INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION PROCEEDING UNDER ARTICLE 8(2)(A) OF THE
AGREEMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CZECH AND SLOVAK FEDERAL REPUBLIC FOR THE PROMOTION

AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES (1976)

ALY LTD.
v.

CZECH REPUBLIC

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/15/1)

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Tribunal
Yves Fortier, PC, CC, OQ, QC, Presiding Arbitrator
Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Arbitrator
Anna Joubin-Bret, Arbitrator

Secretary to the Tribunal
Jara Minguez Almeida

Assistant to the Tribunal
Annie Lespérance

Place of Arbitration: Paris, France
Date of dispatch to the Parties: 9 February 2017

Representing Claimant:

Mr. Hussein Haeri

Mr. David Walker

Ms. Deliya Meylanova
Ms. Ruzin Dagli
Withers LLP

16 Old Bailey

London EC4M 7EG
United Kingdom

and

Mr. Lucas Bastin

Until 2 November 2016:

Quadrant Chambers
Quadrant House

10 Fleet Street
London EC4Y 1AU
United Kingdom

As of 2 November 2016:

Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WC2A 3EG
United Kingdom

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Respondent:

Mgr. Marie TalaSova LL.M.

International Legal Services Department

The Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic
Letenska 15

118 10 Prague 1

Czech Republic

and

Dr. Gerold Zeiler

Dr. Alfred Siwy

zeiler.partners Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Stubenbastei 2

1010 Vienna

Austria

Vi.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIE:

PROCEDURAL HISTORY,

 

 

PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEFS

A. Respondent’s Request for Relief... cccecseesesseseeseseesesesseseesecsesesesaestsseeeseseeseeeeneeneees

 

B. Claimant’s Request for Relief,
JURISDICTION

eon nd ee

 

A. The Scope of Application of Article 8(1) of the Treaty

(1) The Parties’ Positions

co 00

 

a. Respondent’s Position

 

b. Claimant’s Position

 

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

a. Scope of Article 2(3) of the Treaty.......eeceeceseeeseesseeseeseesesneeeesesteseeteneeeene
b. Scope of the MFN Clause ......ccecceesesseseeseseesesesseseesestseceesseesnseeeseseeseeeeeeneane

B. Whether the Claimant is a Foreign Investor ..........cccessesessesseseeseseeeseeeessesesseseeseneeneenes

(1) The Parties’ Positions

 

a. Respondent’s Position ........cccescsseeseseseseeseseeseseesestsecensesensnseeeseensseeneneeeeene

b. Claimant’s Position

 

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
C. The Cooling-Off Period
(1) The Parties’ Positions

 

a. Respondent’s Position .

b. Claimant’s Position

 

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

D. Whether the Treaty is superseded by EU laW...........cecesceessesseseeseseeseseeeseeeseseeseneeneeaes

(1) The Parties’ Positions

 

a. Respondent’s Position ........cccescsseeseseseseeseseeseseesestsecensesensnseeeseensseeneneeeeene

b. Claimant’s Position

 

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
Costs

 

DECISION

 

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Amended Memorial

Cc
CL-
Claimant

Claimant’s Skeleton Argument

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

Hearing

ICSID, or the Centre

Memorial on the Merits

Notice of Arbitration

Parties

PO!

PO2

PO3

PO4

iii

Claimant’s Amended Memorial, filed on 11
January 2016

Claimant’s Exhibit
Claimant’s Legal Authority
ALLY LTD.

Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, filed on 20
September 2016

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
and Request for Endorsement of the
Claimant’s Right to Amend the Memorial,
filed on 11 January 2016

Hearing on Jurisdiction held on 28 and 29
September 2016 at ICC hearing facilities in
Paris, France

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Claimants’ Memorial, filed on 30 May 2015

Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration, filed on 14
October 2014

Claimant and Respondent

Procedural Order No. 1, issued by the Tribunal
on 23 March 2015

Procedural Order No. 2 — Decision on
Bifurcation, issued by the Tribunal on 5
October 2015

Procedural Order No. 3 — Amendment to the
Procedural Timetable, issued by the Tribunal
on 11 December 2015

Procedural Order No. 4— Decision on
Claimant’s Request for Endorsement of its
Right to Amend its Memorial, issued by the
Tribunal on 1 February 2016

POS

PO6

R-

Reply on Jurisdiction

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

Respondent

Respondent’s Skeleton Argument

RL-

Statement of Defence

Transcript

Treaty or BIT

UNCITRAL Rules

VCLT or Vienna Convention

Procedural Order No. 5 — Decision on
Respondent’s Document Production Requests,
issued by the Tribunal on 18 February 2016

Procedural Order No. 6 — Organization of the
Hearing on Jurisdiction, issued by the Tribunal
on 18 February 2016

Respondent’s Exhibit

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, filed on
25 April 2015

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, filed on
25 July 2016

Czech Republic

Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, filed on 20
September 2016

Respondent’s Legal Authority

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (Statement of
Defence), filed on 31 August 2015

Transcript of the hearing in September 2016

Agreement between the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Government of the Czech and
Slovak Federal Republic for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments with Protocol, 10
July 1990

The United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law’s Arbitration Rules as
adopted by the General Assembly Resolution
31/98 on 15 December 1976

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties as
entered into force on 27 January 1980

L

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted pursuant to the Agreement between the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments dated 10 July 1990 (the “BIT” or “Treaty’”), which entered into force on 26
October 1992, and the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on

International Trade Law, 1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules”).
The claimant is Al11Y LTD. and is hereinafter referred to as “A11Y” or the “Claimant.”

The Claimant is a limited liability company incorporated under the laws of the United
Kingdom with its registered address at 6 Bexley Square, Salford, Manchester, United
Kingdom, M3 6BZ.

The respondent is the Czech Republic and is hereinafter referred to as “Czech Republic” or

the “Respondent.”

The Claimant and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

The Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

The Parties’ specific requests for relief are set forth in Section III below, and a fuller
summary of their positions is contained in Section IV below. In its analysis, the Tribunal
has considered not only the positions of the Parties as summarised in this Decision, but the
numerous detailed arguments made in the Parties’ written and oral pleadings as well. To
the extent that these arguments are not referred to expressly, they should be deemed to be

subsumed into the Tribunal’s analysis.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Claimant commenced this arbitration by filing a Notice of Arbitration on 10 October
2014 pursuant to Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Rules. In accordance with Article 3(4) of the
UNCITRAL Rules, the Claimant proposed that the dispute be heard and decided by three

arbitrators, and appointed Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov as arbitrator.

On 11 November 2014, the Respondent appointed Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret asarbitrator.

On 19 December 2014, the two party-appointed arbitrators appointed the Honourable L.
Yves Fortier PC, CC, OQ, QC, as President of the Tribunal.

On 16 January 2015, the Parties informed the Secretary-General of the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) that they had reached an agreement on 12
January 2015 that ICSID would administer the case.

By letter of the same date, the Secretary-General accepted the Parties’ invitation to provide
full administrative services in relation to this proceeding. Ms. Martina Polasek, ICSID
Senior Legal Counsel as she then was, was designated to serve as Secretary of the
Tribunal. The Parties were later informed, on 28 July 2015, that Ms. Jara Minguez
Almeida, ICSID Legal Counsel, would replace Ms. Martina Polasek as Secretary of the

Tribunal.

The Tribunal held a first session with the Parties on 9 March 2015 by telephone
conference. At the session, the Parties confirmed that the Members of the Tribunal had
been validly appointed and agreed, inter alia, that (i) the applicable Arbitration Rules
would be the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 1976, except as modified by agreement of the
Parties in accordance with Article 8(2)(a) of the Treaty, (ii) the procedural language would
be English and (iii) the place of arbitration would be Paris, France. The Parties’ agreement
on procedural matters, and the Tribunal’s determination of the schedule, were embodied in

Procedural Order No. 1 of 23 March 2015.

During the first session, the Parties and the Tribunal also discussed the Claimant’s request
of 8 March 2015 for an initial hearing to provide the Tribunal with an introduction to the
accessibility technology behind the Claimant’s alleged investment. The Parties filed
additional observations on the Claimant’s request by communications of 12 and 16 March
2015. In Procedural Order No. 1, the Tribunal denied the Claimant’s request for an initial
hearing as it was unable to determine whether it would be useful, relevant and appropriate
at that stage of the proceeding and invited the Claimant to renew its request, if it so wished,

following the Respondent’s filing of its Statement of Defence.

14. On 30 May 2015, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits pursuant to paragraph 14.2

of Procedural Order No. 1. The Memorial was accompanied by:
e Expert Report on the Assessment of Damage of Prof. Robert C. Lind, Mr. Pavel
Urban and Dr. Pavel Vacek dated 30 May 2015;
e Witness Statement of Mr. Jan Buchal dated 30 May 2015;
e Witness Statement of Mr. Hynek Hanke dated 28 May 2015;
e Witness Statement of [...] dated 22 May 2015;
e Witness Statement of [...] dated 25 May 2015;
e Witness Statement of [...] dated 20 May 2015;
e Witness Statement of [...] dated 21 May 2015;
e Witness Statement of [...] dated 28 May 2015;
e Witness Statement of [...] dated 25 May 2015;
e Witness Statement of [...] dated 25 May 2015;
e Factual Exhibits C-1 through C-41; and
e Legal Authorities CL-1 through CL-32.

15. In accordance with paragraph 14.3 of Procedural Order No. 1, the Respondent filed its
Statement of Defence on 31 August 2015, which contained its Request for the Bifurcation
of the proceeding between jurisdictional and merits phases. The Statement of Defence was
accompanied by:

e Factual Exhibits R-1 through R-28; and
e Legal Authorities RL-1 through RL-93.
16. On 15 September 2015, in accordance with paragraph 14.4 of Procedural Order No. 1, the

Claimant filed its Response to the Request for Bifurcation, which was accompanied by:

e Factual Exhibits C-42 through C-53; and

20.

21.

e Legal Authorities CL-33 through CL-40.

On 21 September 2015, Ms. Annie Lespérance was appointed as Assistant to the Tribunal

with the agreement of the Parties.

On 5 October 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 granting the
Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation in respect of three of its four objections to
jurisdiction, namely the scope of application of Article 8(1) of the Treaty, whether the
Claimant is a foreign investor and whether the Treaty is superseded by EU Law. The
Respondent’s objection pertaining to whether the Claimant had made an investment in the

Czech Republic was joined to the merits.

On 4 December 2015, the Claimant instructed Withers LLP and Lucas Bastin of Quadrant
Chambers as its new counsel. In view of this change of counsel, the Claimant requested the
Tribunal to extend the deadline for the filing of its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction until

11 January 2016. On 9 December 2015, the Respondent filed observations on the
Claimant’s request for an extension and made its own requests in the event the extension
was granted. On 11 December 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, in

which it granted the Parties’ requests and amended the procedural timetable.

On 11 January 2016, the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction pursuant to
paragraph 5 of Procedural Order No. 3, and a Request for Endorsement of the Claimant’s
Right to Amend the Memorial. The Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction was accompanied
by:

e Factual Exhibits C-54 through C-62;

e Legal Authorities CL-41 through CL-105.

The Amended Memorial was accompanied by:

e Legal Authorities CL-106 through CL-118.

The Respondent submitted its comments on the Claimant’s Request for Endorsement of the
Claimant’s Right to Amend the Memorial on 20 January 2016. The Respondent objected to

the admission of new claims. In the event the Tribunal should admit the Claimant’s new

4

22.

23.

24.

25.

claims, the Respondent requested an opportunity to be heard in a further submission
following the Claimant’s comments on the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections arising
from the Claimant’s new claims. On the same day, the Tribunal invited the Claimant to file

any comments it may have on the Respondent’s letter.

By its letter of 26 January 2016, the Claimant maintained its request and “propose[d] that
the Respondent articulate any new jurisdictional objections that the Respondent can
conceive in the Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, which was scheduled for 25 April
2016. Thereafier, the Tribunal [could] decide whether additional round(s) of pleadings

[were] necessary in the circumstances.”

On 1 February 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4. The Tribunal decided
that (i) the Claimant’s Request for Endorsement of its Right to Amend its Memorial was
granted; (ii) the Claimant’s Amended Memorial was admitted into the record; (iii) the
Respondent may include any additional jurisdictional objections arising from the
Claimant’s amended claims in its Reply on Jurisdiction to be filed on 25 April 2016; (iv)
the Claimant may respond to the Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, including any
additional jurisdictional objections arising from its amended claims in its Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction to be filed on 25 July 2016; and (v) no later than one week following the filing
of the Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, the Respondent may seek leave from the
Tribunal to file a brief reply submission limited to the Claimant’s response to the
Respondent’s additional jurisdictional objections arising from the Claimant’s amended
claims. Should the Respondent file such a request and should the Tribunal accede to it, the
Tribunal would afford the Claimant with an opportunity to comment on the Respondent’s

further reply submission.

As contemplated in paragraph 5 of Procedural Order No. 3, on 12 February 2016, the

Respondent submitted its document production requests.

On 18 February 2016, the Tribunal issued its decisions with respect to document
production requests in Procedural Order No. 5, including Annex A, listing the documents

which the Claimant was ordered to produce.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

On 25 April 2016, the Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction pursuant to paragraph 5
of Procedural Order No. 3. The Reply on Jurisdiction was accompanied by:

* Factual Exhibits R-29 through R-39; and

* Legal Authorities RL-94 through RL-124.
On 25 July 2016, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction pursuant to paragraph 5 of
Procedural Order No. 3. The Rejoinder on Jurisdiction was accompanied by:

* Factual Exhibits C-63 through C-74; and

+ Legal Authorities CL-119 through CL-137.

On 7 September 2016, on behalf of the Tribunal, the President held a Pre-Hearing
organizational meeting with the Parties by telephone conference. On 8 September 2016, the
Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6 regarding the organization of the Hearing on

Jurisdiction.

On 20 September 2016, pursuant to paragraph 28 of Procedural Order No. 6, the Parties

filed skeleton arguments.

A hearing on the Bifurcated Jurisdictional Objections took place in Paris on 28 and 29
September 2016. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal, the Secretary of the Tribunal,

and the Assistant to the Tribunal, present at the hearing were:

 

 

Mr./Ms. First Name/ Last Name

 

 

Counsel:

 

Mr. Hussein Haeri Withers LLP

 

Mr. David Walker Withers LLP

 

Ms. Ruzin Dagli Withers LLP

 

Mr. Lucas Bastin Quadrant Chambers

 

Parties:

 

Mr. Jan Buchal A11Y LTD.

 

Mr. Boris DuSek A11Y LTD.

 

Mr. Hynek Hanke Al11Y LTD.

 

 

 

 

| AI11Y LTD. (carer)

 

31.

32.

33.

iil.

34.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Witness:

Mr. Jan Buchal A11Y LTD.
RESPONDENT

Mr./Ms. First Name/ Last Name Affiliation

Counsel:

Mr. Alfred Siwy zeiler partners Rechtsanwilte GmbH

Parties:

Ms. Hana Kiizova Czech Ministry of Finance

Ms. Anna Bilanova Czech Ministry of Finance

COURT REPORTER

Ms. Claire Hill | The Court Reporter LLC
INTERPRETER

Ms. Martina Parker [ independent Interpreter

 

The Parties filed their submissions on costs on 21 October 2016.

By letter dated 27 October 2016, the Respondent submitted that it considered that a
decision on costs in an interim decision would be premature and prejudicial to its rights.

By letter dated 2 November 2016, the Claimant responded to the Respondent's letter.
PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEFS

Respondent’s Request for Relief

The Respondent requests the Tribunal to:

(1) declare that it lacks jurisdiction to hear Claimant's claims and hence to dismiss its

claims; and

35.

36.

37.

(2) order Claimant to reimburse Respondent for all costs, fees and expenses incurred in

relation to these proceedings.!

Claimant’s Request for Relief

The Claimant seeks the following relief from the Tribunal:
(1) a declaration that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the entirety of the Dispute;

(2) an order that the Respondent pay the costs of this bifurcated jurisdictional proceeding,
including the costs of the Tribunal and ICSID, and the legal and other costs incurred

by the Claimant; and
(3) such further declaration, order, or relief as the Tribunal may deem appropriate.”

JURISDICTION

Three of the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections have been bifurcated. In addition to
those three objections, the Respondent, in its Reply on Jurisdiction, advanced a further
objection that the Claimant, prior to initiating the arbitration, did not adhere to the cooling-
off period of four months. The Respondent’s four jurisdictional objections and the
Claimant’s comments thereon are summarized below in the order in which they were

presented by the Respondent in its pleadings.

The Scope of Application of Article 8(1) of the Treaty

qd) The Parties’ Positions

a. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that Article 8(1) of the Treaty constitutes an offer of the

Respondent to arbitrate “/d/isputes between an investor of one Contracting Party and the

' Reply on Jurisdiction, p. 57.
? Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 194.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under Article 2(3), 4, 5 and
6 of the Agreement [...]”*

The Respondent argues that the ordinary meaning of the language used in Article 8(1) is
“blatantly clear: Respondent offered to arbitrate disputes deriving from alleged violations
of article 2(3) of the BIT (addressing obligations deriving from contracts concluded
between investors and host states), article 4 of the BIT (compensation for losses from
armed conflict, state of national emergency or civil disturbances), article 5 (expropriation)
and article 6 (free transfer of investment and returns). Only such disputes shall be
submitted to arbitration under paragraph (2) [of Article 8] [...]”*

According to the Respondent, the Claimant initially alleged violations by the Respondent
of (i) Article 2(2) of the Treaty, including violations of the fair and equitable treatment
(“FET”) standard and the prohibition of unreasonable and discriminatory measures, and (ii)

the national treatment standard included in Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

The Claimant, in its Amended Memorial, now also claims that its investment has been

expropriated pursuant to Article 5(1) of the Treaty.

Therefore, according to the Respondent, “article 8(1) of the BIT does not apply to any of
the Claimant’s claims but for its claim for expropriation” and consequently the Tribunal

lacks jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims under Articles 2(2) and 3(1) of the Treaty.

In support of its argument, the Respondent relied on, inter alia, the decision in Nagel v
Czech Republic’ involving the very same Treaty under which the Claimant in the present

proceeding is submitting its claims. In that decision the Tribunal concluded as follows:

271. [...] Indeed, Article 8(1) only states that disputes under Articles 2(3), 4,

5, and 6 may be submitted to arbitration and there is nothing in the text

> Statement of Defence, para. 26. See Treaty at CL-1.
* Statement of Defence, para. 27.
5 Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 2.

© Statement of Defence, para. 29. Mr. William Nagel v. The Czech Republic, SCC Case No. 049/2002, Final
Award, 9 September 2003, RL-10.

43.

44.

to indicate that the arbitration may also include other questions arising
under the Treaty. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore concludes that Mr
Nagel’s claims under Articles 2(2), 3(1) and 3(2) are not admissible in

the present arbitration and must be rejected.

In response to the Claimant’s arguments that (i) Article 2(3) of the Treaty should be
interpreted as a “gate” to the other provisions of the Treaty and that (ii) in any event, the
most-favored-nation (“MFN”) clause attracts the more favourable dispute resolution

provision found in the Netherlands-Czech BIT, the Respondent argues the following.
(i) Scope of Article 2(3) of the Treaty

The Respondent submits that the correct interpretation to be given to Article 2(3) of the

Treaty is the following:

Article 2(3) refers to situations in which the investor and the host state
conclude specific agreements. Its first sentence stipulates that such
agreements can be more advantageous for the investor but may not be at
variance with the BIT otherwise. Its second sentence then sets out that
the host state shall observe the provisions of such specific agreements
and the provisions of the BIT. This wording leaves little doubt that the
second sentence refers to the first and must be read in connection with it.
It obliges the host state to adhere to its contractual arrangements and,
consonant with the first sentence, to the provisions of the BIT where
these are more advantageous to the partner of its agreement. The
provision, however, is limited to situations in which a specific agreement

has been concluded.”

[.]

Claimant's interpretation of the BIT assumes that article 8(1) of the BIT
was drafied for the purpose of limiting the jurisdiction of the Arbitral

Tribunal to certain disputes, while article 2(3) was inserted for the

7 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 6.

4S.

46.

47.

purpose of establishing the jurisdiction of the tribunal over all disputes

deriving from the BIT. Claimant’s interpretation therefore implies that

[.J*

 

the limitation included in article 8(1) are meaningles

 

(ii) Scope of the MFN clause

The Respondent submits that the Claimant cannot invoke the MFN clause of the Treaty to

rely on the dispute resolution provision of the Netherlands-Czech BIT for the following

First, the Respondent argues that the MFN clause cannot be interpreted to allow the
invocation of a right to arbitration in a third treaty as this would leave the limitations of

Article 8(1) without any meaning:

Article 8(1) of the BIT grants the investor the right to arbitrate disputes
deriving from alleged breaches of articles 2(3), 4, 5 and 6 of the BIT. It
is therefore evident that the parties to the BIT agreed that the host state
shall only consent to arbitration of those disputes. Claimant’s
interpretation of the MFN clause would render this clear and

unambiguous restriction completely meaningless.”

The Respondent relies, inter alia, on the tribunal’s decision in Austrian Airline v Slovakia

in support of its argument!®. The tribunal, in that decision, wrote:

Faced with a manifest, specific intent to restrict arbitration to disputes
over the amount of compensation for expropriation to the exclusion of
disputes over the principle of expropriation, it would be paradoxical to
invalidate that specific intent by virtue of the general, unspecific intent

expressed in the MFN clause."

8 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 8.
° Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 14.
'Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 15.

41 Austrian Airlines v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL Ad Hoc Arbitration, Final Award, 9 October 2009,
para. 135, Exhibit RL-S.

ll

48.

49.

50.

Second, the Respondent avers that MFN clauses do not permit investors to invoke
arbitration clauses in order to import into the Treaty consent to arbitration where none
exists in the basic Treaty. The Respondent asserts that “/a/n investor can rely on an MFN
clause to import dispute resolution provisions if they allow the claimant to exercise a right
to arbitrate existing under the basic treaty in a more favourable way”.'? As it is clear that
Article 8(1) of the Treaty does not include the Respondent’s consent to arbitrate disputes
under Article 2(2), 3(1) and 3(2) of the Treaty, the Respondent argues that the MFN clause

cannot be invoked to import consent from the Netherland-Czech BIT.'?

In support of its argument, the Respondent relies, inter alia, on the tribunal’s decision in

EURAM v Slovakia where that tribunal wrote:

As regards those categories of disputes, there is no offer of arbitration
at all. Acceptance of the Claimant’s argument would therefore mean
that the MFN clause completely transformed the scope of the arbitration

provision [...].

The Tribunal therefore considers that the special character of the
provision for investor-State arbitration and the radical nature of the
transformation in that provision which acceptance of the Claimant's
argument would entail, both militate against attributing to Article 3 of
the BIT the effect suggested by the Claimant unless there are clear

indications that such was the intention of the States Parties.'*

Third, the Respondent argues that the MFN clause in the present case only applies to
treatment under domestic law and does not apply to arbitration. According to the

Respondent, the MFN clause contains a “significant limitation”:

' Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 28.
'3 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 33.

“4 European American Investment Bank AG (Austria) v. The Slovak Republic, PCA Case No. 2010-17, Award
on Jurisdiction, 22 October 2012, paras. 448 et seq., Exhibit CL-93.

12

Sl.

52.

53.

It expressly refers to treatment “under its law”. Hence, all an investor
can ask for is that its treatment by application of domestic law is no less

favourable than that of other investors. [...]

If the limitation is to have any meaning at all, it must refer to treatment
under domestic law as opposed to treatment under international treaties.
If the latter were supposed to be included in the formulation, it would
have no meaning of its own. As the right to arbitration Claimant is
relying on is incorporated not in domestic law but in an international

treaty, the MFN clause cannot serve as a basis for importing it.'*

b. Claimant’s Position

The Claimant submits at the outset that the Respondent has conceded in its Reply on
Jurisdiction that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the Claimant’s expropriation claim
under Article 5 of the Treaty. As such, says the Claimant, “there is no disagreement on the
existence of the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction, or that this arbitration will be proceeding
to the next phase on liability and damages. What remains in dispute in the present

jurisdictional phase is only the scope of the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction.”"®

The Claimant accepts that, “on its face, Article 8(1) contains reference only to Articles
2(3), 4, 5 and 6.” However, submits the Claimant, “the Respondent ignores the [...] fact
that Article 2(3) serves as a ‘gate’ towards all standards of protection contained in various
articles of the BIT”"’ and that accordingly, the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the entirety of

the Claimant’s claims.
Article 2(3) of the Treaty provides that:

Investors of one Contracting Party may conclude with the other
Contracting Party specific agreements, the provisions and effect of

which, unless more beneficial to the investor, shall not be at variance

'5 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, paras. 23-24.
'6Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 4.1
'” Response to the Request for Bifurcation, para. 2.

13

54.

55.

56.

with this Agreement. Each Contracting Party shall, with regard to
investments investors the other Contracting Party, observe the
provisions these specific agreements, as well as the provisions this
Agreement. (Claimant's emphasis)

According to the Claimant, “the Respondent's obligation under Article 2(3) to observe ‘the

provisions of this Agreement

undoubtedly includes Articles 2(2), 3(1), 3(2) and 5 of the BIT’.'* In addition, argues the

applies to all the provisions of the Agreement. As such, this

Claimant, this obligation is mandatory in view of the use of the plain meaning of the word

“shall” (observe ... the provisions of this Agreement) in the provision.!”

The Claimant’s position that the Respondent’s breaches of Articles 2(2), 3(1), 3(2) and 5 of
the Treaty (ie., “provisions of this Agreement”) also breached the observance of
undertakings clause in Article 2(3) of the Treaty is further supported in the jurisprudence

argues the Claimant. The Claimant relies on the Tribunal’s conclusion in Eureko v Poland:

. the Tribunal concludes that the actions and inactions of the
Government of Poland are in breach of Poland's obligations under the
Treaty —those that have been held to be unfair and inequitable and
expropriatory in effect —also are in breach of its commitments under
Article 3.5 of the Treaty to ‘observe any obligations it may have entered

into with regards to investments of investors’ of the Netherlands.»

The Claimant also submits that its argument is not impacted by the Nage/ award since
nothing in that award suggests that counsel for the claimant in that case made the same
argument that the Claimant is now making before this Tribunal. Moreover, according to the

Claimant, this issue was not a crucial one in that case as the Nagel tribunal proceeded to

the merits and dismissed the claims on their merits.”!

'8Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 11.

'°Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 13.

20 Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, ad hoc proceeding, Partial Award, 19 August 2005, 4/260, CL-48.
2! Response to the Request for Bifurcation, para. 5.

14

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

Alternatively, the Claimant invokes the MFN clause in Article 3 of the Treaty to attract the
more favorable dispute resolution provision found in the Netherlands-Czech BIT. Article 8
of that Treaty provides that “all disputes” between an investor and the host state can be

resolved through investment arbitration.??

The Claimant submits that the case law supports the proposition that MFN treatment does

extend to treatment under a dispute resolution provision.”

While the Claimant concedes that some tribunals have refused to use an MFN clause to
expand a dispute resolution provision, the Claimant argues that “these tribunals reached
such a view not because a ‘host state’s consent to arbitrate’ in a dispute resolution

provision cannot be broadened by an MFN provision, but rather because an MFN

provision cannot be used to summon into existence rights which did not previously exist.”**

In the present case, the Claimant asserts that it “is not seeking to use the MFN provision to
arrogate to itself rights that it does not otherwise have. It only seeks more favourable
treatment in relation to rights that already exist in, and from which it already benefits

under, the BIT.”

In this respect, the Claimant argues that (i) it has a right to initiate international arbitration
under Article 8 of the Treaty,” (ii) it has the substantive rights set out in Articles 2 to 6 of

the Treaty,”’ and (iii) it merely seeks to create a direct connection between these two sets

2 Response to the Request for Bifurcation, para. 6.

?3 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 27. See Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 73-80,
citing National Grid ple v. The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 20 June 2006,
CL-65, paras. 53-94; Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios
Integrales del Agua S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Jurisdiction,
16 May 2006, CL-67, paras. 52 - 66,; Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, (CISD Case No. ARB/03/19, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August
2006, CL-67, paras. 52 - 68, ; Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 24 October 2011, CL-69, paras. 56 - 111; Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision of the Tribunal on Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction, 17 June
2006, CL-53, paras. 41 - 49; Garanti Koza LLP y. Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/20, Decision on
the Objection to Jurisdiction For Lack Of Consent, 3 July 2013, CL-69, paras. 13 - 97.

4 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 30.

?5 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 33.

?6Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 34.
?7Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 35.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

of existing rights through the MEN clause.”* In other words, submits the Claimant, “/t/his
connection of the Claimant's existing rights is (only) a treatment of the Claimant in

relation to rights it already has under the BIT, and for which it may benefit from more

favourable treatment given to investors of other nationalities in other BITs signed by the

Respondent.””?

The Claimant also submits that Article 7 of the Treaty explicitly lists exceptions to the

application of MFN treatment. The list does not include dispute resolution.

For the foregoing reasons, the Claimant submits that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over all

of the Claimant’s claims.

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

The provision of the Treaty in virtue of which the Tribunal derives its competence is
Article 8 which gives an investor the right to submit a dispute under the Treaty to

arbitration.
Article 8(1) of the Treaty provides as follows:

Disputes between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under Articles
2(3), 4, 5 and 6 of this Agreement in relation to an investment of the
former which have not been amicably settled shall, after a period of four
months from written notification of a claim, be submitted to arbitration

under paragraph (2) below if either party to the dispute so wishes.

Both Parties agree that Article 8(1) does not refer to all disputes under the Treaty but
provides that only disputes concerning an obligation of a Contracting Party under Articles
2(3), 4, 5 and 6 of the Treaty which have not been amicably settled shall be submitted to

arbitration if either party to the dispute so wishes.

28 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 36.
?°Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 36.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

723.

Both Parties agree that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the Claimant’s expropriation

claim under Article 5 of the Treaty.

Both Parties also agree that the Tribunal has jurisdiction under Article 8(1) of the Treaty
over the observance of specific undertakings obligation pursuant to Article 2(3) of the

Treaty.

The Parties disagree, however, as to whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the
Claimants’ claims based on Article 2(2) (fair and equitable treatment and full protection

and security) and Article 3 (national treatment) of the Treaty.

a. Scope of Article 2(3) of the Treaty
On the basis of the plain and ordinary meaning of Article 8(1), the Respondent argues that
only disputes under Articles 2(3), 4, 5 and 6 of the Treaty can be the subject of arbitration
and that therefore the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims under Articles

2(2), and 3 of the Treaty.

The Claimant, on the other hand, interprets Article 2(3) of the Treaty, to which Article 8(1)
refers specifically, as meaning that the Respondent has the obligation to observe all the

provisions of the Treaty which include Articles 2(2), 3(1) and 3(2), not only Article 5.
Article 2(3) of the Treaty provides as follows:

Investors of one Contracting Party may conclude with the other
Contracting Party specific agreements, the provisions and effect of
which, unless more beneficial to the investor, shall not be at variance
with this Agreement. Each Contracting Party shall, with regard to
investments of investors of the other Contracting Party, observe the
provisions of these specific agreements, as well as the provisions of this

Agreement.

The Tribunal must therefore determine the meaning and the scope of Article 2(3) of the
Treaty. Which obligations are covered by the second sentence of Article 2(3) of the Treaty,

having regard to the text of Article 8(1) which provides that “Disputes between an investor

17

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the
latter_under Articles 2(3) [...] shall _[...] be submitted _to_arbitration”? (Tribunal’s

emphasis)

The Parties agree that Article 2(3) combines (i) a floor provision and (ii) an umbrella

clause.

A floor provision often, as in this case, refers to specific agreements and provides that the
terms of a specific agreement (or undertaking) entered into between the State and an
investor cannot be less favourable than the Treaty. If the terms of a specific agreement (or
undertaking) are less favorable than those of the Treaty, the more favorable provisions of

the Treaty will apply.

An umbrella clause is typically found in an investment treaty as part of the general
obligations of treatment of an investment and is not usually combined with a floor
provision. A typical umbrella clause reads as follows: “Each Contracting Party shall
observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments of investors of

the other Contracting Party”*°

The Claimant, when it analysed the second sentence of Article 2(3), argued that this
sentence not only obliges the Respondent to observe the provision of any specific
agreement which may have been entered into between the Respondent and UK investors,
but also “(...) serve[d] as a ‘gate’ towards all standards of protection contained in various
articles of the BIT.” This is so by virtue of the last 8 words in Article 2(3): “as well as the

provisions of this Agreement”.

While the Tribunal agrees with the Claimant that, with regard to investments of investors
of the other Contracting Party, the standard umbrella clause applies to the obligations
contained in specific agreements, it cannot agree with the Claimant that the last 8 words in

Article 2(3), “as well as the provisions of this Agreement’, import into the Treaty the

2° See for example, Article 2(2) of the UK Model BIT, Exhibit R-29.
3! Response to Request for Bifurcation, para. 2.

18

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

obligation of the Respondent to observe all standards of protection in the Treaty, including

Articles 2(2), and 3.

The Tribunal is of the view that, in the present_case, the obligation to observe the
provisions of the Treaty in Article 2(3) is required by the combination of the floor

provision and the umbrella clause for the following reasons.

Firstly, the scope of Article 2(3) is limited to investors that have specific agreements with
the host state. The floor provision covers only investors with specific agreements and the
umbrella clause refers to “these specific agreements.” It is with respect to such investors
that Article 2(3) requires the Contracting Parties to observe both the provisions of the

specific agreements and the provisions of the Treaty.

As noted earlier, a typical umbrella clause such as the one found in the model UK BIT
provides that: “Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered

into with regard to investments of investors of the other Contracting Party”. >

“Any obligation” can refer not only to contractual obligations but also to treaty obligations.
The Contracting States in the present Treaty merely spelled out what those obligations
consist of, namely obligations under specific agreements as well as obligations under the
Treaty in order to ensure that a tribunal seized of a contractual dispute brought under the
Treaty by virtue of the umbrella clause will not be limited to the application of the contract

itself but also to “the provisions of this Agreement”.

Secondly, the Tribunal notes that the Claimant’s interpretation would lead to an illogical
result. In order to arbitrate a claim on the basis of the State’s obligation to grant fair and
equitable treatment to the investment of an investor such as the Claimant in this case, a

claimant would merely have to invoke a breach of Article 2(3).

By so doing, the claimant would override the specific and limited consent to arbitration

found in Article 8(1) of the Treaty.

*-Tribunal’s emphasis.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

This is precisely the interpretation which the Nagel tribunal, analysing the very same
Treaty as that invoked in the present case, concluded, in clear terms, had to be rejected.

The tribunal said:

271. [...] Indeed, Article 8(1) only states that disputes under Articles 2(3), 4,
5, and 6 may be submitted to arbitration and there is nothing in the text
to indicate that the arbitration may also include other questions arising
under the Treaty. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore concludes that
Mr. Nagel’s claims under Articles 2(2), 3(1) and 3(2) are not admissible

in the present arbitration and must be rejected.**

Thirdly, the Tribunal must give Article 8(1) an effet utile. The Claimant’s interpretation

would render the limited consent to arbitration in Article 8(1) without any effect.

Fourthly, if the Tribunal accepted the Claimant’s interpretation, it would lead to another
illogical outcome. It would mean that, as the Claimant has done in the present case, an
investor claiming a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard under Article 2(2) of
the Treaty (or of any other substantive protection of the Treaty) could also argue that this
breach constitutes a breach of Article 2(3) since the Contracting State has not observed the

“provisions of this Agreement”.

A breach of Article 2(3) can only be invoked by an investor who has a specific agreement
with the Contracting State. The second sentence of Article 2(3) allows this investor to
invoke not only a breach of the specific agreement but also a breach of the Treaty as a

result of the breach of the specific agreement.

The Tribunal’s interpretation does not provide investors who have specific agreements
with a Contracting State preferred treatment compared to investors who don’t have such
agreements. The investor who has a specific agreement with the State will be able to
submit its dispute to arbitration under the Treaty by alleging that the breach of the specific

agreement by the State constitutes a breach of the Treaty by virtue of the umbrella clause.

3 Mr. William Nagel v. The Czech Republic, SCC Case No. 049/2002, Final Award, 9 September 2003, RL-10,
at para. 271. Emphasis added.

20

90.

91.

92.

93.

In other words, while the investor’s contractual claims remain, the umbrella clause in
Article 2(3) gives the investor a second legal basis on which he can argue a treaty or

“umbrella clause” claim.

In summary, the Tribunal concludes that it has jurisdiction over alleged violations of
Articles 2(3), 4, 5 and 6 of the Treaty but not over violations of other Articles of the

Treaty.

The Claimant confirmed at the hearing that it is not advancing any claims under the Treaty
pursuant to a specific agreement with the Czech Republic. In view of the Tribunal’s
finding that Article 2(3) of the Treaty is only applicable in a dispute where there is a
specific agreement, the Claimant’s request for relief for a “declaration that the Czech
Republic has breached Article 2(3) of the Treaty by failing to observe the provisions of the

Treaty set out in sub-clauses (a) to (d) above” fails and the Tribunal so finds.

The Tribunal will now proceed with its analysis of the Claimant’s alternative argument. In
this section, the Tribunal will determine whether the MFN clause can broaden the scope of
Article 8(1) of the Treaty which would enable the Tribunal to confirm that it has

jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims under Articles 2(2) and 3 of the Treaty.

b. Scope of the MEN clause

Article 3 of the Treaty provides for most-favoured-nation treatment as follows:

3(1) Each Contracting Party shall ensure that under its law investments or
returns of investors of the other Contracting Party are granted treatment

no less favourable than that which it accords to investments or return of

4 Claimant’s Amended Memorial, para. 150 (e). The Tribunal recalls that sub-clauses (a) to (d) of para. 150
of the Claimant’s Amended Memorial read as follows:

“(a) a declaration that the Czech Republic has breached Article 2(2) of the Treaty by failing to accord
Claimant's investment fair and equitable treatment;

(b) a declaration that the Czech Republic has breached Article 2(2) of the Treaty by impairing Claimant's
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of its investment by unreasonable and discriminatory
measures;

(c) a declaration that the Czech Republic has breached Article 3 of the Treaty by failing to provide national
treatment;

(d) a declaration that the Czech Republic has breached Article 5(1) of the Treaty by imposing measures
having effect equivalent to expropriation of the Claimant's investment in the Czech Republic;”

21

94.

95.

96.

its own investors or to investments or returns of investors of any third
State.

3(2) Each Contracting Party shall ensure that under its law investors of the
other Contracting Party, as regards their management, maintenance,
use, enjoyment or disposal of their investments, are granted treatment
not less favourable than that which it accords to its own investors or to

investors of any third State.

The Claimant invokes this most-favored-nation clause to attract the more favorable dispute
resolution provision found in the Netherlands-Czech BIT which provides that “all

disputes” can be resolved through arbitration.
The Tribunal is of the view that an MFN clause can, a priori, apply to dispute settlement.

The Final Report of the ILC Study Group on the Most-Favoured-Nation clause is

instructive in this respect:

95. Key to the decision in Maffezini is the conclusion that dispute
settlement provisions are, in principle, part of the protection for
investors and investments provided under bilateral investment
agreements. Hence dispute settlement provisions by definition are
almost _always_capable of being incorporated into an investment
agreement by virtue of an MFN provision. Under an investment
agreement, to use the language of article 9 of the 1978 draft articles,
dispute settlement falls “within the limits of the subject matter” of an

MFN clause.

96. The conclusion that procedural matters, specifically dispute settlement

provisions, are by their very nature of the same category as substantive

 

Pp ions for foreign investors has been an important part of the
in some q isi of inves tribunals. In

Siemens, the tribunal stated that dispute settlement “is part of the

protection offered under the Treaty. It is part of the treatment of foreign

 

investors and i and of the ad) ible through an

MEN clause.” The tribunal in AWG said that it could find “no basis for
22

97.

98.

99.

100.

Ss

distinguishing dispute settlement matters from any other matters covered

by a bilateral investmenttreaty.”**

A review of arbitral decisions on the issue of the scope of the MFN clause reveals that,
where tribunals have declined to apply the MFN clause to dispute settlement, the ratio
decidendi was either that (i) the MFN clause was invoked to override public policy
considerations such as a substitution of the consent to arbitrate where none exists in the
basic Treaty, and/or (ii) its scope of application was limited by the wording used in the
applicable Treaty. This is consistent with the ILC Study Group’s conclusion that “dispute

provisions by are almost always capable of being incorporated into an

investment agreement by virtue of an MFN provision. °°

Arbitral rulings draw a distinction between the application of an MFN clause to a more
favorable dispute resolution provision where the investor has the right to arbitrate under the
basic treaty, albeit under less favorable conditions, and the substitution of non-existent
consent to arbitration by virtue of an MFN clause. While case law confirms that the former

is possible, it has almost consistently found that the latter is not.

In this respect, the Tribunal notes, in particular, the reasoning of the tribunals in Hochtief v.

Argentina,’ EURAM v Slovakia*® and Plama v Bulgaria®.
In Hochtief, the tribunal found that:

In the present case, it might be argued that the MFN clause requires
that investors under the Argentina-Germany BIT be given MFN
treatment during the conduct of an arbitration but that the MFN clause

can-not create a right to go to arbitration where none otherwise exists

35 International Law Commission Final Report of the Study Group on the Most-Favoured-Nation Clause, CL-
70. Emphasis added by the Tribunal.

36 Jd, Emphasis added by the Tribunal.

5 Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 October
2011, CL-68.

38 European American Investment Bank AG (Austria) v.The Slovak Republic, PCA Case No. 2010-17, Award
on Jurisdiction, 22 October 2012, CL-93.

» Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction,
8 February 2005, CL-37.

23

under the BIT. The argument can be put more generally: the MFN
clause stipulates how investors must be treated when they are exercising
the rights given to them under the BIT but does not purport to give them

any further rights in addition to those given to them under the BIT.

The question is, does the MFN clause in question here create new rights
where none previously existed? and if not, is the right to have unilateral
recourse to arbitration without the 18-month litigation period a distinct,
new right or is it rather a matter of the manner in which those who

already have a right to arbitrate are treated?

In the view of the Tribunal, it cannot be assumed that Argentina and
Germany intended that the MFN clause should create wholly new rights
where none otherwise existed under the Argentina-Germany BIT. The
MFN clause stipulates a standard of treatment and defines it according
to the treatment of third parties. The reference is to a standard of
treatment accorded to third parties, not to the extent of the legal rights
of third parties. Non-statutory concessions to third party investors could,
in principle, form the basis of a complaint that the MFN obligation has
not been secured. In contrast (to take an example comparable to the ILC
example concerning commercial treaties and extradition), rights of visa-
free entry for the purposes of study, given to nationals of a third State,
could not form the basis of such a complaint under the BIT. The MFN
clause is not a renvoi to a range of totally distinct sources and systems
of rights and duties: it is a principle applicable to the exercise of rights
and duties that are actually secured by the BIT in which the MFN clause

is found.”

101. In EURAM, the tribunal found that:

While the present BIT does, of course, contain a provision for investor-

State arbitration, the substantive scope of that provision is strictly

“ Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 October
2011, CL-68, paras. 79 et seq.

24

limited. It encompasses disputes regarding Article 5 of the BIT and
certain aspects of Article 4 but, as the Tribunal has found in Chapter
V(A) of the Award, it excludes disputes regarding other aspects of
Article 4 and alleged violations of the other provisions of the BIT. As
regards those categories of disputes, there is no offer of arbitration at
all. Acceptance of the Claimant's argument would therefore mean that
the MFN clause completely transformed the scope of the arbitration

provision.

The Tribunal therefore considers that the special character of the
provision for investor-State arbitration and the radical nature of the
transformation in that provision which acceptance of the Claimant's
argument would entail, both militate against attributing to Article 3 of
the BIT the effect suggested by the Claimant unless there are clear

indications that such was the intention of the States Parties."'

102. In Plama, the tribunal noted that:

[n]Jowadays, arbitration is the generally accepted avenue for resolving
disputes between investors and states. Yet, that phenomenon does not
take away the basic prerequisite for arbitration: an agreement of the
parties to arbitrate. It is a well-established principle, both in domestic
and international law, that such an agreement should be clear and
unambiguous. In the framework of a BIT, the agreement to arbitrate is
arrived at by the consent to arbitration that a state gives in advance in
respect of investment disputes falling under the BIT, and the acceptance

thereof by an investor if the latter so desires.”

[.]

“| European American Investment Bank AG (Austria) v. The Slovak Republic, PCA Case No. 2010-17, Award
on Jurisdiction, 22 October 2012, CL-93, paras. 448 and 450.

* Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction,
8 February 2005, CL-37, para. 198.

25

103.

104.

105.

106.

When concluding a multilateral or bilateral investment treaty with
specific dispute resolution provisions, states cannot be expected to leave
those provisions to future (partial) replacement by different dispute

li provisions through the ot ion of an MFN provision, unless
the States have explicitly agreed thereto (as in the case of BITs based on
the UK Model BIT). This matter can also be viewed as forming part of
the nowadays generally accepted principle of the separability
(autonomy) of the arbitration clause. Dispute resolution provisions

constitute an agreement on their own, usually with interrelated

provisions.°

In the present case, it is clear that the Contracting Parties’ consent to arbitrate expressed in
Article 8 of the Treaty is limited. The Contracting Parties explicitly agreed in this provision
that they would consent to arbitrate disputes arising out of a certain and limited number of
articles of the Treaty. The Tribunal is therefore of the view that, under the Treaty, the
Contracting Parties have not provided their consent to arbitrate disputes arising out of any

provisions of the Treaty not explicitly mentioned in Article 8.

The arbitral jurisprudence cited above confirms that where there is no consent to arbitrate
certain disputes under the basic Treaty, an MFN clause cannot be relied upon to create that

consent unless the Contracting Parties clearly and explicitly agreed thereto.

The Tribunal notes that the 1991 UK model treaty and most treaties concluded by the UK

include a third sub-paragraph in Article 3 which reads as follows:

3(3) For avoidance of doubt, it is confirmed that the treatment provided for
in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles
1 to 11 of this Agreement.

In the present Treaty, such a paragraph was not included. A review of treaties concluded by

the UK shows that, where the scope of the dispute settlement provision is limited, there is

8 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction,
8 February 2005, CL-37, para. 212.

26

107.

108.

no such paragraph. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the absence of the “For avoidance
of doubt” paragraph in the present Treaty demonstrates the clear intention of the
contracting parties to give its full application to Article 8(1). In addition, in the view of the
Tribunal, the wording of Article 8(1) is crystal clear and leaves no doubt as to the express
limits of the dispute settlement clause. As the Maffezini tribunal found, to override the
Contracting States consent by virtue of an MFN provision would “upset the finality of

arrangements that many countries deem important as a matter of public policy”.4

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal is of the view that the scope of Article 8(1) of the
Treaty cannot be expanded by virtue of the MFN clause. Accordingly, the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims under Articles 2(2) and 3 of the Treaty by virtue of

the MFN clause and it so finds.

Arbitrator Alexandrov takes a different view with respect to some elements of the analysis
relating to the application of the MFN clause. He agrees with the underlying premise that
“an MEN clause can, a priori, apply to dispute settlement” (paragraph 95) and that “where
tribunals have declined to apply the MFN clause to dispute settlement, the ratio decidendi
was either that (i) the MFN clause was invoked to override public policy considerations
such as a substitution of the consent to arbitrate where none exists in the basic Treaty,
and/or (ii) its scope of application was limited by the wording used in the applicable
Treaty” (paragraph 97). He differs from his colleagues on two points. First, he believes
that the analysis of the MFN clause here should begin with a textual interpretation of its
terms. The clause refers to “treatment” and the first question to be addressed should be
whether that term includes dispute settlement. Another question of treaty interpretation
that should be addressed relates to the fact that the exceptions to MFN treatment listed in
Article 7 do not mention dispute settlement. Second, the presence of the limitations (i) and
(ii) referred to in paragraph 97 of the Decision (and quoted above) has not been established
in this case. Consent clearly exists in the Treaty; the objection raised by the Respondent
relates to the scope of consent rather than to its existence. The Decision draws “a

distinction between the application of an MFN clause to a more favourable dispute

“4 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdiction, 25 January 2000, CL-63, para. 63.

27

109.

110.

So

resolution provision where the investor has the right to arbitrate under the basic treaty,
albeit under less favourable conditions, and the substitution of non-existent consent to
arbitration by virtue of an MFN clause” (paragraph 98) yet does not consider the argument
that the application of the MFN clause here may relate to expanding the scope of consent
rather than to “the substitution of non-existing consent.” Finally, arbitrator Alexandrov
believes that a more detailed and in-depth study of the history and evolution of UK BITs is
necessary before one can reach the conclusion that the introduction of the “for the
avoidance of doubt” language was intended to signal a break with the past rather than
continuity. Such a study may show that the intent was the opposite: to make express what
was presumed, i.¢., that the MFN clause covered dispute settlement. He disagrees with the
statement in para. 106 of the Decision that “where the scope of the dispute settlement
provision [in the UK BITs] is limited, there is no such [‘for the avoidance of doubt’]
paragraph.” This statement suggests that there is a pattern in the UK BITs: where the scope
of dispute settlement is limited, there is no “for the avoidance of doubt” paragraph; where
it is not, there is such a paragraph. In fact, no such pattern exists — there are multiple UK
BITs where the scope of dispute settlement is not limited yet there is no “for the avoidance
of doubt” paragraph — and, therefore, the Decision’s conclusion in para. 106 remains

unsubstantiated.

Whether the Claimant is a Foreign Investor

qd) The Parties’ Positions
a. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that the Claimant is not a foreign investor.

Article 1(c)(ii)(bb) of the Treaty defines the term “investor” in respect of the United
Kingdom as “corporations, firms, and associations incorporated or constituted under the

law in force in any part of the United Kingdom.”**

45 Statement of Defence, para. 71. See Treaty at CL-1.

28

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

The Respondent accepts that the Claimant is an entity incorporated under the law in force
in the United Kingdom. However, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to look beyond

this formalistic approach to ascertain whether the Claimant is a foreign investor.*°
According to the Respondent:

..under customary international law, in particular the law on
diplomatic protection, there is a clear exception to the rule on
determining the nationality of a company be reference to the place of its
incorporation: If there are no substantial links between the place of
incorporation and the incorporated company, such as property, an
office, substantial business activities or residence of shareholders, policy

and fairness dictate that the corporate veil can be pierced.”

The Respondent requests the Tribunal to pierce the corporate veil, as was done by several
other tribunals,** in order to ascertain who owns and controls the Claimant. According to
the Respondent, such an exercise will reveal that the Claimant is controlled and owned in

majority by Mr. Buchal, a Czech national.”

In addition, the Respondent submits that the Claimant does not serve any commercial
purpose in the UK. According to the Respondent, the Claimant is a shell corporation with
no business activities in the United Kingdom whatsoever: “/b]y the Claimant’s own
account, it conducts all its business in the Czech Republic [through its Czech subsidiary,

AILY Czech].”®

Accordingly, the Respondent argues that the present dispute is of a purely domestic nature:
a Czech businessman is conducting business exclusively in the Czech Republic. As a

consequence, avers the Respondent, the Claimant cannot be considered a foreign investor

46 Statement of Defence, para. 72.
47 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 58.

 

48 See, inter alia, Mr. Franz Sedelmayer v. The Russian Federation, SCC
RL-38. Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 60.

4° Statement of Defence, paras. 65; 98-113.

59 Statement of Defence, para. 114.

‘ase, Final Award, 7 July 1998,

30

116.

117.

118.

under the Treaty as this would undermine the very purpose of the Treaty by granting a

national of a State access to international arbitration against its own home State.*!

For the foregoing reasons, the Respondent submits that the Claimant does not qualify as a
foreign investor under the Treaty and therefore the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear its

claims.

The Respondent also questions in its Skeleton Argument whether the alleged transfer of
business by Mr. Buchal from his company Brailcom incorporated in the Czech Republic to
the Claimant took place at a time at which the present dispute was foreseeable.* In other
words, the Respondent questions the nationality planning of Mr. Buchal in the light of the

present dispute.

b. Claimant’s Position

The Claimant asserts that it meets the criteria of Article 1(c)(ii)(bb) of the Treaty and that

those criteria are “both necessary and sufficient™:

118.1 The Claimant is a private limited company, incorporated in the UK in August 2012
under the UK Companies Act 2006.*>

118.2 The Respondent itself has certified that the Claimant is a UK company (in the
context of registering the Claimant’s Czech branch) long before the dispute arose
between the Parties. In 17 October 2012, the Czech Commercial Register -
maintained by the Municipal Court in Prague - issued a Statement that All1Y LTD
is a “foreign legal entity” and that it is registered under the “Law of England and
Wales” by the “Commercial Register in Cardiff in Great Britain under the entry

number 8165690.”°°

*! Statement of Defence, paras. 121-122.

* Statement of Defence, para. 123.

*3 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 67.

4 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 39.

55 Certificate of Incorporation of Al1Y LTD,2 August 2012, C-1.
°6 Extract of the Czech Commercial Registry,17 October 2012, C-2.

30

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

118.3. There is a consistent body of jurisprudence supporting that a place of incorporation
test in a treaty (such as exists in Article 1(c)(ii)(bb) of the Treaty) should be upheld
in accordance with ordinary principles of treaty interpretation. In particular, the
Claimant relies on the decision in Yukos v. Russia wherein the tribunal opined that:
“[t]he Tribunal knows of no general principles of international law that would require
investigating how a company or another organization operates when the applicable treaty
simply requires it to be organized in accordance with the laws of a Contracting Party.

fel"
For the foregoing reasons, the Claimant submits that it is a foreign investor.

The Claimant also denies that its incorporation in the UK on 2 August 2012 was done in

bad faith.**

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

Article 1(c)(ii)(bb) of the Treaty defines the term “investor” in respect of the United
Kingdom as “corporations, firms, and associations incorporated or constituted under the

law in force in any part of the United Kingdom.”*?

The Tribunal notes that the Respondent agrees that the Claimant fulfils the formal

requirement stipulated in Article 1(c)(ii)(bb) of the Treaty for being an investor.

The Tribunal recalls that the Claimant submitted at the hearing that under the Treaty,
“[t]he test is an incorporation test, the Claimant meets it. That is and should be the

beginning and the end of the analysis”.*! The Tribunal agrees.

The Tribunal is of the view that the ordinary meaning of Article 1(c)(ii)(bb) of the Treaty
clearly sets an incorporation test in respect of which investors should be protected under
the Treaty rather than a test relating to economic control or otherwise.

51 Yukos Universal Limited (Isle of Man) v. The Russian Federation, PCA Case No. AA 227, Interim Award
on Jurisdiction and Admissibility,30 November 2009, CL-36, 4415.

*8Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, paras 50-52.
5° Treaty, CL-1.

© Statement of Defence, para. 75.

6! Tr, Day 1/111/20-22.

31

125.

126.

127.

xa

128.

Where a Treaty provides for an incorporation test, arbitral tribunals have consistently
upheld such test. Even the Respondent, in its opening submissions during the hearing,
recognized this: “J can state from the outset that I am aware, fully aware, that there are
cases that have been decided on very similar facts and that have been decided in

claimant’s favour.”

In this respect, the Tribunal refers to and adopts the tribunal’s reasoning in Saluka v Czech

Republic:

The parties had complete freedom of choice in this matter, and they
chose to limit entitled 'investors' to those satisfying the definition set out
in Article 1 of the Treaty. The Tribunal cannot in effect impose upon the
parties a definition of ‘investor’ other than that which they themselves
agreed. That agreed definition required only that the claimant-investor
should be constituted under the laws of (in the present case) The
Netherlands, and it is not open to the tribunal to add other requirements
which the parties could themselves have added but which they omitted to

add.

In view of the above, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant meets the definition of investor

under the Treaty and is therefore protected under the Treaty.

The Respondent also advanced an alternative “bad faith” argument. It submitted the

following at the hearing:

[...] It is undisputed that Claimant was incorporated in August 2012,
but at that point in time, and I believe that is also undisputed, it was
simply an English company. It had no links whatsoever to the Czech
Republic. It had also not made an investment at that point in time in the

Czech Republic.

© Tr Day 1/30/24-25 — Tr Day 1/31/1-2.
83 Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Arbitration, Partial Award,
17 March 2006, CL-24, para. 241.

32

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

There is a rule established in particular by the Tribunal of Phoenix v
Czech Republic that if you transfer your investment to a foreign
company at a point in time in which a dispute is either in full swing or is
at least foreseeable, then that is an act of nationality planning and
precludes a claimant investor from invoking claims against the host

state.

The Tribunal notes that it is undisputed between the Parties that the Claimant was
incorporated in August 2012® and that, on the Respondent’s case, the dispute between the

Parties became foreseeable by July 2013.

The Tribunal is therefore of the view that the timing of the Claimant’s incorporation could
not have been done in bad faith since, on the Respondent’s own case, there was no pre-

existing or foreseeable dispute between the Parties in 2012.
Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s bad faith argument.

Whether the Claimant, at the time of its incorporation, had made an investment in the
Czech Republic is a separate argument. The Tribunal recalls that, in its Procedural Order
No. 2, it decided to join this jurisdictional objection to the merits as it is clearly intertwined
with the merits. The Tribunal will thus decide this objection in the merits phase of this

case.

The Cooling-Off Period

qd) The Parties’ Positions

a. Respondent’s Position
The Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over all of the Claimant’s

claims since the Claimant failed to adhere to the cooling-off period:

“Tr Day 1/37/9-21.
6 Tr Day 1/37/9-10; Tr Day 1/123/16-18; C-1.
6 Tr Day 1/38/16-17.

33

Article 8(1) stipulates that Claimant has to notify Respondent of a
dispute under article 2(3), 4, 5 and 6 of the BIT and is only entitled to
initiate arbitration of these disputes after a cooling-off period of four

months.

In the present case, such notification was never made. On 10 October
2014 a dispute was notified to Respondent. However, this notification
alleged one single breach of the BIT, namely a breach of article 2(2).
Hence, there never was a valid notification of any dispute under one of

the provisions listed in article 8(1)."

134. The Respondent argues that the compliance which such notification periods has been
considered by a number of tribunals as a jurisdictional requirement.® It relies, inter alia,

on the tribunal’s decision in Murphy Exploration v Ecuador:

[...] the requirement that the parties should seek to resolve their dispute
through consultation and negotiation for a six-month period does not
constitute, as Claimant and some arbitral tribunals have stated, “a pro-
cedural rule” or a “directory and procedural” rule which can or can-
not be satisfied by the concerned party. To the contrary, it constitutes a
fundamental requirement that Claimant must comply with, compulsorily,

before submitting a request for arbitration under the ICSID rules.

135. For the foregoing reasons, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction.

b. Claimant’s Position

136. The Claimant denies that it failed to adhere to the cooling-off period of four months:

Article 8(1) of the BIT provides for the submission of disputes to
arbitration four months after written notification of a claim. The

Respondent neglects to mention that the Claimant notified the

°7 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, paras. 71-72.

68 Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 198.

® Murphy Exploration and Production Company International v. Republic of Ecuador, Award on
Jurisdiction, 15 December 2010, RL-109, para. 149 .

34

137.

138.

Respondent of a claim by serving a Notice of Dispute on the Respondent
on 30 May 2014, which sets out the factual background of the dispute
and sought the resolution of the dispute “in an amicable manner”. The
subject line of the Notice of Dispute letter was “Notification about
existence of dispute on the basis of article 8 of Czech-British Agreement
for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.” There cannot
therefore be any serious doubt that the Claimant notified the Respondent
of a claim under Article 8 of the UK-Czech Republic BIT and sought to

resolve the dispute amicably.

Nor is the Respondent correct to argue that “the parties have not
entered into amicable settlement negotiations.” For example, the
Claimant met with the Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic in July
2014 (after the Claimant’s Notice of Dispute letter of 30 May 2014 and
before the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration of 10 October 2014) to seek
to resolve the dispute amicably. However, the Ministry of Finance
communicated that “at this time” it would not accept the Claimants

proposal for amicable settlement.

The Respondent appears to consider that the Claimant was obliged to
notify the Respondent of all legal arguments relating to its claim. This is
incorrect. [...] As the Tribunal in Burlington v Ecuador (which the
Respondent cites) noted, a notice of dispute letter “does not require the
investor to spell out its legal case in detail during the negotiation
process” and “does not even require the investor to invoke specific

Treaty provisions at that stage.”

For the foregoing reasons, the Claimant submits that the Tribunal has jurisdiction.

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

Article 8(1) of the Treaty provides as follows:

7 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, paras 79-81. See Burlington Resources Inc. v Republic of Ecuador, \CSID
Case ARB/08/5, Decision on Jurisdiction, 2 June 2010, RL-110, 338.

35

Disputes between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other
Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the latter under Articles
2(3), 4, 5 and 6 of this Agreement in relation to an investment of the
former which have not been amicably settled shall, after a period of four
months from written notification of a claim, be submitted to arbitration
under paragraph (2) below if either party to the dispute so wishes.

(Tribunal’s emphasis.)

. The Tribunal considers that the four-month cooling off requirement of Article 8(1) of the

Treaty must be satisfied before an investor is entitled to initiate an arbitration.
. In the present case, the record reveals the following.
. On 30 May 2014, the Claimant wrote to the Respondent as follows:

Subject: Notification about existence of dispute on the basis of
article_8 of Czech-British_Agreement_ for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments

[.]
13. Both of the above mentioned acts of the Ministry undoubtedly
constitute a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard

contained in Article 2(2) of the Treaty.

14, In accordance with Article 8(1) of the Treaty, I am hereby
commencing negotiations about amicable resolution of the dispute

between AI1Y and Czech Republic. [...]

15. At the same time, I reserve the right to provide supplementary facts
on which AIIY is basing its international legal claims, and to do so
especially in the case of the Czech Republic's failure to provide for a
swift remedy to the illegal state that is harming A11Y. Under the same
conditions, I reserve the right to invoke breaches of other standards

contained in the Treaty.

36

16. Finally, please take into account that upon the delivery of thus
notification the four-month period for amicable resolution of the dispute
defined in Article 8(1) of the Treaty commences to run. If this period
elapses to no avail, AI1Y is prepared to commence an investment
arbitration pursuant to the same article of the Treaty. However, I hope
that the investment arbitration will not be necessary and that we will

solve this dispute in an amicable manner.”'

142. In his witness statement, Mr. Buchal states the following:

130. We did not make an agreement, so finally the notification of the dispute
occurred on May 30, 2014. I still believed in an amicable settlement. I
believed that what the “agreement on promotion and protection of
investments” orders, that is the 4 month period for finding an amicable
settlement, is possible. Therefore I visited with Mr. Sekanina in July
2014 Ministry of finance of the Czech Republic, specifically the director
of Section 02- Legal, Mr. Mgr. et Mgr. Petr Horacek and the then-chief
of the standalone division of international investments Ms. Mgr. Marie
Talasova, LL.M. and again I hoped, I believed in amicable settlement.
Mr. Horacek asked me if we could produce more evidence, that I surely
understand that they cannot make a decision to pay any amount from the
state budget without thorough documentation. I of course gladly
admitted that and so within 14 days, we prepared a file of evidence
about illegal passing of know-how damaging good name and illegitimate
refusal of margin. We presented the file and I believed in honest and just

dealing.

131. The answer was however not coming. So we urged it several times,
several times it was promised to us and again postponed, that they will
respond and will again meet with us. They did not meet by only
answered: “After having studied all documents submitted by you I am

respectfully informing you by this letter that the Ministry of Finance at

™ Notice of Dispute of A11Y LTD, 30 May 2014, C-73.

37

this time will not accept the proposal of your client for settlement.”

(Tribunal’s emphasis)

143. On 10 October 2014, more than four months after its notification, the Claimant filed its
Notice of Arbitration. The relevant excerpts of the Notice of Arbitration are reproduced

below:
[..]

53. The Claimant submits that, as a result of the measures described in
Section III above, the Czech Republic has failed to provide fair and
equitable treatment to the Claimant's investment and has interfered, by

unreasonable and discriminatory measures, with the operation thereof.

[.]

59. The Claimant bases its Notice of Arbitration on Article 8 of the Treaty.

In relevant part, Article 8 provides: [...]
[.]

61. The period of four months, earmarked by Article 8(1) of the Treaty for
the parties to try to reach amicable settlement, expired without success

on September 30, 2014.°

144. At the hearing, Mr. Buchal testified that other meetings concerning the dispute had taken
place with the Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic in June 2015 when the present

proceedings were pending but to no avail.”

145. According to the Respondent, Article 8(1) of the Treaty requires that disputes concerning
an obligation under Articles 2(3), 4, 5 and 6 must be notified by the investor to the State. If

™ Witness Statement of Mr Jan Buchal, paras. 130-131.
73 Notice of Arbitration, 10 October 2014, R-39.
"4 Tr, Day 2/12/11-24.

38

14

14

148.

149.

150.

6.

7.

oo

©

Ss

no amicable settlement is reached after four months, then, and only then can an arbitration

be initiated avers the Respondent.

In the present case, the Respondent argues that the Claimant never notified it of a dispute
under any one of these articles. In fact, the Notice of Arbitration of 10 October only
notified the Respondent of a dispute under Article 2(2). Accordingly, the Claimant never

triggered the cooling-off period of Article 8(1).

The Claimant submits that it complied with the cooling-off period. Its Notice of Dispute
dated 30 May 2014 states that it was made “on the basis of article 8 of the [BIT]”, that
“upon the delivery of this notification, the four-month period for amicable resolution of
dispute defined in Article 8(1) of the Treaty commences to run’, and that it “reserve[s] the
right to invoke breaches of other standards contained in the Treaty”.

Without making any finding as to (i) the validity of the Claimant’s notice of 30 May 2014
pursuant to Article 8(1) of the Treaty or (ii) the characterization of this issue as one of
jurisdiction or admissibility or procedure, the Tribunal is of the view that, as of the date of
the Notice of Dispute, the Respondent was clearly aware of the existence of a dispute, the
facts from which it arose, the legal basis of the dispute (to wit the Treaty) and an estimate
of the damages sought. On the basis of this notice, the Parties met in July 2014 and in June
2015 in an attempt to resolve the dispute amicably. The Parties were unable to reach a

settlement.

In light of the above, the Tribunal considers that it would be futile to decline jurisdiction
over the present arbitration in order to allow the Parties to engage in further attempts to

reach an amicable settlement.
As Christoph Schreuer writes:

There would be little point in declining jurisdiction and sending the
parties back to the negotiating table if these negotiations are obviously
futile. Negotiations remain possible while the arbitration proceedings

are pending. Even if the institution of arbitration was premature,
75 Notice of Dispute of Al1Y LTD, 30 May 2014, C-73.

39

151.

D.

152.

153.

154.

compelling the claimant to start the proceedings anew would be a highly

uneconomical solution.”

Accordingly, the Tribunal denies the Respondent’s objection to its jurisdiction on the basis

that the Claimant failed to adhere to the cooling-off period.

Whether the Treaty is superseded by EU law

qd) The Parties’ Positions

a. Respondent’s Position
The Respondent submits that EU law has superseded the Treaty as of the date of
accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union on 1 May 2004. In other
words, submits the Respondent, the Treaty is no longer in force between the Contracting
States since 1 May 2004. Hence, argues the Respondent, the Claimant is precluded from

invoking the Treaty’s standards and, in particular, its dispute resolution clause.

The Respondent quotes Article 59 of the VCLT in support of its argument: “/a treaty]
shall be considered as terminated if all the parties to it conclude a later treaty relating to
the same subject-matter and: (a) it appears from the later treaty or is otherwise
established that the parties intended that the matter should be governed by that treaty; or
(b) the provisions of the latter treaty are so far incompatible with those of the earlier one

that the two treaties are not capable of being applied at the same time.”

Alternatively, should the Tribunal find that the Treaty is not terminated by virtue of Article
59 of the VCLT, the Respondent relies on Article 30(3) of the VCLT in support of its
following argument: “/A/rticle 30 provides that certain individual provisions of a treaty
can be derogated by a later treaty if they relate to the same subject-matter. In that case, the
earlier treaty applies only to the extent that its provisions are compatible with those of the

latter treat.”

7 Christoph Schreuer, Ch. 21 Consent to Arbitration, Peter Muchlinski (ed.) and others, The Oxford
Handbook of International Investment Law, I“ ed, Oxford University Press 2008, CL-137, p. 846.

40

155. According to the Respondent, various provisions of EU law have the same subject-matter

as those of the Treaty:

Article 2(1) of the Czech-UK BIT provides for the promotion and
admission of investments from investors of the other contracting state.
Corresponding to that article 49 TFEU et seq. states the right of
establishment. Additionally article 16(2) Charter of Fundamental Rights
recognizes the freedom to conduct a business in accordance with
Community law and national laws and practices. Likewise to article 2(1)
of the BIT, these provisions of the TFEU clearly create favourable

conditions for investors of other EU member states.

Article 2(2) of the Czech-UK BIT requires a fair and equitable
treatment standard as well as the prohibition of unreasonable or
discriminatory measures. Also article 3 of the BIT states that investments
or returns of investors of the other contracting party shall not be treated

less fe than ii or returns of ic investors. Very
similarly, EU law in general prohibits any discrimination between EU

member states in article 1I8TFEU.

Article 5 of the BIT prohibits expropriations, except for very limited
reasons and only against compensation. Likewise, article 17 Charter of
Fundamental Rights clearly states that no one may be deprived of his or
her possessions. This rule explicitly and as well general principles of EU

Law prohibit expropriations without the payment of compensation.

Article 6 of the Czech-UK BIT states the guarantee to investors of the
other state to transfer their investments and returns, without restrictions.
Equally, article 63 TFEU et seq. provides that all restrictions on the

movement of capital between member states shall be prohibited.”

77 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, paras. 85-88.

41

156.

157.

158.

159.

160.

161.

Accordingly, argues the Respondent, the Treaty should be considered terminated under
Article 59 of the VCLT, or the provisions of the Treaty listed above no longer apply
pursuant to Article 30 of the VCLT, since the Treaty’s provisions are incompatible with

those of EU law.”

In particular, avers the Respondent, “the dispute resolution clause in Art 8 of the BIT is
incompatible with the later concluded EU treaties, since it infringes both Art 18 TFEU and
Art 344 TFEU.””

The Respondent argues that Article 18 of the TFEU prohibits discrimination between
nationals of member states based on their nationality. The Treaty in the present case
provides the right to arbitration to certain investors, but not to investors from other member

states.*°
Article 344 TFEU provides that:

Member States undertake not to submit a dispute concerning the
interpretation or application of the Treaties to any method of settlement

other than those provided for therein.

The Respondent avers that “the General Court explicitly ruled that out-of-court methods

for settling disputes provided for in agreements [such as arbitration as provided for in

Article 8 of the Treaty] are no longer applicable as of the contracting state’s accession to

the Union if the subject matter is regulated by EU law.”*!

Consequently, argues the Respondent, the entire Treaty or, in the alternative, at least
Article 8 of the Treaty, is incompatible with the EU Treaties. As a result, avers the

Respondent, the Treaty and in particular its dispute resolution clause are superseded by EU

78 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 91.
7° Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 92.
8° Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 93.

8! Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 96. See Judgment of the General Court (Third Chamber),
15.4.2011, T-465/08 (Czech Republic v. Commission), RL-118, para. 102.

42

law and the Claimant is therefore precluded from invoking the substantial standards and

the dispute resolution clause of the Treaty.*?

162. Alternatively, the Respondent submits that the Treaty was impliedly terminated by the
United Kingdom and the Czech Republic upon the latter’s accession to the EU:

In view of the ECJ’s repeated emphasis on the precedence of the EU
Treaties over other agreements between member states, and the
member states’ apparent agreement with such interpretation, it is
difficult to argue that a BIT provision incompatible with EU law should
nevertheless apply. Thus, as far as the Czech Republic is concerned, its
termination of the UK-Czech BIT should be implied from its accession to

the European Union also by virtue of EU Law.“

163. In view of the above, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction.

b. Claimant’s Position

164. At the outset, the Claimant notes the following:

164.1 the Respondent “does not contest that the UK and Czech Republic have confirmed
that the BIT remains in force, or that it and the UK have taken no steps under

Article 14 to terminate the BIT’; and

164.2 the objection regarding intra-EU BITs has failed in numerous past cases.*°

8? Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 98.

8 ECJ, 27.9.1988, C-235/87 (Matteucci v. Belgium) para 22, RL-124; ECJ, 27.2.1962, C-10/61 (Commission
v Italy), RL-123.

4 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, para. 100.

85 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 55. See: List of Current Bilateral Treaties from the Ministry of
Finance of the Czech Government Website, htto://www.mfer.cz/en/themes/trade-defence [accessed on 11
January 2016], C-61; Email from Treaty Enquiry Service of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the
UK Government to Mr. Boris Dusek of A11Y LTD, 25 November 2015, [with English translation] (C-62.

86 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 56. See RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited and RREEF Pan-
European Infrastructure Two Lux S.a.r.1. v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No ARB/13/30, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 6 June 2016, CL-130, 4 89: “the Tribunal underlines that in all published or known investment
treaty cases in which the intra-EU objection has been invoked by the Respondent, it has been rejected.”

  
 

43

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

Nevertheless, the Claimant submits that, according to the VCLT, the termination of the
Treaty pursuant to Article 59 can only be done by having recourse to the procedure set out

in Article 65 of the VCLT which provides as follows:

Article 65
Procedure to be followed with respect to invalidity, termination,

withdrawal from or suspension of the operation of a treaty

A party which, under the provisions of the present Convention, invokes
either a defect in its consent to be bound by a treaty or a ground for
impeaching the validity of a treaty, terminating it, withdrawing from it
or suspending its operation, must notify the other parties of its claim.
The notification shall indicate the measure proposed to be taken with

respect to the treaty and the reasons therefor....

Since the Respondent did not comply with Article 65, the Claimant submits that the
Tribunal should dismiss the Respondent’s objection based on Article 59 of the VCLT.

In any event, argues the Claimant, Article 59 can only terminate a treaty if the subsequent
treaty concerns the same subject matter. In the present case, avers the Claimant, the Treaty

and the TFEU (or EU law or the Charter) do not cover the same subject matter. °”

The Claimant submits that the Respondent’s objection on the basis of Article 30(3) of the
VCLT should also be dismissed since there is no substantive contradiction between Article

8 of the Treaty and Articles 18 and 344 of the TFEU.**

For the foregoing reasons, the Claimant submits that the Tribunal has jurisdiction.

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal must decide whether the Czech Republic’s accession to the EU means that

EU law has superseded the Treaty which is thus no longer in force.

87 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 61.
88 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, para. 77.

44

171.

172.

173.

Investment treaty tribunals have consistently held that EU treaties do not supersede intra-
EU BITs. Accordingly, for sake of procedural economy, the Tribunal will limit its analysis

to the following.

Firstly, investment treaty tribunals have held that no common intention appears from the
EU treaties or accession to the EU to terminate intra-EU BITs. In this respect, the Tribunal
refers to and adopts mutatis mutandis the tribunals’ reasoning in the following decisions:
Micula v Romania, Eastern Sugar v The Czech Republic, Eureko v The Slovak Republic,
Oostergefel v The Slovak Republic and EURAM v The Slovak Republic.”

The Tribunal in EURAM v The Slovak Republic stated, for instance:

The Tribunal is not convinced by the Respondent's argument that, by its
very nature, the ECT demonstrated an implied intent to terminate the
BITs between Members and non-Members of the EU that were
transformed into intra-EU BITs by the accession of Slovakia to the EU.
The Tribunal considers that nothing in the EU Treaties gives such an
indication of intent, rather to the contrary. As rightly emphasised by the
Claimant, “nowhere does the Accession Treaty say that ... the]
Accession Treaty and EU law ‘govern the matter’ of bilateral investment
treaty protection with its protection standards and enforcement
mechanisms. The Accession Treaty and the European Treaties do also
not say anything about investment protection for investors of one EU

Member State in another Member State.”

174. Secondly, the evidence reveals that the Czech Republic and the UK both consider that the

Treaty is in force. Exhibit C-61 is a five-page document printed from the website of the

Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic on 11 January 2016 which lists the bilateral

% Ioan Micula, Viorel Micula, S.C. European Food S.A, S.C. Starmili S.R.L. and S.C. Multipack S.R.L. v.
Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Award, 11 December 2013, RL-68, para. 321; Eastern Sugar BV v.
The Czech Republic, SCC Case No. 088/2004, Partial Award, 27 March 2007, RL-44, para. 167; A Achmea
BV vy. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2008-13 (formerly Eureko BV v. The Slovak
Republic), Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension, 26 October 2010, RL-43, paras. 244-252;
Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction,
30 April 2010, CL-94, paras. 80-85; European American Investment Bank AG (Austria) v. The Slovak
Republic, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2010-17, Award on Jurisdiction, 22 October 2012, CL-93, paras.
186-210.

45

175.

176.

177.

178.

treaties concluded by the Czech Republic. It is recorded that the one concluded with the
UK is currently in force. Counsel for the Claimant represented to the Tribunal that this
document remains unchanged as of the date of the hearing. Similarly, Exhibit C-62 is an e-
mail from the Treaty Public Enquiries Department of the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office to a representative of the Claimant dated 25 November 2015 which says “/ij/n

accordance with our records, the [Treaty] has not been terminated.”

In addition, neither Contracting State has taken the steps under Article 14 of the Treaty to

terminate it.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Treaty is still in force.

Thirdly, in respect of the Respondent’s argument in relation to Article 59 of the VCLT,
that “/a] treaty shall be considered as terminated if all the parties to it conclude a later
treaty relating to the same subject-matter and: (a) [i]t appears from the later treaty or is
otherwise established that the parties intended that the matter should be governed by that
treaty; or (b) [t]he provisions of the later treaty are so far incompatible with those of the
earlier one that the two treaties are not capable of being applied at the same time’, the
Tribunal notes that investment treaty tribunals have consistently found that BITs and EU
treaties do not relate to the same subject-matter and that there is no incompatibility
between the provisions of the EU treaties and BITs. In this respect, the Tribunal refers to
and adopts mutatis mutandis the tribunals’ reasoning in the following decisions: Binder v
The Czech Republic, Eastern Sugar v The Czech Republic, Eureko v The Slovak Republic,
Oostergetel v The Slovak Republic, and EURAM v The Slovak Republic.”

Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction

on the basis that EU law has superseded the Treaty and is no longer in force.

% Mr. Binder v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction, 6 June 2007, CL-39, paras- 63 - 65;

Eastern Sugar BV (Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, SCC

 

“ase No. 088/2004, Partial Award, 27 March 2007,

RL-44, paras. 158-166 and 168 -171; A Achmea BY v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2008-13
(formerly Eureko BV v. The Slovak Republic), Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension, 26 October
2010, RL-43, paras, 239-242, 245-263, 273-277 (in relation to Art. 30 VCLT); Mr. Jan Oostergetel and Mrs.
Theodora Laurentius v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 30 April 2010, CL-94, paras.
72-79, 86-87, 104 (in relation to Art 30 VCLT); European American Investment Bank AG (Austria) v. The Slovak
Republic, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2010-17, Award on Jurisdiction, 22 October 2012, CL-93, paras. 155-185,
213-234, 268-278 (in relation to Art 30 VCLT).

46

Vv.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

COSTS

The parties simultaneously filed submissions on costs on 21 October 2016.

The Claimant requests that the Tribunal rule on the costs of this bifurcated phase in its
decision on jurisdiction and order the Respondent to pay the Claimant the costs of the
arbitration in the amount of GBP 137,123.44 as well as the Claimant’s costs for legal
representation and assistance in the amount of GBP 665,981.16, for a total of GBP

803,104.60 in arbitration and legal costs.

The Respondent requests that the Tribunal order the Claimant to reimburse the Respondent
the amount of USD 200,000 as reimbursement of advance payments in respect of the
Tribunal’s fees; and the amount of CZK 6, 351,778.84 for legal fees and other expenses by

the Respondent in connection with these proceedings.

By letter dated 27 October 2016, the Respondent submitted that a decision on costs in an

interim decision would be premature. It argued inter alia that:

[...] at the current stage of the proceedings, it is not possible to
determine which of the parties will ultimately be successful in the
present proceedings. Even if the Arbitral Tribunal should affirm its
jurisdiction, there is no indication that Claimant will ultimately be
successful in the proceedings; it has merely overcome one set of
Respondent's arguments. If jurisdiction is assumed over Claimant’s
claim for expropriation, Claimant has not even been fully successfil in
the jurisdictional phase. Respondent, however, considers a decision on
costs to be premature while only some of its arguments and objections

have been decided on, but the outcome of the case remains open.

Article 40 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules provides that:

47

184.

185.

186.

Article 40

1. Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration shall in
principle be borne by the unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral
tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the

circumstances of the case.

2. With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance
referred to in article 38, paragraph (e), the arbitral tribunal, taking into
account the circumstances of the case, shall be free to determine which
party shall bear such costs or may apportion such costs between the

parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable.

[.]

According to Article 40 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules, the applicable principle is that the
unsuccessful party pays the costs of the successful party unless the tribunal considers that

apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the circumstances of the case.

Without making a determination of whether apportionment would be reasonable in the
present case, the Tribunal is of the view that, in the circumstances of this case, it would be

premature at this stage to issue any decision with respect to costs.

Consequently, costs relating to the bifurcated jurisdictional phase of these proceedings will

be considered and allocated at the conclusion of the merits phase of this arbitration.

48

Vi.

DECISION

187. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal decides:

188.

@)

2)

G)

4

<

(6

YY

(6)

To uphold the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based on the scope of

application of Article 8(1) of the Treaty. Accordingly,

(a) the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims pursuant to Articles

2(2) and 3 of the Treaty;

(vb) the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims made under Articles

2(3) and 5 of the Treaty;

To deny the Claimant’s request for relief for a “declaration that the Czech Republic
has breached Article 2(3) of the Treaty by failing to observe the provisions of the
Treaty set out in sub-clauses (a) to (d) above” for the reasons set out in paragraph 91

above;

To reject the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection that the Claimant is not a foreign

investor;

To reject the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection that the Claimant failed to adhere

to the cooling-off period;

To reject the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection that the Treaty is superseded by

EU law;

To defer its decision on costs related to this phase of the arbitration until the

Tribunal’s Final Award.

After consultation with both Parties a procedural order will be issued regarding the further

procedure.

49

Place of Arbitration: Paris, France
Date: 9 February 2017

[signed] [signed]
Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov Ms. Anne Joubin-Bret
Arbitrator Arbitrator
[signed]

The Hon. L. Yves Fortier, PC, CC, OQ, QC
President

50

