INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION PROCEEDING UNDER ARTICLE 8(2)(A) OF THE
AGREEMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CZECH AND SLOVAK FEDERAL REPUBLIC FOR THE PROMOTION

AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES (1976)

AI1LY LTD.
v.

CZECH REPUBLIC

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/15/1)

 

AWARD

 

Tribunal
The Hon. L. Yves Fortier, QC, Presiding Arbitrator
Prof. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Arbitrator
Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret, Arbitrator

Secretary to the Tribunal
Ms. Jara Minguez Almeida

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Annie Lespérance

Place of Arbitration: Paris, France
Date of dispatch to the Parties: 29 June 2018

Representing the Claimant:

Mr. Hussein Haeri
Mr. David Walker
Ms. Uliana Cooke
Ms. Ruzin Dagli
Withers LLP

16 Old Bailey
London EC4M 7EG
United Kingdom

and

Mr. Lucas Bastin
Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WC2A 3EG
United Kingdom

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Respondent:

Mgr. Marie TalaSova LL.M.

Ms. Anna Bilanova

Mr. Martin Novaéek

International Legal Services Department

The Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic
Letenska 15

118 10 Prague 1

Czech Republic

and

Dr. Gerold Zeiler

Dr. Alfred Siwy

zeiler.partners Rechtsanwilte GmbH
Stubenbastei 2

1010 Vienna

Austria

IL.

iil.

Iv.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

 

A. Decision on Jurisdiction

 

B. History of the Proceedings Following the Issuance of the Decision on Jurisdiction...

C. Dramatis Personae

 

THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF ..
A. The Claimant’s Request for Relief.

B. The Respondent’s Request for Relief........ccceeseeeeeeseseenesseeseeeseesseeeseeeseeeeeenees
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
A. AI1Y’s Takeover of BRAILCOM’s Business.........c.:scsccsssessecsesseesessessessnsssseseeseeseese
B. AI1Y’s Business

 

 

C. Czech Regulatory Framework and Transparency International’s Letter «0.00.0...
D. July 2013S
THE RESPONDENT’S ALLEGED MEASURES AGAINST THE CLAIMANT.......

 

15
18

A. The Respondent Allegedly Pressured the Claimant’s Visually Impaired Customers to

Leave the Claimant and Turn to the Claimant’s Competitors ........ccseeeeeeeeeee
(1) The Claimant’s Position
(2) The Respondent’s Position
B. The Respondent Allegedly Denounced the Claimant on National Television.............
(1) The Claimant’s Position
(2) The Respondent’s Position

C. The Respondent Allegedly Turned Over the Claimant’s Confidential and Pricing
Information to its Competitors

(1) The Claimant’s Position

 

(2) The Respondent’s Position .........cceceeeeeseseeneseeeseeeseeeseesseeeseeesseesseeetseeeeeeeaees

D. The Respondent Allegedly Rigged the Independent Assessments of the Claimant’s
Assistive Technology Solutions .......0.0.0cccceeeeees

(1) The Claimant’s Position

(2) The Respondent’s Position .........cceceeeeeseseeneseeeseeeseeeseesseeeseeesseesseeetseeeeeeeaees
JURISDICTION
A. Whether the Claimant Made an Investment in the Czech Republic.........0..cee

 

(1) The Parties’ Positions

 

a. The Respondent’s Position ........c.ccceeeeeseseeeeseeseseeeseeeseesseeeeseeeeeseeeneenees

 

21
21
24
24

25

 

 

36
37
37
39
39

b. The Claimant’s Positio:

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi 45

 

 

 

 

 

 

VI. MERITS. 50
A. Whether the Respondent Breached Article 5 of the Treaty .

(1) The Parties’ Positions 51

a. The Claimant’s Position ........0.cececeecesseesessneseeeeeseeseeseeseesessessessesseeeeneenees 51

b. The Respondent’s Position ........c.cccceseeeseeseseeeeseeeseeeseessesesseseeeseeeaeeneees 57

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi 63

VII. COSTS 73
VIII. DECISION 76

 

iii

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 

Act on Allowances

Act on Providing Allowances to Persons with
Health Impairment of January 2012

 

Amended Memorial

Claimant’s Amended Memorial, filed on 11
January 2016

 

 

 

Cc Claimant’s Exhibit
CL- Claimant’s Legal Exhibit
Claimant A1LY LTD.

 

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, dated 23
January 2018

 

Claimant’s Rejoinder

Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Jurisdictional
Objection on Investment, dated 13 October
2017

 

Claimant’s Reply

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits and
Jurisdictional Objection on Investment, dated 3
July 2017

 

Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief

Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, dated 31
January 2018

 

Claimant’s Skeleton

Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, dated 3
November 2017

 

Claimant’s Statement of Costs (Jurisdiction)

Claimant’s Statement of Costs, dated 21
October 2016

 

Claimant’s Statement of Costs

Claimant’s Statement of Costs Merits, dated 31
January 2018

 

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
and Request for Endorsement of the
Claimant’s Right to Amend the Memorial,
filed on 11 January 2016

 

Decision on Jurisdiction

Decision on Jurisdiction, issued on 9 February
2017

 

 

Hearing

 

Hearing held on 13-17 November 2017 in
Paris, France

 

 

 

ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

 

MPSV

Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs of the
Czech Republic

 

Notice of Arbitration

Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration, filed on 14
October 2014

 

Parties

Claimant and Respondent

 

PO!

Procedural Order No. 1, issued by the Tribunal
on 23 March 2015

 

PO2

Procedural Order No. 2 — Decision on
Bifurcation, issued by the Tribunal on 5
October 2015

 

PO3

Procedural Order No. 3 — Amendment to the
Procedural Timetable, issued by the Tribunal
on 11 December 2015

 

PO4

Procedural Order No. 4 — Decision on
Claimant’s Request for Endorsement of its
Right to Amend its Memorial, issued by the
Tribunal on 1 February 2016

 

PO5

Procedural Order No. 5 — Decision on
Respondent’s Document Production Requests,
issued by the Tribunal on 18 February 2016

 

PO6

Procedural Order No. 6 — Organization of the
Hearing on Jurisdiction, issued by the Tribunal
on 8 September 2016

 

PO7

Procedural Order No. 7 — Procedural Calendar
for the Remainder of the Proceedings, issued
by the Tribunal on 21 February 2017

 

 

PO8

 

Procedural Order No. 8 — Decision on the
Parties’ Document Production Requests, issued
by the Tribunal on 11 April 2017

 

 

 

R-

Respondent’s Exhibit

 

RL-

Respondent’s Legal Exhibit

 

Respondent’s Reply

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, filed on
25 April 2015

 

Respondent

Czech Republic

 

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, filed on 23
January 2018

 

Respondent’s Rejoinder

Respondent’s Rejoinder on Merits and
Jurisdiction, filed on 15 September 2017

 

Respondent’s Reply to Post-Hearing Brief

Respondent’s Reply to Claimant’s Post-
Hearing Brief, filed 31 January 2018

 

Respondent’s Skeleton

Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, filed on 20
September 2016

 

Respondent’s Statement of Costs (Jurisdiction)

Respondent’s Statement of Costs, filed 21
October 2016

 

Respondent’s Statement of Costs

Respondent’s Statement of Costs, filed 31
January 2018

 

Statement of Defence

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (Statement of
Defence), filed on 31 August 2015

 

TI

Transparency International

 

Treaty or BIT

Agreement between the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Government of the Czech and
Slovak Federal Republic for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments with Protocol, 10
July 1990

 

Tribunal

Arbitral tribunal constituted on 19 December
2014

 

 

UNCITRAL Rules

 

The United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law’s Arbitration Rules as
adopted by the General Assembly Resolution
31/98 on 15 December 1976

 

vi

 

 

 

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties as

VCLT or Vienna Convention entered into force on 27 January 1980

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION

Having issued a Decision on Jurisdiction on 9 February 2017, the Tribunal now turns to
the Parties’ submissions in respect of the Respondent’s remaining jurisdictional

objection, liability and quantum.

The Tribunal recalls that these proceedings were launched pursuant to the 1976
UNCITRAL Rules and are administered by ICSID further to the Parties’ agreement
of 12 January 2015.

The present Award should be read together with the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction.!
Therefore, the Tribunal sees no need to traverse again the procedural history of these
proceedings, which it reviewed at length in its Decision on Jurisdiction. Initially, the
Tribunal will recall its findings on jurisdiction, and then set out the procedural history of

the proceedings after the issuance of its Decision on Jurisdiction.

In order to set the stage for the present Award, the Tribunal will then review the
background of the Claimant’s investment in the Czech Republic and the Respondent’s
alleged measures which, the Claimant says, breached Article 5, the expropriation

provision of the Treaty. The Parties’ requests for relief are set out in Section II.

In its analysis, the Tribunal has considered not only the submissions of the Parties
summarized in the present Award, but also the numerous detailed arguments presented by
the Parties in their written and oral pleadings. To the extent that these arguments are not

referred to expressly, they should be deemed to be subsumed into the Tribunal’s analysis.

A. DECISION ON JURISDICTION

6.

7.

On 9 February 2017, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction.
The operative part of the Decision provides as follows:

187. _ For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal decides:

' Reproduced as Annex | to the present Award.

(1) To uphold the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based
on the scope of application of Article 8(1) of the Treaty.
Accordingly,

(a) the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the Claimant's
claims pursuant to Articles 2(2) and 3 of the Treaty;

(b) the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the Claimant's claims
made under Articles 2(3) and 5 of the Treaty;

(2) To deny the Claimant’s request for relief for a
“declaration that the Czech Republic has breached
Article 2(3) of the Treaty by failing to observe the
provisions of the Treaty set out in sub-clauses (a) to (d)
above” for the reasons set out in paragraph 91 above;

(3) To reject the Respondent's jurisdictional objection that the
Claimant is not a foreign investor;

(4) To reject the Respondent's jurisdictional objection that the
Claimant failed to adhere to the cooling-off period;

(5) To reject the Respondent's jurisdictional objection that the
Treaty is superseded by EU law;

(6) To defer its decision on costs related to this phase of the
arbitration until the Tribunal’s Final Award.

188. After consultation with both Parties a procedural order will be
issued regarding the further procedure.

B. HISTORY OF THE PROCEEDINGS FOLLOWING THE ISSUANCE OF THE DECISION ON
JURISDICTION
8. On 9 February 2017, the Tribunal invited the Parties to seek to agree the remainder of the
procedural calendar. By the Claimant’s letters of 14 February 2017 and 20 February 2017
sent on behalf of the Parties, the Parties proposed a procedural calendar.
On 21 February 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7 establishing the

procedural calendar for the remainder of the proceedings.

9. In accordance with the procedural calendar set out in Procedural Order No. 7, the
Claimant and the Respondent submitted document production requests for the Tribunal’s
decision on 3 April 2017. On 11 April 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order

No. 8 setting out its decision on the Parties’ document production requests.

10. On 25 May 2017, the Tribunal issued directions regarding the Claimant’s request that
“the Tribunal draw an adverse inference that the Respondent is withholding documents
which are damaging to its position in these proceedings.” It did so after receiving the
Respondent’s letters of 15 May 2017 and 24 May 2017 and the Claimant’s letter
of 18 May 2017. The Tribunal decided that the Claimant’s request was premature but that
the Claimant could renew its request specifying which adverse inference it seeks against

the Respondent in due course and with the benefit of the hearing on the merits.

11. On 3 July 2017, the Claimant filed its Reply on the Merits and Jurisdictional Objection
on Investment. The Reply on the Merits and Jurisdictional Objection on Investment was

accompanied by:

- Second Witness Statement of Jan Buchal dated 2 July 2017;

- Second Witness Statement of Hynek Hanke dated 2 July 2017;
- Expert Report of Morten Tollefsen dated 30 June 2017;

- Second Expert Report on the Assessment of Damage of CRS Economics dated 2 July
2017 with Exhibits CRS-0001 through CRS-0035;

- Factual Exhibits C-0076 through C-0140; and
- Legal Exhibits CL-0142 through CL-0161.

12. On 15 September 2017, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on Merits and on Jurisdiction.

The Rejoinder on Merits and on Jurisdiction was accompanied by:
- Exhibits R-0042 through R-0080, including:

- Second Expert Report of Abdul Sirshar Qureshi (PWC) dated 15 September 2017
(R-0042) with Exhibits SQ-0058 through SQ-0094;

- Joint Expert Report of Gerhard Weber and Zdenék Mikovec dated 15 September
2017 (R-0043) with Annexes | through 17;

2 Claimant’s letter dated 18 May 2017, p. 2.

- Second Witness Statement of Milena Prizkova dated 13 September 2017 (R-0051);
- Witness Statement of Katerina Jirkova dated 14 September 2017 (R-0052);

- Second Witness Statement of [...] dated 15 September 2017 (R-0069);

- Witness Statement of [...] dated 13 September 2017 (R-0073);

- Witness Statement of Ji#i Rame$ dated 13 September 2017 (R-0074);

- Witness Statement of [...] dated 13 September 2017 (R-0075);

- Witness Statement of Ivona Sikorova dated 13 September 2017 (R-0076);

- Witness Statement of Romana Mitulkova dated 13 September 2017 (R-0077);

- Witness Statement of [...] dated 13 September 2017 (R-0078); and

- Legal Exhibits RL-0125 through RL-0152.

On 13 October 2017, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on the Jurisdictional Objection on

Investment accompanied by:

- Exhibits C-0141 through C-0149;

- Second Expert Report of Mr. Morten Tollefsen dated 13 October 2017; and
- Legal Exhibits CL-0162 through CL-0171.

By letter dated 24 October 2017, the Claimant requested Ms. Joubin-Bret to disclose
information regarding her interactions with the Ministry of Finance of the Czech
Republic in connection with Ms. Joubin-Bret’s participation as a speaker at the Prague
Conference on International Investment Treaties organized by said Ministry. The
Respondent commented on this letter on the same day. Ms. Joubin-Bret responded to the
Claimant’s request on 25 October 2017. On 27 October 2017, the Claimant requested
further information, which Ms. Joubin-Bret provided on 28 October 2017. On 30 October

20.

2017, the Claimant requested that its requests for disclosure and Ms. Joubin-Bret’s

responses be noted for the record.

On 1 November 2017, on behalf of the Tribunal, the President held a pre-hearing
organizational meeting with the Parties by telephone conference. On 2 November 2017,
the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 9 regarding the organization of the hearing.

On 3 November 2017, pursuant to paragraph 32 of Procedural Order No. 9, the Parties
filed skeleton arguments.

On 7 November 2017, pursuant to paragraph 12 of Procedural Order No. 9, the Parties
submitted an agreed daily schedule for the hearing.

On 8 November 2017, the Claimant requested leave from the Tribunal to file new
d In d with p h 15.3 of P: dural Order No. 1, the
Respondent filed observations on 9 November 2017 and agreed to the Claimant’s request.
In the same letter, the Respondent requested leave to submit a new document. That same
day, in view of the Respondent’s agreement, the Tribunal admitted the Claimant’s
documents into the record and invited the Claimant’s comments on the Respondent’s
request for leave. The Claimant responded by return without objecting to the
Respondent’s request, and the Tribunal subsequently accepted the Respondent’s new
document into the record. The Tribunal invited both Parties to file the recently admitted

evidence as soon as possible.

On 9 November 2017, the Claimant filed Exhibits CRS-0036 through CRS-0040.
On 10 November 2017, the Respondent filed Exhibit R-0081.

A hearing on the merits and the remaining jurisdictional objection was held in Paris from
13 to 17 November 2017 (the “Hearing”). The following persons were present at the

Hearing:

 

TRIBUNAL

 

The Hon. L. Yves Fortier, QC | President

 

 

Prof. imir A. Al di | Co-Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret

| Co-Arbitrator

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ICSID SECRETARIAT
Ms. Jara Mi Almeida [ Secretary of the Tribunal
ASSISTANT TO TRIBUNAL
Ms. Annie Lespérance [ Assistant to the Tribunal
THE CLAIMANT

Mr./Ms. First Name/ Last Name Affiliation
Counsel
Mr. Hussein Haeri Withers LLP
Mr. Lucas Bastin Essex Court Chambers
Mr. David Walker Withers LLP
Ms. Ruzin Dagli Withers LLP
Ms. Uliana Cooke Withers LLP
Parties
Mr. Jan Buchal AI11Y LTD.
L...] A11Y LTD (carer)
Mr. Boris Dusek Al11Y LTD.
Mr. Hynek Hanke AI11Y LTD.
Ms. Dorothy McMah Augusta Ventures
Witnesses
Mr. Jan Buchal AI11Y LTD.
Mr. Hynek Hanke AI11Y LTD.
L...] N/A
L...] N/A
L..J (carer for [...])
L...] N/A
L...] N/A
L..J (carer for [...])
L...] N/A
L..J (carer for [...])
L...] (via video conference) NA
Experts
Prof. Robert C. Lind CRS Economics
Dr. Pavel Vacek CRS Economics
Mr. Pavel Urban CRS Economics
Mr. Morten Tollefsen Media LT (technology expert)

 

 

 

 

Mr. Magnar Kvalvik

| (Assistant to Mr. Morten Tollefsen)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE RESPONDENT
Mr./Ms. First Name/ Last Name Affiliation

Counsel

Mr. Alfred Siwy zeiler.partners

Mr. Nicolas Zenz zeiler.partners

Parties

Ms. Bilanova Ministry of Finance of the Czech
Republic

Mr. Martin Novaéek Ministry of Finance of the Czech
Republic

Mr. Jaroslav Kud Ministry of Finance of the Czech
Republic

Witnesses

Led General Directorate of the Labour

Office of the Czech Republi

 

 

Ms. Milena Prizkova

General Directorate of the Labour

 

Office of the Czech Republi

 

[...] (via video conference)

General Directorate of the Labour
Office of the Czech Republi

 

 

Ms. Kateiina Jirkova (via video conference)

Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs

of the Czech Republic

 

Mr. Jiti Rame’

Consultancy for Citizenship/Civil and

Human Rights

 

Ms. Ivona Sikorova

Labour Office of the Czech Republic

 

Ms. Romana Mitulkova

Labour Office of the Czech Republic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Experts

Mr. Abdul Sirshar Qureshi PWC

Ms. Kateiina Skryjova Pwc

Prof. Gerhard Weber TU Dresden

Mr. Zdenék Mikovec Czech Technical University

 

 

21.

22.

During the Hearing, the Respondent filed Exhibits R-0082 and R-0082a.

On 28 November 2017, by letter dated 27 November 2017, Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret
informed the Parties and the members of the Tribunal of her decision to step down from

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

the arbitral tribunal in this proceeding on account of her appointment as Director of the
International Trade Law Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations
and ex officio Secretary of the United Nations Commission of International Trade Law.
Over the following weeks, the Parties, Ms. Joubin-Bret and the members of the Tribunal
exchanged correspondence regarding the possibility of Ms. Joubin-Bret staying on as
arbitrator in the case until the issuance of the award. On 20 December 2017,
Ms. Joubin-Bret informed the Parties that “the Secretary General of the United Nations
ha[d] authorized [her] to continue [her] employment as Arbitrator in the case in

reference until the rendering of a final award.”

On 21 December 2017, the Respondent reappointed Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret as arbitrator
pursuant to Articles 13(1) and 7 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Ms. Joubin-Bret

accepted her appointment the same day.

On 27 December 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 10 concerning the

Post-Hearing Submissions.

On 2 January 2018, the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreed deadlines for the

filing of the post-hearing submissions, which the Tribunal endorsed the same day.

On 23 January 2018, both Parties filed their Post-Hearing Submissions. The Claimant
filed Legal Exhibits CL-0172 through CL-0178, and the Respondent filed Legal Exhibits
RL-0153 through RL-0158.

On 31 January 2018, both Parties filed their Reply Post-Hearing Submissions.

On the same day, the Parties filed their Statements of Costs. The Claimant filed Legal
Exhibits CL-0179 through CL-0185, together with this submission.

C. DRAMATIS PERSONAE

29.

The following witnesses and experts testified at the hearing on behalf of each Party in the

following order:

 

THE CLAIMANT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

L.-J Mother of [...], a 7-year old boy who was “practically blind”
at the time of the who ordered A11Y aids for her son

Mr. Jan Buchal Founder of BRAILCOM/A11Y and director

L...] A self-employed masseur who uses A11Y aids

L.-J Was represented by BRAILCOM to obtain allowances from
the Labour Office.

L.-J Ordered from A11Y visual aids to help study and enter the
Police academy in Prague

L...] Choir-master of singing choir Ave who uses A11Y aids

L.-J Director of the Primary School of Prof. V. Vejdovsky (a

 

school for the visually imp

 

Mr. Hynek Hanke

Teck analyst and trainer at A11Y

 

 

Mr. Morten Tollefsen

Technical Expert; Co-founder and Research Director at
MediaLT

 

Prof. Robert C. Lind.

Quantum Expert, Partner at CRS Economics s.r.0.; Professor
Emeritus of Economics, Management and Public Policy at the

 

Johnson Graduate School of M: Cornell University

 

Mr. Pavel Urban

Quantum Expert, Partner at CRS Economics s.r.0.

 

Dr. Pavel Vacek

Quantum Expert, Partner at CRS Economics s.r.o., Assistant
Professor at the Charles University in Prague and a Czech
court appointed expert

 

 

THE RESPONDENT

 

Director for Social Affairs Department in the General
Directorate of the Labour Office of the Czech Republic who
issued the December Decision

 

Ms. Kateiina Jirkova

Head of the Department of Non-Insurance Social and Family
Allowance of the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs who
issued the July Statement

 

 

L.-J Spokesperson of the Labour Office who made a statement
during the TV Report
Mr. Jiti Rames Former social worker at the Department of Non-Insurance

Social Benefits for People with Disabilities of the Labour
Office; Social worker at Consultancy for Citizenship/Civil and
Human Rights, Public Society

 

Ms. Ivona Sikorova

Officer at the Department of Non-Insurance Social Benefits for
People with Disabilities of the Labour Office and social
worker

 

Ms. Romana Miéulkova

Former Head of the Department of Non-Insurance Social
Benefits for People with Disabilities of the Labour Office;
Social worker

 

 

Ms. Milena Prizkova

 

 

Head of Department of Non-Insurance Social Benefits for

 

 

Prof. Gerhard Weber

People with Disabilities of the Labour Office who informed
[ol

Technical Expert; Professor at TU Dresden in Human-
Computer Interaction; Expert for the European Union, for ISO
and for DIN on digital accessibility

 

Prof. Zdenék Mikovec

Technical Expert; Associate Professor at the Czech Technical
University in Prague; Member of Human-Computer
Interaction research group, the oldest and largest HCI group in
Czech Republic

 

Mr. Abdul Sirshar
Qureshi

 

 

Quantum Expert; Partner at PWC, Forensic Services

 

IL. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

A. THE CLAIMANT’S REQUEST FOR RELIEF

30. The Claimant seeks the following relief from the Tribunal:

(1) a declaration that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and
determine the Claimant's expropriation claim;?

(2) a declaration that the Czech Republic has breached Article 5(1)

 

of the BIT by imy 's having effect equivalent to expropriation
on (sic) the Claimant;
(3) an order that the Czech Republic pay the Claimant compensation

for the damage and lost profits it has suffered as a result of the breaches
of UK-Czech Republic BIT, in the amount of CZK 564,719,000;

(4) interest of 6-Month LIBOR plus 2%, compounded semi-annually
on the compensation awarded to the Claimant;

(5) an order that the Czech Republic pay the cost of these arbitration
proceedings, including the costs of the Tribunal and the legal and other
costs incurred by the Claimant on a full indemnity basis; and

(6) such further or other relief as the Tribunal may deem

appropriate.

3 Claimant’s Rejoinder, para. 34.

+ Claimant’s Reply, para. 237.

 

B. THE RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR RELIEF

31.

Ill.

The Respondent requests the Tribunal to:

(1) declare that it lacks jurisdiction to hear Claimant’s claims and

hence to dismiss its claims;
(2) in eventu dismiss all Claimant’s claims on the merits;

(3) in either case to order Claimant to reimburse Respondent for all

costs, fees and expenses incurred in relation to these proceedings.>

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

A. A11Y’sS TAKEOVER OF BRAILCOM’s BUSINESS

32.

33.

34.

35.

The Claimant, A11Y, is a private limited company incorporated in the United Kingdom

of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on 2 August 2012.°

A11Y’s Czech branch office was registered in the Czech Commercial Register on 17

October 2012.7

Following the registration of its Czech branch office, A11Y began to take over the

assistive technology solutions activities of BRAILCOM, o.p.s. (“BRAILCOM”).

BRAILCOM developed its know-how and goodwill for more than 20 years through
various activities both in the Czech Republic and in connection with various international
projects. Before 2010, BRAILCOM was known in the Czech Republic mainly for its
projects “Internet for a Buck” (providing access to the Internet both for the blind and
seeing people in 1997), “Speech Dispatcher” (speech infrastructure on Linux), “Biblio”
(providing an electronic catalogue for the largest Czech library and printing facility for
the blind), the project “Trafika” (the only country-wide news service for visually-

impaired in the Czech Republic) and the international project “Eurochance” (a system of

5 Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 437.
© See Certificate of Incorporation of A1LY, dated 2 August 2012, Exhibit C-0001.
7 See Extract of the Czech Commercial Registry, dated 17 October 2012, Exhibit C-0002.

ll

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

freely available electronic language textbooks for education of visually-impaired).®
BRAILCOM has also been known for developing a range of special tools for visually

disabled people.’

In 2012, BRAILCOM began offering to individual customers unique and complex
aids/solutions in the field of assistive technologies for blind and visually impaired
persons (most importantly, equipment based on computers enabling them to read, write,

communicate, study and work).!°

BRAILCOM was the first company in the Czech Republic to offer aids built on Apple’s
technologies. It became the first and exclusive supplier in the Czech Republic and Slovak
Republic of the unique foldable and mobile magnifier VisioBook and high-quality Braille
displays from BAUM Retec AG (“Baum’”).!!

BRAILCOM was the first company in the Czech market that started to offer such

complex services (“Solutions”). !?

BRAILCOM was also the sole company in the Czech Republic to offer its customers

assistance while applying on their behalf for a state allowance.!*

From late 2012, A11Y took over BRAILCOM’s assistive technology solutions business,
which included taking on new contracts with customers. A11Y hired former employees

of BRAILCOM.

In connection with this take-over of BRAILCOM’s assistive technology solutions
business by A11Y, the Claimant writes as follows:!*

(1) From late 2012, the Claimant started to carry out sales of assistive

technology aids in the Czech Republic and began issuing pro-forma

invoices and invoices to customers for assistive technology solutions. The
Claimant's Czech branch financial accounts thus show income from sales

8 See First Witness Statement of Jan Buchal (“First Buchal’”), paras. 35, 55 and 56.

° Claimant’s Amended Memorial, para. 14.

1° See First Buchal paras. 61, 62, 64, and First Witness Statement of Hynek Hanke (“First Hanke”), para. 16.
1! See First Buchal, para. 60.

2 See First Hanke, para. 17.

3 See First Buchal para. 83.

'4 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 3(1) -3(3) and para. 4 (footnotes omitted).

12

flowing to the Claimant from 2012. By March 2013, the Claimant entered
into all new orders for assistive technology solutions and Brailcom no
longer entered into new orders to produce assistive technology aids. After
March 2013, Brailcom only fulfilled assistive technology aids orders
made before that time. The Claimant's contracts with its customers in the
Czech Republic are assets and investments.

(2) The Claimant entered into important contracts with suppliers.

(3) The Claimant assumed the contractual employment relationship with
employees for the production of assistive technology solutions.

(4) Brailcom continued its activities to support the blind after A11Y’s
takeover of Brailcom’s assistive technology solutions business. In the
context of assistive technology solutions supplied by A11Y, Brailcom
would typically represent AI1Y’s customers in their interactions with the
Labour Office under a power of attorney, as had been recommended by
the Labour Office. In some cases, an applicant who applied for an
allowance under the Act would only be granted an allowance of 90% of
the price approved by the Labour Office. The applicant would have to pay
the remaining 10% of the approved price themselves unless they and their
family went through a social investigation to determine whether they
could afford this. However, in such cases, Brailcom would typically offer
to pay that 10% to the Claimant's customers as a charitable contribution.

42. The Respondent submits that the “exact circumstances of this alleged take-over remain

nebulous and unclear”.'°

43. The Respondent writes the following in respect of the Claimant’s take-over of

BRAILCOM: '¢

What Claimant essentially is alleging was not an arm’s-length transaction
in which Brailcom’s business was taken over, but merely that Claimant
as a matter of fact continued the business that Brailcom had been
operating in the Czech Republic. Claimant therefore also paid no
purchase price for the business of Brailcom. It just took over its business
as a matter of fact. Given that both Brailcom and Claimant are
companies owned and run by Mr. Buchal, he obviously saw no need
for a clearly structured transaction. This, however, has severe
jurisdictional implications.

44. The jurisdictional implications of the take-over by A11Y of BRAILCOM’s assistive
technology solutions business are discussed and analysed by the Tribunal later in

Section V.

'S Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 11.
6 Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 13.

B. A11Y’s BUSINESS

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

The Parties disagree on the nature of the Claimant’s business.

The Claimant asserts that it is “an assistive technology developer and solutions
provider”.'” The Claimant develops “holistic solutions built around the specific needs of
the individual user’; draws “on its deep expertise and know-how in technical
development and accessibility to produce effective solutions that worked and were
genuinely useful to the blind or visually impaired customer’; and provides “invaluable
configuration, set-up, and training to make sure individuals could use their assistive
technology properly as well as fine-tuning to make sure the aids were well adapted for
the various needs of the user”.!8

As Mr. Buchal stated in his Second Witness Statement “Please notice the word ‘solution’
here, which was key for AI1Y’s services for the visually impaired. This is what

distinguished A11Y from other companies in the same business.”””

On this basis, the Claimant alleges that it conducts a different business compared to its
direct competitors in the Czech market for providing aids to the blind and visually

impaired.”°

The Respondent, on the other hand, argues that the Claimant is “a retailer for ‘out-of-the-
box’ devices from third party manufacturers”.”' In this connection, the Respondent writes

as follows:

43. Essentially, Claimant buys two categories of electronic products as a
wholesaler and then resells them as aids for the blind. First, Claimant
retails so-called “ICT with closed functionality”, like for example Apple
iPhones or MacBook computers. These are standard consumer products
that have built in accessibility features, e.g. a screenreader functionality
or a magnified presentation of captures images. Second, Claimant retails
so-called Assistive Technology (“AT”), which are additional devices that

"7 Claimant’s Reply, para. 34.

'8 Claimant’s Reply, para. 39.

° Second Witness Statement of Jan Buchal (“Second Buchal”), para. 3.
2 Claimant’s Reply, para. 316.

2! Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 83.

% Respondent’s Skeleton, paras. 43-44.

50.

can be added to an ICT to enhance their accessible functionality. An
example of an AT would be a Braille display.

44. Claimant re-sells these products either as separate components or in
certain “aid-packages. [...]

As will be seen later, the Parties have submitted technical expert reports and expert

testimony in respect of the nature of the Claimant’s business.

C. CZECH REGULATORY FRAMEWORK AND TRANSPARENCY INTERNATIONAL’S LETTER

51.

52.

53.

54.

In January 2012, the Act on Providing Allowances to Persons with Health Impairment”?

(“Act on Allowances” or the “Act”) came into effect in the Czech Republic.

The Act on Allowances provides for the granting of subsidies to persons with health
impairments, including the blind. These allowances are limited in absolute amounts (to
CZK 800,000 per applicant for five years)”* and in the amount for a single aid (to CZK
350,000 per aid). The person with a health impairment is required to pay 10% of the aid

for which an allowance is sought.”°

Importantly, Section 9(10) of the Act specifies that an allowance will be granted for an

aid:

-  inits basic version;

- which satisfies the individual needs of the applicant; and

- which is the cheapest (“least economically demanding”) option for doing so.

When the Act was introduced in 2012, the Labour Office, the body responsible for
administering the Act, was confronted with a large number of applications. As the Labour

Office had not been provided with any guidance from the Labour Ministry as to the

3 Act on Allowances, Legal Exhibit CL-0002.
2 The actual limit is CZK 800.000. A further CZK 50.000 is available only if the applicant also applies for an
allowance for a stair lift for wheelchairs.

25 Act on Allowance:
26 Act on Allowances,

  

ction 10 (3) and (6), dated 13 October 2011, Legal Exhibit CL-0002.
ction 10 (3), dated 13 October 2011, Legal Exhibit CL-0002.

15

application of the Act, most requests for subsidies were granted without any in-depth

scrutiny.””

55. On 21 May 2013, the Labour Office received a letter from Transparency International

(“TI”). The letter reads in relevant part as follows:

Madam Director-General,

Transparency International — Ceska republika (“TI”) is a non-
governmental organisation with a mission to chart corruption in the
Czech Republic and to actively assist in stifling corruption through its
activities. TI focuses on championing paradigms shifts in legislation,
public administration and the private sector.

In the past few months, the TI Legal Advice Centre has seen a re-influx of
clients with severe visual disabilities resulting in the long-term
impairment of their health, who are complaining about the conduct of
BRAILCOM, o.p.s. in relation to special-aid allowances under Act No
329/2011 on the provision of benefits to disabled persons, as amended
(the “Act”).

    

According to Section 9(1) of the Act, a person with a severe visual
disability resulting in the long term impairment of their health is entitled
to a special-aid allowance. Section 10(2) of the Act provides that the
amount of a special-aid allowance is set in such a manner that the
beneficiary contributes 10% of the estimated or already paid price of a
special aid, up to a maximum of CZK 1,000. Those persons eligible for
the special-aid allowance under the Act have been contacted, on a more
intensive scale since 1 January 2012, i.e. since the Act took effect, by
BRAILCOM, o.p.s., with an offer that, if those persons enter into an
agreement on a power of attorney with it, this company will organise the
procedure for applying for a special-aid allowance with the competent
Labour Office (a regional branch) on the basis of a power of attorney,
without the applicant having to take care of anything at all. Part of the
arrangement between the applicant and BRAILCOM, o.p.s. is the
provision of a gift by the company, as the gifting party, to the applicant,
as the gifted party, at the value of the applicant’s statutory contribution,
ie. ata value of 10% of the estimated or already paid price of a special
aid. From the point of view of a person with a severe visual disability
resulting in the long-term impairment of their health, this is an
advantageous offer because they receive a special aid free of charge and
there is no need for them to get in contact with the competent Labour
Office themselves. On the other hand, this entirely eliminates any
incentive on the part of the applicant to seek out rival offers for their
selected aid, as supplied by other suppliers at much lower prices.

 

7 Respondent's Skeleton, para. 25.
8 Letter from TI of 21 May 2013, Exhibit R-0009.

According to the information shared by clients, in the application for a
special-aid allowance BRAILCOM, o.p.s. marks up the value of the
special aid considerably. One of the clients who contacted TI witnessed a
decision to grant a special-aid allowance, according to which the Labour
Office (regional branch) granted an applicant an allowance worth more
than CZK 30,000, even though the price of the corresponding special aid
(a voice-activated Apple iPhone) had a market price of approximately
CZK 17,000 at the time. Statements from other clients indicate that the
value of special aids in benefit proceedings in which they are represented,
on the basis of a power of attorney, by BRAILCOM, o.p.s., is marked up
by between 50% and 100%. According to the information provided to TI
by these persons, the main focus is on computer equipment — reading
devices for the blind with a normal market value ranging from CZK
100,000 to CZK 150,000. BRAILCOM, o.p.s. purportedly supplies these
aids for between CZK 200,000 and CZK 300,000.

According to Section 9(10) of the Act, an allowance is granted for a
special aid delivered in a basic design which fully meets the requirements
of the beneficiary, bearing in mind their disability, and meets the
condition of best value for money. In the benefit proceedings in which
BRAILCOM, o.p.s. has been active on the basis of a power of attorney,
and the subject of which has been a substantially overpriced special aid
in the basic design, if Labour Offices (regional branches) have issued
decisions granting these allowances at the requested amount, they have
failed and fallen short of their statutory obligation. Labour Offices
(regional branches) as the authorities competent, by law, to take
decisions on the granting of special-aid allowances, are required to grant
such an allowance only in an amount which is consistent with the special
aid’s price customary at the place and time. The information disclosed by
clients makes it quite plain that Labour Offices (regional branches)
throughout the Czech Republic have failed to comply with this obligation,
either out of negligence or by design. Apart from the fact that the state
has made a loss, the victims are the individual applicants who have
entered into an agreement on a power of attorney with BRAILCOM, o.p.s.
and who have been represented by that company in benefit proceedings
because, as a result of the repeated granting of allowances at a
disproportionate amount, the amount of CZK 800,000, or CZK 850,000
according to Section 10(6) of the Act, could be exhausted early, the
amount which may be granted to persons with severe visual disabilities
on aggregate over a five-year period, in the form of an allowance to
purchase special aids, could be used up well before such a period ends.

 

Clients with severe visual disabilities who have contacted TI in this
matter are concerned by the practices pursued by BRAILCOM, o.p.s. and
believe that the way it is acting could imperil the credibility of the entire
system of public solidarity, entailing the payment of assistive aids which
would otherwise be unaffordable for them and which are essential for
their ability to be part of the workforce and for their general integration
into the life of society. They are worried that the abuse of state
allowances could result in the political relativisation of the need for such
an established system of public solidarity and in moves to recover

17

amounts by which the special aids purchased for them have been
overpriced. Accordingly, TI’s clients wish to remain anonymous.

According to Act No 73/2011 on the Labour Office of the Czech Republic,
as amended, the Labour Office of the Czech Republic is a national
administrative authority whose duties, among other things, include
benefits for the disabled. Section 25(2)(d) and (e) of Act No 320/2001 on
financial control in public administration, as amended, provides that the
head of a body of public administration must take all necessary action to
protect public funds and to ensure the economic, effective and efficient
use of public funds in accordance with the principles of sound
management set out in the Financial Control Act.

In the light of the foregoing, TI requests that, starting with 1 January
2012, you review individual benefit proceedings held by the competent
Labour Offices (regional branches) in accordance with Act No 329/2011
on the provision of benefits to disabled persons, as amended, in which
applicants have been represented, on the basis of a power of attorney, by
BRAILCOM, o.p.s., and the subject of which has been the granting of a
special-aid allowance to a person with a severe visual disability to
determine whether the granting and payment of the allowance has been at
a disproportionate level for a markedly overpriced special aid and
whether this constitutes widespread abuse of state allowances for persons
with severe visual disabilities.

TI also requests information from you on how this case has been
investigated and whether you have taken, in response to any errors
identified, action to protect public funds.

Yours sincerely,

ssignature>

Transparency International - Ceské republika, o. p. s.

David Ondracka

Director

D. JULY 2013 STATEMENT

56. Following TI’s letter and an internal investigation, the Labour Office approached the
Ministry of Labour and requested general guidance on the application of the Act to
overcome the difficulties encountered with the implementation of the Act, to ensure a

uniform application of the Act and to avoid an abuse of the Act.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

As a result, on 12 July 2013, the Ministry issued a statement that further defined the
criteria set out by the Act to ensure that the requirements of the Act could effectively be
assessed in each application and to allow the Labour Offices to take a uniform approach

towards all applications submitted under the Act (“July Statement”).

The July Statement, inter alia, made clear that when the aids applied for consist of
several individual functionally independent components, the applicant is under the
obligation to submit a list of the particular components and their respective prices. This
was necessary, says the Respondent, because if such a list of components is not
submitted, it is not possible for the Labour Office to assess whether the criteria of the Act

are met.*?

The July Statement also made clear that additional services, like training, or accessory
products, like protective covers or laptop bags, could not be considered to be part of the
basic version of an aid and were therefore not covered under the Act. The Respondent
explains that the reason why the Ministry did not consider it necessary to pay private
commercial companies for training was that there were various public benefit
associations that provide training for blind persons for free or at very low cost throughout

the Czech Republic.*!

The Respondent submits that the July Statement’s purpose was not, contrary to the
Claimant’s allegation, to “stop the Claimant’s business” or “to stop Claimant” but to stop
the Claimant’s detrimental practice of submitting applications which did not allow an

assessment in accordance with the Act on Allowances, submits the Respondent.”

The Claimant, on the other hand, submits that the July Statement “targeted specifically at
the Claimant’s business” and “was the first step on the way to destroying the Claimant’s

business”.

2° Statement of the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (“MPSV”), dated 12 July 2013, Exhibit C-0010. The
Claimant refers to the Statement in its pleadings as the “July Instruction”.
*° Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 30.

+! Respondent’s Skeleton, para.

  

1; see Second Witness Statement of Milena Prizkova, Exhibit R-0051, para. 11.

* Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 29.
33 Claimant’s Reply, para. 94.

62.

In this respect, the Claimant writes as follows:*4

95. The key requirement in the July Instruction was the onus on the
Labour Office regional branches to request suppliers of aids to provide a
list of individual components and prices. The July Instruction also stated
that in order to compare prices for the purposes of identification of the
“least economically demanding” condition under section 9(10) aid the
Labour Office was:

“to compare the prices of the same or similar aids from different
producers or suppliers, means for example in the case of hardware to
have information about the name of the producer or trade name (such as
Apple iPhone 4). In case of software it is necessary to know the producer
and trade name (such as Microsoft Office 2010, Home & Business)”.

96. The July Instruction contains multiple references to the necessity

for an aid to be functional and serve a particular user's needs and

purpose in line with the objective of the Act on Allowances. However, it
also contained a draconian edict:

“\..in case of not delivering the list of particular components, the
application for the allowance for special aid will be rejected. If the list or
the invoice includes training, protective covers, or other additions, which
are not necessary, we do not include them in the price of the aid.”

97. This is arbitrary and contradictory in a number of respects. First,
it goes against the functionality objective which the July Instruction
recognised as valid. As explained above, an aid without proper
configuration and training is of no use to a blind or visually impaired
person. If a blind or visually impaired person receives a machine in a
box, he or she is very unlikely to be able to do anything with it. As Mr.
Tollefsen pointed out:

“An assistive technology solution configured for the specific needs of a
visually impaired person with training is completely distinct from a
product ordered from a list and simply out of the box, which is likely to be
largely inappropriate and unfit for purpose”.

Effective solutions require set-up, installation, ongoing configuration,
adjustments and guidance from those who understand how the aid is
designed in light of that particular person's needs.

98. Second, it is striking that the July Instruction expressly referred
to these two examples — “training and protective covers” - for exclusion
from the price of an aid. Both were integral parts and distinguishing
features of a solution developed by the Claimant, especially when
compared with its competitors. Configuration, training, and support were
a necessary feature of the Claimant's assistive technology solutions. As
mentioned above, the Claimant's business was not to resell hardware

 

 Claimant’s Reply, paras. 95-100 (footnotes omitted).

20

63.

64.

IV.

components. It developed an integrated holistic solution often comprised
of several aids that would function and work well together to serve
particular needs of a visually impaired person.

99. Furthermore, the exclusion of protective covers is notable.
Protective covers serve the purpose of increasing the durability of an aid.
An aid may not last very long without a protective cover - especially in
the hands of a person without sight. This is significant particularly in the
light of the very clear five-year financial limits as set out in the Act on
Allowances (as above).

100. It is also notable that the July Instruction contains an express
reference to an Apple iPhone. Apple iPhones were an underlying product
that Brailcom and later the Claimant incorporated into electronic
communication aids. The iPhone was “a device that was supplied by
AILY but usually not by other competitors at the time.”
The Claimant also submits that the July Statement was issued “without transparency and
the Claimant was not informed about it at this time. It was not until later that the

Claimant discovered that the July Instruction had even been issued.”*>

According to the Claimant, the following four measures of the Respondent destroyed its

investment in the Czech Republic and lead to its insolvency.

 

THE RESPONDENT’S ALLEGED MEASURES AGAINST THE CLAIMANT

 

A. THE RESPONDENT ALLEGEDLY PRESSURED THE CLAIMANT’S VISUALLY IMPAIRED

65.

66.

CUSTOMERS TO LEAVE THE CLAIMANT AND TURN TO THE CLAIMANT’S COMPETITORS

(LD The Claimant’s Position

According to the Claimant, following the issuance of the July Statement, the
Respondent’s representatives repeatedly told many customers of the Claimant that they
should seek their assistive technology aids from the Claimant’s competitors (which the

Respondent sometimes named, including Spektra and Galop).*°

The record is replete with evidence of this wrongdoing says the Claimant, including the

following:

35 Claimant’s Reply, para. 92. See First Buchal, para. 125 (at Item No. 6).
*© Claimant’s Skeleton, para. 8.

21

  

 

0)

(ii)

[...] recounted in her witness statement the specifics of a “very unpleasant social

”°37 at her home in early 2014. [...]explained that: “The participants

investigation
were the officers [...] and [...]. They tried to discourage me from aid purchase
from AI1Y company and they told me repeatedly that ‘the office knows A11Y
LTD. company very well and is not satisfied with it’ and ‘the aids from A11Y
LTD. company are overpriced’ and even ‘there was a reportage on TV about
frauds of the company.””* [...] further recalls that: “The officers recommended
me during the social investigation to turn to Tyfloservis or Galop companies. The
officers threatened me in that context that they will not pay out many components
of the aid delivered by A11Y LTD.”*® [...] confirmed the contents of her statement

as a witness at the hearing.”

[...]’s testimony stands essentially unrebutted submits the Claimant. The
Respondent did not submit a witness statement from [...] and the Respondent
informed the Tribunal and the Claimant at the hearing that [...] would no longer
be available to testify. In her witness statement, [...] cannot recall the meeting

od

well, saying that “my memories are a little bit foggy"! and she “cannot remember

that this visit was somehow unpleasant.”

[...] explained in his witness statement that “/i/n September 2013, when I visited
the office to bring the necessary information about my income, Mr. [sic.]
Sikorovd tried to convince me that aids from AI11Y LTD. company are overpriced
and that other suppliers offer cheap aids in exactly the same version. Mrs
Sikorovd also tried to convince me to cancel my order for aids at AI1Y LTD. And
she tried to convince me to turn to another company.” [...] confirmed this at the

hearing.“

Statement of [...], para. 8.

tatement of [...], para. 8.

+? Witness Statement of [...], para. 9.

4° Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of [...], Day 2, p. 336 (lines 7-19).

41 Witness Statement of [...], Exhibit R-0075, para. 10.

42 Witness Statement of [...], Exhibit R-0075, para. 11.

‘tatement of [...], paras. 8-9.

+ Transcript of Final Hearing, Day 2, Testimony of [...], Day 2, p. 349 (lines 16-18).

22

45 Witn

 

(iii)

(iv)

Ms. Sikorova in her own witness statement wrote that she “cannot recall having

spoken about A11Y Ltd.” when she visited [...].4° At the Hearing, as a witness she

 

denied ever mentioning the Claimant in her meeting with [...].4° The Claimant
asserts that Ms. Sikorova’s depiction “strains credulity” in view of the fact that
the meeting in question was to discuss an assistive technology aid for [...] which
was to be supplied by the Claimant and which had just been approved by the
Labour Office.*”

Even in those cases where the Respondent’s representatives did not directly name
the Claimant’s competitors, the Claimant submits that the Labour Office
representatives pressured the Claimant’s customers to go to another company.**
For instance, at the Hearing Mr. Haeri asked [...] “/...]when Mr. Rames told you
that he was not going to tell you which company you should go to, how did you
understand that? What did you understand him to be saying?”* [...] answered
that: “7 understood from him that I could go to any other company but AIIY,
because in that instance they will not reimburse.” [...], in response to a question
from the President of the Tribunal about this conversation with Mr. Rame§,
replied that she was told that “the aid was three times overpriced and that Mr.
Rames himself is not going to give me advice on what sort of company I should

choose. Therefore, I was convinced that I shouldn’t be selecting A11Y.”>!

[...] (who did not testify as he had passed away prior to the Hearing) recalled in
his witness statement that he was informed by a Labour Office representative
during a meeting that the Labour Office has a “bad experience” with the

Claimant.”

‘tatement of Ivona Sikorova, Exhibit R-0076, para. 9.

“© Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of Ivona Sikorova, Day 3, p. 612 (line 14) - p. 613 (line 9).
+7 Claimant’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 43.
+8 Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 44.

4° Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of [...], Day 2, p. 368 (lines 9-12).

*° Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of [...], Day 2, p. 368 (lines 13-15).

5! Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of [...], Day 2, p. 377 (line 4) - p. 377 (line 8). The President of the
Tribunal asked: "That was your deduction?’; to which [...]replied: “Yes, that was my deduction, my conclusion.”
(Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of [...], Day 2, p. 377 (line 9) - p. 377 (line 11)).

°? Witness Statement of [...], para. 8.

23

67.

68.

[...] does not recall having any meeting with [...] in 2014, but “cannot exclude

that one of my colleagues [from the Labour Office] held this meeting with [...].”>

 

 

Vv) CL

on 22 November 2013 saying that two Labour Office representatives,

1 a client of the Claimant, wrote to the Claimant

Ms. Kofyinkova and Ms. Noziékova, had carried out a social investigation at her
home concerning her application for an assistive technology solution aid with the
Claimant. They had asked her whether “J would be willing to go to another

‘company’ and try other aids (cheaper).”*+

(2) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent filed witness statements from all officers of the Labour Office who
allegedly “attack[ed] the Claimant's business” says the Respondent. These officers all
affirm that applicants were never asked to turn to a competitor of the Claimant and
denied that applicants were told that the Claimant’s aids were overpriced or that their

allowance would not be granted if they ordered aids from the Claimant.*°

At most, what the representatives of the Labour Office did, says the Respondent, is to
inform the applicants that if an application included unnecessary components or was
made for an aid that had a premium price compared to other aids with the same function,
the application would be granted, but not in the full amount. This was the wording of the
Act and thus something the applicants should have been aware of in any event.*® The
Respondent argues that there was never a “systematic approach” of the Labour Office to
pressure visually impaired persons to purchase products from the Claimant’s

competitors.*”

B. THE RESPONDENT ALLEGEDLY DENOUNCED THE CLAIMANT ON NATIONAL TELEVISION

 

.], Exhibit R-0078, para. 9.

5 Message from [...] (client) to AI1Y LTD., dated 22 November 2013, Exhibit C-0105.

55 Witne
Witness

R-0077,

s Statement of Jiti Rame’, Exhibit R-0074, para. 11; Witness Statement of [...], Exhibit R-0075, para. 12;
tatement of Ivona Sikorova, Exhibit R-0076, para. 9; Witness Statement of Romana Miéulkova, Exhibit
para. 9; Witness Statement of [...], Exhibit R-0078.

  

 

56 Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 72. Witness Statement of [...] Exhibit R-0075, para. 13; Witness Statement of [...],
Exhibit R-0078, para. 11.
57 Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 75.

24

69.

70.

71.

(DL The Claimant’s Position

According to the Claimant, the Respondent publicly denounced the Claimant on prime-

time national television on 12 January 2014, further destroying its investment.

The television program of 12 January 2014 in the “Udalosti” news broadcast (the “TV

Report”) was aired at 7 p.m. in the evening (prime time viewing) on public broadcast

television to over 1 million viewers.** It remains available for anyone to view on the

Internet says the Claimant, thereby reaching a far larger audience.*?

The English translation of the program’s transcript reads as follows:

Newsperson: The company BRAILCOM fell into suspicion of abusing the
state allowance for the blind. A group of visually handicapped people
have complained about it to Transparency International. The company,
according to them, offers free processing of subsidies for compensation
aids, such as special phones or computers. Then, however, it sells them
for significantly higher price than is common and the state loses out.

Commentary: The aids talk to them and the braille display shows what
others usually see on the screen. Adjusted computer or phone is a
necessity for the blind. This is also respected by the state and therefore it
is contributing to the purchase of such aids by 90% of their price. But the
blind must pay the 10% themselves. This should encourage them to look
for an advantageous offer. But the BRAILCOM company offers to
arrange everything for them and to reimburse the 10% participation. Its
aids, however, are significantly more expensive.

Blind woman (anonymized face and voice): Computer sets which we can
get from other companies for some 100 to 150 thousand, the price from
BRAILCOM is often up to twice as high.

Citing Jan Buchal, director, BRAILCOM: ... we are supplying aids that
are different, with different utility value which is several times higher that
(sic) the aids on the market.

Conmmantary (sic): Critics of BRAILCOM want to remain anonymous
amid fears. But they are trying to draw attention to the problem.

58 Claimant's Amended Memorial, para. 133 and fn. 163; Television Audience Viewing Figures for CT1 and CT24,
dated January 2014, Exhibit C-0110, p. 2 (row 31) and p. 3 (row 24) (938,000 viewers aged over 15 on CTI on 12
January 2014, and 214,000 viewers aged over 15 on CT24).

Claimant’s  Post-Hearing Brief, para. 26; see Udalosti, 12 January 2014,

59

     

http:/

c/w"

: skatelevize.cz/ivysilani/1097181328-udalosti/21441 10001001 12/obsah/301888-predrazene-
(last accessed on 20 June 2016).

© Transcript of News Report on Czech Television, Exhibit C-0032.

25

available at:
omucky

Jiri Kracmar, expert assistant of law advisory centre of Transparency
International: Those people with severe visual impairment who contacted
us concerning BRAILCOM were several.

Newsperson: The non-standard procedures of BRAILCOM company are
already being addresses by the management of Labour Offices. It’s
because they are those who pay for the aids for the blind. Even their own
investigation pointed to significant overpricing. But also to cases where
the company reportedly charged for completely ordinary equipment.

[...], the spokesperson, General directorate of Labour Office: For
example, the iPads, which have, say, voice dialling already included in
their price, then even for such services [BRAILCOM] billed special
surcharges.

Citing Jan Buchal, director, BRAILCOM: The Ministry of Labour
unfortunately doesn’t have the necessary expertise in the area of our
business.

Newsperson: According to the collected data, officials already
reimbursed tens of unusually expensive aids.

[...], the spokesperson, General directorate of Labour Office: At the
moment, we do not know the exact amount the state lost as a result of this
overpricing.

Newsperson: The BRAILCOM company is not threaten with any penalty,
because apparently it did not violate the law. Neither the bureaucrats
themselves made a mistake according to their bosses. They even pointed
on some suspicious prices and their suspicion was confirmed by further
investigation. For the future, according to the management of the Labour
Offices, similar problems should be prevented by stricter rules for
reimbursement of special aids.

 

72. According to the Claimant, the following allegations made by [...], the State

spokesperson, and cited during the TV program were unsubstantiated:*!

(1) That the Claimant was guilty of “overpricing”;

(2) That the Claimant was illicitly charging for things for which it should
not have been charging (such as billing "special surcharges" for "voice
dialling" for iPads, even though this is false and iPads don't even have
voice dialling’) thus acting in a dishonest or underhanded way;

(3) That the State lost money as a result of the Claimant's wrongful
practices, the only issue being the quantification of those losses of the
State;

6! Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 27.

26

73.

74.

75.

76.

(4) That the Claimant was culpable of "suspicious prices," which were
“confirmed by further investigation"; and

(5) “For the future, according to the management of the Labour Offices,
similar problems [with reference to the Claimant's alleged "problems'
should be prevented by stricter rules for reimbursement of special aids,”
thus starkly warning viewers away from the Claimant.

The television broadcast, submits the Claimant, was made, inter alia, because of TI’s
letter of 21 May 2013 to the Labour Office and an undated “Compilation of
Applications.” In the opinion of the Respondent, the Compilation of Applications

263

showed “that the allegations raised by Transparency International were correct” in that

“[vJirtually all solutions offered by Claimant were far more expensive than those offered
by Claimant's competitors serving the same purposes”.

The Claimant emphasizes that the Respondent admitted that “Transparency International
did not provide any evidence with its letter’® and submits that “the Respondent did not
communicate with the Claimant in any way to let the Claimant know about the [...] TI
[letter] or to provide the Claimant with an opportunity to respond to the allegations. That
is not only non-transparent, but it is also an evident violation of basic fairness and due

process.”°°

At the Hearing, Ms. Prizkova, who was identified by [...] as the person who instructed
her in preparation for the TV Report,°’ admitted when she testified that: “The letter of

Transparency International, in my opinion, doesn’t prove anything.”

When asked by the President of the Tribunal if the Labour Office should have contacted
the Claimant’s representatives in order to get their version of the Transparency
International allegations before publicly endorsing them in the TV Report, [...] answered

that: “Jt is not my task to act on behalf of other parties. My task is to act and present the

© Compilation of Applications, Exhibit R-0010.

©} Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 182.

 Respondent’s Statement of Defence, para. 186.

65 Claimant’s Skeleton, para. 14. Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 182.

 Claimant’s Skeleton, para. 12.

©T Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of [...], Day 3, p. 558 (lines 5-22); Witness Statement of [...], Exhibit R-
0073, para. 9.

68 Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of Milena Prazkova, Day 4, p. 695 (lines 4-6).

27

77.

78.

79.

80.

standpoints or the opinion of the Czech Labour Office, and that's what I did in a few

sentences that I said.”® The Claimant writes that this is unacceptable.””

The Claimant also submits that the “Compilation of Applications” does not corroborate

the TI letter. Mr. Tollefsen, in his expert report, opines as follows:”!

I understand that the Respondent alleges that this [Compilation of
Applications] shows that almost all of A11Y's (or Brailcom's) solutions
were ‘far more expensive’ than competitor's solutions. I do not see how
this document could show that since it has no reference to equivalent
solutions or their prices.

On this point, the Claimant notes that during the television broadcast, it was reported that

the Labour Office’s own investigation “pointed to significant overpricing”.’”

According to the Claimant, this television broadcast was seen by over one million people.
It had a devastating effect on the Claimant’s business and its reputation in the closed-knit
blind and visually impaired community. As [...], one of the Claimant’s witnesses and a

Director of a school for the visually impaired, wrote in his witness statement:”*

[A]fter this report was broadcasted [sic.], I witnessed that the reputation
of public benefit organization BRAILCOM and the company AI1Y LTD
significantly suffered not only within the community of the blind but also
within the professional public. For example, Mrs. doctor Pavlina
Baslerova from the Association of Consulting Workers personally asked
me what that should mean and whether this company is trustworthy or
not.

From what the reporter proclaimed at the end of the report, I understood
that the state plans to prevent reimbursement of such aids supplied by the
company AI1Y in the future.

(2) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that the Claimant conflates in its submissions the contents of the
TV Report and the statements actually made by different persons which could be

attributed to the Respondent.

©? Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of [...], Day 3, p. 588 (lines 18-22).

7 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 29.

7! First Expert Report of Morten Tollefsen, para. 89.

7 Claimant’s Skeleton, para. 19. See Transcript of News Report on Czech Television, Exhibit C-0032, p. 2.
™ Witness Statement of [...], paras. 16 and 15.

28

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

The Respondent explains that the Labour Office was asked to participate on a TV
program which commented on TI’s letter regarding the Claimant’s business practices.
The spokesperson of the Labour Office of the Czech Republic, [...], only made “a very

brief statement” during the program.”*

According to the Respondent, [...] (i) explained that the Claimant in some cases had
included certain features in the price list attached to the applications which were
unnecessary, and (ii) confirmed that she was not aware of the amount that had been paid

in contravention of the Act.’>

The Respondent thus denies that the Labour Office publicly “denounced” the Claimant.
The Respondent writes:”°
All [...] did was to state what the Labour Office had been able to

determine at that time. She neither spoke of any systematic wrongdoing
nor did she publicly “denounce” Claimant.

The Respondent submits that, if any damage was caused to the Claimant due to the TV
Report, the damage was caused by the contents of the letter of TI and dissatisfied

customers of the Claimant that cannot be attributed to the Respondent.””

The Respondent also submits that Mr. Buchal confirmed that, in the course of the
preparation by the Labour Office of the TV report, he was contacted by the TV reporter
and asked to participate in the program and to give his perspective on camera. Mr. Buchal
refused and chose only to provide a written statement.’* In other words, the reporter made
an effort to present not only the viewpoint of the Labour Office but also the viewpoint of
AI1Y. The conduct of the TV station in any case is not attributable to the Respondent,

argues the Respondent.”

C. THE RESPONDENT ALLEGEDLY TURNED OVER THE CLAIMANT’S CONFIDENTIAL AND

PRICING INFORMATION TO ITS COMPETITORS

7 Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 77.

75 Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 77.

7 Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 79.

7 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 82.
78 First Buchal, para. 117.

7 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 79.

29

86.

87.

88.

(1) The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant notes that, in its implementation of the July Statement, the Labour Office
required the Claimant to provide some of its confidential information including the

breakdown of components of its assistive technology solutions and their prices.*°

The Claimant, initially, answered that the July Statement was inconsistent with previous
assurances given by the Labour Office that broken-down components and prices were not
required. Specifically, Mr. Buchal wrote to the Ministry of Labour in May 2013 to say

that:*!

The fact that presenting a detailed itemised calculation has no support in
the law has been confirmed even by the General Directorate of the
Labour Office, specifically by Mgr. Markéta Hrubiskova, who assured us
that in this sense an instruction has been issued to methodologists at
Labour Offices to not require breakdown of components and their prices.

Nevertheless, the Claimant says that it complied with the requests of the Labour Office
and submitted detailed and highly confidential information relating to its solutions.*? In
doing so, the Claimant said very clearly that its confidential information must not be
shared with its competitors. It stated in unequivocal terms in the documentation it

provided to the Respondent:

- “designated solely for the purposes of the administrative proceedings and may be
disclosed to third parties only subject to the consent of AI1Y LTD. — branch CZ”;

and

- “Price calculation is intended only for the use of the administrative proceedings. It is

not allowed to pass the price calculation or its parts to third parties” *+

8 Claimant’s Skeleton, para. 27.

8! Letter from Jan Buchal to Katefina Jirkova, undated, Exhibit C-0085.

%2 Claimant’s Skeleton, para. 28.

8 Features and Functionality Specifications — Digital Magnifier 2013 [...], dated 30 August 2013, Exhibit C-0094,

p.l

4 Preliminary Price Calculation and Specification for A11Y’s special aid for [...], dated 2014, Exhibit C-0006, p.

1; Preliminary Price Calculation and Specification for A11Y's special aid for [...], dated 2013, Exhibit C-0007, p. 1.

30

89. Notwithstanding these clear instructions, the Labour Office shared the Claimant’s
confidential information and its prices with the Claimant’s competitors*’ such as

Tyflocentrum/ Ergones, Spektra and ACE Design.*°

90. The Claimant submits that this was improper and highly prejudicial to the Claimant as it
resulted in a skewed playing field and an unfair competitive environment.®’ By contrast,
the Claimant says that it was never asked by the Labour Office to provide a competing

offer or price with reference to any of its competitors.

91. According to the Claimant, the Respondent does not deny that the July Statement was in

fact applied inconsistently. The Claimant says:

(i) At the hearing, the Respondent did not even attempt to refute the
assertion of the Claimant that: “Never once did the Respondent ask the
Claimant for an alternative application...Never once did the Respondent
share the confidential and pricing information of Spektra and Galop and
the other competitors with the Claimant. Not once. "*®

(ii) [T]he Respondent has not been able to point out a single piece of
evidence in the record showing that it asked the Claimant for a
comparative price regarding an assistive technology aid offered by
another provider.®°

85 See Claimant's Reply, paras. 149-166; First Expert Report of Morten Tollefsen, paras. 92-102. See also, e.g. Email
of Ms. Smidova to Ms. Vonesova of the TyfloCentrum, dated 12 September 2013, Exhibit R-0013; Emails between
Labour Office (Jana Sinova) and Tylfocentrum Olomouc/Ergones, last dated 11 December 2013, Exhibit C-0108;
Price Calculation for Electronic Communication Aid, Digital Magnifier and Camera Magnifier for [...], dated 1
October 2013, Exhibit C-0102; Offer by ACE Design, dated 19 May 2014, Exhibit C-0017; Letters between
Labour Office (Renata MatyaSova) and Ergones (Pavel Koléava), dated 8 October 2014, Exhibit C-0134.

86 First Expert Report of Morten Tollefsen, paras. 95, and 92-102.

87 See: Preliminary Price Calculation for [...], dated 2014, Exhibit C-0125; Offer by ACE Design, dated 19 May
2014, Exhibit C-0017; Offer by Spektra, v.d n., dated 19 May 2014, Exhibit C-0018; Request for alternative offers
by the Labour Office, dated 19 May 2014, Exhibit C-0019; Application of 27 May 2013 and Invoice of 20 May
2013 re [...], submitted on 29 May 2013, Exhibit R-0007; Functional description of Digital Magnifier for [...],
dated 2013, Exhibit C-0086; Letter of the Labour Office to Adaptech re [...], dated 26 June 2013, Exhibit R-0011;
Letter of the Labour Office to Spektra s.r.o., dated 26 June 2013, Exhibit R-0012. Emails between Labour Office
(Jana Sinové) and Tylfocentrum Olomouc/Ergones, last dated 11 December 2013, Exhibit C-0108; Price
Calculation for Electronic Communication Aid, Digital Magnifier and Camera Magnifier for [...], dated 1 October
2013, Exhibit C-0102. See also Claimant’s Reply, paras. 143-166.

88 Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 20; Transcript of Final Mearing, Claimant’s Opening Submissions, Day 1, p.
24 (lines 3-5 and lines 12-15).

® Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 21.

 

31

92. Accordingly, the Claimant concludes that there cannot therefore be any serious dispute
that the July Statement was not applied consistently vis-a-vis the Claimant as compared

with other assistive aid providers.

93. The Claimant also alleges that the Labour Office continued to share with the Claimant’s
competitors the Claimant’s confidential and pricing information despite the Decision of
the Deputy for Social Matters No. 14/2013 of 4 December 2013 (“December Decision”)

which prohibited the Respondent from doing so.”

94. The December Decision will be set out in full:?!

Article I
Initial provisions

General Directorate of Labour Office of Czech Republic was notified by
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, in_relation_to complaints of
subjects supplying aids for handicapped persons, that offices of Labour
Office _of Czech Republic did not proceed _in_some_admini: ive
proceedings on admission of allowance for special aid in lic with
corresponding regulations. On basis of the mentioned, General
Directorate of Labour Office of Czech Republic decided on adoption of
measures of adjusting methods of administrative proceedings on
admission of allowance for special aid.

Article IT

Policy to evaluation of the condition of being least economically
demanding for the purposes of allowance for special aid

J. Competent places of work of non-insurance social allowances as
administrative bodies are obliged to handle documents that create files in
such a way so that the rights and interests imposed by law of third-party
persons are not violated and no detriment is caused.

2. During the proceedings on allowance admission for special aid, when
a regional branch of Labour Office of Czech Republic examines whether
the aid, for which the allowance is requested, is in basic version that fully
satisfies the person and satisfies the condition of being least economically
demanding, it may not pass the details of parameters of the requested aid
(price, particular project de ion), that the applic

provided, to any other subjects. Those subjects may be in competitive
positions against the supplier of the requested aid and thus information

% Claimant’s Skeleton, para. 31. Decision of [...], dated 4 December 2013, (“December Decision”), Exhibit C-
0040, Article II (2).
°! December Decision, Exhibit C-0040 (Tribunal’s emphasis).

32

passed by a regional branch of Labour Office of Czech Republic could
intervene in their mutual positions as entrepreneurs on the business
market.

3. To fulfil Section 9(10) of the Act 329/2011 Coll. on providing
allowances to handicapped persons, as amended, regional branches of
Labour Office of Czech Republic_must compare prices of similar special
aids from _different_manufacturers or suppliers. A regional branch of
Labour Office of Czech Republic for that reason asks for price offerings
of aids, similar from the point of view of their functionality, from other
subjects. But it is not possible so that those subjects would qualify against
particular itive offer they would get detailed information about

just from the regional branch of Labour Office of Czech Republic.

   
 

 

4. It is always needed to apply the policy stated in the previous points of
this article in practice according to the following example providing that
in practice it is always necessary to start from individual conditions of the
particular case:

a) a regional branch of Labour Office of Czech Republic asks a supplier
of aids for visually impaired persons for making an offer for special aid,
for instance digital notetaker for the visually impaired with speech output,
with the following properties:

- software: screen reader, software for optical character recognition
(OCR), office suite, speech synthesis Zuzana,

- hardware: notebook (including operating system, with built-in speakers
of good sound quality, weight below 2 kg), portable scanner.

b) the regional branch of Labour Office of Czech Republic consults the
given parameters with the applicant (e.g. during social investigation) to
find out what properties of the special aid are fundamental for him in
relation to the possibility and ability to utilize that particular aid, that is
for his personal activities in the sense of Section 9(5) b) and c) of the Act
No. 329/2011 Coll., as amended.

5. Further it is inadmissible in practice so that an employee of a regional
branch of Labour Office of Czech Republic (its contact office) would call
in writing to the applicant for special aid so that he would contact a
particular_company of competition (specialized on the _same_kind_of
special aids) and add invoices of tenders from the selected company till
the deadline given in the call (or determination of particular term of
visit), that is under the threat of rejecting the allowance. An applicant is
only obliged, in cases defined by the law (administrative proceedings in a
matter of application for allowance for special aid — staircase platform,
staircase chair, and ceiling lifting system), already at the time of
application to add at least two offers of the barrier removal. In other
cases, a regional branch of Labour Office of Czech Republic finds out the

 

33

95.

96.

prices of similar aids from various manufacturers for the purpose of
determining the amount of allowance by its own exploration.

Article IIT
Final provision

This decision is obligatory for all employees of departments of non-
insurance social allowances.

The Claimant submits that the breach of the December Decision was confirmed at the
Hearing by representatives of the Labour Office. Both [...]°? and Ms. Prizkova’? agreed
that, on the application of the July Statement by the Labour Office, there were instances

of cases which were contrary to the December Decision.**

(2) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that the “Claimant failed to evidence any disclosure of its
know-how”? because “no special know-how is needed to combine different products into
a standard aid for the blind and, hence, the disclosure of the specific components used

by an aid supplier in general cannot reveal any special know-how”.°®

° See Transcript of Final Hearing, Day 2, p. 467 (line 25) - p. 468 (line 18):

MR. HAERI: So you agree that this document [C-0134] includes pricing
information and particular components of ALLY Ltd?

[...]: Yes, from what I see.

MR. HAERI: If you turn over the page, you'll see the e-mail from Ms. Renata
Matydsova of the Czech Labour Office to Ergones on 8 October 2014 attaching
this what she calls more precise specification of the special aid which is stated in
the attachment. Do you see that?

[...]: Yes, Ican see that.

MR. HAERI: This October 2014 date was after the December 2013 decision,
wasn't it?

[...]: Yes.

MR. HAERT: So have you now seen a document that would evidence a breach of
the December decision?

[...]: From what I see this is a document that is not in accordance with my
[December 2013] decision...

°3 Transcript of Final Hearing, Day 3, Ms. Prazkova, p. 663 (lines 16-19):

“MR. HAERI: So it shouldn't have happened and it breached your December 2013 decision. Is that right?
MS. PRUZKOVA: Yes. [...]”

% Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 23.

°5 Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 86.

°% Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 81.

34

97. In any event, the Respondent says that the July Statement was applied consistently: just
as applications regarding products of the Claimant were compared with its competitors’

offers, so were the applications of all other companies too.””
98. In this connection, the Respondent writes as follows:°8

61. The Respondent has filed thirteen decisions taken after the issuance of
the July Statement as Exhibits R-0053 to R-0066 which in their reasoning
show that alternative offers were obtained and that the allowance granted
was always for the least economically demanding option which was
determined based on the alternative offers obtained.

62. In Exhibit R-0053, as an example, the applicant required an
allowance for a camera magnifier and submitted two offers, one by
Spektra and one by SmartOne. The Labour Office in its reasoning held
that

Due to objectivity the labour office gathered other price offer for
special aid — camera magnifying glass — made by company Galop
Praha in order to compare prices and basic equipment. This
company offers comparable camera magnifying glass for 24
900,- CZK which fulfils the same purpose as the ones above
mentioned.

Pursuant to the provision of Section 9 para. 10 of the quoted Act
the labour office during assessment of amount of contribution
was taking into consideration the price offer made by Galop
Praha which offers cameras with same characters but it is less
economically demanding and fulfils the same purpose.

 

The amount of the contribution is set by the lowest economic cost,
which is 24900,- CZK. That is basic equipped aid which you are
able to use and meet your needs.”

63. Also the other decisions make clear that the Labour Offices obtained
alternative offers regardless of the company making the initial offer which
was attached to the application. [...]

99. In view of the evidence, the Respondent concludes that the Claimant was not treated any

differently than its competitors.

D. THE RESPONDENT ALLEGEDLY RIGGED THE INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENTS OF THE
CLAIMANT’S ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS

°” Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 60.
°8 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 61-63.
% Decision in the case of [...], dated 27 October 2014, Exhibit R-0053, p. 1.

35

(1) The Claimant’s Position

100. The Claimant submits that the Labour Office gamed its “independent evaluations” of the
Claimant’s assistive technology solutions applications following the issuance of the July

Statement. It gives the following as an example:!°°

[I]n the case of the Claimant's client [...], the Labour Office insisted that
the “independent evaluator” of the Claimant's assistive technology
solution should be Tyflocentrum. This was despite the fact that
Tyflocentrum was a competitor of the Claimant. Furthermore,
Tyflocentrum had previously supplied [...] with an aid that did not work
and was not fit for purpose. Undeterred by these facts, which were
pointed out to the Labour Office, the Labour Office insisted on
Tyflocentrum as an appropriate evaluator of the Claimant's assistive
technology solution for [...].

101. Accordingly, submits the Claimant, the Labour Office failed to “consider the needs of the

applicant or the effectiveness of the competing quotes”.'"!

(2) The Respondent’s Position

102. The Respondent denies that it rigged the independent assessments of the Claimant’s

assistive technology solutions.
103. In the case of [...], the Respondent writes as follows:!°

312. In summary, [...], represented by Brailcom, submitted an application
for an electronic magnifying glass at a price of CZK 181.648,-. The
application, as was Claimant’s business practice at the time, did not
contain a list of components but a lump sum for an unspecified product
referred to as a “digital magnifier”. The labour office contacted [...]
school to determine whether he needed such a product for his education
and then requested two competitors of Claimant to submit offers for
solutions which would meet [...] needs. These companies submitted offers
of CZK 88,800.- for a Windows-based solution and CZK 58,660.- for an
Apple based solution.

313. [...]Jhad in the meantime been asked to send a list of components.
The Labour Office then submitted all three lists of components (without
identifying which ies had submitted the offers _and_without

indicating the prices offered) to Tyflocentrum for it to give its opinion on

'00 Claimant's Skeleton, para. 30 (footnotes omitted).
‘01 Claimant’s Reply, heading of Section II.D.4(b).
2 Respondent’s Rejoinder, paras. 312-314 (Tribunal’s emphasis).

36

whether they meet the needs of [...], who was not only visually impaired
but suffered also from a severe impairment of motor functions. The
Labour Office also asked with regard to the iMac computer offered by
Claimant at CZK 100,000.- why this computer was so expensive. Thi:
document did not identify that the had been offered by Claiman
The Tyflocentrum, however, could not explain this pricing.

   

         

314. The Labour Office then came to the conclusion that the offer by
Adaptech was the economically least demanding offer and granted an
allowance accordingly.

104. In light of the foregoing, the Respondent submits that the Labour Office’s approach was

suitable.

Vv. JURISDICTION

105. In accordance with the Tribunal’s Decision on Bifurcation of 5 October 2015,'° the
Respondent’s jurisdictional objection as to whether the Claimant made an investment in
the Czech Republic was joined to the merits. The Respondent’s jurisdictional objection

and the Claimant’s comments thereon are summarized below.

A. WHETHER THE CLAIMANT MADE AN INVESTMENT IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC

106. The Claimant describes the investment it made in the Czech Republic as follows:!°*

18. First, the Claimant had a multitude of claims to money and/or
performance under contract having a financial value in the Czech
Republic:

(1) The Claimant's contracts with its customers in the Czech
Republic are assets and investments of the Claimant. More generally, the
fact that the Claimant had such contracts with its customers is
characteristic of the Claimant's broader assistive technology business
operations and investment in the Czech Republic.

(2) [...] Further evidence of the Claimant having assets of this kind
exists in the important distribution contracts it signed with BAUM Retec
and iStyle.

19. Second, as one would expect with an operating and ongoing business,
the Claimant held property rights as well as movable property for the
purpose of its business in the Czech Republic. As the evidence reflects, the
Claimant's property included a lease of business premises, an automobile,

103 See PO 2.
104 Claimant’s Reply, paras. 18-22 (footnotes omitted).

37

and business assets that the Claimant acquired in the Czech Republic
(such as printers, iPads, computers and telephones).

20. Third, the Claimant had developed extensive know-how and technical
processes:

(1) The Claimant’s staff comprise an impressive gathering of
assistive technology experts who have in their work and experience
developed extensive know-how and technical processes for the Claimant
to assist the blind and the visually impaired with technology solutions to
meet their needs. [...]

(2) The Claimant had particular know-how in producing integrated
and holistic assistive technology solutions that were designed and
developed specially for individual customers in view of their particular
disability and needs. This set the Claimant apart from standard suppliers
and retailers of assistive technology products.

 

(3) In his expert report, Mr. Tollefsen, who has extensive practical
experience in the field of assistive technologies, has said that the
Claimant's documents “clearly show know-how.” [...]

21. Fourth, the Claimant had significant goodwill and a_ stellar
reputation, which in turn promoted a strong "word of mouth"
recommendations of the Claimant's business.105 This is attested to
repeatedly by the Claimant's customers, who enthuse over the value of its
support in clearly appreciative terms.

[.-]

22. Finally, in addition to the Claimant's know-how and_ other
contributions in the Czech Republic, the Claimant made considerable
financial contributions in the Czech Republic through the payment of
liabilities incurred in the course of its business, including for the supply of
components for its solutions, employee salaries, and otherwise. For
example, by 31 December 2012, the Claimant's Czech Branch had spent
CZK 105,000 on the cost of goods in the Czech Republic. This had
increased to CZK 7,950,000 by 31 December 2013.

107. The Parties agree that in order to determine whether or not an investment has been made,
the Tribunal should assess the Claimant’s business in the Czech Republic as a whole (as
opposed to the individual elements of that business), and decide whether the combined

effect of all features of that business render it an investment. !%°

105 Jan Buchal explains in his Second Witness Statement, with reference to multiple examples, that “A//Y's

marketing was word of mouth from happy, satisfied customers.” Second Buchal, para. 11.
106 Claimant’s Rejoinder, para. 27. Respondent's Rejoinder, para. 15.

38

(1) The Parties’ Positions

a. The Respondent’s Position

108. The Respondent submits that the Treaty lists certain assets as a descriptive indication of

what form an investment may take.
109. Article 1(a) of the Treaty provides as follows:!°”

(a) The term ‘investment’ means every kind of asset belonging to an
investor of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party under the law in force of the latter Contracting Party in any sector
of economic activity and in particular, though not exclusively, includes:

(i) moveable and immoveable property and any other related
property rights including mortgages, liens or pledges;

(ii) shares in and stock and debentures of a company and any other
form of participation in a company;

(iii) claims to money or to any performance under contract having a
financial value;

(iv) intellectual property rights, goodwill, know-how and technical
processes;

(vy) business concessions conferred by law or, where appropriate
under the law of the Contracting Party concerned, under contract,
including concessions to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural
resources.

110. The Respondent argues that, for an investment to exist, three criteria, (i) contribution, (ii)
risk and (iii) duration must be met.'°® The word “investment”, according to many
decisions, has an inherent meaning and the objective definition of this term in a BIT

comprises the elements of a contribution or allocation of resources, duration, and risk.!

107 Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic for the Promotion and Protection of Investments with
Protocol, Legal Exhibit CL-0001.

108 Respondents Rejoinder, paras. 19 and ff.

109 Romak S.A. (Switzerland) v. Republic of Uzbekistan, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. AA280, Award, 26 November
2009, paras. 180 and 207, Legal Exhibit RL-0128; KT Asia Investment Group B.V. v. Republic of Kazakhstan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/8, Award, 17 October 2013, paras. 165 et seq. and 173, Legal Exhibit RL-0134.

39

111. The finding of a contribution by the Claimant is the first step in the determination of
whether an investment has been made, argues the Respondent.! 10 Without a contribution,
there is automatically no risk involved and no duration, as several tribunals have

affirmed.'!!

112. The existence of a contribution made by the investor is a precondition for the
qualification of an investment, and for this reason, it is also a precondition for the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae says the Respondent.!!?
113. For example, the tribunal in KT Asia v. Kazakhstan held that:!3

The assets listed in Article (...) of the BIT are the result of the act of
investing. They presuppose an investment in the sense of a commitment of
resources. Without such a commitment of resources, the asset belonging
to the claimant cannot constitute an investment [...].

114. The tribunal in that case concluded that the claimant had not made any contribution with
respect to its alleged investment, and, as a consequence, the “Claimant has not
demonstrated the existence of an investment”.''* On these grounds, the tribunal

concluded that it did not have jurisdiction.
115. In this respect, the Respondent quotes Professor Zachary Douglas:!!°

Given that the stated objective of investment treaties is to stimulate flows
of private capital into the economies of the contracting states, the

110 Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 24.

\1_KT Asia Investment Group B.V. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/8, Award, 17 October 2013,
para. 219, Legal Exhibit RL-0134; see also Capital Financial Holdings Luxembourg S.A. v. Republic of Cameroon,
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/18, Award, 22 June 2017, para. 425, Legal Exhibit RL-0135.

12 See e.g., Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/20, Award, 14 July 2010, paras. 110-111,
Legal Exhibit RL-0131; Quiborax S.A. and Non Metallic Minerals S.A. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 September 2012, para. 220, Legal Exhibit RL-0132; Electrabel
S.A. v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/19, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability,
30 November 2012, para. 5.43, Legal Exhibit RL-0136; Deutsche Bank AG v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/2, 31 October 2012, para. 295, Legal Exhibit RL-0133; KT Asia Investment
Group B.V. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/8, Award, 17 October 2013, paras. 170-173, Legal
Exhibit RL-0134; Nova Scotia Power Incorporated y. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/I1/1, Excerpts of Award, 30 April 2014, para. 84, Legal Exhibit RL-0137.

“3 KT Asia Investment Group B.V. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/09/8, Award, 17 October 2013,
Legal Exhibit RL-0134, para. 166.

44 Td., para. 206.

45 Zachary Douglas, The International Law of Investment Claims (4" ed. Cambridge University Press 2012), Legal
Exhibit RL-0138, para. 336.

40

116.

117.

118.

claimant must have contributed to this objective in order to attain the
rights created by the investment treaty.

This contribution must be clearly ascertained by the tribunal if its
existence is challenged by the host state; for otherwise the procedural
privilege conferred by the investment treaty might be utilised by a
claimant who has not fulfilled its side of the bargain.

Accordingly, submits the Respondent, the existence of an investment depends on the
making of a contribution for the acquisition of the investment at issue. Where there is no
such contribution, tribunals have declined jurisdiction ratione materiae as it does not

correspond with the objective of investment treaties.

In the present case, says the Respondent, the Claimant had no significant funds to make
an investment. It spent GBP 28 to incorporate its letterbox company in the United
Kingdom. Before taking over BRAILCOM, it had no business in the United Kingdom. In
fact, it had no premises or employees in the United Kingdom until mid-2016. Mr. Jan
Buchal, who owns and/or controls both BRAILCOM and the Claimant, shifted assets and
business from one entity to the other, in pursuance of his own benefits. It is clear from the
Claimant’s own submission that it never committed any resources to acquire
BRAILCOM’s business. The Claimant, submits the Respondent, received BRAILCOM’s

business completely for free.!!

Accordingly, concludes the Respondent, the Claimant made no contribution and
therefore, cannot establish that it made an investment in the Czech Republic. As the
Claimant did not make any personal contribution, it could not have assumed any personal
risk with its alleged investment.!!’ Therefore that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione

materiae over the Claimant’s investment.

116 Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 12.

47 See KT Asia Investment Group B.

 

. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/8, Award, 17 October

2013, Legal Exhibit RL-0134, para. 219; Capital Financial Holdings Luxembourg S.A. v. Republic of Cameroon,
ICSID Case No. ARB/15/18, Award, 22 June 2017, Legal Exhibit RL-0135, para. 425.

4l

119. Should the Tribunal find that the Claimant did make a contribution, the Respondent
submits that, in addition to the fact that an investment must involve a contribution, it

must also involve a transfer of value from one country to another.!!®
120. In Alapli Elektrik v. Turkey, the tribunal held that:'!°

ECT Article 26(1) provides for resolution of disputes between a
Contracting Party and an Investor of another Contracting Party relating
to an Investment of the latter in the Area of the former. [...]

In each instance, the investor is assumed to be an entity which has
engaged in the activity of investing, in the form of having made a
contribution. An alleged investor must have made some contribution to
the host state permitting characterization of that contribution as an
investment “of” the investor.

Consequently, [...] (the Second Project Company) cannot be considered
an investment “of” Claimant. Although not a very long word, the term
“of” constitutes the operative language for determining investor status in
both relevant treaties. Pursuant to the interpretative principles of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which instruct that treaty
terms are to be read in their ordinary meaning in context, reference to the
investment “of” an investor must connote active contribution of some
sort.

Put differently, the treaty language implicates not just the abstract
existence of some piece of property, whether stock or otherwise, but also
the activity of investing. The Tribunal must find an action transferring
some- thing of value (money, know-how, contacts, or expertise) from one
treaty- country to another.

121. In the present case, both Articles 5 and 8 of the Treaty refer to investments of the

investor.!7°

122. The Respondent avers that the Claimant, however, never transferred anything of value
from the United Kingdom to the Czech Republic. All assets of BRAILCOM that the
Claimant alleges were transferred to it were and remained in the Czech Republic.
Respondent argues that the Claimant specifically confirmed that, before 2016, it never

had any business in the United Kingdom. BRAILCOM’s business was merely transferred

'l8 Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 15.

119 Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/13, Excerpts of Award, 12 July 2012, Legal
Exhibit RL-0139, paras. 357-360.

20 Respondents Rejoinder, para. 60 (Respondent's emphasis).

 
 

42

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

from one Czech entity to the Czech branch of a UK entity. Nothing of value ever left the
Czech Republic. Even less did anything of value enter the Czech Republic from the
United Kingdom.'?!

As the Claimant never made an investment in the Czech Republic, the Tribunal therefore

lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae over the Claimant’s claim, concludes the Respondent.

b. The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant submits that it has made a qualified investment under the Treaty.

The Claimant asserts that the Tribunal should only apply the broad definition of
investment found in Article 1(a) of the Treaty which does not define or limit “every kind

of assets”.

In view of the specific definition of “investment” in Article 1(a) of the Treaty, the Salini
test which pertained to the term “investment” in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
finds no application in the present case, argues the Claimant. This is an UNICTRAL

Tribunal governed by the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.
In this respect, the Claimant relies on the following decisions:!77
(i) In White Industries v. India, the tribunal held:'?*

The present case, however, is not subject to the ICSID Convention.
Consequently, the so-called Salini Test, and Douglas's interpretation of it,
are simply not applicable here. Moreover, it is widely accepted that the
‘double-check’ (namely, of proving that there is an ‘investment’ for the
purposes of the relevant BIT and that there is an ‘investment’ in
accordance with the ICSID Convention), imposes a higher standard than
simply resolving whether there is an ‘investment’ for the purposes of a
particular BIT.

(ii) In Guaracachi v Bolivia, the tribunal held:'**

'2! Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 61.

122

Claimant’s Rejoinder, paras. 8-11.

"23 White Industries Australia Limited v. Republic of India, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 30 November 2011, Legal
Exhibit CL-0165, para. 7.4.9.

43

The Tribunal also considers that it is not appropriate to import ‘objective’
definitions of investment created by doctrine and case law in order to
interpret Article 25 of the ICSID Convention when in the context of a non-
ICSID arbitration such as the present case. On the contrary, the
definition of protected investment, at least in non-ICSID arbitrations, is to
be obtained only from the (very broad) definition contained in the BIT
concluded by Bolivia and the United Kingdom.

(iii) In Flemingo v. Poland, the tribunal held:'?°

Article 9 of the Treaty, and not Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, is the
jurisdictional basis of the present arbitration. _ Consequently,
jurisdictional restrictions deriving from the notion of ‘investment’ in
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, as emphasised by various ICSID
tribunals such as the Salini panel, do not apply to the present arbitration.
Moreover, the present Tribunal is convened under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, which merely refer to any ‘dispute’ without any further
qualification.

(iv) In Anglia Auto v. Czech Republic, the tribunal held:!7°

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal does not deem it necessary to
inquire into the question whether the requirements of a contribution,
certain duration and an element of risk are met in this instance, given that
this arbitration was brought under the SCC Arbitration Rules, not the
ICSID Arbitration Rules under which the so-called Salini test has been
developed in arbitral case law in relation to Article 25 of the 1965 ICSID
Convention.

128. In addition, the Claimant submits that its investment, as described at paragraph 106
above, clearly falls within the Treaty’s definition of an investment since the Claimant has
(i) moveable property and property rights related to immoveable property in the Czech
Republic, (ii) claims to money and/or performance contracts having financial value, and

(iii) know-how, technical processes and goodwill.!”

 

"24 Guaracachi America, Inc. and Rurelec PLC y. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No.2011-17, Award, 31
January 2014, Legal Exhibit CL- 0167, para. 364 (internal citations omitted).

"5 Flemingo Duty Free Shop Private Limited v. Republic of Poland, UNCITRAL, Award, 12 August 2016, Legal
Exhibit CL-0169, para. 298.

26 Anglia Auto Accessories Ltd. v. Czech Republic, SCC Case No. V2014/181, Final Award, 10 March 2017, Legal
Exhibit CL-0171, para. 150.

"7 Claimant’s Skeleton, para. 54.

44

129. Even the Respondent’s technical experts acknowledged at the Hearing that the Claimant

possessed know-how. !28

130. Finally, in respect of the Respondent’s argument that the Claimant’s investment is not
“international”, the Claimant submits essentially that case law is clear that the origin of

an investor’s capital, whether international or not, is irrelevant as to whether an

investment exists.!”°

131. For these reasons, the Claimant submits that the Tribunal has ratione materiae

jurisdiction over the Claimant’s investment.

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

132. The Tribunal recalls that in its Decision on Jurisdiction, it upheld the Respondent’s
objection regarding the scope of the dispute resolution clause and found that the Claimant

was a foreign investor under the Treaty.
133. The Tribunal then wrote at paragraph 132 of that Decision:

Whether the Claimant, at the time of its incorporation, had made an
investment in the Czech Republic is a separate argument. The Tribunal
recalls that, in its Procedural Order No. 2, it decided to join this

28 Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of Gerhard Weber and Zdenék Mikovec, Day 4, p. 827 (lines 11-18).
When asked again to confirm his answer, Gerhard Weber replied, “There is know-how, of course, [...].” See
Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of Gerhard Weber and Zdenék Mikovec, Day 4, p. 828 (line 13). See also
Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of Gerhard Weber and Zdenék Mikovec, Day 4, p. 836 (line 12) - p. 838
(line 15).

29 Claimant’s Rejoinder, para. 20(3), citing Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/94/2,
Award, 29 April 1999, Legal Exhibit CL-0163, para. 109; Yukos Universal Limited (Isle of Man) v. Russian
Federation, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, PCA Case No. AA 227, Interim Award on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, 30 November 2009, Legal Exhibit CL-0036, para. 432; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, Legal Exhibit CL-0080, para. 77; Bernhard von Pezold and
others v. Republic of Zimbabwe, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/15, Award, 28 July 2015, Legal Exhibit CL- 0168, para.
288; Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, 8 April 2013, Legal Exhibit
CL-0166, para. 383; Venezuela Holdings B.V. and others (formerly Mobil Corporation and others) v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/27, Decision on Jurisdiction, 10 June 2010, Legal Exhibit RL-
0101, para. 198; Joseph C. Lemire v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability,
21 January 2010, Legal Exhibit CL-0152, para. 56; Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v. Arab
Republic of Egypt, (CSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Decision on Jurisdiction, 11 April 2007, Legal Exhibit CL-0164,
para. 210; Saipem S.p.A. v. People’s Republic of Bangladesh, (CSID Case No. ARB/05/7, Decision on Jurisdiction
and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, 21 March 2007, Legal Exhibit RL-0127, para. 106; CME Czech
Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award, 13 September 2001, Legal Exhibit CL-0019, para.
418.

 

 

45

jurisdictional objection to the merits as it is clearly intertwined with the
merits. The Tribunal will thus decide this objection in the merits phase of
this case.

134. The Tribunal must now determine whether the Claimant made an investment in the

Czech Republic which is protected by the Treaty.

135. The Tribunal deems it useful to cite again Article 1(a) of the Treaty which defines

“investment” in this case:!*°

[T]he term ‘1 ’ means every _kind_of asset to_an
investor of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party under the law in force of the latter Contracting Party in any sector
of economic activity and in particular, though not exclusively, includes:

(i) moveable and immoveable property and any other related
property rights including mortgages, liens or pledges;

(ii) shares in and stock and debentures of a company and any other
form of participation in a company;

(iii) claims to money or to any performance under contract having a
financial value;

(iv) intellectual property rights, goodwill, know-how and technical
processes;

(vy) business concessions conferred by law or, where appropriate
under the law of the Contracting Party concerned, under contract,
including concessions to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural
resources.

136. The Tribunal notes that there are no definitions or limitations in the Treaty of the terms

“every kind of asset belonging”.

137. On its face, the Treaty does not require, for instance, that the assets be transferred for
consideration, that there be a flow of funds from the United Kingdom into the Czech
Republic or that there be an underlying transaction. The Treaty only refers to “every kind

of asset belonging” to the investor without any further qualification.

50 Tribunal’s emphasis.

46

138. The Contracting Parties to the Treaty could have qualified the definition of investment
but they chose not to do so. It is not the task of this Tribunal to add words to the broad

definition agreed by the Contracting Parties.

139. The Tribunal recalls that this case is proceeding pursuant to the UNCITRAL Arbitration

Rules. These Rules have no equivalent to Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

140. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Treaty is clear: the investment is the asset and

such asset must belong to the investor for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction. !!

141. The Tribunal is comforted in its conclusion by the reasoning and the findings mutatis

mutandis of the tribunals in Tokios Tokelés and in Yukos.
142. The tribunal in Tokios Tokelés wrote as follows:'*?

77. The Respondent requests the Tribunal to infer, without textual
foundation, that the Ukraine-Lithuania BIT requires the Claimant to
demonstrate further that the capital used to make an investment in
Ukraine originated from non-Ukrainian sources. In our view, however,
neither the text of the definition of “investment,” nor the context in which
the term is defined, nor the object and purpose of the Treaty allow such
an origin-of-capital requirement to be implied. The requirement is plainly
absent from the text. In_addition, the context in _which_the_term
“investment” is defined, namely, “every kind of asset invested by an
investor,” does not support the restriction ad by the Re

Finally, the origin-of-capital requirement is inconsistent with the object
and purpose of the Treaty, which, as discussed above, is to provide broad
protection to investors and their investments in the territory of either
party. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds no basis on which to impose the

 

 

13! Arbitrator Joubin-Bret takes a different view from the other members of the Tribunal with respect to a central
aspect in the analysis relating to the existence of an investment in light of the Treaty. Arbitrator Joubin-Bret
considers that in the present case, there is no evidence of a transaction, a transfer, a contribution, a consideration or a
counter-performance of any kind originating from the United Kingdom into the Czech Republic to establish or
acquire property over the assets listed in the definition of investment under article 1. In Arbitrator Joubin-Bret’s
view, while, for purposes of definition, an investment can take different forms, it cannot dispense from being
invested or otherwise acquired and to involve some form of transfer from one contracting State into the other
contracting State of the BIT at any given stage. Arbitrator Joubin-Bret considers that it would defeat the object and
purpose of investment promotion and protection treaties to cover situations where no foreign investment has taken
place. However, Arbitrator Joubin-Bret is also mindful of the specific wording of the Treaty at hand that does not
make reference to such transaction into the territory of the host State. Arbitrator Joubin-Bret is further reminded of
the provisions of the Vienna Convention where the plain meaning of the text will take precedence over the object
and purpose of the text and where Arbitrator Joubin-Bret’s reading would result in adding a condition that the
underlying treaty does not provide, which would in turn result in an incorrect interpretation.

132 Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, Legal Exhibit
CL-0080, para. 77. Tribunal’s emphasis.

  

47

restriction proposed by the Respondent on the scope of covered
investments.

143. The tribunal in Yukos wrote as follows:!*

430. As an initial matter, the Tribunal finds that the ECT, by its terms,
applies to an “Investment” owned nominally by a qualifying “Investor.”
Respondent’s submission that simple legal ownership of shares does not
qualify as an Investment under Article 1(6)(b) of the ECT finds no support
in the text of the Treaty. The breadth of the definition of Investment in the
ECT is emphasized by many eminent legal scholars. As defined in Article
1(6) of the ECT, an “Investment” includes “every kind of asset” owned
or controlled, directly or indirectly, and extends not only to shares of a
company but to its debt (Article 1(6)(b) of the ECT), to monetary claims
and contractual performance as well as “any right conferred by law”
(Article 1(6)(f) of the ECT, [...]). The Tribunal _recalls again that,
according to Article 31 of the VCLT, a treaty is to be interpreted in good
faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning of its terms. The Tribunal
reads Article 1(6)(b) of the ECT as ining the widest possible
definition of an interest in a company, including shares (as in the case at
hand), with_no_indication_whatsoever_that_the_drafters_of the Treaty
intended to limit ownership to “beneficial” ownership.

144. In the present case, the Claimant asserts that the assets that belong to it in the Czech

Republic consist mainly of know-how and goodwill. The Tribunal agrees.

145. In respect of know-how, even the Respondent’s technical experts agreed at the Hearing
that A11Y possessed know-how.'** Such know-how includes the expertise of A11Y’s
employees, such as Mr. Hanke, and its owner, Mr. Buchal, in providing cutting-edge
assistive technologies and holistic solutions for the visually impaired. As Mr. Tollefsen,
the Claimant’s expert testified, the Claimant’s training handbooks are “among the best

learning materials” he has seen and would have required “a lot of work and technical

knowledge to prepare.”

'33 Yukos Universal Limited (Isle of Man) v. Russian Federation, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, PCA Case No.
A227, Interim Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 30 November 2009, Legal Exhibit CL-0036, para. 430
(Tribunal’s emphasis).

'4 Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of Gerhard Weber and Zdenék Mikovec, Day 4, p. 827 (lines 11-18).
When asked again to confirm his answer, Gerhard Weber replied, “There is know-how, of course, [...].” See
Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of Gerhard Weber and Zdenék Mikovec, Day 4, p. 828 (line 13). See also
Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of Gerhard Weber and Zdenék Mikovec, Day 4, p. 836 (line 12) - p. 838
(line 15).

55 Expert Report of Morten Tollefsen, para. 59(a).

 

 

48

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

In respect of the Claimant’s goodwill, the Tribunal need merely note that the record is
replete with evidence concerning the loyalty of the Claimant’s customers and

Mr. Buchal’s stellar reputation in this field. The evidence of goodwill is overwhelming.

The Tribunal heard the evidence of many A11Y’s customers who expressed their
unreserved satisfaction of the services A11Y provided to them. Those customers were
[L...-]. E--], [.-], [-.], and [...]. Those witnesses impressed the Tribunal which found
them all honest and totally credible. These witnesses, except for [...] who testified by
video-conference, travelled from the Czech Republic to Paris, accompanied by personal
aides in order to provide evidence and assist the Tribunal. They did indeed impress and
assist the Tribunal in its task to determine that the Claimant had made an investment in

the Czech Republic.

With respect to Mr. Buchal’s reputation, [...], the Director of a primary school for the
visually impaired wrote as follows in his witness statement:

[...] Mr. Jan Buchal, the companies BRAILCOM and AIIY and their

team had an excellent professional name and an excellent reputation.

Their clients first of all valued a high technical maturity of compensation

aids and service of the workers of the company, which allowed the clients
to make a perfect use of their aids.‘

[...] confirmed this statement when he testified at the Hearing. The Tribunal found [...]

to be a credible witness.

The Tribunal concludes that these assets, namely the know-how and the goodwill,
transferred from BRAILCOM to A11Y, belong to A11Y, and thus represent an

investment by the Claimant in the Czech Republic under the Treaty.

Indeed, as noted earlier, the evidence reveals that over a period of several months A11Y
took over the business from BRAILCOM, which included taking on new contracts with
customers to provide them with assistive technology solutions, and hiring former

employees of BRAILCOM.

136 Witness Statement of [...], para. 13.

49

152.

153.

154.

155.

In this connection, the Claimant writes in its Post-Hearing Brief:'°7

From late 2012, the Claimant started to carry out sales of assistive
technology aids in the Czech Republic and began issuing pro-forma
invoices and invoices to customers for assistive technology solutions. The
Claimant's Czech branch financial accounts thus show income from sales
flowing to the Claimant from 2012. By March 2013, the Claimant entered
into all new orders for assistive technology solutions and Brailcom no
longer entered into new orders to produce assistive technology aids. After
March 2013, Brailcom only fulfilled assistive technology aids orders
made before that time.

 

 

[.-]

The Claimant assumed the contractual employment relationship with
employees for the production of assistive technology solutions.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant’s investment, namely its know-how

and its goodwill, is a protected investment under the Treaty.

The Tribunal will now proceed to address the merits of this case. It will commence with

the issue of liability of the Respondent.

MERITS

As a result of the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, the Claimant’s claim for indirect
and creeping expropriation by the Respondent under Article 5 of the Treaty is the only
claim which the Tribunal must adjudicate. The Parties’ positions in respect of this claim

are summarized below.

A. WHETHER THE RESPONDENT BREACHED ARTICLE 5 OF THE TREATY

156.

Article 5 (1) of the Treaty provides, in relevant part, as follows:

Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall not be
nationalised, expropriated or subjected to measures having effect
equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation (hereinafter referred to as
“expropriation ”) in the territory of the other Contracting Party except for
a public purpose related to the internal needs of that Party on a non-
discriminatory basis and against prompt, adequate and effective
compensation. [...]

'57 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 3 (footnotes omitted).

50

157. The Parties appear to agree on two important points regarding the Claimant’s claim:

- while they cite different authorities and use different formulations of wording, the
Parties seem to agree that an indirect expropriation arises when an investment’s value
has been substantially deprived of value or destroyed, even if title to it remains with

the investor; and

- there is no value left in the Claimant’s investment in the Czech Republic and the

Claimant is insolvent today.

158. The Parties agree that the test for indirect expropriation is reflected in the case of
Metalclad v. Mexico in which the Tribunal held that an expropriation exists if the
measure in issue has the “effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of
the use or reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit of property.”'*® Nor is there any
disagreement between the Parties that an indirect expropriation can take the form of a

“creeping” expropriation. !*°

159. However, the Parties disagree as to whether the Respondent expropriated the Claimant’s

investment.

(1) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Claimant’s Position

160. The Claimant submits that the Respondent breached Article 5 of the Treaty.

'88 Metalclad Corp v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award, 30 August 2000, Legal
Exhibits CL-0017/RL-0142, para. 103.

89 See inter alia: Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award, 16 September 2003,
Legal Exhibit RL-0002, para. 20.22; Spyridon Roussalis v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/1, Award, 7
December 2011, Legal Exhibit CL-0114, para. 329; Crystallex International Corporation v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/11/2, Award, 4 April 2016, Legal Exhibit CL-0176, para. 667; Teinver S.A.,
Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/09/1, Award, 21 July 2017, Legal Exhibit CL-0178, para. 948.

   

Sl

161.

162.

163.

Firstly, the Claimant submits that the Respondent subjected the Claimant’s investment to

measures having the effect of expropriation. The Tribunal recalls that these four measures

were summarized in Section IV above. They are:!#°

the Labour Office of the Respondent — deliberately and with the intention of
persuading the Claimant’s customers to abandon the Claimant’s business — destroyed

the Claimant’s reputation and goodwill;

the Labour Office of the Respondent participated in a prime-time television program
and told the entire community of blind and visually impaired persons in the Czech

Republic that the Claimant was “overpricing”;

the Labour Office of the Respondent consistently disclosed the Claimant’s know-how
and customer information to its competitors, eroding the Claimant’s competitive

edge; and

the Labour Office of the Respondent rigged the “independent” assessments of the
Claimant’s assistive technology solutions by seeking biased assessments from
competitors, failing to consider the needs of applicants and comparing the Claimant’s
assistive technology solutions against very different “out of the box” aids prepared by

its competitors.

In its Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimant interestingly seemed to shift the focus of its initial

position and argued that the predominant cause of the failure of the Claimant’s business

was the TV Report which aired on 12 January 2014.'*! According to the Claimant, it was

that program which caused the collapse in the number of A11Y’s customers and

orders, !4?

The position of the Claimant and its evolution is apparent from the following passage of

the Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brie:

£143

140 Claimant's Reply, para. 259.
141 Claimant’ s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 68.
'2 CRS-4; Claimant Demonstrative 3.

143

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 88.

52

 

Although the Respondent’s discriminatory application of the July
Statement to the Claimant unquestionably had an adverse impact on the
Claimant, it did not in itself result in the collapse of the Claimant’s
customers and orders (which caused the demise of the Claimant). The
Respondent tried to inject uncertainty into the clear-cut position by asking
at the hearing: “Why is the fact that I sold fewer aids in 2014 a result of
the TV interview? Why isn't it a result of the fact that the applicants
received less money?” However, in response to a question from
Arbitrator Alexandrov, the Respondent's counsel answered his own
question: “the applicant is given an amount of money and it can do with
the money what it wants.” Simply put, that is why the July Statement
(notwithstanding that the Respondent applied it in a discriminatory
fashion against the Claimant), did not in itself result in the collapse of the
Claimant's customers and orders. The Claimant's customers could choose
to stay with the Claimant and do with the money provided what they
wanted, which was typically to continue with the Claimant. This did not
change with the July Statement. What happened regarding the
Respondents discriminatory approach to the Claimant under the July
Statement was explained by Mr. Buchal: “we always tried to reduce the
aids to our own costs in such a way that we could at least supply it to the
client and we were hoping that soon we will start doing better and can
provide support for the clients and satisfy their needs later. So we
reduced stuff, or we just cancelled some necessary components. That was
also a possibility.”

164. Mr. Buchal in his Second Witness Statement wrote:!“*

The Respondent told many of A11Y's customers directly that they should
use other companies and that their applications would never be granted if
they used AIIY. These allegations spread quickly within the blind
community, and were very damaging because AIIY relied on word of
mouth. We could not continue like this.

165. And then, when referring to the television broadcast of 12 January 2014, Mr. Buchal says

that:!4

This was a terrible blow to AI1Y, whose name was associated with
Brailcom. A11Y's reputation, which was excellent through its work, was
completely destroyed. I and my colleagues received many messages from
clients who were extremely worried about their solutions applications and
contacted A11Y enquiring about them. It shocked me that the Labour
Office could make such allegations on national television without giving
AIIY a chance to respond. The scale of the negative impact this would
have on A11Y's business was devastating.

4 Second Buchal, para. 34.
45 Second Buchal, para. 32. For other evidence in respect of the effect of the TV Report see Claimant’s Post-
Hearing Brief, paras. 72-79.

53

166. And then, in its Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimant writes as follows in respect of the effect

of the TV Report on A11Y’s business:!4°

The collapse in the Claimant's number of customers and orders resulting
from the TV Report is clearly shown in CRS-4 and Claimant
Demonstrative-3. The number of new customers plummeted by more than
two-thirds from 62 new customers in 2013 to only 20 new customers in
2014 after the TV Report. Similarly, new orders went from a peak of 166
new orders in 2013 to only 58 new orders in 2014 after the TV Report.
There is nothing other than the TV Report that could possibly explain this
collapse in the Claimant's customers and orders in 2014 and thereafter,
nor could the Respondent credibly point to (still less prove) anything that
could otherwise explain this.

167. The Claimant further submits that its financial and employment data confirms that the
Claimant’s assistive technology solutions business was destroyed as a result of the TV

Report.!47

168. In respect of A11Y’s financial situation, the chart below'** produced by the Claimant
evidences, says the Claimant, the increase of its liabilities and the decrease of its cash-

flow following the TV Report.

446 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 63.
47 Claimant’s Reply, para. 265 (as modified by Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief).
448 Second Expert Report of CRS Economics, para. 30, Chart 1.

54

Chart 1: Cash-flow test of A11Y insolvency
Cash —— — Liabilities

2,500,000
2,000,000
1,500,000

=<

N
1,000,000

500,000

 

169. And then, in the autumn of 2014, the Claimant was forced to enter into compromise
arrangements with its two major creditors, BAUM and iStyle, and has since been unable

to pay those debts.'4°

170. Inrespect of the Claimant’s employment data, the Claimant writes:!°°

In September 2014, Mr. Buchal announced to the Claimant’s employees
that the company was insolvent and that almost all employment contracts
had to be terminated.

[J]

On 17 October 2014, Mr. Buchal had his employment terminated at the
Czech Branch.

171. In light of the foregoing says the Claimant, there can be little doubt that A11Y’s assistive
‘hnology solutions busi ‘was irreparably d yed as a result of the TV Report.

 

172. Secondly, the Claimant submits that the Respondent’s actions were discriminatory.

¥49 Claimant’s Reply, para. 265. See Second Buchal, para. 37; Second Witness Statement of Hynek Hanke (“Second
Hanke”), para. 55. See also, e.g. Email from BAUM (Michaela Gubernator) to ALLY LTD. (Marketa Buchalova
and Boris Dugek), dated 31 May 2016, Exhibit C-0137 (attaching an “overview of open invoices” and reflecting that
EUR 41,560.88 was outstanding).

130 Claimant’s Reply, para. 265. See Second Buchal, para. 36; and Termination of Jan Buchal’s employment, dated
17 October 2014, Exhibit C-0135.

55

173.

174.

The standard for discriminatory conduct in international investment law is well-known

avers the Claimant.!*!

While a claim for discrimination may be based on the nationality
of the investor, this is not the only basis on which it can be proven that a measure is
discriminatory. Rather, the core element of the test is that entities that are comparable are
treated in a different manner in a way that is not justified.'*? As the Saluka v. Czech
Republic tribunal held:

State conduct is discriminatory, if (i) similar cases are (ii) treated
differently (iii) and without reasonable justification.'*

The Claimant submits that the Respondent’s measures were targeted specifically and

deliberately at the Claimant, and thus were discriminatory: '**

(i) First, the motivation and design of the July Statement were clearly targeted at the
Claimant, as the Labour Office acted only after it received the TI letter of 21 May
2013.15

(ii) Second, the Labour Office repeatedly asked the Claimant’s competitors to offer
competing prices for the Claimant’s applications on the basis of the July
Statement, but never asked the Claimant to provide a competing offeror price with

reference to any of its competitors.'*°

(iii) Third, the inconsistent application of the July Statement by the Labour Office was
contrary even to the Respondent's own legal requirements.'*” In fact, the
Respondent contemporaneously admitted that "misconducts" had occurred, '!** and
that in their attacks on the Claimant and its reputation “the employees of the

Labour Office breached the Code of Ethics of the Labour Office of the Czech

'5! Claimant’s Reply, para. 269.

'52 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 51.

'53 Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Arbitration, Partial Award, 17
March 2006, Legal Exhibit CL-0024, para. 313.

84 Claimant’s Reply, para. 272.

155

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 54(1).

'86 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 54(2).
'57 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 54(3).
'58 Claimant’s Reply, paras. 191-200.

56

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

Republic and such conduct was totally unacceptable, beyond good
administration.”'
Thirdly, the Claimant submits that the Respondent’s measures were not carried out for a

public purpose.
In this respect, the Claimant writes as follows:!©

42. The entirety of the Respondent's defence is thus focused on trying to
blame the Claimant for its own demise, and cast the Respondent's
conduct as innocent regulation. The Respondent does not try to reconcile
this position with the reality that the Claimant’s business was a success
before the July Instruction and TV broadcast, but then foundered rapidly
thereafter. Rather, it invites this Tribunal to conclude that it was mere
coincidence that the Claimant's business failed immediately afier its
singling-out of the Claimant for adverse treatment compared to its
competitors and its ominous denunciation of the Claimant on national
television.

43. That position strains belief, particularly when there is direct witness
testimony on record saying that the impact of the Respondent’s conduct
severely damaged the Claimant’s reputation in the market.

Finally, the Claimant submits that the Respondent’s actions were not accompanied by
prompt, adequate, and effective compensation. This point is “uncontentious” says the

Claimant.'*!

In conclusion, for the above-mentioned reasons, the Claimant submits that the
Respondent breached Article 5 of the Treaty by unlawfully and indirectly expropriating

its investment in the Czech Republic.

b. The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent denies that it has breached Article 5 of the Treaty.

Firstly, the Respondent submits that, for an indirect expropriation to exist, the Claimant

must establish that A11Y’s insolvency is the result of the Respondent’s measures.

159 Meeting Notes of Meeting on 19 February 2014 prepared by Labour Office (Mgr. Lada KuneSova), dated 19
February 2014, Exhibit C-0115, p. 2.

160 Claimant’s Skeleton, paras. 42-43 (footnotes omitted).

161 Claimant's Reply, para. 283.

s7

181. The Respondent submits that the Claimant has failed to establish that the Respondent’s
alleged measures caused any deterioration to the Claimant’s investment. The Respondent

writes as follows in this respect:
- Concerning the Respondent’s alleged destruction of the Claimant’s goodwill:

[T]here was no practice of employees of the Labour Office making false
statements about Claimant's business or pressuring or directing them to
Claimant's competitors. To the contrary, all the employees in fact did was
10 inform the applicants about the process and application of the Act.'

However, even under the hypothetical assumption that the individual state
representatives in these three cases “pressured” Claimant’s customers,
Respondent could not be held liable under the BIT.‘

The Claimant did not even come close to showing that a wide-spread
practice of such pressuring might have existed that went beyond these
individual cases. It can be excluded that at that time Respondent would
have ignored any such misbehaviour of its officials or that it would have
even encouraged it. Quite to the contrary, Respondent's officials from the
General Directorate of the Labour Office and from its regional branches
clearly confirmed during the hearing that if such conduct would have
occurred in the way described by Claimant's witnesses, it would have
been absolutely inadmissible and not tolerable.'*

Moreover, [...] the Labour Office in its December Decision explicitly
stated that employees were not to suggest to customers to approach
competitors of the Claimant. As of December 2013, therefore, the Labour
Office ensured that such isolated instances would not occur in the
future.'

[In any event] Claimant at the time did not point the Labour Office to any
specific case in which an alleged “pressuring” occurred. Therefore,
Respondent was not in a position to verify Claimant's allegations and to
take action against any such wrongdoing in case it really had
happened.‘

What is even more relevant in this respect is that even if Claimant’s
accusations should have any merit, they had no effect whatsoever on the
collapse of Claimant’s business. Hence, even if the Tribunal should find

162 Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 382.

63 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 87.
64 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 88.
65 Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 383.

66 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 88.

58

In respect of the alleged admission of misconduct

that there was mis di ibutable to the Respondent, this mi: di
would not be of any relevance for Claimant's expropriation claim.'87

Claimant failed to provide any evidence that the alleged misbehaviour of
the Labour Office employees resulted in customers turning away from
Claimant. [In fact, each of [...], [...Jand [...] remained with A11Y.]'°

Consequently, even if any pressuring of customers would have happened
and if the Tribunal further is of the opinion that such conduct would be
attributable to the Respondent, it would not be causal for Claimant’s
alleged expropriation.'©

In respect of the TV report:'°

116. [F]or Claimant’s case of expropriation to work it must not only
show that the TV interview had some impact on its business. It must show,
first, that the statements made by [...] were untrue and, second, that due
to the statements made by [...] in that interview, and her statements
alone, its entire investment was economically destroyed.

117. Claimant had not been able to show any impact of the TV interview
on the demise of its business at all. In particular, Claimant has been
unable to show that the alleged impact was not due to the fact that
Transparency International had publicly raised very serious allegations
of Claimant’s wrongdoing based on information received from
disgruntled customers of Claimant in the TV interview, but only due to the
fact that [...] had spoken two sentences in that interview.

[J

122. The available evidence shows, however, that Claimant itself has
stated that sharp demise of its business started in July 2013. Obviously,
therefore, the reason for the demise of Claimant's business occurred in
July 2013 and not in January 2014. By January 2014, says the Claimant,
the downward trend of its business was already “sharp” and significant.
Claimant's experts even computed a slight and short reverse trend in the
first half of 2014. The TV interview, therefore, cannot have caused the
destruction of Claimant’s investment. This, however, is what Claimant
would have to show.

{171
Suffice it to say that where Respondent detected an imperfect

implementation of the Act it immediately took measures to meet the
Claimant's concern. Respondent never admitted anything more than that.

167 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 89.

168 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 90.

169 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 96.

170 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 116-117 and 122 (footnotes omitted).
171 Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 386.

59

182. Rather, says the Respondent, it was A11Y’s flawed business model which destroyed the

Claimant’s investment.
183. In this connection, the Respondent writes:!7?

374. Claimant alleges that its business “irreparably ceased as a result of
the Respondent's interventions and misconduct from July 2013 onwards”.
[...] [a]s of July 2013, the Labour Offices took a different and more
effective approach towards the implementation of the Act. As of July
2013, put in a nutshell, the Labour Office ensured that allowances would
only be granted in an amount to satisfy the needs of the applicant at the
lowest cost. This, however, simply was not Claimant's business model.

375. First, Claimant’s entire business was based on the use of Apple
products. As Respondent’s expert explained already in his first report,
Apple’s entire business strategy is to “focus on high end [and] give
priority to profits over market share”. Apple products are therefore more
expensive than products based on other platforms. These findings are not
disputed by Claimant. Claimant simply alleges that its products are
superior and therefore the fact that they are more expensive is justified. In
any event, so Claimant argues, the aids it offered fell within the maximum
financial limits set out by the Act, which provides that applicants are
entitled to allowances in an overall maximum of CZK 800.000,- for every
five years and CZK 350.000,- per aid.

376. This argumentation already shows Claimant's blatant disrespect of
the provisions of the Act. [...] the Act simply did not provide for the
granting of allowances of high-end products. It further shows Claimant's
mind-set when it argues that its aids were below the absolute maximum
available to an applicant. This argument underlines that Claimant’s
business model simply was based on selling not the economically least
demanding solution, but a more expensive one. This, however, is what is
demanded by the Act. As Claimant itself concedes, blind and visually
impaired persons rarely have sufficient income to pay for aids themselves.
Hence, Claimant's business model was based on selling products to blind
or visually impaired persons who could not afford them, while these
products were also too expensive for the prospective buyers to get an
allowance for them. Hence, the customers for this reason simply could not
buy Claimant’s products.

377. Second, Claimant's business model was based on a profit margin
which was way above that of its competitors. While Claimant’s model was
based on a gross profit margin of 47%, the average of its competitors was
35%. The EBITDA margin of Claimant was projected to be between 15
and 27% while that of its competitors was at 4% in average. Hence,
Claimant's model was based on far higher profits to be generated fiom its

'72 Respondent’s Rejoinder, paras, 374-380.

60

184.

173

business than that of its competitors. This is reflected in Claimant's
pricing policy and the fact that it charged higher margins for its products.

378. In this context, it must also be emphasized that Claimant’s practice
included the alleged “gift” of the 10% mandatory participation of the
applicant. As Claimant expected a higher profit margin from the products
it was selling while also having to cover the 10% mandatory
participation, the prices of its aids had to include this participation. If
Claimant offered an aid at e.g., CZK 100.000,-, this amount included not
only a profit margin of 47%, but also the 10% that the applicant was
supposed to pay itself. Hence, the price offered by Claimant would be
comparatively higher than that of a competitor.

379. Third, in depending on the individual needs, in some cases,
Windows-based solutions are the better option. They are in most cases the

ically less de ing option. It is there} not surprising that
companies offering these aids would benefit from the custom of the blind
and visually impaired who cannot afford to pay significantly more for an
aid than the amount of the allowance. As some competitors of Claimant
offer both Windows and Apple-based solutions and so are more attractive
to customers searching for a larger range of options than those offered by
Claimant.

380. The reason why Claimant actually went out of business in the Czech
Republic therefore was not one or all of the issues Claimant complains
about in the present case. Claimant’s business model, which was based
on selling high-end products with a significantly higher profit margin
than all of its competitors, simply was not competitive in the Czech
market. Claimant’s products were simply too expensive for the reasons
set out here above to be sold on the Czech market. Claimant's model only
worked until July 2013 when the Labour Offices actually started
examining Claimant’s offers for the compliance with the Act. After this, it
was evident to the Labour Offices that Claimant’s aids were not the
economically least demanding and no blind or visually impaired person
was willing or capable to pay the surcharge for Claimant's products.

Secondly, the Respondent submits that the July Statement was a legitimate regulation
based on the law existing at the time the Claimant entered the Czech market.'7 It did not
change the legal situation which existed as of January 2012 as it merely interpreted the
Act in greater detail. This, however, does not amount to expropriation as the Act was

adopted in a bona fide manner and is not discriminatory avers the Respondent.!* The

Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 370.
"4 See Saluka Investments B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award, 17 March 2006, Legal Exhibit RL-
0070, para. 255 (“It is now established in international law that States are not liable to pay compensation to a foreign
investor when, in the normal exercise of their regulatory powers, they adopt in a non-discriminatory manner bona

fide regulations that are aimed at the general welfare.”).

61

Claimant was never entitled to assume that the Act would never be implemented in a

more detailed way by such an administrative regulation avers the Respondent.'”>

185. In addition, the Claimant has alleged numerous imperfections in the application of the
Act. However, submits the Respondent, the correct legal standard to be applied is not
whether the Act was applied incorrectly by the Respondent but whether there was a

“blatant disregard” by the Respondent of the Act.'”° The Claimant has failed to show this,

says the Respondent.!””

186. Finally, the Respondent submits that the Claimant has failed to show that it was

discriminated against in the application of the Act.
187. In this connection, the Respondent submits as follows: 178

106. In the present case, however, there was no different treatment of
Claimant at all and hence there is no basis for a claim based on
discriminatory treatment. Ms. Jirkovd explained that she drafted the July
Statement to unify the application process under the Act on Allowances.
At that time she was not even aware of the fact that Claimant was a
subject of interest of Transparency International. Hence, the July
Statement clearly was not a direct reaction on Claimants behaviour and
not directed at Claimant, but a means to solve problems encountered by
officers of the Labour Office in handling applications for allowances. The
July Statement was drafted to ensure the full implementation of the Act on
Allowances with regard to all companies in all sectors of aids. Also
during the hearing Ms. Jirkovd explained:

“The instruction was drafied based on the request by the Labour Office to
give them an interpretation on the law. The law was very new, different
from previous legislation, and it was to be expected as new applications
arrived, that there will be questions by the General Directorate about
how to apply the law in practice. This is just a common procedure.”

175 See Charanne B.V. and Construction Investments S.A.R.L. v. Kingdom of Spain, SCC Case No. 062/2012, Award,
21 January 2016 (translation from the Spanish original), Legal Exhibit RL-0144, para. 510 (“However, as stated in
previous sections of this award, in the absence of a specific commitment toward stability, an investor cannot have a
legitimate expectation that a regulatory framework such as that at issue in this arbitration is to not be modified at any
time to adapt to the needs of the market and to the public interest.”).

176 See Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Award, 28 March 2011, Legal Exhibit RL-
0061, para. 43 (“As the First Decision stated, “not every violation of domestic law necessarily translates into an
arbitrary or discriminatory measure under international law and a violation of the FET Standard”. For this to happen,
it is necessary that the State incurs in “a blatant disregard of applicable tender rules, distorting fair competition
among tender participants”. And this is what has occurred: the First Decision found that on four occasions (three
tenders plus an administrative practice) Ukraine indeed acted in “blatant disregard of applicable tender rules”.).

177 Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 371.

178 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 106-107 (footnotes omitted).

62

107. As explained above, the July Statement was applied equally to all
companies in Czech market for assistive technology and not only to
Claimant. Hence, it can be excluded that there was any discriminatory
intent of the Ministry when drafting the July Statement and there was not
different treatment of Claimant with regard to the scrutiny of the
applications it filed.

188. Even if the Respondent had treated the Claimant differently than its competitors, which is
not the case, this would not have amounted to discriminatory treatment, says the
Respondent.!” Under general international law,'*°

[mJere differences of treatment do not necessarily constitute
discrimination [...] [D]iscrimination may in general be said to arise
where those who are in all material respects the same are treated

differently, or where those who are in material respects different are
treated in the same way.

189. Accordingly, the Respondent submits that even if the Claimant had received different
treatment at the hands of the Labour Office regarding the implementation of the Act, this
was because A11Y’s business model put it in a different position vis-a-vis A11Y’s
competitors. Hence, a different treatment of Al11Y would not have been discriminatory

according to the Respondent.'*!

190. In conclusion, for the foregoing reasons, the Respondent submits that it has not breached

Article 5 of the Treaty.

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

191. The Claimant submits that the Respondent breached Article 5 of the Treaty by indirectly

expropriating its investment in the Czech Republic.

192. As the Tribunal traversed earlier, the Claimant contends that:!8?

"79 Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 395.

'80 R. Jennings, A. Watts (eds.), Oppenheim’s International Law (9 ed. Longman, 1992), Vol. 1, Legal Exhibit
RL-0149, p. 378.

'8! Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 398.

82 Claimant’s Reply, para. 259.

63

193.

194.

195.

196.

the Labour Office of the Respondent — deliberately and with the intention of
persuading the Claimant’s customers to abandon the Claimant’s business — destroyed

the Claimant’s reputation and goodwill;

the Labour Office of the Respondent participated in a prime-time television program
and told the entire community of blind and visually impaired persons in the Czech

Republic that the Claimant was "overpricing";

the Labour Office of the Respondent consistently disclosed the Claimant's know-how
and customer information to its competitors, eroding the Claimant's competitive edge;

and

the Labour Office of the Respondent rigged the "independent" assessments of the
Claimant's assistive technology solutions by seeking biased assessments from
competitors, failing to consider the needs of applicants and comparing the Claimant's
assistive technology solutions against very different "out of the box" aids prepared by

its competitors.

The Claimant contends that, as a result of those measures, its investment was completely

destroyed.

The Respondent denies that it has indirectly expropriated the Claimant’s investment. Its
main defence rests on the argument that the Claimant’s insolvency is not due to the

State’s alleged measures but rather to the Claimant’s own business model.

The Tribunal notes that there is no disagreement between the Parties that the Claimant is
insolvent. The value of the Claimant’s investment in the Czech Republic has been

completely destroyed.'**

The Claimant bears the burden of proving whether the State’s alleged measures had the

“effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-

'83 Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 34.

64

197.

198.

199.

200.

to-be-expected economic benefit of property.”'** Both Parties agree that there must be a
sufficient causal link between any breach of the Treaty by the Respondent and the loss

the Claimant sustained.

After reviewing carefully the totality of the evidence and the Parties’ comprehensive
submissions, the Tribunal has concluded that the Claimant’s case must fail for the

following reasons.

The Tribunal recalls that, in January 2012, the Act on Allowances came into effect in the
Czech Republic. It provides for the granting of subsidies by the State to persons with
health impairments, including the blind and visually impaired. Under the Act, the
allowances are limited in absolute amounts (to CZK 800,000 per applicant for five years)
and in the amount for an individual aid (to CZK 350,000 per aid).'*> The Act requires the
applicant to pay 10% of the aid for which the allowance may be granted.'*° In other

words, under the Act, the Czech Republic will pay 90% of the purchase price of the aid.

Section 9(10) of the Act is very crucial. It provides that an allowance will only be granted

for an aid if:'87

The allowance is provided for a special aid in basic version, which fully
satisfies the person with regard to his or her health handicap and meets

the condition of the aid being the least economically demanding. [...]
The Tribunal notes that a list of these aids is set out in Decree No. 388/2011 issued by the
Czech Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs. In respect of the aids for the visually
impaired, Annex 1 to the Decree provides that allowances will only be granted with
respect to the following aids:'**

Annex 1; List of kinds and types of special aids meant for persons with
health impairment which the allowance for special aid is extended for

[ub]

'8§! Metalclad Corp v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award, 30 August 2000, Legal
Exhibits CL-0017/RL-0142, para. 103.

'85 Act on Allowances, Sections 10 (3) and (6), Legal Exhibit CL-0002.

'86 Act on Allowances, Sections 10 (3), Legal Exhibit CL-0002.

'87 Tribunal’s emphasis.

'88 Decree No. 388/201 1, dated 29 November 201 1, Legal Exhibit CL-0003.

65

II. Special aids meant for severely visually-impaired persons

J. For persons with health impairment that is mentioned in the part I
point 2 of the attachment to the law:

a) calculator with speech output
b) digital reading device for the blind with speech output

c) digital notetaker for visually impaired with speech output or braille
display

d) special software equipment for visually impaired

2. For persons with health impairment that is mentioned in the part I
point 2 letter a) and b) of the attachment to the law:

a) guide dog

b) typewriter for the blind

c) DYMO pliers

d) electronic orientation aid for the blind and deafblind

e) electronic communication aid for the blind and deafblind

JS) indicator of colors for the blind

g) measuring devices for household with speech or tactile output
h) braille display for the blind

i) printer of relief letters for the blind

J) speech for the blind and deafblind

3. For persons with health impairment that is mentioned in the part I
point 2 letters a) through c) of the attachment to the law:

voice recorder

4. For persons with health impairment that is mentioned in the part I
point 2 letters b) through d) of the attachment to the law:

a) camera enlarging magnifier
b) digital enlarging magnifier
[.. HL. ...]

[...Annex 2, 3, 4, 5]

66

201.

202.

203.

204.

The evidence reveals that BRAILCOM entered the market for assistive technology
solutions for the visually-impaired in October 2011. A11Y was incorporated in the UK
on 2 August 2012 and its Czech branch office was registered on 17 October 2012, a few
months after the enactment of the Act on Allowances.!*? By March 2013, A11Y had
taken over BRAILCOM’s profitable business.

Obviously, the timing of A11Y’s incorporation is not coincidental. As Mr. Buchal

explained in his first witness statement:!””

69. The reality was however completely different than I imagined. I
thought that the revenue from sales of aids will be only a smaller part of
our total income. But already in the middle of 2012 [a few months after
the enactment of the Act on Allowances] it was clear that the income from
sales of aids will be many times higher and that the originally intended
secondary activity will become the main activity.

70. That was also one of the reasons why I began to consider a change. It
was clear that BRAILCOM,o.p.s., that is a non-profit organization by law,
cannot be conducting such an extensive economic activity, and it was also
clear that BRAILCOM,o.p.s. cannot expand with this activity outside the
Czech Republic.

71. I therefore decided to found a private, commercial company. [...]

The Act on Allowances clearly opened a new market in the Czech Republic, a market for
assistive technology aids which incentivized Mr. Buchal to create Al11Y which would

take over BRAILCOM’s profitable business.

When the Act was adopted in 2012, the Labour Office, the body responsible for
administering the Act, received many applications. Since the Labour Office had not been
provided with any guidance from the Labour Ministry with respect to how the Act,
particularly Section 9(10), should be applied, most requests for subsidies were granted

without any in-depth scrutiny.!*!

189 Certificate of Incorporation of AI1Y, dated 2 August 2012, Exhibit C-0001.
190 First Buchal, paras. 69-71.
19! Respondent’s Skeleton, para. 25.

67

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

192

A11Y’s business thrived. According to the Claimant, clients and orders were increasing
every month. Within the first 15 months of operations, A11Y submitted 161 applications

to the Labour Office on behalf of 81 clients.!°”

On 21 May 2013, the Labour Office received the TI letter which has been cited in full

earlier.
The TI letter singled out BRAILCOM. It includes the following paragraph:!%*

According to the information shared by clients, in the application for a
special-aid allowance BRAILCOM, o.p.s. marks up the value of the
special aid considerably. One of the clients who contacted TI witnessed a
decision to grant a special-aid allowance, according to which the Labour
Office (regional branch) granted an applicant an allowance worth more
than CZK 30,000, even though the price of the corresponding special aid
(a voice-activated Apple iPhone) had a market price of approximately
CZK 17,000 at the time. Statements from other clients indicate that the
value of special aids in benefit proceedings in which they are represented,
on the basis of a power of attorney, by BRAILCOM, o.p.s., is marked up
by between 50% and 100%. [...]

On 12 July 2013, the Ministry of Labour of the Czech Republic, in reaction to the TI
letter, and after having been asked by the Labour Office for an opinion on how to proceed
going forward'™ issued a statement that defined the criteria set out by the Act in order to
ensure that the requirements of the Act could effectively be assessed in each application
and to allow the Labour Offices to take a uniform approach vis-a-vis all applications
submitted under the Act (the “July Statement”).!°> The Tribunal recalls in particular that
one of the conditions for the provision of an allowance by the State is that the aid must be

“the least economically demanding”.

The July Statement also decreed that when the aids applied for consist of several
individual functionally independent components, the applicant must submit a list of the
components and their prices. The July Statement also clarified that, henceforth, additional

services, such as training, or accessory products, such as protective covers or laptop bags,

First Expert Report of CRS Economics, paras. 4.4 and 4.5.

13 Letter from TI of 21 May 2013, Exhibit R-0009.

'%4 First Witness Statement of Milena Priizkova, Exhibit R-0028, para. 14; First Witness Statement of [...], Exhibit
R-0027, para. 10.

15 Statement of MPSV, dated 12 July 2013, Exhibit C-0010. The Claimant refers to the Statement in its pleadings
as the “July Instruction”.

68

210.

211.

212.

213.

214.

could not be included as part of “the basic version” of an aid and were therefore no

longer covered under the Act.

Although the July Statement was issued following receipt of the TI letter, in the view of

the Tribunal, it did not target in any away or discriminate against A11Y.

The Tribunal finds that the July Statement was a bona fide regulatory measure. It applies
to all people with a health impairment, not only those who are visually impaired. The
language of the July Statement is neutral and, on its face, does not target AI1Y and
applies uniformly to all companies providing aids across different groups of people with

health impairments.

Following receipt of the TI letter, and as Ms. Jirkova writes in her witness statement,!% it
became clear to the State that it needed to provide guidance to the Labour Office on the
application of the Act. Article 9(10) of the Act, principally, needed to be interpreted and
this is precisely what the Ministry did.

After the July Statement was issued, as noted above, A11Y could no longer charge for
training and accessory products. Furthermore, it had to provide to the Labour Office a list
of all the components of the special aid with their prices in order that the Labour Office
could determine whether the aid offered was “basic” and “the least economically

demanding”.

However, it is obvious to the Tribunal that A11Y was not in the business of providing the
most “basic” solutions to its clients. As Mr. Hanke, a technician, analyst and trainer at

A1LY, explains in his first witness statement in respect of A11Y’s business:!°”

17. We have decided to work on these key aspects:

a. quality — To seek and design solutions that are of a_higher technical
quality.

b. individuality — Not_to just sell_generic solutions, but design the
solutions on individual situation and needs of each visually handicapped
individual.

'9 Witness Statement of Katetina Jirkova, Exhibit R-0052, para. 8.
197 First Hanke, para. 17 (Tribunal’s emphasis).

69

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

c. complexity — To provide each visually handicapped person not with a
single-use device, but with a thoughtful solution of his situation and
needs.

d. support — By means of close cooperation with manufacturers and
developers of all the i} of the solutions to i ly work on
maintenance and improvement of the quality of the solutions, as well as to
give support to the customer when he/she encounters problems.

 

 

In retrospective I believe that in all these elements, we were quite
different than the other companies selling special aids that existed in the
Czech Republic before 2012.

This is confirmed by Mr. Buchal in his second witness statement wherein he says that
AI1Y provided “highly specialised technical services which were not available

elsewhere in the market” !°8

The Tribunal has no doubt that A11Y had its clients’ best interest at heart and wanted to
provide them “with a thoughtful solution of [their] situation and needs.” During the
Hearing, as noted earlier, the Tribunal heard the testimony of several clients of ALY

who were unanimous in their praise of the excellent services A11Y provided to them.

However, the State, which funded the aids, had decided to pay for the least economically
demanding aid which answered the needs of the visually-impaired citizens of the Czech
Republic. The Tribunal has already concluded that the July Statement was a bona fide
regulatory measure. Therefore, if the July Statement created an environment, in which the
Claimant’s business of providing high-end products to their clients at a premium became

commercially unviable, that would not result in an expropriation.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant’s own experts on quantum affirm in their report that
the gross profit margin of A11Y between 2012 and 2013, i.e. prior to the release of the
July Statement, ranged between 35% and 47%, with the highest margin of 47% being
reached in the first half of 2013.'°

The Claimant’s experts then proceed to opine that, as a result of the July Statement, “the

State [...] declined to cover A11Y’s full margin [and] A11Y was consequently forced to

8 Second Buchal, para. 12.
'99 First Expert Report of CRS Economics, para. 6.21, Table 9.

70

220.

221.

222.

223.

reduce its margins by up to 6 percentage points (i.e. from 47% down to approximately
40-41%)” before concluding that the reduced profit margins were “economically
unsustainable from a long-term perspective”.”®! They then opine that “/bJased on [their]
calculations and AI1Y’s cost projections, 47% _gross_profit_margin_represents_the
minimum gross profitability that makes the business sustainable in the long run while
generating returns that a reasonable business investor would expect to receive from

investment in a highly specialized IT company such as A11Y” 2°?

Even Mr. Buchal, in response to a question from the Tribunal at the Hearing as to
whether A11Y’s economic model was sustainable in the long term following the issuance

of the July Statement, responded: “It was not, definitely not.”?°

It follows from this statement and the opinion of the Claimant’s experts that Al1Y’s
business had become “economically unsustainable from a long-term perspective” in the

regulatory environment created by the July Statement.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant has advanced other claims of expropriatory conduct
by the Respondent, in particular that the Respondent: (i) deliberately and with the
intention of persuading the Claimant’s customers to abandon the Claimant’s business,
destroyed the Claimant’s reputation and goodwill; (ii) participated in a prime-time
television program and told the entire community of blind and visually impaired persons
in the Czech Republic that the Claimant was “overpricing”; (iii) consistently disclosed
the Claimant’s know-how and customer information to its competitors, eroding the
Claimant’s competitive edge; and (iv) rigged the “independent” assessments of the

Claimant’s assistive technology solutions.

There is sufficient evidence on the record that, in their implementation of the July
Statement, some Labour Office employees acted improperly, notably by pressuring
customers to abandon A11Y and purchase aids from its competitors and by sharing

A11Y’s business proprietary information with Al1Y’s competitors. This was recognized

200 First Expert Report of CRS Economics, para. 6.22.

201 First Expert Report of CRS Economics

202

203

 

para. 6.22. Tribunal’s emphasis.

First Expert Report of CRS Economics, para. 6.23. Tribunal’s emphasis.
Transcript of Final Hearing, Testimony of Jan Buchal, Day 2, p. 313 (lines 9-13).

71

224.

225.

226.

227.

by the Labour Office itself in its December Decision.” This behaviour of the Labour
Office probably caused damage to the Claimant. A11Y lost customers and orders.?°> The
Tribunal also accepts that the TV Report harmed the Claimant and caused it to lose more

customers and orders.

Accordingly, the Tribunal has endeavoured to separate the effect of A11Y’s loss of
customers and orders as a result of those improper actions of the Labour Office
employees from the effect of A11Y’s significant price reductions and the non-coverage
of extras such as training as a result of the implementation of the July Statement. The
Tribunal has been unable to do so. Unhelpfully, the Claimant’s own experts, after stating
that “there have been several components of the Breach and thus several causes of the
damage” concluded that “[hJowever, it is practically impossible to distinguish to what

extent individual components of the Breach contributed to the damage.”?°®

In the circumstances, the Tribunal finds that the evidence before it is manifestly
inadequate to reach a conclusion that the Respondent’s conduct referred to in items (i) to
(iv) of paragraph 222 above and the resulting loss of customers and orders would have
caused the demise of A11Y’s business independently of the effect of the July 2013
Statement. On the other hand, there is ample and convincing evidence that, after the July
Statement was enacted and implemented, A11Y’s business model was doomed to fail, as

it did.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant has not met its burden of proof that the
Respondent, by it actions, unlawfully indirectly expropriated the Claimant’s investment

in the Czech Republic.

While the Tribunal has reached its conclusion strictly on the basis of the evidence of the
Parties, it would like to acknowledge that Mr. Buchal is a very courageous entrepreneur.

He was well intentioned. Being himself blind since a very young age, he founded

24 December Decision, Exhibit C-0040. The December Decision provides that: “[...] offices of Labour Office of
Czech Republic did not proceed in some administrative proceedings on admission of allowance for special aid in
compliance with corresponding regulations.”

205

See Claimant’s Demonstrative Exhibit 3.

206 First Expert Report of CRS Economics, para. 4.1.

72

BRAILCOM and later A11Y to assist his visually impaired compatriots. Many of them
came before the Tribunal to testify as to the help and assistance they had received from
Mr. Buchal. The Tribunal also wishes to acknowledge their own courageous and brave
attitude. For Mr. Buchal and his visually impaired customers, this must be a very sad

ending.

Vil. COSTS

228. The Tribunal recalls that, in its Decision on Jurisdiction, it decided that the costs relating
to the bifurcated jurisdictional phase of these proceedings would be considered and

allocated at the conclusion of the merits phase of this arbitration.

229. Accordingly, the Tribunal will now consider the Parties’ Statements on Costs relating to

both the jurisdictional and the merits phase of the proceedings.”°”

230. The Claimant details the costs it incurred in these proceedings as follows:?°*

 

Arbitration Costs

 

Deposits towards fees and expenses incurred by the Tribunal | USD 475,000.00

 

 

 

 

 

 

Legal Costs

Fees for Withers LLP GBP 1,210,825.50
Fees for Mr. Lucas Bastin GBP 140,520.00
Sekanina Legal GBP 27,539.91
Expert fees and expenses of Mr. Morten Tollefsen GBP 35,470.00
Expert fees and expenses of CRS Economics GBP 83,662.44

 

Other disbursements including travel, travel and | GBP 101,133.34
accommodation expenses for witnesses and their carers,
photocopying, couriers, etc.

 

TOTAL USD 475,000.00 (arbitration costs)
GBP 1,599,151.19 (legal costs)

 

 

 

 

2°7 Parties’ Statements of Costs filed simultaneously on 21 October 2016 with respect to the Jurisdictional phase and
31 January 2018 with respect to the Merits phase.
208 Claimant’s Statement of Costs, paras. 8-10.

73

231. The Respondent details the costs it incurred in these proceedings as follows:?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Arbitration Costs

Deposits towards fees and expenses incurred by the Tribunal | USD 475,000.00

Legal Costs

Costs of Legal Representation and disbursements CZK 5,129,261.84 (jurisdictional phase)
CZK 4,861,445.77 (merits phase)

Expert Fees of PWC CZK 1,222,517.00 (jurisdictional phase)
CZK 2,984,041.00 (merits phase)

Expert Fees of Mr. Weber EUR 9,685.00

Expert Fees of Mr. Mikovec CZK 106,480.00

TOTAL USD 475,000.00 (arbitration costs)
CZK 14,303,745.61 (legal costs)
EUR 9,685.00 (legal costs)

 

 

 

 

232. The Tribunal notes that the Claimant and the Respondent, to the extent that they each
prevail, have requested that the opposing party be ordered to pay the full costs of the

arbitration.

233. The Tribunal observes that the Treaty does not contain provisions on the allocation of the

costs of arbitration in the case of a dispute between an investor and a Contracting Party.

234. However, Article 40 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules does provide the Tribunal with
guidelines with respect to the allocation of costs in an arbitration.
Article 40
J. Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration shall in
principle be borne by the unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral
tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties if it

determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the
circumstances of the case.

2 Respondent’s Statement of Costs, para. 5, as updated by Respondent’ Reply Statement on Costs, para. 19.

74

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

240.

241.

242.

243.

2. With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance referred
to in article 38, paragraph (e), the arbitral tribunal, taking into account
the circumstances of the case, shall be free to determine which party shall
bear such costs or may apportion such costs between the parties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable.

[.]
While the “loser pays” principle is the guiding principle under Article 40 of the 1976
UNCITRAL Rules, it is well established that an UNCITRAL Tribunal has total and

unfettered discretion in the allocation of the costs of the arbitration and the parties’ legal

costs.

The Parties deposited with ICSID a total of USD 950,000.00 to cover the costs of the
present proceedings; USD 475,500.00 by the Claimant and USD 475,000.00 by the

Respondent.

The fees of Prof. Stanimir Alexandrov, the arbitrator appointed by the Claimant, amount

to USD 118,200.00. His expenses amount to USD 20,259.90.

The fees of Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret, the arbitrator appointed by the Respondent, amount
to USD 96,000.00. Her expenses amount to USD 5,829.66.

The fees of The Hon. L. Yves Fortier, QC, the Presiding Arbitrator, amount to
USD 138,000.00. The Presiding Arbitrator’s expenses amount to USD 17,615.12.

Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1 and the agreement of the Parties of 16 January 2015,
ICSID was designated to act as the Administering Authority in this arbitration. ICSID’s

fees for its services amount to USD 128,000.00.

The fees of Ms. Annie Lespérance, the Assistant to the Tribunal, amount to

USD 104,000.00. Her expenses amount to USD 7,604.84.

Other Tribunal costs, including travel and all other expenses relating to the arbitration

proceedings, amount to USD 112,354.52.

Accordingly, the combined Tribunal costs in this arbitration amount to USD 747,864.04.

75

244.

245.

246.

247.

248.

Vill.

249.

The Parties’ respective tranches of these tribunal costs, amounting to USD 475,000.00 for
each side, shall be deducted from the deposit. Any unexpended balance will be returned

to the Parties in proportion to their respective contributions.

The Parties’ legal and other costs total GBP 1,599,151.19 for the Claimant and
CZK 14,303,745.61 and EUR 9,685.00 for the Respondent.

Pursuant to Article 40 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules, as noted above, the costs are to be
awarded to the successful party and against the unsuccessful party, unless the
circumstances of the case justify a different approach. The Rules are clear on their face
that costs follow the event as a matter of principle but that the tribunal has discretion to

decide otherwise.

In the present proceedings, while the Claimant did, all things considered, prevail on
jurisdiction, it is clear that the Respondent has prevailed on the merits. The Tribunal can
see no reason why the Claimant, the unsuccessful party, should not bear the costs of the

arbitration.

However, the Tribunal, in its discretion and having regard to the totality of the
circumstances of this case, finds and orders that the Claimant will bear the combined

Tribunal costs and that each Party will bear its respective legal costs.

DECISION

Having carefully considered the Parties’ arguments in their written and oral pleadings,
and having deliberated, for the reasons stated above, the Arbitral Tribunal unanimously

Decides, Declares and Awards, as follows:
(dd) The Tribunal has jurisdiction over the Claimant’s indirect expropriation claims;

(2) The Claimant’s case on the merits fails in its entirety as it has not discharged its
burden of proving that the measures complained of are tantamount to an indirect

expropriation under Article 5 of the Treaty;

(3) The Respondent has not indirectly expropriated the Claimant’s investment;

76

(4) The Claimant is ordered to pay to the Respondent the amount of USD 373,932.02
representing the Respondent’s share of the costs and expenses of the arbitration as

detailed in paragraphs 236 to 244 above; and

(5) All other claims and requests for relief by both Parties are dismissed.

[intentionally left blank]

77

Place of arbitration: Paris, France

Date: 29 June 2018

[signed] [signed]
Prof. Stanimir Alexandrov Ms. Anna Joubin-Bret
Arbitrator Arbitrator
[signed]

 

The Hon. L. Yves Fortier, QC
President

78

