IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION PROCEEDING UNDER CHAPTER 10 OF THE DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC-CENTRAL AMERICA-UNITED STATES FREE TRADE AGREEMENT AND
THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES (2010)

AARON C, BERKOWITZ, BRETT E. BERKOWITZ AND TREVOR B. BERKOWITZ
v.
THE REPUBLIC OF CosTA RICA
(UNCT/13/2)

PROCEDURAL ORDER ON THE CORRECTION OF THE INTERIM AWARD
AND THE TERMINATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS

Daniel Bethlehem, Presiding Arbitrator
Mark Kantor, Arbitrator
Rail E. Vinuesa, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Anneliese Fleckenstein

 

Date of dispatch to the parties: 30 May 2017

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica

(UNCT/13/2)

Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

Representing the Claimants

Mr. Diego Brian Gosis
Mr. Quinn Smith

Mr. Ignacio Torterola
GST LLP

175 SW 7th Street, #2110
Miami, FL 33130

United States of America

Representing the Respondent

Ms. Adriana Gonzalez

Legal Unit Coordinator

Ministerio de Comercio Exterior de Costa Rica
Plaza Tempo, costado oeste del Hospital
CIMA

Escazti, Costa Rica

Ms. Karima Sauma

Ms. Arianna Arce

Mr. Julian Aguilar

Legal Unit Advisor

Ministerio de Comercio Exterior de Costa Rica
Plaza Tempo, costado oeste del Hospital
CIMA

Escazti, Costa Rica

Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

Ms. Marinn Carlson

Ms. Jennifer Haworth McCandless
Sidley Austin LLP

1501 K Street NW

Washington, D.C. 20005

Page 2 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

Introduction

1. The Tribunal refers to its Procedural Order Taking Note of the Termination of the Case
with respect to certain Claimants of 10 February 2017 and to its Procedural Order on
the Claimants’ Request for a Stay of the Proceedings of 28 February 2017,' which
relate the procedural details of this case. Insofar as is necessary and appropriate for
purposes of this Order, the Tribunal sets out below relevant events as well as those
events that occurred after its 28 February 2017 Order.

2. Following the hearing on jurisdiction and merits which took place in Washington D.C.
on 20 — 24 April 2015, the Parties, at the request of the Tribunal, submitted periodic
updates — 3 in total, the last of these being filed on 6 July 2016 — on on-going
developments in the Costa Rican proceedings concerning each of the 26 Lots that were
the subject of the arbitration. In requesting the Parties to provide the Tribunal with
such periodic updates, the Presiding Arbitrator observed at the close of the hearing that
the request was for the Parties “to draw to the Tribunal’s attention material
developments of fact” so that the Tribunal did not find, as it put its signature to an
Award, “that the day before there was some material development.”

3. On25 November 2015, the Tribunal put 5 additional questions to the Parties. Question
4 was as follows:

4. In respect of Lot B1, Appendix 2 to the Claimants’ Rejoinder (Procedural
History of the Claimants’ Lots) indicates an Appeal Judgment of 31 July 2013, referring
to Respondent’s Exhibit R-36. There is no reference to any Judgment in respect of
this Lot. Additionally, the Exhibit refers to the suspension of judicial proceedings.
The parties are asked to clarify the position in respect of any judicial proceedings in
respect of this Lot and to provide any relevant documentation.

4. The Parties submitted their responses to the questions, together with accompanying
documentation, on 23 December 2015. In response to the Tribunal’s Question 4
regarding Lot B1, the Claimants responded, inter alia, as follows:

In respect of the Tribunal’s inquiry regarding the judicial proceedings for Lot B1,
Appendix 2 to the Claimants’ Rejoinder (Procedural History of the Claimants’ Lots)
contains a typographical error. It ought to indicate the suspension of judicial
ptoceedings under the column entitled “Judgment” rather than the column “Appeal
Judgment”. Judicial proceedings were suspended before a first instance judgment was
issued.

' Tn accordance with the transparency requirements of DR-CAFTA Article 10.21, the Tribunal notes that both
Orders are published on the ICSID website.

Page 3 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

In summary, the administrative and judicial proceedings in respect of Lot B1 are as
follows:

Ll
Since the second judicial appraisal of 2009, no judgment has been made and nothing
has moved forward with the expropriation process (see Berkowitz WS2 at para.56).
In 2013, the judicial procedure for Lot B1 was suspended in response to the waiver
filed by Claimants for the purposes of this arbitration (Respondent’s Memorial on
Jurisdiction and Counter-memorial on the Merits at para. 100; Respondent’s Reply on
Jurisdiction and Rejoinder on the Merits at para. 116; Exhibit R-036).

Claimants apologize for any confusion caused by the error in Appendix 2. A corrected
version of Appendix 2 is attached for the Tribunal’s convenience.

5. In response to the Tribunal’s Question 4, the Respondent stated as follows:

Claimants’ reference in Annex 2 of their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction to an Appeal
Judgment dated July 31, 2013 for Lot B1 appears to be in error. The document
referenced by Claimants is Exhibit R-036, which shows a July 31, 2013 request for
suspension of judicial proceedings concerning Lot B1 submitted by Claimants to the
Court. Ms. Georgina Chaves, the Deputy Attorney General at the Office of the
Attorney General in Costa Rica, explained in her witness statement that on July 31,
2013 Claimants requested the suspension of judicial proceedings regarding Lot B1 in
light of the current arbitral proceedings. Claimants’ request for suspension was denied
and the proceedings are currently ongoing. No judgment has yet been entered, either
in the first instance or on appeal, regarding Lot B1. [Footnote omitted]

6. The Tribunal relied on these representations by the Parties for purposes of its Interim
Award.

7. On 25 October 2016, the Tribunal issued its Interim Award deciding as follows:

1. The Tribunal finds that it has no jurisdiction to entertain the Claimants’ claims in
respect of Lots Bl, A39, C71, C96, SPG3, V30, V31, V32, V33, V38, V39, V40, V46,
V47, V59, V6la, V6lb and V6l1c.

2. The Tribunal finds that it has no jurisdiction to entertain the Claimants’ claims in
respect of Lots A40, B3, B8, SPG1 and SPG2 save in respect of the Claimants’
allegations that, by reference to relevant and applicable judgments of the Costa Rican
courts, the assessment of compensation in respect of Lots B3, B8, A40, SPG1 and
SPG2 amounts to manifest arbitrariness and / or blatant unfairness contrary to
CAFTA Article 10.5.

Page 4 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica

(UNCT/13/2)

Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

8.

o

3. The Tribunal finds that the Parties should be afforded an opportunity to be heard
on the question of whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain the Claimants’
allegations of breach of CAFTA Article 10.5 by reference to relevant and applicable
judgments of the Costa Rican courts rendered after 10 June 2013 in respect of Lots
B5, B6 and B7.

4. The procedure applicable to further proceedings is reserved for further decision by
the Tribunal in due course, following consultations with the Parties.

5. The Claimants and the Respondent shall each bear their own costs, including
counsel’s fees and expenses, and shall bear equally half of the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal and the Secretariat, in respect of the proceedings to date, without prejudice
to the possibility of a different apportionment of costs, fees and expenses in respect
of any future phase of these proceedings.

Noting the heavy factual detail of the case, and recalling Article 38 of the UNCITRAL
Rules, the Tribunal, in it 25 October 2016 letter transmitting the Interim Award,
expressly requested the Parties to draw its attention to “any error in computation, any
clerical or typographical error, or any error or omission of a similar nature” within
30 days of receipt of the Interim Award so that the Tribunal could consider whether
any correction was appropriate.

Following receipt of the Interim Award, neither Party notified to the Tribunal any
factual error or omission, or other issue that might warrant a correction of the Interim
Award. On the contrary, by letter dated 28 November 2016, the Respondent replied
noting that it had “not identified any corrections to be made to the Interim Award.” By
a letter of the same date, the Claimants replied that they had “not identified any errors
in the nature of those set out in Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules to which
they wish to draw the Tribunal’s attention.” The Claimants further informed the
Tribunal that “the Spence Claimants have decided not to pursue any of their potential
remaining claims in the arbitration” and also that the Berkowitz Claimants were no
longer represented by Fasken Martineau Dumoulin LLP, Dr. Todd Weiler or Mr.
Vianney Saborio Hernandez.

. By email of 29 November 2016, the Secretariat, the Respondent and the Tribunal were

informed that Mr. Diego Gosis and his law firm GTS LLP had been retained by the
Berkowitz Claimants to act as their counsel going forward, as well as other procedural
matters concerning the next steps of the proceeding.

. After hearing the Parties on the Spence Claimants request for termination, on 10

February 2017, at the request of the Parties and pursuant to Article 36(2) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order taking note of
the Termination of the case with respect to Spence International and its lots A40,
SPG 1 and SPG 2 and Mr. Glen Gremillion and his lot B7, not altering the costs

Page 5 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica

(UNCT/13/2)

Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

decision made in the Interim Award. Accordingly, the case name was changed from
Spence International Investments, LLC, Berkowitz et al v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2), reflecting the names of the Claimants when the proceedings were
instituted, to the Claimants in the present Procedural Order, Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett
E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. Republic of Costa Rica (UNCT/13/2).

. On 25 January 2017, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that they had filed a motion

to vacate or set aside the Interim Award before the U.S. District Court for the District
of Columbia and therefore requested that this Tribunal stay the current proceeding. The
parties exchanged their observations on the Claimants’ Stay request and on 28 February
2017, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order rejecting the Claimants’ request for a Stay
of the proceeding.

. On 8 March 2017, the Tribunal circulated for the Parties’ comments a draft Procedural

Order No. 2 addressing the schedule for the next steps in the proceeding.

. On 15 March 2017, the Parties submitted their comments to the draft Order. In its letter,

the Respondent indicated that it was in general agreement with the proposed schedule.
In their letter, the Claimants reiterated their application before the U.S. District Court
for the District of Columbia to set aside the Interim Award, stating:

The Application, infer alia, takes issue with the legal standard applied to Lot B1, arguing
that the Tribunal did not consider, or indicate it would consider, the actual status of
certain court proceedings as to Lot B1, as a bar to jurisdiction regarding certain claims
before this Tribunal.

Even though the district court will ultimately consider if the Tribunal exceeded its
powers in this respect, the Tribunal chose to actively address the issue in the
Procedural Order on the Claimants’ Request for a Stay of Proceedings (the “Order’”’).
The Berkowitz Claimants are now faced with exactly the type of contradiction that
they sought to avoid by requesting the Tribunal to suspend the proceedings. Faced
with the Order and the Tribunal’s direct mention of the legal proceedings as to Lot
B1, the Berkowitz Claimants are in an untenable position. If they respond to the
Tribunal’s assertions regarding Lot B1, it may give the impression that the Interim
Award was not final on this point, playing into the argument that Costa Rica has made
regarding an alleged lack of finality. If the Berkowitz Claimants remain silent, that
silence could be construed as a form of judicial estoppel that Costa Rica could use in
the proceedings to annul or set aside the Award, arguing that the Berkowitz Claimants
somehow agreed with the Order. This is the kind of simultaneous, contradictory
position that the Berkowitz Claimants cannot be expected, much less forced, to adopt.

In their footnote 1 to this paragraph the Claimants indicated:

Page 6 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

To further illustrate the point, it must be noted that it was not that the Claimants chose
to hide the legal proceedings as to Lot B1 form the Tribunal, but rather that the court
decision was sent to the ICSID Secretariat -to whom all communications aimed at the
Tribunal, including these presents, should be addressed— before the Award was issued,
but those materials were not relayed onto the Tribunal for reasons or no reasons
beyond the scope of this communication and the current competence of the Tribunal.
Any further exchanges on this issue can only undermine the consistency required of
any party litigating before multiple tribunals, and Claimants thus reserve any further
elaboration on this point for the competent court authorities hearing the Application.

15. On 16 March 2017, the Tribunal sent a letter to the Parties and requested:

1. ... clarification that the Claimants are in fact applying for an order terminating the
outstanding proceedings on the grounds that Claimants have decided not to
pursue any remaining claims that they may have; and

2. ... that Claimants clarify and elaborate on the allegation made in footnote 1 of
their letter that the ICSID Secretariat failed to relay to the Tribunal information
regarding a court decision regarding Lot B1 that had been set to the Secretariat.

16. On 17 March 2017, the Claimants confirmed that they were in fact applying for an
order terminating the outstanding proceedings in identical terms to those of the
previous Claimants in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order Taking Note of the Termination
of the Case with Respect to Certain Claimants of 10 February 2017. The Claimants
stated further that they:

... confirm their understanding that their ability to further pursue the claims originally
pursued in this arbitration will be subject to the results of the application for
annulment and setting aside of the Award currently being heard by the competent
courts in Washington, D.C., and to any applicable res judicata effect of the Tribunal’s
outstanding decisions.

Regarding the Tribunal’s invitation to further comment on the issues surrounding the
court decision issued regarding Lot B-1, the Claimants —again— kindly note that this is
ptecisely one of the matters being discussed as part of the application for annulment
and setting aside of the Award currently being heard by the competent courts in
Washington, D.C., which makes it improper and beyond the scope of these
ptoceedings to revisit the matter before the Tribunal. The Tribunal has already
rendered a final decision on Lot B-1, found that no court decision had been issued,
and relied on the lack of a decision to deprive this Tribunal of jurisdiction regarding
the relevant claims.

Asa result, Claimants respectfully maintain that they cannot be expected to elaborate
on issues regarding which the Tribunal has become functus officio, but will nonetheless

entertain the request for a factual confirmation contained in the Secretariat’s note.

Page 7 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

Unfortunately, this representation did not receive a full copy of the exchanges among
the parties and the Secretariat at the time of being retained, but what little sample it
did receive suffices to confirm that —as appears from the communication attached as
Exhibit I the fact that the decision had in fact been issued and would be conveyed to
the Tribunal had been discussed among the parties as early as August, 2016.
Thereafter, all the then claimants informed the Secretariat of the developments in the
court proceedings, and were told that there was no need for those materials to be
transmitted to the Tribunal. [Footnotes omitted]

17. On 20 March 2017, the Tribunal sent a letter to the parties indicating:

... The Tribunal notes the exhibit attached to the Claimants’ letter of March 17, 2017
indicating that there had been a judgment in the domestic proceedings concerning Lot
B1 on 10 June 2016 and subsequent proceedings in respect of that judgment. These
developments were not before the Tribunal when it came to finalise its Interim Award,
which, but for translation into Spanish, had been complete by mid-September. Nor
were these developments drawn to the Tribunal’s attention following the transmittal
of the Interim Award as a (potential) predicate error or omission of a factual nature
going to an element of the Tribunal’s decision. In the Tribunal’s October 25, 2016
letter transmitting the Interim Award, the Tribunal "noting the heavy factual detail of
this case, and recalling Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (as revised in
2010), invite[d] the parties to draw its attention to 'any error in computation, any
clerical or typographical error, or any error or omission of a similar nature! within 30
days of receipt of the Interim Award so the Tribunal can consider whether any
correction is appropriate." Neither side drew to the attention of the Tribunal any error
ot omission, notwithstanding the conclusion, stated in paragraph 288 of the Interim
Award, that there had been no judgment in the domestic proceedings related to Lot
Bl.

Although the Tribunal reached a decision on the question of its jurisdiction regarding
Lot B1 in its Interim Award, it remains seised of the dispute between the Parties. It is
not functus officio. Without prejudice as to any consequences that may follow from this,
the Tribunal, in the exercise of its inherent competence in respect of the administration
of justice, requests both Parties to submit to the Tribunal, without commentary, the
documents to which reference is made in the exhibit to the Claimants’ letter of March
17, 2017 concerning the domestic proceedings in respect of Lot B1. Should the
Tribunal consider that the documents in question go to the conclusion expressed in
paragraph 288 of the Interim Award, it will invite the views of both Parties on whether
the Interim Award should be revised and corrected in respect of the conclusion
regarding Lot B1 to allow the Parties to make submissions on jurisdiction in respect
of Lot B1 alongside the submissions on jurisdiction in respect of Lots B5 and B6. The
Tribunal would in that eventuality invite the Claimants to withdraw their application
for an order of termination in respect of the Claimants’ outstanding claims or would
otherwise defer consideration on any such extant application until after the issue of
any warranted revision of the Interim Award has been addressed.

Page 8 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

The Parties are also requested to draw to the Tribunal’s attention any further
developments in the domestic legal proceedings in Costa Rica in respect of any and all
of the Berkowitz Claimants’ Lots up until the date of the transmittal of the Interim
Award on October 25, 2016.

18. On 3 April 2017, the Parties submitted communications regarding the Tribunal’s 20
March 2017 letter. The Claimants did not provide any lot updates stating that:

...they cannot and should not respond by providing any further documents or
submissions regarding Lot B1. As Claimants have maintained, only the district court
considering the Motion to Vacate is currently competent to receive any submissions
and evidence related to the findings of the Tribunal regarding Lot B1 and any accessory
information. This position finds support in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order on the
Claimant’s Request for a Stay of the Proceedings (the “Stay Decision”), where the
Tribunal stated that “[t]he grounds advanced in the Claimants’ Set Aside Petition to
the U.S. District Court are a matter for the U.S. District Court, not for the Tribunal|[,]”
and continued to find that “[t}he Tribunal accordingly considers that deference
requires it to forebear from any comment on its appreciation of the issues engaged by
the Claimants’ Set Aside Petition.”

Specifically as to Lot B1, the Tribunal wrote that “[t]he issue of the Claimants’ asserted
shortcomings in the Tribunal’s decision as regards this Lot will be a matter for the U.S.
District Court.” Moreover, the submission of documents is equivalent to presenting
an argument. Because the Letter opens the possibility for comment based on the
content of the documents, the documents function as a condition precedent to later
argument, making the documents part of the sequence resulting in an argument being
made or forfeited. In light of Claimants’ prior position that the proper forum for the
continued discussion of Lot B1 is the district court and the statements by the Tribunal
to this effect, Claimants must refrain, at the risk of taking contrary positions in these
ptoceedings and the vacatur proceedings, from submitting any documents.

Claimants’ position should not prejudice the Tribunal’s evaluation of those documents
as it relates to any claims that Costa Rica may make, whether it be a renewed request
for costs and fees like Costa Rica’s prior submission as to the Spence and Gremillion
Claimants or a continuation of the proceedings despite the fact that the Stay Decision
was specifically premised on the (false) non-existence of a court decision as to Lot B1.
That decision has become final in accordance with Costa Rican law, but the situation
would be identical even if Costa Rica had — quod non— in fact filed an appeal against it,
as it has contended. As the plaintiff in the court proceedings related to Lot B1, Costa
Rica should have the documents necessary for the Tribunal’s rulings on this point, to
the extent jurisdiction for such rulings exists. [Footnotes omitted]

Page 9 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

19. In its communication, the Respondent provided documents updating the Tribunal on
the local court proceedings up until the issuance of the Interim Award regarding lots
B1, B3, BS and B8.

20. On 7 April 2017, the Respondent urged the Tribunal to act upon the Claimants’ request
for termination and requested an opportunity to comment on such request. The
Respondent further stated that:

Claimants have consistently refused to participate further in this arbitration. First, in
their letter of March 15, 2017, Claimants asked the Tribunal to terminate these
ptoceedings. Second, in response to the Tribunal's request that the parties provide
updates on judicial activity concerning Claimants’ properties at issue in these
ptoceedings up until the issuance of the Interim Award, Claimants refused to submit
any such updates. This refusal is even more striking given that the Tribunal's request
for update was prompted by Claimants’ complaints that the Tribunal did not have
sufficient information regarding recent activity in the judicial proceedings in Costa
Rica concerning Lot B 1, which allegedly prejudiced Claimants. Yet Claimants refused
to cure the situation by providing that information to the Tribunal. Claimants’ refusal
to respond to the Tribunal's request leaves no doubt that they have no intention to
continue participating in these proceedings. In the meantime, Respondent continues
to incur costs unnecessarily.

 

21. In their last footnote 3 to this paragraph, the Respondent asserted that:

Moreover, Claimants’ complaints regarding Lot BI are entirely unjustified. As the
Tribunal will have seen from the updates concerning Lot BI submitted by Respondent,
the only intervening event is a judgment from the Costa Rican lower court. In its
judgment, the court granted the owners of Lot BI greater compensation than initially
determined. Claimants have not complained in this arbitration or before Costa Rican
courts about the increased sum awatded. In fact, as the updates show, the State
appealed the lower court judgment, not Claimants. Thus, there is no need for the
Tribunal to amend the Interim Award in light of the updates provided.

22. On 17 April 2017, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties acknowledging receipt of their
letters and stating the following:

The Tribunal has reviewed the additional documents submitted by the Respondent by
email dated April [4], 2017 concerning Lots B1, B3, B5 and B8 responsive to the
Tribunal’s request dated March 20, 2017.

The Tribunal has concluded that this documentation, and in particular (but not limited
to) the documentation concerning Lot B1 discloses an error or omission of a factual
nature in the Interim Award of October 25, 2016 within the scope of Article 38 of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules that should have been drawn to the attention of the

Page 10 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

Tribunal by the Parties pursuant to the Tribunal’s express request in its letter dated
October 25, 2016 transmitting the Interim Award.

The Tribunal considers that it is not functus officio, being still seised of the dispute
between the Parties and having expressly requested the Parties to draw to the
Tribunal’s attention errors or omissions going to the factual detail of the case.

Having regard to the above, the Tribunal invites comments from the Respondent and
Claimants respectively on the Claimants’ letter dated March 15, 2017 and the
Respondent’s letter dated April 7, 2017. The Tribunal also invites the comments of
the Parties on how the Tribunal should proceed in the light of the additional
documentation referred to above concerning Lots B1, B3, B5 and B8 and the
Tribunal’s conclusion that the documentation in question, notably concerning (but not
limited to) Lot B1 discloses an error or omission of a factual nature in the Interim
Award that would warrant correction of the Interim Award. The Tribunal’s provisional
conclusion is that this development ought properly to be reflected either in a corrected
Interim Award or, if the Parties consider that the arbitral proceedings should be
terminated without the issuing of a corrected Interim Award, in the Order of the
Tribunal terminating the arbitral proceedings.

23. On 1 May 2017, the Parties submitted their observations on the Tribunal’s 17 April
2017 letter. In their letter, the Claimants reiterated their position that they could not
make any submissions regarding Lot B1 as the District Court was the proper forum to
receive any submission or evidence regarding this Lot. Otherwise, the Claimants would
be forced to adopt contrary positions in the two proceedings. The Claimants further
stated that:

In any event, it should be noted that the position adopted by Costa Rica is
selfcontradictory, ethically challenged and unbecoming of the high standards expected
of sovereign States in their international disputes. Costa Rica has always known of the
existence of the decision regarding Lot B1 —which Costa Rica itself issued—, and even
its counsel knew of that decision at all times, as evidenced by the admission, posited
in its last letter, that it attempted —albeit extemporaneously— to lodge an appeal against
that decision.

 

A closer look into the position adopted by Costa Rica and its counsel in these
ptoceedings and the annulment proceedings will reveal that, if Costa Rica knew that
the Tribunal might make a decision on the basis of whether a court decision had been
issued regarding Lot B1 —even if Costa Rica had never incorporated that defense in
the course of the proceeding, then it had an obligation and an ethical duty to notify
the Tribunal of the existence of the local decision, or to seek correction of the
Tribunal’s “error” regarding this very critical fact. Not only did Costa Rica not do that,
but, quite to the contrary, it expressly stated that it considered the award not to have
any errors. On the other hand, if Costa Rica did not know that the Tribunal might
make a decision on the basis of whether a court decision had been issued regarding

Page 11 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

Lot B1, this would confirm that it has to admit that the decision of the Tribunal was
adopted wtra petita, and their opposition to the annulment before the District Court —
where they are currently under a declaration of default issued by the clerk of the court—
would be frivolous, and similarly self-contradictory, ethically challenged and
unbecoming.

The stance of Claimants, when faced with this ethical quandary —ie, whether to
artificially take a knowingly wrong position to benefit from incorrect statements by the
Tribunal— is the opposite of that of Respondent. Claimants have stood by their firm
belief — based on applicable law— that the proper remedy for the Interim Award’s
shortcomings is that of annulment, and have followed through consistently, even
where the Tribunal repeatedly invited Claimants to allow the Tribunal to amend the
Interim Award in certain areas, leading to the Tribunal itself now confirming that the
information “concerning (but not limited to) Lot B1 discloses an error or omission of
a factual nature in the Interim Award that would warrant correction of the Interim
Award.”

Claimants respectfully submit that the Tribunal applied an improper test, and used
erroneous information to apply it. Correcting the information will not cure the
impropriety of the test applied, and, at any rate, the Tribunal currently lacks
competence to take any action regarding its decisions contained in the Interim Award,
which, as confirmed by the Tribunal, are exclusively properly before the U.S. District
Court. As a result, Claimants reiterate their request that these proceedings be
terminated in the same terms as set forth paragraphs 15 and 18 of the Procedural
Order Taking Note of the Termination of the Case with respect to Certain Claimants
of 10 February 2017.

24. In its letter the Respondent requested the termination of the case and that the Tribunal
award it costs and fees. The Respondent further stated that:

Given the Berkowitz Claimants’ conduct anything but termination of these
ptoceedings would be unfair and prejudicial to Costa Rica. On March 15, 2017, the
Berkowitz Claimants requested that the Tribunal terminate these arbitral proceedings.
Since then, the Berkowitz Claimants have refused to participate in any way in these
ptoceedings: they did not respond to the Tribunal’s March 20, 2017 request to submit
on the record any documents evidencing developments in the domestic legal
ptoceedings in Costa Rica concerning the Berkowitz Claimants’ properties; they have
failed to pay ICSID costs requested on March 3, 2017; and their counsel has made
public declarations stating that Claimants will insist that the proceedings be terminated.
In the meantime, Costa Rica has continued to participate in good faith—i.e., it
responded to the Tribunal’s March 20, 2017 request for additional documents; it has
paid its share of the arbitration fees and costs; and it has responded to all other requests
of the Tribunal, all while incurring additional costs and fees. In light of Berkowitz
Claimants’ conduct, there is no reason for these proceedings to continue and for Costa
Rica to continue incurring costs and fees. Costa Rica, therefore, respectfully requests

Page 12 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

that the Tribunal terminate these proceedings and award Costa Rica costs and fees
incurred from the date of the issuance of the Interim Award to the date of termination.
With the termination of these proceedings, the Berkowitz Claimants would be
ptecluded, under the doctrine of res judicata, from submitting the same claims to a
different CAFTA tribunal in any subsequent arbitration. [Footnote omitted]

25. With respect to the correction of the Interim Award, the Respondent agreed to its
factual correction to reflect the factual developments submitted in the documents on 3
April 2017, adding that:

...Costa Rica, however, does not believe that any factual correction to the Interim
Award would affect, and would require an amendment of, the Tribunal’s legal analysis
and conclusions. As Respondent stated in its April 7, 2017 letter, the Berkowitz
Claimants were granted a higher value for Lot B1 by the first instance court than they
were awarded in the administrative proceedings. That court judgment has been
appealed by Costa Rica, and the legal proceedings are ongoing. None of these facts
affects any of the Tribunal’s analysis and conclusions in the Interim Award. Moreover,
and importantly, the Berkowitz Claimants have not made and explicitly refuse to make
any additional arguments in these proceedings with respect to the Tribunal’s
conclusion regarding Lot B1. Therefore, there is no pending matter before the
Tribunal other than ensuring that the factual narrative is complete by reflecting the
latest development. [Footnote omitted]

26.On 9 May 2017, the Tribunal informed the Parties that, having considered their
correspondence of 1 May 2017, it was appropriate for the Tribunal to correct the
Interim Award to reflect the developments of the Costa Rican Courts which were
brought to the its attention by the Respondent’s correspondence of 3 April 2017. The
Tribunal further informed the Parties that it would issue an Order terminating the
arbitral proceedings (to be reflected in an Order on Correction and Termination) in
which it would address any outstanding issues of costs.

Costs

27. Following the Tribunal’s Termination Order of 10 February 2017, the ICSID
Secretariat proceeded to refund to the Spence International Claimants the portion of
unused funds deposited with the Secretariat for the purposes of the proceeding.

28. On 3 March 2017, the ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties that it had on hand
US$30,357.76 from the Respondent. Accordingly, after consultation with the President
of the Tribunal, the Secretariat requested from the Claimants a fourth advance of
US$30,000 in order to cover the expenses of the proceeding for the following three to
six months.

2!

©

. In its letter of 16 March 2017, the Tribunal reminded the Claimants of the funds
requested from them, which remained outstanding. The Tribunal further noted “‘in this

Page 13 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica

(UNCT/13/2)

Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

3

3

So

regard that fees and expenses have already been incurred by the Tribunal and the
Secretariat in respect of various issues arising since the Interim Award, including as
regards applications by the Berkowitz Claimants and relating to proceedings in
contemplation in respect of their outstanding claims. The Tribunal notes that Article
43(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules requires such payments to be made within
30 days after receipt of the request for funds.”

. On 17 April 2017, the Claimants were reminded of the call for funds sent by ICSID on

3 March 2017 and their obligation under UNCITRAL Article 43. The Claimants were
further requested to provide an update on the status of their payment by 21 April 2017.

. On 8 May 2017, absent a response from the Claimants, ICSID sent a letter to both

Parties informing them of the Claimants’ default and inviting either party to make the
outstanding payment.

32. To date the requested payment remains outstanding.

Decision

33. The Tribunal has given careful consideration to the Parties’ arguments regarding the

3

3

3

&

an

a

correction of the Interim Award and the request to terminate this proceeding.

. Regarding the correction of the Interim Award, as stated above by the Tribunal in its

letter of 20 March 2017, the developments noted in the Claimants’ letter of 15 March
2017, concerning Lot Bl and the developments noted in the Respondent’s
communication of 3 April 2017, concerning Lots B1, B3, BS and B8, were not before
the Tribunal when it came to finalize its Interim Award. Nor were these developments
brought to the Tribunal’s attention following the transmittal of the Interim Award on
25 October 2016, as requested pursuant to UNCITRAL Article 38 in the Award’s
transmittal letter.

. Although the Tribunal reached a decision on the question of its jurisdiction regarding

Lot B1, it is not functus officio and remains seised of the matter. The decision of the
Tribunal was expressly designated to be an “interim” award, not a “final” award. That
Interim Award contemplated further proceedings involving all Claimants, including
both the Berkowitz Claimants and Respondent. All parties thus remained subject to
the arbitral jurisdiction of the Tribunal even after the Interim Award issued.
Consequently, there has been no risk of the type of outside communication or unilateral
influence affecting the conduct of the Tribunal against which the doctrine of functus
officio is intended to protect.

. Moreover, consistent with UNCITRAL Article 38, the Tribunal, in the letter

transmitting the Interim Award, noting the heavy factual detail of the case, expressly

Page 14 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica

(UNCT/13/2)

Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

37.

38.

invited the Parties to draw its attention to “any error in computation, any clerical or
typographical error, or any error or omission of a similar nature” within 30 days of
receipt of the Interim Award so that the Tribunal could consider whether any correction
was appropriate. As recounted above, the Parties failed to accurately respond to that
invitation. If the information about Lot B1 developments had been submitted to the
Tribunal in response to that invitation, the unintended mistake in treatment of that Lot
would have been apparent on the face of the Interim Award, and subject to timely
correction.

Having regard to the preceding, the Tribunal considers that it cannot be divested of its
functions by virtue of the failure of the Parties to accurately respond to the Tribunal’s
inquiry regarding material post-hearing developments. Insisting that the authority of
the Tribunal could only be exercised within the time periods set out in Article 38 would,
in those circumstances, be an abuse of right. “[I]n all systems of law, whether domestic
or international, there are concepts framed in order to avoid misuse of the law.
Reference may be made in this respect to “good faith” (“bonne foi’), “détournement de
pouvoir” (misuse of power) or “abus de droit” (abuse of right).” Mobil Corporation
and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, |CSID Case No. ARB/07/27, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 10 June 2010, §169 (CAFTA-DR arbitration). See also UNCITRAL
Article 32. That is particularly the situation where the Tribunal seeks, as it does here,
to correct an inadvertent mistake and clarify a now-apparent ambiguity of possible
inconsistent treatment within the Interim Award of Lot B1 that arose out of the
Tribunal’s belief, in reliance on the record before the Tribunal and confirmed by
statements from the parties, that no relevant developments had occurred with respect
to the Lots after the hearings.

The Tribunal concludes that it has the authority, in the exercise of its inherent
competence in respect of the administration of justice, see, e.g., Brown, The Inherent
Powers of International Courts and Tribunals, LXXVI British Year Book of
International Law 195 (20005), to correct an involuntary mistake resulting in
potentially inconsistent treatment and to clarify the resulting ambiguity in its Interim
Award once that error is finally disclosed to the Tribunal. As such, having considered
the documents regarding Lot B1, as well as Lots B3, BS and B8, the Tribunal has
concluded, and so informed the Parties on 9 May 2017, that it is appropriate for it to
correct the Interim Award to reflect the Costa Rican Court proceedings. The Tribunal
hereby issues its corrected Interim Award, concluding with respect to Lot B1, the
relevant part of the Decision of the Tribunal to read as follows:

308. ...
3. The Tribunal finds that the Parties should be afforded an opportunity to be heard

on the question of whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain the Claimants’
allegations of breach of CAFTA Article 10.5 by reference to relevant and applicable

Page 15 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica

(UNCT/13/2)

Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

39.

40.

Al.

4

vv

43.

judgments of the Costa Rican courts rendered after 10 June 2013 in respect of Lots
BI, BS, B6 and B7.

Regarding the termination of the proceeding, the Tribunal takes note of the notification
by the Claimants of their decision not to pursue their remaining claims with respect to
Lots B1, B3 B5, B6 and B8 and of the Respondent’s agreement to terminate the
proceedings.

Regarding the costs of the proceeding, the Tribunal makes reference to UNCITRAL
Articles 40(1) and 42. These articles establish the following:

Article 40

1. The arbitral tribunal shall fix the costs of arbitration in the final award and, if it
deems appropriate, in another decision.

Article 42

1. The costs of the arbitration shall in principle be borne by the unsuccessful party
or patties. However, the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs
between the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into
account the circumstances of the case.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall in the final award or, if it deems appropriate, in any other
award, determine any amount that a party may have to pay to another party as a
result of the decision on allocation of costs.

Furthermore, the Tribunal refers to the Interim Award in which it established that until
that point of the proceeding the Parties were to “each bear their own costs, including
counsel’s fees and expenses, and shall bear equally half of the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal and the Secretariat, in respect of the proceedings to date, without prejudice to
the possibility of a different apportionment of costs, fees and expenses in respect of any
future phase of these proceedings.”

. The issue of costs that requires decision by the Tribunal concerns those costs incurred

following the Tribunal’s 10 February 2017 Procedural Order Taking Note of the
Termination of the Case with respect to certain Claimants. The developments in the
proceedings since that date have been concerned with procedural matters, the
Claimants’ request for a stay of the proceedings, dismissed by the Tribunal Procedural
Order of 28 February 2017, and issues engaged in the present Procedural Order going
to the correction of the Interim Award.

As regards the last of these elements, of relevance to the matter of costs is that both
Parties failed to inform the Tribunal of the factual developments in the Costa Rican

Page 16 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica

(UNCT/13/2)

Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

4

4

4

&

an

a

proceedings that the Tribunal has concluded necessitates the correction of the Interim
Award.

. Also relevant to the matter of costs, the Tribunal notes (as set out above) that the

Claimants are in default of their obligation to make the necessary contribution of funds
first requested by the ICSID Secretariat by letter dated 3 March 2017. The consequence
of this is that the funds held account of these proceedings by the ICSID Secretariat in
respect of the current phase of the proceedings have been contributed by the
Respondent alone.

. Having regard to the preceding, the Tribunal decides that the appropriate order on costs

is that (a) each Party shall bear their own costs, (b) the costs of the Tribunal and
Secretariat shall be divided equally between the Parties, and (c) having regard to the
Claimants’ default on funds, that the Claimants shall pay to the Respondent 50% of the
costs of the Tribunal and Secretariat incurred following the Tribunal’s 10 February
2017 Procedural Order Taking Note of the Termination of the Case with respect to
certain Claimants. For these purposes, the costs of the Tribunal and Secretariat incurred
following the Tribunal’s 10 February 2017 Procedural Order will be formally notified
to the Parties by the ICSID Secretariat in a financial statement following the present
Procedural Order.

. In the light of the preceding, the Tribunal takes note of the decision of the Claimants to

withdraw their remaining claims in this arbitration and orders the termination of the
proceeding with respect to the Berkowitz Claimants and their remaining Lots B1, B3,
B5, B6 and B8. On costs, the Tribunal decides that each Party shall bear their own
costs, the costs of the Tribunal and Secretariat shall be divided equally between the
Parties, and the Claimants shall pay to the Respondent 50% of the costs of the Tribunal
and Secretariat incurred following the Tribunal’s Procedural Order of 10 February
2017.

Done on 30 May 2017 in Washington, D.C.

Page 17 of 18

Aaron C. Berkowitz, Brett E. Berkowitz and Trevor B. Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
(UNCT/13/2)
Procedural Order on the Correction of the Interim Award and the Termination of the Proceedings

[signed and dated] [signed and dated]
Mark Kantor Rail E. Vinuesa
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: Date:

[signed and dated]

Daniel Bethlehem
Presiding Arbitrator
Date:

Page 18 of 18

