SIDLEY AUSTIN LLP BEIJING HONG KONG. SAN FRANCISCO

SIDLEY AUSTIN LLP
1501 K STREET, N.W. BOSTON HOUSTON SHANGHAI
SIDLEY! IDLEY'| DL EY WASHINGTON, D.C. 20005 BRUSSELS LONDON SINGAPORE
+1 202 736 8000 CENTURY CITY LOS ANGELES SYDNEY
+1 202 736 8711 FAX CHICAGO MUNICH TOKYO
DALLAS NEW YORK WASHINGTON, D.C.
GENEVA PALO ALTO
salexandrov@sidley.com
+1 202 736 8115 FOUNDED 1866

By Email

Anneliese Fleckenstein

Legal Counsel

International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes

1818 H Street, N.W.

Washington, D.C. 20433

Re: Aaron Berkowitz, Brett Berkowitz and Trevor Berkowitz v. the Republic of Costa Rica
ICSID Case No. UNCT/13/2

Dear Ms. Fleckenstein:

Respondent writes in response to the Tribunal’s letter of April 17, 2017 in which it invites the
parties to comment on how the Tribunal should proceed in light of (i) its conclusion that additional
documentation sent to it concerning, in particular Lot B1, discloses an error or omission of fact in its
Interim Award; and (ii) the Berkowitz Claimants’ request of March 15, 2017 to terminate these
proceedings. For the reasons provided below, Respondent requests that the Tribunal terminate these
proceedings and award Respondent costs and fees. In addition, Respondent does not object to a factual
correction of the Interim Award.

Given the Berkowitz Claimants’ conduct anything but termination of these proceedings would be
unfair and prejudicial to Costa Rica. On March 15, 2017, the Berkowitz Claimants requested that the
Tribunal terminate these arbitral proceedings.' Since then, the Berkowitz Claimants have refused to
participate in any way in these proceedings: they did not respond to the Tribunal’s March 20, 2017
request to submit on the record any documents evidencing developments in the domestic legal
proceedings in Costa Rica concerning the Berkowitz Claimants’ properties;” they have failed to pay
ICSID costs requested on March 3, 2017;? and their counsel has made public declarations stating that
Claimants will insist that the proceedings be terminated.’ In the meantime, Costa Rica has continued to

' See Letter from Berkowitz Claimants to ICSID, March 15, 2017.
? See Letter from Berkowitz Claimants to ICSID, April 3, 2017.
5 See Letter from ICSID to Claimants, April 17, 2017.

4 See, e.g., “Costa Rica Says Default Against It Should Be Vacated,” Law360, April 21, 2017 (“An attorney for the Berkowitzes,
GST LLP partner Diego Gosis, told Law360 on Thursday that they will insist that the proceedings be terminated without
prejudice in the same terms given to the other investors who voluntarily withdrew their claims. In the meantime, they intend to
continue with the annulment bid in D.C. federal court.”).

 

Sidley Austin (DC) LLP is a Delaware limited liabifty partnership doing business as Sidley Austin LLP and practicing in affiliation with other Sidley Austin partnerships.

SIDLEY!

Ms. Fleckenstein
May 1, 2017
Page 2

participate in good faith—i.e., it responded to the Tribunal’s March 20, 2017 request for additional
documents; it has paid its share of the arbitration fees and costs; and it has responded to all other requests
of the Tribunal, all while incurring additional costs and fees. In light of Berkowitz Claimants’ conduct,
there is no reason for these proceedings to continue and for Costa Rica to continue incurring costs and
fees. Costa Rica, therefore, respectfully requests that the Tribunal terminate these proceedings and award
Costa Rica costs and fees incurred from the date of the issuance of the Interim Award to the date of
termination. With the termination of these proceedings, the Berkowitz Claimants would be precluded,
under the doctrine of res judicata, from submitting the same claims to a different CAFTA tribunal in any
subsequent arbitration.*

With respect to the Tribunal’s inquiries related to the correction of the Interim Award, Costa Rica
does not object to a factual correction of the award—i.e., that the Interim Award be amended to reflect the
factual developments discussed in the documents submitted to the Tribunal on April 3, 2017. Costa Rica,
however, does not believe that any factual correction to the Interim Award would affect, and would
require an amendment of, the Tribunal’s legal analysis and conclusions. As Respondent stated in its April
7, 2017 letter, the Berkowitz Claimants were granted a higher value for Lot B1 by the first instance court
than they were awarded in the ad: ative proceedings.° That court j has been appealed by
Costa Rica, and the legal proceedings are ongoing. None of these facts affects any of the Tribunal’s
analysis and conclusions in the Interim Award. Moreover, and importantly, the Berkowitz Claimants
have not made and explicitly refuse to make any additional arguments in these proceedings with respect
to the Tribunal’s conclusion regarding Lot BI. Therefore, there is no pending matter before the Tribunal
other than ensuring that the factual narrative is complete by reflecting the latest development.

Therefore, Costa Rica respectfully requests that, to the extent the Tribunal deems it necessary to
amend the Interim Award, it limit that amendment to correcting the Interim Award’s factual findings.
Respondent also requests that the Tribunal terminate these arbitral proceedings and award Respondent
costs and fees.

Respectfully submitted,

Bal

Stanimir A. Alexandrov
Jennifer Haworth McCandless
Counsel for Respondent

5 See Procedural Order Taking Note of the Termination of the Case with Respect to Certain Claimants, February 10, 2017,
para. 15.

© See Letter from Respondent to ICSID, April 7, 2017.

ACTIVE 221468654

