Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 1 of 22

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

BRETT BERKOWITZ, TREVOR
BERKOWITZ, and AARON
BERKOWITZ,

Petitioners,
Case No: 17-148
v.

REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA,

Respondent.

PETITION TO VACATE OR SET ASIDE INTERIM ARBITRATION AWARD

 

The petitioners, Brett Berkowitz, Trevor Berkowitz, and Aaron Berkowitz (collectively
the “Berkowitz Claimants”), move this Court to vacate or annul the partial final award identified
as “Interim Award” by the Arbitration Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) sitting in an international
arbitration filed by the Berkowitz Claimants against the respondent, the Republic of Costa Rica
(“Costa Rica”), pursuant to the terms of the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade
Agreement (“CAFTA-DR”). Based on the applicable law and the facts, this Court should set
aside or vacate the Interim Award for the reasons stated herein.

INTRODUCTION

1. Despite the foreboding language of court decisions, courts have the duty and
ability to review the issues submitted to arbitration and the scope of the arbitration clause. These
obligations may have a unique role based on the features of the underlying arbitration, but it no
case can an arbitration tribunal subject to the Federal Arbitration Act exceed the authority given

to it by the parties. In this case, the Tribunal exceeded its authority in four distinct circumstances:

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 2 of 22

- The Tribunal took it upon itself to find and prove facts it then considered crucial
for purposes of denying jurisdiction, without notice or requiring Costa Rica to
carry this burden;

- The Tribunal applied its own notions of policy to support its position without
reference to any applicable law;

- The Tribunal failed to give the Berkowitz Claimants the opportunity to show that
jurisdiction existed; and

- The Tribunal bifurcated the proceedings, despite the lack of a request by any
party.

Each of these instances of exceeding its power resulted in the Berkowitz Claimants losing the
ability to continue claims at a preliminary stage. The Berkowitz Claimants therefore request this
Court vacate or set aside the Interim Award for the reasons described herein.

GENERAL BACKGROUND TO THE DISPUTE

2. The Berkowitz Claimants submitted claims for expropriation without
compensation, denial of fair and equitable treatment, and treatment less favorable than that
granted to other international investors. All of these claims arise under Articles 10.5 and 10.7 of
CAFTA-DR. See Exhibit A, CAFTA-DR Art. 10. In essence, the Berkowitz Claimants filed their
claims against Costa Rica in relation to certain measures taken by Costa Rica that deprived the
Berkowitz Claimants of their rights over real estate they owned in Costa Rica without proper
compensation.

3. As allowed by CAFTA-DR Article 10.16, the Berkowitz Claimants selected the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules to govern the proceedings. The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules are
a set of arbitration rules promulgated by the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law (“UNCITRAL”) and incorporated by reference in Article 10.16.3(c). The Tribunal rendered
an Interim Award on October 25, 2016, dismissing certain claims brought by the Berkowitz

Claimants and refusing to hear further evidence regarding others. The Motion follows as a result.

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 3 of 22

STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION AND VENUE
4. The Federal Arbitration Act (the “FAA”) generally directs the parties in the

method for seeking vacatur. “Any application to the court hereunder shall be made and heard in
the manner provided by law for the making and hearing of motions, except as otherwise herein
expressly provided.” 9 U.S.C. § 6; see also Contech Const. Products Inc. v. Heierli, 764
F.Supp.2d 96, 105-106 (D.D.C. 2011) (“the FAA does not allow a party to initiate a challenge to
an arbitration award by filing a complaint or a petition to vacate the award”). That being the
case, the FAA still requires the moving party to set out the basis for jurisdiction and venue.

5. The Berkowitz Claimants are all citizens of the United States. Brett Berkowitz is
the father of Aaron and Trevor Berkowitz. The United States has ratified the Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the “New York Convention”).

6. The respondent, the Republic of Costa Rica, is a foreign state. See 28 U.S.C. §
1603. Costa Rica has ratified the New York Convention.

7. Because the arbitration is an international dispute between a national of a country
where the New York Convention is in force and a sovereign state that has ratified the New York
Convention, the New York Convention applies to these proceedings, as incorporated in 9 U.S.C.
§ 201, et seq.

8. As an action falling under the New York Convention, it arises under the treaties
and laws of the United States, and the district courts of the United States have original

jurisdiction, regardless of the amount in controversy. See 9 U.S.C. § 203.

+ United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, Status Convention on the

Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York 1968),
http://www. uncitral.org/uncitral/en/uncitral_texts/arbitration/NYConvention_status.html (listing
Costa Rica and the U.S. as having ratified the New York Convention).

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 4 of 22

9. Moreover, because the district courts have jurisdiction over this action pursuant to
9 U.S.C. § 203, venue is proper in the court for the district that embraces the place of arbitration,
so long as the place of arbitration is in the United States. See 9 U.S.C. § 204. CAFTA-DR Article
10.20 allows the parties to select the legal place of the arbitration. The Berkowitz Claimants and
Costa Rica agreed that Washington, D.C., would be the legal place of arbitration, and the Interim
Award indicates the same. See Exhibit B, Procedural Order No. 1 { 9. Washington, D.C., is the
place of arbitration, and venue is therefore proper in this Court.

10. Costa Rica cannot assert immunity from jurisdiction. When Costa Rica became a
Party to CAFTA-DR, it waived its immunity from jurisdiction in relation to disputes covered by
the treaty in accordance with 28 U.S.C. § 1605(a)(1) and (2), for the reasons to follow. Article
10.26.6(b) stays enforcement of an award rendered under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
pending an application for annulment. CAFTA-DR thus contemplates requests for annulment as
part of the waiver of immunity from jurisdiction generally granted within Article 10, extending
the express or implicit waiver to this proceeding. See 28 U.S.C. § 1605(a)(1). Article 10.26.10
clarifies that the dispute stems from a commercial relationship to the extent relevant for
satisfying the requirements of the New York Convention. Because the dispute arose from a
commercial relationship outside the United States with an impact on United States nationals,
Costa Rica has no immunity from jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1605(a)(2).

11. In addition, Costa Rica waived its immunity from jurisdiction to the extent any
party seeks to enforce an agreement to arbitrate with it that meets the requirements of 28 U.S.C.
§ 1605(a)(6). When a foreign state selects international arbitration, it waives its immunity from
any action related to the confirmation, and concomitantly the vacatur, proceedings inherent in the

process. For example, in Ipitrade Int’l, S.A. v. Federal Republic of Nigeria, this Court rejected a

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 5 of 22

claim of immunity because Nigeria implicitly waived its immunity from the enforcement of the
award, based on § 1605(a)(6). 465 F.Supp. 824, 826 (D.D.C. 1978). The Court made no
distinction in the text of § 1605(a)(6), finding that the reference to “confirmation,” necessarily
included proceedings to vacate. See id; see also Markowski v. Atzmon, No. 92-2865, 1994 WL
162407, at *1 (D.D.C. April 19, 1994) (“[a] motion for confirmation involves the same
substantive consideration as a motion to vacate”). The underlying arbitration satisfies §
1605(a)(6)(A) because the place of arbitration is Washington, D.C., and it also meets the
requirements of § 1605(a)(6)(B) because the New York Convention governs the Interim Award.
In sum, Costa Rica cannot assert immunity from jurisdiction.
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

The limited nature of arbitration under CAFTA-DR and UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

12. Arbitration under CAFTA-DR involves different types of claims and a distinct
framework to decide them. Article 10 determines the outlines of the consent to arbitration, and
absent a separate agreement (not the case here), the consent contained in Article 10 is the only
applicable arbitration clause. Article 10.16 is the relevant language, and it enables a claimant to
“submit to arbitration under this Section a claim (i) that the respondent has breached (A) an
obligation under Section A... .” See Article 10.16.1(a)(i)(A). A CAFTA-DR tribunal therefore
has a more specific mandate than it might have in the context of a standard commercial
arbitration.

13. CAFTA-DR contains other features in regards to the sets of rules that can govern
the parties’ proceedings. The claimant can select the arbitration rules of the International Center
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”), the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, or the

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. See Article 10.16.3(c). The selection depends on certain pre-

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 6 of 22

requisites, but in this case the Berkowitz Claimants selected the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
and the parties and the arbitration tribunal agreed to the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, except to
the extent they are modified by CAFTA-DR. See Exhibit B, Procedural Order No. 1 1.1.

14. The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules are a set of rules that parties can select and do
not require the administration of any particular arbitration institution. Here, the parties to the
dispute agreed that ICSID could act as the administrator of the arbitration through its Secretariat.
The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules contain some provisions that are similar and others that are
distinct from typical commercial arbitration rules. For example, the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules permit the arbitral tribunal to conduct the arbitration in the manner it considers
appropriate, “provided that the parties are treated with equality and that at an appropriate stage of
the proceedings each party is given a reasonable opportunity of presenting its case.” See Exhibit
C, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Art. 17.

15. The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules also contain a unique provision regarding the
proof of facts. Article 27 requires that “[e]ach party shall have the burden of proving the facts
relied on to support its claim or defence.” The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules give significant
direction in how a party must present its case. Article 20 requires the claimant to submit a
statement of claim that contains the “points at issue,” among other things, and “as far as possible,
be accompanied by all documents and other evidence relied upon by the claimant[.]” As for the
respondent, Article 21 requires a “statement of defence” that responds to the “particulars” of the
statement of claim, including the “points at issue.” The respondent must also submit all
documents and other evidence upon which it relies. See Article 21(4). In other words, the

tribunal should receive a detailed picture of the issues in dispute and all of the documents and

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 7 of 22

other evidence the parties rely on, eliminating the need for guesswork regarding the scope of the
tribunal’s mandate and authority over the dispute.

16. In the arbitration at issue, the Berkowitz Claimants and Costa Rica did not modify
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules in any meaningful way that would change the unique nature
of their arbitration.

The relevant procedural facts and context underlying the Interim Award

17. In 2003, Brett Berkowitz began to purchase land through a number of controlled
entities along the Pacific coast of Costa Rica with the intent of building luxury homes. See
Exhibit D, Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim { 43. Brett Berkowitz thus purchased
six of the lots at issue in the underlying arbitration. See id. The Tribunal and the parties
eventually came to refer to these lots with one letter that correlated to the last name of the
claimant controlling the relevant owner followed by a number. See id. {{[ 44-49. The Berkowitz
Claimants owned lots B1, B3, B5, B6, and B8 (the “Berkowitz Lots”).” See id.

18. Starting in 2005, Costa Rica started local court proceedings to expropriate the
Berkowitz Lots (the “Local Litigation”), similar to an eminent domain proceeding in the United
States. In 2013, Brett Berkowitz decided to give lots B1 and B8 to his sons, Trevor and Aaron.
Litigation proceedings were ongoing as to all of the lots when the Berkowitz Claimants chose to
file their arbitration.

19. The expropriations contradicted the assurances given to Mr. Berkowitz by the
relevant minister prior to acquiring those lots—in meetings held to that precise effect as part of

Mr. Berkowitz’ due diligence— that they would not be expropriated. See Exhibit K, Interim

2

Lots B2 and B4 were also purchased by Brett Berkowitz in September 2003, but these
lots were subsequently sold to third parties and therefore did not form part of the Berkowitz
Claimants’ claims in the Arbitration. Lot B7 was sold to Glen Gremillion in 2004 and did not
form a part of the claim brought by the Berkowitz Claimants.

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 8 of 22

Award (60. They also contradicted the authorization granted under Art. 1 of the 1995 Park Law
being invoked as the basis for the Local Litigation, which allowed for the creation of an offshore
park, one not requiring onshore expropriations. See Exhibit K, Interim Award J 59. For these and
other reasons, including the lack or patent insufficiency of any offered compensation, the
conduct by Costa Rica breached several standards of treatment accorded to the Berkowitz
Claimants under CAFTA-DR. As a consequence, the Berkowitz Claimants filed their Notice of
Arbitration on June 10, 2013. See Exhibit D. At that time, other landowners in the same area had
also chosen to arbitrate their disputes with Costa Rica, consolidating their claims with the
Berkowitz Claimants. See id. | 6. These other claimants have decided to voluntarily dismiss their
case after the Interim Award for reasons distinct from the Berkowitz Claimants.

20. In their Statement of Claim, the Berkowitz Claimants informed the Tribunal of
the Local Litigation under course between Costa Rica and the holding corporate owners of the
land and their decision to waive any rights the Berkowitz Claimants had to initiate or continue
court proceedings regarding their rights under the challenged Costa Rican measures. See Exhibit
D { 7. The Berkowitz Claimants did not hide the gift of Lots B1 and B8 to Trevor and Aaron.
See, e.g., Exhibit D, fn 49. The Berkowitz Claimants did not request a bifurcated proceeding or
otherwise request the Tribunal to divide the arbitration in distinct phases related to jurisdiction
and merits. See generally, Exhibit D.

21. Costa Rica prepared and submitted a Memorial on Jurisdiction and Counter-
Memorial on the Merits (the “Counter-Memorial). In its Counter-Memorial, Costa Rica objected
to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on several grounds, largely on the fact that some of the facts
related to the claims arose before the entry into force of CAFTA-DR and three year time bar in

Article 10.18 of CAFTA-DR. See Exhibit F, Counter-Memorial at 56-63. Costa Rica did not

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 9 of 22

challenge the validity of the gift of Lots B1 and B8 to Trevor and Aaron. See generally, Exhibit
F. Costa Rica did not request bifurcation of the proceedings, and it did not dispute the existence
of the underlying Local Litigation related to the lots. See id.

22. Following the submissions of briefs, the parties exchanged their proposals for a
Procedural Order 1 meant to guide the remainder of the proceedings. The Tribunal took those
proposals and issued Procedural Order 1 on February 26, 2014. See Exhibit B. Procedural Order
1 required the parties in each pleading to “include all factual and legal arguments in support
thereof, including written witness statements, expert opinions or reports, and exhibits.” See
Exhibit B, Procedural Order 1 {[ 14.1. It further limited the scope of documents the parties could
submit, stating that “[nJeither party shall be permitted to submit additional or responsive
documents after the filing of its respective last written submission.” See id. [ 17.3.

23. The Tribunal also had the ability to request documents from the parties on its own
initiative, “[a]t any time during the arbitral proceedings the arbitral tribunal may require the
parties to produce documents, exhibits or other evidence within such a period of time as the
arbitral tribunal shall determine.” See Exhibit C, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Article 27(3).

24. The proceeding followed the guidelines set forth in the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules and the Procedural Order with a further exchange of written briefs accompanied by
witness statements, expert reports, and documentary evidence. The parties exchanged requests
for documents and ultimately set a date for a hearing for oral testimony. See Exhibit B, { 23.

25. In their submissions to the tribunal, the parties did not submit any information
regarding the validity of the donation of Lots B1 and B8. See generally, Exhibit D, Notice of
Arbitration and Statement of Claim; Exhibit E; Response to Notice of Arbitration; Exhibit F,

Memorial on Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits; Exhibit G, Memorial on the

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 10 of 22

Merits; Exhibit H, Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Reply on the Merits; Exhibit I, Reply
on Jurisdiction and Rejoinder on Merits; and Exhibit J, Rejoinder on Jurisdiction. The Berkowitz
Claimants provided the documentation that showed the donation had occurred, but neither party
presented further arguments regarding the legality or effect of the transfers. See Exhibit K,
Interim Award, fn. 8.

26. The parties hotly contested the Local Litigation and its effects on jurisdiction
generally, but at no time did Costa Rica present any evidence regarding the result of the Local
Litigation as to Lot B1. See generally, Exhibits E, F and I. Costa Rica made no effort to prove
the fact that there was any result, one way or the other, in relation to this lot. See id. Moreover,
there was no request for bifurcation of the proceedings into a jurisdictional and then merits
phase. See Exhibit K, Interim Award, 7.

27. A hearing was held the week of April 20, 2015, in Washington, D.C. Exhibit K,
Interim Award { 15. At the hearing, Brett Berkowitz testified and was cross-examined. See e.g.,
id. { 181. Neither Trevor nor Aaron testified and neither was called for cross-examination. See
generally, Exhibit K. No expert legal testimony was offered regarding the validity or effect of
the donation of Lots B1 and B8. No request for bifurcation was made. See id J 7.

28. The Tribunal issued an Interim Award on October 25, 2016, where it found that
Brett Berkowitz knew that Lots B1 and B8 were within the ecological park. See Exhibit K,
Interim Award { 181. Without receiving any argument from Costa Rica, the Tribunal went on to
analyze the transfer of Lots B1 and B8 to Trevor and Aaron: “[a]lthough it might have been put
to the Tribunal that the claims by Aaron and Trevor Berkowitz should not be afflicted by the

3 The Berkowitz Claimants respectfully disagree with the Tribunal on this point and others,

but in light of the limited scope of review, the Berkowitz Claimants can merely register their
disagreement, not elevate it to a request for vacatur or set aside in the present Motion.

10

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 11 of 22

knowledge of their father, Brett Berkowitz, when first acquiring the lots, no such argument was
advanced.” See id. Costa Rica did not make this argument of imputing Brett’s knowledge to
Aaron and Trevor, and the Berkowitz Claimants had no notice of any challenge to the validity or
effect of the donation of Lots B1 and B8. See generally, Exhibit K.

29. The Tribunal went on to question the sufficiency of the argument not made,
stating that “no such argument would be sustainable given that Aaron and Trevor Berkowitz
became owners of Lots B1 and B8 by what appears to the Tribunal to have been a simple share
transfer to each of 50% of the nominal shares of Aceituno Mar Vista Estates (the holding
company in respect of the B1 claim) and of Nispero Mar Vista Estates (the holding company in
respect of the B8 claim), both transfers being recorded in a notarised certificate of joint
ownership dated 11 January 2013.” See Exhibit K, Interim Award { 181.

30. The Tribunal continued to apply the reasoning of a commercial contract, even
though Brett Berkowitz had testified that he “transferred Lots B1 and B8 as a gift to my two
adult sons.” See Exhibit K, Interim Award { 181.

31. The Tribunal concluded its analysis on the gift of Lots Bl and B8, applying a
presumption regarding Brett Berkowitz’s knowledge and what appears to be its own policy
considerations: “[a]bsent compelling evidence to the contrary, such a conclusion would risk
opening the door to property ‘sales’ that had as their object the cleansing of the knowledge of the
original purchaser of defects or restrictions in the original title.” See id. There was no law cited
for this conclusion, and neither party offered any evidence to prove the fact of Trevor and
Aaron’s knowledge or the law that would provide the policy rationale regarding the gift. See id.

32. As regards the Local Litigation, the Tribunal found that no decision had been

issued in the Local Litigation regarding Lot B1, and that, as a result, it had no jurisdiction

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 12 of 22

regarding as to Lot B1. See Exhibit K, Interim Award {. 288 In support of this conclusion, the
Tribunal decided, as a matter of fact, that “[t]here is therefore no act or other conduct that
amounts to an independently actionable breach in respect of this property, including for entry
into force and limitation period purposes.” See id. Based on its proclaimed absence of a decision
in the Local Litigation as to Lot B1, the Tribunal decided that it lacked jurisdiction regarding the

result of the court proceedings concerning Lot B1:

There is therefore no basis, by reference to Article 10.5, or indeed
even arguably by reference to Article 10.7, on which the Claimants
can sustain a claim to a justiciable cause of action. The Tribunal
accordingly concludes, and so finds, that it has no jurisdiction to

entertain the Claimants’ claims in respect of Lot B1. See id.

But on July 15, 2016, before the date of the Interim Award, the Costa Rican courts had, in fact,
rendered a decision regarding Lot B1. See Exhibit L.4 The Tribunal had not requested either of
the parties to provide any information regarding the status of the court proceedings regarding Lot
B1 as a prior step to making its decision dismissing jurisdiction on Lot B1, nor was it foreseeable
to the Berkowitz Claimants that the fact of whether or not such a decision had been issued would
be the sole basis on which its claim over Lot B1 would be dismissed. See generally, Exhibit K.

33. The Tribunal went on to decide it could conclude it has jurisdiction to determine
if the rulings of the Costa Rican courts violated CAFTA-DR, just so long as those rulings were
issued after June 10, 2013. See Exhibit K, Interim Award {| 289. In so doing, the Tribunal
allowed the parties to present further evidence regarding Lots B5 and B6. See id {| 289-293. The
Interim Award did not grant any further opportunity to present evidence regarding the Local

Litigation as to Lot B1:

4 The Berkowitz Claimants are filing the Spanish version and will supplement the filing

with an English translation by Notice of Filing.

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 13 of 22

The Tribunal accordingly concludes and so finds that, in the
particular circumstances of this case, the Parties should be afforded
an opportunity to present their views on the issue of whether the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain the Claimants’ allegations of
a breach of CAFTA Article 10.5 by reference to relevant and
applicable judgments of the Costa Rican courts rendered after 10
June 2013 in respect of Lots BS, B6 and B7.

See Interim Award at para. 294.

34. The Tribunal admitted there was no request for bifurcation made by either party:

Costa Rica objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the
grounds that the Claimants failed to initiate proceedings within the
CAFTA’s three-year limitation period under CAFTA Article
10.18.1 and/or that the alleged breaches occurred before the
CAFTA entered into force between Costa Rica and the United
States on 1 January 2009. No application for bifurcation was made

and jurisdictional issues were pleaded alongside the merits.
See Exhibit K, Interim Award J 7. Regardless, the Tribunal decided certain issues of jurisdiction
and made some findings regarding liability. See id. 7308.
35. On these points, the Tribunal exceeded its authority, and this Court should vacate
the Interim Award.
MEMORANDUM OF LAW
L Legal Standards

A. This Court should apply the grounds for vacatur found in Section 10 of the FAA
to the Motion

36. One of the exclusive grounds for refusing confirmation under the New York
Convention is where “[t]he award ... has been set aside or suspended by a competent authority of
the country in which, or under the law which, that award was made.” See Convention on the

Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, art. V(1)(e), June 10, 1968, 21 UST

13

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 14 of 22

2517. This Court has recognized that Article V(1)(e) of the New York Convention grants U.S.
courts the authority to apply domestic arbitral law when reviewing a motion to set aside or vacate
an arbitral award. See e.g., CPConstruction Pioneers Baugesellschaft Anstalt (Liechtenstein) v.
Government of Republic of Ghana, Ministry of Roads and Transport, 578 F. Supp. 2d 50, 53-54
(D.C.C. 2008) (citing Yusuf Ahmed Alghanim & Sons v. Toys “R” Us, Inc., 126 F.3d 15, 23 (2d
Cir. 1997). A court’s authority to vacate an arbitral award derives from 9 U.S.C. § 10(a), which
enumerates the exclusive grounds for vacating an award. See Hall Streets Associates, LLC v.
Mattel, Inc., 552 U.S. 576, 586 (2008). Therefore in reviewing a motion to vacate, this Court
looks to the standards outlined in Section 10 of the FAA. See id.

37. Here, the New York Convention applies to the underlying arbitration because the
Berkowitz Claimants are nationals of a contracting state (the United States), and Costa Rica is a
contracting state. In addition, the Berkowitz Claimants seek to set aside or vacate the Interim
Award by the competent authority in Washington, D.C., the place where the award was made. As
such, this Court’s authority to vacate arises under 9 U.S.C. § 10(a), and applying this standard,
the Berkowitz Claimants seek to vacate the Interim Award because the Tribunal exceeded its
powers. See 9 U.S.C. § 10(a)(4).

B. Section 10(a)(4) requires the Tribunal to only decide the issues submitted to it
within the scope of the arbitration clause, while granting the Court the power to
review both the submission of the issue and the scope of the arbitration clause

38. The tribunal cannot venture beyond the bounds of its authority. See Matteson v.
Rider System Inc., 99 F.3d 108, 112 (3d Cir. 1996). The tribunal’s authority is defined not simply
by the parties’ agreement, “but is determined in large measure by the parties’ submissions.”> A

5 Matteson deals with a collective bargaining agreement, but there is no meaningful

distinction in a court’s review of any other type of agreement and a collective bargaining
agreement and arbitration pursuant to it. See, e.g., Granite Rock Co. v. Int'l Bhd. of Teamsters,

14

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 15 of 22

tribunal can only decide the issues submitted to it. See id. at 112-13. The tribunal must interpret
the parties’ submissions, but the court can review that interpretation. See id. at 113; see also,
Geneva Securities, 138 F.3d 688, 692 (observing that “arbitrators must make clear the matters
that are deemed submitted for arbitration”). Similarly, in determining if the parties agreed to
arbitrate, the courts review is de novo. See, e.g., National Railroad Passenger Corp. v.
Expresstrak, LLC, 330 F.3d 523, 529 (D.C. Cir. 2003). If the parties do not submit an issue or
claim, the tribunal has no authority to decide on it. See, e.g., Davis v. Prudential Securities, Inc.,
59 F.3d 1186, 1194-95 (11th Cir. 1995); see also, PMA Capital Insurance Company v. Platinum
Underwriters Bermuda, Ltd., No. 09-3963, 2010 WL 4409655, *656 (3d Cir. Nov. 10, 2010)
(finding that “[t]he arbitrators in this case, by ordering unrequested relief . . . went beyond the
scope of their authority”).

39. Moreover, “when [an] arbitrator strays from interpretation and application of the
agreement and effectively ‘dispense[s] his own brand of industrial justice’ [...] his decision may
be unenforceable.” See Stolt Nielsen S.A. v. Animalfeeds Int’l Corp., 559 U.S. 662, 671 (2010).
When a tribunal does not identify and apply a rule of decision derived from the FAA or the law
applicable to the dispute, “the arbitration panel impose[s] its own policy choice and thus

exceed[s] its powers.” See id. at 676-77.

 

561 U.S. 287, 296, (2010) (finding that “it is well settled in both commercial and labor cases that
whether parties have agreed to ‘submi[t] a particular dispute to arbitration’ is typically an ‘issue
for judicial determination.’). Moreover, in Granite the court found that “cases invoking the
federal ‘policy favoring arbitration’ of commercial and labor disputes apply the same
framework.” See id. at 301. See also Mala Geoscience AB v. Witten Techs., Inc., No. CIV 06-
1343, 2007 WL 1576318, at *3 fn 7 (D.D.C. May 30, 2007) (“[t]he Court recognizes that labor
arbitration, drawing its authority from the collective bargaining agreement, and commercial
arbitration under the FAA are related, but distinct, legal fora. Principles may nonetheless be
borrowed from one to the other.”)

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 16 of 22

40. The Berkowitz Claimants will show that the Tribunal exceeded its powers by
deciding on issues of fact in the absence of any submission by Costa Rica, applying its own
policy rationale without looking to a rule of decision from the FAA or applicable law, failing to
give the Berkowitz Claimants the opportunity to show that jurisdiction existed, and bifurcating
the proceedings, despite the lack of a request by any party.

c. The mere fact that the Berkowitz Claimants seek to vacate or set aside an interim

award, not the ultimate and final award on all issues, poses no hurdle to this
Court’s analysis

41. The Berkowitz Claimants seek to vacate the Interim Award, but this merely
invokes the same standards applied to a final award. Interim awards are final confirmable awards
where they conclusively dispose of an independent claim. See, e.g., Zeiler v. Deitsch, 500 F. 3d
157, 169 (2d Cir. 2007). In other words, an interim award is considered final “if it resolves the
rights and obligations of the parties definitively enough to preclude the need for further
adjudication with respect to the issue submitted to arbitration.” See EcoPetrol S.A. v. OffShore
Exploration and Production LLC, 46 F. Supp. 3d 327, 336 (S.D.N.Y. 2014). For the purposes of
satisfying the “finality” requirement, courts consider whether an award "finally and conclusively
dispose[s] of a separate and independent claim. . . .” Metallgesellschaft A.G. v. M/V Capitan
Constante, 790 F.2d 280, 283 (2d Cir. 1986). To permit review, an award does not need to be
final as to all issues of liability and damages. See Home Ins. Co. v. RHA/Pennsylvania Nursing
Homes, 127 F. Supp. 2d 482, 487 (S.D.N.Y. 2001). And finality need not mean the ultimate,
conclusive arbitral award. See id. Finally, when a court has vacated an award that is final as to
the merits of a claim, the proper course is to remand the claim to a new arbitrator. See Muskegon

Cent. Dispatch 911 v. Tiburon, Inc., 461 Fed. App’x. 517, 527 (6th Cir. 2012).

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 17 of 22

42. The Interim Award is not the ultimate, conclusive arbitral award on all claims
submitted to arbitration, but it is certainly the final disposition of all claims as to Lots B1 and B8,
and most claims as to Lots B3, BS, and B6. Procedural Order | states that “[d]ecisions of the
Tribunal shall be issued in writing and be final and binding on the parties.” See Exhibit B,
Procedural Order | {| 4.2. The Interim Award is a decision of the Tribunal, and it found that the
Tribunal had no jurisdiction over Lots B1 and B8 generally, that it only had jurisdiction over
certain claims, not others, as to Lot B3, and that it might have jurisdiction over certain claims,
again, not others, over Lots BS and B6, among other things. See generally, Exhibit K. The
decision rejecting jurisdiction over Lots B1 and B8 and the dismissed claims as to Lots B3, B5,
and B6 is therefore final as to those claims, enabling this Court to review the Interim Award,
vacate or set aside the Interim Award, and remand to a new tribunal.

IL. This Court should vacate or set aside the Interim Award because the Tribunal
exceeded its powers

A. The Tribunal exceeded its authority when it reached findings of fact without
Costa Rica offering any evidence, and substituted its own policy judgments in

place of applicable law
43. Just as an arbitration tribunal is bound by the issues submitted by the parties, it is
further bound by the requirements of the applicable rules. The parties and the Tribunal agreed to
be bound by the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and Article 37 requires each party to bear the
burden of proving the facts supporting its case. See Exhibit C. The Tribunal made findings of
fact on key issues, even though Costa Rica had submitted nothing in this regard. See generally,
Exhibit K. More specifically, the Tribunal found that Trevor and Aaron shared Brett’s
knowledge of potential expropriation of Lots BI and B8. See id. at {| 181. The existence (or not)

of this knowledge would certainly be a fact, as would be the transfer (or not) of this knowledge

to Trevor and Aaron through the gift of Lots B1 and B8. By deciding on these facts and using

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 18 of 22

them to reject jurisdiction without requiring Costa Rica to submit any evidence or argument, the
Tribunal exceeded its authority.

44. In addition to being bound by the submissions of the parties, arbitration tribunals
cannot choose to apply their own policy preferences instead of the requirements of applicable
law. This is especially true where the arbitration tribunal has not reached the threshold question
of which law applies. See Exhibit K, J 181. Turning to the legal effect of the donation of Lots BI
and B8, the Tribunal did not select the law that would apply, deciding instead to apply its own
policy preferences to the effect of the transfer. See id. The Tribunal found convincing policy
rationales to dismiss claimant’s claims, such as the “risk [of] opening the door to property ‘sales’
that had as their object the cleansing of the knowledge of the original purchaser of defects or
restrictions in the original title.” See id. This risk is nothing more than a policy consideration
substituting a legal analysis of gifts pursuant to Costa Rican (applicable) law. The Tribunal did
not otherwise cite a rule of decision from the FAA or applicable law. As such, the Tribunal
exceeded its powers.

45. The Interim Award seems to implicitly recognize these failings, but the Tribunal
did not give the Berkowitz Claimants a chance to offer any evidence or argument. The Tribunal
found that “it might have been put to the Tribunal that the claims by Aaron and Trevor
Berkowitz should not be afflicted by the knowledge of their father, Brett Berkowitz, when first
acquiring the lots, no such argument was advanced.” See Exhibit K, Interim Award, { 181. Given
the chance, the Berkowitz Claimants would have responded, an especially concerning result

because Costa Rica also did not make this argument.

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 19 of 22

B. The Tribunal exceeded its authority when it declined jurisdiction stemming from
the court rulings after June 10, 2013, in the Local Litigation as to Lot B1

46. Arbitration tribunals have the obligation to define the issues they will decide,
including objections to jurisdiction. In the context of an arbitration according to the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal has the ability to decide on its own jurisdiction. As a part of this
power, it can request documents and evidence from the parties. In any event, an arbitration
tribunal’s decision on its own jurisdiction is subject to review by courts, and in the case of a
request to set aside or vacate the award under Section 10(a)(4), the courts have the ability to
review de novo the arbitration tribunal’s findings.

47. Here, the Tribunal’s decision declining jurisdiction over the result of the Local
Litigation as to Lot B1 was an excess of the Tribunal’s authority. In the Interim Award, the
Tribunal found that the parties had not adequately made any submissions regarding the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the effect of the decisions made in the Local Litigation after June 10,
2013, as to Lots BS and B6.° See Exhibit K {[ 294. In so doing, it gave the parties an opportunity
to show that jurisdiction existed over Lots BS and B6 because there were court rulings in the
Local Litigation after June 10, 2013. See id. [| 289-294. Without any submission by the parties,
the Tribunal found that there were no court rulings in the Local Litigation after June 10, 2013, as
to Lot B1. See id. { 288. As such, the Tribunal decided that the absence of any court ruling meant
it had no jurisdiction over the Local Litigation as to Lot B1.

48. However, there had been a court ruling in the Local Litigation after June 10,
2013, as to Lot B1. The Tribunal had the power under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules to
© “The Tribunal accordingly concludes and so finds that, in the particular circumstances of this
case, the Parties should be afforded an opportunity to present their views on the issue of whether
the Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain the Claimants’ allegations of a breach of CAFTA

Article 10.5 by reference to relevant and applicable judgments of the Costa Rican courts
rendered after 10 June 2013 in respect of Lots B5, B6 and B7.” (emphasis in original)

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 20 of 22

request any documents showing any court ruling in the Local Litigation as to Lot B1, and had the
Tribunal made this request, it would have found that on July 15, 2016, there was a court ruling in
the Local Litigation as to Lot B1. The existence of the court ruling, under the Tribunal’s analysis
of Lots BS and B6, would have changed the Tribunal’s analysis of Lot B1, at least giving the
Berkowitz Claimants the opportunity to show that jurisdiction existed over the court proceedings
as to Lot B1. But the Interim Award foreclosed this opportunity, constituting an excess of
powers by the Tribunal and another reason to vacate the Interim Award.

Cc. The Tribunal exceeded its authority when it bifurcated the proceedings, denying
the Berkowitz Claimants the opportunity to be heard on the relevant jurisdiction
objections d_sua sponte by the Tribunal

49. While the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules give the arbitration tribunal the ability to
issue one or more awards, including a separate award on jurisdiction, arbitration tribunals do not
have the authority to bifurcate the proceedings into multiple phases without at least a request by
one of the parties, coupled with the opportunity to be heard by the others.

50. When the parties went to the hearing in April 2015, they had prepared a hearing
on both jurisdiction and the merits, taking into consideration that all jurisdictional objections had
been lodged and that the Tribunal would render an award on the issues before it. None of the
parties requested the Tribunal to split, or bifurcate, the proceedings between jurisdiction and
merits, a fact recognized by the Tribunal in the Interim Award. See Exhibit K, [ 7. Due to the
lack of a request to bifurcate, the Berkowitz Claimants did not have notice of the distinct legal
arguments and evidence it should have presented as to the effect of the donation of Lots B1 and
B8 and the Local Litigation as to Lot B1. Had there been a request to bifurcate, coupled with any
indication of the jurisdictional issues raised by the Tribunal (though not by Costa Rica), the

Berkowitz Claimants could have submitted full arguments, testimony, and evidence as to those

20

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 21 of 22

jurisdictional issues. But the Berkowitz Claimants did not get that opportunity, leading the
Tribunal to find against the Berkowitz Claimants on the points raised above. At a minimum,
there should have been a request to bifurcate by Costa Rica or some sort of notice of the
jurisdictional issues to be addressed. Absent a request or notice, the Tribunal exceeded its
authority by sua sponte bifurcating the arbitration and rendering an Interim Award.

51. Strangely enough, the Tribunal appeared cognizant of its ability to give the parties
an opportunity for further submissions as to jurisdiction. For example, the Tribunal found that
Costa Rica’s limited submissions on the effect of the rulings in the Local Litigation as to Lots BS
and B6 required the parties to receive a chance to submit further arguments and evidence as to
this issue. The Tribunal could have followed the same process as to the donation of Lots B1 and
B8 and the effect of the Local Litigation as to Lot B1. By failing to do so, the Tribunal exceeded
its powers, requiring this Court to vacate the Interim Award.

Ill. This Court should stay the arbitration proceedings pending the resolution of the
Motion

52. On filing a motion to vacate, courts have the ability to stay the underlying
arbitration proceedings. See 9 U.S.C. § 12; see e.g. Aurum Asset Managers, LLC v. Banco do
Estado do Rio Grande do Sul, Miscellaneous Action No. 08-102, 2010 WL 4027382 at *1 (E.D.
Pa. Oct. 13, 2010). The stay functions to stop any enforcement of the award. See 9 U.S.C. § 12.
Similarly, CAFTA-DR prohibits a “disputing party” from seeking enforcement of an award in
the case of a final award under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules until “a court has dismissed or
allowed an application to revise, set aside, or annul the award and there is no further appeal.” See
Article 10.26.6(b)(ii).

53. This Court should immediately stay the underlying arbitration proceedings. The

Berkowitz Claimants have met the condition of timely filing and serving a motion to vacate an

21

Case 1:17-cv-00148-RJL Document1 Filed 01/23/17 Page 22 of 22

award that is final as to certain claims and issues brought by the Berkowitz Claimants. The
Tribunal has already ordered the proceedings to continue, essentially enforcing the Interim
Award as it relates to grounds for vacatur mentioned herein, and further steps in the underlying
arbitration will severely harm the rights of the Berkowitz Claimants, requiring them to
participate before a tribunal that has already exceeded its powers. Moreover, the Berkowitz
Claimants may take potentially different positions in the underlying arbitration, putting at risk
any future arbitration before a new tribunal. Both the FAA and CAFTA-DR contemplate exactly
the relief sought by the Berkowitz Claimants. This Court should therefore stay the underlying
arbitration until a final decision has been issued as to the Motion.
CONCLUSION

Wherefore, the Berkowitz Claimants respectfully request this Court vacate or set aside

the Interim Award, stay the arbitration proceedings pending the outcome of the ruling on the

Motion, and grant such other relief the Court deems proper.

Dated this the 23" day of January, 2017.

Respectfully submitted,

/s/ Megan C. Connor

Megan C. Connor (DCB# 996991)
mconnor@pilieromazza.com

Paul W. Mengel III (DCB# 457207)
pmengel @pilieromazza.com
PILIEROMAZZA PLLC

888 17th Street, N.W., 11th Floor
Washington, D.C. 20006
Telephone: (202) 857-1000
Facsimile: (202) 857-0200

22

