Declaration appended to the Award by Arbitrator Santiago Torres Bernardez

The subject-matter of the present Declaration consists in an explanation and a
reservation. The explanation of vote concerns my acceptance of the Parties’
request to the Tribunal to discontinue the case in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 43 (2). The reservation relates to the Award. I signed the Award
because I voted in favour of its operative part but I am entering into a reservation
with respect to the section of its motives entitled “Procedural History” because the
reporting of facts contained therein is incomplete.

1. The explanation

1. ICSID Arbitration Rule 43 entitled “Settlement and Discontinuance” provides
two procedural ways for discontinuing a case before the award is rendered by the
arbitral tribunal concerned depending upon of whether or not the parties have
requested to embody their own settlement in an award of the tribunal. If such a
request is not made by the parties the tribunal is under the obligation of issuing an
order noting the discontinuance of the case as provided for in Rule 43 (1). That is
all.

2. But, if the parties’ request the tribunal to embody their settlement in an award
as a form of discontinuance, the tribunal is under no obligation pursuant to Rule 43
(2) to comply with the request. As provided in this provision, the “Tribunal may
record the settlement in the form of its award” and, therefore, it may decide in a
given case not to accede to the request because jurisdictional, propriety or other
kind of considerations, even if the parties have complied with the conditions of
submitting their request in writing and filed the full text of their settlement duly
signed. In the latter hypothesis, the requested discontinuance would need to be
declared by other means, namely by noting it in a tribunal’s order, because the
right of the parties acting together to discontinue their case - before the award
thereon be rendered - is under ICSID Arbitration Rule 43 an unquestionable
procedural right of the parties.

3. In their request of 7 October 2016, the Parties informed the Tribunal inter alia
that as a result of negotiations, on 21 April 2016, the Parties signed a Settlement
Agreement pursuant to which they (i) fully settled their dispute, (ii) agreed to
terminate the Arbitration, as well as any other pending proceedings, and (iii)
agreed to jointly request that the Tribunal incorporate their agreement in the form
of a public Consent Award. Together with their request, the Parties provided the

Tribunal with the full signed text of their Settlement Agreement and a proposed
draft of a Consent Award.

4. The Parties asked therefore the Tribunal to put an end to the present arbitration
by adopting the form of discontinuance set forth in ICSID Arbitration Rule 43 (2),
form that, as mentioned above, the Tribunal may or may not grant in the light of
the particular circumstances of the case. One of those circumstances is that the
Parties’ request of 7 October 2016 stated the following important legal caveat:

“For the avoidance of doubt the Settlement Agreement and the Consent Award
and their terms and provisions are made and agreed without any admission by the
Parties of ICSID jurisdiction and international liability and it is not, and shall not,
be represented and/or construed by the Parties as an admission of international
liability or wrongdoing on the part of either Party.”

5. This legal caveat - incorporated now in paragraph (pp) of the present Tribunal’s
Consent Award - has been determinative in the decision of this arbitrator to accede
to the Parties’ writing request of discontinuing the case in accordance with
Arbitration Rule 43 (2). Without that legal caveat I would have had to decline the
said writing request on jurisdictional as well as propriety grounds of my own.

6. In effect, as to jurisdiction it is in the public domain (see my 2013 Dissenting
Opinion in the ICSID Ambiente Ufficio case) that I share the conclusion of the
Dissenting Opinion of Arbitrator Abi-Saab, issued at the first phase of the present
case in which — contrary to the majority 2011 Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility— Professor Abi-Saab concluded at the absence of Tribunal’s
jurisdiction to entertaining the present case. Concerning propriety, as a member of
the Tribunal at the merits phase of the case I have participated fully in the
deliberation held by the Tribunal reaching then, in conscience, legal conclusions on
both the pending jurisdictional ratione personae issues and core issues regarding
the merits of the case (see majority 2011 Decision, paragraph 670) on the basis of
the law applicable to the dispute, the pleading of the Parties and the elements of
proof provided by either of them. Without the above legal caveat I would have had
to uphold the proposition that the Tribunal will simple note the discontinuance in
an order, namely in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 43 (1).

7. But, the above jurisdictional and propriety considerations of mine are not an
obstacle at all for me to accede to the joint request of discontinuing the case in
accordance with Arbitration Rule 43 (2) from the very moment that both Parties

declare - in the commented caveat - that their Settlement Agreement and draft
Consent Award and their terms and provisions are made and agreed without any
admission by them of ICSID jurisdiction and international liability on the part of
either Party, and it is not, and shall not, be represented or construed otherwise. In
other words, I accede to the Parties’ request concerning the form of discontinuance
of the present case because, as explained by the Parties themselves in the legal
caveat, their Settlement Agreement and draft Consent Award is based upon
considerations alien to the law applicable to the dispute as instituted.

2. The reservation

8. As indicated above, I signed the present Consent Award of the Tribunal because
I voted in favour of its operative part and, therefore, the Present Award has been
adopted as a whole unanimously by the Tribunal. Concerning the reasons upon
which the Award is based, I endorsed also the section entitled “Settlement” but I
entered, as already mentioned, into a reservation with respect to the section entitled
“Procedural History” because in my opinion the reporting of the facts contained
therein is not as complete as it should be.

9. In this context, I will begin recalling that ICSID Arbitration Rule 43 (2)
mentions three instruments, namely the Parties’ settlement, their writing request
and the Tribunal’s award. The Tribunal cannot revise in any respect the Settlement
or the Writing Request of the Parties. But, the Tribunal is the master of the text of
the Award because it is its own Award. As stated in the last words of Rule 43 (2):
“.., the Tribunal may record the settlement in the form of its award” (italics
supplied). It follows that, if the Tribunal accedes to the Writing Request of the
Parties it may review or complete the text of any draft Consent Award which might
have been provided by the Parties, as occurred in the present case. The Parties
seems to have a similar view because they qualify their draft Consent Award as a
“proposal”.

10. I failed however to convince my co-arbitrators to complete the elements of fact
missed in the section of the present Consent Award entitled “Procedural History”.
Those elements of fact are nevertheless part and parcel of the reality of the arbitral
proceeding of the Abaclat Case whose integrity and transparency as a whole
should, in my opinion, be preserved and recorded in the present Tribunal’s Award.

11. The existing temporal gap in the said “Procedural History” of the present
Consent Award concerns an ample period of time which goes from 12 November

2014 (see paragraph (hh) of the present Consent Award) to the receiving by the
Tribunal, on 21 March 2016, a Parties’ joint letter, dated March 2016, requesting
the suspension of the arbitral proceeding for a duration of 120 days, suspension
which was granted in the light of the Agreement in Principle executed by TFA and
Argentina on 31 January 2016. By letters of 26 August 2016 of the Claimants and
22 September 2016 of the Argentine Republic the Tribunal was informed that they
have settled their dispute and that they would request the discontinuance of the
proceeding. Thereafter, on 7 October 2016, the Parties informed in due form
jointly the Tribunal that they have signed on 21 April 2016 a Settlement
Agreement settling the whole of the dispute before the Arbitral Tribunal and
requesting the discontinuance of the present Abaclat Case as described above in
paragraph 3 of this Declaration.

12. That factual temporal gap in the said “Procedural History” corresponds mostly
to the part of the proceeding concerning the “preparation” by the Tribunal itself
pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 46 of the Award on the dispute between the
Parties, notion that encompasses the three classic stages of drawing up an award:
“study of documentation”, “deliberation” and “drafting of a draft Award”. In the
present case such a temporal period started as usual at the Hearing closing the oral
procedure on the Merits on 24 June 2014 (see paragraph (cc) of the present Award)
and ended on 7 October 2016 when the Parties requested the Tribunal to
discontinue the Abaclat Case as indicated above. Thus, the span of time at the
disposal of the Tribunal in the present case to render its Award on the Abaclat
dispute went from 24 June 2014 to 7 October 2016 (minus the 120 days in which
the proceeding was suspended).

13. In the months following the closing of the Hearing, the Tribunal commenced
its work as it is usual in the internal arbitral practice of ICSID , namely by studying
the records of the Hearing and Parties’ post- hearing briefs and other documents
filed by them, following by the holding of the deliberation of the Tribunal. Once
the deliberation was concluded, the Tribunal began, as it is also usual in the said
ICSID practice, the task of preparing the draft Award but it was incapable to
rendering the Award before March 2016 when the Parties requested the suspension
of the proceeding or before 7 October 2016 when they moved jointly the disclosure
of the Abaclat Case. This is not usual in ICSID arbitral proceedings. It reflects an
evident failure, namely the failure of the Tribunal in accomplishing the task of
rendering its arbitral Award on the Abaclat dispute within a reasonable period of
time under the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules. Otherwise, it would be
legally impossible to suspend the proceeding in March 2016 and, later on, to
discontinue the case in October 2016 because the Parties’ procedural rights under

ICSID Arbitration Rule 43 operate, obviously, only before the award on the
dispute is rendered.

14. The silence in the present Award of references to factual sequential events
concerning the Tribunal’s work adds to the said failure, because of my conviction
on the need that arbitral praxis implements basic principles which are in turn
manifestations of the fundamental principle of the good administration of
international arbitral justice and, particularly, the corollary that justice delayed is
justice denied.

15. I am second to none in upholding the right of the Parties to settle their disputes
by direct consultations, negotiations or conciliation, as well as to their right of
conducting those consultations, negotiations or conciliation in parallel to eventual
instituted judicial, arbitration or conciliation by a third proceedings. As the ICJ has
recalled in several occasions, the judicial, arbitral or conciliation by thirds of the
settlement of disputes is not more than a substitute to the failure of the parties to
settle the dispute concerned by mutual agreement.

16. But, this does not mean at all that the proceedings of each of those different
means of settlement be susceptible of being mixed up with each other without
denaturalizing themselves. If that happens, the utility for the parties of having
recourse to international judicial, arbitral and conciliation institutions would
become less evident. Each of those alternative means might lose its present status
of autonomous means governed by particular rules and, therefore, impairing the
confidence of parties in the settlement of international disputes by thirds.

‘Signed: Santiago Torres Bernardez December 15, 2016

1

