ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

ABACLAT AND OTHERS
(Case formerly known as GIOVANNA A BECCARA AND OTHERS*)
(CLAIMANTS)

and

THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
(RESPONDENT)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Professor Pierre Tercier, President
Professor Georges Abi-Saab, Arbitrator
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg, Arbitrator

Secretary to the Tribunal:
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 4 August 2011

Representing Giovanna a Beccara and
others.

Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm

Mr. Jonathan C. Hamilton
Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny
Ms. Andrea J. Menaker
Mr. Francis A. Vasquez, Jr.
WHITE & CASE LLP

701 Thirteen Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20005
US.A.

and

Avy. Vittorio Grimaldi
Avv. Paolo Marzano
GRIMALDI E ASSOCIATI
Via Pinciana, 25

00198 Rome

Italy

and

Dr. José Martinez de Hoz, Jr.
Dra. Valeria Macchia

PEREZ ALATI, GRONDONA, BENITZ, ARNTSEN

& MARTINES DE HOz (JR.)
Suipacha 1111 — Piso 18
C1008AAW Buenos Aires
Argentina

* For the change of name, see § 641 below.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Representing The Argentine Republic

Dra. Angélina Maria Esther Abbona
Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
Posadas 1641

Buenos Aires (C.P. 1112)

Argentina

and

Mr. Jonathan I. Blackman

Mr. Matthew D. Slater

Mr. Carmine D. Boccuzzi

Ms. Inna Rozenberg

Mr. Ezequiel Sanchez Herrera

CLEARY GOTTLIEB STEEN & HAMILTON LLP
One Liberty Plaza

New York, NY 10006

US.A.

IL

IL.

Il.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Table of Contents
PARTIES 10
A. CLAIMANTS 10
B. RESPONDENT 1
FACTS 12
A. INTRODUCTION 12
(1) General Concepts relating to Financial Market and Bonds
(2) General Overview on Sovereign Debt Restructuring ... 17
(3) Argentina’s Restructuring of Its Economy and Its Debt in relation to Bonds ..........22
(a) Argentina’s Restructuring of Its Economy in the 1990s.
(b) — Argentina’s Financial Crisis and Default of 2001 ...
(c) _ The Events following Argentina’s Default of 2001...
(d) — Argentina’s Restructuring of Its Debt in relation to Bonds and Relevant
Creditors’ Reactions ..
(4) Evolution of the Dispute following Argentina’s Exchange Offer 2005... 39
(5) New Exct Offer 2010 50
B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 51
(1) Request for Arbitration and its Registration by ICSID 51
(2) Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal .....
(3) Arbitral Procedure 55
LAW, 77
A. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS...
(1) The Arbitral Procedure ....
(2) Object of the Present Decision...
(3) | Summary of the Parties’ Positions and Relief Sought
(a) Respondent’s Position and Requests for Relief. .80
(b) — Claimants’ Position and Requests for Relief. -84
(4) Structure of the Present Decision...
B. LEGAL BASIS FOR THE TRIBUNALS JURISDICTION .

 

 

(1) Article 25 ICSID C i 91
(2) Argentina-Italy BIT

 

GB)

(4)
6)

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION .

a)
2)

GB)

(4)

6)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

 

(a) General Scope and Aim of the Argentina-Italy BIT...
(b) Article 8 BIT.
Relationship between Article 25 ICSID Convention and Article 8 BIT
(a) InGeneral 102

 

 

 

(b) With regard to the Subject Matter of the Dispute...

 

(c) With regard to the Parties

 

(d) With regard to the Procedure to Be Followed ...

 

Other Relevant Legal Provisions and Principles.

ICSID, BIT and Mass Claim:

 

 

Remarks 109

 

Legal Dispute Arising out of the BIT — Issues 7 & 6....

 

(a) Issues at Stake and Relevant Legal Provision:

 

(b) Parties’ Positions ...

(c)  Tribunal’s Findings
(i) Alleged Breaches of the BIT.
(ii) Contract Claims v. Treaty Claims .
(iii) Potential Contract Claims against the Italian Bank

dC i 122

 
  
  

 

 

Legal Dispute relating to an Investment — Issues 9 & 8 ...

 

(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

 

(b) Parties’ Positions

 

(c)  Tribunal’s Findings .
(i) Definition and Role of an Investment ~ In General.
(ii) Investment under Article 1(1) BIT......
(iii) Investment under Article 25 ICSID Convention.
(iv) Two Alternative Views on “Investment” Lead to the Same Result.
(v) Made in Argentina...
(vi) In Compliance with the La

dC i 149

 
  
  
    
 

 

 

Between Argentina and Italian Investors - Issues 10 & 11...

 

(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

 

(b) Parties’ Positions

 

(c)  Tribunal’s Findings .

 
  

(i) Jurisdiction Rationae Personae — In Genera
(ii) With regard to Natural Persons 159
(iii) With regard to Juridical Person

dC i 165

 

Subject to the Claimants’ Written Consent — Issue 2.....

(a)
(b)
(©)

qd)

(6) Subject to Argentina’s Written Consent — Issues I(a), 4 & 8...

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

 

Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

Parties’ Positions ..

 

Tribunal’s Findings

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

(i) Law Applicable to the Question of Consent.
(ii) Scope of Examination of the Tribunal.
(iii) Relevant Substantive Validity Requirements.
(iv) Argentina’s Standing to Challenge Claimant:
(v) Existence and Validity of Claimants’ Consen
(vi) Existence of a Clear Consent to ICSID Arbitration
(vii) Validity of Claimants’ Consent to ICSID Arbitration..

 

 

 

 

 

  
    

 

(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisio1
(b) Parties’ Positions...
(c)  Tribunal’s Findings .
(i) InGeneral
(ii) Regarding Foreign Debt Restructuring
(iii) Regarding “Mass Claims”
(iv) Regarding the Negotiation and 18 Months Litigation Requirement
(v) Regarding the Forum Selection Clauses... 7
@ c 195
(7) Conel on Jurisdiction 195

 

ADMISSIBILITY OF THE CLAIM

a)

(2) Mass Action — Issue 1(b)....

 

Remarks

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
   

(a) _ Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions
(b) Parties’ Positions...
(c)  Tribunal’s Findings .
(i) Interpretation of the Silence of the ICSID Framework... 7
(ii) Powers of the Arbitral Tribunal under Article 44 ICSID Convention and
Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules.
(iti) Nature of the Necessary Adaptations to the ICSID Standard Procedure
(iv) of the Necessary
(v) Policy C
@ c i 216
3) C — Issue 4
(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provision...
(b) Parties’ Positions...
(c)  Tribunal’s Findings .
(i) Existence of Consultations...
(ii) TFA’s Role in the Consultation.
(iii) Consultations Requirement as Expression of Good Will
@ c i 22

 

Iv.

(4)

6)

(6)

a

E. OTHER PROCEDURAL ISSUES ....

a)

2)

COSTS

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

 

18 Months Litigation Requirement — Issues 4 & 5...

 

(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

 

(b) Parties’ Positions

 

(c)  Tribunal’s Findings .
(i) The System Put in Place by Article 8 BI
(ii) General Consequences of a Disregard of the System... a
(iii) Consequences of Claimants’ Disregard of the 18 Months Litigation

 

   

@ ¢ i 231
Withdrawal and Addition of Claimants - Is

 
 

(a) Relevant Facts ...

 

(b) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisio

 

(c) _ Parties’ Positions...

(@) — Tribunal’s Findings .
(i) Addition of Claimants

 

 
  
 
  
 
 

 

(ii) of Claimants
(a) Withdrawal, Discontinuance and Default
(b) Conditions for Discontinuance...
(©) Terms of Discontinuance.
(d Consequences of the Discontinuance.......
()  C

 

Abuse of Rights — Issue 2(b)...

 

(a) Issues

 

 

(b) Parties’ Positions...

(c)  Tribunal’s Findings
(i) Good Faith in the Context of Treaty Claims
(ii) Qualification of the Alleged Abuse of Rights
(iii) Lack of Relevant Abuse of Rights.
@ Cc i 258

Concl on issibilit 258

 

 

 

In General: ing the Procedur 263
(a) d
(b) Splitting of the Merits Phase ...
(©) Cc

 

 

 

Specific Procedural Aspects

 

(a) Admissibility of Substitute Annexes — Issue 3(a)....

 

(b) Other Procedural Aspects ...

 

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Vv. THE 11 ISSUES SERIATIM - ANSWERS AND REFERENCES ....

 

VI. DECISIONS 279

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Abbreviations

In this Decision, the Tribunal adopts the following abbreviations:

“RfA” refers to Claimants’ Request for Arbitration of 14 September 2006.

“R-MJ” refers to Respondent’s First Memorial on Jurisdiction and

Admissibility filed on 8 August 2008.

“C-MJ” refers to Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction filed on 7

November 2008.

“R-R-MJ” refers to Respondent’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction and

Admissibility filed on 23 February 2009.

“C-R-MJ” refers to Claimants’ Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction filed on 6

May 2009.

“First Session Tr.” refers to the transcript made of the First Session of 10

April 2008 (Tr. p. 1/1 means Transcript on page | on line 1).

“First Session Minutes” refers to the Minutes of the First Session of 10 April

2008.
“Exh. C[letter]-[N°]” refers to Claimants’ exhibits.
“Exh. R[letter]-[N°]’” refers to Respondent’s exhibits.

“Hearing Tr.” Refers to the transcript made of the Hearing on Jurisdiction
held from 7 to 13 April 2010 (Hearing Tr. Day 1 p. 1/1 means Transcript of
the Hearing Day 1, page | on line 1).

“C-PHB” refers to Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief of 22 June 2010.

“R-PHB” refers to Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief of 22 June 2010.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

With regard to the witness and expert statements,:

- “BIANCHI I” refers to Legal Opinion of Dr. Alberto B. Bianchi of 5
November 2008;

- “BIANCHI II” refers to the Supplementary Legal Opinion of
Dr. Alberto B. Bianchi of 6 May 2009;

- “BRIGUGLIO” refers to the Opinion of Prof. Avv. Antonio Briguglio of 13
February 2009;

- “CERNIGLIA” refers to the Declaration of Avv. Massimo Cerniglia of 4 May
2009;

- “COTTANI I” refers to the Expert Report by Joaquin A. Cottani of 7 November
2008;

- “CREMIEUX” refers to the Expert Report of Pierre-Yves Cremieux (Analysis
Group, Inc.) of 18 February 2009;

- “HARDIE I” refers to the Expert Report of Iain Hardie of 6 November 2008;

- “TLLUMINATO” refers to the Declaration of Dott. Sergio Mario Iluminato of
10 February 2009;

- “MAIRAL I” refers to the Legal Opinion of Héctor A. Mairal of 6 November
2008;

- “NAGAREDA” refers to the Expert Opinion of Richard A. Nagareda of 19
February 2009;

- “NAVIGANT I” refers to the Expert Report of Brent C. Kaczmarek, CFA

(Navigant Consulting, Inc.) of 7 November 2008;

8

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

“PICARDI” refers to the Independent Legal Opinion of Prof. Nicola Picardi of
24 April 2009;

“PINGLE I” refers to the Expert Report of Mr. Rex E. Pingle of 7 November
2008;

“SLAUGHTER & BURKE-WHITE I” refers to the Expert Witness Statement of
Anne-Marie Slaughter and William Burke-White of 8 August 2008;

“SUSMEL” refers to the Legal Opinion of Francisco G. Susmel of 5 November
2008.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

I. PARTIES

A. CLAIMANTS

Claimants, as presented by Claimants, are those described in the Annexes A, B and
C to the Request for Arbitration, as substituted, the total number of whom at the
time of initiation of the arbitration exceeded 180,000! (hereinafter referred to as
“Claimants”). Annexes A and B to the Request for Arbitration contain a list of
natural persons; Annex C to the Request for Arbitration contains a list of juridical

entities.

Annex D to the Request for Arbitration contains a power of attorney and delegation
of authority for each Claimant being a natural person to White & Case LLP (see
page | above). Annex E to the Request for Arbitration contains a power of attorney
and delegation of authority for each Claimant being a juridical person to White &

Case LLP (see page | above).

According to Claimants, Claimants are mostly natural persons of Italian nationality

or juridical persons incorporated and existing under the laws of Italy.

Claimants are represented in these proceedings by “/’Associazione per la Tutela
degli Investitori in Titoli Argentini” (hereinafter “Task Force Argentina” or
“TFA”). The nature of TFA’s representation, its specific role and position in, and
its impact on the present proceedings are disputed between the Parties and will be

dealt with by the Tribunal in the relevant part of this Decision.

' See C-MJ § 164, stating that the total number of Claimants at the time of filing the C-MJ is

180,285. See also Navigant I § 27 and Cremieux § 22.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

B. RESPONDENT.

Respondent is the Argentine Republic (hereinafter referred to as “Respondent” or

“Argentina”).

Respondent is represented in this arbitration by its duly authorised attorneys

mentioned at page 2 above.

Claimants and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

II. FACTS

A. INTRODUCTION

This Decision concerns the jurisdictional phase of a dispute relating to Claimants’
claims for compensatory damages due to Respondent’s alleged breach of its
obligations under the Agreement between the Argentine Republic and the Republic
of Italy on the Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed in Buenos Aires on
22 May 1990, in two original copies, in the Italian and the Spanish language, both
texts being equally authentic (hereinafter “Argentina-Italy BIT” or “BIT” or
“Treaty”) in relation to-bonds issued by Respondent, allegedly held by Claimants,

on which payment Respondent defaulted.

Considering the matter of Argentina’s sovereign debt restructuring on which
Claimants’ claims are based, the Tribunal finds it necessary and appropriate to set
out in this Section II the factual background to Argentina’s default and its debt
restructuring, to the extent it is not disputed between the Parties, by describing the
financial market in relation to bonds, followed by a general overview on sovereign
debt restructuring, and subsequently setting forth Argentina’s restructuring of its
economy and of its debt in relation to bonds in order to eventually address the

evolution/development of the dispute.

The following summary of the factual background is not meant to be exhaustive,
and simply aims to lay down the general context of the dispute, while focusing on

aspects relevant to this jurisdictional phase.

(1) General Concepts relating to Financial Market and Bonds

(i) Bonds. Generally, “bonds” are defined as a debt, in which an interested party
loans money to an entity (corporate or governmental) that borrows the funds for a
defined period of time at certain interest rates. Bonds are commonly referred to as
fixed-income securities and are one of the three main asset classes, along with

stocks and cash equivalents.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Bonds, generally, have a pre-set final date of repayment, the “maturity” date, and
pay interest, “coupon,” on pre-set dates until the maturity date, usually on an annual
or semi-annual basis. Bonds are uniquely identified by a 12-character alpha-
numerical International Securities Identifying Number or “ISIN.” The ISIN allows

electronic trade and settlement in the particular security in markets across the globe.

A set of bonds issued at the same time but having different maturity dates is
referred to as “serial bonds.” A single bond issue offered to the public on multiple

dates is referred to as “series bonds.”

“Sovereign bonds” have the same characteristics as the normal bonds described
above, with the specificity that they are issued by governments and are usually
denominated in a foreign currency. “International sovereign bonds” are bonds
issued by governments denominated in a foreign currency in foreign markets (i.e.,
outside the country of the issuer). Bonds issued by governments in the country’s

own currency are referred to as “government bonds.”

A popular example of sovereign debt security is the instrument of “Brady Bonds,”
first proposed in 1989. They are named after former U.S. Treasury Secretary
Nicholas Brady, who supported the effort to restructure emerging market debt
instruments, following the 1980s debt crisis. Brady Bonds were issued by
governments in developing countries as a conversion of bank debts into loans. The
key innovation behind the introduction of Brady Bonds was to allow commercial
banks to exchange their claims vis-a-vis developing countries into tradable
instruments, allowing them to get the debt off their balance sheets. Due to their
classification as bonds, rather than bank loans, Brady Bonds were much easier to
trade to a broader range of financial market actors. Given that Brady Bonds were
in many cases very large by the standards of the bond markets at the time, they
were seen as one of the most liquid emerging market securities. Brady Bonds were
collateralized, i.e., the repayment of principal and, in some cases, part of the

interest payments, was backed by U.S. government bonds (“Treasuries”), which the

13

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

debtor country purchased, using a combination of International Monetary Fund,
World Bank, and the country’s own foreign currency reserves. The collateral
involved made Brady Bonds considerably more attractive to potential investors
than ordinary, uncollateralized bonds of the issuing country. The two main types of
Brady Bonds are (i) “par bonds,” issued at the same value as the original loan, with
the coupon on the bonds being below market rate and principal and interest
payments are usually guaranteed; and (ii) “discount bonds,” issued at a discount to
the original value of the loan, with the coupon on the bonds being at market rate

and principal and interest payments usually guaranteed.

Brady Bonds are the origin of the emerging sovereign bond market in its current

form. The Brady Bond process ended during the 1990s.

(ii) Process of Issuing Bonds. The process of issuing new bonds involves a chain

of sales in order to achieve distribution of the issued bonds to the final investor.

The bond issuer enters into an agreement with a group of banks, which undertake to
subscribe to and purchase a bond. These banks, commonly referred to as the
“Subscribers” or “Lead Managers,” then organize together with other banks, the so-
called “Underwriters” or “Co-Managers,” a syndicate. The members of this
syndicate, jointly referred to as the “Participants,” each underwrite differing parts
of this bond, depending on their status in the syndicate. These Participants then
distribute their specific part of the bond to further “Intermediaries,” such as
commercial banks, pension funds and other financial institutions, which in turn may
or may not distribute their own part to their clients, including individual investors.
Thus, the purpose of the subscribers, underwriters and intermediaries is to act as a

distribution conduit.

Originally, bonds were traded in the form of negotiable bearer instruments,
imposing significant handling costs and security risks. As trading volume grew,

systems were developed to “dematerialize” tradable securities, i.e., to eliminate

20.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

both the need for certificates and maintenance of a complete security register by the
issuer. Therefore, centralized depository systems were established allowing
electronic trading of the securities through electronic accounts (so-called “non-
certified securities”).” On a global scale, a system has developed whereby issuers
deposit a single “global certificate” representing all the outstanding securities of a
class or series with a “universal depository,” such as The Depository Trust
Company (“DTC”), Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (“DTCC”),
Euroclear or Clearstream. All securities traded through a universal depository are
registered in electronic form, on the books of various Intermediaries (so-called
“book-entry form”) between the ultimate investor, e.g., a retail investor, and the
banks participating in the universal depository, i.e., the Participants. The securities,
e.g., bonds, are then traded and settled on the basis of changes in the registration of
the accounts opened with the Participants for Intermediaries (i.e., Sub-Participants)

and the sub-accounts opened with the Intermediaries for their clients.

Each global certificate is identified by a special number (CUSIP for DTC, ISIN for
Euroclear) and each Participant’s account is also identified. The system uses the
global certificate’s identification number to keep track of transfers and ownership
of the relevant securities. The universal depository issues computer-generated
position listing reports indicating the position of the relevant Participant in the
global certificate and the amount thereof. Final investors’ position on their
securities is usually evidenced by account statements issued by one of the
Participants or intermediaries. It is disputed between the Parties whether the use of
such central depository systems creates different categories of holders or owners of

the relevant categories (see §§ 374, 411, 415 below).

SUSMEL, §§ 7 and 11.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The final investor can be anyone and anything from hedge funds, pension funds,
central banks, to individuals. With respect to the investor, a distinction is made

between “institutional” and “retail” investors.
“Tnstitutional investors” are those that are themselves institutions.

“Retail investors” are those who are individuals, investing on their own behalf. A
bond issued sold to “retail” means, thus, the bond issued is sold to an individual
investor. Retail investors who are less-wealthy individuals prefer the certainty of
investing in fixed-income bonds to the greater volatility of the stock market. Such
retail investors tend to be “buy and hold” investors who buy the bond and hold it

until maturity. Consequently, “buy and hold” investors trade little.

A “retail bank” is referred to when a bank purchases bonds from the larger banks
which typically serves as underwriters and sells bonds to individual investors,

usually through its branch networks.

(iii) The Bond Market. The bond market can be divided into a “primary market”

and a “secondary market.”
- The “primary market” is defined as the market for newly issued bonds.

- The “secondary market” is defined as the market where previously issued

securities are bought and sold.

Thus, the distinguishing difference between the two markets is that in the “primary
market,” the money for the bonds is received by the issuer of the bonds from an
investor, in principle the Underwriters, whereas in the “secondary market,” the

securities are simply assets held by one investor selling them to another investor.

(iv) Rating of Bonds. _ Usually, bonds issues are rated by agencies expressing an
opinion as to the creditworthiness of bonds. One of the most important rating

agencies is Moody’s Investor Services (hereinafter “Moody’s”) assigning a rating

16

28.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

on a scale from AAA to C. Another important rating agency is Standard & Poor’s,
using a rating scale from AAA to D. The rating scales are based on the probability

of default by the issuer in question.

(2) General Overview on Sovereign Debt Restructuring

(i) Sovereign Default. The reason for a State to engage in sovereign debt
restructuring is the default of the State on its sovereign debt. In this connection, the
Tribunal refers to the description of sovereign default as defined by Standard &

Poor’s:>

Standard & Poor’s generally defines default as the failure to meet a principal
or interest payment on the due date (or within the specified grace period)
contained in the original terms of a debt issue.

Question can arise, however, when applying this definition in different
situations and to different types of sovereign obligations. Standard & Poor’s
considers a sovereign to be in default under any of the following
circumstances:

For local and foreign currency bonds, notes, and bills issued by the central
government and held outside the public sector of the country, a sovereign
default occurs when the central government either fails to pay scheduled debt
service on the due date or tenders an exchange offer of new debt with less-
favorable terms than the original issue. While a central government’s failure
to service debt owed to public sector entities, to meet a lease or other nondebt
obligation, or to pay on a guarantee may be indicative of significant
political/economic stress and imminent default, such an event in and of itself
does not constitute a sovereign default. If a debt issue is rated on the basis of
payment of one of these nondebt financial obligations and the sovereign’s
failure to pay results in a default on the rated issue, the rating of that specific
issue will fall to ‘D’.

For local currency issued by the central bank, a sovereign default takes place
when notes are converted into a new currency of less than equivalent face
value.

For private sector bank loans incurred by the central government, a sovereign
default occurs when the central government either fails to pay scheduled debt
service on the due date, or negotiates with the bank creditors a rescheduling of

Exh. C-127, p. 19; see also PINGLE I, § 31.

29.

30.

31.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

principal and/or interest at less-favorable terms than in the original loan. Such
rescheduling agreements covering short- and long-term bank debt are
considered defaults even where, for legal or regulatory reasons, creditors deem
the rescheduling to be voluntary.

In some cases, rescheduled sovereign bank loans are ultimately extinguished
at a discount from their original face value. Typically, such episodes involve
exchange offers (such as those linked to the issuance of Brady bonds),
debt/equity swaps related to government privatization programs, and/or
buybacks for cash. Standard & Poor’s considers such transactions as defaults
when they feature less-favorable terms than the original obligation.

LJ

(ii) Sovereign Debt Restructuring. Sovereign debt restructuring has the aim of
preserving the functioning of the defaulting State as well as the international

financial system while equitably protecting the interests of the creditors.

The modern sovereign debt restructuring is rooted in the establishment of the
International Monetary Fund (hereinafter “IMF”) at the Bretton Woods Conference
in July 1944. According to its Articles of Agreement, the IMF is to “[t]o promote
exchange stability, to maintain orderly exchange arrangements among members,
and to avoid competitive exchange depreciation.”* Thus, the IMF’s purpose is,
inter alia, to prevent sovereign defaults through monitoring and lending, including
providing emergency loans intended to assist sovereigns to avoid default in a time

of potential crisis.

Considering that the size of defaulting government debt has increased exceptionally
while the IMF resources have expanded only slightly, it became clear that
negotiating an agreement with the IMF is not a central part of modern sovereign

debt restructuring anymore.

Article 1§ 3 of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund.

32.

33.

34.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Rather, from the 1950s through the 1970s, the bigger part of lending to sovereigns
was provided by other States or their agencies. The outcome was the establishment
of the Paris Club in 1956, when Argentina agreed to meet its public creditors in

Paris.

The Paris Club consists of a group of sovereign lenders “whose role is to find
coordinated and sustainable solutions to the payment difficulties experienced by

debtor countries.”°

The Paris Club considers itself as a “non institution,” remaining
strictly informal. However, its work is based on a number of rules and principles
agreed by the creditor States in order to facilitate the decision making process and
the conclusion of agreements between the member States of the Paris Club and the

debtor State.°

The principles of the Paris Club are summarized as follows: (i) decision making on
a case-by-case basis; (ii) consensus among the participating creditor States;
(iii) conditionality upon the debtor State providing a precise description of its
economic and financial situation, that it has implemented and is committed to
implement reforms to restore its economic and financial situation, and that it has
demonstrated track record of implementing reforms under an IMF program; (iv)
solidarity among the creditor States of the Paris Club to agree to act as a group in
their dealings with a given debtor State; and (v) comparability of treatment, i.e.,
that a debtor State in agreement with its Paris Club creditor States should not accept
from its non-Paris Club creditors terms of treatment of its debt less favorable to the

debtor than those agreed with the Paris Club.”

5 http://www .clubdeparis.org/

Ibid.; http://www.imf.org/external/np/ext/facts/groups.htm.
http://www.clubdeparis.org. See also PINGLE I, § 83 and SLAUGHTER & BURKE-WHITE I, §

6
7
22.

35.

36.

37.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the nature of sovereign borrowing changed to
“emerging market debt,” and ultimately led to the establishment of the London
Club, given that the effectiveness of the Paris Club was limited in this market
sector. The emerging debt market was rooted in flows of private capital from larger
banks in developed, high-income States, which sought to take advantage of the
higher interest rates available through loans to sovereigns in the developing world.
Introduced by the Baker Plan, named after U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker,
both debtors and creditors understood that funding from international financial
institutions depended on a rescheduling agreement with private creditors, i.e.,

commercial bank lending.

Generally, a debtor initiates a process in which a London Club “Advisory
Committee” is formed, which is chaired by a leading financial firm and includes
representatives from other exposed firms. Upon signing of a restructuring
agreement, the Advisory Committee is dissolved.® Such restructuring agreement is
based on three principles: (i) case-by-case approach, (ii) voluntary participation of

the borrowing banks, and (iii) restructuring designed based on the market situation.’

In the mid-1990s, caused by the substantial issuing of Brady Bonds, mentioned in {
15 above, the vast majority of sovereign borrowing from private sources came from
bond issues by sovereign States. In the light of the ever growing number of holders
of interests in or under a sovereign bond, the closed negotiating framework of the
Paris and London Clubs showed its limits. !° Thus, a new mechanism was

developed in the form of an “exchange offer.”

 

° See also PINGLE I, § 88 and SLAUGHTER & BURKE-WHITE I, § 25 referring to LEX RIEFFEL,

Restructuring Sovereign Debt: The Case For Ad Hoc Machinery 27-29 (2003), § 108.

0 SLAUGHTER & BURKE-WHITE I, § 29 et seq.; PINGLE I, § 96.

20

38.

39.

40.

Al.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

While many elements of an exchange offer are disputed between the Parties, they
do seem to agree on the main object of an exchange offer, which may be
summarized as follows: In an exchange offer, the sovereign facing default develops
a new issue of bonds that are within the sovereign’s ability to pay and acceptable to
most bond holders and offers such new bonds in exchange for the old bonds in the

hope of securing the acceptance of a supermajority of the bondholders.

Although the Parties agree that the terms and conditions of an exchange offer
should ideally aim to ensure an equitable balance between the interests of the
sovereign in restructuring its debt according to its payment abilities and the

interests of the creditors, they disagree on how and when such aim is best achieved.

Currently, there exists no formal legal framework establishing precise steps to be
followed by the defaulting sovereign or the creditors. Nevertheless, an informal
regime has developed consisting of the following principles: (i) sovereign to signal
the need of debt restructure; (ii) communication between the sovereign and the
creditors; (iii) consensus and consent on the terms of the restructure; and

(iv) equitable burden sharing.'!

Remaining inefficiencies in the sovereign restructuring practices, in particular with
regard to the risk created by holdout creditors, continue to trigger a series of
proposals for improvements. Existing proposals include the creation of an
international bankruptcy mechanism modelled on U.S. domestic bankruptcy law, or

the development of contractual “collective action clause” to be included in bonds in

u

IMF.

SLAUGHTER & BURKE-WHITE I, §§ 42 er seq. and §§ 87 et seq. referring to a proposal of the

21

42.

43.

44.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

order to bind a holdout minority to new payment terms agreed upon by a

supermajority of bondholders. a

(3) Argentina’s Restructuring of Its Economy and Its Debt in relation
to Bonds

After having laid down the basic concepts necessary to understand the general
context of the dispute, the present section focuses on the economic context
prevailing in Argentina preceding, during and following the issuance of the bonds

at stake in the present dispute.

(a) Argentina’s Restructuring of Its Economy in the 1990s

In the 1990s, following the 1980s debt crisis, Argentina embarked on an ambitious
effort to restructure its economy in order to encourage growth and reduce debt and
inflation by deregulating its economy and privatizing certain industries.
Argentina’s Convertibility Plan of 1991 was part of the strategy aimed at
addressing inflation, by pegging the Argentine peso to the U.S. dollar and limiting
the printing of additional currency to an amount necessary to purchase surpluses of

U.S. dollars in the foreign exchange market.

(i) Issuing of Sovereign Bonds. Issuing sovereign bonds was one of the pillars of
restructuring Argentina’s economy in the early 1990s. Thus, on 29 October 1992,
Law No. 24,156, the Law on Financial Administration and Control Systems
(hereinafter “LFA”) was enacted,'* being the legal foundation for Argentina to

issue bonds. It contains several requirements as described below:"*

R See SLAUGHTER & BURKE-WHITE I, §§ 87 et seg. and §§ 90-91referring with regard to
collective action clauses to a report of the IMF encouraging such clauses (report available on
http://www.imf.org/external/np/g22/ifcrep.pdf).

8 Exh. CLA-ARG-297.

" See MAIRAL I, §§ 39-44. These requirements are not disputed by Respondent.

22

15

16

"0

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Legal Authorization: Either a specific law authorizes the loan, or the loan
is included in a general authorization contained in the annual budget law.
The relevant law may authorize either the Executive or the Secretary of
the Treasury to execute relevant transactions. The annual budget law shall
specify the type of debt, the maximum amount authorized for the
transaction, the minimum repayment schedule, and the purpose of the

financing.'°

Executive Decision: An executive decision (called a “Decree”) is issued to
approve the debt transaction specifically or to authorize the Ministry of
Economy or the Secretary of the Treasury to execute transactions up to a
certain amount. Alternatively, the enabling law may authorize the Ministry
of Economy or the Secretary of the Treasury directly to enter into

sovereign debt transactions.

Central Bank opinion: The Central Bank issues an opinion as required by
Article 61 of the LFA concerning the impact of the debt on Argentina’s

balance of payments. 6

Intervention of the National Office of Public Credit: This office certifies
that the amount of the sovereign debt transaction is within the limits
provided by the relevant budget law, and thus complies with Article 60 of
the LFA that provides that Government agencies cannot execute debt
transactions that are not authorized by the General Budget Law of the

respective year or in another specific law.'7

Article 60 LFA.
Exh. CLA-ARG-297.
Ibid.

23

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

e Approval of the terms and conditions: A decision of the Ministry of
Economy or of the Secretary of the Treasury approves the terms and
conditions of the bonds, including the subscription agreement, the paying
agency agreement, and the prospectus, and authorizes a Government

officer to execute the appropriate documentation.

e Legal opinion by the Procuracién de Tesoro or the Legal Office of the
Ministry of Economy: The Procuracién de Tesoro or, as the case may be,
the Legal Office issues an opinion on the validity of the transaction at
stake and certain other requirements. This opinion represents the official

position of the Argentine State on the issue.

In addition to enacting a series of laws and decrees, Argentina also implemented

various programs facilitating issuing sovereign bonds.

In particular, in order to raise capital, Argentina implemented the Brady Bond

program and started issuing Brady Bonds in early 1993.

Argentina intended to develop a diversified market by issuing bonds in the

international financial markets.

The process of Argentina issuing bonds in Europe was by relying on large
investment banks as its lead managers, which studied the markets and competed
with each other for Argentina’s business. Argentina’s choice of its lead managers
were investment banks such as BNP Paribas, CS First Boston, Deutsche Bank, J.P.
Morgan, and Morgan Stanley. Thereafter, banking syndicates were established to
underwrite and distribute differing volumes of bonds, depending on the

underwriters’ status in the syndicate.

The lead managers would design, together with Argentina, a general bond issuance
strategy. Based thereon, they would then suggest to Argentina which commercial

banks would participate as co-managers, based, namely, on their ability to reach

24

50.

51.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

investors with a profile fitting the bond issuance strategy. In this respect, while it is
not disputed that Argentina participated in marketing efforts to banks and large
institutional purchasers, the Parties disagree whether Argentina’s bond issuance

strategy targeted the Italian retail market, as submitted by Claimants.

In total, from 1991 through 2001, Argentina placed over US$ 186.7 billion in
sovereign bonds across both domestic and international capital markets. 'S This
included 179 bonds issued in the international capital markets that raised a total of
approximately US$ 139.4 billion, of which 37% were denominated in US$, 22%
were denominated in Euros, 11% were denominated in Yen, 11% were
denominated in Deutsche Mark, 7% were denominated in Italian Lira, 3% in
Argentine Pesos and 9% in other currencies.'? Out of the 179 bonds issued by
Argentina, 173 were denominated in foreign currencies; six were denominated in
Argentine Pesos. Claimants allegedly purchased 83 of the 173 foreign currency

bonds.”

The 83 bonds allegedly purchased by Claimants are governed by the laws of
different jurisdictions, were issued in different currencies, and listed on various
international exchanges, such as Buenos Aires, Frankfurt, Hong Kong,
Luxembourg, Milan, Munich, and Vienna. These bonds generally paid a fixed

coupon with the final maturity varying from three to thirty years.”!

8 CoTTANI I, § 22, referring to Chart “All Argentine External Bonds, 1991-2001,” derived

from Bloomberg and Ministry of Economy, “Titulos Publicos Emitidos en Moneda Nacional” and
“Titulos Publicos Emitidos en Moneda Extranjera” (Charts of Argentine Government Bonds in
Domestic and Foreign Currency), 31 December 2001. See also R-MJ § 11, and Exh. RE-195.

9 NAVIGANT I, Table 2; see also C-MJ §§ 117-118.

20 CoTTANII, § 22, See also R-MJ § 11, and Exh. RE-195.

2 HARDIE I, § 19; CREMIEUX, §§ 9 ef seq.

25

52.

53.

54.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(b) | Argentina’s Financial Crisis and Default of 2001

By the late 1990s, Argentina began to suffer a severe economic recession and
consequent reduction of fiscal revenues, leading Argentina to incur additional

debt.”

The Parties disagree on the specific causes of this recession. Respondent
emphasizes external factors such as the Asian, Russian and Brazilian financial
crises in 1997, 1998 and 1999 respectively; the raising of interest rates in the US;
the appreciation of the US dollar from 1995 to 1999 affecting export prices; ete.*
In contrast, Claimants invoke failures on Argentina’s side as important factors

leading to the recession.”4

These adverse economic developments reflected mainly in two ways on the

Argentine economy:

(i) Substantial “capital flight”: Many businesses and individuals fearing a
devaluation of the peso started to withdraw money from the Argentine
banking system. By the end of 2001, those withdrawals allegedly amounted
to approximately US$ 15 billion,” endangering the entire banking system and
forcing Argentina’s central bank to expend substantial parts of its
international reserve to defend the value of the peso, and forcing the

Government to introduce restrictions on the withdrawal of bank deposits.

R-MJ § 20.
R-MJ §§ 7 et seg. and 13 et seq.
C-R-MJ §§ 108 et seq.

R-MJ § 16, Ex. RE-132.

26

55.

56.

57.

58.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(ii) Decrease of capital inflow: As a result of a loss of confidence in the
Argentine economy, capital inflows from foreign direct investment declined

significantly.°°

As the need for debt relief became clear, Argentina took in 2001 various measures
in an attempt to restructure its economy and lighten its debt. Such measures
included cutting both federal and provincial government spending, adopting a zero-
deficit law, improving its tax administration system, and supporting competition
with tax cuts for exporters, as well as global exchange offers in February, June and

November 2001.7”

These efforts apparently did not suffice to redress the situation. By December 2001,
Argentina had allegedly come to a point where it was unable to avoid deferring
interest and principal payments on all of its external bond debt owed to both foreign

and Argentine creditors.”*

These economic difficulties were accompanied by considerable political and social
unrests, leading eventually to the resignation of the then President Fernando de la

Ria and his entire cabinet on 19 December 2001.

On 23 December 2001, Argentina defaulted by publicly announcing the deferral of
over US$100 billion of external bond debt owed to both non-Argentine and

Argentine creditors.”

R-MJ § 17.
R-R-MJ §§ 22-23, and §§ 65-66, see also Exh. RE-195, RF-26.
28 R-MI § 24.

R-R-MJ § 66.

27

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(c) The Events following Argentina’s Default of 2001

After President de la Rua’s resignation of 19 December 2001, various difficult
attempts to appoint a new president were made. On 1 January 2002, Congress

eventually elected Mr. Eduardo Duhalde as President.

In January 2002, Congress declared a public emergency in social, economic,
administrative, financial and exchange matters with the passage of the Public
Emergency and Reform Law of 2002 (the “Emergency Law”).*° The Emergency
Law, among other things, terminated the parity between the peso and the dollar.

This “pesification” was followed by a substantial devaluation of the peso.

The effects of the economic crisis on ordinary Argentine citizens were devastating.
According to Argentina, by May 2002, unemployment had reached 21.5%, an 8%
increase over 1998, the year the crisis began. Another 19% of the population was
underemployed. The poverty level increased to 54.3% of the Argentine urban

population and the indigence level reached 22.7%!

(d) Argentina’s Restructuring of Its Debt in relation to Bonds and
Relevant Creditors’ Reactions

The substantial devaluation of the peso further accentuated the weight of debt in
foreign currencies, which constituted an important part of Argentina’s total debt.

This led Argentina to envisage the restructuring of its foreign debt.

Based on figures produced by Respondent, by the end of 2002, Argentina’s total

public debt burden was approximately US$ 137 billion, representing approximately

3 RMI§ 30.
u R-MI § 32.

28

64.

65.

66.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

130% of its GDP in 2002, and among which approximately US$ 76 billion was

owed to resident and non-resident public bondholders.*”

In relation to the restructuring of its foreign debt, according to figures brought
forward by Respondent in 2003 and relied upon by Claimants, more than US$ 27.5
billion worth of bonds were held by European bondholders, of which
approximately US$ 22.2 billion were held by retail bondholders, including US$
13.5 billion owned by Italian bondholders (approximately 600,000 persons).**

On 18 September 2002, pursuant to a resolution of the Executive Committee of the
Italian Banking Association (hereinafter “ABI”), eight major Italian banks (Banca
Antonveneta, Banca Intesa, Banca Sella, BNL, Iccrea Banca, Monte dei Paschi di
Siena, San Paolo, and UniCredito) established /’Associazione per la Tutela degli
Investitori in Titoli Argentini or “Task Force Argentina” or “TFA” in Rome (see §
4 above). TFA is organized under Italian law as an associazione non riconosciuta,
funded by its members’ contributions and headed by Dr. Nicola Stock as its

president.

The aim of TFA is to “represent the interests of the Italian bondholders in pursuing
a negotiated settlement with Argentina.”*° Bondholders wishing to make use of this

possibility and to be represented by TFA were requested to sign a “Mandate for the

2

~ R-MJ § 33.

*  Corrant I, § 46, referring to the presentation of the Secretariat of Finance, Ministry of

Economy and Production “Argentina — From Stabilization to Economic Growth” of August 2003 at:
http://www.ar fo.gov.ar/d S ion_english_august.pdf.
“http://www. tfargentina.it/chisiamo.php.
C-MJ § 180, which reflects the wording to be found in Italian on
http://www.tfargentina.it/chisiamo.php. See also TFA’s Bylaws 2002, Article 2, which provide that
“to represent free of charge and on the basis of a mandate the interests of Italian investors in
Argentinean securities within the framework of the debt restructuring operations to be negotiated
with the Argentinean authorities or other Argentinean issuers” (translation provided by the
Tribunal).

35

29

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Protection of the Interests Connected with the Bonds involved in the ‘Argentinean
Crisis” (so called “TFA Negotiating Mandate”).*° The specific role and the
legitimacy of TFA’s actions under this mandate is disputed between the Parties and

will be subject to further examination (see §§ 449 et seg. below).
The TFA Negotiating Mandate provides — inter alia — as follows:

The undersigned [...]
HAVING ACKNOWLEDGED THAT:

banks and financial intermediaries have created the Association for the
Protection of Interests of the Investors in the Argentinean Bonds
(“Associazione per la Tutela degli Interessi degli Investiotori in Titoli
Argentini”), which has the following purposes:

to represent, free of charge and on the basis of a mandate, the interests of the
subscribers of Argentinean bonds in the frame of the restructuring of the debt,
which will be subject to the negotiation with the Argentinean Authorities or
with other Argentinean issuers;

to make available its own consulting and assistance activity, to the above
purposes;

to handle the relationships with the Argentinean diplomatic and consular
Authorities, with the central and local Authorities of such country, with the
International Monetary Fund, with the European Central Bank and with the
various National Central Banks, with the Italian Government and Parliament
as well as, more in general, with each other economic and political, private
and public, national and international authority, organisation and institution,
with which the Association will deem necessary or appropriate to consult or
co-operate;

to attend the negotiations for the restructuring of the debt with the Argentinean
Authorities or with other Argentinean issuers at any national or international
seat, in accordance with the Bylaws of the Association and with the decisions
taken by the management bodies of the Association;

to make the requests and proposals which as might deem appropriate in the
interests of the holders of the bonds represented by it and to obtain the
necessary consent of such holders (the way and the timing thereof will be
decided).

DELEGATES

Exh. C-417.

30

68.

69.

70.

71.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The aforementioned Association to represent himself during any stage of the
negotiations in connection with the receivables of the bonds indicated in the
exhibit hereof.

The undersigned hereby undertakes to communicate promptly in writing to the
bank any amendments which may occur in the holding the bonds indicated in
the exhibit hereof.

The undersigned may terminate this proxy, in writing, with a notice of 15
days, provided that the same proxy will be considere[d] terminated in the case
of sale of all the bonds indicated in the same exhibit.

(Emphasis in the original)

Allegedly, over 450,000 Italian persons and entities claimed to have held Argentine
bonds for an aggregated nominal amount of US$ 12 billion and submitted their

mandates to TFA.*”

While the Parties are in agreement that discussions took place between TFA and
Respondent in order to reach a solution for the outstanding debt, they disagree
whether these discussions can be considered to constitute proper negotiations
between TFA, on behalf of Claimants, and Respondent. The Tribunal will analyze
the exchanges between TFA and Respondent in its findings where appropriate and

necessary.*®

In September 2003, Argentina reached an agreement with the IMF concerning a

three-year credit package of approximately US$ 12.5 billion.”

On 22 September 2003, Argentina presented an initial debt restructuring strategy
known as the “Dubai Proposal,” focusing on the objective of obtaining a reduction

in the face value of the unrestructured debt:“°

7 Exh. C-RA-I1, 12 and 13; see further C-MJ § 182 and Exh. C-372.

See below §§ 559 et seq.
R-MJ § 36 and Exh. RE-137.

38

30

31

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

“LJ

We also have to ensure liquidity with a new maturity profile in line with
Argentina’s real repayment capacity.

Finally, although our decision is not to increase Argentina’s debt, but to
reduce it, we have to facilitate a responsible return to the capital markets to
ensure compliance with the commitments assumed under the restructuring.

LJ

The debt to be restructured i[s] defined as “eligible debt”. It includes all the
bonds issued before the cutoff date, December 31, 2001. To have an idea of
the size and complexity of Argentina’s debt, the eligible debt encompasses
152 different bonds, issued originally in 14 different currencies, which have
been reduced to seven thanks to the Euro, and subject to eight different
legislations.

LJ

Undoubtedly, our proposal must be based on Argentina’s repayment capacity
in the medium and long term.

The bond swap and the amendment of the issuance conditions, in the cases in
which such amendment is possible, will take place simultaneously. The menu
will include comparable bonds, equivalent in terms of present value.

LJ

We would like to make clear again that there will be no discrimination among
bondholders.

LJ

Summing up, we want to have a smaller number of bonds, a smaller number
of currencies and jurisdictions so that the resulting bonds may have a higher
liquidity.

LJ

The new bonds will be: Discount bonds, whose value evidences the haircut in
the face value; Par bonds, which suffer no face value reduction or a small face
value reduction, but that offer coupons and longer payment terms; and last of
all Capitalized Bonds. Our offer will also include different alternatives for
such bonds, with coupons including a lower fixed interest rate coupled with a
variable rate indexed on the basis of the growth of Argentina’s GDP. These
indexed bonds reflect our intention to share the benefits of increased growth in
the medium term and to pay a lower interest rate flow in the case of possible
slowdowns of or drops in Argentina’s GDP. It seems to be a reasonable

 

40

Exh, RE-138, pp. 14, 21, 22, 24.

32

72.

73.

74.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

option since nobody knows which Argentina’s economy growth rate will be
in, let’s say, five or ten years.

LP

On 12 January 2004, the Global Committee of Argentina Bondholders (hereinafter
“GCAB”) was founded in Rome. Its founding members were three major
bondholder groups, the Argentine Bond Restructuring Agency, the Argentine
Bondholders Committee (hereinafter “ABC”), and TFA as well as two banks, Bank
of Tokyo-Mitsubishi and Shinsei Bank. At the time of GCAB’s founding, the
members represented more than half a million retail investors and more than 100
institutions, including banks, funds, partnerships, and committees, with total
holding of US$ 37 billion in nominal value."! Nicola Stock, chairman of TFA, and

a representative of ABC were appointed as chairmen of GCAB.

The aim of GCAB was to allow a better coordination of the various members’
efforts to negotiate with Argentina “in order to achieve an efficient and fair

42

restructuring of the debt of Argentina. To achieve this purpose, the Steering

Committee of GCAB was to “establish a plan of action and guidelines for a single,
global strategy.”

Following the publication of the Dubai Proposal, discussions were held between
creditor groups, such as GCAB and TFA, and Respondent, whereby the Parties
disagree on whether these discussions can be considered “good faith” negotiations

or consultations, each of them accusing the other of a lack of good faith.“ The

Exh. C-163.
Exh. C-297.
Exh. C-297.

“4 C-MJ §§ 197-198; R-MJ §§ 87-97, and 99 in which Respondent described GCAB as “TFA-
dominated.”

33

75.

76.

77.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Tribunal will analyze any exchanges between such creditor groups and Respondent

in its findings where appropriate and necessary.*°

On 27 April 2004, Argentina issued a press release announcing its intention to file
Form 18-K/A with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission in “early June

2004” concerning a proposal of a debt restructuring exchange offer.*°

On 10 June 2004, Argentina filed Form 18-K/A with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission, describing the basic terms of its exchange offer. Th
Autumn 2004, the Argentine Government filed further documents with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission and other relevant national securities
regulators laying out details of the exchange offer (hereinafter “Exchange Offer
2005”).** The Exchange Offer 2005 opened on 14 January 2005 and closed on 25
February 2005.

On 14 January 2005, Argentina launched the Exchange Offer 2005, pursuant to
which bondholders could exchange 152 different series of bonds, on which
Argentina had suspended payment in 2001, for new debt that Argentina would
issue. The Exchange Offer 2005 provided to the beneficial owners of the roughly
US$ 81.8 billion in eligible outstanding debt a choice of options from which to
choose the form of their new debt. The bondholders could choose par bonds with
the same principal but a lower interest rate than the non-performing debt, discount
bonds with reduced principal but a higher interest rate, or quasi-par bonds with a
principal and interest rate falling between the two other bond options. Each bond

offered was accompanied by securities with payment conditioned upon Argentina’s

45 See below §§ 559et seq.
46 Exh. C-165.

“7 Exh, RE-152.

See e.g. Exh. RE-155.

34

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

gross domestic product (“GDP-Linked Securities”). The first page of the

Prospectus Supplement to the Prospectus of 27 December 2004 states:”

“The Republic of Argentina

Offers to Owners of

Each Series of Bonds listed in Annex A to this Prospectus Supplement
(collectively, the “Eligible Securities”)

To exchange Eligible Securities for its

Par Bonds due December 2038 (“Pars”),

Discount Bonds due December 2033 (“Discount”),

Quasi-Par Bonds due December 2045 (“Quasi-pars”) and

GDP-linked Securities that expire in December 2035 (“GDP-linked
Securities”)

collectively, the “New Securities,” on the terms and conditions described in
this prospectus supplement.

The GDP-linked Securities will initially be attached to the Pars, Discounts and
Quasi-pars.

The aggregate Eligible Amount (as defined below) of all Eligible Securities
currently outstanding is U.S.$81.8 billion, comprising U.S.$79.7 billion of
principal and U.S.$21 billion of accrued but unpaid interest as of December
31, 2001, based on exchange rates in effect on December 31, 2003.

cP

On 9 February 2005, Law 26,017 was enacted, referred to by Claimants as the
“Cram Down Law,” and hereafter referred to as “Emergency Law” or “Law
26,017.” It was promulgated on 10 February 2005 and published in the Official
Gazette on 11 February 2005. The Emergency Law provides, inter alia, that with
regard to those bonds which were eligible for but were not exchanged in the

Exchange Offer 2005 (i) the Executive Branch of the government shall not reopen

® Exh, RF-28.

35

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

the exchange process; and (ii) the national government is prohibited from entering

into any juridical, extra-juridical or private transaction:

“ARTICULO 1° -- Sin perjuicio de la vigencia de las normas que resulten
aplicables, los bonos del Estado nacional que resultan elegibles para el canje
establecido en el Decreto N° 1735 del 9 de diciembre de 2004, que no
hubiesen sido presentados al canje segtin lo establecido en dicho decreto,
quedaran sujetos adicionalmente a las disposiciones de la presente ley.

ARTICULO 2° -- El Poder Ejecutivo nacional no podrda, respecto de los
bonos a que se refiere el articulo 1° de la presente, reabrir el proceso de canje
establecido en el Decreto N° 1735/04 mencionado.

ARTICULO 3° -- Prohibese al Estado nacional efectuar cualquier tipo de
transaccién judicial, extrajudicial o privada, respecto de los bonos a que
refiere el articulo 1° de la presente ley.

ARTICULO 4 -- El poder Ejecutivo nacional deberd, dentro del marco de las
condiciones de emisién de los respectivos bonos, y de las normas aplicables
en las jurisdicciones correspondientes, dictar los actos administrativos
pertinentes y cumplimentar las gestiones necesarias para retirar de cotizaci6n
en todas las bolsas y mercados de valores, nacionales o extranjeros, los bonos
a que se refiere el articulo anterior.

ARTICULO 5° -- El Poder Ejecutivo nacional remitiré al Honorable
Congreso de la Nacién un informe que refleje los efectos del canje y los
nuevos niveles de deuda y reduccién de la misma.

ARTICULO 6° -- Sin perjuicio de lo establecido precedentemente, los bonos
del Estado nacional elegibles de acuerdo a lo dispuesto por el Decreto N°
1735/04, depositados por cualquier causa o titulo a la orden de tribunales de
cualquier instancia, competencia y jurisdiccién, cuyos titulares no hubieran
adherido al canje dispuesto por el decreto antes citado o no hubieran
manifestado, en forma expresa, en las respectivas actuaciones judiciales, su
voluntad de no adherir al mencionado canje antes de la fecha de cierre del
mismo, segtin el cronograma establecido por el referido decreto N° 1735/04,
quedarén reemplazados, de pleno derecho, por los “BONOS DE LA
REPUBLICA ARGENTINA A LA PAR EN PESOS STEP UP 2038”, en las
condici blecidas para la asi idn, liquidacién y emisién de tales
bonos por el Decreto N° 1735/04 y sus normas complementarias.

LP

36

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

79. In the non-official English translation provided by Respondent, these articles

provide as follows:”

“Article 1 - Notwithstanding the validity of applicable rules, the national
Government’s bonds eligible for the exchange established in Decree No. 1735
of December 9th, 2004, which were not exchanged as established in said
decree, shall be subject additionally to the provisions of the present law.

Article 2 - The national Executive Branch shall not, with respect to the bonds
to which Article 1 of the present law refers, reopen the exchange process
established in said Decree No. 1735/04.

Article 3 - The national Government is precluded from entering into any type
of judicial, extra-judicial or private settlement with respect to the bonds to
which Article | of the present law refers.

Article 4 - The national Executive Branch shall, within the framework of the
issuing conditions of the respective bonds and the applicable rules in the
relevant jurisdictions, issue appropriate administrative acts and effect
necessary steps to delist the bonds to which the previous article refers from all
exchanges and markets, domestic and foreign.

 

 

Article 5 — [not translated]

Article 6 - Notwithstanding the above established, the bonds of the national
Government eligible under the terms of Decree No. 1735/04, deposited
pursuant to any cause or title on the order of any court of any venue,
competence, and jurisdiction, whose depositary has not participated in the
exchange provided for in the above-mentioned decree or who has not
indicated, in express form, in their respective court proceedings, their desire
not to participate in said exchange before its expiration date, according to the
timeline established by said decree No. 1735/04, shall be replaced, by
operation of law, with the ‘BONDS OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC AT
PAR IN PESOS STEP UP 2038,’ according to the terms established for the
assignment, liquidation and issue of such bonds by Decree No. 1735/04 and
its complementary norms.”

80. On 25 February 2005, the period for submitting tenders pursuant to the Exchange
Offer 2005 expired, 76.15% of all holdings having participated in the Exchange

Offer 2005, *! following which Argentina issued approximately an aggregate

%° Exh. RD-121.
3 R-MJ § 40; C-R-MI § 205.

37

81.

82.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

principal amount of US$ 15 billion in par bonds, US$ 11.9 billion in discount
bonds, ARG$ 24.3 billion (US$ 8.3 billion) in quasi-par bonds and US$ 62.3 billion
in GDP-Linked Securities. Forty-four percent of the new debt was denominated

in indexed pesos.™> The Exchange Offer 2005 settled on 2 June 2005.
The Claimants did not participate in the Exchange Offer 2005.

The announcement and filing of the Exchange Offer 2005 was followed by a series
of court litigations initiated by creditors unsatisfied with the terms and conditions
of the Exchange Offer 2005. According to Respondent, these series of court cases

included the following lawsuits:

(i) Over 130 lawsuits brought in the US, mostly in New York, seeking
repayment of approximately US$ 3.3 billion in principal and accrued
interest.** These lawsuits include the Urban Case, in which a German
corporation - H.W. Urban GmbH - and holder of two series of Argentine
bonds initiated a class action,” the Agritech Case and the Gandola Case in
which many of the plaintiffs are also Claimants in the present arbitration.°°
These cases were stayed by the New York District Court upon request of

plaintiffs in favor of the pending ICSID proceeding.””

(ii) Over 470 court proceedings filed against Argentina in Germany, with claims

amounting to a total of approximately EUR 106 million. Among these cases,

Exh, RE-195, p. 135.
PINGLE I, § 254.
R-MJ § 53 et seq.

H.W. Urban GmbH et al. v. The Republic of Argentina, 02 Civ. 6699 (TPG) (SDNY), see
Exh, C-193, p. 3.

56 Agritech S.R.L. et al. v. Republic of Argentina, 06 Civ. 15393 (TPG) (SDNY), see Exh. RD
143, and Gandola & C. S.P.A,, et al. v. Republic of Argentina, see Exh. C-505.

7 Exh. RD-148 and RD-154.

38

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

judgment would have been entered against Argentina in 115 cases for a total

amount of EUR 39 million plus interest.°*

(iii) Thirteen lawsuits filed against Argentina in Italy before civil courts, with

claims amounting to a total of approximately EUR 71 million. ”

Except for the US litigations referred to below (see § 193), the Arbitral Tribunal
has not been informed of the specific developments and status of these various

litigations.
(4) Evolution of the Dispute following Argentina’s Exchange Offer
2005

On 28 February 2006, TFA wrote a letter to the Argentine Ministry of Economy

and Production, Minister Lic. Felisa Miceli:

“Dear Minister Miceli:

As you are well aware, Associazione per la Tutela degli Investitori in Titoli
Argentini — Task Force Argentina (“TFA”), is a member and co-founder of the
Global Committee of Argentina Bondholders (““GCAB”) and a member of the
International Group of Rome for Argentina Bondholders (“IGOR”). Together
with and as a member of the GCAB group, and separately, on its own, TFA
has contacted repeatedly the Government of the Argentine Republic
(“Argentina”) in an effort to resolve amicably the dispute arising out of
Argentina’s default on and expropriation of TFA bondholders’ investments,
and lack of fair and equitable treatment of the TFA bondholders in violation of
the Agreement between the Republic of Italy and the Argentine Republic on
the Promotion and Protection of Investments signed in Buenos Aires on May
22, 1990 (“Bilateral Investment Agreement”), and Italian law.

In furtherance of our efforts on behalf of hundreds of thousands of Italian
bondholders/creditors to recover on defaulted Argentine debt we have
engaged in several years of unceasing efforts to initiate meaningful
negotiations with Argentina. We write to remind you that beginning around

R-MJ § 59.
R-MJ § 60 and R-R-MJ §§ 95 et seq.
© Exh. C-418.

39

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

November of 2002, we have continuously attempted, directly and through
IGOR and GCAB, to recover the debt owed by Argentina to our constituents
through negotiations and in this regard have notified Argentina of the
bondholders’ dispute on numerous occasions, including, inter alia,
specifically that (1) we disapproved of the unilateral Argentine exchange offer
and Argentina’s obstructionist tactics with external creditors; and (2) we
expected Argentina to engage in good faith negotiations with us to arrive at an
acceptable debt restructuring plan. As you may recall, we have communicated
often and repetitively in an attempt to resolve the bondholders’ dispute
amicably including, inter alia:

. November 28, 2002 meeting with Minister of the Economy Lavagna,
Undersecretary of Finance Madcur and Ambassador Kelly in Rome.

. December 3, 2002 meeting with Secretary for Economic Policy
Tangelson in Rome.

. February 7, 2003 meeting with new Argentine Ambassador Roggiero in
Rome.

. February 10-14, 2003 meetings with Minister Lavagna, Undersecretary
of Finance Nielsen, Undersecretary of Finance Madcur and Director
General Mirré of the Ministry of International Affairs in Buenos Aires.

. March 26, 2003 meeting with Undersecretary of Finance Nielsen and
Undersecretary of Finance Madcur in Rome.

. May 23, 2003 letter from TFA to Minister Lavagna notifying him that
we represented 400,000 Italian bondholders with holdings totaling Euro
13 billion, and expressing our hope that we would soon be able to begin
negotiations to reach terms for Argentina’s bond restructuring that
would be acceptable to the TFA bondholders.

. July 17, 2003 letter from TFA to Secretary of Finance Nielsen
attempting to confirm a consultative group meeting and informing that
we would prefer to participate as a “negotiating group.”

. July 25, 2003 meeting with Secretary Nielsen in Rome.

. August 25, 2003 letter from TFA to Secretary Nielsen reminding
Argentina that it had given assurances at the prior meeting in Rome that
Argentina’s restructuring proposal “would not occur without the
consultation with, and, if possible, the pre-agreement of, the
representatives of the major creditors....”. We further stated that we
would not “stand idly by a situation which cannot reach a shared and
acceptable solution.”

. September 22, 2003 participation in a presentation by Minister Lavagna
during the IMF meeting in Dubai.

. September 23, 2003 meeting with Secretary Nielsen in Dubai.

. October 22, 2003 meeting with Secretary Nielsen in Rome.

40

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

November 10, 2003 letter from TFA to Secretary Nielsen reminding
Argentina that we intend to be a “negotiating group,” rather than simply
a “consultative group.”

November 12, 2003 letter from IGOR to Minister Lavagna informing
Argentina that its debt restructuring proposal had been “rejected by all
the major investor groups.” We further reiterated our ongoing desire to
“negotiate in good faith with Argentina a fair and sustainable
restructuring of the government’s foreign debt.” Finally, we prepared
and included a set of parameters for sustainable debt restructuring for
Argentina, and warned that “[i]f Argentina does not enter good faith
negotiations with its major creditors and [instead] pursues the
implementation of a debt restructuring along the lines the government
has proposed, many bondholders will reject it and will resort to legal
action in an effort to protect their interests.” Secretary Nielsen’s
follow-up letter to creditors dated November 14, 2003 stated that
Argentina was committed to pursuing “good faith negotiations toward a
successful debt restructuring that attracts broad participation from
creditors.”

November 26, 2003 meeting with Mr. Facundo Vila, representative in
Italy of the Ministry of Economy of Argentina, in Rome.

January 13, 2004 letter from GCAB to Minister Lavagna inviting
formal negotiations with respect to defaulted Argentine debt.

January 27, 2004 letter from GCAB to Minister Lavagna reiterating our
hope that “you will be starting negotiations with the GCAB [...]”

February 18, 2004 letter from GCAB to Minister Lavagna stating that
we “look forward to initiating this constructive [negotiation] process, a
process that has not yet begun....”

February 25, 2004 meeting with Mr. Federico Molina, representative of
the Argentine Embassy to the United States, in New York and
representatives of GCAB.

February 27, 2004 meeting with new Argentine Ambassador Taccetti in
Rome.

April 16, 2004 meeting with representative of the Argentina Ministry of
the Economy in Buenos Aires and representatives of GCAB.

May 4, 2004 letter from GCAB to Minister Lavagna reconfirming that
further to the April 16, 2004 meeting in Buenos Aires, “GCAB is
prepared to initiate direct and good faith negotiations with the
Argentine government...”

May 13, 2004 letter from GCAB to Minister Lavagna informing
Argentina that “GCAB is still waiting to be invited for the agreed
technical meeting with the Argentine government...”

41

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

. May 26, 2004 letter from GCAB to Minister Lavagna requesting the
proposed agenda and timing for the “previously discussed technical
meeting and productive negotiations leading to an acceptable deal...”

. June 8, 2004 letter from GCAB to Minister Lavagna stating that “it is
now essential to initiate the good faith negotiation process to which the
government committed in order to reach an acceptable deal...”

. June 21, 2004 letter from GCAB press release announcing GCAB’s
retention of Bear Stearns as its financial advisor to assist it in
negotiation with Argentina and stating that “GCAB remains fully
committed to starting serious negotiations directly with Argentina.”

. June 25, 2004 letter from GCAB to Minister Lavagna informing
Argentina of GCAB’s retention of Bear Stearns as its financial advisor
and stating that “[w]e are hopeful that GCAB and Argentina, with the
active assistance of our respective advisors, will be able to swiftly
achieve an equitable, consensual and mutually beneficial solution...”

. August 18, 2004 letter from White & Case LLP on behalf of GCAB to
Minister Lavagna stating that despite Argentina’s assertions to the
contrary, “there is no basis under U.S. law or market practice for you to
assert that the Republic is prohibited from communicating or
negotiating with GCAB at the present time...” and that “the need for
negotiations between the Republic and GCAB is more urgent than
ever.”

. August 26, 2004 letter from GCAB to Minister Lavagna stating that “no
negotiations [have occurred] between Argentina and GCAB...despite
Argentina’s commitment to the International Monetary Fund and the G-
7 to do so” and reiterating “GCAB’s desire that Argentina seek to
resolve its external debt crisis in the proven and mutually beneficial
way through negotiations...”

. February 3, 2005 GCAB press release condemning Minister Lavagna’s
announcement of a proposed law that would prohibit any future offer to
bondholders who did not accept the current exchange offer commenced
by Argentina on January 12, 2005, and stating that this proposal
“ignores the various international legal systems under which the
defaulted debt was issued”, and that “Congressional action in Argentina
will not supersede rights under international law.”

In addition to such meetings and correspondence, GCAB delivered
presentations at several meetings with creditors of Argentina, at which
representatives of Argentina were present, setting forth our position
concerning a strategy for resolving the dispute between Argentina and the
bondholders/creditors. | Additionally, GCAB_ notified representatives of
Argentina that we did not “endorse Argentina’s current unilateral offer, and
[were] evaluating all other options, not excluding litigation, to protect
investors’ rights.” Despite our clear warnings, our communicated disapproval
of Argentina’s strategy of avoidance and our repeated efforts to negotiate

42

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

illustrated by the communications listed above, Argentina continues to refuse
to negotiate with us in good faith.

Given that Argentina has steadfastly failed to negotiate with us, and has
defaulted on and expropriated the bonds of our constituents, we are left with
little choice. Accordingly, we hereby provide you final notice that:

we and TFA bondholders remain unsatisfied with Argentina’s refusal to
negotiate in good faith as we fully contemplated you would under Article 8 of
the Bilateral Investment Agreement; and

Argentina has sixty (60) days from receipt of this correspondence to pay the
monies it owes to the hundreds of thousands of Italian bondholders/creditors
TFA represents.

If Argentina fails to resolve the dispute amicably and pay within sixty (60)
days, the TFA bondholders will have no choice but to commence legal
proceedings against Argentina in one or more appropriate for a ([sic]) to
recover the amounts due. On behalf of the TFA bondholders, who are Italian
nationals not domiciled in Argentina, and who acquired their bonds prior to
Argentina’s default, we hereby accept the offer of consent, expressed by
Argentina in Article 8 of the Bilateral Investment Agreement, to submit the
dispute to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes for
settlement by arbitration pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States.

If Argentina refuses to resolve the dispute amicably, we invite you to contact
me and/or counsel for the anticipated litigation, Carolyn Lamm of White &
Case LLP, to negotiate a memorandum of understanding on an agreed
procedure that would facilitate the resolution of the hundreds of thousands of
TFA bondholder claims in the most expeditious way for all parties.

Sincerely,

Associazione TASK FORCE ARGENTINA (TFA)
(signed)

Nicola Stock”

Unsatisfied with the situation, TFA seriously considered the initiation of an ICSID
arbitration against Argentina. For this purpose and in order to be able to represent
the concerned Italian bondholders, a new mandate (so-called “TFA Mandate

Package”) was designed by TFA in and consisting of the following documents:

4B

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- A Letter of Instructions to Bondholders (“TFA Instruction Letter”),
explaining the object and modalities of the ICSID arbitration and setting
forth instructions for the bondholders how to participate."!

- A Declaration of Consent, Delegation of Authority, and Power of
Attorney (“Power of Attorney”), in favor of White & Case.”

- A Grant of Mandate to TFA (“TFA Mandate”), in which the signatory
mandates TFA to act as coordinator of the ICSID arbitration.

- A questionnaire, seeking information and documents related to
nationality and ownership of the bonds. “

- Additional instructions regarding gathering of documents.”
86. In the TFA Instruction Letter, in addition to the specific instructions on how to
participate in the ICSID proceedings, TFA set forth some basic rules of conduct for

the bondholders. In particular it provided that:

“8. SOME RULES OF THE LEGAL ACTION PLANNED BY TFA
THAT SHOULD BE KEPT IN MIND

In keeping with the transparency that has always been a hallmark of TFA’s
activities to protect Italian bondholders, we wish to highlight some basic rules
that the conduct of the ICSID arbitration on behalf of numerous Italian
Investors makes it necessary to impose on all of you.

First of all, the ICSID arbitration is available only to persons who qualify as
“investors”, that is, to persons who can demonstrate that they purchased and
have title to Argentine bonds. Failure to meet this requirement would not only
jeopardize the position of the individual participant in the initiative, but could
endanger the success of the legal proceeding for the other bondholders as well.
It is therefore evident that, for anyone who intends to initiate the ICSID
arbitration, it will not be possible to bring a legal action in Italy against the
credit institution that sold the bonds to them and at the same time demand the
right to continue the proceedings before ICSID; likewise, those who have
already filed a claim against their banks may not participate in the ICSID
arbitration. Indeed, a final judgment issued by an Italian court of last resort
declaring null and void or voiding the agreement for the purchase of the

Exh. RA-I.
© Exh, RA-3.
@ Exh, RA-2.
ot Exh. RA-4.
Exh. RA-7.

44

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

security would cause your status as an investor to cease to exist, whereas such
status is indispensable to bring an ICSID arbitration.

Does this mean that participating in the ICSID arbitration will prevent_you
from suing the credit institutions at a later day ? Not at all! Anyone who wants
to change his/her mind and abandon the ICSID arbitration can do so freely: it
will be sufficient to withdraw from the ICSID proceeding, revoke White &
Case’s power of attorney ad litem and TFA’s mandate in order to initiate
whatever legal proceedings is deemed most appropriate. It is not_possible,
however, to conduct at the same time two different legal proceedings that
are incoherent with one another.

Finally, we note that the proceedings before ICSID will not toll the running of
the statute of limitations to bring your claims, if any, against the banks.

LJ

The peculiarity and complexity of the case to be presented before ICSID on
behalf of TFA make it necessary, for reasons of coherence and uniformity of
the representation of all Italian bondholders, to have a single attorney in the
proceedings (White & Case) and that the latter have a single interlocutor
(TFA). This also requires compliance with certain rules that make it possible
for the representation of bondholders, taken as a group, to remain logical and
coherent. Accordingly:

(a) _ it will not be possible to give instructions directly to the attorneys at
“White & Case” (or the Italian lawyers at “Grimaldi e Associati”, who will act
solely as TFA’s out of court advisors): they will coordinate directly with TFA,
which, as mentioned before, will act as your sole agent;

(b) in lum [sic!], TFA, acting in the collective interest of all bondholders,
will operate autonomously, taking into consideration their general interest
without being able to adopt different conducts for each or only some of the
various bondholders at their request;

(c) _ nor will it be possible to conduct autonomously the proceeding initiated
jointly with all the bondholders; accordingly, any revocation of TFA’s
mandate or of the power of attorney ad litem of the American lawyers must
necessarily be preceded by withdrawal from the ICSID proceeding; in other
words, it will not be possible to revoke TFA’s mandate so as to deal
individually with your American lawyer or to appoint other agents. Revoking
the mandate or the power of attorney without having previously withdrawn
from the proceeding will result in renunciation of the mandates received by
TFA and “White & Case”, respectively.

LP

(Emphasis in the original)

87. In the Power of Attorney, the signatory makes the following declarations and

statements:

45

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

“Each of the Undersigned [...]
hereby [...]

1. Declares that he/she owns the following bonds issued by the Argentine
Republic, as described on Tab 1.

2. Declares his/her irrevocable consent to submit, jointly with other
similarly situated bondholders, the dispute arising under the [...] [BIT]
due to the nonpayment by the Argentine Republic [...] of amounts
owed under the above-mentioned bonds, including inter alia, the full
face amount of the bonds plus interest, fees and damages, for settlement
by arbitration to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID”) in Washington [...], and/or other related litigation
outside Italy to assert claims and/or enforce rights of the Undersigned
arising as a result of the non-payment of the Argentine bonds. The
Undersigned further declares his/her acceptance of the Argentina’s offer
of consent to ICSID jurisdiction, which is contained in Article 8 of the
Agreement [ie the BIT], as of January 1, 2006 and reconfirms any such
acceptance and notification of the dispute previously provided. The
Undersigned’s consent also covers such other actions that may be
deemed necessary or useful to pursue the Undersigned’s rights in this
dispute.

Delegates to the law firm of White & Case LLP [...], in particular Carolyn B.
Lamm, Esq. and any other attorney of White & Case LLP outside of
Italy that she designates, the authority and confers the power of attorney
to represent the Undersigned, jointly with other similarly situated
bondholders, in the furtherance of their interests with respect to their
above-described bondholdings. Such delegation of authority and power
of attorney includes without limitation the authority and power:

(i) to accept Argentina’s offer of consent to ICSID arbitration under the
Agreement, as of January 1, 2006, and to reconfirm any such consent
and/or notice of dispute previously provided;

(ii)to initiate and conduct for the Undersigned and on his/her behalf an
ICSID arbitration against Argentina and any related litigation or other
proceedings outside Italy to protect and further the Undersigned’s
interests in relation to the above-mentioned dispute.

LJ

Further instructions regarding this delegation may be made from time to time
by any duly appointed agent of the Undersigned.

1. Acknowledges and agrees that this power of attorney is conferred
pursuant to the laws of the District of Columbia to lawyers practicing
in the District of Columbia, [...]”

46

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

88. In the TFA Mandate, the object of TFA’s mandate is described as follows:®°

66

“OBJECT

Subject to all legal requirements that may from time to time be applicable, the
Agent is hereby entrusted with the assignment of providing for the
coordination of any arbitral and judicial proceedings of the kind described in
the premises hereto that may be undertaken in the name and on behalf of the
holders of Bonds pursuant to the Power of Attorney and this Mandate, for the
recovery of their investment in the Bonds. In particular, and solely by way of
examples, it shall be the Agent’s responsibility:

to give to the attorneys appointed pursuant to the Power of Attorney any
instructions that the Agent, in its role as coordinator, deems useful or
appropriate for the purpose of bringing about a positive outcome of the
proceedings;

to appoint other attorneys directly, in addition to es [sic!] replacements for
those appointed pursuant to the Power of Attorney, so that they may
represent the Principals in proceedings filed outside Italy, in judicial or
other venue, including, but not limited to, ICSID arbitral tribunals;

- to revoke the mandates granted to the attorneys identified in the Power
of attorney and those appointed pursuant to the preceding paragraph.
Accordingly, consistently with the Agent’s role as sole coordinator of
legal proceedings commenced by the Agent, it is understood that the
Principal(s) may revoke the powers of attorney ad litem granted to the
above-mentioned attorneys only through the Agent, by instructing it in
writing to that effect;

- to perform organizational functions entrusted to it using the Italian
banking system or any other means that may be necessary or
appropriate for the initiation and conduct of the legal proceedings
described in the Power of Attorney and this Mandate. [...]

- to appoint arbitrators, experts and advisors;

- if it deems it appropriate, to bring against Argentina, outside Italia, in
judicial venues having jurisdiction, or before domestic or international
arbitral tribunals, or before any conciliation and mediation body, any
additional proceeding that may be necessary for the purposes of
obtaining reimbursement of principal and payment of interest on the
Bonds, or proceedings seeking damages arising out of the failure to

Exh. RA-2.

47

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

comply with the Bonds, or out of the measures adopted by the
Argentine Authorities;

- to negotiate and enter into settlement agreements with Argentina, in
judicial venues or otherwise, [...]

- to participate in any type of bondholders’ meeting or similar collective
decision-making body and to vote in the name and on behalf of the
Principal(s);

- to send any communication or notice on behalf of the Principal(s), in
order to toll the running of the statute of limitation or other time limits,
in relation to the Republic of Argentina, [...];

- to collect on behalf of the Principal(s) the payments received from
Argentina and to transfer them through the credit institutions serving as
depositaries for the Bonds to the current accounts that will be specified
by the Principal(s);

- to obtain recognition and enforcement outside Italy of the arbitration
awards issued by the ICSID arbitral tribunal — as well as of any other
awards or judgments that may be issued by any adjudicating body
outside Italy with respect to the object of this Mandate — [...];

- to withdraw from any actions in any legal proceedings contemplated by
the Power of Attorney and/or this Mandate, in the name and on behalf
of all bondholders who have granted an identical power of attorney ad
litem and an identical mandate, or to withdraw from any actions in the
name and on behalf of the Principal(s), in any of the instances described
in Article 4 below;

- to arrange for the banks serving as depositaries for the Bonds to subject
the same to transfer restrictions; [...]

- in general, to take any step that it deems useful for the recovery of the
amounts due under the Bonds, subject always, as an absolute priority, to
equal treatment of all of the owners of bonds issued by Argentina who
have signed an identical power of attorney or attorney ad litem and an
identical mandate.”

89. The TFA Mandate further provides for following terms and conditions of

revocation:

“EXCLUSIVITY, REVOCATION AND RENUNCIATION

Principal also grants this Mandate in the interest of all of the other
bondholders who have granted an identical power of attorney ad litem and an
identical mandate; such interest arises out of the need to coordinate the arbitral
and judicial proceedings mentioned in the premises hereto. Accordingly:

48

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(i) | This Mandate, pursuant to Article 1723 of the Civil Code, will not
terminate if revoked by the Principal(s), unless there exists a just cause for
such revocation; such revocation will become effective upon expiration of the
fifteen day period following the time when the Agent became aware of the
same;

 

(ii) even in the absence of just cause, the Principal(s) may validly revoke
this Mandate if he/they has/have previously withdrawn from every judicial
and arbitral proceeding referred to in the premises hereto which are pending at
the time of such revocation; such revocation will become effective upon
expiration of the fifteen day period following the time when the Agent became
aware of the same;

(iii) if the Principal(s) should initiate any legal action conflicting with the
interests pursued by TFA on behalf of all of the bondholders who have
granted an identical power of attorney ad litem and an identical mandate, by
means of any legal proceedings contemplated by this Mandate or the Power of
Attorney, with particular reference to the consolidated proceeding before the
ICSID: (a) White & Case, as specified in the Instructions to Bondholders, may
without any notice whatsoever renounce the mandate granted to them by
means of the Power of Attorney; (b) the Agent may renounce this Madate;

LJ

(v) if the Principal(s) revoke the Power of Attorney without the prior
agreement of the Agent, the Agent may renounce this Mandate.

In any event, the Agent shall have the right to renounce this Madate at any
time, by giving at least fifteen (15) business days written notice to the
Principal(s).

Ll

(Emphasis in the original)

TFA’s member banks arranged for the distribution and collection of the Mandate
Package among their clients during March and April 2006, which was — according

to Claimants’ figures — accepted by over 180,000 Italian bondholders.”

On 14 September 2006, White & Case filed the Request for Arbitration with ICSID

on behalf of these Italian bondholders, Claimants to the present arbitration.

” C-MI § 261, see also NAVIGANT I, § 27 and CREMIEUX, § 22.

49

92.

93.

94.

95.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(5) New Exchange Offer 2010
In April 2010, Respondent announced the launching of a new Exchange Offer

(hereinafter the “Exchange Offer 2010”).

This offer was launched on 3 May 2010 and aimed to “restructure and cancel
defaulted debt obligations of Argentina represented by Pre-2005 Eligible Securities,
to release Argentina from any related claims, including any administrative,
litigation or arbitral claims and to terminate legal proceedings against Argentina in
respect of the tendered Eligible Securities in consideration for the issuance of New

Securities and, in certain cases, a cash payment.”

In this offer, Respondent invited “the Owners of each Series of Bonds listed in
Annexes A-1 and A-2 and related claims (collectively, the ‘Eligible Securities’) to
submit offers to exchange Eligible Securities for New Securities and, in certain
cases, cash, on the terms and conditions described [tJ]herein.” © The bonds listed in
Annexes A-1 and A-2 are bonds in which Claimants hold security entitlements, and

Claimants were thus eligible to tender into this Exchange Offer 2010.

The launching of this Exchange Offer 2010 required the temporary suspension of
certain effects of the Emergency Law until the earlier of two dates — 31 December
2010 or the date on which the Executive Branch, through the Ministry of Economy
and Public Finance, announces the conclusion of the second restructuring process
of Argentina’s nonperforming debt securities.” In addition, Argentina further took
administrative and legislative steps in connection with the Exchange Offer 2010,

approving the budget providing the amount of debt that Argentina may issue,

6s See Exchange Offer Prospectus (Exh. C-999B), p. 6; see also Annex A to R-PHB § 76.
® Idem

” See Annex A to R-PHB § 79.

50

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

namely through the Exchange Offer 2010, and authorizing the necessary

administrative registrations and issuance of new securities, etc.”!

Whilst in Claimants’ view this Exchange Offer 2010 was just another punitive offer
imposing harsh exchange terms,” even less favorable than the Exchange Offer
2005, Respondent contends that it merely reflected the result of adequate

consultations with creditors’ groups.”*

A considerable number of Claimants eventually tendered into this Exchange Offer
2010, which led to their withdrawal from the present proceedings (see §§ 216 ef

seq. below).

B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

(1) Request for Arbitration and its Registration by ICSID

On 14 September 2006, Claimants filed their Request for Arbitration, accompanied

by Annexes A through E.

On 26 September 2006, ICSID transmitted to Respondent the Request for

Arbitration.

On 20 October 2006, Respondent sent a letter to ICSID requesting the latter not to
register the case arguing that Claimants lack standing to sue and that the nature of
this “group claim” entail Respondent’s defense right. Respondent therefore

concluded that ICSID has no jurisdiction over the dispute.
On 20 November 2006, Claimants responded to Respondent’s letter dated 20

October 2006 arguing that ICSID must register the case according to Article 36(3)

See Annex A to R-PHB § 80.
” CL-PHB 8§ 139 et seq., § 144.
Annex A to R-PHB § 76.

Sl

102.

103.

104.

105.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

ICSID Convention. It based its position on two legal opinions rendered by
Prof. Christoph Schreuer and Prof. Rudolf Dolzer dated 2 and 16 November 2006,

respectively.”

On 18 December 2006, Respondent responded to Claimants’ letter of 20 November
2006. Respondent again requested ICSID not to register the case alleging that
ICSID lacks jurisdiction and that Respondent never consented to an arbitration

concerning such kind of claims initiated by “groups of people” or “class action.”

On 19 and 22 December 2006, Claimants submitted supplemental Annexes in
relation to information contained in Annexes A through E, and submitted Annexes
K and L. The substitute annexes reflect: (i) an addition of certain Claimants
(separately listed in Annex K), (ii) the withdrawal of certain Claimants (separately
listed in Annex L), (iii) limited corrections and substitutions to the information on
Claimants (Annexes A-E), (iv) the revision of the aggregate amounts (Annex I),

and (v) the addition of one new bond series (Annex J).

On 6 January 2007, Claimants responded to Respondent’s letter of 18 December
2006 insisting that ICISD register the case and arguing (i) that it is up to the
Tribunal to decide on the jurisdiction, and (ii) that the claim at stake is not a “class
action” but a joint claim in which each Claimant initiates arbitration on its own

behalf, and therefore covered by ICSID’s jurisdiction.

On 24 January 2007, Respondent responded to Claimants’ submissions of 19 and
22 December 2006 opposing the incorporation of new Claimants in the arbitration.

According to Respondent, the changes made to the Request for Arbitration

m See letter from Prof. Christoph Schreuer of 2 November 2006 and letter from
Prof. Rudolf Dolzer of 16 November 2006 both attached to Claimant’s letter of 20 November 2006

addressed to the Secretary-General of ICSID.

52

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

regarding the identity and number of Claimants is inadmissible. Further,

Respondent reiterated its request that the case be refused registration.

On 1 February 2007, Claimants responded to Respondent’s letter of 24 January

2007 insisting that the case be registered “as soon as possible.”

On 5 February 2007, Claimants submitted “substituted versions” of Annexes A
through E, K, L, I and J. The substitute annexes reflect: (i) the withdrawal of certain
Claimants (listed separately in Annex L), (ii) certain corrections and substitutions
to the documentation for other Claimants, and (iii) the revision of certain aggregate

amounts based on the foregoing adjustments (Annexes I and J).

On 7 February 2007, concluding that the dispute is not manifestly outside the
jurisdiction of ICSID, the Secretary-General of the ICSID registered Claimants’
Request for Arbitration with accompanying Annexes A through L, and issued the

Notice of Registration.

(2) Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal

On 7 February 2007, the Secretary-General of ICSID invited the Parties to
communicate any provisions agreed by them regarding the number of arbitrators

and the method of their appointment.

On 9 March 2007, Claimants suggested that the arbitral tribunal be composed of
three arbitrators, one arbitrator to be appointed by each Party and the third, who
shall be the President of the Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the Parties,
and appointed Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg, a national of The Netherlands, as

arbitrator.

On 12 March 2007, ICSID confirmed receipt of Claimants’ letter of 9 March 2007
and further stated that no further steps regarding the appointment of Prof. van den
Berg could be taken until the Parties inform the Centre of their agreement regarding

the method for the constitution of the arbitral tribunal. It therefore invited

53

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Respondent to accept Claimants’ proposals or make other proposals regarding the

constitution of the arbitral tribunal.

On 27 April 2007, Claimants sent a letter to the ICSID informing that the Parties
have not reached agreement on the method of constituting the Tribunal, and
therefore requested that the Tribunal be constituted according to Article 37(2)(b)
ICSID Convention, given that more than 60 days had passed since the registration
of the Request for Arbitration. Claimants then confirmed the appointment of Prof.
van den Berg and suggested the name of a person to serve as President of the

Tribunal.

On 7 May 2007, Respondent opposed Claimant’s suggestion for President and
suggested instead another candidate. Respondent further appointed Prof. Georges

Abi-Saab, a national of the Arab Republic of Egypt, as arbitrator.

On 14 May 2007, ICSID informed the Parties that Prof. van den Berg and
Prof. Abi-Saab accepted their appointments as arbitrators and enclosed copies of

their signed declarations according to Rule 6(2) ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On 25 August 2007, Claimants informed ICSID that the Parties have not been able
to reach an agreement regarding the appointment of the third, presiding arbitrator
and therefore requested ICSID to make the appointment in accordance with Article

38 ICSID Convention and Rule 4 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On 28 August 2007, ICSID confirmed receipt of Claimants’ letter of 25 August
2007 and announced that it would proceed with the appointment after consultation

with both Parties in accordance with Rule 4(4) ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On 8 November 2007, the Secretary-General of the ICSID proposed a candidate to
serve as President of the Tribunal and invited the Parties to comment before 19

November 2007.

54

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 16 and 19 November 2007 respectively, Respondent and Claimants both
objected to the appointment of the person proposed by the Secretary-General of the
ICSID. On 29 November 2007, the Secretary-General informed the Parties of its
intention to propose to the Chairman of ICSID’s Administrative Council the

appointment of Dr. Robert Briner, of Switzerland, as the President of the Tribunal.

On 6 February 2008, the Secretary-General of the ICSID informed the Parties and
the arbitrators that the Tribunal is deemed to be constituted by (i) Professor Albert
Jan van den Berg (appointed by Claimants), (ii) Professor Georges Abi-Saab
(appointed by Respondent) and (iii) Dr. Robert Briner (appointed by ICSID
pursuant to Article 38 ICSID Convention). Further, the Tribunal was informed that
Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel at ICSID, would serve as the Secretary to the

Tribunal.

On 26 February 2008, Respondent requested further information from Dr. Briner on

his past experience and his positions in companies and financial institutions.

On 28 February 2008, Dr. Briner provided further information on his past
experience and current positions. On the same day, Respondent acknowledged and

thanked Dr. Briner for his response.

On 27 July 2009 Dr. Robert Briner resigned as President of the Tribunal due to
health reasons. On 2 September 2009 Prof. Pierre Tercier, a Swiss national, was

appointed, by agreement of the parties, as the new President of the Tribunal.

(3) Arbitral Procedure

On 10 March 2008, ICSID sent a letter to the Parties and the Tribunal with
organisational details concerning the First Session to be held on 10 April 2008 at
the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. The Parties were invited to comment on

the proposed draft provisional agenda before 3 April 2008.

55

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

During March 2008, various exchanges of correspondence took place concerning
Respondent’s request that the information contained in Claimants’ Annexes be
provided to it in an appropriate form. On 31 March 2008, the ICSID informed the
Parties that the Tribunal had taken note of the Parties’ correspondences and had

decided to defer its ruling on the matter until the First Session of 10 April 2008.

On 3 April 2008, both Parties sent their comments on the provisional agenda for the
First Session (see § 123 above). Whilst Respondent had “no comment to make,”
Claimants made several comments and suggestions regarding the various items of

the agenda.

On 9 April 2008, Claimants sent a letter expressing their concerns about
Respondent’s statement that it “has no comments to make” on the provisional
agenda for the First Session. Claimants feared to be prejudiced if Respondent was

to raise any such comments during the First Session.

On 10 April 2008, the First Session was held at the seat of the Centre in
Washington, D.C. at which a procedural calendar for the further conduct of the
proceedings was established. During the First Session it was agreed that the
arbitration will be bifurcated in a jurisdictional and a merits phase. With regard to
the jurisdictional phase, the Tribunal invited the Parties to agree on a joint list of
preliminary issues to be submitted before 2 May 2008. The Tribunal stated that it
would then decide over any remaining divergence and communicate its decision on

9 May 2008.

On 2 May 2008, both Parties sent letters announcing that they could reach an
agreement on only very limited issues and laid down their respective position
concerning the remaining divergences on the scope of the jurisdictional phase.
Respondent further requested that Claimants submit the list of the members of Task
Force Argentina, and that that the schedule discussed at the First Session be

amended to account for document discovery.

56

129.

130.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 5 and 8 May 2008 respectively, each Party commented on the other Party’s
submission of 2 May 2008.

On 9 May 2008, after receiving and considering the Parties’ submissions on the
scope of the jurisdictional phase and in the light of the Parties’ disagreement, the
Tribunal submitted a “List of issues to be addressed during the jurisdictional first
phase of the proceedings” (hereafter “List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008”), listing the
following 11 issues covering Claimants and Respondent’s main positions and

objections:

“(1) Does the consent of Argentina to the jurisdiction of the Centre include
claims presented by multiple Claimants in a single proceeding? If so,
are the claims admissible?

(2) Is the Declaration of Consent signed by the individual Claimants
submitted in this proceeding valid; and what is the role and relevance of
Task Force Argentina (if any) in this proceeding?

(3) Is the submission of substitute annexes to the Request for Arbitration
permissible? Is it possible to add further Claimants after the filing of
the claim?

(4) | Were the Claimants entitled to initiate ICSID arbitration in light of the
18-month domestic litigation clause at Article 8(2) of the Argentina-
Italy BIT?

(5) What are the consequences (if any) of the Most-Favored-Nations-
Clause (MEN) contained in Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT?

(6) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to hear Claimants’ claims for
violation of the MFN provisions contained in Article 3(1) of the
Argentina-Italy BIT with reference to the so-called umbrella clause
contained in Article 7(2) of the Argentina-Chile BIT?

(7) Are the Claimants’ claims contract claims or Treaty claims and what (if
any) are the consequences of this determination?

(8) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over claims where the relevant bond
contains a forum selection clause which refers to national courts, but
not to ICSID?

(9) Do the bonds in question satisfy the definition of “Investment” under
Article 1(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT with respect to the provisions on
investment “in the territory” of Argentina and in “compliance with the
laws and regulations of Argentina”?

(10) Without making a determination with respect to any individual
Claimant, does the Tribunal have jurisdiction ratione personae pursuant

s7

131.

132.

133.

134.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

to Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and Article 1(2) of the
Argentina-Italy BIT, and its Additional Protocol, over each Claimant
who is a natural person and who ultimately is found to have the
following characteristics: (i) a natural person with Italian nationality on
September 14, 2006 (i.e., the date of the filing of the Request for
Arbitration) and February 7, 2007 (i.e., the date of registration of the
Request); (ii) who on either date was not also a national of the
Argentine Republic; and (iii) who was not domiciled in the Argentine
Republic for more than two years prior to making the investment?

(11) Without making a determination with respect to any individual
Claimant, does the Tribunal have jurisdiction ratione personae pursuant
to Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and Article 1 of the Argentina-
Italy BIT over each Claimant that is a juridical person with Italian
nationality on September 14, 2006 (i.e., the date of the filing of the
Request for Arbitration)?”

An amended procedural calendar was further agreed upon. Also, the Tribunal
invited Claimants to submit by 23 May 2008 a complete list of all present members

of Task Force Argentina.

On 23 May 2008, Claimants submitted the list of current members of Task Force
Argentina, according to the Tribunal’s request of 9 May 2008, but nevertheless
raised certain concerns, in particular regarding the submission of documents on

behalf of a third party.

On 8 August 2008, Respondent filed its First Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, | accompanied by exhibits and expert reports by
Prof. Barry J. Eichengreen, Prof. Anne-Marie Slaughter and Prof. William Burke-
White.

On 8 October 2008, after discussions concerning a possible rescheduling of the
hearing and after having heard and taken into account both Parties’ positions as
well as the availability of all participants, the Tribunal decided that the hearing date
would not be changed and still take place on the week of 22 June 2009, as agreed
upon on 9 May 2008.

58

135.

136.

137.

138.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 7 November 2008, Claimants filed their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,
accompanied by substitute versions of Annexes A through E, K and L; exhibits;
witness statements by Mr. Stefano De Grandi, Mr. Mario Flagella, Mr. Richard
Liebars, Mr. Raffaele Martino, Mr. Ajata Mediratta, Mr. Fabrizio Modoni, and
Mr. Roberto Ranieri; and expert reports by Dr. Alberto B. Bianchi, Ms. Elizabeth J.
Cabraser, Dr. William R. Cline, Dr. Joaquin A. Cottani, Prof. Rudolf Dolzer,
Dr. Pablo E. Guidotti, Prof. Geoffrey C. Hazard, Prof. Natalino Irti, Mr. Brent
Kaczmarek, Prof. Salvatore Maccarone and Prof. Fabrizio Maimeri, Dr. Héctor A.
Mairal, Prof. Annibale Marini, Mr. Rex Pingle, Prof. W. Michael Reisman,
Mr. Stephen Schaefer, Prof. Christoph Schreuer, Dr. Francisco G. Susmel, and

Dr. Guillermo O. Teijeiro.

On 17 November 2008, the Parties exchanged their requests for document

production pursuant to the schedule set forth in the letter of 9 May 2008.

On 18 November 2008, Respondent sent a letter stating that Claimants had not
complied with the deadline for submission of their Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction. It argued that the transmittal letter sent to ICSID was received on 8
November 2008, 12:02 am and that subsequent emails were received at 02:31 am.
It further complained that it received the Spanish version of the Counter-Memorial
on Jurisdiction only on 11 November 2008, i.e., four days after the deadline set
forth in the Tribunal’s letter of 9 May 2008 (see § 130 above). Respondent
therefore requested that the deadline for submission of its Reply Memorial on
Jurisdiction scheduled for 20 February 2009 be extended to 24 February 2009. It
further expressed its wish that the Tribunal would not allow further failures to
comply with the established deadlines, absent special circumstances under the

terms of Rule 26 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On 18 November 2008, the Tribunal advised the Parties that the hearing would take
place from Friday, 19 June 2009, through Wednesday, 24 June 2009.

59

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 24 November 2008, Claimants responded to Respondent’s letter of 18
November 2008 asking the Tribunal to reject Respondent’s request for extension of
time and giving further explanations on why its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
and related documents were sent out late. Claimants further stressed that while
Respondent had 15 weeks to prepare its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, Claimants

were only given 10.5 weeks to prepare their Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction.

On 5 December 2008, the Parties submitted their respective “Redfern Schedules”
listing their specific requests for document production by the other Party and their

objections to the other Party’s requests.

On 10 December 2008, the Tribunal granted Respondent’s request for extension of
the deadline for submission of its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction to 23 February

2009.

On 12 December 2008, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. | ruling on the

Parties’ production for document requests.

Subsequently, correspondence was exchanged between the Parties with regard to
(i) Respondent’s compliance with Order No. 1, referred to in § 142 above; and
(ii) the progress on reaching a conclusion on a confidentiality agreement. None of
the issues could be solved among the Parties who requested the Tribunal’s

directions.

On 22 December 2008, the Parties exchanged documents in accordance with Annex
A of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No.1. Respondent’s submission of

documents appeared to be incomplete.

On 9 February 2009, Respondent completed its document production as ordered in

Procedural Order No. | (see § 142 above).

On 12 February 2009, the Tribunal directed Respondent to provide an

accompanying table to the produced documents which contained references to each

60

147.

148.

149.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

specific request that the Tribunal had ordered Respondent to comply with in
Procedural Order No. 1, referred to in § 142 above. Further, the Tribunal invited
the Parties to continue their discussions in order to arrive at a Confidentiality
Agreement and stated that if the Parties cannot come to such an agreement and if so
requested by a Party, the Tribunal will hear the Parties on this matter at the

occasion of the June 2009 Hearing and then take the necessary steps.

On 23 February 2009, Respondent filed its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, accompanied by exhibits; witness statements by Mr. Enrique H.
Boilini, Avv. Gianluca Fontanella, Dr. Sergio Mario Illuminato, Ms. Noemi C. La
Greca, Mr. Federico Carlos Molina, Ambassador Guillermo Nielsen, and
Hon. Luigi Olivieri; and expert reports by Prof. Avv. Guido Alpa,
Prof. Avv. Antonio Briguglio, Dr. Pierre-Yves Cremieux, Avv. Remo Danovi,
Prof. Barry J. Eichengreen, The Forensic Document Examination Division of the
Argentine Federal Police, Ms. Rachel Hines, Prof. Jorge Kielmanovich,
Prof. Daniel Marx, Abog. Ismael Mata, Prof. Arthur R. Miller, Prof. Richard A.
Nagareda, Prof. Nouriel Roubini, Prof. Alessandro Penati, Prof. Avv. Andrea
Perrone, Mr. Héctor Jorge Petersen and Mr. Héctor Jorge Petersen (h),
Prof. Anne-Marie Slaughter and William Burke-White, and Prof. Charles W.
Wolfram.

On 9 March 2009, Respondent submitted the table of documents referencing each
specific document according to the Tribunal’s directions of 12 February 2009 (see

§ 146 above).

On 22 April 2009, Claimants requested that Respondent be ordered to submit
documents complementing its previous production, i.e., charts and proposals and
other pages accompanying the Analysis Memoranda relating to the bonds issued by

Respondent.

61

150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 6 May 2009, Respondent responded to Claimants letter of 22 April 2009 and

requested that Claimants’ request for further document production be rejected.

On 6 May 2009, Claimants filed their (English) Rejoinder Memorial on
Jurisdiction, accompanied by exhibits; witness statements by Mr. Massimo
Cerniglia, Mario Flagella, Richard Liebars, Ajata Mediratta, and Fabrizio Modoni;
and expert reports by Alberto B. Bianchi, Elizabeth J. Cabrazer, Dr. William R.
Cline (second expert opinion), Joaquin A. Cottani, Professor Dr. Dr. Rudolf Dolzer
(supplemental expert opinion), Mrs. Cristiana Franco, Mr. Mario Franco, Mr.
Alberto Bravo, Pablo E. Guidotti (supplemental expert report), Mr. Iain Hardie
(supplemental expert report), Geoffrey C. Hazard JR (supplemental legal opinion),
Prof. Natalino Irti (supplemental pro veritate legal opinion), Salvatore Maccarone
and Fabrizio Maimeri (supplemental legal opinion), Héctor A. Mairal (supplemental
legal opinion), Prof. Annibale Marini (supplemental pro veritate legal opinion), Mr.
Brent C. Kaczmarek (supplemental expert report), Prof. Nicola Picardi, Rex E. Pingle

(supplemental expert opinion), and Prof. W. Michael Reisman (second opinion).

Subsequently, correspondence was exchanged between the Parties with regard to
Respondent’s requests to amend the schedule of 9 May 2008 with regard to the
designation of witnesses and experts and the submission of documents relating to
direct and cross-examination of such witnesses and experts for the forthcoming

hearing and to hold a pre-hearing conference.

On 11 May 2009, the Tribunal announced that it would, for the time being, not
make any decision with respect to the designation of witnesses and experts for the
forthcoming hearing and invited the Parties to confer and try to reach an agreement,
reverting to the Tribunal by 15 May 2009. It further stated that it would be

prepared to hold a pre-hearing conference call during the first week of June 2009.

On 14 May 2009, Respondent reiterated its concerns already raised in its letter of 8

May 2009 concerning Claimants’ late submission of their Rejoinder Memorial on

62

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Jurisdiction and related documents. Whilst electronic copies of the documents were
received by ICSID only after the midnight deadline of 6 May 2009, Respondent
received the Spanish version of the Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction only on 9
May 2009. Respondent consequently requested the Tribunal to disregard

Claimants’ late submissions in application of Rule 26(3) ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On 15 May 2009, in accordance with the deadline set in the Tribunal’s letter of 11
May 2009 (see § 153 above), the Parties submitted to the Tribunal their respective
positions concerning the various pre-hearing and hearing matters. Respondent

further requested that an additional hearing of 10 days be set.

On 18 May 2009, Claimants provided certain explanations on the delay in
submitting their Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction and requested that
Respondent’s request to disregard such Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction be

rejected.

On 20 May 2009, the Parties exchanged further correspondence concerning the
various pre-hearing and hearing matters. While Respondent insisted that each Party
be given the right to cross-examine every witness and expert presented by the other
Party and that additional hearing time be arranged, Claimants requested that

Respondent’s requests be denied.

On 20 May 2009, Claimants requested the Tribunal to order Respondent to
immediately produce the complementary documents requested in their letter of 22

April 2009 (see § 149).

On 21 May 2009, the Tribunal ruled that it accepted Claimants’ Rejoinder
Memorial on Jurisdiction despite its delayed submission. It further set forth certain
principles for conduct of the forthcoming Hearing on Jurisdiction confirming,
among others, that the hearing would last 5.5 days, defining the scope of direct

examination of witnesses and experts and setting new deadlines for the designation

63

160.

161.

162.

163.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

of witnesses and experts and submission of documents for direct and cross-

examination.

On 26 May 2009, the Tribunal requested Respondent to produce the documents
requested by Claimants in their letter of 20 May 2009 or to otherwise give specific

reasons for not producing such documents before 5 June 2009.

On 28 May 2009, in accordance with the deadline set in the Tribunal’s letter of 21
May 2009 (see § 159 above), the Parties submitted their designation of witnesses
and experts relevant to the jurisdictional phase. Whilst Claimants did not directly
designate witnesses or experts from Respondent for cross-examination, it reserved
the right to do so in case Respondent would designate any such witnesses or experts
for direct examination and to expand the scope of redirect examination of
Claimants’ witnesses or experts accordingly. Respondent submitted a list of
witnesses and experts from Claimants for cross-examination and a list of its own

witnesses and experts for direct examination.

On 29 May 2009, Respondent objected to Claimants position in its letter of 28 May
2009 contending that Claimants had not complied with the Tribunal’s request to
designate the witnesses and experts for direct and cross examination and that
Claimants should not have the right to further designate such witnesses or experts

or to expand the scope of their re-direct examination.

On 31 May 2009, Claimants objected to Respondent’s position in its letters of 28
and 29 May 2009. With regard to Respondent’s designation of witnesses and
experts for direct examination, Claimants objected to the examination of
Respondent’s handwriting experts and experts on US and Italian tax law. With
regard to Respondent’s designation of witnesses and experts for cross-examination,
Claimants objected to the examination of Mr. Stock and of their own handwriting
experts. Claimants further objected to Respondent’s request to extend the daily

hearing schedule.

64

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 2 June 2009, the Tribunal ruled that (i) the Parties’ handwriting experts shall not
be examined at the hearing because the issue of authenticity of the Claimants’
signatures related to circumstances concerning individual Claimants and were thus
not covered by this jurisdictional phase and (ii) Mr. Stock shall not be called as a
witness because he has not submitted any statement, opinion or report (i.e., he is
not a witness or expert). Regarding the daily hearing schedule, the Tribunal decided
not to change it but remained open to discuss the issue during the Hearing. This

decision was taken by majority, as communicated to the Parties on 3 June 2009.

On 3 June 2009, the deadline set in the Tribunal’s letter of 21 May 2009 (see § 159
above), Respondent submitted its documents for direct and cross-examination
accompanied by an index, and requested disclosure of documents regarding the

direct testimony by Prof. Briguglio and Prof. Nagareda.

On 5 June 2009, the deadline set in the Tribunal’s letter of 26 May 2009 (see § 160
above), Respondent explained why it deemed that it should be relieved from any
obligation to produce any documents called by Claimants in their letter of 20 May

2009 (see § 158 above).

On 7 June 2009, Claimants insisted that Respondent be ordered to produce the

documents as requested in their letter of 20 May 2009 (see § 158 above).

On 7 June 2009, Claimants also responded to Respondent’s submission of 3 June
2009 and raised the following two main objections: (i) Claimants consider
Respondent’s submission of its “Supplemental Exhibits” as untimely, abusive and
partly in disregard of confidentiality obligations, and (ii) Claimants objected to
Respondent’s designation of Prof. Nagareda and Prof. Briguglio for direct
examination because such direct examination would exceed the scope of

examination set forth in the Tribunal’s letter of 21 May 2009 (see § 159 above).

On 8 June 2009, the Tribunal communicated the organizational details of the

Hearing on Jurisdiction to be held from 19 June 2009 through 24 June 2009.

65

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 8 June 2009, Respondent reacted to the Tribunal’s decision of 2 June 2009 (see
§ 164) expressing concerns that “two of the members of the Tribunal have simply
taken an incomprehensible decision” by not admitting to call the handwriting
experts as experts during the Hearing on Jurisdiction and requested that the

Tribunal reconsider its decision of 2 June 2009.

On 9 June 2009, Claimants responded to Respondent’s letter of 8 June 2009 and

requested that the Tribunal reject Respondent’s requests.

On 9 June 2009, the President of the Tribunal informed the Parties that in light of
certain recent health problems, he would not be allowed to travel to Washington,

D.C. for the Hearing on Jurisdiction.

On 9 June 2009, Claimants acknowledged that the Hearing on Jurisdiction was
postponed and understood that related deadlines were presently suspended,

including with respect to the submission of examination documents, etc.

On 17 June 2009, the Tribunal decided on several issues regarding the Hearing:
(i) with respect to the issues raised by the Parties in relation to the Hearing, in
particular to the testimony of fact and expert witness, the Tribunal reserved its
decision for a later stage during the proceedings, once the new dates for the Hearing
have been established; (ii) with respect to Claimants’ request for the production of
documents as contained in their letter of 20 May 2009, it was denied; (iii) with
regard to Claimants’ objection of 7 June 2009 regarding Respondent’s submission
of 3 June 2009, the Tribunal invited Respondent to state its position, especially with
regard to Claimants’ objection relating to confidential material, before 24 June

2009.

On 24 June 2009, Respondent responded to Claimants’ letters of 7 and 9 June 2009
(see §§ 168 and 171 above) in accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions (see §
174 above). Respondent insisted on the relevance of the question of the authenticity

of some of the Claimants’ signatures for this jurisdictional phase. With regard to

66

176.

177.

178.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

the confidentiality issue, Respondent stressed that it had not submitted any
document filed in sealed proceedings and that there was no general rule of
confidentiality governing ICSID arbitration proceedings. It therefore requested that
Claimants’ objections be rejected. Respondent further complained about
Claimants’ position, as reflected in their letter of 9 June 2009 (see § 173 above), to
suspend the deadline for submission of documents for cross-examination and
requested that the Tribunal order Claimants to immediately present such

documents.

On 6 July 2009, Claimants responded to Respondent’s letter of 24 June 2009
requesting once again that the Tribunal (i) exclude the use of confidential
documents and (ii) refuse to undo its decision of 2 June 2009 concerning the
handwriting experts. Claimants further requested that the Tribunal issue a
confidentiality order protecting the confidentiality of the current proceedings.
Claimants also stressed that the suspension of the deadline for submission of
documents for witnesses’ and experts’ examination was in accordance with the

Tribunal’s communication of 9 June 2009.

On 8 and 16 September 2009, Claimants suggested new dates concerning pre-
hearing issues and the Hearing on Jurisdiction. It further requested anew that the
Tribunal reject Respondent’s request to reconsider the Tribunal’s decision of 2 June
2009 and asked the Tribunal to strike Respondent’s supplemental exhibits and
confidential material as submitted by Respondent on 3 June 2009. It also insisted

on its request for a confidentiality order.

On 16 September 2009, Respondent requested the Tribunal to set an entirely new
calendar, including dates for witnesses and experts hearings, and considering an
additional two weeks for the Hearing on Jurisdiction. It further insisted on the
examination of the handwriting experts during the Hearing and on the admission of

its documents submitted on 3 June 2009.

67

179.

180.

181.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 17 and 23 September 2009, Claimants responded to Respondent’s letter of 16
September 2009 and formulated the following requests: (i) with regard to the
Hearing, that Respondent’s requests to overturn previous decisions on hearing days
be denied; (ii) with regard to witnesses and experts, that Respondent’s requests to
re-open the designation of witnesses, to overturn the Tribunal’s decision on
handwriting experts, and to refuse the direct examination of Prof. Briguglio and
Prof. Nagareda be denied; (iii) with regard to the documents for the Hearing, that
the admission of Respondent’s “Supplemental Exhibits” be limited to those relating
expressly to the scope of direct testimony of Claimants’ experts and witnesses; and

(iv) that Claimants’ request for a confidentiality order be granted.

On 14 October 2009, after the procedure had been staying still due to the
unfortunate circumstances affecting Dr. Briner and eventually leading to his
resignation, the procedure was actively resumed through a joint telephone
conference between the Tribunal (with Prof. Pierre Tercier as new President of the
Tribunal (see § 122 above)), the Secretary and the Parties. During the conference
call, new pre-hearing deadlines and hearing dates, as well as other organisational
aspects were discussed. At the conclusion of the telephone conference, four
procedural matters were left open for decision by the Tribunal: (i) whether or not to
allow direct and cross-examination of the handwriting experts, (ii) whether or not to
allow direct examination of Professors Richard A. Nagareda and Antonio
Briguglio, (iii) dates for the hearing on jurisdiction and admissibility and thereto
related, pre-hearing dates, as well as (iv) the standard of confidentiality to be

applied in the present proceeding.

On | December 2009, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 2, in which (i) it
admitted — under certain restrictions — the direct and cross-examination of the
handwriting experts; (ii) it admitted the direct examination by Respondent of
Professors Richard A. Nagareda and Antonio Briguglio, and by Claimant of
Professor Nicola Picardi; and (iii) it set the dates for the Hearing on Jurisdiction to

7 April 2010 to 13 April 2010.

68

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 11 December 2009, Claimants requested some further clarifications concerning
Procedural Order No. 2 with regard to the procedure for examination of the

handwriting experts and the scope of examination in general.

On 28 December 2009, the Tribunal provided the Parties with further clarifications
on Procedural Order No. 2 and enclosed a draft hearing agenda inviting the Parties
to comment thereon by 22 January 2010. It further invited Claimants to submit by
22 January 2010 the documents to be used for its direct, cross and re-direct
examination and not yet in the record while Respondent was given a deadline until 19

February 2010 to comment thereon.

On 19 January 2009, Claimants requested clarifications regarding its duty to submit
any supplemental exhibits not yet in the record for use during direct, cross and re-
direct examination, alleging that the outstanding decision of the Tribunal
concerning the admissibility of part of Respondent’s Supplemental Exhibits played

arole on the scope of Claimants’ submission.

On 21 January 2010, the Tribunal decided on Claimants’ enquiry of 19 January
2010, postponing (i) Claimants’ deadline for submitting any additional exhibits for
witness and expert examination until the issuance of the imminent Procedural Order

No. 3 and (ii) Respondent’s deadline for commenting on Claimants’ submission.

On 22 January 2010, the Parties submitted their comments on the draft Agenda for

the Hearing on Jurisdiction:

(i) | Respondent informed the Tribunal that it had no objection to the draft agenda.
Nevertheless, due to scheduling issues, it requested a change in the
examination order of certain expert witnesses. It further designated the
specific handwriting experts to be examined during the Hearing on

Jurisdiction.

69

187.

188.

189.

190.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(ii) Claimants requested to be given more time for their opening and closing
statements and to amend the hearing schedule accordingly. They further
requested a change in the order of examination of certain expert witnesses

due to their limited availability.

On 27 January 2010, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 3 ruling on the
standard of confidentiality to be followed in the present proceeding and rejecting
the admissibility of Respondent’s Exhibits RE-427, RE-428, RE-429, RE-435, RE-
440, RE-452, RE-462, RE-488, RE-489, RE-490, RE-491, RE-492, RE-493, RE-
494, RE-495, RE-496, RE-497, RE-498, RE-499, RE-504 and RE-528, as well as
of any other exhibit relating to an expert report or to a transcript of expert

examination issued in another arbitration.

On the same day, according to the Tribunal’s directions of 21 January 2010 (see §
185 above), the Tribunal invited Claimants to submit any additional exhibits not yet
in the record for use during direct, cross- and re-direct examination by | February
2010. Respondent was invited to comment on Claimants’ submission by 22
February 2010. This latter deadline was subsequently corrected by the Tribunal to 1
March 2010.

On 1 February 2010, Claimants filed their supplemental exhibits not yet in the
record for use during direct, cross- and re-direct examination, as requested by the

Tribunal in its letters of 28 December 2009 and 27 January 2010.

On 2 February 2010, Respondent informed the Tribunal that on 26 January 2010,
Dr. Osvaldo César Gugliemino had resigned from his position as Attorney General
of Argentina and that the President of the Argentine Republic had appointed
Dr. Joaquin Pedro da Rocha as his successor. On 27 December 2010 Dr. Joaquin
Pedro da Rocha was replaced by Dr. Angelina Maria Esther Abbbona as

Argentina’s Attorney General .

70

191.

192.

193.

194.

195.

196.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 1 March 2010, Respondent filed its comments on Claimants’ submission of 1

February 2010, including a series of additional documents (see § 189 above).

On 2 March 2010, Claimants reacted to Respondent’s submission of 1 March 2010
raising various objections against the submission of additional documents by
Respondent. Claimants requested that the Tribunal issue an immediate order
directing that the documents submitted by Respondent not be admitted to the record
and announced that they would respond in full to Respondent’s submission within

one week.

On 8 March 2010, Respondent sent a letter to the Tribunal concerning a new claim
that Claimants would allegedly have initiated before the Federal Court of the
Southern District of New York, including as Plaintiffs some of the Claimants, as
well as two other litigation procedures initiated in the US. Respondent
consequently asked the Tribunal to invite Claimants (i) to inform whether or not
these three proceedings “are the only one initiated in New York or in any other
jurisdiction relating to security entitlements in Argentine bonds that comprise
individuals or companies that are also Claimants in this arbitration” and (ii) to
confirm whether or not all the Claimants in any of these proceedings are also

Claimants in this arbitration.

On 9 March 2010, ICSID forwarded directions from the Tribunal to the Parties
dated 5 March 2010 and 9 March 2010 regarding (i) an updated hearing agenda and
(ii) the question of the submission of documents for expert and witness

examination.

On 9 March 2010, Claimants submitted a letter in which they substantiated their
previously raised objections (see § 192 above) against Respondent’s submission of

documents of 1 March 2010.

On the same day, Respondent submitted a second expert report from Hector Jorge

Petersen and Hector Jorge Petersen (h) concerning the authenticity of signatures

71

197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

attributed to Claimants and appearing in the powers of attorneys, together with an

accompanying note.

On the same day, Claimants objected strongly to the submission by Respondent of

such report and accompanying note.

On 10 March 2010, ICSID sent out a letter to the Parties conveying a message from
the Tribunal stating as follows:
“Counsel shall not send any further documents until the Arbitral Tribunal has
issued its upcoming Procedural Order on the admissibility of all documents
relating to the expert and witness examination, including the latest submission
by Respondent. In this respect, the Tribunal has taken due note of the
Claimants’ objection thereto. However, in order to prevent a further escalation
of this issue preventing the Tribunal to focus on the substantial issues of the

hearing, the Tribunal invites the Parties to refrain from any further comments
until reception of the upcoming Procedural Order.”

On 11 March 2010, notwithstanding the Tribunal’s directions of 10 March 2010,
Respondent submitted a letter insisting that Messrs. Petersens’ report submitted on
9 March 2010 (see § 196 above) be admitted. On the same day, Claimants stressed
that this submission was in violation of the Tribunal’s directions of 10 March 2010

and reserved the right to respond in due course.

On 18 March 2010, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 4 in which it set
forth certain principles on the admissibility and use of the documents submitted for
witness and expert examination and invited the Parties to submit certain documents

and information in view of the upcoming Hearing on Jurisdiction.

On 22 March 2010, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing joint telephone conference
together with the Parties and ICSID concerning the organization and agenda of the
Hearing on Jurisdiction scheduled on 7-13 April 2010. At the conclusion of the
telephone conference, the following procedural matters were left open: (i) the

specific order of examination of experts and witnesses, (ii) the presence of experts

72

202.

203.

204.

205.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

and witnesses during the hearing, and (iii) the specific role and presence of TFA

during the Hearing on Jurisdiction.

Between 25 March 2010 and | April 2010, correspondence was exchanged between
the Parties and the Tribunal concerning various issues relating to the Hearing on
Jurisdiction, such as the admissibility of documents to be used for expert and
witness examination, Respondent’s request for immediate access to Claimants’
online database, information on the existence of parallel proceedings relating to
Claimants’ security entitlements and the role and presence of TFA during the

Hearing on Jurisdiction.

On 29 March 2010, the Tribunal advised the Parties of its decision on the matters
left open during the telephone conference of 22 March 2010 (see § 201 above). The
Tribunal therein (i) confirmed the order of examination of experts as witnesses as
set forth in the draft agenda circulated to the Parties on 5 March 2010, (ii) gave
further specification as to the use of the time allocated to each Party, and (iii) set
forth rules as to the presence of experts and witnesses during the Hearing on

Jurisdiction.

On 2 April 2010, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 5, in which it ruled
over the admissibility of the documents designated by the Parties for expert and
witness examination and admitted TFA to attend the Hearing on Jurisdiction “as
Claimants ‘agent’, without prejudice to the pending issue of the validity of its
mandate.” This Procedural Order was then complemented on 6 April 2010 by
Procedural Order No. 6, in which the Tribunal ruled on the admissibility of further

documents designated by Respondent for witness and expert examination.

From 7 April 2010 to 13 April 2010, the Hearing on Jurisdiction took place at the
seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. After hearing the Opening Statements of
Counsel to both Parties, the Parties proceeded with the examination of the

following witnesses and experts: Prof. Richard A. Nagareda, Prof. Avv. Antonio

73

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Briguglio, Subinspector Lucio Pereyra, Mr. Héctor Jorge Petersen, Mr. Massimo
Cerniglia, Mr. Mario Franco, Mr. Brent C. Kaczmarek, Prof. W. Michael Reisman,
Mr. Stefano De Grandi, Mr. Joaquin A. Cottani, Prof. Christoph Schreuer,
Prof. Nicola Picardi, Mr. Héctor A. Mairal and Professor Dr. Dr. Rudolf Dolzer.

The last two days were dedicated to the Parties’ Closing Statements.

On 22 April 2010, the Tribunal sent a letter to the Parties with instructions
concerning the submission of the Post-Hearing Briefs to be submitted by both

Parties by 14 June 2010.

On 20 May 2010, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 7, in which it ruled
on the admissibility of new documents not yet in the record and which both Parties

wished to submit in order to use them in their upcoming Post-Hearing Briefs.

On the same day, the Tribunal sent a letter to the Parties listing nine questions that

the Tribunal wished the Parties to address in the Post-Hearing Briefs.

On 25 May 2010, both Parties filed new documents admitted into the procedure
under Procedural Order No. 7. These documents were submitted by the Parties as
C-998 to C-1003 with regard to Claimants, and RD-484 and RF-92 with regard to

Respondent.

On 9 June 2010, the Tribunal granted an extension of the deadline for the

submission of the Post-Hearing Briefs to 22 June 2010.

On 22, 23 and 25 June 2010, the Parties submitted their Post-Hearing Briefs,
together with their response to the Tribunal’s nine questions raised in its letter of 20

May 2010 (see § 209 above).

On 25 June 2010, Respondent complained about the delay of the submission of
some parts of Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, which was received during the night

of 22-23 June 2010 and requested that the Tribunal disregard such submission.

74

213.

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 7 July 2010, after having given Claimants the opportunity to comment on
Respondent’s letter of 25 June 2010 and after considering both Parties’ respective

positions, the Tribunal accepted both Parties’ Post-Hearing Briefs.

On 22 July 2010, Claimants requested the postponement of the deadline for the
submission of the Parties’ Statements of Cost due on 22 July 2010. After having
invited Claimants to elaborate on the reasons for their request and after having
given Respondent the opportunity to comment thereon, the Tribunal decided by
Procedural Order No. 8 dated 3 August 2010, to reject Claimants’ request for
postponement of the deadline for the submission of the Parties’ Statements of Cost
and invited both Parties to submit their Statements of Cost within 24 hours upon

receipt of Procedural Order No. 8
On 4 August 2010, the Parties filed their Statements of Cost.

On 5 October 2010, Claimants filed a letter submitting that certain Claimants, who
tendered into the Exchange Offer 2010, would no longer participate in the present
arbitration, thereby reducing the number of remaining Claimants to approximately
60,000. Claimants attached to their letter updated versions of Annexes A, B, C and
L to the Request for Arbitration, the latter containing a list of all Claimants who

have withdrawn from the arbitration since 14 September 2006.

On 22 October 2010, Respondent responded to Claimants’ letter of 5 October 2010
and requested the Tribunal (i) to require Claimants to promptly inform which
Claimants have tendered their security entitlements into the Exchange Offer 2010
and (ii) to order that the Argentine Republic and those Claimants with respect to
which proceedings will be discontinued under the terms set forth in its letter,
equally bear the arbitration costs, and each of them bear their own cost, and that

such order of discontinuance be rendered in due course.

On 27 October 2010, Claimants requested that Respondent’s requests raised in its

letter of 22 October 2010 be denied based on the following main arguments:

75

219.

220.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(i) with regard to Respondent’s request for information on the identity of Claimants
having tendered into the Exchange Offer 2010, this request has been rendered moot
because Respondent is already in possession of such information as Claimants
already have submitted a complete list of all Claimants having withdrawn from the
arbitration since 14 September 2006 and (ii) with regard to Respondent’s request
regarding costs issues as to withdrawn Claimants, this request constitutes an
attempt to raise new issues regarding costs and should therefore be rejected and
stricken from the record, or alternatively, Claimants should be given the

opportunity to brief the Tribunal in full as to this issue.

On 2 November 2010, Respondent responded, contending that (i) Claimants’
objections to its requests was based on old arguments; (ii) that the information as to
the identity of Claimants having tendered into the Exchange Offer 2010 is
necessary, since these Claimants would have accepted to abandon, dismiss,
withdraw and/or discontinue any proceedings pending against Argentina whilst
Claimants who have withdrawn irrespective of the Exchange Offer 2010 have not
made such undertaking; (iii) that Claimants are in a better position than Respondent
to provide such information; and (iv) that Respondent’s request regarding costs was
to be understood as a modality of the request for an order of discontinuance, which

the Tribunal shall be free to issue when considered appropriate.

On 26 November 2010, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 9 in which it
rejected Respondent’s request for further specific information on the identity of the
Claimants having tendered into the Exchange Offer 2010 and announced that the
question of the allocation of the arbitration costs concerning the Claimants who
withdrew would be dealt with in the Tribunal’s upcoming determination on

jurisdiction together with the question of the withdrawal of certain Claimants.

76

221.

222.

223.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

I. LAW

A. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS
(1) The Arbitral Procedure

The present procedure is subject to the ICSID legal framework, including the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals
of Other States of 1965 (hereinafter “ICSID Convention”), the Rules of Procedure
for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (hereinafter the
“Institution Rules”), the Rules for Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(hereinafter the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”) and the Administrative and Financial

Regulations, in their versions as amended in 2006.

The Arbitral Tribunal has been duly constituted on 6 February 2008 pursuant to
Articles 37 and 38 ICSID Convention and Rule 4 ICSID Arbitration Rules (see §
119 above). Following the sudden and unfortunate death of the President of the
Arbitral Tribunal, Dr. Robert Briner, Prof. Pierre Tercier was appointed by
agreement of the Parties on 2 September 2009 as the new President of the Arbitral
Tribunal according to Rule 11 ICSID Arbitration Rules. The Parties have not
raised objections to the nomination and appointment of any of the present members

of the Arbitral Tribunal.

Through the various rounds of exchange of written submissions and through the
Hearing on Jurisdiction held in Washington D.C. from 7 to 13 April 2010, both
Parties have been given wide and equal opportunity to present their case with

regard to the jurisdictional and admissibility issues of the present case.”>

Hearing Tr. Day 7 pp. 1941/14 -1942/10.

77

224.

225.

226.

227.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Having read the Parties’ written submissions, having listened to the Parties, the
testimony of their witnesses and experts during the Hearing on Jurisdiction, and
based on the deliberations held among the members of the Tribunal, the Arbitral

Tribunal considers itself in a position to render the present Decision on Jurisdiction.

(2) Object of the Present Decision

The main object and aim of the present decision is to examine the Centre’s
jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s competence over the Claimants’ claims against
Argentina and, to the extent that there is competence and jurisdiction, to determine
whether or not such claims are admissible. In what follows, the Tribunal will use
for convenience the terms jurisdiction and competence interchangeably, without

however ignoring the difference between the two concepts (see § 245 below).

During the First Session of 10 April 20087° (see § 127 above) and as further set
forth in the Tribunal’s letter of 21 May 2009 (see § 159 above), it was agreed that
the present jurisdictional phase is limited to general issues and shall not include
“issues touching specifically upon each individual claimant,” except where the
presentation of the general issue (of jurisdiction or admissibility) cannot be done

without reference to a particular situation.

As such, the present decision does not aim at determining whether or not the
Tribunal has jurisdiction with regard to each specific Claimant. Instead, it will set
forth the general requirements for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction regarding the present
case and the admissibility of Claimants’ claims, and will examine to what extent
these requirements can be considered fulfilled without entering into issues touching
specifically upon each individual Claimant. To the extent that the Tribunal

considers that the general requirements for its jurisdiction and for the admissibility

7 First Session Tr. p. 140/17 and p. 141/3-9.

78

228.

229.

230.

23

232.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

of Claimants’ claims are fulfilled, it will determine how to address relevant
jurisdictional issues touching specifically upon individual Claimants. These issues
will then be dealt with in a later decision according to a procedure to be further

determined.

With regard to relevant general issues of jurisdiction and admissibility, the
Tribunal, in its letter of 9 May 2008, provided the Parties with a “List of issues to
be addressed during the jurisdictional first phase of the proceedings” identifying 11

issues which are listed above (see § 130 above).

These 11 issues cover Claimants’ and Respondent’s main positions and objections
with regard to the Tribunal’s hearing and handling of the case, and address various

issues including jurisdictional, admissibility and other procedural issues.

Whilst this decision will address the 11 issues listed above, it will not follow the

order of such 11 issues.

. After a brief summary of the Parties’ positions (see section (3) below), the Tribunal

will make a short presentation of the legal basis for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
(section B below). The Tribunal will then set forth the requirements for ICSID’s
jurisdiction and determine to what extent these requirements can be deemed
fulfilled without entering into issues specifically touching upon individual
Claimants (section C below) and, to the extent these requirements are fulfilled,
address relevant issues relating to the admissibility of the claims (section D below)

and other procedural issues related thereto (section E below).

(3) Summary of the Parties’ Positions and Relief Sought

The Parties hold opposing views with regard to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral
Tribunal and the admissibility of the present proceedings. The Parties’ respective
positions and the requests for relief they seek from the Tribunal can be summarized

as follows:

79

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(a) Respondent’s Position and Requests for Relief

233. In general, Respondent rejects Claimants’ claims in their entirety and contends that

234.

Claimants have not asserted a plausible or prima facie case for violation of any of

the protections of the Argentina-Italy BIT. According to Respondent, Respondent

could not and consequently did not pay its external debts according to their terms,

but offered Claimants, on a non-discriminatory basis, a voluntary exchange offer

for new debt on other terms, which Claimants were free to reject with all their

rights intact.”

With respect to the jurisdiction, Respondent objects to the ICSID’s jurisdiction and

the Tribunal’s competence over Claimants’ claims based mainly on the following

arguments:

@)

Respondent contends that the conditions for ICSID jurisdiction are not
fulfilled and that Claimants’ claims are an unprecedented abuse of the
investment treaty regime, brought without legal basis and for a fundamentally
illegitimate motive. According to Respondent, this is a claim of
approximately 180,000 unrelated Claimants, arising out of different purported
investments acquired individually by each Claimant at different times and
under different circumstances.”* The ICSID Convention would not permit
such collective claim, nor would the Argentina-Italy BIT. Therefore,
Respondent submits that Claimants’ claim is a legally unsupported attempt to
turn a sovereign’s non-payment of external debt that is governed by other
States’ laws which provide for remedies in the courts of those other States

into a violation of investment treaty protection.”

R-MJ § 4; R-PHB §§ 364 er seq.
R-MJ §1.
R-PHB §§ 363 ef seq.

80

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Further, Respondent declares that it has not consented to such a proceeding in
any of the relevant instruments. Therefore, to force Respondent into such a
proceeding without its consent would be a fundamental denial of due process,
as well as a breach of the ICSID Convention’s “outer limits.”*° In addition,
even if jurisdiction was to be admitted, the way this proceeding has been
initiated would not be in compliance with the requirements of the BIT with
regard to preliminary conduct of amicable negotiations and court
proceedings, *! and would, in any event, be inefficient, unmanageable and

contrary to Respondent’s right to due process.

Respondent also contends that Claimants’ purported consent is equally
invalid because TFA, as the sole mover and controller of Claimants’ claims,
violated the duty of full and truthful disclosure by an un-conflicted
representative and thereby vitiated any consent given by Claimants. TFA
solicited Claimants’ consents to instituting this arbitration, over which they
have no control, by fraud and half-truths with the aim of diverting those
customers from claiming against the TFA member banks, while prescription
in Italy runs in favor of the TFA member banks.*? In addition, the consent
allegedly given by Claimants is not irrevocable as required by Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention."

Respondent further submits that the contractual entitlements created by and
acquired by Claimants in secondary securities markets outside Argentina are
not “investments made in the territory” of Argentina in the sense of the

ICSID Convention or the Argentina-Italy BIT. Respondent also contends that

R-MJ §1, R-PHB §§ 7-8, 19-59.
R-PHB § 267-291; R-PHB §§ 72-141.
R-MJ § 2; R-PHB § 142, §§ 158-200.
R-PHB § 227.

81

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

in most instances, the sales of the entitlements to Claimants by the members
of TFA were not in accordance with Argentine law as they violated both
contractual restrictions on such sales and relevant legal regulations.
Respondent derives from this that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione

materiae. *

The Tribunal further lacks jurisdiction ratione personae as Claimants have
not shown that they are “investors” or that they have satisfied the nationality
requirements of the Argentina-Italy BIT. 85 Respondent also disputes
Claimants’ standing, contending that Claimants in their capacity as holders of
security entitlements have only a remote and attenuated relationship to the
underlying bonds through secondary market transactions that violated

relevant law.*°

Further, Respondent submits that Claimants’ claims are not treaty claims
because they depend fundamentally on non-performance of contractual
payment obligations for which the relevant contractual instruments provide
non-Argentine legal rights and remedies that could not be and were not

affected by any act of Respondent.*’

Finally, Respondent contends that Claimants listed in Annex L of the Request

for Arbitration have not validly withdrawn from the arbitration and, since

R-MJ § 3, R-PHB §§ 394-405, § 478.
R-MJ § 3, R-PHB § 500.

R-MJ § 3, R-PHB § 394-405.

R-MJ § 4, R-PHB § 363, 8§ 366-371.

82

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

White & Case does not represent them, they have not submitted any of the

required pleadings and face default.**

235. Based on these considerations, Respondent requests that the Tribunal issue an

award:”

“(a) Determining that it lacks competence and that ICSID lacks jurisdiction
over this case;

(b) In the alternative, determining that it lacks competence and ICSID lacks
jurisdiction because both Argentina and Claimants have not provided
valid consent to this proceeding, and, further, TFA’s abuse of right in
bringing the claims in this proceeding renders invalid such consent as
Claimants may have offered and inadmissible these proceedings;

(c) In the alternative, determining that it lacks jurisdiction ratione
materiae;

(d) _ In the alternative, determining that it lacks jurisdiction ratione personae
or that Claimants lack standing;

(e) In the alternative, determining that Claimants have not satisfied the
necessary prerequisites for bringing a claim under the Argentina-Italy
BIT;

(f) In the alternative, determining that Claimants listed in Claimants’
Annex L have defaulted and ordering them to pay a pro rata share of
Argentina’s costs;

(g) Ordering Claimants to pay all of Argentina’s costs, expenses, and
attorneys’ fees; and

(h) Granting any further relief requested against Claimants that the Tribunal
deems fit and proper.”

236. The above Requests for Relief as contained in the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief
of 22 June 2010 (§ 501) and its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility
of 23 February 2009 (§ 730) are slightly different from the Requests for Relief it

8s R-R-MJ §§ 638-639; R-PHB §§ 253-266.
@ R-PHB § 501.

83

237.

238.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

formulated in its First Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 8 August

2008 and providing as follows:””

“(a) Determining that it lacks competence and that ICSID lacks jurisdiction
to entertain this collective action;

(b) In the alternative, determining that it lacks competence and ICSID lacks
jurisdiction because Claimants have not provided valid consent, and,
further, TFA’s abuse of right in bringing the claims in this proceeding
renders invalid such consent as Claimants may have offered;

(c) In the alternative, determining that it lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae;

(d) In the alternative, determining that it lacks jurisdiction ratione personae
or that Claimants lack standing;

(e) In the alternative, determining that Claimants have not satisfied
necessary prerequisites to bringing a claim under the Argentina-Italy
BIT;

(f) Ordering Claimants to pay all of Argentina’s costs, expenses, and
attorneys’ fees; and

(g) | Granting any further relief requested against Claimants that the Tribunal
deems fit and proper.”

In addition, in its letters of 22 October 2010 and 2 November 2010 (see §§ 217 and
219 above), Respondent requested the Tribunal to issue an order for discontinuance

concerning the Claimants who had withdrawn from the proceedings.

(b) Claimants’ Position and Requests for Relief

Claimants submit that throughout the 1990s, Respondent proceeded to issue over
170 sovereign bonds, intentionally targeting retail investors, including in particular
Italian retail investors like Claimants. By virtue of Argentina’s subsequent acts
surrounding its default in late 2001 and directed at all Claimants collectively,
Claimants were deprived of the value of their investments. In particular, Claimants

raise the following allegations:

“0 See R-MI § 401.

84

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(i) | Respondent first repudiated its obligations under the bonds and, subsequently,
refused to negotiate with bondholders thereby pursuing a unilateral, punitive
exchange offer targeting, infer alia, Italian retail investors, including

Claimants;

(ii) Thereafter, Respondent enacted legislation repudiating all obligations to

Claimants, which destroyed the value of their investments;”!

(iii) Respondent’s acts as a rogue debtor violated its international treaty
obligations, the reason why Claimants submitted claims pursuant to the
“Argentina-Italy BIT” and under the auspices of the International Centre for

Settlement of Investment Disputes (hereafter “ICSID”). °”

239. In their Request for Arbitration of 14 September 2006, Claimants formulated the

following Requests for Relief:

“212. Claimants hereby request that the Arbitral Tribunal to be constituted in
this case issue a final award:

1. Declaring that the Argentine Republic has breached its obligations
under the Argentina-Italy BIT, and is liable to Claimants therefor;

2. Awarding Claimants compensatory damages in an amount to be
specified at a later stage;

3. Awarding Claimants costs associated with these proceedings, including
all professional fees and disbursements;

4, Awarding Claimants pre-award and post-award interest at a rate to be
fixed; and

5. Awarding Claimants such further or other relief as the Tribunal may

deem appropriate.

213. Claimants reserve the right to amend this Request for Arbitration and
assert additional claims as permitted by the ICSID Convention and the ICSID
Arbitration Rules.”

1 CMI §§ 2-10.
C-MJ §§ 7-8.

85

240.

241.

242.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

After the initiation of these proceedings, the Tribunal decided to deal first with
issues of jurisdiction and admissibility and to deal with the merits of the case in a

second phase (see §§ 127-130 above).

Within such context and with regard to the jurisdictional phase of the present
proceedings as limited in scope to the extent described above (§§ 127-130),
Claimants contend that ICSID and the Tribunal have full jurisdiction over
Claimants’ claims, which meet all relevant requirements set forth in the ICSID

Convention, Arbitration Rules and the Argentina-Italy BIT.

Consequently, Claimants request that the Tribunal decide as follows with respect to

the 11 issues presented in this jurisdictional phase (see § 130 above):°**

“(1) Argentina consented to arbitrate claims by multiple Claimants, and
those claims are admissible.

(2) Claimants’ consent to arbitrate pursuant to a valid declaration of
consent, and the role of Task Force Argentina or any other alleged
conflict does not vitiate such consent.

(3) Claimants’ submission of substitute annexes to the Request for
Arbitration was permissible.

(4) Claimants were entitled to commence arbitration and the 18-month
domestic litigation clause in Article 8(2) of the Argentina-Italy BIT was
not a barrier.

(5) The MEN clause allows Claimants to bypass any requirement to resort
to domestic court before commencing arbitration.

(6) By operation of the MFN clause, Claimants can benefit from the
protection of the umbrella clause in the Argentina-Chile BIT.

(7) | The Tribunal has jurisdiction over Claimants’ prima facie treaty claims
under the Argentina-Italy BIT.

° C-MJ § 15; C-R-MJ § 353, §§ 656, 675, §§ 788, 793 and 798; C-PHB § 6.
C-MJ Section IV § 22 ; C-R-MJ Section IV; see further C-PHB § 449.

86

243.

244.

245.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(8) The Tribunal’s jurisdiction over Claimants’ treaty claims is unaffected
by any forum selection clauses in Claimants’ bonds.

(9) The bonds held by Claimants satisfy the definition of “investment”
under Article 1(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT and the ICSID
Convention. Their investments were made “in the territory” of
Argentina and “in compliance with the laws and regulations of
Argentina.”

(10) The Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione personae pursuant to Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention over Claimants who are natural persons,
provided certain requirements are met.

(11) The Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione personae pursuant to Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention over Claimants that are juridical persons and had
Italian nationality on September 14, 2007.”

Claimants also request the Tribunal to order Respondent to bear all legal fees and

expenses incurred by Claimants in connection with this arbitration.°>

(4) Structure of the Present Decision

As mentioned above (see §§ 225 et seg. above), the present decision deals with

general questions of jurisdiction, as well as admissibility.

The Convention does not define the concept of “jurisdiction” of the Centre or of
“competence” of the Tribunal contemplated in Articles 25 and 41 ICSID
Convention (see § 225 above). °° Nevertheless, in their Report, the Executive
Directors have interpreted the concept of “jurisdiction of the Centre” as a
“convenient expression to mean the limits within which the provisions of the

Convention will apply and the facilities of the Centre will be available for

95

C-MJ Section IV § 23.

°° ‘The differences between the concept of “jurisdiction” of the Centre compared to the concept

“competence” of the arbitral tribunal seem to be more linked to the difference in the nature and role
of the Centre compared to the arbitral tribunal rather then to a real difference of concept, see
GEROLD ZEILER, “Jurisdiction, Competence and Admissibility,” in: International Investment Law
for the 21st Century, Essays in Honour of Christoph Schreuer, Oxford University Press 2009, pp 77-
81.

87

246.

247.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

conciliation and arbitration proceedings.” In other words, the concept of
jurisdiction under the Convention also covers issues which may usually be regarded
as issues of “admissibility.”*” It is thus not surprising that some tribunals have

questioned the usefulness of the term in the framework of IcsID.*

Within the context of the present dispute and its particularities, it is useful and
important to distinguish issues of jurisdiction from issues of admissibility for the

following reasons.

Although a lack of jurisdiction or admissibility may both lead to the same result of
a tribunal having to refuse to hear the case, such refusal is of a fundamentally

different nature” and therefore carries different consequences: 00

(i) | While a lack of jurisdiction stricto sensu means that the claim cannot at all be
brought in front of the body called upon, a lack of admissibility means that

the claim was neither fit nor mature for judicial treatment;!”!

°7 See e.g. The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3), Decision on

Respondent’s Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 18 April 2008, $§ 11 et
seq. (hereinafter “Rompetrol”). In contrast, some authors and tribunals have expressed a different
view on this topic: see e.g. ZEILER, op. cit. fn. 96, pp. 90-91, who, referring to the Methanex case,
supports the view that since the objections mentioned in Rule 41 ICSID Arbitration Rules do not
include objections of inadmissibility of the claim, this provision does not confer to the Tribunal a
separate power to rule on objections to admissibility.

98

 

CHRISTOPH SCHREUER, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Cambridge University
Press, 2" edition, 2009, Ad Art. 25 § 18 and references quoted therein.

” See in this respect Paulsson, who called them “as different as night and day” (JAN PAULSSON,

“Jurisdiction and Admissibility,” in G. AKSEN, K. H. BOCKSTIEGEL, M.J. MUSTILL, P.M. PATOCCHI,
and A.M. WHITESELL (eds), Global Reflections on International Law, Commerce and Dispute
Resolution, Liber Amicorum in honour of Robert Briner (2005), pp. 601 ef seq.).

100 See also ZEILER, op. cit. fn. 96, pp. 81 et seq.

101 See PAULSSON, op. cit. fn. 99, and The Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the

Philippines, (ICSID Case ARB/02/6), Decision of 29 January 2004 (§ 153), 8 JCSID Reports 518
(hereinafter “SGS v. Philippines”).

88

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(ii) Whereby a decision refusing a case based on a lack of arbitral jurisdiction is
usually subject to review by another body, a decision refusing a case based on

a lack of admissibility can usually not be subject to review by another body;

(iii) Whereby a final refusal based on a lack of jurisdiction will prevent the parties
from successfully re-submitting the same claim to the same body, a refusal
based on admissibility will, in principle, not prevent the claimant from
resubmitting its claim, provided it cures the previous flaw causing the

inadmissibility.

248. Therefore, and in the light of the many objections raised in the present proceedings
with regard to various aspects of ICSID’s jurisdiction and proceedings, the Tribunal
has deemed it not only appropriate but also necessary to distinguish issues relating

to ICSID’s jurisdiction stricto sensu and admissibility issues.

249. In this respect, the guiding thought of the Tribunal for distinguishing issues of
jurisdiction from issues of admissibility has been the following cornerstone

consideration:

If there was only one Claimant, what would be the requirements
for ICSID’s jurisdiction over its claim ? If the issue raised relates to
such requirements, it is a matter of jurisdiction. If the issue raised
relates to another aspect of the proceedings, which would not apply
if there was just one Claimant, then it must be considered a matter
of admissibility and not of jurisdiction.

250. This thought will be further developed along the Tribunal’s analysis which is

structured as follows:

(i) The Tribunal will start with a short presentation of the fundaments and scope
of the Tribunal’s competence as deriving from the relevant legal provisions of

the BIT and the Convention (see section B below);

89

251.

252.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(ii) Based on this presentation, the Tribunal will then set forth the requirements
for its jurisdiction as set forth by the relevant legal provisions and examine to
what extent these requirements can be considered fulfilled without entering
into issues specifically touching upon individual Claimants (see section C

below);

(iii) To the extent these requirements can be considered fulfilled, the Tribunal will
address relevant issues relating to the admissibility of the claims (see section

D below); and

(iv) Finally, to the extent that the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that it has, in
principle, jurisdiction and that the claims are, in principle, admissible, it will
address other procedural issues relevant for the conduct of the present

proceedings (see section E below).

B. LEGAL BASIS FOR THE TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION

It is not contested between the Parties that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction must be based
on the relevant provisions of the Argentina-Italy BIT as well as Article 25 ICSID

102

Convention.” What is, however, disputed is the scope of jurisdiction as deriving

from these instruments and provisions.

Before entering into the analysis of the various jurisdictional and other procedural
requirements for ICSID arbitration, the Tribunal considers it useful to briefly
discuss the scope of application and effect of the relevant legal provisions. This
will facilitate the determination of the specific scope of ICSID’s jurisdiction and
the Tribunal’s competence in the present dispute, which will serve as basis for the

Tribunal’s analysis of the jurisdictional requirements.

102 CMJ § 308; R-MJ § 174, R-R-MIJ § 241.

90

253.

254.

255.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(1) Article 25 ICSID Convention

To recall, Article 25 of the ICSID Convention provides:

“(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that
State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have
given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State other
than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented
to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration as well as on the date on
which the request was registered pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 28 or
paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does not include any person who on either
date also had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute; and

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any
juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the
dispute on that date and which, because of foreign control, the parties have
agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for the
purposes of this Convention.

[I

Article 25 ICSID Convention is generally understood as prescribing the following

requirements for ICSID’s jurisdiction:

(i) Existence of a legal dispute: The ICSID Convention does not provide for a
definition of what constitutes a “legal dispute.” ICSID tribunals have generally
defined this concept as referring to “disputes regarding the existence or scope of a
legal right or obligation, or to disputes regarding the nature or extent of the

reparation to be made for the breach of a legal obligation.” '® Similarly, the

103 See REED/PAULSSON/BLACKABY, Guide to ICSID Arbitration, Kluwer International, 2004, p.

15. See also 2011 ed., p. 26.

91

256.

257.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

International Court of Justice defines a dispute as “a disagreement on a point of law

or fact, a conflict of legal views or interests between parties.”!*

(ii) A dispute arising directly out of an “investment”: In order to be subject to
ICSID’s jurisdiction, the dispute must concern an “investment” and the claims put
forward by either Party must arise directly from such investment. Again, the ICSID
Convention does not provide for any definition or explanation of the terms “arising
directly out of” or “an investment.”!® Attempts by tribunals to define the concept
of investments are numerous and will be examined further below when determining
whether an investment may be deemed to exist in the present case (see §§ 343 et

seq. below).

(iii) A dispute between a Contracting State and a national of another Contracting
State: The dispute must exist between a Host State having ratified the Convention
and an investor of another State, having also ratified the Convention. With regard
to the investor, the nationality requirement is understood to be two-fold, i.e., subject
to a positive and a negative requirement: (i) the investor must possess the
nationality of a Contracting State, and (ii) not simultaneously possess the
nationality of the Host State. The fulfilment of the nationality requirement set forth
in Article 25 is considered an objective condition to the Convention’s application,
which is not subject to the Contracting Parties’ arrangement. Article 25(2) however,
does not provide for a definition of the concept of nationality, which is according to
general principles of international law left to the law of the State of which
nationality is claimed. Article 25(2) merely provides certain clarifications as to the
time at which the nationality requirement must be fulfilled, while drawing a

distinction between natural persons and juridical persons. In addition, with regard

104 See the case concerning East Timor, I.C.J. Reports 1995, pp. 89, 99. See also SCHREUER, op.

cit. fn.98, Ad Article 25 § 42 and references quoted in footnote n. 44.

105 SCHREUER, op. cit. fn.98, Ad Article 25 § 85.

92

258.

259.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

to juridical persons, Article 25(2) provides the parties with the possibility to take
into account foreign control over a juridical person when determining its nationality

for the purposes of the Convention.

(iv) Existence of a written consent of both Parties: In order for consent for
ICSID’s jurisdiction to be given, a State must not only have generally consented to
ICSID’s jurisdiction by becoming a party to the ICSID Convention, it must also have
consented to ICSID’s jurisdiction in the specific case at hand. This specific consent
must then be matched by the consent of the concerned investor. Consent must be
given in writing and be explicit. However, the Convention does not define the
concept of written form, and in practice the form of such consent has evolved and
may differ depending on the type, contractual- or treaty-based, of the dispute.
Within the context of BIT-based arbitration, it is widely admitted that an arbitration
clause contained in a BIT and providing for ICSID arbitration constitutes a valid
written offer for ICSID arbitration by the relevant State. Actually, Article 8(3) of
the BIT in the present case states with so many words: “With this purpose and
under this Agreement, each Contracting Party grants its anticipated and irrevocable
consent that any dispute may be subject to arbitration.” Such an offer of consent
may be validly accepted by an investor through the initiation of ICSID

proceedings.'°°

(2) Argentina-Italy BIT
On 22 May 1990, the Republic of Italy and the Argentine Republic signed the
Argentina-Italy BIT which entered into effect on 14 October 1990, and on which

Claimants’ claims as well as the Tribunal’s competence are allegedly based.

106 SCHREUER, op. cit. fn. 98, Ad Art. 25 §§ 427 et seq., § 448; REED/PAULSSON/BLACKABY, op.

cit. fn. 103, p. 35.

93

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(a) General Scope and Aim of the Argentina-Italy BIT

260. With regard to the general purpose of the Argentina-Italy BIT, the preamble of the

BIT provides as follows:

261. In its authentic Spanish version:

“L]

Con el deseo de crear condiciones favorables para una mayor cooperacién
econémica enre los dos Paises y, en particular, para la realizacién de
inversiones por inversores de una Parte Contratante en el territorio de la otra
ys

Considerando que la tinica manera de establecer y conservar un adecuado
flujo internacional de capitales es a través del mantenimiento de un clima
satisfactorio para las inversiones dentro del respeto a las leyes del pais
receptor;

Reconociendo que la conclusi6n de un Acuerdo para la promocién y la
reciproca proteccién de las inversiones contribuird a estimular las iniciativas
empresariales que favorezcan la prosperidad de las dos Partes contratantes.

Ll

262. In its authentic Italian version:

“L]

desiderando creare condizioni favorevoli per una maggiore cooperazione
economica fra i due Paesi ed, in particolare, per la realizzazione di
investimenti da parte di investitori di una Parte Contraente nel territorio
dell’altra;

considerando che l’unico modo per stabilire e mantenere un adeguato flusso
internazionale di capitali consiste nell’assicurare un clima propizio agli
investimenti, nel rispetto delle leggi del Paese ricevente;

riconoscendo che la conclusione di un Accordo per la Promozione e la
reciproca Protezione degli Investimenti contribuira a stimolare iniziative
imprenditoriali idonee a favorire la prosperita delle due Parti Contraenti,

Ll

263. In its unofficial English translation by Claimants:

“L]

Desiring to create favourable conditions for greater economic cooperation
between the two States and, in particular, for the realization of investments by

94

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party;

Considering that the only way of establishing and maintaining an appropriate
international flow of capital is to ensure a favourable climate for investments,
in compliance with the laws of the receiving State;

Recognizing that entering into this Agreement on the Promotion and
Protection of Investments will stimulate entrepreneurial intiatives which will
increase the prosperity of both Contracting Parties.

LJ

264. In accordance with this general aim of the BIT, the BIT is then construed as

follows:

@)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Article 1 provides for definitions of various key terms used throughout the

‘investor,

BIT, including the terms “investment, returns” and “territory”;

Articles 2 to 6 contemplate various standards of investment protection and
promotion, including fair and equitable treatment to investors of the other
Contracting Party (Article 2(2)), national treatment standard and most-
favored nation principle (Article 3), compensation for damages or losses
related to certain events (Article 4), protection against nationalization and
expropriation (Article 5), assurance of the possibility to transfer and repatriate
capital, revenues, considerations and compensation of damages (Article 6),

while Article 7 extends such protection to subrogated parties;

Articles 8 and 9 provide for a mechanism of settlement of disputes, Article 8
applying to disputes between investors and a Contracting Party (see § 267
below), and Article 9 applying to disputes between the Contracting Parties,

i.e., Argentina and Italy;

Article 10 contemplates the principle that if another applicable law or treaty
provides for a more favorable treatment, such more favorable treatment shall

apply;

95

265.

266.

267.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(v) Articles 11 to 13 are of a more technical nature and address questions of entry

into force and duration of the BIT.

In addition to the core of the BIT, Argentina and Italy further signed an “Additional
Protocol,” which provides specifications and clarifications concerning Articles 1

and 3 BIT:

(@) ~~ With regard to Article 1 BIT and the concept of “individual” investor defined
therein, the Additional Protocol provides for specific domiciliation
requirements for individuals of a Contracting Party to benefit from the

protection of the BIT;

(ii) With regard to Article 3 (and Article 10) BIT and the principles of most
favored nation and most favorable treatment contemplated therein, the
Additional Protocol specifies the scope of application of these principles:
(a) with regard to problems relating to the entry, stay, work and movement in
each Contracting Party’s territory of relevant citizens of the other Contracting
Party and their families and (b) in general, by excluding from its scope of
application “investments made within facilitated credit set forth in bilateral
agreements” such as the Treaty signed in Rome on 10 December 1987 and
establishing a Particular Association between Italy and Argentina and the
General Treaty of Cooperation and Good Relationships signed in Madrid on 3

June 1988 between Argentina and Spain.

In summary, the Argentina-Italy BIT resembles other BITs concluded at that time
and does not contain any “out of the ordinary” provision or principle.
(b) Article 8 BIT

As mentioned above (§ 264), in Article 8 BIT, Argentina and Italy set forth the
principles for settlement of disputes arising between investors of one Contracting

Party and the other Contracting Party, i.e., the Host State.

96

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

268. Articles 8(1) through 8(9) BIT in the Spanish authentic text provides as follows:

“1, Toda controversia relativa a las inversiones que surja entre un inversor
de una de las Partes Contratantes y la otra Parte, respecto a cuestiones
reguladas por el presente Acuerdo sera, en la medida de lo posible,
solucionada por consultas amistosas entre las partes en la controversia.

2. Si esas consultas no aportaran una solucién, la controversia podra ser
sometida a la jurisdiccién administrativa o judicial competente de la Parte
Contratante en cuyo territorio esta situada la inversién.

3. Si todavia subsistiera una controversia entre inversores y una Parte
Contratante, luego de transcurrido un plazo de dieciocho meses desde la
notificacién del comienzo del procedimiento ante las jurisdicciones nacionales
citadas en el parrafo 2, la controversia podrd ser sometida a arbitraje
internacional.

A ese fin, y de conformidad con los términos de este Acuerdo, cada
Parte Contratante otorga por el presente su consentimiento anticipado e
irrevocable para que toda controversia pueda ser sometida al arbitraje.

4, A partir del momento en que se inicie un procedimiento arbitral, cada
una de las partes en la controversia adoptara todas las medidas necesarias a fin
de desistir de la instancia judicial en curso.

5. En caso de recurrirse al arbitraje internacional, la controversia sera
sometida, a eleccién del inversor, a alguno de los organos de arbitraje
designados a continuacién:

a) Al Centro Internacional de Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a
Inversiones (C.I.A.D.I.) creado por el «Convenio sobre el arreglo de
diferencias relativas a Inversiones entre Estados y nacionales de otros
Estados », abierto a la firma en Washington el 18 de marzo de 1965, cuando
cada Estado parte en el presente Acuerdo haya adherido a aquel. Mientras
dicha condicién no se cumpla, cada una de las Partes Contratantes da su
consentimiento para que la controversia sea sometida al arbitraje de
conformidad con el reglamento del Mecanismo Complementario de
Conciliacién y Arbitraje del Centro Internacional de Arreglo de Diferencias
Relativas a Inversiones.

b) A un tribunal de arbitraje “ad hoc” establecido para cada caso. El
Arbitraje se efectuara de acuerdo con el Reglamento Arbitral de la Comisién
de la Naciones Unidas para el Derecho Mercanil Internacional (C.N.U.D.M.1.)
al cual se refiere la Resolucién de la Asamblea General de las Naciones
Unidas No. 31/98 del 15 de diciembre de 1976. Los drbitros seran tres. Si los
mismos no son nacionales de la Partes Contratantes, deberan ser nacionales de
Estados que tengan relaciones diplomaticas con ellas.

 

6. Ninguna de la Partes Contratantes que sea parte en una controversia
podra plantear, en ninguna etapa del proceso de arbitaje, ni de la ejecucién de
una sentencia arbitral, excepciones basadas en el hecho que el inversor, parte
contratante en la controversia, haya percibido una indemnificaci6n destinada a

97

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

cubrir todo o parte de la perdidas sufridas, en cumplimento de una poliza de
seguro o de la garantia prevista en Articulo 7 del presente Acuerdo.

7. El tribunal arbitral decidiraé sobre la base del derecho de la Parte
Contratante parte en la controversia — incluyendo las normas de esta ultima
relativas a conflictos de leyes -, las disposiciones del presente Acuerdo, los
terminos de eventuales acuerdos particulares concluidos con relacién a la
inversién, como asi también los principios de derecho internacional en la
materia.

8. Las sentencias arbitrales serdn definitivas y obligatorias para las partes
en la controversia. Cada Parte Contratante se compromete a ejecutar las
sentencias de conformidad con su legislacién nacional y de acuerdo a las
conveniones internacionales en la materia vigentes para ambas Partes
Contratantes.

9. Las Partes Contratantes se abstendran de tratar, a través de los canales
diplomaticos, argumentos concernientes al arbitraje o a un proceso judicial ya
en marcha hasta que los procedimientos correspondientes hubieran sido
concluidos, salvo que las partes en la controversia no hubieran cumplido el
laudo del tribunal arbitral o la sentencia del tribunal ordinario, segtin los
términos de cumplimiento establecidos en el laudo o en la sentencia.”

269. Article 8(1) through 8(9) BIT in the Italian authentic text provides:

“1, Qualsiasi controversia relativa agli investimenti insorta tra una Parte
Contraente ed un investitore dell’altra, riguardo problemi regolati dal presente
Accordo, sara per quanto possibile risolta mediante consultazioni amichevoli
tra le parti in controversia medesime.

2. Se tali consultazioni non consentissero una soluzione, la controversia
potra essere sottoposta alla competente magistratura ordinaria od
amministrativa della Parte Contraente nel cui territorio si trovi l’investimento.

3. Ove tra un a Parte Contraente ed investitori sussista ancora
controversia, dopo trascorso un periodo di 18 mesi dalla notifica di inizio di
una azione avanti le magistrature nazionali indicate al paragrafo 2, tale
controversia potra essere sottoposta ad arbitrato internazionale. A tale effetto
ed ai sensi del presente Accordo, ciascuna Parte Contraente conferisce fin
d’ora consenso anticipato ed irrevocabile affinché qualsiasi controversia possa
essere sottoposta all’arbitrato.

4, Fin dal momento in cui abbia avuto inizio un procedimento arbitrale,
ciascuna delle parti nella controversia adottera ogni utile iniziativa intesa a
desistere dall’azione giudiziale in corso.

5. In caso di ricorso all’arbitrato internazionale, la controversia sara
sottoposta, a scelta dell’investitore, a uno degli organismi di arbitrato qui di
seguito indicati:

98

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

a. al Centro Internazionale per la Risoluzione delle Controversie
relative ad Investimenti (I-C.S.LD.), istituito dalla Convenzione sul
"Regolamento delle Controversie relative agli investimenti tra Stati e cittadini
di altri Stati", aperta alla firma in Washington il 18 marzo 1965, qualora
ognuno dei Paesi parte nel presente Accordo vi avesse aderito. Ove questa
condizione non sussista, ciascuna delle Parti Contraenti conferisce il proprio
consenso affinché la controversia sia sottoposta ad arbitrato, in conformita alla
regolamentazione sui "meccanismi" aggiuntivi per la conciliazione e
V’arbitrato del Centro Internazionale per il Regolamento delle Controversie
relative ad Investimenti.

b. Ad un Tribunale arbitrale "ad hoc" istituito caso per caso.
L’arbitrato si effettuera secondo il Regolamento Arbitrale della Commissione
delle Nazioni Unite sul Diritto Commerciale Internazionale (UNCITRAL), di
cui alla Risoluzione dell’Assemblea Generale delle Nazioni Unite 31/98 del
15 dicembre 1976: Gli arbitri saranno in numero di tre e, se non cittadini delle
Parti Contraenti, dovranno essere cittadini di Paesi che abbiano relazioni
diplomatiche con le Parti Contraenti.

6. Nessuna delle Parti Contraenti, che sia parte in una controversia, potra
sollevare in una fase della procedura di arbitrato né in sede di esecuzione di
una sentenza di arbitrato, eccezioni basate sul fatto che un investitore parte
avversa abbia, per effetto di una polizza di assicurazione o della garanzia
prevista all’ Articolo 7 del presente Accordo, ricevuto un indennizzo destinato
a coprire in tutto od in parte le perdite subite.

7. Il Tribunale Arbitrale decidera sulla base del diritto della Parte
Contraente parte nella controversia — comprese le norme di quest’ultima
relativi ai conflitti di leggi -, delle disposizioni del presente Accordo, di
clausole di eventuali particolari accordi relativi all’investimento, nonché sulla
base dei principi di diritto internazionale applicabili in materia.

8. Le sentenze arbitrali definitive vincolanti per le parti nella controversia.
Ciascuna Parte Contraente si impegna ad eseguire le sentenze, in conformita
alla propria legislazione nazionale ed alle Convenzioni internazionali in
materia vigenti per ambo le Parti Contraenti.

9. Le parti Contraenti si asterranno dal trattare per via diplomatica
argomenti attinenti ad un arbitrato od un procedimento giudiziario gia in
corso, finché le procedure relative non siano concluse e le parti nella
controversia non abbiano poi adempiuto al lodo del tribunale arbitrale od alla
sentenza del competente tribunale interno, secondo i termini di adempimento
stabiliti nel lodo o nella sentenza medesimi.”

270. Article 8(1) through 8(9) BIT in Claimants’ unofficial English translation provides:

“1, Any dispute in relation to the investments between a Contracting Party
and an investor of the other Contracting Party in relation to the issues

99

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

governed by this Agreement shall be settled, if possible, by means of amicable
consultation between the parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute has not been settled in such consultation, it may be subject
to the competent ordinary or administrative court of the Contracting Party in
the territory of which the investment is located.

3. If, after 18 months from the notification of commencement of an action
before the national courts indicated in the above paragraph 2, the dispute
between the Contracting Party and the investors still continues to exist, it may
be subject to international arbitration.

With this purpose and under this Agreement, each Contracting Party grants its
anticipated and irrevocable consent that any dispute may be subject to
arbitration.

4, Since the commencement of the arbitration proceeding, each disputing
party will adopt any initiative suitable to desist from the judicial action in
course.

5. In case of international arbitration, the dispute will be subject, upon
choice of the investor, to one of the following arbitration bodies:

a) International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(LC.S.I.D.), established under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States opened for signature in
Washington on March 18, 1965, provided that both Contracting Parties are
parties to the said Convention. If this condition is not satisfied, each of the
Contracting Parties agrees that the dispute shall be subject to arbitration in
compliance with the Additional Facility Rules for conciliation and arbitration
of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes.

b) Ad hoc arbitration tribunal. The arbitration will be carried out
according to the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), approved by the General Assembly
Resolution 31/98 of December 15, 1976. There will be three arbitrators who,
if not citizens of the Contracting Parties, must be the citizens of the countries
with which the Contracting Parties have diplomatic relations.

6. No Contracting Party which is a party to the dispute is allowed to raise,
during the arbitration procedure or while the arbitration decision is being
enforced, exceptions based on the fact that the investor involved in the dispute
received, in force of an insurance policy or security provided under Art. 7
hereof, a compensation which covers, in whole or in part, the losses suffered.

7. The arbitration tribunal will decide on the basis of the laws of the
Contracting Party involved in the dispute — including its rules on the conflict
of laws — and of the provisions of the Agreement, of clauses of any particular
agreements relating to the investment, as well as on the basis of the applicable
principles of international law.

8. The arbitration decisions will be definitive and binding on the parties to
the dispute. Each Contracting Party undertakes to enforce the decisions in

100

271.

272.

N

273.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

compliance with its national legislation and international conventions
applicable to both Contracting Parties.

9. The Contracting Parties will refrain from diplomatic negotiations on
issues relating to an arbitration or judicial proceeding in course, until the
related proceeding has not been concluded and the parties have not complied
with the arbitration decision or the decision of the competent internal court
according to the terms of performance provided in such arbitration or judicial
decision.”

Thus, whilst Article 8(1) firstly defines the scope of its application by referring to
“any dispute relating to the investments between a Contracting Party and an
investor of the other Contracting Party in relation to the issues governed by this
Agreement,” Article 8(1) to (3) then provides for three different settlement
mechanisms: (i) amicable consultations (Article 8(1)), (ii) proceedings before the
competent ordinary or administrative court of the Host State (Article 8(2)), and

(iii) international arbitration (Article 8(3)).

Article 8(4) to 8(8) further contains supplementary principles applicable where a
party initiates international arbitration proceedings, providing for either ICSID or
ad hoc arbitration upon the choice of the investor (Article 8(5)), as well as for a
choice of law in favor of the law of the Host State, the provisions of the BIT, as
well as the applicable principles of international law (Article 8(7)). Article 8(9)
finally prohibits the Contracting Parties from conducting diplomatic negotiations on

issues relating to an ongoing litigation or arbitration.

Article 8 BIT is at the heart of the Parties’ controversy regarding the question of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction: The Parties not only disagree on the scope and nature of the
disputes subject to the settlement mechanisms set forth in Article 8, but also on how
these three mechanisms interact, and in particular whether some of them are a
mandatory prerequisite to the coming into play of other mechanisms, and if so,

whether or not they have been duly complied with.

101

274.

275.

276.

277.

278.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(3) Relationship between Article 25 ICSID Convention and Article 8
BIT

(a) In General

As mentioned above, Article 8(5) BIT provides that in case of an international
arbitration initiated under Article 8(3) BIT, the dispute would be subject, upon the
choice of the investor, to either ICSID or ad hoc arbitration under the UNCITRAL

Arbitration Rules.

In other words, through the express designation of ICSID arbitration in Article 8
BIT, Italy and Argentina, which are both Contracting Parties to the ICSID
Convention, express their consent required under Article 25 ICSID Convention to
submit specific disputes with nationals of each other to ICSID arbitration. The
scope of this consent is therefore defined by and must be determined according to

the relevant provisions of the BIT, and in particular by Article 8.

In this respect, the Parties disagree on the actual and admissible scope of this
consent. They disagree on how these two provisions - Article 25 ICSID Convention
and Article 8 BIT - interact, and in particular on whether Article 25 ICSID
Convention sets forth the outer limits of the consent given under Article 8 BIT and,
if so, whether the Parties’ consent as expressed in Article 8 goes beyond these outer

limits.

(b) With regard to the Subject Matter of the Dispute

According to Article 8(1) BIT, the settlement mechanism provided for in Article 8,
including ICSID arbitration, applies to “[a]ny dispute in relation to the investments
between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party in

relation to the issues governed by this Agreement.”

Through this phrase, Argentina and Italy defined the nature and kind of disputes

that the Contracting Parties wished to submit to the dispute settlement mechanisms

102

279.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

provided under Article 8, i.e., disputes “in relation to the investments” made “in

relation to the issues governed by this Agreement.”

Insofar as ICSID arbitration is concerned, this phrase arguably implements the

requirements of Article 25 reserving ICSID jurisdiction to “legal disputes arising

directly out of an investment.” To recall, Article 25(1) ICSID Convention provides

as follows (see § 253 above):

@)

(ii)

“(L) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that
State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have
given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.”

To the extent that the BIT provides an investor with specific rights for the
protection of its investment, a dispute relating to the existence, scope or
violation of such a right can be deemed a “legal dispute” in the sense of

Article 25 ICSID Convention.

To the extent that Article 8(1) requires a “relation” between the dispute and
the investment, it would appear to implement the requirement of Article 25(1)
ICSID Convention that only disputes arising “directly out of an investment”
is subject to ICSID’s jurisdiction. Now, it is true that Article 8(1) does not
expressly provide for the need of “directness” between the investment and the
dispute and merely requires the existence of a “relation” between them. The
question thus arises whether such less restrictive wording may be considered
going beyond ICSID’s outer limits and should therefore be interpreted with
due regard to the requirement of “directness” of such relationship. This
question will be addressed in more detail below when determining the

existence of a legal dispute arising out of the BIT (below §§ 301 ef seq.).

103

280.

281.

282.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(c) With regard to the Parties

As mentioned above (§257), Article 25 ICSID Convention requires that the dispute
at stake exists between a Host State having ratified the Convention and an investor
of another Contracting State. To this extent, ICSID arbitration initiated under
Article 8 BIT may only take place between the Host State, i.e., Argentina or Italy,
and an investor of the other State’s nationality. This is duly reflected in Article 8(1)
BIT, which applies only to disputes between “a Contracting Party and an investor
of the other Contracting Party.” As such, Article 8(1) BIT reflects the objective
requirements of Article 25 ICSID Convention that the investor be of the nationality

of a Contracting State other than the Host State.

With regard to the nationality of the investor, Article 25 ICSID does not provide for
any specification as to when an investor is deemed to be of the nationality of a
particular State. Thus, while the requirement that the investor be of the nationality
of a Contracting State other than the Host State is an objective requirement, the
criteria to determine whether such requirement is fulfilled are not set forth by the
ICSID Convention and may therefore be further determined by the Contracting

Parties to the Convention.

In this respect, the BIT contains the following provision with regard to the

nationality of an investor:
. Article 1(2) BIT provides as follows:

“2. “Investor” shall mean any individual or corporation of one Contracting
Party that has made, makes or undertakes to make investments in the territory
of the other Contracting Party.

a) “individual” shall mean, for each Contracting Party, an individual who
is a citizen of such Contracting Party, in compliance with the laws
thereof;

b) “corporation” shall mean, in relation to each Contracting Party, any

entity incorporated in compliance with the legislation of a Contracting
Party, having its office in the territory of such Party and being
recognized thereby, such as public entities that conduct economic

104

283.

284.

285.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

activities, partnerships and corporations, foundations and associations,
independent of whether liability is limited or not. “

. Par. | of the Additional Protocol provides as follows:

“1. With reference to Article 1:

a) Individuals of each Contracting Party who, when making an investment,
maintained their domicile for more than two years in the Contracting Party in
the territory of which the investment was made, cannot benefit of this
Agreement.

If an individual of one Contracting Party maintains at the same time its
registered residence in its State and domicile in the other State for more than
two years, he/she will be considered equivalent, for the purposes of this
Agreement, to individuals of the Contracting Party in the territory of which
they made investments.

b) The domicile of an investor will be determined in compliance with
laws, regulations and provisions of the Contracting Party in the territory of
which the investment was made.”

While Article 1(2) BIT focuses on the definition of the term of “investor,” the
Additional Protocol sets forth further eligibility criteria for an investor to benefit
from the protection offered by the BIT. As such, these provisions aim to define the
general scope of application rationae personae of the BIT, including but not limited

to issues of nationality.

Within this context, Article 1(2) BIT requires that the investor be (i) with regard to
physical persons, an individual having citizenship of the other Contracting Party,
according to the latter’s laws, and (ii) with regard to corporations, a corporation
being incorporated in the other Contracting Party’s territory in accordance with its

legislation.

Thus, the BIT provides that the question of whether an investor is an “investor of
the other Contracting Party” in the sense of Article 8(1) BIT is subject to the law of
the Contracting State of which nationality is claimed. This can be said to reflect
Article 25 ICSID Convention, which does not impose any criteria with regard to the

determination of the nationality.

105

286.

287.

288.

289.

290.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In addition thereto, the Additional Protocol to the BIT sets forth further criteria of
eligibility for an investor to benefit from the protection offered under the BIT, in
particular domiciliation requirements, which are to be examined under the laws of

the Host State, i.e., Argentina.

In summary, under the BIT, an investor must not only be of the nationality of the
other Contracting Party, but it must further fulfil the domiciliation requirements of

Par. 1 of the Additional Protocol.

(d) With regard to the Procedure to Be Followed

As mentioned above (§ 271), Article 8 BIT provides for three different types of
dispute settlement mechanisms and the Parties disagree on the scope and nature of
the disputes subject to these mechanisms, as well as on the interaction of these three
mechanisms. In particular, it is disputed between the Parties whether these three
mechanisms are to be considered as mere alternatives or whether they provide for a
sequential dispute resolution system implementing a mandatory three-steps
mechanism, in which arbitration constitutes the ultimate step to be initiated only

after completion of the first two steps.

Whilst Article 25 ICSID Convention sets forth the requirements for the Centre’s
jurisdiction, and the ICSID Arbitration Rules further set forth the specific rules to
be followed in order to initiate arbitration proceedings falling under ICSID’s
jurisdiction, the ICSID framework is silent with regard to the question of whether
such arbitration proceedings can be rendered conditional upon the fulfilment of
further requirements, and if so, what are the effects of such additional requirements

on ICSID’s jurisdiction for handling of the case.

Whether or not Article 8 BIT provided for additional requirements and whether
these requirements should be deemed of such nature and importance to be an

inseparable part of the Parties’ consent will be addressed below when examining

106

291.

292.

293.

294.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

the existence and scope of the Parties’ consent to ICSID jurisdiction (see §§ 423 et

seq. and §§ 467 et seg. below).

(4) Other Relevant Legal Provisions and Principles
The Tribunal takes guidance from the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
(“Vienna Convention”) in particular Article 31 (“General rule of interpretation”)

and 32 (“Supplementary means of interpretation’).

As already mentioned in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 3 of 27 January 2010,
this Tribunal shares the generally accepted view that the decisions of ICSID
tribunals, like those of other investment dispute settlement mechanisms, are not
legally binding precedents. Consequently, the Tribunal does not consider itself

bound by previous decisions of other international tribunals.

However, the Tribunal is also of the opinion that, subject to the specific provisions
of a treaty in question and of the circumstances of the actual case, it should pay due
consideration to earlier decisions of international tribunals, where it believes that
such consideration is appropriate in the light of the specific factual and legal
context of the case and the persuasiveness of the legal reasoning of these earlier

decisions.'””

(5) ICSID, BIT and Mass Claims

The present proceedings are particular insofar as they gathered as of the date of
their initiation, on Claimants’ side, over 180,000 individuals and corporations. In
the light of this figure, the present proceedings can be qualified as “mass claims”

proceedings. The same remains true despite the recent withdrawal of several

107 On the precedential value of ICSID decisions, see GABRIELLE KAUFMANN-KOHLER, Arbitral

Precedent: Dream, Necessity or Excuse? Freshfields lecture 2006, in Arbitration International Vol.
23 (2007) No. 3, pp. 368 ef seq.; see also AUGUST REINISCH, The Role of Precedents in ICSID
Arbitration, in Austrian Arbitration Yearbook 495-510 (2008).

  

107

295.

296.

297.

298.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

thousands of Claimants, thereby reducing the number of remaining Claimants to
approximately 60,000 (see § 216 above), subject to the Tribunal’s decision on

whether such “withdrawal” is admissible.

While it has happened in the past that multiple claimants initiated ICSID arbitration
proceedings, this appears to be the first case in ICSID’s history that “mass claims”

are brought before it.

It is undeniable that the large number of Claimants raises a series of questions and
challenges. In particular, the large number of Claimants makes it impossible to treat
and examine each of the 180,000 claims (or 60,000 claims for that matter) as if it
were a single claim, and certain generalisations and/or group examinations will be
unavoidable. The question thus arises whether these or any other relevant
characteristics of the present “mass claims” which will be addressed further below,
may constitute a hurdle to ICSID’s jurisdiction and/or to the admissibility of the
claims (see §§ 480 and §§ 515 et seq.).

Neither the ICSID framework nor the BIT addresses the issue of such mass
proceedings and therefore fail to provide a clear answer to this question. Also, the
Parties disagree on how this silence should be interpreted and what it means with
regard to the present mass proceedings. While Respondent argues that, in the light
of their characteristics, mass proceedings are contrary to the system of ICSID
arbitration and were not covered by Respondent’s consent, Claimants, in contrast,
hold the view that the “mass” aspect of the claim is a mere procedural aspect,
which does not raise any issues of consent or jurisdiction, and which can thus be
duly addressed by the arbitrators under their usual power to rule upon the procedure

of the arbitration.

Consequently, the issue of the “mass claims” will have to be addressed under a

two-fold approach: first, within the context of the Parties’ consent (see §§ 480 et

108

299.

300.

301.

302.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

seg. below), and secondly, within the context of admissibility of the present

proceedings (see §§ 506, 515 et seg. below).

Cc. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION

(1) Introductory Remarks

As mentioned above (see § 250(ii) above), this section will deal with the question
of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the claims. In particular, it will focus on
examining whether the four basic conditions for jurisdiction are given. If so, the

Tribunal will deal with issues of admissibility in the next section.

Thus, after dealing with the nature of the dispute and examining whether it arises
out of the BIT ((2)) and relates to an “investment” (jurisdiction rationae materiae)
((3)), the Tribunal will address relevant issues of nationality, capacity and
characteristics of the Parties involved (jurisdiction rationae personae) ((4)), before
examining the existence and scope of Claimants’ and then Argentina’s consent ((5)

&(6)).

(2) Legal Dispute Arising out of the BIT — Issues 7 & 6
(a) Issues at Stake and Relevant Legal Provisions

It is uncontested between the Parties, that there is a dispute which can be
considered a “legal dispute” in the sense of Article 25 ICSID Convention. What is
contested between the Parties is whether this legal dispute arises out of rights and
obligations contemplated in the BIT, or whether they are of a mere contractual
nature arising out of the relevant bond documents relating to the Claimants’
security entitlements. In other words, the Parties disagree whether the claims

submitted to this Tribunal fall within the scope of protection of the BIT.

Thus, the issues to be determined by the Tribunal here are the following:

109

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- Do the present claims arise out of the BIT, i.e., are they so-called treaty
claims or, on the contrary, pure contract claims or claims of another nature?

(see Issue No. 7 of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008)
- What, if any, are the consequences of this determination? In particular:

(i) If they are treaty claims, would the alleged facts, if proven, possibly

constitue a treaty violation?

(ii) If they are contract claims or claims of another nature, or in case of a
treaty claim where the alleged facts would not constitue a violation of
the treaty, can their case still be heard based on the MFN Clause of
Article 3(1) BIT in connection with the Umbrella Clause contained in
the Argentina-Chile BIT? (See Issue No. 6 of the List of 11 Issues of 9
May 2008)

303. In this context, it is to be recalled that according to generally accepted practice, the
task of the Tribunal at the stage of determining whether it has jurisdiction to hear a
claim under an investment treaty merely consists in determining whether the facts
alleged by the claimant(s), if established, are capable of constituting a breach of the
provisions of the BIT which have been invoked. '°° In performing this task, the
Tribunal applies a prima facie standard, both to the determination of the meaning
and scope of the relevant BIT provisions invoked as well as to the assessment of
whether the facts alleged may constitute breaches of these provisions on its face. In

the words of the tribunal in Saipem v. Bangladesh: “If the result is affirmative,

108 Saipem S. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07),

Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures of 21 March 2007, §§ 84 et
seq. (hereinafter “Saipem”).

 

110

304.

305.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

jurisdiction [rationae materiae] will be established, but the existence of breaches

will remain to be litigated on the merits.”"”

The key legal provisions and documents in dealing with the above issues are the
following: Articles 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 8 of the BIT, Article 7(3) of the Argentina-
Chile BIT, as well as the relevant bond documents, including but not limited to the

Subscription Agreements between the subscribers and Argentina, ''°

i

the Syndication

Agreements between the syndicate of banks and Argentina, the sales contracts

between the commercial banks and the final purchaser of the securities, as well as

112

the Offering Circulars of the relevant bonds, ~ their Terms and Conditions, and

other documents related to the bonds.'!?

In particular, Article 3 of the Argentina-Italy BIT in the unofficial English

translation submitted by Claimants provides as follows:

“1, Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investments made
by the investors of the other Contracting Party, returns and other assets
relating to such investments, as well as all other issues governed by this
Agreement, to treatment less favourable than that which it accords to its own
investors or the investors of third States.

2. The provision of paragraph | hereof does not apply to advantages and
privileges that one Contracting Party accords or will accord to third countries
as a consequence of its participation in customs or economic unions, common
market associations, free exchange zones or as a consequence of regional or
sub-regional agreements, multilateral international economic treaties or
treaties against double taxation, other tax treaties or treaties aimed at
simplifying cross-border exchanges.”

Saipem, § 91.

110 See e.g. Exh. C-122 and RF-18.

See e.g. Exh. C-123, C-350 and C-353.

112 See e.g. Bond 1 Offering Circular Exh. C-1.

See e.g. Trust Deed Exh. C-93, Fiscal Agency Agreement Exh. C-95, etc.

111

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

306. Article 7(2) of the Argentina-Chile BIT in the unofficial English translation

submitted by Claimants further provides as follows:

“Each Contracting Party shall observe any other obligation that it has entered
into in relation to the investments of nationals of companies of the other
Contracting Party in its territory.”

(b) Parties’ Positions

307. Respondent's Position. Respondent contests that the present claims are “treaty

claims” falling under the scope of protection of the BIT. Respondent supports this

position with the following main arguments:

@)

(ii)

The operative facts of which Claimants complain are simply those attendant
to non-payment under the bonds, i.e., to a contractual claim, which do not fall
under the scope of protection of the BIT. None of the sovereign acts
Claimants rely upon is capable of falling within the substantive protection of
the BIT, because those acts did not and could not impair the rights
represented by Claimants’ security entitlements since they were not created
and are not governed by Argentine law and are enforceable outside

Argentina. 4

Under such circumstances the Tribunal simply lacks jurisdiction, and such
jurisdiction may not be extended through an import of the Umbrella Clause
contained in the Argentina-Chile BIT based on the MEN clause of Article
3(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT. ''°

R-PHB §§ 363 ef seq.
R-R-MJ, §§ 543 et seq.

112

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- First, the MFN clause cannot override core matters (such as an
Umbrella Clause) which must be subject to specific negotiations

between the Contracting Parties.

- Second, Articles 1, 3 and 8 BIT are limited to “matters regulated in this
Agreement,” and the tribunal would thus have no jurisdiction over
claims based on standards not regulated in the BIT, such as an Umbrella
Clause. The MFN clause in the Argentina-Italy BIT cannot be
construed to extend the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal to categories
of disputes beyond those set forth in the jurisdictional clause of the
basic treaty. Claimants are seeking to establish jurisdiction over a type
of claim not covered by the grant of jurisdiction of Article 8 of the

Argentina-Italy BIT.

- Third, the MFN treatment granted in Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy
BIT is limited to “treatment in Argentina’s territory.” Argentina’s
obligations under the bonds would not qualify as “treatment in
Argentina’s territory” in the light of the foreign forum selection clauses
contained in the bond documents, and would therefore not qualify for

MEN treatment.

- Finally, based on Article 8(7) BIT which requires to give due regard to
“the terms of any particular agreement entered into regarding the
investment,” Claimants cannot rely on the Umbrella Clause of the
Argentina-Chile BIT to override the contractually agreed fora contained

in the bond documents.

308. Alternatively, in the event Claimants’ claims were considered treaty claims,
Respondent contends that Claimants have failed to establish a prima facie breach of
the BIT by Respondent. In this respect, Respondent contends that a mere invocation

of various BIT provisions, as done by Claimants, may not suffice to satisfy the

113

309.

310.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

prima facie standard as otherwise the standard would be meaningless. 16

Respondent insists that Argentina is not a rogue debtor, that the 2001 crisis was
unprecedented and could not be resolved merely through economic reform, that
Argentina’s actions were in accord with the actions of other sovereign debtors, and

that there was no bad faith on Argentina’s side. ''7

Claimants’ Position. In contrast, Claimants contend that the present claims are
sufficiently established as treaty claims deriving from violations of the BIT and

arising from sovereign acts of Argentina: us

(i) Claimants need at this stage only present plausible treaty claims capable of

falling within the scope of the BIT in order to establish jurisdiction.

(ii) Claimants’ claims are directed at Respondent’s failure to meet its
international law obligations, and in particular its obligations under the BIT,
based on Argentina’s exercise of sovereign authority. This is duly reflected
and supported in their submissions. These claims are therefore sufficiently

established as treaty claims for the purpose of the jurisdictional phase.

(iii) These treaty claims are distinct from and their nature unaltered by any

contract claims they may have against Argentina.

Alternatively, in the event Claimants’ claims were considered contractual claims,
Claimants contend that these claims would fall within the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal and the scope of protection offered under the Argentina-Italy BIT through
the operation of the MFN clause of Article 3(1) allowing Claimants to invoke the

Umbrella Clause contained in the Argentina-Chile BIT: A breach of the Umbrella

116

R-R-MJ §§ 528-529.
R-MJ §§ 46 ef seq., R-R-MJ §§ 68 et seq.
C-MJ §§ 656-661; C-PHB §§ 355 et seq.

17

18

114

311.

312.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Clause contained in the Argentina-Chile BIT would simultaneously constitute a
breach of the MEN clause of Article 3(1) Argentina-Italy BIT, which in turn clearly
constitutes a “matter regulated in this agreement” in the sense of Article 8 BIT and

therefore falls within the scope of jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

(c) Tribunal’s Findings

(i) | Alleged Breaches of the BIT
As mentioned above (see §§ 302-303), for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction its task
at the stage of determining whether it has jurisdiction to hear a claim under an
investment treaty merely consists in determining whether the facts alleged by the
claimant(s), if established, are capable of constituting a breach of the provisions of
the BIT which have been invoked and that in performing this task, the Tribunal is
to apply a prima facie standard, both to the determination of the meaning and scope
of the relevant BIT provisions invoked as well as to the assessment of whether the

facts alleged may constitute breaches of these provisions on its face.

Claimants allege the following breaches by Respondent of various provisions of the

BIT, in particular of Articles 2, 3 and 5,19

(i) The violation by Argentina of its obligations under Article 2(2) BIT to accord
Claimants fair and equitable treatment, by ignoring any concept of
proportionality in responding to its temporary financial crisis and continuing
to impose through arbitrary legislative and other regulatory actions an unjust

excessive burden on Claimants long after the abatement of any issues; '2°
(ii) The violation by Argentina of its obligations under Article 2(2) BIT to abstain

from adopting discriminatroy measures that impair the enjoyment of

119 RFA, Section V, §§ 179-211.

120

RfA, Section V, § 186.

115

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

121
122

123

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Claimants’ investments, by discriminating between Claimants (and other
international investors) on the one hand, and domestic investors in Argentine
pension funds on the other hand, by shielding such domestic investors from
the negative impact on their investments of Argentina’s acts surrounding its

7 . «121
financial restructuring;

The violation by Argentina of its obligation under Article 3(1) BIT to provide
national treatment to Claimants, by providing a more favorable treatment to
its domestic investors, in particular its pension funds, than to Claimants,
shielding the former from some of the economic effects of the moratorium

whilst not extending these advantages to the Claimants;'”?

The violation by Argentina of its obligation under Article 5 BIT not to
expropriate Claimants’ investments without payment of adequate, effective
and immediate compensation, by expropriating Claimants of their investment
through the unilateral restructuring of its public debt and the enactment of

legislation thereby destroying the value of Claimants’ investment;'?*

The violation by Argentina of its obligation under Article 3(1) BIT to accord
most-favored nation treatment to Claimants’ investments and in connection
with Article 7(2) Argentina-Chile BIT, according to which Argentina
undertook to observe any other obligation that it has entered into in relation to
the investments of nationals of the other contracting party. By not respecting

its obligations under the bonds, Argentina would have violated Article 7(2)

REA § 190.
REA §§ 193-104.
REA §§ 196-198.

116

313.

314.

315.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Argentina-Chile BIT, which in turn, constitutes a violation of Article 3(1)

Argentina-Italy BIT. ad

The facts on which Claimants base their above allegations relate to the acts of
Argentina preceding and following its public default in December 2001, and in
particular the way it consulted with its creditors, the way it reached a decision on
how to deal with its foreign debt, and the nature, scope and effects on Claimants’
security entitlements of the legislation and regulations it promulgated in

implementation of its decision.

The Tribunal considers that, prima facie, these facts, if established, are susceptible
of constituting a possible violation of at least some of the provisions of the BIT

invoked by Claimants, particularly:

(i) The arbitrary promulgation and implementation of regulations and laws can,
under certain circumstances, amount to an unfair and inequitable treatment. It
may even further constitute an act of expropriation where the new regulations
and/or laws deprive an investor from the value of its investment or from the

returns thereof.

(ii) The allegations by Claimants with regard to different treatment afforded to
domestic investors, such as Argentine pension funds, are susceptible of
constituting a discriminatory treatment in breach of the obligation to refrain

from discriminatory measures and to provide for national treatment.

Consequently, it is sufficient to note — at this stage - that the facts as presented by
Claimants, if proven, are susceptible of constituting a violation of the BIT

provisions invoked by Claimants. Whether Claimants’ presentation of the facts is
1s

REA §§ 199 et seq.

117

316.

317.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

accurate will, if necessary, be examined during the merits stage of these

proceedings.

(ii) Contract Claims v. Treaty Claims

It is in principle admitted that with respect to a BIT claim an arbitral tribunal has no
jurisdiction where the claim at stake is a pure contract claim. This is because a BIT
is not meant to correct or replace contractual remedies, and in particular it is not
meant to serve as a substitute to judicial or arbitral proceedings arising from
contract claims. Within the context of claims arising from a contractual
relationship, the tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation to BIT claims is in principle only
given where, in addition to the alleged breach of contract, the Host State further
breaches obligations it undertook under a relevant treaty. Pure contract claims must
be brought before the competent organ, which derives its jurisdiction from the
contract, and such organ — be it a court or an arbitral tribunal — can and must hear

the claim in its entirety and decide thereon based on the contract only.

As an exception to this principle, a BIT sometimes provides for a so-called
“Umbrella Clause,” which requires a State to observe any obligation arising from
particular commitments it has entered into with regard to investments.!> Under a
broad - and not undisputed - interpretation of these clauses as adopted by some
arbitral tribunals and scholars, a State’s breach of contract with a foreign investor
or breach of an obligation under another treaty or law becomes, by virtue of an
Umbrella Clause contained in the relevant BIT, a breach of the BIT actionable

through the mechanism provided in such treaty, i.e., through ICSID arbitration. '°

5 ETHAN SHENKMAN / JASON FILE, Contract Claims in Investment Treaty Arbitrations: Recent

Umbrella Clause Case Developments, in The International Comparative Legal Guide to:
International Arbitration, Global Legal Group Ltd., 6" edition 2009, p. L..

6 See, e.g., SHENKMAN/FILE, op. cit. fn.125, p. 1 et seq.; KIM ROONEY, ICSID and BIT

Arbitrations in China, in Journal of International Arbitration, Vol. 24, No. 6 (2007), p. 695;
EDWARD BALDWIN / MARK KANTOR / MICHAEL NOLAN, Limits to Enforcement of ICSID Awards,

(footnote cont'd)

118

318.

319.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The present Argentina-Italy BIT does not contain such Umbrella Clause.
Nevertheless, Claimants contend that, based on the MEN clause of Article 3 of the
BIT, they are entitled to invoke and rely on the Umbrella Clause contained in the
subsequent Argentina-Chile BIT. This theory, however, only applies in case the

Tribunal considers that the claims at stake are pure contract claims.

A claim is to be considered a pure contract claim where the Host State, party to a
specific contract, breaches obligations arising by the sole virtue of such contract.
This is not the case where the equilibrium of the contract and the provisions
contained therein are unilaterally altered by a sovereign act of the Host State. This
applies where the circumstances and/or the behavior of the Host State appear to
derive from its exercise of sovereign State power. Whilst the exercise of such
power may have an impact on the contract and its equilibrium, its origin and nature

are totally foreign to the contract.

It is undisputed that Claimants, as owners of security entitlements, have a potential
contract claim against Argentina for payment of the principal amount and interest
of such security entitlement. '”’ This relationship is of a private and contractual
nature, subject to the terms and conditions of the bonds, which vary depending on
the bond series. The terms and conditions of the relevant bonds provide for forum
selection clauses, whereby the specific fora again vary from one series of bond to

another.

 

in Journal of International Arbitration, Vol. 23, No. 1 (2006), pp. 3 et seq.; EMMANUEL GAILLARD,
Investment Treaty Arbitration and Jurisdiction over Contractual Claims. The SGS Cases
Considered, in TODD WEILER (ed.), International Investment Law and Arbitration, Leading Casese
from the ICSID, NAFTA, Bilateral Treaties and Customary International Law, Cameron May, 2005,
pp. 325 et seq. and 336 et seq.

127 See Annex A to R-PHB § 8, although the Parties disagree with regard to the conditions for

the exercise of such claims..

119

320.

321.

322.

323.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

It is undisputed that Argentina, as debtor of the bonds, has failed to perform its
obligations under these bonds. Argentina may (or may not) thereby have breached
contractual obligations towards Claimants or other owners of security entitlements;
this question is not at stake here. What is, however, relevant is that Argentina
justifies its failure based on the exceptional circumstances surrounding its public
default and linked to its devastating financial situation at the end of 2001. The
Emergency Law that Argentina enacted thereafter was a reaction to these

circumstances and part of an attempt to redress the finances of Argentina.

The Emergency Law had the effect of unilaterally modifying Argentina’s payment
obligations, whether arising from the concerned bonds or from other debts.
Argentina does not contend that it had any contractual right of doing so, such as for
example, a force majeure provision. Argentina has not invoked any contractual or
legal provision excusing its non-performance of its contractual obligations towards
Claimants. In fact, Argentina relies and justifies its non-performance based on its

situation of insolvency, which has nothing to do with any specific contract.

It is true that an insolvent debtor may in principle benefit from special regimes such
as bankruptcy or other mechanisms of financial redress, and such mechanisms can
very well affect the way a contract is performed by partially or fully liberating the
debtor from its obligations thereunder. However, such a mechanism is subject to
specific rules and conditions. First of all, it requires a legal basis contemplating the
basic principle and then providing for its implementation through the designation of
competent authorities, the formulation of a specific procedure taking into account
both the debtor’s and the creditors’ interests, and the provision of distribution
principles of the debtor’s assets with regard to the entirety of the creditors’ group

and not just with regard to a specific contract or creditor.

In the present case, the situation is somewhat peculiar, since the debtor is a
sovereign State. Argentina, which considered itself insolvent, decided to

promulgate a law entitling it not to perform part of its obligations, which Argentina

120

324.

325.

326.

327.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

had undertaken prior to such law, and fixing sovereignly the modalities and terms
of such liberation. Such a behavior derives from Argentina’s exercise of sovereign
power. Thus, what Argentina did, it did based on its sovereign power; it is neither

based on nor does it derive from any contractual argument or mechanism.

In other words, the present dispute does not derive from the mere fact that
Argentina failed to perform its payment obligations under the bonds but from the
fact that it intervened as a sovereign by virtue of its State power to modify its
payment obligations towards its creditors in general, encompassing but not limited

to the Claimants.

Whilst it is true that there exists no international bankruptcy regime for States,
certain principles have nevertheless been developed by the international community
with regard to sovereign debt restructuring. The scope and content of these
principles, as well as the question whether or not Argentina complied with these
principles are matters relating to the merits of the present dispute and are, at this
stage, not relevant. It is only relevant to note that the dispute, and in particular
Claimants’ claims and Argentina’s defense thereto, relate to the actions Argentina
took in order to remedy its financial insolvency. Such actions were based on a
sovereign decision of Argentina outside of a contractual framework. Thus,
Argentina’s actions were the expression of State power and not of rights or

obligations Argentina had as a debtor under a specific contract.

Consequently, the Tribunal considers that the claims brought forward by
Claimants in the present arbitration are not pure contractual claims but treaty claims
based on acts of a sovereign, which Claimants allege are in breach of Argentina’s

obligations under the BIT.

(iii) Potential Contract Claims against the Italian Banks

Respondent repeatedly brought forward that Claimants’ claims against Argentina

are “covered-up” contract claims, which should actually be directed against the

121

328.

329.

330.

331.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

banks and not against Argentina. Whether or not Claimants may have any
contractual or other claims against the Italian banks, who acted as Intermediaries or

Participants in the bond distribution process (see § 18 above), is irrelevant.

The present proceedings focus solely on whether Argentina complied with its
obligations of protection and promotion of Italian investments under the BIT. In
other words, it only concerns the direct relationship between Argentina (the Host
State) and the Claimants (the alleged investors) as arising out of the BIT, and not
their relationship as arising out of the bond distribution process under the relevant

contractual bond documents, which involve other actors such as the banks.

For the purpose of examining Claimants’ rights and Argentina’s obligations under
the BIT, third parties such as banks intervening in the process of the bond issuance
and distribution are to be considered auxiliaries of Argentina, who helped the latter

create the basis for Claimants’ alleged investment.

Tf such third parties, in particular the Italian banks, have breached any of their own
obligations towards Argentina and/or the Claimants, redress can be sought by either
Argentina and/or Claimants against these banks under the remedies provided for in
the relevant contractual bond documents or in the applicable statutory laws and/or
regulations concerning purchase and sale of securities. Such liability, however,
does not seem to derive from the BIT and would therefore in principle have no

place in the present proceedings.

(d) Conclusion
In conclusion, and in response to Issue No. 7 , the Tribunal holds that the claims at

stake are treaty claims in nature and fall under the scope of the BIT and therewith

under the jurisdiction rationae materiae of the Tribunal, and in particular:

(i) The allegations of Claimants and the facts on which these allegations are
based are susceptible of constituting a violation of provisions of the BIT and

establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction with regard to the present claims;

122

332.

333.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(ii) The claims brought forward by Claimants in the present arbitration are not
pure contractual claims but treaty claims based on acts of Argentina, a
sovereign, which Claimants allege are in breach of Argentina’s obligations

under the BIT;

(iii) If third parties, in particular the Italian banks, have breached any of their own
obligations towards Argentina and/or the Claimants, redress can be sought by
either Argentina and/or Claimants against these banks under the remedies
provided for in the relevant contractual bond documents or in the applicable
statutory laws and/or regulations concerning purchase and sale of securities.
Such liability, however, does not seem to derive from the BIT and would

therefore in principle have no place in the present proceedings.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that it is not necessary anymore
to examine Issue No. 6, i.e., whether the Tribunal may also have jurisdiction based
on the Umbrella Clause of the Argentina-Chile BIT in connection with the MFN
Clause of the Argentina-Italy BIT. To the extent that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
already derives from the treaty nature of the claims at stake, the question of the
interaction between the Umbrella Clause of the Argentina-Chile BIT and the MFN

Clause of the Argentina-Italy BIT becomes moot.

(3) Legal Dispute relating to an Investment — Issues 9 & 8
(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

It is uncontested between the Parties that Claimants’ claims arise in connection
with their security entitlements in the relevant Argentine bonds. However, the
Parties disagree whether these claims can be considered arising out of an
investment within the meaning of Article 1 of the BIT and Article 25(1) ICSID
Convention, since Respondent contests that the security entitlements at stake
constitute investments in the sense of Article 1 of the BIT and Article 25(1) ICSID

Convention.

123

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

334. Thus, the issues to be determined by the Tribunal here are the following:

Analyzing the term “investment” as defined in Article 1(1) BIT and
establishing whether bonds and thereto related security entitlements fall
within the scope of such definition (see Issue No. 9 of the List of 11 Issues of

9 May 2008).

Tf so, it may possibly have to be determined whether such definition is in line

with the spirit of the term “investment” in Article 25 ICSID Convention.
If so, determining whether the investment was made:

(i) “in compliance with the law,”

(ii) “in the territory of Argentina,” and

(iii) in this respect determining whether the forum selection clauses
influence the place where the alleged investment is deemed to have

been made (see Issue No. 8 of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008).

335. The key legal provisions in dealing with the above issues are the following: Articles

336.

1(1), 8 BIT (see §§ 268-270 above), Article 25 ICSID Convention, as well as the

forum selection clauses contained in the relevant bond documents. '**

In particular, Article 1(1) BIT in the unofficial English translation submitted by

Claimants provides:

“Article 1
Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement:

See e.g. RF-5, Trust Deed § 17.2; see also Exh. RF-6, 1993 FAA § 20; Exh. RF-7, 1994 FAA

§ 22, Exh. RF-8, Swiss Bond Prospectus § 13, etc..

124

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

1. “Investment” shall mean, in compliance with the legislation of the
receiving State and independent of the legal form adopted or of any other
legislation of reference, any conferment or asset invested or reinvested by an
individual or corporation of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other
Contracting Party, in compliance with the laws and regulations of the latter
party.

In particular, investment includes, without limitation:

(a) movable and immovable property and any other property rights such as
collateral securities over the property of third parties — to the extent they
may be used for investment;

(b) shares, quotas and other holdings, including minority or indirect
holdings, in companies incorporated in the territory of one of the
Contracting Parties;

(c) bonds, private or public financial instruments or any other right to
performances or services having economic value, including capitalized
revenues;

(d) credits which are directly related to an investment, lawfully created and
documented pursuant to the legislation in force in the State where the
investment is made;

(e) copyrights, intellectual or industrial property rights — such as patents,
licenses, registered trademarks, secrets, industrial models and designs —
as well as technical

(f) processes, transferrals of technological know-how, registered business
names and goodwill;

(g) any right of economic nature conferred under any law or agreement, as
well as any license and concession granted in compliance with the
applicable provisions governing the performance of the related
economic activities, including prospecting, cultivating, extracting and
exploiting of natural resources.” '”

337. In comparison thereto, Article 1(1) BIT as published in the Boletin Oficial de la
Reptiblica Argentina No. 27,480 of 25 September 1992 provides as follows:

2° ‘The English text of the BIT differs from the Italian and Spanish text of the BIT in that Article

1(g) in the English text of the BIT is equal to Article 1(f) in the Italian and Spanish text and a part of
Article 1(e) of the Italian and Spanish text, namely, “processes, transferrals of technological know-
how, registered business names and goodwill” is included in the English text of the BIT as Article
1(f). In the Tribunal’s view the omission in Article 1(e) and addition of a further sub-paragraph in
Article | of the English text BIT appears to be a mistake. Therefore, the Tribunal relies on the Italian
and Spanish text of the BIT as being equally authentic.

 

125

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

“ARTICULO 1
Definiciones
A los fines del presente Acuerdo:

1. El término “inversion” designa, de conformidad con el ordenamiento
juridico del pais receptor e independientemente de la forma juridica elegida 0
de cualquier otro ordenamiento juridico de conexién, todo aporte o bien
invertido o reinvertido por personas fisicas o juridicas de una Parte
Contratante en el territorio de la otra, de acuerdo a las leyes y reglamentos de
esta Ultima.

En este marco general, son considerados en particular como inversiones,
aunque no en forma exclusiva:

(a) bienes muebles e inmuebles, como también cualquier otro derecho “in
rem”, incluidos-en cuanto sean utilizables para inversiones—los
derechos reales de garantia sobre propiedad de terceros;

(b) acciones, cuotas societarias y toda otra forma de participacién, aun
minoritaria o indirecta en las sociedades constituidas en el territorio de
una de las Partes Contratantes;

(c)  obligaciones, titulos ptiblicos o privados o cualquier otro derecho a
prestaciones 0 servicios que tengan un valor econémico, como también
las ganancias capitalizadas;

(d) créditos directamente vinculados a una inversién, regularmente
contraidos y documentados segtin las disposiciones vigentes en el pais
donde esa inversi6n sea realizada;

(f) derechos de autor, de propiedad industrial o intelectual —tales como
patentes de invencidn; licencias; marcas registradas; secretos, modelos
y disefios industriales--, asi como también procedimientos técnicos,
transferencias de conocimientos tecnolégicos, nombres registrados y
valor llave;

  

(g) cualquier derecho de tipo econdémico conferido por ley o por contrato y
cualquier licencia 0 concesién de acuerdo con las disposiciones vigentes
que regulan estas actividades econémicas, incluyendo la prospeccién,
cultivo, extraccién y explotacién de los recursos naturales.”

338. As to the official Italian version of Article 1(1) BIT, it provides as follows:

“Articolo 1
Definizioni
Ai fini del presente Accordo:

1. Per investimento si intende, conformemente all’ordinamento giuridico del
Paese ricevente ed indipendentemente dalla forma giuridica prescelta o da
qualsiasi altro ordinamento giuridico di riferimento, ogni conferimento o bene

126

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

investito o reinvestito da persona fisica o giuridica di una Parte Contraente nel
territorio dell’altra, in conformita alle leggi e regolamenti di quest’ ultima.

In tale contesto di carattere generale, sono considerati specificamente come
investimenti, anche se non in forma esclusiva:

a. beni mobili ed immobili, nonché ogni altro diritto in rem, compresi -
per quanto impiegabili per investimento - i diritti reali di garanzia su proprieta
di terzi;

b. azioni, quote societarie e ogni altra forma di partecipazione, anche se
minoritaria o indiretta, in societa costituite nel territorio di un delle Parti
Contraenti;

c. obbligazioni, titoli pubblici o privati o qualsiasi altro diritto per
prestazioni 0 servizi che abbiano un valore economico, come altresi redditi
capitalizzati;
d. crediti direttamente collegati ad un investimento, regolarmente assunti e
documentati secondo le disposizioni vigenti nel Paese in cui tale investimento
sia effettuato;

e. diritti d’autore, di proprieta industriale od intellettuale - quali brevetti di
invenzione; licenze; marchi registrati; segreti, modelli e designs industriali -
nonché procedimenti tecnici, trasferimenti di conoscenze tecnologiche,
denominazioni registrate e l’avviamento;

f. ogni diritto di natura economica conferito per legge o per contratto,
nonché ogni licenza e concessione rilasciata in conformita a disposizioni
vigenti per l’esercizio delle relative attivita economiche, comprese quelle di
prospezione, coltivazione, estrazione e sfruttamento di risorse naturali.”

339. To recall (see § 270 above), Article 8(7) BIT provides as follows:

“The arbitration tribunal will decide on the basis of the laws of the
Contracting Party involved in the dispute — including its rules on the conflict
of laws — and of the provisions of the Agreement, of clauses of any particular
agreements relating to the investment, as well as on the basis of the applicable
principles of international law.”

340. The relevant bond documents contained forum selection clauses, according to
which disputes arising out of the bonds and thereto related titles, such as coupons,
were submitted to the jurisdiction of specific courts of various different countries

and cities. Below are two examples of such forum selection clauses:

- From the Swiss Bond Prospectus (RF-8, § 13):

127

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

“Any dispute which might arise between Bondholders and/or Couponholders
on the one hand and the Republic on the other hand regarding the Permanent
Global Certificate, the Bonds and/or the Coupons shall be settled in
accordance with Swiss law and falls within the jurisdiction of the Ordinary
Courts of the Canton of Geneva, the place of jurisdidion being Geneva, with
the right of appeal to the Swiss Federal Court of Justice in Lausanne, where
the law permits, whose decision shall be final. Only for that purpose and for
the purpose of execution in Switzerland, the Republic elects legal and special
domicile at the Embassy of the Republic of Argentina, Jungfraustrasse 1, 3005
Bern, Switzerland, which has agreed forthwith to notify the Republic of any
communication received under this Section.

 

The above-mentioned jurisdiction is also exclusively valid for the declaration
of cancellation of Bonds and Coupons.

The Republic hereby irrevocably submits to the nonexclusive jurisdiction of
the above mentioned Swiss courts and any Federal court sitting in the City of
Buenos Aires as well as any appellate court of any thereof, in any suit, action
or proceeding against it arising out of or relating to the Bonds.”

- From the Trust Deed with Chase Manhattan Trustees Limited (RF-5, § 17.2):

“17.2 Jurisdiction: The Republic irrevocably submits to the jurisdiction of the
courts of England; any New York State or Federal court sitting in the Borough
of Manhattan, New York City; and the courts of the Republic of Argentina
(the "Specified Courts") over any suit, action, or proceeding against it or its
properties, assets or revenues with respect to the Notes, the Coupons or the
Trust Deed (a "Related Proceeding"). The Republic waives any objection to
Related Proceedings in such courts whether on the grounds of venue,
residence or domicile or on the ground that the Related Proceedings have been
brought in an inconvenient forum. The Republic also agrees that a final non-
appealable judgment in any-such---Related Proceeding (a "Related
Judgment") shall be conclusive and binding upon it and may be enforced in
any Specified Court or in any other courts to the jurisdiction of which the
Republic is or may be subject (the "Other Courts"), by a suit upon such
judgment.”

(b) Parties’ Positions

341. Respondent contends that the security entitlements purchased by Claimants do not
constitute an investment within the meaning of Article 25(1) ICSID Convention.

Respondent bases its position on the following main arguments:

128

(i)

(ii)

130

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

No investment in the sense of Article 25(1) ICSID: In order to qualify as

“investment” under Article 25(1) ICSID, a specific economic transaction or

   

operation must meet certain objective criteria known as the “Salini factors,”
including typically (a) a substantial contribution of the investor, (b) a certain
duration, (c) the existence of an operational risk, (d) a certain regularity of
profit, and (e) a contribution to the economic development of the host State.
180 According to Respondent, these criteria are not met (or the information
provided by Claimants is not sufficient to determine whether they are met).
Respondent further contends that the concept of investment in Article 25(1)
ICSID Convention, as defined by the Salini factors, determines the outer
limits of ICSID’s jurisdiction with regard to the nature of the disputes. As
such, parties cannot override such outer limits by providing for a broader
definition of the term “investment.” In addition to Salini, Respondent relies

upon a number of other ICSID arbitrations. Bl

No investment “made within the territory of Argentina”: Respondent
contends that even if Claimants’ security entitlements were to be considered
investments, they are not made within the territory of Argentina as required
by Article 1 BIT. According to Respondent, these security entitlements do not
show a sufficiently significant physical and legal connection to Argentina
because (i) they did not cause any transfer of money into the territory of

Argentina, (ii) they are located outside of Argentina and are beyond the

R-MJ §§ 266-270; R-R-MJ §§ 425-468, referring, inter alia, to Salini Construttori S.p.A. and

Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4), Decision on Jurisdiction of
23 July 2001, § 52, 42 ILM 609,622 (2003) (hereinafter “Salini”), See also R-PHB §§ 406 et seq.

131

R-R-MJ §§ 425-432, referring, inter alia, to Joy Mining Machinery Ltd. v. Arab Republic of

Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11), Award on Jurisdiction of 6 August 2004, § 50, 19 ICSID Rev.
486, 499; Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Decision on
Annulment of Award of 1 November 2006, § 25; Malaysian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v.
Malaysia (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10), Decision on Jurisdiction of 17 May 2007, § 55.

129

(iii) Investment not “in compliance with Argentinean law’

132

133

ARB/03/24), Award of 27 August 2008, §§ 140, 143-144, 146; Inc:

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

latter’s scope of territorial jurisdiction based on the foreign law and forum
selection clauses contained in the relevant bond documents, and (iii) the
indirect holding systems of these entitlements implicates a cut-off point
beyond which claims are not permissible because they have only a remote

. . * 3
connection with the investment.'*?

: Respondent further
contends that Claimants’ security entitlements were not purchased in
compliance with the laws and regulations of Argentina as required by Article
1 BIT. According to Respondent, the terms “in compliance with the laws and
regulations of [Argentina]” must be read in connection with Article 8(7) BIT,
which refers not only to Argentine law but also to Italian and European law,
as well as to “the terms of any particular agreements entered into regarding
the investment,” i.e., to the specific selling restrictions contained in the
relevant bond documents, and general principles such as the principle of good
faith. Respondent contends that where any relevant provisions or principles
are violated, the investment becomes illegal and cannot be protected by the
BIT. Based on the alleged violation by the Italian banks of various European
laws and regulations, of the specific selling restrictions allegedly prohibiting
the sale to retail purchasers, and of the principle of good faith, Respondent
contends that Claimants’ security entitlements have been purchased in
violation of applicable laws and regulations and do therefore not qualify for

protection under the Bir.’

R-PHB §§ 455 et seq.

R-R-MJ §§ 500-508, referring to Plama Consortium Ltd. v. Bulgaria (ICSID Case No.
ysa v. El Salvador (ICSID Case

 

No. ARB/03/26), Award of 2 August 2006, §§ 219 et seq.. See also R-PHB §§ 461 et seq.

130

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

342. In contrast, Claimants bring forward that their security entitlements in Argentine

bonds constitute an investment in the sense of Article 25(1) ICSID Convention and

the Argentina-Italy BIT. Claimants justify their position based mainly on the

following arguments:

(i)

134

135

134

“Investments” in the sense of Article 25(1) ICSID Convention and Article 1
BIT: Claimants bring forward that Article 25(1) ICSID Convention does not
define the concept of investment, and leaves this definition to the Contracting
Parties. In this respect, Article 1 BIT contains a definition of what is to be
considered an investment. Claimants contend that Claimants’ security
entitlements clearly constitute investments in the sense of Article 1 BIT
because they duly qualify as “bonds, private or public financial instruments or
any other right to performances or services having economic value” and/or
“any right of economic nature conferred under any law or agreement” within
the meaning of Article 1(1) lit. c and lit. f BIT. In addition, Claimants further
contend that the security entitlements fulfill all necessary Salini factors, while
these factors are not to be seen as rigid but need to be appreciated adopting a
flexible and pragmatic approach and giving due consideration to the
economic reality of the investment at stake. '%° Looking at the economic
reality of the bond issuance process, and the role therein of Claimants’
security entitlements, Claimants’ investment constitute a substantial
contribution, carry a certain risk, produce regular profits, are of a certain

duration and contributed to Argentina’s economic development.

See C-PHB §§ 376 et seq.
C-MJ §§ 699-719, referring, inter alia, to Salini, 622; Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v.

United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22), Award of 24 July 2008, §§ 312, 314,
316-318 . See also C-PHB §§ 391 et seq.

131

(ii)

(iii)

136

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Investment “made within the territory of Argentina”: Claimants contend that
Claimants’ investment were made within the territory of Argentina, because
that is where the bonds funds were ultimately made available. In this respect
Claimants bring forward that (a) it is not necessary that funds be physically
transferred to the Host State, as long as the funds are made available to the
Host State; (b) even Argentine tax law considers these bonds as located in
Argentina for tax purposes; (c) the bonds have a strong connection to
Argentina, since they were issued by the Argentine Government pursuant to
Argentinean law; and (d) Argentina knew and supported the sales of security
entitlements to retail investors and are therefore estopped from claiming that

Claimants are too remotely connected to the bonds.'*°

Investment made in compliance with Argentinean law: According to
Claimants, the terms “in compliance with the laws and regulations of
[Argentina]” of Article 1 BIT refer to Argentinean law only. In this respect,
Argentina does not dispute that the bonds were issued in compliance with
Argentine sovereign debt legislation, so that the requirement of compliance
with Argentinean law is met. Claimants contend that a potential breach by the
Italian banks of other laws and regulations is irrelevant to the qualification of
the bond and/or security entitlements as protected investment. Further, even if
any non-Argentinean laws or regulations were to be considered, Claimants
contend that Argentina is estopped from relying on the breach of such laws or
regulations, since Argentina fully knew and controlled the bond issuance

process and thereby knew and accepted such breaches.'*”

See C-PHB §§ 431 et seq.
See C-PHB §§ 436 et seq.

132

343.

344.

345.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(c) Tribunal’s Findings
(i) Definition and Role of an Investment — In General

In order for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction rationae materiae over the dispute, it
is necessary that a dispute, as defined by the terms of the claims, relate to an
investment. Thus, the question of the definition of the concept of investment is to

this extent relevant for the stage of the jurisdiction.

In this respect, a number of arbitral tribunals hold the view that whether or not a
dispute at stake relates to an investment is subject to a two-fold test, i.e., a sort of

“double barrelled” test:

- On the one hand, the alleged investment must fit into the definition of
investment as provided by the relevant BIT, which reflects the limits of the

State’s consent;

- On the other hand, the alleged investment must also correspond to the
inherent meaning of investment as contemplated by the ICSID Convention,

which sets the limits of ICSID’s jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s competence.

Looking at the definition of investment provided in Article 1(1) BIT (see §§ 336-
338 above), it corresponds largely to the definition of other contemporaneous BITs,
such as the BIT between Italy and Bangladesh of 1990 (Article 1), between Italy
and Bolivia of 1990 (Article 1), between Italy and Kuwait of 1987 (Article 1),
between Italy and Uruguay of 1990 (Article 1), between Argentina and
Belgium/Luxembourg of 1990 (Article 1), between Argentina and the United
Kingdom of 1990 (Article 1). '**

188 Regarding BITs signed by Italy, see Volume RB to R-MJ. These BITs are also available on

http://www.unctadxi.org/templates/DocSearch 779.aspx.

133

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

346. Analysing the concept of an investment, one can identify two different aspects

347.

thereof: (i) the contribution that constitutes the investment, and (ii) the rights and

the value that derive from that contribution.

These two aspects are addressed somewhat differently by the BIT and the ICSID

Convention as interpreted by a number of arbitral tribunals:

@)

(ii)

The definition provided at Article 1(1) BIT, and in particular the list of
examples of what is considered an investment under the BIT, is drafted in a
way describing the rights and values which may be endangered by measures
of the Host State, such as an expropriation, and therefore deserve protection
under the BIT. Thus the focus here is on the rights and the value that potential
contributions from investors may generate. Nevertheless, this definition is of
course based on the premise of the existence of such contribution. This
namely derives from the wording of other provisions such as for example
Article 2 of the BIT which provides that “[E]ach Contracting Party shall

encourage investors of the other Contracting Party to invest in its territory.”

In contrast, the concept of investment as contempated by the ICSID
Convention relates more to the contribution itself. As mentioned above (see §
256), Article 25 ICSID Convention does not provide for any specific
definition of the concept of investment, and this silence was intended by the
drafters of the Convention in order to leave certain room to further develop
this notion. Thus, a number arbitral tribunals have attempted to further define
the concept of investment under Article 25 ICSID Convention. This has been
regularly done by reference to some or all of the so-called Salini factors,
developed in the Salini decision (see § 341 above). According to these Salini
factors, for a transaction or activity to qualify as “investment” in the sense of
Article 25 ICSID Convention, it would require (i) a contribution, (ii) of a
certain duration, (iii) of a nature to generate profits or revenues, (iv) showing

a particular risk, and (v) of a nature to contribute to the economic

134

348.

349.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

development of the Host State. This definition focuses on the nature of the
contribution constituting the investment, and not on the rights and value

deriving therefrom.

At this juncture, it may be recalled that whilst BITs in general, including the
present BIT, address both substantive investment protection rules and dispute
resolution procedure, the ICSID Convention is concerned mainly with dispute
resolution rules. Bearing this distinction and the above considerations in mind, the

Tribunal makes the following analysis.

If it is obvious that the definition of Article 1(1) BIT and the criteria developed by a
number of arbitral tribunals with regard to Article 25 ICSID Convention do not
coincide, this is so because they can be said to focus each on a different aspect of
the investment, i.e., they each look at the investment from a different perspective.'*?
The two perspectives can be viewed to be complementary, and to merely reflect a
two-folded approach of the BIT and the ICSID Convention towards investment: At
first, it is about encouraging investments, i.e., creating the frame conditions to
encourage foreign investors to make certain contributions, and once such
contributions are made, it is about protecting the fruits and value generated by these
contributions. Following this interpretation, the double approach can also be
considered as being illustrated in the Preamble of the ICSID Convention as well as

in the BIT:

- According to the Preamble of the ICSID Convention, one of the key
considerations of the Convention is “the need for international cooperation
for economic development, and the role of private international investment

therein” combined with the recognized need to establish international dispute

189 See Malicorp Limited v. The Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/18), Award
of January 2011, § 110.

135

350.

351.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

settlement mechanisms ensuring effective protection of such private

international investments;

- According to the Preamble of the BIT, it aims to “create favorable conditions
for greater economic cooperation between the two States, in particular, for the

realization of investments,” '“°

which presupposes the implementation of
material standards of protection of such investments as set forth in Articles 2
to 5, combined with effective procedural remedies as established in Articles 8

and 9.

Thus, within this interpretation, as it arises further from the wording of Article 1(1)
and the aim of the BIT, the definition of investment provided in the BIT focuses on
what is to be protected, i.e., the fruits and value generated by the investment, whilst
the general definitions developed with regard to Article 25 ICSID Convention focus
on the contributions, which constitute the investment and create the fruits and
value. In summary, a certain value may only be protected if generated by a specific
contribution, and — vice versa — contributions may only be protected to the extent

they generate a certain value, which the investor may be deprived of.

In other words, if it is to be applied, the “double barrelled” test does not mean that
one definition, namely the definition provided by two Contracting Parties in a BIT,
has to fit into the other definition, namely the one deriving from the spirit of the
ICSID Convention. Rather, it is the investment at stake that has to fit into both of
these concepts, knowing that each of them focuses on another aspect of the

investment.

40 Translated by the Tribunal from the Italian version “creare condizioni favorevoli per una

maggiore cooperatzione economica fra i due Paesi ed, in particolare, per la realizzazione di
investimenti.” The Spanish version has the same meaning “crear condiciones favorables para una
mayor cooperacién econémica entre los dos Pafses y, en particular, para la realizacién de
inversiones.”

136

352.

353.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(ii) Investment under Article 1(1) BIT

According to the Tribunal’s own English translation of Article 1(1) BIT, the term

“investment includes, without limitation”:

lit. (a): “movable and immovable goods, as well as any other right in rem,
including — to the extent usable as investment — security rights on property of

third parties;”

lit. (b): “shares, company participations and any other form of participation,
even if representing a minority or indirectly held, in companies established in

the territory of a Contracting State;”

lit. (c): “obligations, private or public titles or any other right to performances

or services having economic value, including capitalized revenues;”

lit. (d):“credits which are directly linked to an investment, which is
constituted and documented in accordance with the provisions in force in the

State where the investment is made;”

lit. (e):“copyrights, intellectual or industrial property rights — such as
invention patents, licenses, registered trademarks, secrets, industrial models
and designs — as well as technical processes, transfer of technology,

registered trade names and goodwill;”

lit. (f): “any right of economic nature conferred under law or contract, as well
as any license and concession granted in compliance with the applicable
provisions applicable to the concerned economic activities, including the

prospection, cultivation, extraction and exploitation of natural resources.”

Analysing the structure of the various subsections of Article 1(1), it appears that
they reflect a categorization of various types of investments from the perspective of

rights and values that they generate: lit. (a) refers to property rights on movable and

137

354.

355.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

immovables, lit. (b) relates to participations into companies, lit. (c) refers to
financial instruments, lit. (d) refers to credits, lit. (e) to rights on immaterial
property and technology transfer, and lit. (f) to all kinds of further rights of

economic value.

Firstly, this list covers an extremely wide range of investments, using a broad
wording and referring to formulas such as “independent of the legal form adopted,”
or “any other” kind of similar investment. It even contains a residual clause in lit.
(f), encompassing “any right of economic nature conferred under law or contract.”
In other words, the definition provided for in Article 1(1) is not drafted in a
restrictive way. Based on its wording, as well as on the broader aim of the BIT as
described in the Preamble, Article 1(1) cannot be seen to have intended to adopt a
restrictive approach with regard to what kind of activity or dealing was meant to

qualify as an investment.

Secondly, lit. (c) specifically addresses financial instruments. It is true that the term
“obligations” is a broad term and can refer to any kind of contractual obligation,
i.e., debt, and it is also true that the term “title” is also very broad. However, put in
the context of the further terms listed in lit. (c) such as “economic value” or
“capitalized revenue,” as well as considering that lit. (f) already deals with the more
general concept of “any right of economic nature,” lit. (c) is to be read as referring
to the financial meaning of these terms. Thus, the term “obligation” may be
understood as referring to an economic value incorporated into a credit title
representing a loan. This kind of obligations would in the English language more
commonly be called “bond,” rather than “obligation.” Similarly, the term “title” in
Spanish and Italian would be more accurately translated into the English term of
“security,” which means nothing more than a fungible, negotiable instrument

representing financial value.

138

356.

357.

358.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Thus, the Tribunal finds that the bonds, as defined above in § 11, constitute
“obligations” and/or at least “public securities” in the sense of Article 1(1) lit. (c) of

the BIT.

With regard to the security entitlements that Claimants hold in these bonds, they
also represent “securities” in the sense of Article 1(1) lit. (c), since they constitute
an instrument representing a financial value held by the holder of the security

entitlement in the bond issued by Argentina.

The question now is whether the connection between the security entitlements and
the bonds could be seen as so remote as to consider that the dispute is not “directly”
related to an investment, since the dispute related primarily to the rights arising
from Claimants’ security entitlements. The Tribunal sees no valid reason that

would support such conclusion:

- The bonds at stake were always meant to be divided into smaller negotiable

 

  

economic values, i.e., securities. It has been sufficiently demonstrated by
Claimants that the underwriters would not have subscribed to any of the
bonds, without having previously ensured that the bonds were re-sellable to

the Intermediaries and their end customers;

- The security entitlements are the result of the distribution process of the
bonds through their division into a multiude of smaller securities representing
each a part of the value of the relevant bond. The security entitlements have

no value per se, i.e., independently of the bond;

- The fact that the distribution process happens electronically, without the
physical transfer of any title, does not change anything to the fact that rights

effectively passed on to acquirers of security entitlements in the bonds.

139

359.

360.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In other words, whatever the technical nuances between bonds and security
entitlements may be, they are part of one and the same economic operation and they

make only sense together.

This is confirmed by the scope and the terms of the Exchange Offer 2010. Although
Respondent insists that under the underwriting agreements, the underwriter
committed to a single lump-sum payment to Argentina for the issuance of the bonds
and after that took all responsibility for selling the bonds on the open market, '“!
Argentina at the same time admits that the tendering of holders of security
entitlements into the Exchange Offer 2010 was necessary to discharge Argentina in
connection with the issuance of the bonds, including the payment in connection

> that

with security entitlements.'*” Whilst it is true, as contended by Argentina,“
the requirements for eligibility under the Exchange Offer 2010 have no relationship
whatsoever to the requirements for ICSID jurisdiction or the question whether BIT
protection exists under the BIT, they are relevant to understand the relationship
between the security entitlements and the bonds. In this respect, it cannot be
ignored that by considering holders of security entitlements, such as Claimants, a
necessary component of the Exchange Offer 2010, Argentina admitted their
importance within the broader context of the bond issuance and distribution
process. If the Underwriters were really the sole purchasers of the bonds and
thereby the sole “bondholders,” why would it be necessary to “engage [into the
Exchange Offer 2010] all parties that had beneficial interests in the bonds”'“? Why

would that not bear on the Underwriters’ shoulders? Because this is not the way an

41 Annex A to R-PHB § 3.
‘2 Annex A to R-PHB §§ 69-70. “In particular, in order to retire some or all of the defaulted
bonds through the Exchange Offer, Argentina had to find a way to engage all parties that had
beneficial interests in the bonds” (§ 70).

43 Annex A R-PHB § 67.

44 Annex A R-PHB § 70.

140

361.

362.

363.

364.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Exchange Offer is meant to work, and this evidences that bonds and security
entitlements therein cannot be regarded as two separate investments relating to

different rights or values.

Consequently, the bonds and Claimants’ security entitlements therein are both to be

considered “investments” in the sense of Article 1(1) lit. (c) BIT.

(iii) Investment under Article 25 ICSID Convention

Under Article 25 ICSID Convention, the relevant question is whether the bonds and
the security entitlements therein were generated by a contribution that is in line

with the spirit and aim of Article 25 ICSID Convention.

One approach would be to follow the Salini criteria and check whether the
contribution made by Claimants fulfil all these requirements. However, and
irrespective of the adequacy of the individual Salini criteria, the Tribunal finds that

this would not be the right approach, for the following main reason.

If Claimants’ contributions were to fail the Salini test, those contributions —
according to the followers of this test — would not qualify as investment under
Article 25 ICSID Convention, which would in turn mean that Claimants’
contributions would not be given the procedural protection afforded by the ICSID
Convention. The Tribunal finds that such a result would be contradictory to the
ICSID Convention’s aim, which is to encourage private investment while giving
the Parties the tools to further define what kind of investment they want to promote.
It would further make no sense in view of Argentina’s and Italy’s express
agreement to protect the value generated by these kinds of contributions. In other
words — and from the value perspective — there would be an investment, which
Argentina and Italy wanted to protect and to submit to ICSID arbitration, but it
could not be given any protection because — from the perspective of the
contribution — the investment does not meet certain criteria. Considering that these

criteria were never included in the ICSID Convention, while being controversial

141

365.

366.

367.

368.

369.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

and having been applied by tribunals in varying manners and degrees, the Tribunal
does not see any merit in following and copying the Salini criteria. The Salini
criteria may be useful to further describe what characteristics contributions may or
should have. They should, however, not serve to create a limit, which the

Convention itself nor the Contracting Parties to a specific BIT intended to create.

The other approach consists in verifying that Claimants made contributions, which
led to the creation of the value that Argentina and Italy intended to protect under
the BIT. Thus the only requirement regarding the contribution is that it be apt to

create the value that is protected under the BIT.

In this respect, there is no doubt that Claimants made a contribution: They
purchased security entitlements in the bonds and thus, paid a certain amount of
money in exchange of the security entitlements. The value generated by this
contribution is the right attached to the security entitlements to claim
reimbursement from Argentina of the principal amount and the interests accrued.
As mentioned above (see §§ 352-361), this right is protected under Article 1(1) lit.
(c) of the BIT.

Consequently, the Tribunal finds that Claimants’ purchase of security entitlements
in Argentinean bonds constitutes a contribution which qualifies as “investment”

under Article 25 ICSID Convention.
(iv) Two Alternative Views on “Investment” Lead to the Same
Result

If the so-called “double-barrelled” test is not applied in the present case and no

distinction is made as is stated in §§ 346-351 above, the result is the same.

According to one alternative view, it is argued that, in the case of a BIT arbitration
under the ICSID Convention, the “double barrelled” test need not be applied since
the ICSID Convention does not contain a definition of “investment” and the State

Parties to the BIT have agreed to such a definition in a treaty between them, i.e., the

142

370.

371.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

BIT.'*° That view leads also to the conclusion that there is an “investment” in the
present case because, as mentioned above (§§ 352-361), the bonds and Claimants’
security entitlements therein are both to be considered “investments” in the sense of

Article 1(1) lit. (c) BIT.

A third view on this question also leads to the same result. Pursuant to that view,
the term “investment” has an objective meaning in itself. Accordingly, the term
“investment” under the BIT has an inherent meaning, irrespective of whether the
investor resorts to ICSID or UNCITRAL arbitration. As it is observed by the tribunal
in Romak S.A. vy. Uzbekistan, conducting its proceedings on the basis of the

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:

The term “investment” has a meaning in itself that cannot be ignored when
considering the list contained in Article 1(2) of the [Germany — Ukraine] BIT.

.... The Arbitral Tribunal therefore considers that the term “investments”
under the BIT has an inherent meaning (irrespective of whether the investor
resorts to ICSID or UNCITRAL arbitral proceedings) entailing a contribution
that extends over a certain period of time and that involves some_risk.... By
their nature, asset types enumerated in the BIT’s non-exhaustive list may
exhibit these hallmarks. But if an asset does not correspond to the inherent
definition of “investment,” the fact that it falls within one of the categories
listed in Article | does not transform it into an “investment.” In the general
formulation. of the tribunal in Azinian, “labelling ... is no substitute for
analysis.”

 

(Emphasis in original)

The term “investment” per se in Article 1(1) of the Argentina — Italy BIT can
indeed be analysed in the same manner as the term “investment” in Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention (see §§ 362-367 above). That analysis is similar to the

45 See for an overview regarding this issue, GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft v. Ukraine, \CSID

Case No. ARB/08/16 (Germany/Ukraine BIT), Award of 31 March 2011, §§ 137-143.

146 Romak S.A. v. The Republic of Uzbekistan (PCA Case No. AA280), Award of 26 November

2009, § 180 and § 207.

143

372.

373.

374.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

analysis on the basis of the criteria identified above in Romak (i.e., a contribution
that extends over a certain period of time and that involves some risk). The
conclusion is again that Claimants’ purchase of security entitlements in
Argentinean bonds constitutes a contribution which qualifies as “investment” per se

under Article 1(1) of the BIT.

(v) Made in Argentina
In order to determine whether Claimants’ investment was made in Argentina, the
Tribunal will first determine the place where an investment is generally considered
to be made (i), and then examine whether the presence of forum selection clauses in
contractual documents relating to the investment may influence such a

determination (ii).

(i) With regard to the place where the investment is considered made,
Respondent contends that the investment cannot be considered “made in the
territory of Argentina,” because the purchase price paid by Claimants for their
security entitlements never ended up in Argentina. Instead, only the lump sum
payment made by the underwriters to Argentina can be considered made in the
territory of Argentina, whilst payments for purchases of security entitlements were

made to the various Intermediaries.

The Tribunal finds that the determination of the place of the investment firstly
depends on the nature of such investment. With regard to an investment of a purely
financial nature, the relevant criteria cannot be the same as those applying to an
investment consisting of business operations and/or involving manpower and
property. With regard to investments of a purely financial nature, the relevant
criteria should be where and/or for the benefit of whom the funds are ultimately

used, and not the place where the funds were paid out or transferred. Thus, the

144

375.

376.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

relevant question is where the invested funds ultimately made available to the Host
State and did they support the latter’s economic development? This is also the view

taken by other arbitral tribunals. M7

A further question is whether it is necessary that investment of purely financial
nature be further linked to a specific economic enterprise or operation taking place
in the territory of the Host State. Based on the above consideration (see § 355) that
in Article 1 BIT Argentina and Italy designated financial instruments as an express
kind of investment covered by the BIT and thereby intending to provide such
investment with BIT protection, the Tribunal considers that it would be contrary to
the BIT’s wording and aim to attach a further condition to the protection of

financial investment instruments.

Respondent makes an additional argument out of the fact that the payment of the
purchase price occurred after the payment of the lump sum price by the
underwriters, and that only the latter payment can be considered to have been made
available to Argentina. The Tribunal is of the opinion that such argument ignores
the reality of the bond issuance process. Indeed, although the payment of the lump
sum price for the bonds and the payment of the purchase price by the individual
holders of security entitlements happened at different points in time, the latter
constitutes the basis for the former. As mentioned above (see § 359 ), the bonds and
the security entitlements are part of one and the same economic operation and they
make only sense together: Without the prior insurance to be able to collect

sufficient funds from the individual purchasers of security entitlements, the

7 ‘See e.g. Fedax N.V. v. Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3), Decision of the

Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of 11 July 1997, § 41. See also SGS Société Générale de
Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13), Decision of the
Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of 6 August 2003, §§ 136-140, where emphasis was led on
the fact that the aim of SGS’s activity was to “raise the financial revenue of the State” (§ 139); SGS
v. Republic Philippines, §§ 111.

145

377.

378.

379.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

underwriters would never have committed to the payment of the lump sum
payment. In other words, the lump sum payment is an advance made by the

underwriters to Argentina on the future payments of individual investors.

Thus, the funds generated by the purchase of the relevant security entitlements are
— for the purpose of establishing where they were made — no different than the

lumps sum payment paid by the underwriters for the bonds.

There is no doubt that the funds generated through the bonds issuance process were
ultimately made available to Argentina, and served to finance Argentina’s
economic development. Whether the funds were actually used to repay pre-existing
debts of Argentina or whether they were used in government spending is irrelevant.
In both cases, it was used by Argentina to manage its finances, and as such must be
considered to have contributed to Argentina’s economic development and thus to

have been made in Argentina.

(ii) With regard to the question whether the presence of forum selection clauses
in contractual documents relating to the investment may influence the
determination of the place of investment, Respondent contends that based on the
forum selection clauses contained in the bond documents, the bonds must be
considered located outside of Argentina and beyond the latter’s scope of territorial
jurisdiction. The Tribunal considers Respondent’s argument inapposite for two

main reasons:

- Following Respondent’s line of argumentation would mean that forum
selection clauses determine the place where contractual performance is
supposed to take place. Jn casu, Claimants’ purchase of security entitlement
would be considered made at the place of the selected forum. The Tribunal
disagrees with this view. Rather, forum selection clauses are clauses of a

procedural nature aiming to determine the place of settlement of a dispute

146

380.

381.

382.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

relating to a contractual performance. They have nothing to do with the place

where a party is supposed to perform its obligations;

- Even if forum selection clauses had an influence on the place of contractual
performance, they would not be relevant to determine the place where the
investment, pursuant to Article 1(1) BIT and Article 25 ICSID Convention,
was made. As mentioned above (see §§ 319 ef seq.), rights and obligations
deriving from the BIT have an independent basis from rights and obligations
deriving from the contract, and may as such — in principle — not be affected

by contractual provisions dealing only with contractual rights and obligations.

Consequently, the Tribunal finds that the relevant bonds and Claimants’ security

entitlements therein are both to be considered ‘made in the territory of Argentina’.

(vi) In Compliance with the Law
Respondent contends that Claimants’ investment, i.e., the purchase of security
entitlements, were not made in compliance with the law, because these purchases
would have been done in violation by the Italian banks of certain selling restrictions
applicable to the bonds, as well as to local regulations regarding the marketing of
such financial instruments and the principle of good faith. According to
Respondent, these violations would be relevant to appreciate the legality of the

investment in the light of Article 8(7) of the BIT.

At the stage of the jurisdiction, the Tribunal’s examination is limited to verifying
the existence of a dispute relating to an investment, and focuses thus on the
definition of the investment (see §§ 343 ef seq. above). It is not concerned yet with
the question whether the investment was validly made, i.e., whether it fulfils the
necessary requirements to enjoy full protection under the BIT. This will be a matter
to be dealt at the merits stage of the present dispute, subject to the Tribunal’s

findings on jurisdiction.

147

383.

384.

385.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Thus, at this stage the Tribunal’s examination is limited to the question whether the
investment fits into the definition of Article 1(1). In contrast, Article 8(7) of the
BIT deals with the law applicable to the merits of the dispute, and may be relevant
when appreciating the validity of the investment. It may however not serve as a
basis to extend the definition of an investment as provided for in Article 1(1) of the

BIT. These two provisions have different contexts and different purposes.

With regard to the “lawfulness” of the investment, which forms part of the
definition of the concept of investment under Article 1(1) BIT, Article 1(1) par. 1
merely requires that the investment be made “in compliance with the laws and
regulations of the [Host State],” i.e., Argentina. It is undisputed between the Parties
that the bonds have been issued by Argentina in accordance with the relevant laws

148

and regulations (see § 44 above)."" As such, they were made “in compliance with

the laws and regulations of Argentina.”

The alleged breach of applicable regulations Respondent relies on, concerns
breaches allegedly committed by the Italian banks and not by Claimants. As
mentioned above (see § 327 ef seq.), such breaches should not be relevant for the
purpose of examining Claimants’ rights and Argentina’s obligations under the BIT.
As such, an alleged misconduct of the Italian banks may not render the security
entitlements unlawful pursuant to Article 1(1) BIT. Whether it may render such
investment invalid under the laws applicable to the dispute according to Article
8(7) BIT is an issue to be dealt with at the merits stage of the present dispute,

subject to the Tribunal’s findings on jurisdiction.

M8 See R-MJ §§ 521 “the issuances of the bonds were in conformity with Argentine Law.”

148

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

386. Consequently, the relevant bonds and Claimants’ security entitlements therein are

387.

both to be considered made “in compliance with the laws and regulations of

[Argentina]” pursuant to Article 1(1) BIT.

(d) Conclusion

In conclusion, and in response to Issue No. 9 and 8, the Tribunal holds that the

present dispute arises out of an investment pursuant to Article 1 BIT and (if

needed) Article 25(1) ICSID Convention. In particular:

@)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

According to one view, the “double-barrelled” test developed with regard to
the concept of “investment” does not mean that the definition of investment
provided by two States in a BIT has to fit into the definition deriving from the
spirit of the ICSID Convention. Rather, arguably, it is the investment at stake
that has to fit into both of these concepts, knowing that each of them focuses

on another aspect of the investment;

In any event, the relevant bonds and Claimants’ security entitlements therein

are both to be considered “investments” pursuant to Article 1(1) lit. (c) BIT;

If needed to be applied, Claimants’ purchase of security entitlements in
Argentinean bonds constitute a contribution which qualifies as “investment”

under Article 25 ICSID Convention;

The relevant bonds and Claimants’ security entitlements therein are both to
be considered made “in compliance with the laws and regulations of

[Argentina]” pursuant to Article 1(1) BIT;

The bonds and Claimants’ security entitlements therein are both to be

considered “made in the territory of Argentina.”

149

388.

389.

390.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(4) Between Argentina and Italian Investors - Issues 10 & 11
(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

It is uncontested that Argentina has the necessary capacity to be a party to the
present arbitration. Therefore, the present section will focus on determining
relevant issues concerning Claimants. These issues appear to be threefold: (i) the
issue of nationality, whereby it is contested whether Claimants qualify as “Italian”
in the sense of the BIT; (ii) the issue of legal capacity, whereby it is disputed
whether those Claimants which are corporations have the necessary capacity to be a
party to the BIT and can be protected thereunder; and (iii) the issue relating to the
“investor” status of Claimants, whereby it is disputed whether Claimants, who have
purchased their security entitlements through various layers of intermediaries, can

still be classified as the “investor,” i.e., the party having made the investment.

In this regard, it should be recalled that according to the First Session of 10 April
2008! and the Tribunal’s letter of 21 May 2009, the present analysis is limited to
general issues and shall not include “issues touching specifically upon each
individual claimant,” except where the presentation of the general issue (of
jurisdiction or admissibility) cannot be done without reference to a particular

spe 5
situation.'~

Consequently, the present decision will not decide on whether Claimants have the
Italian nationality or necessary capacity, but it will merely confirm which are the
conditions which Claimants must fulfil so as to qualify as a party under the BIT.
With regard to the issue relating to the investor status of Claimants, the present
decision will not address the individual investor status of each Claimant. Rather, it

will be limited to address from a general perspective whether a party purchasing a

149 First Session Tr. p. 140/17; p. 141/3-9.

150

See Conference Call of 14 October 2009.

150

391.

392.

393.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

security entitlement in the way Claimants allege they purchased their security

entitlements would qualify as investor in the sense of the BIT.
Thus, the issues to be determined by the Tribunal here are the following:

- What are the conditions under which physical persons may benefit from the
protection of the BIT, and thereby be a party to the present arbitration? (see
Issue No. 10 of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008)

- What are the conditions under which juridical entities may benefit from the
protection of the BIT, and thereby be a party to the present arbitration? (see
Issue No. 11 of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008), and in particular, do
corporations established under Italian law and which do not have “legal

personality” benefit from such protection and capacity?

- Does a party which acquires a security entitlement in a bond through similar
mechanisms as used in the present case for the purchase by Claimants of their
security entitlements still qualify as the party making the investment, i.e., as

the investor?

The key legal provisions and documents in dealing with the above issues are the
following: Article 1 BIT, Article 1 of the Additional Protocol to the BIT, Article
25(2) ICSID Convention, and Articles 36, 75, 78 Italian Civil Procedure Code.

Articles 1(2) and (3) BIT in the unofficial English translation submitted by

Claimants provides:

“2. “Investor” shall mean any individual or corporation of one Contracting
Party that has made, makes or undertakes to make investments in the territory
of the other Contracting Party.

(a) “individual” shall mean, for each Contracting Party, and individual who
is a citizen of such Contracting Party, in compliance with the laws
thereof.

(b) “corporation” shall mean, in relation to each Contracting Party, any
entity incorporated in compliance with the legislation of a Contracting

151

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Party, having its office in the territory of such Party and being
recognized thereby, such as public entities that conduct economic
activities, partnerships and corporations, foundations and associations,
independent of whether their liability is limited or not.

3. For the purposes of this Agreement, legal deeds and capacity of
corporations in the territory of the Contracting Party receiving the investment
will be governed by the legislation of that Contracting Party.”

394. In comparison thereto, the relevant parts of Article 1(2) BIT as published in the
Boletin Oficial de la Reptiblica Argentina No. 27,480 of 25 September 1992

provide as follows:

“2. El término “inversor” comprende toda persona fisica o juridica de una
Parte Contratante que haya realizado, realice o haya asumido la obligacién de
realizar inversiones en el territorio de la otra Parte Contratante.

- Por “persona fisica” se entiende, con relacion a cada una de las Partes
Contratantes, toda persona fisica que tenga la ciudadania de ese Estado,
de acuerdo a sus leyes.

- Por “persona juridica” se entiende, con relacién a cada una de las Partes
Contratantes, cualquier entidad constituido de conformidad con la
legislacién de una Parte Contratante, con sede en el territorio de esa
Parte y por esta ultima reconocida, tales como entidades ptiblicas que
realizan actividades econémicas, sociedades de personas 0 de capitales,
fundaciones  y asociaciones, independientemente de que su
responsabilidad sea limitada 0 no.

- A los efectos del presente Acuerdo, los actos juridicos y la capacidad de
cada persona juridica en el territorio de la Parte Contratante donde se
efectia la inversién seran regulados por la legislacion de esta ultima.”

395. As to the official Italian version of Article 1(2) and 3 of the Italian text of the
Argentina-Italy BIT, it provides as follows:
“2. Per “investitore” si intende ogni persona fisica 0 giuridica di una Parte

Contraente che abbia effettuato, effettui o abbia assunto obbligazione di
effettuare investimenti nel territorio dell’altra Parte Contraente.

a. Per “persona fisica” si intende, per ciascuna Parte Contraente, una
persona fisica che abbia la cittadinanza di tale parte, in conformita a le
sue leggi.

b. Per “persona giuridica” si intende, con riferimento a ciascuna Parte

Contraente, qualsiasi entita costituita conformemente alla normativa di
una parte Contraente, con sede nel terrtorio di tale Parte e da questa

152

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

ultima riconosciuta, come Enti publlici che esercitino attivita
econonmiche, societa di persone o di capitali, fondazioni, associazinoe
e, questo, indipendentemente dal fatto che la loro responsabilita sia
limitata 0 meno.

3. Agli effetti del presente Accordo, gli atti giuridici e la capacita di
ciascuna persona giuridica nel territorio della Parte Contraente destinataria di
un investimento, saranno regolati dalla legislazione di quest’ ultima.”

396. In addition, Article 1 Additional Protocol to the BIT provides as follows in the

various languages:

(i) In the unofficial English version:

“1. With reference to Article 1:

a) Individuals of each Contracting Party who, when making an investment,
maintained their domicile for more than two years in the Contracting Party in
the territory of which the investment was made, cannot benefit of this
Agreement.

If an individual of one Contracting Party maintains at the same time its
registered residence in its State and domicile in the other State for more than
two years, he/she will be considered equivalent, for the purposes of this
Agreement, to individuals of the Contracting Party in the territory of which
they made investments.

b) The domicile of an investor will be determined in compliance with
laws, regulations and provisions of the Contracting Party in the territory of
which the investment was made.”

(ii) In the official Spanish version:

“Con referencia al Articulo 1:

a) No podran prevalerse del Acuerdo las personas fisicas de cada Parte
Contratante que, al momento de efectuar la inversién, hubieran tenido su
domicilio por mas de dos ajios en el territorio de la Parte Contratante donde la
inversi6n se realizé.

En caso que una persona fisica de una Parte Contratante tuviera
simultaneamente residencia registrada en su pais y domicilio por mas de dos
afios en el de la otra Parte Contratante se equiparard, a los fines del presente
Acuerdo, a las personas fisicas nacionales de la Parte Contratante en cuyo
territorio se realiz6 la inversion.

153

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

b) El domicilio de un inversor serd determinado de conformidad con las
leyes, reglamentos y disposiciones de la Parte Contrante en cuyoterritorio se
realiz6 la inversién.”

(iii) In the Italian official version:

“1. Con riferimento all’Articolo 1:

a) Non potranno beneficiare dell’Accordo le persone fisiche di ciascuna
Parte Contraente le quali, al momento di effettuare un investimento, abbiano
mantenuto il loro domicilio per pitt di due anni nella Parte Contraente nel cui
territorio l’investimento sia stato realizzato.

Qualora una persona fisica di una Parte Contraente mantenga
contemporaneamente la residenza anagrafica nel proprio Paese ed il domicilio
per pit’ di due anni nell’altro, essa verra equiparata, ai fini del presente
Accordo, alle persone fisiche della Parte Contraente nel cui territorio abbia
realizzato investimenti.

b) I domicilio di un investitore sara determinato in conformita alle leggi,
regolamenti e disposizioni della Parte Contraente nel territorio della quale
l’investimento sia stato realizzato.”

397. Article 36 Italian Civil Code in its original Italian version provides as follows:

“Art. 36 Ordi e inistrazione delle associazioni non
riconosciute

L'ordinamento interno e l'amministrazione delle associazioni non riconosciute
come persone giuridiche sono regolati dagli accordi degli associati.

Le dette associazioni possono stare in giudizio nella persona di coloro ai quali,
secondo questi accordi, e conferita la presidenza o la direzione (Cod. Proc.
Civ. 75, 78).”

398. Partly based on the translation provided by Prof. Picardi,'°! which the Tribunal

considers to be a fair reflection of the Italian version, Article 36 can be translated as

follows:

151

PICARDI, § 229.

154

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

“Art. 36 Organisation and inistration of non-recognized associ:

The internal organization and administration of associations not recognized as
juridical persons are regulated according to the association agreement.

Said associations may stand in court through the person who, in accordance
with such agreement, hold the office of president or director (Civil Procedure
Code 75, 78).”

399. Article 75 and 78 Italian Civil Procedure Code in their original Italian version

provide as follows:

“Art. 75. (Capacita' processuale)

Sono capaci di stare in giudizio le persone che hanno il libero esercizio dei
diritti che vi si fanno valere. Le persone che non hanno il libero esercizio dei
diritti non possono stare in giudizio se non rappresentate, assistite o
autorizzate secondo le norme che regolano la loro capacita’. Le persone
giuridiche stanno in giudizio per mezzo di chi le rappresenta a norma della
legge o dello statuto. Le associazioni e i comitati, che non sono persone
giuridiche, stanno in giudizio per mezzo delle persone indicate negli artt. 36 e
seguenti del codice civile.

LJ
Art. 78. (Curatore speciale)

Se manca la persona a cui spetta la rappresentanza o I'assistenza, e vi sono
ragioni di urgenza, puo' essere nominato all'incapace, alla persona giuridica 0
all'associazione non riconosciuta un curatore speciale che li rappresenti o
assista finche’ subentri colui al quale spetta la rappresentanza o I'assistenza.
Si procede altresi’ alla nomina di un curatore speciale al rappresentato, quando
vi e' conflitto d'interessi col rappresentante.”

   

 

400. These provisions can be translated as follows:

“Art. 75. (Capacity to stand in a legal proceeding)

Those who can freely exercise rights as object of a claim can stand in a
corresponding legal proceeding. Those who cannot freely exercise rights
cannot stand in a corresponding legal proceeding if they are not represented,
assisted or authorized according to the rules governing their legal
capacity. Legal entities stand in a proceeding through the person that legally
represents them according to the law’ ortheir articles of
association. Associations and committees, who are not a legal entity, stand in
a legal proceeding through the individuals indicated by Articles 36 et seq. of
the Civil Code.

155

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

LJ
Art. 78. (Guardian ad litem)

As long as the person entitled to the representation or assistance is and
remains absent and there are grounds for urgency, a guardian ad litem can be
appointed to represent individuals who are lacking legal capacity, legal
entities or non-recognized associations. The guardian ad litem will leave its
office upon intervention of the person entitled to the representation or
assistance. A guardian ad litem is also appointed in case of conflict of interests
between the legal representative and the individual or entity which is
represented in the proceeding.”

(b) Parties’ Positions

401. Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction rationae personae with

regard to Claimants who are natural persons. Respondent’s main arguments are as

follows:

@)

(ii)

Claimants are not investors within the meaning of Article 1(2) BIT because
(i) Claimants did not make an investment in the territory of the Argentine
Republic, and (ii) Claimants lack standing because in their capacity as holders
of security entitlements acquired through multiple intermediaries they are

only remotely connected with the underwriters and the underlying bonds; '*

Claimants have failed to provide any evidence whatsoever of compliance
with the nationality requirements of Article 25 ICSID Convention and the
nationality and domicile requirements of the BIT and its Additional Protocol.
Referring to arbitral tribunals, Respondent contends that the nationality
requirement of a claim before an ICSID tribunal has in each case to be
satisfied before an ICSID proceeding can be initiated or even registered.
With regard to natural persons, Respondent has serious doubts that the

individual Claimants listed in Annexes A and B meet the nationality and

R-MJ §§ 271-283; 365; 374-475; R-R-MJ §§ 590-600; 642-651.

156

402.

403.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

domicile requirements and submit that there is a high likelihood of the

existence of thousands of cases of dual nationality.!

With regard to juridical
persons, Respondent contends that to qualify as a “juridical person” under
Article 1(2) BIT the concerned entity must have legal personality, which is
not the case of apprpoximately 40% of the Claimants listed in Annex C such
as “assoziani non-recognosciuta,” ecclesiastical associations, local branches

of national associations, trade unions, political parties, etc. 154

In contrast, Claimants contend that the Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae personae
pursuant to Article 25 ICSID Convention and Article 1(2) BIT and its Protocol over
each and every Claimant who (i) is a natural person and who was an Italian national
on 14 September 2006 and 7 February 2007, was not an Argentine national at either
of those dates, and was not domiciled in the Argentine Republic for more than two
years prior to making his or her investment;'*° and (ii) is a juridical entity that on
14 September 2006 was duly organized under Italian law with its principal place of

business in Italy and that did not have Argentine nationality on that date.'*°

With regard to Respondent’s objections, Claimants requests the Tribunal to reject

them based on the following main arguments:

(i) | Respondent does not contest the principle that the Tribunal has jurisdiction

over the Claimants fulfilling the above mentioned requirements, but raises

153

R-MJ § 365; R-R-MJ §§ 590-600, referring to Mihaly International Corporation v.
Democratic Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/2), Award of 15 May 2002, § 120;
Champion Trading Company and Ameritrade International Inc. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/9), Decision on Jurisdiction of 21 October 2003, §§ 3.1-3.4. See also R-PHB §§
480 et seq.

4 R-MI § 366, R-R-MJ §§ 602-61, referring to C-MJ § 863.

185 C-MJ §§ 830; 853. See also C-PHB §§ 443 et seq.

156

C-MJ §§ 854; 865. See also C-PHB §§ 446 et seq.

157

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

objections based on the standing of individual Claimants and lack of specific

evidence;

(ii) These objections are improper at this stage of the proceedings. Respondent is
trying to arbitrate the factual issues pertaining to each Claimant’s standing
contesting the prima facie evidence of nationality. The task of establishing
nationality is a task that the Tribunal expressly postponed until after it has

made a determination that it has jurisdiction over the claim;

(iii) Claimants contend that they will submit adequate evidence of nationaliy in

due time, such information being already available in Claimants’ database;

(iv) With regard to juridical persons, Respondent’s objection regarding the
alleged lack of legal personality is inapposite. Claimants contend that legal
personality is not a prerequisite to qualify as juridical person under Article
1(2) BIT. Since the definition of “juridical person” of Article 1(2) lit. b BIT
expressly includes foundations and associations, independent of whether their
liability is limited or not, Claimants contend that the term “juridical person”
does not solely refer to entities with legal personality. According to
Claimants, the relevant element to determine whether a Claimant is a juridical
person under Article 1(2) lit. b BIT is whether it has the right to litigate. All

entities involved have such right.
(c) Tribunal’s Findings
(i) Jurisdiction Rationae Personae — In General

404. As already set forth above (see §§ 280-287 and 392-396), the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction rationae personae derives from, Article 1(2) BIT and Article 1
Additional Protocol to the BIT, Article 25 ICSID Convention and has to be

established based on the requirements set forth therein.

158

405.

406.

407.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In other words, as called to decide on a dispute arising out of the BIT, the Tribunal
has jurisdiction rationae personae over any person, who is entitled to claim
protection under this BIT and who has the capacity to conduct arbitration

thereunder.

The question thus is under what conditions Claimants can be considered to be
entitled to claim protection under the BIT and have capacity to be a party to the

present arbitration.

(ii) With regard to Natural Persons
Based on the relevant legal provisions and as described above (see §§ 280-287 and
392-396), in order to benefit from the protection of the BIT and be a party to the

present ICSID arbitration conducted thereunder, a physical person must:

(i) Have the Italian nationality on the relevant date, such date being the date on
which the Parties consented to arbitration (in casu the date of filing of the
Request for Arbitration, see § 49 above), i.e., 14 September 2006, as well as
the date of registration of such Request, i.e., 7 Frebruary 2007. The question
of whether a person has on such date the Italian nationality is subject to

Ttalian law;

(ii) Not have the Argentinean nationality on neither of the relevant dates. The
question of whether a person has Argentinean nationality is subject to

Argentinean law;

(iii) Not have been domiciled in the Argentine Republic for more than two years
prior to making the investment. The question of whether a person has been

domiciled in Argentina is subject to Argentinean law;

(iv) Have made an investment, which falls within the scope of the BIT.

159

408.

409.

410.

4l

412.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

It appears that these conditions are actually not contested by Respondent, whose

objections relate to whether these conditions are fulfilled.

Whilst it is true that in order to establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction rationae
personae these conditions need to be fulfilled with regard to each Claimant, the
present decision does not aim at making a determination with respect to any
individual Claimant and only aims to determine the general conditions for its
jurisdiction over such Claimants. Insofar, it is not necessary at this stage to
determine whether the information submitted by Claimants so far sufficiently

evidences the fulfilment of these conditions.

Thus, Respondent’s doubts as to the nationality or domicile of certain Claimants are

irrelevant at this stage.

. With regard to Respondent’s objection as to the quality of investors of Claimants, it

is based on the allegedly remote connection between the security entitlements and
the original underwriters and underlying bonds. This objection has to be rejected
for the Tribunal has come to the conclusion, in the preceding section (see § 358
above), that not only the bonds themselves, but also any security entitlement held in
those bonds and distributed by the Participants and other Intermediaries to
Claimants constitute an investment in the sense of Article 1 BIT and Article 25
ICSID Convention. Thus, to the extent that Claimants are holders of such security
entitlements, they are to be considered “investors” under the terms of the BIT and

subject to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction rationae personae.

Consequently, at this stage of the proceedings, it is sufficient to establish that
pursuant to the relevant legal provisions, the Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae
personae over each and any Claimant being a natural person (i) with Italian
nationality on 14 September 2006 and 7 February 2007, (ii) who on either date was
not also a National of the Argentine Republic, (iii) who was not domiciled in the

Argentine Republic for more than two years prior to making the investment, and

160

413.

414,

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(iv) has made an investment falling under the scope of the BIT, whereby Claimants
having purchased a security entitlement in one of the concerned bonds issued by

Argentina are to be considered “investors.”

(iii) With regard to Juridical Persons
Based on the relevant legal provisions and as described above (see §§ 280-287 and
392-396), in order to benefit from the protection of the BIT and be a party to the

present ICSID arbitration conducted thereunder, a juridical person must:

(i) Have the Italian nationality on the relevant date, such date being the date on
which the Parties consented to arbitration (in casu, the date of filing of the
Request for Arbitration, see § 91 above), i.e., 14 September 2006. The
question of whether a person has on such date the Italian nationality is subject

to Italian law.

As transposed into the BIT, this requirement of “nationality” means that the
concerned juridical person must be an Italian “corporation” in the sense of
Article 1(2)(b) BIT, i.e., an entity incorporated in compliance with the
legislation of Italy, having its office in the territory of Italy and being

recognized thereby.
(ii) Have made an investment, which falls within the scope of the BIT.

Respondent’s objections are manifold. Insofar as they do not relate to the basic
principles, but rather to whether the above-mentioned conditions have been
fulfilled, they will be disregarded at this stage of the proceedings. Respondents
however also contends that the concept of corporation set forth in Article 1(2)(b)
BIT applies only to corporations possessing legal personality under Italian law, and
further reiterates its objection as to the quality of investors of Claimants due to the

allegedly remote connection between the security entitlements and the bonds.

161

Als.

416.

417.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

With regard to the latter objection, it has to be rejected for the same reasons as

mentioned above (see § 411).

With regard to the nature of the capacity necessary for corporations to benefit from
the protection of the BIT and be a party to the present arbitration, the Tribunal is of
the opinion that neither Article 1(2)(b) BIT nor Article 25 ICSID Convention limits
the scope of eligible entities to those having full legal capacity, and also
encompasses entities which enjoy limited civil capacity to the extent that such
entities have the capacity to make an investment under the BIT and further to sue

and to be sued.
The reasons are the following:

(i) Based on the wording of Article 1(2)(b) BIT and the situation under Italian
law, it has to be concluded that not only entities with full legal capacity
qualify as “juridical persons” under Article 1(2)(b) BIT. Under Article 36
Italian Civil Code (quoted at § 397 above), associations not recognized as
legal entities (hereinafter “non-recognized associations”) have the procedural
capacity to stand in court and to be represented by their president or director.
In other words, whilst non-recognized associations may not have legal
personality, they possess certain attributes of legal personality and in
particular the right to sue and to be sued.'*’ To the extent that the relevant
Claimants had the capacity to make the relevant investment, and that they
also have the statutory right to litigate in their own names, and that their
constituents all have the requisite nationality, the “juridical person”
requirement of Article 25(2)(b) ICSID Convention must be considered

satisfied.

See PICARDI, §§ 228 et seq.

162

418.

(ii)

(iii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The ICSID Convention does not define the concept of juridical person, and
does in particular not expressly require a non-natural investor to have specific
legal personality.'°* Thus, although this question is controversial, the Tribunal
finds that the ICSID Convention does not provide for a clear “yes or no”
answer and that the specific requirements regarding the legal personality of a
non-natural investor therefore eventually depends on the scope rationae
personae of the relevant BIT and the legal capacity required for a non-natural
investor to acquire an investment protected by the BIT under the law
applicable to such investor and to sue or be sued in its own name with regard

to such investment.'°°

Where a non-natural investor falls within the definition of juridical persons
provided for in the BIT, and where such investor has under the law applicable
to it the legal capacity to acquire an investment protected under the BIT and
to sue and to be sued, it would be contrary to the purpose of the BIT and the
ICSID Convention to deny such investor the capacity to initiate ICSID
arbitration. Indeed, it would make no sense to allow on one hand an investor
to make an investment protected under the BIT, and deny on the other hand
such investor the right to invoke protection under the BIT for violation of the

rights attached to such investment.

Having regard to these considerations, the Tribunal finds that in order to qualify as

“juridical person” under Article 1(2)(b) BIT it is sufficient that Italian law affords

158

See SCHREUER, op. cit. fn. 98, Ad Article 25 § 689, and references to the historical debate

concerning the term of juridical person.

159

See Consorzio Groupement L.E.S.1.-DIPENTA v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria

(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/08), Award of 10 January 2005, §§ 37 et seq., where the Tribunal
recognized the capacity of an “external” consortium to be a party to an arbitration, based on its
capacity to act in its own name, to sue and to be sued. The Tribunal rejected its jurisdiction not
because of a lack of legal capacity of the claimant, but because the claimant was not the party bound
by the contract underlying the investment, see § 37(iii).

163

419.

420.

421.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

those Claimants who constitute entities or other forms of organizations with the
capacity to make the investment and the right to litigate in their own name. It is not

necessary that they be granted full legal personality under Italian law.

In the light of the limited scope of the present decision, it is not necessary at this
stage to determine which of the Claimants constitute entities in the sense of Article

1(2)(b) BIT.

In addition, in order to benefit from the protection of the BIT and be a party to the
present arbitration, these entities must fulfil the criteria of “Italian nationality.”
According to general international law, applied to corporate entities and other
forms of organizations, the nationality requirement means that such entities and
organizations must be duly constituted and organized under Italian law and/or have
their ‘siége social’ in Italy. ' These requirements do not really seem to be disputed
between the Parties, Respondent’s objections focusing solely on whether they have
been met.'°! This question is however premature at this stage and will be examined

when dealing with questions relating to individual Claimants (see § 227 above).

Consequently, at this stage of the proceedings, it is sufficient to establish that
pursuant to the relevant legal provisions the Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae
personae over each and any Claimant being a juridical person with Italian
nationality on 14 September 2006, meaning that it was on such date constituted in
compliance with the legislation of Italy, had its siége social in the territory of Italy,
and was recognized by Italian law in the sense that it had the civil capacity to make

such investment and to litigate in its own name.

10 See SCHREUER, op. cit. fn. 98, Ad Article 25 §§ 694 et seq., and references quoted therein.

iol See R-MJ § 364 and R-PHB § 491, where Respondent states that “Claimants did not produce
any prima facie evidence of being incorporated, having their seat in Italy and being recognized
under Italian law,” thereby implicitly admitting that the law of incorporation and/or recognition and
the place of the seat are the relevant criteria to determine the nationality of non-natural investors.

164

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(d) Conclusion

422. In conclusion, and in response to Issues Nos. 10 and 11, the Tribunal finds that
without making a determination with respect to any individual Claimant, it has
jurisdiction rationae personae pursuant to Article 1(2) BIT, and its Additional

Protocol, and Article 25 ICSID Convention, over each Claimant:
(@) who isa natural person and who ultimately is found:

- to have had Italian nationality on 14 September 2006 and 7 February
2007;

- not to also have had Argentinean nationality on either of such dates;

- not to have been domiciled in the Argentine Republic for more than two

years prior to making the investment;

- to have been an investor as of the date of the alleged breach by

Argentina of its treaty obligations.

(ii) who is a juridical person and who ultimately is found to have had the Italian

nationality on 14 September 2006, meaning that it:
- was on such date constituted in compliance with the legislation of Italy;
- had its siége social in the territory of Italy; and

- was recognized by Italian law in the sense that it had the civil capacity
to make an investment under the BIT and to litigate in its own name,

without necessarily having full legal personality.

165

423.

424,

425.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(5) Subject to the Claimants’ Written Consent — Issue 2
(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

It is contested between the Parties whether Claimants validly consented to submit
the present dispute to ICSID jurisdiction. In particular, Respondent challenges the
validity of the TFA Mandate Package and contends that the mandate given by
Claimants in this TFA Mandate Package is not fit to constitute a consent in the
sense of Article 25(1) ICSID Convention. Claimants, on the other hand, contest

Argentina’s entitlement to challenge the validity of Claimants’ consent.

Again, in accordance with the limits of the jurisdictional phase, the present decision
will not decide whether each Claimant has validly consented to the present
arbitration. The Tribunal will limit its analysis to the question whether Claimants’
consent, as expressed in the relevant documents of the TFA Mandate Package, is fit
to constitute a valid consent to the present ICSID arbitration taking into account the

representation mechanism implemented by the TFA Mandate Package.
Thus, the specific issues to be determined by the Tribunal here are the following:

- What is the law applicable to the question of the validity of the Parties’

consent?

- How far need the Tribunal go when examining the existence of consent to

ICSID arbitration? In particular:

(i) Is the Tribunal’s scope of examination limited to the mere existence of

a consent, or does it further extend to the validity of such consent?

(ii) If extending the Tribunal’s scope of review also to the validity of such
consent, what are the relevant validity requirements? In this respect,
does the multiplicity of Claimants impose certain additional
requirements as to the form and content of Claimants’ consent to

arbitration?

166

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(iii) What is the relevance and consequence of the argument that Argentina

lacks standing to challenge the validity of Claimants’ consent?

To the extent specific requirements apply to the validity of the consent, are
these requirements fulfilled (see Issues 2(a) & 2(b) of the List of 11 Issues of
9 May 2008)? In particular:

(i) | What is the role and effect of the TFA Mandate Package, other thereto
related documents and the Request for Arbitration with regard to

Claimants’ consent?

(ii) What is the role and impact on Claimants’ consent of the alleged

conflict of interest allegedly affecting TFA?

(iii) Can the consent provided for in the TFA Mandate Package be
considered “irrevocable” in the sense of Article 25(1) ICSID

Convention.

426. The key legal provisions and other documents in dealing with the above issues are
the following: Article 8 BIT, Article 25(1) ICSID Convention, the TFA Mandate
Package, and Rule 18 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

427.

428.

As to the specific content and wording of the TFA Mandate Package, it is set forth
above in §§ 86-89.

(b) Parties’ Positions

Respondent contends that Claimants have not validly consented to the present

ICSID arbitration, based mainly on the following arguments:

(i)

Claimants’ consent does not fulfill the applicable substantive requirements:
First, Respondent contends that Claimants’ consent is vitiated by TFA’s
conflict of interests (which aims to protect the Italian banks from their

liability towards Claimants), and was obtained through TFA’s

167

(ii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

misrepresentations and non-disclosure of relevant information. As such, it
was given in violation of the good faith principle and has been fraudulently
obtained. TFA’s improper conduct is evidenced by the existence of
counterfeited signatures on the relevant documents of the TFA Mandate
Package. Second, the terms of the TFA Mandate Package provide TFA
with full control over the arbitration and deprives Claimants’ of basic
procedural rights, which is inadmissible. Claimants can therefore not be
considered to be legitimately represented by TFA and White & Case in these
proceedings and may therefore not be deemed to have validly consented to

the present arbitration. 163

Third, Claimants have not agreed to the
“irrevocability” of the purported consent represented in the TFA Mandate,

and can therefore not perfect an ICSID arbitration agreement.'

Claimants’ consent does not fulfill the applicable form requirements:
Respondent contends that according to Italian law, the Powers of Attorney
issued to TFA and White & Case should have been executed in front of a
notary. This has not been done. In addition thereto, there exist strong doubts
about the authenticity of the Claimants’ signature on the relevant documents
of the TFA Mandate Package, including the Power of Attorneys. Thus, the
relevant Powers of Attorney are invalid and Claimants can therefore not be

considered to have validly consented to the present ICSID arbitration. 165

R-PHB §§ 144 et seq.
R-PHB §142, §§ 201 et seq.
R-PHB §§ 225 et seq.

R-MJ § 205, R-PHB § 144.

168

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

429. In contrast, Claimants contend that they have validly consented to submit a dispute

like the present one to ICSID arbitration. Claimants submit that their consent is

fully valid, based on the following main arguments:

@)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

166

166

Claimants validly consented in writing to arbitrate this dispute (through the
signature of the Power of Attorney), which is all that is required as a matter of
international law. The documentation Claimants submitted is more than
sufficient to demonstrate Claimants’ consent and there is no ground for the

Tribunal to second-guess Claimants’ consent;

The role of TFA is irrelevant in determining whether Claimants consented to

arbitrate;

In any event, TFA’s role is entirely proper. Argentina’s allegation of fraud is
wrong and based on the speculative assertion that Claimants have a claim
against the Italian banks. Further, there is no conflict of interest; on the
contrary, TFA and Claimants have a convergent interest to win these

proceedings;

Formal requirements of Italian law are not applicable to the Powers of

Attorneys, which are subject to the law of the District of Columbia;

Respondent’s policy argument as to the impact of an ICSID arbitration on

sovereign debt restructuring are irrelevant and inaccurate.

C-MJ §§ 390 et seq., C-R-MJ §§ 355 et seq. See aso C-PHB §§ 104 et seq, and §§ 244 et seq.

169

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(c) Tribunal’s Findings

(i) | Law Applicable to the Question of Consent

430. As mentioned above (see § 274), Article 8 and in particular Article 8(3)

431.

contemplate the Parties’ consent required under Article 25(1) ICSID Convention. It
is widely acknowledged that the question of the existence and validity of consent in
the sense of Article 25(1) ICSID Convention is not subject to the law applicable to
the merits designated in Article 42 ICSID Convention, but rather to Article 25
ICSID Convention itself and the instruments expressing such consent.” This is
also the view of the present Tribunal, which considers that questions of consent
under Article 25 ICSID Convention are subject to principles of international law,
and not pursuant to any particular national law.'® This applies not only with regard
to the material content of the consent, i.e., to its substantive validity, but also with
regard to its form, i.e., to its formal validity. In this respect, Article 8(7) BIT, which
refers to the law applicable to the merits of the dispute in the sense of Article 42

ICSID Convention, is irrelevant for the determination of the existence of consent.

(ii) Scope of Examination of the Tribunal

It is undisputed that the Tribunal must verify the existence of a consent, as an
objective condition to its jurisdiction (see § 258 above). However, the question of
the scope of such examination arises: How far does the examination of the Tribunal
need to go in order to verify the existence of consent? And, in particular, is such
examination limited to the existence of consent, or should it extend also to the
formal and substantive validity of such consent? What, if any, are the documents
or other evidence that may be required from Claimants to verify the existence
and/or validity of such consent?

167 See e.g. SCHREUER, op. cit. fn. 98, § 578 ef seq. and references quoted therein.

See also Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. v. the Slovak Republic (ARB/97/4), Decision
of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, § 35.

168

 

170

432.

433.

434,

435.

436.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

With regard to the formal requirements, Article 8 BIT does not appear to impose
any specific form requirement, whilst Article 25(1) ICSID Convention only
requires the consent to be in “written” form. No notarization or supplementary

other procedure is requested.

With regard to the substantive requirements, both Article 8 BIT and Article 25(1)
ICSID Convention are silent and there are no internationally recognized specific
rules regarding such requirements. In addition, Article 25(1) ICSID Convention
does not require the submission of any particular document or evidence. This

question is therefore to be assessed by the Tribunal.

As such, one could argue that a tribunal’s role is limited to the examination of the
existence of a written document, incorporating the parties’ consent to submit the
dispute to ICSID arbitration, without further examination regarding other aspects of

such consent.

However, the Tribunal’s view is that such an approach may — depending on the
circumstances — not give sufficient regard to the crucial role of consent, which
constitutes the cornerstone of ICSID and BIT arbitration. Under the particular
circumstances of the present case and the nature and scope of Respondent’s
objections, the Tribunal considers that it not only has the duty to examine the
existence of a written document incorporating a consent to submit the present
dispute to ICSID arbitration, but it should also ask itself whether such consent

reflected Claimants’ sincere intention.

(iii) Relevant Substantive Validity Requirements
As mentioned above (see § 435), the Tribunal believes that in the present case its
examination regarding consent should go beyond the mere formal existence of the
consent. In this respect, the Tribunal finds that reference should be made to

international law and in particular the general principles of law requiring that any

171

437.

438.

439.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

consent be genuine and intended, i.e., free from coercion, fraud and/or from any

essential mistake.

Thus, consent that was not freely given, i.e., given under threats or coercion, was in

fraudulently induced,'? or was based on an essential mistake!”

may not constitute
a valid consent under general principles of law. It is generally admitted that under
such circumstances the party, who is victim of coercion, fraud or mistake may
avoid the contract. The Tribunal holds that the same principle should apply to the

concept of consent under Article 8(3) and Article 25(1) ICSID Convention.

At this point, a distinction should be drawn between the genuine character of the
consent and the motivations lying behind this consent. The reasons why a person
decides to give its consent to a specific commitment are in principle irrelevant for it
to be valid, provided they are based on a correct understanding of the underlying
facts and law. In other words, an investor who consents to ICSID arbitration must
understand and want to initiate ICSID arbitration as a dispute resolution means for
the dispute at stake. The reasons why such investor opts for ICSID arbitration, the
question whether or not the decision to give its consent is a “good” decision, e.g.,
whether it is the best way to get the sought redress or whether there may be further
more suitable options, is in contrast irrelevant for the validity of the consent,

provided such consent was free and informed.

With regard to the “irrevocability” of the consent, this irrevocability is not a
prerequisite of a valid consent but rather a consequence of the existence of a valid

consent: If a party has validly consented to ICSID arbitration, such consent is

‘A consent is fraudulously induced when it is based on a willfully inaccurate representation on

a willful concealment of information, which in accordance with good faith and fair dealing should
have been disclosed.

‘0 A mistake is considered essential, where the party would not have given it consent had it

known about the mistake.

172

440.

441.

442.

443.

444,

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

irrevocable. Thus, although irrevocability and validity go hand in hand,
irrevocability does not constitute a separate validity requirement. Thus, whilst it is
necessary, it is also sufficient that the party giving its consent be aware of and

agrees with such irrevocable nature.

Consequently, the Tribunal shall examine not only the existence of a written
document incorporating consent, but also the validity of such consent, whereby the
only relevant validity requirement is that such consent be given in a free and
informed manner. Other validity requirements which may apply under national
laws to specific kinds of contracts or actions are however irrelevant and will not be

taken into account by the Tribunal.

(iv) Argentina’s Standing to Challenge Claimants’ Consent

Claimants contend that Argentina does not have standing to challenge Claimants’

consent and that such challenge could only be raised by Claimants themselves.

Indeed, the avoidance of a contract based on a coercion, fraud or mistake is in
principle reserved to the party whose consent is affected by such flaw. It can in
principle not be invoked by the other party, who has validly consented to the

contract.

However, the particularity of the case is that the alleged fraud and/or mistake is
alleged to have been caused by a third party, TFA. The question therefore arises
whether the party, validly bound by its own consent, can invoke the other party’s

flawed consent to challenge the validity of the contract.

Considering (i) the crucial role of consent in ICSID and BIT arbitration, (ii) the
relevant third party, i.e., TFA’s role in the present dispute, and (iii) the fact that
Argentina had no link with or control over TFA, the Tribunal considers that
Argentina is not precluded from invoking a lack of consent from Claimants in

relation to TFA’s role and behaviour.

173

445.

446.

447.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

However, this does not mean that all of Respondent’s arguments are admissible or
otherwise fit to establish a lack of consent. The Tribunal shall stick to the scope of
examination and the validity requirements described above (§§ 431-440) and
address only those arguments which fall within the scope of such examination. In
addition, when proceeding to such examination, the Tribunal shall give due regard
to the fact that Claimants themselves do not invoke such lack of consent, which
may impose a higher standard of proof than if the mistake or fraud is invoked by

the affected party itself.

(v) Existence and Validity of Claimants’ Consent
As mentioned above (§ 258), within the context of BIT based arbitration, it is
widely admitted that consent is given through the initiation of ICSID proceedings,
which constitutes the acceptance by an investor of the Host State’s offer to
arbitrate. Thus, it is the Request for Arbitration that embodies the consent of the
investor, unless the investor has otherwise previously expressed its consent, e.g. in
a notice of dispute. Where such Request is filed by a lawyer, that lawyer must be
duly authorized to do so, based on an appropriate power of attorney. In other words,
in such a circumstance, it is the power of attorney instructing the lawyer to launch
the arbitration proceedings on behalf of the investor and the request thereby filed by
the empowered attorney which contain and simultaneously constitute the consent of

the investor.

As mentioned before (see § 430 above), the validity of such power of attorney as
embodiment and expression of an investor’s consent is thus subject to general
principles of international law. Indeed, one must distinguish the validity of the

power of attorney itself and the validity of the consent embodied therein. While the

 

former is a matter of procedure (and thereby of admissibility) and is regulated in
Rule 18 ICSID Arbitration Rules, the latter is a matter of jurisdiction and subject to

the law applicable to the consent itself, i.e., international law.

174

448.

449.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Therefore, objections regarding the formal invalidity of a power of attorney would
— if at all — be relevant under Rule 18 ICSID Arbitration Rules. In this respect, it
should be stressed that the filing of ICSID arbitration is not an action reserved to
lawyers admitted to practice in a specific jurisdiction or bar. It is open to any
investor, irrespective of its legal qualifications and such investor is not required to
resort to the assistance of a lawyer, although such assistance may in practice be
highly recommended. Consequently, even if lawyers are asked to intervene by
preparing and participating to the ICSID proceedings on the investor’s behalf, there
is no reason to impose on such lawyers and their principal specific limitations or
restrictions existing in their home jurisdiction and applicable to domestic court or
arbitration proceedings. This is so irrespective of whether or not lawyers are, under
the locally applicable professional rules, prevented from representing or limited in
the way of representing such an investor in ICSID arbitration, and may engage their
liability towards their client and/or relevant authorities in their home jurisdiction. It
may, under certain circumstances, further raise questions with regard to the
admissibility of the arbitration proceedings initiated by such lawyers (see §§ 506 et
seg. below). It may however in principle not affect the validity of Claimants’
consent to ICSID arbitration, unless the circumstances at hand simultaneously
constitute a fraud, a coercion or a mistake in the sense described above (see §§ 436-

440) and being the basis for the investor’s consent.

Thus, the core question in order to determine the validity of Claimants’ consent is

the following:

In view of the content and specificities of the TFA Mandate
Package, the alleged circumstances surrounding its signature and
the representation mechanism implemented by such Package, can
Claimants’ consent to ICSID arbitration still be considered a free
and informed consent?

175

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

450. The TFA Mandate Package is composed of (i) the TFA Instruction Letter, (ii) the

451.

Power of Attorney, (iii) the TFA Mandate, and (iv) additional questionnaires and

instructions, as further described above (see §§ 85-89).

The TFA Instruction Letter provides in section 8 thereof some “basic rules that the

conduct of the ICSID arbitration on behalf of numerous Italian Investors makes it

necessary to impose on all of [the bondholders].”!”! These rules focus mainly on

two issues: (i) the eligibility of a person to participate in the ICSID arbitration, and

(ii) rules concerning the conduct of such arbitration:

With regard to the eligibility requirements, the TFA Instruction Letter
requires that a person wishing to participate in the ICSID arbitration must be
an “investor,” i.e., hold a security entitlement in the relevant Argentine bonds.
In addition thereto, the TFA Instruction Letter sets forth that anyone who
intends to initiate ICSID arbitration may not bring — as long as the arbitration
proceedings are ongoing — any legal action in Italy against any credit
institution, i.e., bank, that sold the bonds to them. The TFA Instruction Letter
justifies this restraint by an alleged risk that legal proceedings against the
banks may lead to the annulment of the purchase of the bonds, which in turn
would annihilate the status of “investor” of the concerned person.
Nevertheless, the TFA Instruction Letter also provides that it is possible for
the “investors” to change their mind and revoke the mandates related to the
ICSID arbitration, whereby a revocation of these mandates in principle
triggers the investor’s withdrawal from the ICSID proceeding. It is further
mentioned that the running of the statute of limitations for claims against the

banks will not be tolled by the participation to the ICSID proceeding.

See TFA Instruction Letter (Exh. RA-2), Section 8, first paragraph.

176

452.

453.

454.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- With regard to the rules concerning the conduct of the arbitration, the TFA
Instruction Letter introduces and explains the role of TFA and the appointed
lawyers White & Case, further described in the TFA Mandate. Based on these
two documents, TFA is given all powers to take any action necessary to
conduct the arbitration and/or settle the dispute, without direct consultation
with Claimants, who are deprived of the right to give instructions either to
TFA or to White & Case. The TFA Instruction Letter and the TFA Mandate
justify this restraint as necessary for reasons of coherence and uniformity of
representation of all Italian bondholders, and base it on the principle that

TFA’s role is to act in the collective interest of all bondholders.

Based on the TFA Instruction Letter and the TFA Mandate, as well as the
supplementary documentation included in the TFA Mandate Package, each
Claimant then had to sign a Power of Attorney, in which it (i) declared being a
holder of relevant Argentine bonds, (ii) declared giving its irrevocable consent to
submit to ICSID arbitration and to accept Argentina’s offer to arbitrate contained in
Article 8 BIT, and (iii) conferred to White & Case the power to initiate and conduct
on its behalf the ICSID arbitration and other actions necessary to manage the

Claimant’s rights as deriving from its status as bondholder.

(vi) _Existence of a Clear Consent to ICSID Arbitration

The Tribunal holds that the Power of Attorney constitutes a written power of
attorney and contains a clear and unambiguous expression of irrevocable consent
by the relevant Claimant to initiate ICSID arbitration against Argentina in relation
to its non-payment of amounts due under the relevant bonds, and to entrust White
& Case with the conduct of such arbitration. Based thereon, this Power of Attorney

constitutes a written consent in the sense of Article 25(1) ICSID Convention.

Further, the Tribunal finds that:

177

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- Whether or not this Power of Attorney also complies with Italian law or law
of the District of Columbia is irrelevant for the purpose of assessing its
validity under Article 8 BIT and Article 25(1) ICSID Convention. This
conclusion is based on the assumption that the Powers of Attorney were
signed by the relevant Claimants. The argument of a possible falsification of
certain signatures is irrelevant at this stage, and will — if necessary — be

examined when dealing with issues relating to individual Claimants.

- Further, objections relating to the validity of the Power of Attorney itself fall
under Rule 18 ICSID Arbitration Rules and are not of a nature to challenge

the validity of the consent embodied therein (see § 448 above).

- In addition, Claimants’ intention to participate to the ICSID proceedings is
further confirmed by the series of further documents, such as copies of
identification documents and documents establishing the holding of the
security entitlement, which each Claimant had to submit together with the

TFA Mandate Package.

(vii) Validity of Claimants’ Consent to ICSID Arbitration

455. Thus, the question now is whether the consent of the Claimants, who signed this
Power of Attorney, may have been truncated by coercion, fraud or an essential
mistake caused by TFA and/or White & Case. Respondent alleges that the restraints
set forth in the TFA Mandate Package preventing Claimants from freely pursuing
the banks is fraudulent, to the extent that it is based on a misrepresentation of key
facts and legal issues aiming at unduly protecting the banks from law suits and with
the effect of depriving Claimants of a redress against such banks. In other words,
Respondent’s argument suggests that these documents concealed TFA’s real
purpose, i.e., protecting its banks, and that had Claimants known such real purpose,
they would not have given their consent to the TFA Mandate Package and thereby
to ICSID arbitration.

178

456.

457.

458.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The system put in place by the TFA Mandate Package provides for certain
restrictions, such as the waiver of Claimants to sue the Italian banks for the duration
of the ICSID proceedings, limitations related thereto imposed on the revocation of
the TFA Mandate Package, and the principle that Claimants are passive participants
to the arbitration, all relevant decisions being made by TFA and White & Case on
behalf of these Claimants,. With regard to these restrictions and limitations the

Tribunal finds as follows:

(i) | With regard to Claimants’ inability to give instructions and make decisions
regarding the conduct of proceedings, the Tribunal holds that this restriction was
clearly set forth in the TFA Mandate Package. In this respect, Claimants were
aware that by accepting the TFA Mandate Package, they would be unable to
exercise themselves certain procedural rights individually, and in particular they
would not be in a position to instruct the lawyers and direct the proceedings
individually. In addition, it is also understandable that proceedings involving
several thousand claimants cannot be conducted in the same manner as proceedings
with a handful of claimants, and that the coordination and management of such
proceedings may therefore affect the scope of power and freedom of the parties to
decide on how to conduct the proceedings. The question may arise whether this
cutting into Claimants’ rights may have gone too far. This question is however not
a question of consent: Claimants knew what they were doing. It is a question of
admissibility: Is it admissible for Claimants to entrust a third party with rights as
extensive as those of TFA? This question will thus be addressed together with other

issues of admissibility (see §§ 536 et seg. below).

(ii) With regard to Claimants’ inability to sue the banks whilst ICSID arbitration
is ongoing, the Tribunal finds that this restriction (rightfully or wrongfully) indeed
benefits the banks. Under the TFA Mandate Package scheme, banks are protected
from being sued by Claimants as long as the ICSID arbitration is ongoing and
Claimants participate thereto. Based thereon, Respondent alleges that TFA, whose

membership is composed of such banks, is affected by a conflict of interest which

179

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

truncates Claimants’ consent. The Tribunal holds that the restriction imposed on
Claimants with regard to the temporary limitation to sue the banks is neither
fraudulent, nor does it attach Claimants’ consent with any essential mistake. The

reasons are the following:

- Whilst the representation mechanism implemented by the TFA Mandate
Package does impose certain restrictions on Claimants, it should not be
forgotten that it also actually entitles Claimants to conduct ICSID arbitration,
at the cost and expense of the TFA’s member banks. Indeed, it is very
unlikely that many of the Claimants would individually be in a position to
initiate and conduct ICSID arbitration, if they had to finance the arbitration

themselves.

- It is further true that the TFA member banks may indirectly benefit from this
scheme, since there is a likelihood of reducing the risks that they get sued by
Claimants. However, there is no certainty regarding the existence of scope of
any claims against the TFA member banks and these banks are actually
paying a certain price for this “risk reduction,” since they are financing the
ICSID proceedings. In other words, from TFA’s perspective, the TFA
Mandate Package is a sort of a risk insurance, for which they pay a premium
(the cost of the ICSID arbitration), in return for which they are protected to a

certain extent against a risk (lawsuits from Claimants).

459. This scheme may appear uncommon and it raises questions relating to TFA’s role
in the proceedings, such as issues of conflict of interests between TFA and
Claimants. However, these are more considerations of admissibility of the
proceedings, rather than of consent of Claimants (see §§ 529 et seg. below). The
key factor with regard to Claimants’ consent is not related to the motivations of
TFA, but rather to the question whether through the TFA Mandate Package
Claimants’ were fraudulently induced in doing something they did not want to do,

or whether they unconsciously waived a right or lost an option, which — if

180

460.

461.

462.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

conscious thereof — they would not have been willing to concede at the price of

being able to conduct ICSID arbitration.

Respondent argues that Claimants would not have agreed to ICSID arbitration had
they been better aware of the risks related to such ICSID arbitration, in particular
the alleged risk of losing their potential claims against the TFA member banks. The
Tribunal finds that Respondent has failed to bring sufficient evidence supporting

such contention.

The Tribunal holds that the TFA Mandate Package contains sufficient information
to allow Claimants to make an informed consent. It clearly sets forth that during the
ICSID arbitration Claimants cannot simultaneously initiate legal claims against the
TFA member banks and that the statute of limitation for such claims is not tolled.
Further, it is also comprehensive with regard to the way the proceedings will be
conducted, restricting Claimants from exercising themselves a number of decisional
and procedural rights. Of course, one could argue that some information of the TFA
Mandate Package could have been better explained or should have been more
comprehensive. However, one should also take into account that the present dispute
is not a consumer dispute, although a number of the Claimants may have a
consumer like profile. It is a dispute surrounding multi faceted financial
investments. Thus, the degree and nature of the information provided did not need
be of the same extent and nature than in the context of pure consumer transactions,
and TFA was entitled to assume a certain level of sophistication and knowledge of

the investors.

Thus, based on the information contained in the TFA Mandate Package the
Tribunal finds that it allowed Claimants to make an informed choice between (i)
ICSID arbitration at the cost of TFA and at the temporary detriment of Claimants’
potential claims against TFA’s member banks, or (ii) civil litigation against the
banks, at Claimants’ own expense and without the option of simultaneous ICSID

arbitration against Argentina.

181

463.

464.

465.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In addition, even if the TFA Mandate Package did not contain sufficient
information or did to some extent misrepresent certain information, such a flaw
would have been cured by the subsequent events. Indeed, various associations
started to assist Italian purchasers of Argentinean bonds by disseminating
information on available legal means and even by supporting them in the
revocation of the TFA Mandate Package, the tolling of the prescription period
and/or the filing of legal claims against the banks.'”” Thus, even if at the time of
signature of the TFA Mandate Package, some of the Claimants did not have a full
picture of what they were doing, they were able to get such a full picture afterwards
through the various actions of associations, legal proceedings and news reports on
the ongoing ICSID arbitration. Given that Claimants themselves do not invoke a
lack of consent, it is sufficient that they were in a position to appreciate the scope of
their commitment to ICSID arbitration, and it is irrelevant whether or not they

eventually really understood such commitment.

Thus, whilst the Tribunal does not take a position on TFA’s representation scheme
resembling a “seduction operation,” there is no indication that such operation was
systematically fraudulent, coercive or otherwise caused Claimants to agree to

ICSID arbitration based on an essential mistake.

Consequently, the Tribunal considers that there is at this stage no indication that
Claimants’ consent to ICSID arbitration through the TFA Mandate Package and the
initiation of the present proceedings by White & Case in accordance with such

package would be invalid.

12 See CERNIGLIA, §§ 4 et seq., see also Hearing Tr. Day 4 pp. 933/10-939-22, and pp. 952/8-
953/21; and ILLUMINATO, §§ 3-5, 9.

182

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(d) Conclusion

466. In conclusion and in response to Issue No. 2, the Tribunal holds that the way in

467.

which Claimants consented to the ICSID arbitration through the relevant

documents contained in the TFA Mandate Package is — as a matter of principle —

valid. In particular:

@)

(ii)

(iii)

(6)

Based on the circumstances leading to the execution of the documents
embodying Claimants’ consents, in particular, the Declaration of Consent and
the Power of Attorney, there is at this stage no indication that such execution
would have been achieved based on systematical fraud, coercion or essential

mistake vitiating Claimants’ consent;

Whether or not such fraud, coercion or mistake may exist with regard to
individual Claimants based on the specific circumstances of the individual
case remains open and will be addressed, to the extent necessary and

appropriate, when dealing with issues concerning individual Claimants;

Questions regarding TFA’s specific role and relevance, as well as issues
relating to conflict of interests or breach of professional obligations by White
& Case are issues relating to the admissibility of the proceedings, and not to
the validity of Claimants’ consent. They will be addressed, to the extent
necessary and appropriate, when dealing with the issue of admissibility (see §

642 et seq. below).

Subject to Argentina’s Written Consent — Issues 1(a), 4 & 8

(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

It is uncontested that through Article 8(3) BIT, Argentina, in principle, consented to

ICSID arbitration with regard to a dispute falling within the scope of the BIT and

according to the terms and conditions set forth therein. Whilst the principle is not

contested, the scope and the modalities of this consent are disputed. In particular, it

183

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

is disputed between the Parties whether Respondent’s consent, as expressed in the

BIT, covers “mass claims” within the context of sovereign debt restructuring.
468. Thus, the specific issues to be determined by the Tribunal here are the following:
- What is the scope of Argentina’s consent under Article 8, and in particular:

(i) | Does the fact that the dispute relates to sovereign debt restructuring

somehow exclude Argentina’s consent to ICSID arbitration?

(ii) Which are the elements of the dispute that must be covered by

Argentina’s consent, and in particular:

- Is the multiplicity of Claimants an element that must be covered
by Argentina’s consent or is it only a procedural modality? (see

Issue 1(a) of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008)

- Is the previous negotiation and litigation requirement an element
which draws the limits of the consent, or is it a modality of the

consent? (see Issue 4 of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008)

(iii) Based thereon, can Argentina be considered to have consented to the
present proceedings? (see Issue 1(a) of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May

2008)

- What are, if any, the effects of the contractual forum selection clauses in the
relevant bond documents on Argentina’s consent? (see Issue 8 of the List of

11 Issues of 9 May 2008)

469. The key legal provisions and other documents in dealing with the above issues are

the following: Articles 1 and 8 BIT in connection with Article 25(1) ICSID

184

470.

471.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Convention, (see §§ 336 and 268 ef seg. above), as well as the forum selection

clauses contained in the relevant bond documents.'”

(b) Parties’ Positions

With regard to Argentina’s consent, Respondent contends that it has not and cannot
be considered to have consented in any of the relevant instruments to ICSID
arbitration over a dispute relating to sovereign debt restructuring and taking the

form of an unprecedented mass action.
Respondent bases its position on the following main arguments:'4

(i) The ICSID framework is silent concerning the possibility of collective

proceedings;

(ii) At the time of the conclusion of ICSID Convention and BIT, collective
claims were allowed neither in Italy nor in Argentina, and could therefore not

have been envisaged by Argentina;

(iii) The present proceeding is an unprecedented proceeding, neither Party could

have expected;

(iv) The present proceeding would change the nature of ICSID claims as it was
envisioned, from one focused on studied analysis of the grievances brought
by an individual investor for a singular, precise harm, to one focused on mass
or class claims in which the circumstances of each Claimants can no longer
be realistically examined and the peculiarities of each investment are ignored

in favor of the lowest common denominator;

3 See above § 340.

14 RMI §§ 136 ef seg., R-R-MJ §§ 138 et seq., 159 et seq., 168 et seq., §§ 183 et seq, R-PHB
§§ Let seq.

185

472.

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The opening of ICSID arbitration with regard to sovereign debt restructuring
would be counterproductive and go against current efforts to modernize

foreign debt restructuring process;

The forum selection clauses contained in the bond documents clearly show
that Argentina did not consent to submit the disputes arising from the bonds

to ICSID arbitration;

Argentina’s consent to ICSID arbitration is, in any event, conditional upon
the compliance with the preliminary negotiation and litigation requirement set

forth in Articles 8(1) and (2).

In contrast, Claimants contend that Argentina validly consented to submit a dispute

like this one to ICSID arbitration:

@)

(ii)

(iii)

175

175

Claimants contend that Respondent gave its express consent to ICSID
arbitration in the BIT and its consent contains no limitation on the number of
Claimants who may submit such dispute. This is evidenced by the use of the
plural in Article 8 BIT, as well as by the nature of some of the types of
investment listed in Article 8(1) BIT, which necessarily implies a plurality of

investors;

Claimants further submit that the existence of forum selection clause
contained in the contractual documents may not influence the validity of the

consent given by Argentina with regard to treaty claims;

Claimants finally contend that Article 8 sets forth three alternative dispute
resolution mechanisms, none of them being a pre-condition to the others.

Consequently, the non-compliance with the negotiation or litigation

C-MJ §§ 113 et seq., C-R-MJ §§ 292 et seq., C-PHB §§ 147 et seq.,

186

473.

474.

475.

476.

477.

478.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

mechamism provided in Article 8(1) and Article 8(2) has no bearing on

Respondent’s consent to arbitration.

(c) Tribunal’s Findings
(i) In General

As mentioned above (§ 258), within the context of BIT based arbitration, it is
widely admitted that consent of the Host State is given through the provision in the
relevant BIT of a dispute resolution clause providing for ICSID arbitration. This is
the case of Article 8, in particular Articles 8(3) and 8(5) BIT, in which Argentina
consented to submit “disputes relating to investments” and “in relation to the issues

governed by this Agreement” to ICSID arbitration, if so chosen by the investor.

As arises from sections(2) and (3) above, the present dispute is a dispute arising out
of the BIT and relating to an investment. So far, it is a dispute falling within the

scope of Argentina’s consent as expressed in Article 8 BIT.

In view of the specificities of the present arbitration, the question arises whether

Respondent’s consent covers all relevant elements of the present dispute.

(ii) Regarding Foreign Debt Restructuring
With regard to Respondent’s argument that ICSID arbitration should be excluded
concerning disputes arising from foreign debt restructuring, the Tribunal finds that

this argument is without merit.

It is to be recalled that a State has the possibility under Article 25(4) ICSID
Convention to notify the Centre of the class or classes of disputes from that it
would not consider submitting to the jurisdiction of the Centre. No such notification

has been made by Argentina.

In the absence of such notification, the core question with regard to ICSID’s

jurisdiction is whether the investment at stake is protected under the concerned BIT

187

479.

480.

481.

482.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

providing for ICSID arbitration in case of breach of such protection. If this is the
case, then the State’s consent must be considered to extend to such investment and

the dispute falls within the scope of ICSID’s jurisdiction.

To the extent that the Tribunal has accepted that actions of Argentina relating to its
foreign debt restructuring may, in principle and under certain circumstances, affect
Claimants’ rights and are therefore susceptible of constituting a violation of
provisions of the BIT (see §§ 311-330, 331 above), there is no reason to exempt

foreign debt restructuring situations from the scope of application of the BIT.

(iii) Regarding “Mass Claims”
It should be stressed that there is no uniform terminology concerning the various
kinds of proceedings involving a high number of parties, and that various
jurisdictions, courts and authors refer to different terms and meanings. For the sake
of simplicity and clarity, the Tribunal will refer to “mass proceedings” as a
qualification for the present proceedings, whereby this term should be understood
as referring simply to the high number of Claimants appearing together as one
mass, and without any prejudgment on the procedural classification of the present
proceedings as a specific kind of “collective proceedings” recognized under any

specific legal order.

Respondent contends that its consent does not extend to disputes taking the form of
“mass proceedings,” mainly because the “mass” aspect of the proceedings is not
possible within the normal ICSID framework and implies adaptations to such
framework, which cannot be done by the Tribunal itself and are of such importance

that they must be specifically covered by Respondent’s consent.

In order to determine whether the “mass” aspect of the present arbitration should be
subject to the express consent of Respondent, it is first necessary to examine more
in detail the nature and characteristics of such proceedings, which fall under the

more general concept of “collective proceedings.”

188

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

483. (i) Types of Collective Proceedings and their Key Features. It is impossible to list
all the various types of collective proceedings existing worldwide within the
context of court litigation or arbitration. A certain categorization into two main

types of collective proceedings is, however, possible:!7°

- Representative proceedings: Some jurisdictions address collective injuries by
creating mechanisms allowing claims to be brought for representative relief.
Whilst forms of representative relief vary greatly, they have in common that a
high number of claims arise as one single action. The mechanism in which
these claims are brought together vary and can be categorized by reference to
their approach to three different issues: (i) the nature of the claim, with regard
to which representative relief can take the form of a purely procedural device
available regardless of the type of substantive law at issue, or be limited to
certain fields of law (e.g., consumer law, antitrust, etc.); (ii) the nature of the
representative, who can be a private named individual on behalf of a large
group of unnamed others or an approved intermediary entity on behalf of all
injured individuals; (iii) the nature of the relief, which can take the form of
individual damages or representative relief (e.g., declaratory or injuctive

relief).

- Aggregate proceedings: Some jurisdictions address collective injuries
through judicial aggregation of claims, such as, for example, the English
Group Litigation Order (GLO), which results in the creation of a judicial
registry of individual claims that arise out of the same fact pattern, and then

are assigned to the same judge for management purposes. Whilst this sort of

‘6 For a quick overview see STACY I. STARCK, From Class to Collective: The De-

Americanization of Class Arbitration, in Arbitration International, Vol. 26 No. 4 (2010), pp 493-
548, pp 501-508, which refers further to a third type, ic., “settlement-only proceedings,” which
permit parties to a mass dispute to create a collective for settlement purposes only.

189

484.

485.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

collective proceeding is relatively uncontroversial in the context of court
proceedings, where courts can simply apply pre-existing rules of procedure
regarding joinder, intervention or consolidation to create the necessary
procedure, the situation is more delicate in the context of arbitration.
Although certain principles and mechanisms have developed through the
concept of “multiparty and multicontract arbitrations,” typically involving a
handful of parties, many issues remain where the number of parties reaches

the “mass” level.

The Tribunal will refrain from trying to identify and give a name to further sub-
categories in order to avoid endless discussions over the correct terminologies.
Suffice is to say that although various legal systems have developed certain types of
collective proceedings, their scope, modalities and effects remain different from
one jurisdiction to another, and that there is, as of today, no harmonized approach
towards such collective proceedings. Nevertheless, it appears that all these various
forms of collective proceedings share a common “raison d’étre”: Collective
proceedings emerged where they constituted the only way to ensure an effective
remedy in protection of a substantive right provided by contract or law; in other
words, collective proceedings were seen as necessary, where the absence of such
mechanism would de facto have resulted in depriving the claimants of their

substantive rights due to the lack of appropriate mechanism.”

The issues raised by the development of collective proceedings are manifold and
depend on the type of collective proceedings. In the context of arbitration, these
issues arise in slightly different terms and focus mainly around the following
problems: Representative proceedings raise issues relating to consent, especially for

those who subscribe to a view of arbitration that requires the parties’ explicit

"7 See STARCK, op. cit. fn.176, pp 183-212, pp 195-196.

190

486.

487.

488.

489.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

consent not only to arbitration of the dispute but also to the procedure to be used in
the arbitration. In contrast, aggregate proceedings raise issues of a more technical
nature, in particular the question whether ordering the parties to proceed

collectively is within the scope of the Tribunal’s discretion and authority.

Looking at the way the present arbitration was initiated, the present proceedings
appear to be aggregate proceedings, in which each individual Claimant is aware of
and consented to the ICSID arbitration. As such, the present proceedings cannot be
compared to US class-actions, in which a representative initiates a proceeding in
the name of a class composed of an undetermined number of unidentified
claimants. In the present arbitration, the number of Claimants is established and so

is their identity.

However, one cannot ignore that some features of the present proceedings, in
particular the way it is conducted, resemble representative actions: Although
Claimants made the individual and conscious choice of participating to the
arbitration, their participation is thereafter limited to a passive participation in the
sense that a third party, TFA, represents their interests and makes on their behalf all
the decisions relating to the conduct of the proceedings. The high number of
Claimants further makes it impossible for the representative to take into account
individual interests of individual Claimants, and rather limits the proceedings to the

defense of interests common to the entire group of Claimants.

In summary, the present proceedings seem to be a sort of a hybrid kind of collective
proceedings, in the sense that it starts as aggregate proceedings, but then continues
with features similar to representative proceedings due to the high number of

Claimants involved.

(ii) “Mass” Aspect and Consent. As mentioned above (see §§ 453-455 and § 474),
both Parties have consented to ICSID arbitration as dispute resolution method for

disputes arising out of the BIT. The only remaining question is whether a specific

191

490.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

consent regarding the specific conditions in which the present arbitration would be

conducted is required, i.e., regarding the form of collective proceedings.

This question led the Tribunal to the conclusion that the answer should be in the

negative, mainly for the following reasons:

Assuming that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims of several
individual Claimants, it is difficult to conceive why and how the Tribunal
could loose such jurisdiction where the number of Claimants outgrows a
certain threshold. First of all, what is the relevant threshold ? And second,
can the Tribunal really ‘loose’ a jurisdiction it has when looking at Claimants

individually ?

In addition, the collective nature of the present proceeding derives primarily
from the nature of the investment made. The ICSID Convention aims at
promoting and protecting investments, without however further defining the
concept of investment and leaving this task to the parties through relevant
instruments such as BITs (see §§ 257 and 362 et seg. above). Thus, where the
BIT covers investments, such as bonds, which are susceptible of involving in
the context of the same investment a high number of investors, and where
such investments require a collective relief in order to provide effective
protection to such investment, it would be contrary to the purpose of the BIT
and to the spirit of ICSID, to require in addition to the consent to ICSID
arbitration in general, a supplementary express consent to the form of such
arbitration. In such cases, consent to ICSID arbitration must be considered to
cover the form of arbitration necessary to give efficient protection and
remedy to the investors and their investments, including arbitration in the

form of collective proceedings.

491. Thus, with regard to the “mass” aspect of the present proceedings, the Tribunal

considers that the relevant question is not “has Argentina consented to the mass

192

492.

493.

494,

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

proceedings?”, but rather “can an ICSID arbitration be conducted in the form of
‘mass proceedings’ considering that this would require an adaptation and/or
modification by the Tribunal of certain procedural rules provided for under the
current ICSID framework?” If the answer is in the affirmative, then Argentina’s
consent to ICSID arbitration includes such mass aspect. If the answer is in the
negative, then ICSID arbitration is not possible, not because Argentina did not
consent thereto but because mass claims as the ones at stake are not possible under

the current ICSID framework.

Consequently, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the “mass” aspect of the present
proceedings relates to the modalities and implementation of the ICSID proceedings
and not to the question whether Respondent consented to ICSID arbitration.
Therefore, it relates to the question of admissibility and not to the question of
jurisdiction. It will thus be addressed below when dealing with admissibility issues

(see §§ 515 et seg. below).

(iv) Regarding the Negotiation and 18 Months Litigation
Requirement

Respondent argues that the requirement of negotiation and litigation set forth in
Articles 8(1) and 8(2) are of such a nature and importance that they constitute an
essential part of and motive for Respondent’s consent to ICSID arbitration. In other
words, Respondent contends that it would not have consented to ICSID arbitration
if such arbitration had not been made conditional upon the implementation of a

prior mechanism of negotiation and 18 months litigation.

The present issue comes down to the following question: What is conditional?
Respondent’s consent to ICSID jurisdiction or the implementation of such consent
in a case as the present one? Indeed, there is a difference between conditioning its
consent to ICSID jurisdiction to the fulfilment of a pre-condition, and conditioning
the effective implementation of such consent, i.e., the possibility to resort to ICSID

arbitration, to the fulfilment of such a pre-condition.

193

495.

496.

497.

498.

499.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In the case at hand, the question is not as much “has Argentina consented to ICSID
jurisdiction?” This would make little sense in the light of Argentina’s adherence to
the Washington Convention and its acceptance of ICSID arbitration under Article 8
BIT for the present type of dispute (see § 474 above). The question is rather “under
what circumstances will ICSID arbitration be possible under the terms of

Argentina’s consent?”

The Tribunal is of the opinion that the negotiation and 18 months litigation
requirements relate to the conditions for implementation of Argentina’s consent to
ICSID jurisdiction and arbitration, and not the fundamental question of whether
Argentina consented to ICSID jurisdiction and arbitration. Thus, any non-
compliance with such requirements may not lead to a lack of ICSID jurisdiction,
and only — if at all — to a lack of admissibility of the claim, and will thus be

addressed when dealing with issues of admissibility (see §§ 567 et seg. below).

(v) Regarding the Forum Selection Clauses
Respondent further argues that the introduction of forum selection clauses in the
relevant bond documents is to be interpreted as an exclusion of consent to ICSID

arbitration for disputes deriving from such bonds.

The Tribunal cannot follow Respondent in this respect as it conflates contract
claims and treaty claims. As explained above (see §§ 316 ef seq.), even though
Claimants claims relate to the bonds, they are based on alleged breaches by
Argentina of the BIT and not on contractual rights provided to Claimants under the
bond documents. The forum selection clauses apply only to claims based on
contractual rights, and may not affect treaty claims, which the bond documents did

neither anticipate nor deal with.

Consequently, the presence of forum selection clauses in the contractual bond
documents is irrelevant for the assessment of the existence and/or validity of

Argentina’s consent to ICSID arbitration.

194

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(d) Conclusion

500. In conclusion and in (partial) response to Issues Nos. 1(a), 4 and 8, the Tribunal

501.

finds that Argentina validly consented to submit the present dispute to ICSID

jurisdiction and arbitration. In particular:

@)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

™

The fact that the present dispute relates to foreign debt restructuring is per se

irrelevant to the determination of Argentina’s consent to ICSID arbitration;

Argentina’s consent to ICSID jurisdiction includes claims presented by
multiple Claimants to the extent that such claims are admissible under the

ICSID framework;

The negotiation and litigation requirement provided in Articles 8(1) and (2)
of the BIT does not condition Argentina’s consent to ICSID jurisdiction and
arbitration, and merely relates to the circumstances under which such consent

is to be given full effect and be implemented;

The presence of forum selection clauses in the contractual bond documents
are irrelevant to the determination of Argentina’s consent to ICSID

arbitration.

Conclusion on Jurisdiction

Based on the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes that it has jurisdiction

over the present claims as follows:

@)

The claims at stake are treaty claims in nature and fall under the scope of the
BIT and therewith under the jurisdiction ratione materiae of the Tribunal (see

§§ 331-332 above). In particular:

- The allegations of Claimants and the facts on which these allegations

are based are susceptible of constituting a violation of provisions of the

195

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

BIT and establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction with regard to the present

claims;

- The claims brought forward by Claimants are not pure contractual
claims but treaty claims based on acts of Argentina, a sovereign, which
Claimants allege are in breach of Argentina’s obligations under the

BIT;

- If third parties, in particular the Italian banks, have breached any of
their own obligations towards Argentina and/or the Claimants, redress
can be sought by either Argentina and/or Claimants against these banks
under the remedies provided for in the relevant contractual bond
documents or in the applicable statutory laws and/or regulations
concering purchase and sale of securities. Such liability, however, does
not seem to derive from the BIT and would therefore in principle have

no place in the present proceedings;

- Under these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that it is not
necessary anymore to examine Issue No. 6, i.e., whether the Tribunal
may also have jurisdiction based on the Umbrella Clause of the
Argentina-Chile BIT in connection with the MFN Clause of the
Argentina-Italy BIT. To the extent that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
already derives from the treaty nature of the claims at stake, the
question of the interaction between the Umbrella Clause of the
Argentina-Chile BIT and the MFN Clause of the Agrentina-Italy BIT

becomes moot.

(ii) The present dispute arises out of an investment pursuant to Article 1 BIT and

Article 25(1) ICSID Convention (see § 387 above). In particular:

- According to one view, the “double-barrelled” test developed with

regard to the concept of “investment” does not mean that the definition

196

(iii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

of investment provided by two States in a BIT has to fit into the
definition deriving from the spirit of the ICSID Convention. Rather,
arguably, it is the investment at stake that has to fit into both of these
concepts, knowing that each of them focuses on another aspect of the

investment;

In any event, the relevant bonds and Claimants’ security entitlements
therein are both to be considered “investments” pursuant to Article 1(1)

lit. () BIT;

If needed to be applied, Claimants’ purchase of security entitlements in
Argentinean bonds constitute a contribution which qualifies as

“investment” under Article 25 ICSID Convention;

The relevant bonds and Claimants’ security entitlements therein are
both to be considered made “in compliance with the laws and

regulations of [Argentina]” pursuant to Article 1(1) BIT;

The bonds and Claimants’ security entitlements therein are both to be

considered “made in the territory of Argentina.”

With regard to the jurisdiction rationae personae and without making a
determination with respect to any individual Claimant (see § 422 above), the
Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae personae pursuant to Article 1(2) of the
Argentina-Italy BIT, its Additional Protocol and Article 25 ICSID

Convention, over each Claimant:

who is a natural person and who is ultimately found:

. to have had Italian nationality on 14 September 2006 and 7
February 2007;

197

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

. not to also have had Argentinean nationality on either of such
dates;
. not to have been domiciled in the Argentine Republic for more

than two years prior to making the investment;

. to have been an investor as of the date of alleged breach by

Argentina of its treaty obligations.

- who is a juridical person and who is ultimately found to have had the

Italian nationality on 14 September 2006, meaning that it:

. was on such date constituted in compliance with the legislation of
Italy;

. had its siége social in the territory of Italy; and

. was recognized by Italian law in the sense that it had the civil

capacity to make an investment under the BIT and to litigate in its

own name, without necessarily having full legal personality.

(iv) The way in which Claimants consented to the ICSID arbitration through the
relevant documents contained in the TFA Mandate Package is — as a matter of

principle — valid (see § 466 above). In particular:

- Based on the general circumstances leading to the execution of the
documents embodying Claimants’ consents, in particular the
Declaration of Consent and the Power of Attorney, there is at this stage
no indication that such execution would have been achieved based on

fraud, coercion or essential mistake vitiating Claimants’ consent;

- Whether or not such fraud, coercion or mistake may exist with regard to

individual Claimants based on the specific circumstances of the

198

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

individual case remains open and will be addressed, to the extent
necessary and appropriate, when dealing with issues concerning

individual Claimants;

- Questions regarding TFA’s specific role and relevance, as well as issues
relating to conflict of interests or breach of professional obligations by
White & Case are issues relating to the admissibility of the proceedings,
and not to the validity of Claimants’ consent. They will be addressed, to
the extent necessary and appropriate, when dealing with the issue of

admissibility (see § 642 et seg. below).

(v) Argentina validly consented to submit the present dispute to ICSID

jurisdiction and arbitration (see § 500 above). In particular:

- The fact that the present dispute relates to foreign debt restructuring is
per se irrelevant to the determination of Argentina’s consent to ICSID

arbitration;

- Argentina’s consent to ICSID jurisdiction includes claims presented by
multiple Claimants to the extent that such claims are admissible under

the ICSID framework;

- The negotiation and litigation requirement provided in Articles 8(1) and
(2) of the BIT does not condition Argentina’s consent to ICSID
jurisdiction and arbitration, and merely relates to the circumstances

under which such consent it to be given full effect and implemented;

- The presence of forum selection clauses in the contractual bond
documents are irrelevant to the determination of Argentina’s consent to

ICSID arbitration.

502. Consequently, with regard to the relevant issues set forth in the List of 11 Issues of

9 May 2008, the Tribunal finds as follows:

199

@)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Issue 1(a): Argentina’s consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre includes

claims presented by multiple Claimants in a single proceeding;

Issue 2(a): The Declaration of Consent signed by the individual Claimants
submitted in this proceeding is in principle valid, whereby the potential
existence of a fraud, coercion or essential mistake invalidating the consent of
a specific individual Claimant based on the specific circumstances of the
individual case remains open and will be dealt with in a later stage of the

proceedings;

Issue 5: The MFN clause has no consequences on the ICSID’s jurisdiction

and the Tribunal’s competence;

Issue 6: Whether the Tribunal may also have jurisdiction based on the
Umbrella Clause of the Argentina-Chile BIT in connection with the MFN
Clause of the Argentina-Italy BIT is irrelevant to the extent that the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction already derives from the treaty nature of the claims at

stake;

Issue 7: Claimants’ claims are to be considered Treaty Claims arising out of
the BIT and therewith fall under the jurisdiction ratione materiae of the

Tribunal;

Issue 8: The presence of forum selection clauses referring to national courts
in the bond documents do not apply to Treaty Claims and do thereby not

affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over such Treaty Claims;

Issue 9: The bonds in question, and in particular the security entitlements
held by Claimants in these bonds, qualify as ’Investment” under Article 1(1)
BIT made “in the territory of Argentina” and “in compliance with the laws

and regulations of Argentina”;

200

503.

504.

505.

506.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(viii) Issue 10: The Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae personae over each Claimant

who is a natural person to the extent set forth above in § (7) (iii);

(ix) Issue 11: The Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae personae over each Claimant

who is a juridical person to the extent set forth above in § (7) (iii).

The remaining Issues 1(b), 2(b), 3(a), 3(b), 4 and 5 are issues of admissibility and

will be dealt with in the section below.

D.

 

MISSIBILITY OF THE CLAIM

(1) Introductory Remarks

In section C above, the Tribunal has established that it has — as a matter of principle
and without making a determination with respect to any individual Claimants —
jurisdiction over the present dispute. However, in order for the Tribunal to hear the
present case, it is further necessary that the claims raised by Claimants be

admissible.

As mentioned above (see §§ 245 et seq.), the difference between jurisdictional and
admissibility issues is not always clear. Consequently, some of the issues addressed
in this section may have been invoked by the Parties within the context of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. However, the Tribunal considers that these issues are not
matters of jurisdiction but of admissibility. Where this applies, any argument raised
by the Parties with regard to these issues and aiming to establish a lack of

jurisdiction is addressed below as an argument of lack of admissibility.

(2) Mass Action — Issue 1(b)
(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

Although the Tribunal considers that the “mass” aspect is not a hurdle to its
jurisdiction, it must further examine whether this “mass” aspect is — as it is a point

of dispute between the Parties — admissible under the current ICSID framework.

201

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

507. Thus, the specific issues to be determined by the Tribunal here are the following:

508.

509.

Is a “mass action” like the present one compatible with the current ICSID

framework and spirit, also giving due regard to the existing framework for

sovereign debt restructuring?

If so, what are the procedural adaptations that the Tribunal would need to

implement in order to make such a “mass action” workable in an ICSID

arbitration. In particular:

(i)

(ii)

With regard to admissibility requirements, should the Tribunal refer to
principles applicable to “class actions” and other aggregate litigations

as known under certain legal regimes?

With regard to modalities of the procedure, may the Tribunal limit
procedural rights of one Party where such limitation is necessary to

ensure the other Party’s procedural rights?

Are such adaptations covered by the Tribunal’s power to decide on

procedural issues?

The key legal provisions in dealing with the above issues are the following: Article

44 ICSID Convention and Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Article 44 ICSID Convention provides as follows:

“Any arbitration proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this Section and, except as the parties otherwise agree, in
accordance with the Arbitration Rules in effect on the date on which the
parties consented to arbitration. If any question of procedure arises which is
not covered by this Section or the Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by the
parties, the Tribunal shall decide the question.”

510. Article 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules provides as follows:

202

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

“The Tribunal shall make the orders required for the conduct of the
proceeding.”

(b) Parties’ Positions

511. Respondent contends that mass proceedings as the present one are not admissible

under the current ICSID framework. To support its position, Respondent brings

forward the following main arguments:

@)

(ii)

(iii)

178

178

The ICSID framework does not provide and does not allow mass claims.
Article 44 ICSID Convention simply permits the Tribunal to decide
procedural questions with respect to matters over which it already has
jurisdiction. It does not provide a basis for the Tribunal to exercise
jurisdiction over proceedings that are not authorized by the ICSID

Convention and to which the parties did not consent in the relevant BIT;

The present mass action cannot be compared to a multi-party arbitration, and
resembles more a type of class action. Even if such mass claim was
considered allowed under the current ICSID framework, the way this
arbitration was initiated and conducted is not in compliance with generally
recognized principles applicable to class actions and similar collective

proceedings (e.g., regarding the role and position of the representative);

Such mass claim proceedings are unmanageable because individualized facts
and circumstances are relevant not only for the merits but also for the
jurisdiction (e.g., whether the specific investment was made in accordance
with applicable laws, whether the Claimants’ signature are all authentic, etc.)

and could not be duly ascertained.

See R-MJ §§ 138 er seq., 154 et seq., 264; R-R-MJ §§ 159 et seq., 178 et seq., 184 et seq.;

R-PHB §§ 22 et seq.

203

512.

513.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In addition, Respondent contends that the opening of ICSID arbitration with regard
to sovereign debt restructuring would be counter-productive in so far as it would
encourage hold outs.'” As such, it would go against current efforts to modernize
foreign debt restructuring processes. Consequently, in order to preserve the
efficiency of foreign debt restructuring mechanisms, the Tribunal should deem the

present claims inadmissible.

In contrast, Claimants contend that the present mass proceedings are within the
jurisdictional limits of ICSID, the question of its management being a question of
mere procedure covered by Article 44 ICSID Convention and thereby within the

power of the Tribunal. Claimants’ main arguments are as follows:'*”

(i) This proceeding is not different from any other multi-party arbitration, the
only particularity being the unusually high number of Claimants. Multi-party
proceedings are widely admitted under current ICSID arbitration practice, and
since the ICSID framework contains no limitation on the number of possible
parties, there is no reason to treat this claim differently from any other multi-

party arbitration;

(ii) Collective proceedings are further consistent with the purpose and object of
the BIT, since the high number of Claimants is inherent to the nature of the

investments protected by the BIT (see § 490 above);

(iii) The present claims are proper and manageable: (a) Claimants are from a
single jurisdiction, they have identical claims arising out of the same State
measures under the same BIT and stand in an identical posture vis-a-vis

Respondent; (b) the individual facts and issues detailed by Respondent (i.e.,

179 RMI 8§ 62.

180 CMJ §§ 313 ef seq., 333 et seq., 350 et seq.; C-R-MJ §§ 316 et seq., C-PHB §§ 125 et seq.,
§§ 190 et seq.

204

514.

515.

516.

517.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

the individual circumstances of the purchase of the bonds) are not material to
the Tribunal’s core task of determining whether a specific set of actions taken
by Argentina constituted a violation of the BIT; (c) Argentina’s due process
rights would not be infringed; and (d) the Tribunal is well-equipped to adopt
procedures to handle the claims under Article 44 ICSID Convention.

Consequently, it is only just and efficient to hear these cases jointly.

With regard to the policy argument raised by Respondent, Claimants contend that
Respondent’s view is outdated and irrelevant. The major threat to the efficiency of
foreign debt restructuring would be rogue debtors, such as Argentina.
Consequently, opening the door to ICSID arbitration would create a supplementary
leverage against such rogue debtors and therefore be beneficial to the efficiency of

foreign debt restructuring.

(c) Tribunal’s Findings
As mentioned above (see §§ 489-492), the Tribunal finds that the issue of whether

or not the present mass proceedings could be conducted in the form of collective

proceedings is an issue of admissibility and not of consent.

To recall, Respondent contends that arbitration in the form of collective
proceedings is not provided for by ICSID, that this silence is a “qualified silence”
that should be interpreted to mean that collective arbitration is not possible and not
admissible under the current ICSID framework, and in particular that the Tribunal
cannot rely on Article 44 ICSID Convention or Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules to

create its own solution to the problems raised by the high number of Claimants.

It is undisputed that the ICSID framework contains no reference to collective
proceedings as a possible form of arbitration. The key question here is how to
interpret this silence. In particular, the Tribunal is tasked with the assessment of
whether this silence should be considered a “qualified silence,” meaning an

intended silence indicating that it does not allow for something that is not provided,

205

518.

519.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

or whether it is to be considered a “gap,” which was unintended and which the
Tribunal has the power to fill. In the latter case, the Tribunal shall further determine
whether the adaptations which would be needed to fill this gap, i.e., to manage the
present proceedings, fall within the scope of its powers as deriving from Article 44

ICSID Convention and/or Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

(i) Interpretation of the Silence of the ICSID Framework
As mentioned above (see §§ 489-492), the Tribunal finds that, in the light of the
absence of a definition of investment in the ICSID Convention, where the BIT
covers investments which are susceptible of involving a high number of investors,
and where such investments require a collective relief in order to provide effective
protection to such investment, it would be contrary to the purpose of the BIT, and
to the spirit of ICSID, to require in addition to the consent to ICSID arbitration in

general, a supplementary express consent to the form of such arbitration.

For these same reasons and as further developed below, the Tribunal finds that it
would be contrary to the purpose of the BIT and to the spirit of ICSID to interpret
this silence as a “qualified silence” categorically prohibiting collective proceedings,

just because it was not mentioned in the ICSID Convention:

- First, at the time of conclusion of the ICSID Convention, collective
proceedings were quasi inexistant, and although some discussions seem to
have taken place with regard to multi-party arbitrations, these dicussions were
not conclusive on the intention to either accept or refuse multi-party
arbitrations, and even less so with regard to the admissibility of collective

proceedings;

- ICSID sets forth a standard arbitration mechanism. Insofar as investments can
be of a varying nature and scope, it is possible that the current ICSID
procedure may not be fully adapted to resolve a dispute arising out of any

kind of investment. Indeed, where an investment, protected under a BIT

206

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

providing for ICSID arbitration, shows certain particular characteristics, these
characteristics may influence the way of conducting the arbitration, and lead
the Tribunal to make certain adaptations to the standard procedure in order to
give effect to the choice of ICSID arbitration. The need for certain
adaptations to the standard ICSID arbitration procedure merley derives from
the impossibility to anticipate all kinds of possible investments and disputes,
and is certainly not a sufficient motive to simply close the door of ICSID
arbitration to investors who are not “standard investors” having made
“standard investments.” However, it is understood that adaptations made to
the standard procedure must be done in consideration of the general principle
of due process and must seek a balance between procedural rights and

interests of each party.

520. Thus, the silence of the ICSID framework regarding collective proceedings is to be

521.

interpreted as a “gap” and not as a “qualified silence.” Consequently, the Tribunal
has, in principle, the power under Article 44 ICSID Convention to fill this gap.
However, this does not mean that the scope of this power is unlimited. Rather, the

Tribunal is bound by the limits set forth by Article 44 ICSID Convention.

(ii) Powers of the Arbitral Tribunal under Article 44 ICSID
Convention and Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules

 

As mentioned above (see § 509), Article 44 ICSID Convention provides that where
the ICSID framework is silent on a procedural question, which is also not subject to
the parties’ agreement, the Tribunal shall decide the question. Within the context of
arbitration proceedings, this rule is further complemented by Rule 19 ICSID

Arbitration Rules, according to which “the Tribunal shall make the orders required

207

522.

523.

524.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

for the proceeding.” These provisions are the mere expression of the inherent power

of any tribunal to resolve procedural questions in the event of lacunae. '*!

As a matter of principle, the power of a tribunal is limited to the filling of gaps left
by the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules. In contrast, a modification of
existing rules can only be effected subject to the parties’ agreement, in accordance
with minimum standards of fair procedure and to the extent that the rules to be
modified are not mandatory (in the sense that they restate mandatory provisions of

the Convention). 182

A tribunal’s power is further limited to the filling of gaps left by the ICSID
framework in the specific proceedings at hand, and a tribunal’s role is not to
complete or improve the ICSID framework in general. As such, a tribunal’s power
to fill gaps will usually be limited to the design of specific rules to deal with

specific problems arising in the proceedings at hand.
Considering the above, the Tribunal cannot:

- modify the current arbitration rules without the Parties’ consent. A revision of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules can only be done by the Administrative Council,
which is the body competent to adopt the Arbitration Rules under Article
6(1)(c) ICSID Convention; or

- adopt a full set of rules of procedure unless the Parties have agreed that the
Arbitration Rules adopted by the Administrative Council should not apply

without substituting their own rules.

See e.g. SCHREUER, op. cit. fn. 98, Ad Article 44 § 54.

12 See e.g. SCHREUER, op. cit. fn. 98, Ad Article 44 §§ 20 et seq.

208

525.

526.

527.

528.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The Tribunal, however, can and ought to fill gaps left where the application of
existing rules are not adapted to the specific dispute submitted to ICSID arbitration.
In such a case, the filling of the gap does not consist of an amendment of the

written rule itself, but rather of an adaptation of its application in a specific case.

As mentioned above (see §§ 518-520), the Tribunal finds that the silence of the
ICSID Convention concerning collective proceedings is to be seen as a “gap.” As
such, the Tribunal has, in principle, the power to fill this gap. The key question at

hand thus, is the following:

Can the Tribunal fill the gap created by the collective aspect of the
claim on an ad hoc basis and through the design of specific rules, or
would this require the creation and/or modification of general rules
which are under the competence of the Administrative Council?
This question cannot (and should not) be answered in the abstract. Not only would
this imply creating general principles thereby relying on a terminology, which is as
diverse and varied as the currently existing forms and modalities of collective
proceedings, but it would also go beyond the powers of the Tribunal to fill a
specific gap regarding the conduct of specific proceedings. What the Tribunal
however can (and should) do is to analyse this question in a concrete manner, i.e.,
asking itself (i) what are the specific rules that would be necessary in order to be
able to conduct the present proceedings under the ICSID framework, and (ii) can
these specific rules, in the light of their nature and scope, be considered to fall
within the power of the Tribunal as deriving from Article 44 ICSID Convention and

Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

When answering these questions, the Tribunal shall, in accordance with the
principles of interpretation of treaties, not only ask itself whether, from a technical
perspective, it can make such adaptations, but also whether, based on the object and

purpose of the ICSID Convention, it should do so.

209

529.

530.

531.

532.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(iii) Nature of the Necessary Adaptations to the ICSID Standard
Procedure

Notwithstanding the high number of Claimants involved, the Tribunal must
examine not only the elements necessary to determine its jurisdiction (i.e., the
nationality of the Claimants, their status of investor and the existence of their
investment, etc.), but also those necessary to establish Claimants’ claims and
relating to the merits of the case (i.e., the existence of a breach by Argentina of its
obligations under the BIT, the effect of such breach on Claimants’ investment,
etc.). Thus, the high number of Claimants may not serve as an excuse not to
examine such elements and adaptations to the procedure may therefore not affect

the object of the Tribunal’s examination.

However, it appears that adaptations to hear the present case collectively would
concern not that much the object of the examination, but rather (i) the way the
Tribunal will conduct such examination, and/or (ii) the way Claimants are

represented.

With regard to the examination, it is undeniable that the Tribunal will not be in a
position to examine all elements and related documents in the same way as if there
were only a handful of Claimants. In this respect, the Tribunal would need to
implement mechanisms allowing a simplified verification of evidentiary material,
while this simplification can concern either the depth of examination of a document
(e.g. accepting a scanned copy of an ID document instead of an original), or the
number of evidentiary documents to be examined, and if so their selection process
(i.e. random selection of samples instead of a serial examination of each document)
(see §§ 668 et seg. below). However, such a simplification of the examination

process is to be distinguished from the failure to proceed with such examination.

With regard to the mechanism of representation, it is true that TFA has been
provided with powers which may go beyond the power granted to a normal agent

under Rule 18 ICSID Arbitration Rules (see §§ 455 et seg. above). Admitting the

210

533.

534.

535.

536.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

present collective proceedings would thus also mean accepting TFA’s role as due

representative of Claimants.

In conclusion, the procedure necessary to deal with the collective aspect of the
present proceedings concerns the method of the Tribunal’s examination, as well as
the manner of representation of Claimants. However, it does not affect the object of
such examination. Further, the Tribunal remains obliged to examine all relevant
aspects of the claims relating to Claimants’ rights under the BIT as well as to
Respondent’s obligations thereunder subject to the Parties’ submissions. Thus, it is
the manner in which the Tribunal will conduct such examination which may

diverge from usual ICSID proceedings.

(iv) Admissibility of the Necessary Adaptations
Considering the above (§§ 529-533), the adaptations required to deal with the
collective aspect of the claims are issues which relate strictly to the manner of
conducting the present proceedings, and in particular, how to collect and weigh
evidence. In other words, the nature of these measures and their scope do not
exceed the powers of the Tribunal as deriving from Article 44 ICSID Convention

and Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

The Tribunal is entitled to proceed with such adaptations under the relevant
provisions of the ICSID framework. As mentioned above (see § 528), the Tribunal
is, however, of the opinion that it should not only examine whether it can do so but
also whether it should do so based on the aim and purpose of the ICSID Convention
and in particular, with regard to the equilibrium established by the Convention with

regard to the Parties’ respective rights.

For this purpose, the Tribunal will firstly examine the implications of the intended
adaptations. These implications are twofold: (i) It will not be possible to treat each
Claimant as if he/she was alone and certain issues, such as the existence of an

expropriation, will have to be examined collectively, i.e., as a group; and (ii) the

211

537.

538.

539.

540.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

implications will likely limit certain of Claimants’ and Argentina’s procedural
rights to the extent that Claimants have to waive individual interests in favor of
common interests of the entire group of Claimants, while Argentina will not be able
to bring arguments in full length and detail concerning the individual situation of

each of the Claimants.

The Tribunal finds it appropriate to compare the consequences of these implications
to the consequences of rejecting the claims for lack of admissibility and requesting
each Claimant to file an individual ICSID claim. In this regard, the Tribunal finds
that not only would it be cost prohibitive for many Claimants to file individual
claims but it would also be practically impossible for ICSID to deal separately with
60,000 individual arbitrations. Thus, the rejection of the admissibility of the present
claims may equal a denial of justice. This would be shocking given that the
investment at stake is protected under the BIT, which expressly provides for ICSID

jurisdiction and arbitration.

Thus, the question arises whether in the light of the present circumstances it would
be justified to set strict boundaries to certain of the Parties’ procedural rights, while
adapting a method of examination so as to give actual effective protection to the

investment. The challenge lies in finding the right balance.

In the search for the right balance, the Tribunal considers the following issues to be
relevant: (i) under what conditions is it acceptable to change the method of
examination from individual to group treatment; (ii) to what extent are Argentina’s
defense rights affected in comparison to 60,000 separate proceedings; and (iii) is it
admissible to deprive Claimants of certain procedural rights, such as provided for

under the TFA Mandate Package?

(i) Pre-conditions for group treatment: The Tribunal is of the opinion that group
examination of claims is acceptable where claims raised by a multitude of

claimants are to be considered identical or at least sufficiently homogeneous. The

212

S41.

542.

543.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

question is thus whether Claimants’ claims are to be considered identical or

sufficiently homogeneous.

In this respect, it is important to recall that the present proceedings concern only
potential treaty claims and do not deal with any contractual claims Claimants may
have against Argentina and/or the banks (see §§ 316-332 above). Thus, the identity
or homogeneity requirement applies to the investment and the rights and
obligations deriving therefrom based on the BIT and not to any potential
contractual claims. In other words, in the present case, it is irrelevant whether
Claimants have or do not have homogeneous contractual rights to repayment by
Argentina of the amount paid for the purchase of the security entitlements. The
only relevant question is whether Claimants have homogeneous rights of
compensation for a homogeneous damage caused to them by potential
homogeneous breaches by Argentina of homogeneous obligations provided for in

the BIT.

Therefore, the specific circumstances surrounding individual purchases by
Claimants of security entitlements are irrelevant. If Italian or other banks have
breached any obligations they had towards Claimants or Argentina, such a breach is
to be addressed in a recourse action against the relevant banks (see §§ 327-330
above) and is foreign and external to the present arbitration which concerns solely

Argentina’s behavior with regard to Claimants’ investment.

With regard to the nature of the claims deriving from the BIT, it appears to be

homogeneous:

- The rights deriving from Claimants’ investment and Argentina’s obligations
to protect these rights are the same with regard to all Claimants to the extent
that they derive from the same BIT and the same provisions. Indeed, first, the
provisions of the BIT invoked by Claimants are identical for all Claimants;

second, the rights allegedly affected all derive from Claimants’ purchase in

213

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Italy of security entitlements in Argentinean bonds; third, all these security

entitlements were subject to the Exchange Offer 2005 (see § 312 above);

The events leading to the alleged disregard of such rights and obligations, i.e.
to the breach by Argentina of the relevant provisions, are the same towards all
Claimants. They all relate to the acts of Argentina preceding and following its
public default in December 2001, and in particular the way it consulted with
its creditors, the way it reached a decision on how to deal with its foreign
debt, as well as the way it implemented such decision, namely through its
Exchange Offer 2005 and the legislation and regulations relating thereto. In
doing so Argentina treated all Claimants in the same manner and did not

differentiate between different kinds of Claimants (see § 313 above).

The legislation and regulations promulgated and implemented by Argengina,
together with the implementation of its Exchange Offer 2005, affected all
Claimants in the same way. Thus, the potential damage caused to Claimants
is, by nature the same for all Claimants although the scope of such damage

will of course depend on the scope of their individual investment.

544. Consequently, Claimants’ claims are to be considered sufficiently homogeneous to

545.

justify a simplification of the examination method and procedure.

Effects on Argentina’s defense rights: It appears that the effect of such

examination method and procedure on Argentina’s defense rights is limited and
relative. Whilst it is true that Argentina may not be able to enter into full length and
detail into the individual circumstances of each Claimant, it is not certain that such
approach is at all necessary to protect Argentina’s procedural rights in the light of
the homogeneity of Claimants’ claims. In addition, the only alternative would be to
conduct 60,000 separate proceedings. The measures that Argentina would need to

take to face 60,000 proceedings would be a much bigger challenge to Argentina’s

214

546.

547.

548.

549.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

effective defense rights than a mere limitation of its right to individual treatment of

homogeneous claims in the present proceedings.

(iii) Deprivation of Claimants’ procedural rights: It is undeniable that the TFA
Mandate Package has the effect to depriving Claimants of a substantial part of their
procedural rights, such as the decision on how to conduct the proceedings, the right
to instruct the lawyers, etc. However, as mentioned above (see §§ 457-465), the
setting of strict boundaries in relation to Claimants’ procedural rights has been
consciously accepted by Claimants in order to benefit from the collective treatment
of their claims before an ICSID tribunal. In addition, the Tribunal did not find that
such agreement was affected by any vice which would render it invalid.
Consequently, the Tribunal sees no reason to disregard — as a matter of principle —

Claimants’ conscious choice.

In conclusion, under the present circumstances, the procedure necessary to deal
with Claimants’ claims in a collective way is admissible and acceptable under
Article 44 ICSID Convention, Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules, as well as under

the more general spirit, object and aim of the ICSID Convention.

(v) Policy Considerations
To recall (see § 476 above), the Tribunal found that Respondent’s arguments
regarding the appropriateness of ICSID proceedings in the context of sovereign
debt restructuring are not an impediment to the Respondent’s consent to ICSID

arbitration.

Similarly, the Tribunal finds that those policy arguments are also not an
impediment to the admissibility of Claimants’ claims. In the Tribunal’s view, such
policy arguments are inapposite. As mentioned above (§ 478), the real question is
whether the investment at stake is protected under a BIT providing for ICSID
arbitration in case of breach of such protection. If this is the case, then ICSID has

jurisdiction, and it would be wrong to hinder the effective exercise of such

215

550.

551.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

jurisdiction through the rejection of the admissibility of the claims based merely on
policy considerations. This is all the more the case here as the present policy
considerations are controversial and based on Respondent’s assumption that the
biggest threat to the stability and fairness of sovereign debt restructuring are

holdout creditors.

Policy reasons are for States to take into account when negotiating BITs and
consenting to ICSID jurisdiction in general, not for the Tribunal to take into
account in order to repair an inappropriately negotiated or drafted BIT. The present
BIT is clear, it includes bonds and security entitlements (see §§ 352-361 above).
Whether or not ICSID is the best way to deal with a dispute relating to these bonds
and security entitlements in the context of foreign debt restructuring is irrelevant.
The Parties chose ICSID arbitration for this kind of dispute. They, as well as the
Tribunal, are bound by such choice and cannot evade it based on controversial

policy reasons.

(d) Conclusion

In conclusion and in (partial) response to Issue No. 1(b), the Tribunal holds that the
mass aspect of Claimants’ claims does not constitute an impediment to their

admissibility. In particular:

(i) _ The silence of the ICSID framework regarding collective proceedings is to be

interpreted as a “gap” and not as a “qualified silence;”

(ii) The Tribunal has, in principle, the power under Article 44 ICSID Convention
to fill this gap to the extent permitted under Article 44 ICSID Convention and
Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules;

(iii) The procedure necessary to deal with the collective aspect of the present
proceedings concern the method of the Tribunal’s examination, as well as the
manner of representation of Claimants. However, it does not affect the object

of such examination. Thus, the Tribunal remains obliged to examine all

216

552.

N

(iv)

(v)

@)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

relevant aspects of the claims relating to Claimants’ rights under the BIT as
well as to Respondent’s obligations thereunder subject to the Parties’

submissions;

Such procedure is admissible and acceptable under Article 44 ICSID
Convention, Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules, as well as under the more

general spirit, object and aim of the ICSID Convention;

Respondent’s policy arguments regarding the appropriateness of ICSID
proceedings in the context of sovereign debt restructuring are irrelevant for

the determination of the admissibility of the claims.

Consultation Requirement — Issue 4

(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provision

Article 8(1) BIT provides that the investor and the Host State shall in case of a

dispute try first to settle their dispute through the means of amicable consultation.

The Parties hold diverging views as to the nature of this consultation requirement

and the consequence of a non-compliance therewith on the admissibility of the

present claims.

553. Thus, the specific issues to be determined by the Tribunal here are the following:

Is the requirement of preliminary amicable consultation a mandatory
requirement, which constitute a hurdle to the admissibility of a claim
introduced without fulfilling such requirement? (connected with Issue 4 of the

List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008)

Tf so, can the consultation requirement be considered to have been met in the

present case?

If not, should Claimants be considered to have been released from such

consultation requirement based on the futility rule?

217

554.

555.

556.

557.

558.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The key legal provision concerning the above issues is Article 8(1) BIT, which in
its unofficial English version provides as follows (see § 267 et seq. above):

“1, Any dispute in relation to the investments between a Contracting Party

and an investor of the other Contracting Party in relation to the issues

governed by this Agreement shall be settled, if possible, by means of amicable
consultation between the parties to the dispute.”

(b) Parties’ Positions

In Respondent’s view, Article 8 BIT articulates a multi-layered, sequential dispute
resolution system setting forth mandatory requirements which Claimants have not

complied with and therefore, constitute a jurisdictional bar.

In particular, Respondent submits that Article 8 provides for a mandatory three-step
dispute resolution as further supported by the wording and spirit of Article 8(3) and
8(4) BiT.!*

With regard to the consultation requirement, Respondent contends that Claimants
have not complied therewith because (i) it is unclear how far TFA actually
represented Claimants at the time of the talks between TFA and Respondent, (ii)
TFA’s attitude was one of bad faith, and (iii) the talks with TFA concerned

Argentina’s default and not any alleged treaty violation.

In contrast, Claimants contend that Article 8 BIT may not constitute a bar to the

present arbitration based mainly on the following arguments: !*

(i) Based on the permissive language used, Article 8 BIT aims to provide the
parties with different options of dispute resolution and does not institute a

compulsory multi-layered, sequential dispute resolution system;

183 R-MJ §§ 382 et seq.; R-R-MJ §§ 652 et seq.; R-PHB §§ 267 et seq.

184

C-MJ §§ 544 et seq.; C-R-MJ §§ 543 et seq.; C-PHB §§ 323 et seq.

218

559.

560.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(ii) Even if the Tribunal considered that Article 8 instituted a mandatory multi-
layered sequential dispute resolution system, Claimants have complied with
the various requirements. With regard to the requirement of amicable
consultation, Claimants have complied with this requirement through TFA
and it is Argentina which refused to negotiate with TFA. In order to conduct
adequate consultation talks in the sense of Article 8(1) BIT it is not necessary
to identify the specific legal basis of the dispute during the consultations, but

it is sufficient that the talks relate to the facts at the basis of the dispute;

(iii) Any further attempt at consultation would have been futile in the light of the
Emergency Law, which prohibits the Argentinean Government from entering

into a settlement agreement.

(c) Tribunal’s Findings
(i) Existence of Consultations

According to the Parties, after the announcement of Argentina’s default, talks took
place between TFA and the Argentinean Government and continued until 2005.'*5
TFA conducted these talks in the name of Italian bondholders, who signed the TFA
Negotiating Mandate with the aim to “represent the interests of the subscribers of
Argentinean bonds in the frame of the restructuring of the debt, which will be
subject to the consultation with the Argentinean Authorities or with other

Argentinean issuers.” '*°

Thus, based on the wording of the TFA Negotiating Mandate, the object of the
consultations to be conducted by TFA were not limited to contractual claims and

encompassed all “interests” of the Italian bondholders in relation to the

185 See above § 84.

186 See above § 66.

219

S61.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

restructuring of Argentina’s debt. It further arises from the correspondence between
TFA and the Argentinean authorities that TFA’s complaints towards Argentina did
not only focus on the mere non-payment of its debt by Argentina but also on the
way Argentina was handling these issues through its restructuring plan and its
attitude towards creditors. As such, TFA’s talks with Argentina also encompassed
the main facts on which Claimants based their present claims. For consultation talks
to be conducted in accordance with Article 8(1) BIT, it is not necessary to identify
or name specific legal issues. Rather, it is sufficient that the context of the dispute
be the same as the context of the dispute brought forward under Article 8 BIT.
Consequently, the talks conducted by TFA with the Argentine authorities can be

considered talks aiming at a settlement of the present claims.

(ii) TFA’s Role in the Consultations

The remaining question is whether TFA can be considered to have been
representing Claimants during these talks. Indeed, it is not entirely clear how many
of the Italian bondholders who signed the TFA Negotiating Mandate are also
Claimants to the present arbitration. However, this question can remain open for the
following reason: Whilst Argentina contends that it is unclear how far TFA actually
represented Claimants at the time of the talks, Respondent did not contend having
otherwise tried to contact Claimants to conduct separate talks.'*” Thus, although it
may be unclear how many of the Claimants signed the TFA Negotiating Mandate,
it is undeniable that TFA did represent to a certain extent the interests of some of
the Italian bondholders and that Argentina could not have been unaware that a
considerable number of Italian bondholders had not accepted its Exchange Offer
and that a dispute had arisen in this respect. Thus, Argentina cannot allege that

Claimants failed to fulfil the consultation requirement of Article 8(1) based on the

187 Respondent actually contends that “Argentina has no way of even knowing who such owners

[of security entitlements] are,” see Annex A to RSP PHB § 6.

220

562.

563.

564.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

denial of TFA’s authorities without trying to engage in talks with such Italian
bondholders or at least setting up conditions under which Argentina would

recognize TFA’s authority.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal finds that Argentina is precluded from
invoking a failure on Claimants’ side to fulfil the consultation requirement under

Article 8(1) BIT.

(iii) Consultations Requirement as Expression of Good Will
In addition, even if it considered the present circumstances not sufficient to comply
with the consultation requirement of Article 8(1) BIT, this would still not constitute

a hurdle to the admissibility of Claimants’ claims for the following reason:

In the view of the Tribunal, the consultation requirement set forth in Article 8(1)
BIT is not to be considered of a mandatory nature but as the expression of the good

will of the Parties to try firstly to settle any dispute in an amicable way:

- This derives first from the wording of Article 8(1) BIT which provides that
consultations should be conducted “en la medida del possible” or “per
quanto possibile,” i.e., “to the extent possible.” Indeed, Article 8(1) BIT is
not drafted in any way as to impose the consultation requirements upon the
Parties under any circumstances. It is only refers to the possibility of such
amicable settlement talks, whereby such term is to be reasonably understood
as referring not only to the technical possibility of settlemen talks, but also to

the possibility, i.e. the likelyhood, of a positive result.

- It also derives from the general purpose and aim of such provision, which is
to allow amicable settlement where such settlement is wanted and supported
by both Parties. Where one or both Parties did not have the good will to resort
to consultation as an amicable means of settlement, it would be futile to force

the Parties to enter into a consultation exercise which is deemed to fail from

221

565.

566.

567.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

the outset. Willingness to settle is the sine qua non condition for the success

of any amicable settlement talk.

As such, the Tribunal considers that a potential non-compliance with the
consultation requirement set forth in Article 8(1) BIT would simply express that the
premises for an amicable settlement were not given because one or both of the
Parties were not willing to give the dispute an amicable end. As such, it could not
be considered to constitute per se a hurdle to the admissibility of the claim, thereby
preventing any other dispute resolution means provided in Article 8 BIT to come to

play.
(d) Conclusion

In conclusion and in (partial) response to Issue No. 4, the Tribunal holds that the
prior consultation requirement set forth in Article 8(1) BIT does not constitute an

impediment to the admissibility of Claimants’ claims. In particular:

(i) Consultations did take place between TFA, as representative of Italian

bondholders, and Argentina;

(ii) Argentina is precluded from invoking the non-fullfilment by Claimants of the

consultation requirement; and

(iii) Even if Claimants were considered not to have fulfilled this requirement, this
non-compliance would simply express that the premises for an amicable
settlement were not given and cannot be interpreted as constituting a hurdle to

the admissibility of Claimants’ claims.

(4) 18 Months Litigation Requirement — Issues 4 & 5
(a) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

To recall, Article 8(2) BIT provides for a requirement to resort to local courts for a

duration of 18 months in case the previously-conducted consultations have failed.

222

568.

569.

570.

S71.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The Parties hold diverging views as to the nature of this litigation requirement and
the consequence of a non-compliance therewith on the admissibility of the present

claims.

On the basis of the Parties’ submissions, the specific issues to be determined by the

Tribunal in this regard are the following:

- Is the 18 months litigation requirement a mandatory prior prerequisite for the
conduct of arbitration proceedings, the non-fulfillment of which constitutes a
hurdle to the admissibility of a claim? (see Issue 4 of the List of 11 Issues of

9 May 2008)

- If so, can Claimants be considered to have been released from the 18 months

litigation requirement, either
. based on the futility rule or

. based on the MEN clause of Article 3(1) BIT in connection with the
“more favorable” arbitration clause contained in the Argentina-Chile

BIT? (see Issues 4 and 5 of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008).

The key legal provisions and other documents in dealing with the above issues are

the following: Articles 3(1) and 8(2)-(4) BIT and Article 10 Argentina-Chile BIT.

The wording and content of Articles 3(1) and 8(1) to (4) BIT is reproduced above at
§§ 305 and §§ 267 et seq.

Article 10 Argentina-Chile BIT provides as follows in its Spanish authentic
version:
“(L) Toda controversia relativa a las inversiones en el sentido del presente
Tratado, entre una Parte Contratante y un nacional 0 sociedad de la otra Parte

Contratante sera, en la medida de lo posible, solucionada por consultas
amistosas entre las dos partes en la controversia.

223

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(2) Si la controversia no hubiera podido ser solucionada en el término de
seis meses a partir del momento en que hubiera sido planteada por una u otra
de las partes, sera sometida, a pedido del nacional o sociedad.

- o bien a jurisdicciones nacionales de la Parte Contratante implicada en
la controversia;

- o bien al arbitraje internacional en las condiciones descriptas en el
parrafo 3.

Una vez que un nacional o sociedad haya sometido la controversia a las
jurisdicciones de la Parte Contratante implicada o al arbitraje internacional, la
eleccién de uno u otro de esos procedimientos sera definitiva.

(3) En caso de recurso al arbitraje internacional la controversia podra ser
llevada ante uno de los é6rganos de arbitraje designados a continuacién a
eleccién del nacional 0 sociedad;

Al Centro Internacional de Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a inversiones
(CIADD), creado por el "Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a
las Inversiones sobre Estados y Nacionales de otros Estados", abierto a la
firma en Washington el 18 de marzo de 1965, cuando cada Estado parte en el
presente Convenio haya adherido a aquél. Mientras esta condiciédn no se
cumpla, cada Parte Contratante da su consentimiento para que la controversia
sea sometida al arbitraje conforme con el Reglamento del Mecanismo
Complementario del CIADI;

A un tribunal de arbitraje ad hoc establecido de acuerdo con las reglas de
arbitraje de la Comisién de las Naciones Unidas para el Derecho Mercantil
Internacional (CNUDMI).”

(b) Parties’ Positions

572. As mentioned above (see §§ 555 ef seq.), Respondent contends that Article 8 BIT
articulates a multi-layered, sequential dispute resolution system setting forth a
three-step mandatory process which Claimants have not complied with and
therefore, constitutes a jurisdictional bar. Accordingly to Respondent, this is in
particular true with regard to the 18 months litigation requirement, which Claimants

have not fulfilled.'**

188

R-R-MJ §§ 661 ef seq., 694 et seq.

224

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

573. Respondent further contends that the arguments invoked by Claimants in order to

574.

circumvent the 18 months litigation requirement are not convincing:

@)

(ii)

(iii)

189

The mere argument that resort to domestic courts would involve time or

money may not render such litigation “futile.”

The Emergency Law does not prevent Claimants from submitting a dispute

before the Argentinean courts under the BIT.

Claimants may not invoke the MFN clause to circumvent the mandatory
consultation requirement for the following reasons: (a) the MFN clause
applies only to investments, not to dispute resolution mechanisms; (b) the
MEN clause concerns only treatment “in the territory” of Argentina whereas
arbitration is to be conducted abroad; (c) it cannot be stated that the resort to
Argentinean courts is necessarily a “less favorable” treatment; and (d) even if
the MEN clause operates to incorporate the dispute resolution clause under
the Argentina-Chile BIT, Claimants have still failed to conduct adequate
consultations so that the necessary requirements for arbitration under the

Argentina-Chile BIT are not met either.

In contrast and as mentioned above (see § 558 above), Claimants contend that

Article 8 BIT aims to provide the Parties with different options of dispute

resolution and does not institute a compulsory multi-layered, sequential dispute

resolution system. In other words, the 18 months litigation requirement is not a

mandatory prior prerequisite for the initiation of arbitration proceedings and its

non-compliance is therefore irrelevant.

189

190

190

R-MJ §§ 387 et seq.; R-R-MJ §§ 661 et seq., 694 et seq.; R-PHB §§ 267 et seq.
C-MJ §§ 544 et seq.; C-R-MJ §§ 543 et seq.; C-PHB §§ 323 et seq.

225

575.

576.

577.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Even if considered a mandatory preliminary requirement, Claimants submit that
they should be relieved from having to comply with such requirement for the
following two main reasons: (i) because conducting litigation before the Argentine
courts would have been futile and would have defeated the very object and purpose
of the BIT, and (ii) even if not considered futile, Claimants would be exempted
from any potential obligation to go before local courts based on the broad wording
of the MEN clause of Article 3(1) BIT, which entitles Claimants to invoke the more
favorable dispute resolution clause contained in the Argentina-Chile BIT and which

does not require prior court litigation.'"!

(c) Tribunal’s Findings
It is undisputed that Claimants did not submit their dispute to the Argentine courts

before initiating the present arbitration. Thus, the first question is whether

Claimants should have done so.

(i) |The System Put in Place by Article 8 BIT
Article 8 BIT provides for three different types of dispute resolution means:
amicable consultations (Article 8(1)), proceedings before the ordinary or
administrative courts of the concerned State (Article 8(2)), and international
arbitration (Article 8(3)). As to the relationship between these three mechanisms,
the Tribunal finds that both the structure of Article 8 BIT as well as its wording

indicate a certain order among these three means:

- Article 8(1) establishes the core principle of amicable consultations as the

first and foremost means of dispute settlement;

191 CMJ §§ 557 et seq., §§ 594 et seq.; C-R-MJ §§ 556 et seq., §§ 643 et seq.; C-PHB §§ 330 et
seq., §§ 347 et seq.

226

578.

579.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- Article 8(2) then introduces the second means, i.e., the submission of the
dispute to the ordinary or administrative courts, applicable under the
following circumstance: “if the dispute has not been settled in such
consultations.” Thereby, the recourse to courts is linked to some extent to the

absence or failure of amicable consultations;

- Article 8(3) then introduces the method of international arbitration whereby it
is introduced within a specific context: “[i]f, after 18 months from the
notification of commencement of an action before the national courts
indicated above in paragraph 2, the dispute between the Contracting Party and

the investors still continues to exist [...]”;

- Article 8(4) then provides that in case of commencement of arbitration
proceedings, each disputing party shall take any appropriate measures to

desist from the judicial action in course.

Thus, the order, structure and wording of Article 8 clearly indicate that these three
dispute resolution means were, to some extent, interconnected, with the underlying
idea that it is the failure of one of them that would trigger the next one. In other
words, Article 8 did not provide for a mere “pick and choose” solution, leaving the
disputing parties free to pick any of the means at any time. Article 8 provided for an
integrated system, built upon a certain hierarchy or order of the three

interconnected means of dispute resolution.

(ii) General Consequences of a Disregard of the System
At the same time, the wording of Article 8 BIT itself does not suffice to draw
specific conclusions with regard to the consequence of non-compliance with the
order established by Article 8. In this respect, regard should be given to the context,
as well as to the purpose and aim of Article 8. The system put in place by Article 8
is a system aimed at providing the disputing parties with a fair and efficient dispute

settlement mechanism. As such, the idea of fairness and efficiency must be taken

227

580.

581.

582.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

into account when interpreting and determining how the system is supposed to
work and what happens if one part of the system fails or is otherwise disregarded

by one party.

Thus, the Tribunal is of the opinion that Claimants’ disregard of the 18 months
litigation requirement is in itself not yet sufficient to preclude Claimants from
resorting to arbitration. The real question is whether this disregard, based on its
circumstances, can be considered compatible with the object and purpose of the

system put in place by Article 8, or whether it goes against it.

Answering this question requires to examine more in detail the object and purpose
as well as the meaning of the 18 months litigation requirement and the interests at
stake. According to Respondent, the 18 months litigation requirement was put in
place to give the Host State the opportunity to address the allegedly wrongful act
within the framework of its own domestic legal system and to provide a chance to
resolve the dispute in a potentially shorter period than international arbitration.'”? In
this respect, it would be irrelevant whether the 18 months time frame is a realistic
time frame for the reaching of a final decision, the purpose of this paragraph being
merely to provide the Host State with an opportunity to address the issue before
resorting to international arbitration. Thus, the relevant question is not “could the
dispute have been efficiently settled before the Argentine courts?”, but “was
Argentina deprived of a fair opportunity to address the dispute within the
framework of its own domestic legal system because of Claimants’ disregard of the

18 months litigation requirement?”

This question in turn requires a weighting of the interests of the Parties, i.e., of

Argentina in being given the opportunity to address the dispute through the

192

R-PHB § 290.

228

583.

584.

585.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

framework of its domestic legal system, and of Claimants in being provided with an
efficient dispute resolution mechanism. Thus, the Tribunal is of the view that the
disregard of the 18 months litigation requirement can only be considered
incompatible with the system of Article 8 where it unduly deprived the Host State
of a fair opportunity to address the issue through its domestic legal system. In this
respect, the Tribunal considers that this opportunity must not only be a theoretical
opportunity, but there must be a real chance in practice that the Host State, through
its courts, would address the issue in a way that could lead to an effective resolution

of the dispute.

Where, based on the overall circumstances of the case, it appears that such
opportunity was only theoretical and/or could not have led to an effective resolution
of the dispute within the 18 months time frame, it would be unfair to deprive the
investor of its right to resort to arbitration based on the mere disregard of the 18
months litigation requirement. The reason is that such disregard would not have
caused any real harm to the Host State, whilst in contrast, the deprivation of the
investor’s right to resort to arbitration would, in effect, deprive him of an important

and efficient dispute settlement mean.

This conclusion derives more from a weighting of the specific interests at stake
rather than from the application of the general principle of futility: It is not about
whether the 18 months litigation requirement may be considered futile; it is about
determining whether Argentina’s interest in being able to address the specific
claims through its domestic legal system would justify depriving Claimants of their

interests of being able to submit it to arbitration.
(iii) Consequences of Claimants’ Disregard of the 18 Months
Litigation Requirement

By not resorting to the Argentine courts, Claimants disregarded the 18 months
litigation requirement. It is further established that Claimants had the possibility to

bring claims before the Argentine courts. However, looking at the nature of the

229

586.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

claims that were available to Claimants, the Tribunal finds that none of them would
have been suited to address the present claims in such a way as to effectively

resolve the dispute:

- Claims for compensation: Claims for compensation for the damage caused to
Claimants by Argentina’s actions surrounding its default were deemed to fail
in view of the Emergency Law and other relating decrees and budget laws,'"?
which prohibited the Argentine government from entering into any juridical,
extra-juridical or private transaction. Thus, even in the case that Claimants
would have won the case before the courts, the government would still have

been under the impossibility to pay out the compensation.'**

- Claims for unconstitutionality of the Emergency Law: Claimants could have
initiated proceedings aiming at declaring the Emergency Law
unconstitutional for breach of the BIT. However, claims for compensation
could only be filed once the Emergency Law would have been considered
unconstitutional, which is highly unlikely to have been possible within the 18

months time frame.

In addition, the Tribunal finds that in the light of the uproar created by Argentina’s
Emergency Law, the Argentinean Government could have arranged for an
examination of the constitutionality of the Emergency Law. Such examination
could have brought clarity on the effectiveness of claims before the Argentinean
courts against the Argentinean Government. However, Argentina did apparently not

see the need to proceed with such examination.

193 See also Law 25,561 of January 2002 and Resolution 73/2002, by which Argentina deferred
the repayment of its sovereign debt, and the subsequent decrees and budget laws maintaining such
deferral, see BIANCHI I, § 42 and BIANCHI II, §§ 59 er seq.

14 See BIANCHI I, §§ 42 et seg. and BIANCHI II, $§ 59 ef seq.

230

587.

588.

589.

590.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In addition, it should be noted that Argentina’s legal system does generally not
provide for mass claims mechanisms, !”° and that Claimants would therefore have
needed to initiate separate claims. '°6 This would have been incredibly burdensome
for them and for the courts, and would very likely have caused substantial delay in

the handling of the cases by the courts.

In the light of the Emergency Law and other relevant laws and decrees, which
prohibited any kind of payment of compensation to Claimants, the Tribunal finds
that Argentina was not in a position to adequately address the present dispute
within the framework of its domestic legal system. As such, Argentina’s interest in
pursuing this local remedy does not justify depriving Claimants of their right to
resort to arbitration for the sole reason that they decided not to previously submit

their dispute to the Argentinean courts.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that it is not necessary anymore
to examine Issue No. 5, i.e., whether the MEN clause contained in Article 3(1) BIT
may have entitled Claimants to rely on the allegedly more favorable dispute

resolution clause contained in Article 10(1) Argentina-Chile BIT.

(d) Conclusion

In conclusion and in (partial) response to Issues Nos. 4 and 5, the Tribunal holds
that the disregard by Claimants of the 18 months litigation requirement does not
preclude them from resorting to ICSID arbitration. In particular, the Tribunal finds

that:

(i) Article 8 provides for an integrated dispute resolution mechanism built upon

a certain hierarchy or order of three interconnected means whereby the

195 See NAGAREDA, §§ 8, 15-16; MATA, §§ 52 et seq., R-R-MJ § 152.

196 See MATA, §§ 35 et seq., 49 et seq.

231

591.

592.

(ii)

(iii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

wording of Article 8 itself does not suffice to draw specific conclusions with
regard to the consequences of non-compliance with the order established by

Article 8.

The question whether Claimants’ disregard of the 18 months litigation
requirement justifies precluding them from resorting to arbitration requires a
weighting of interests between Argentina’s interest to be given the
opportunity to address the dispute through the framework of its domestic
legal system and Claimants’ interest in being provided with an efficient

dispute resolution means.

Based on the circumstances of the present case and in particular the
Emergency Law and other relevant laws and decrees, Argentina’s interest in
pursuing the 18 months litigation requirement does not justify depriving
Claimants of their right to resort to arbitration for the sole reason that they

decided not to previously submit their dispute to the Argentinean courts.

In view of the above conclusions, the question whether Claimants could have relied

on the MFN clause of Article 3(1) BIT in connection to Article 10(1) Argentina-

Chile BIT in order to evade the 18 months litigation requirement (Issue No. 5 of the

List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008) is moot.

6)

Withdrawal and Addition of Claimants - Issues 3(a) and 3(b)

(a) Relevant Facts

The following facts may be recalled in connection with the issues relating to the

withdrawal and addition of Claimants:

Claimants, as presented by Claimants, are those described in the Annexes A,

B and C to the Request for Arbitration, the total number of whom at the time

232

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

of initiation of the arbitration exceeded 180,000.!°7 Annexes A and B to the
Request for Arbitration contain a list of natural persons; Annex C to the

198

Request for Arbitration contains a list of juridical entities." (see § 1 above)

- On 19 and 22 December 2006, Claimants submitted supplemental Annexes in
relation to information contained in Annexes A through E, and submitted
Annexes K and L. The substitute annexes reflect: (i) an addition of certain
Claimants (separately listed in Annex K), (ii) the withdrawal of certain
Claimants (separately listed in Annex L), (iii) limited corrections and
substitutions to the information on Claimants (Annexes A-E), (iv) the
revision of the aggregate amounts (Annex I), and (v) the addition of one new

bond series (Annex J). (see § 103 above)

- On 5 February 2007, Claimants submitted “substituted versions” of Annexes
A through E, K, L, I and J. The substitute annexes reflect: (i) the withdrawal
of certain Claimants (listed separately in Annex L), (ii) certain corrections
and substitutions to the documentation for other Claimants, and (iii) the
revision of certain aggregate amounts based on the foregoing adjustments

(Annexes I and J). (see § 107 above)

- On 7 February 2007, the Secretary-General of the ICSID registered
Claimants’ Request for Arbitration with accompanying Annexes A through L,

and issued the Notice of Registration. (see § 108 above)

7 See C-MJ § 164, stating that the total number of Claimants at the time of filing the C-MJ is

180,285. See also Navigant I § 27 and Cremieux § 22.

18 Annex D to the Request for Arbitration contains a power of attorney and delegation of

authority for each Claimant being a natural person to White & Case LLP (see page | above). Annex
E to the Request for Arbitration contains a power of attorney and delegation of authority for each
Claimant being a juridical person to White & Case LLP.

233

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

On 7 November 2008, Claimants filed their Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction, accompanied by substitute versions of Annexes A through E, K

and L. (see § 135 above)

On 5 October 2010, Claimants filed a letter submitting that certain Claimants,
who tendered into the Exchange Offer 2010, would no longer participate in
the present arbitration, thereby reducing the number of remaining Claimants
to approximately 60,000. Claimants attached to their letter updated versions
of Annexes A, B, C and L to the Request for Arbitration, the latter containing
a list of all Claimants who have withdrawn from the arbitration since 14

September 2006. (see § 216 above)

On 26 November 2010, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 9 in
which it rejected Respondent’s request for further specific information on the
identity of the Claimants having tendered into the Exchange Offer 2010 and
announced that the question of the allocation of the arbitration costs
concerning the Claimants who withdrew would be dealt with in the
Tribunal’s upcoming determination on jurisdiction together with the question

of the withdrawal of a number of Claimants. (see § 220 above)

(b) Issues and Relevant Legal Provisions

593. As summarized in the preceding section, between the filing of the Request for

594.

Arbitration and its registration, as well as thereafter, the number of Claimants has
changed and, from time to time, Claimants have submitted substitute annexes with
updated information on the number and identity of Claimants. It is disputed
between the Parties whether it is admissible to change the number of Claimants
once the Request for Arbitration has been filed, and what the consequences of such

changes are.

Thus, the specific issues to be determined by the Tribunal in this regard are the

following:

234

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(i) To what extent is it admissible to add new Claimants to the present arbitration
proceedings? And if so, what are the consequences of such addition? (see

Issue No. 3(b) of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008);

(ii) To what extent is it admissible to withdraw existing Claimants? And, to the
extent possible, what are the conditions for withdrawing existing Claimants?

In addition, what are the consequences of a withdrawal of a Claimant?

595. The key legal provisions and other documents in dealing with the above issues are
the following: Articles 36, 44 and 45 ICSID Convention; Rules 24, 25 and 44
ICSID Arbitration Rules; and Rules 1 et seg. ICSID Institution Rules.

596. Article 36 ICSID Convention provides as follows:

“(L) Any Contracting State or any national of a Contracting State wishing to
institute arbitration proceedings shall address a request to that effect in writing
to the Secretary-General who shall send a copy of the request to the other
party.

(2) The request shall contain information concerning the issues in dispute,
the identity of the parties and their consent to arbitration in accordance with
the rules of procedure for the institution of conciliation and arbitration
proceedings.

(3) | The Secretary-General shall register the request unless he finds, on the
basis of the information contained in the request, that the dis- pute is
manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre. He shall forthwith notify the
parties of registration or refusal to register.”

597. To recall, Article 44 ICSID Convention provides as follows:

“Any arbitration proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this Section and, except as the parties otherwise agree, in
accordance with the Arbitration Rules in effect on the date on which the
parties consented to arbitration. If any question of procedure arises which is
not covered by this Section or the Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by the
parties, the Tribunal shall decide the question.”

598. Article 45 ICSID Convention provides as follows:

235

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

“(L) Failure of a party to appear or to present his case shall not be deemed an
admission of the other party’s assertions.

(2) If a party fails to appear or to present his case at any stage of the
proceedings the other party may request the Tribunal to deal with the
questions submitted to it and to render an award. Before rendering an award,
the Tribunal shall notify, and grant a period of grace to, the party failing to
appear or to present its case, unless it is satisfied that that party does not intend
to do so.”

599. Rules 24 and 25 ICSID Arbitration Rules provide as follows:

“Rule 24
Supporting Documentation

Supporting documentation shall ordinarily be filed together with the
instrument to which it relates, and in any case within the time limit fixed for
the filing of such instrument.

Rule 25
Correction of Errors

An accidental error in any instrument or supporting document may, with the
consent of the other party or by leave of the Tribunal, be corrected at any time
before the award is rendered.”

600. Rule 44 ICSID Arbitration Rules provide as follows:

“Discontinuance at Request of a Party

If a party requests the discontinuance of the proceeding, the Tri- bunal, or the
Secretary-General if the Tribunal has not yet been consti- tuted, shall in an
order fix a time limit within which the other party may state whether it
opposes the discontinuance. If no objection is made in writing within the time
limit, the other party shall be deemed to have acquiesced in the discontinuance
and the Tribunal, or if appropriate the Secretary-General, shall in an order take
note of the discontinuance of the proceeding. If objection is made, the
proceeding shall continue.”

601. Articles 1 and 2 ICSID Institution Rules provide as follows:

“Rule |
The Request

236

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(1) Any Contracting State or any national of a Contracting State wishing to
institute conciliation or arbitration proceedings under the Convention shall
address a request to that effect in writing to the Sec- retary-General at the seat
of the Centre. The request shall indicate whether it relates to a conciliation or
an arbitration proceeding. It shall be drawn up in an official language of the
Centre, shall be dated, and shall be signed by the requesting party or its duly
authorized represen- tative.

(2) The request may be made jointly by the parties to the dispute.

Rule 2
Contents of the Request

(1) The request shall:

(a) designate precisely each party to the dispute and state the address of
each;

(b) _ state, if one of the parties is a constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State, that it has been designated to the Centre by that State
pursuant to Article 25(1) of the Convention;

(c) _ indicate the date of consent and the instruments in which it is recorded,
including, if one party is a constituent subdi- vision or agency of a
Contracting State, similar data on the approval of such consent by that
State unless it had notified the Centre that no such approval is required;

(d) indicate with respect to the party that is a national of a Contracting
State:
(i) its nationality on the date of consent; and
(ii) if the party is a natural person:
(A) _ his nationality on the date of the request; and
(B) that he did not have the nationality of the Contracting

State party to the dispute either on the date of consent or on the
date of the request; or

(iii) if the party is a juridical person which on the date of consent had
the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute, the
agreement of the parties that it should be treated as a national of another
Contract- ing State for the purposes of the Convention;

(e) contain information concerning the issues in dispute indi- cating that
there is, between the parties, a legal dispute aris- ing directly out of an
investment; and

(f) state, if the requesting party is a juridical person, that it has taken all
necessary internal actions to authorize the request.

(2) The information required by subparagraphs (1)(c), (1)(d)(iii) and (1)(f)
shall be supported by documentation.

237

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(3) “Date of consent” means the date on which the parties to the dispute
consented in writing to submit it to the Centre; if both parties did not act on
the same day, it means the date on which the second party acted.”

(c) Parties’ Positions

602. Respondent contends that Claimants’ repeated use of substitute annexes to

unilaterally change the identity of Claimants is incompatible with the ICSID

Convention and Rules. In particular:

@)

(ii)

200

The addition of new Claimants after the filing of the Arbitration Request is
not permissible without Argentina’s consent. It is in breach of Article 36
ICSID Convention and may not be justified by Rule 25 ICSID Arbitration
Rules, which does not apply to corrections concerning the number and

identity of the parties themselves.”

The withdrawal of Claimants is not admissible without the consent of
Argentina or the permission by the Secretary-General according to Rule 44
ICSID Arbitration Rules. This derives from the irrevocable nature of a State
and/or investor’s consent to ICSID arbitration. Claimants cannot rely on
Article 44 ICSID Convention to override the irrevocable nature of the parties’
consent, which constitutes a prerequisite for ICSID’s jurisdiction.
Consequently, the Claimants listed in Annex L remain parties to the present
arbitration without however being represented by White & Case and are thus,

without adequate representation. 20 In

their latest correspondence,
Respondent has stated that it does not oppose the discontinuance of the
proceedings in respect of those Claimants who, among those listed in

Claimants’ Annex L, have entered into the Exchange Offer 2010, and that it

See R-PHB §§ 240 et seq.
See R-PHB §§ 258 et seq.

238

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

would agree to the discontinuance as to Claimants having withdrawn for
other reasons, provided they agree to discontinuance on the same terms as
those applicable to those who have tendered into the Exchange Offer

2010.2"!

603. Claimants contend that the addition and withdrawal of Claimants through the

submission of substitute annexes is fully consistent with the ICSID framework and

that the Tribunal has full authority to accept these annexes under Article 44 ICSID

Convention. Claimants support their position with the following main arguments:"

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

201

202

Before the Registration: Claimants contend that the admissibility of annexes
submitted before the registration is part of the Request for Arbitration
accepted by ICSID Secretary-General and is thus not reviewable by the

Tribunal. It has already been admitted.

After the Registration: The submission of substitute annexes is fully
consistent with ICSID framework and their amendment is further authorized

by Rule 25 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

No prejudice to Respondent: In addition, Claimants contend that the changes
to the annexes do not prejudice Respondent because most of them were
submitted before the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal so that none of
Respondent’s defense rights were affected. While Claimants assert that no
new Claimants were added after the registration of the Request for
Arbitration, they contend that the withdrawal of certain Claimants after the
registration actually benefit Respondent so that it cannot claim any prejudice

in this respect.

See letter from Respondent of 22 October 2010 (see above §217)
See C-MJ §§ 503 et seq., C-R-MJ §§ 507 et seq.,C-PHB §§ 309 et seq.

239

604.

605.

606.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(d)  Tribunal’s Findings

The question of the addition and withdrawal of Claimants was addressed by the
Parties together with the issue of the admissibility of substituted annexes to the
Request for Arbitration. The Tribunal considers that, whilst the addition and
withdrawal of Claimants has been effected through the submission of specific
substitute annexes, questions regarding the additions and withdrawal of Claimants
are to be distinguished from questions regarding the admissibility of modifications
to instruments or supporting documents filed in the form of the substitute annexes.
Indeed, the question of being a claimant is one of the cornerstones of ICSID’s
jurisdiction and not just part of any instrument or supporting document in the sense
of Rule 25 ICSID Arbitration Rules submitted in support of allegations made in the
Request for Arbitration or other written submissions. The question concerning the
admissibility of the substitute annexes as “any instrument or supporting document”

will therefore be addressed separately (see §§ 672 et seg. below).

(i) Addition of Claimants

It appears that all additions of Claimants have been made by means of Annex K, as
substituted, before the Notice of Registration of the Request for Arbitration of 7
February 2007. Claimants therefore contend that the admissibility of such
additions, as contemplated in the submission of substitute Annex K, has already
been accepted by the ICSID Secretary-General when registering the Request for

Arbitration.

It is true that the ICSID Secretary-General reviews the request for arbitration and
takes the decision whether to accept or refuse to register it. However, this
examination is limited to making sure that the request for arbitration in question
contains all information requested in Article 36 ICSID Convention in connection
with Rules 1 ef seg. ICSID Institution Rules, including information on the identity
of the parties, and that the request for arbitration is not “manifestly outside the

jurisdiction of the Centre.” Where certain documents or information are missing,

240

607.

608.

609.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

the ICSID Secretary-General will prompt the parties to submit the additional
information or documents before accepting the request. Only where the ICSID
Secretary-General considers that a request for arbitration is manifestly outside
ICSID’s jurisdiction he or she will refuse to register a request. Thus, the scope of
examination of the ICSID Secretary-General is limited and cannot be considered to
cover all aspects relevant to ICSID’s jurisdiction and/or to the admissibility of the

case as such.

As mentioned above, the addition of Claimants is to be distinguished from other
corrections or additions to supporting information or documents. The identity of
Claimants is a core element of ICSID’s jurisdiction. Consequently, the question of
who are the actual Claimants to the present arbitration cannot be considered to have
been definitely dealt with by the ICSID Secretary-General and is subject to the
examination of the Tribunal. This question includes the question of who duly

initiated the arbitration.

Article 36 ICSID Convention requires as a matter of principle that relevant
information on the parties’ identity be submitted with the request for arbitration. In

this regard, two issues arise in connection with the present arbitration:

- Firstly, the timing of the information relating to Claimants: The identity of
Claimants was changed, in the sense that Claimants were added, after the

filing of the Request for Arbitration;

- Secondly, the form in which information on Claimants’ identity was
submitted: Instead of inserting relevant information in the Request for
Arbitration, Claimants submitted information on their identity in the form of

annexes to such Request.

With regard to the timing of the submission of the annexes, the Tribunal does not
consider it problematic for the following two main reasons: (i) Article 36 ICSID

Convention does not prohibit that the lack of relevant information in the request for

241

610.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

arbitration may be cured before its registration; it actually conforms to ICSID’s
practice and the powers of the Secretary-General to give parties the opportunity to
complement their request for arbitration before its registration if any core
information is missing; and (ii) since the question of the identity of the Claimants is
subject to the Tribunal’s competence, it can only be finally examined once the
Tribunal is constituted. When the Tribunal took over the case and started with the
examination, all new Claimants had already been added, and the examination of
“old” and “new” Claimants jointly did not cause any particular prejudice to

Respondent.

One further point is Respondent’s argument that the subsequent addition of
Claimants in fact constituted the filing of new requests for arbitration, which should
have been the object of separate proceedings. However, the Tribunal finds that this
does not lead to the inadmissibility of the addition of Claimants for two main

reasons:

- First, it is possible to unilaterally withdraw a request for arbitration before its
registration and one could easily consider the withdrawal of one among
several Claimants through the withdrawal of its request for arbitration. This
would not lead to any particular problem and would just reduce the number of
Claimants. Conversely, under the circumstances of the present case, it is also
possible to add claimants prior to the registration of the request for

arbitration.

- Second, the question of addition of Claimants to a claim is closely related to
the question of whether “mass proceedings” are admissible under the ICSID
framework. The Tribunal considers that such proceedings were admissible
(see §§ 515-551 above), and the nature of such mass proceedings may require

making certain adjustments to the number and identity of Claimants.

242

6ll.

612.

613.

614.

615.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In conclusion, the Tribunal considers that the addition of Claimants after the filing
of the Request for Arbitration and before its registration through the submission of
Annex K, as substituted, is admissible and does not contravene any of the

provisions of the ICSID Convention and Rules.

Consequently, the Tribunal rules that the present arbitration proceedings were
validly initiated by all the Claimants mentioned in Annex K as being in the record
before the date of the Notice of Registration of the Request for Arbitration, i.e., 7

February 2007.

(ii) Withdrawal of Claimants

Since the filing of the Request for Arbitration on 14 September 2006, Counsel for
Claimants informed ICSID, the Tribunal and Respondent on various occasions of
the “withdrawal” of several thousands of Claimants from the proceedings. This
“withdrawal” happened in several stages, namely, on 19/22 December 2006, 5
February 2007, 7 November 2008, and 5 October 2010 (see §§ 103, 107, 135 and
216 above, as summarized in § 592 above) and was effected through the
submission of substitute versions of Annex L, listing each time the Claimants who
were withdrawing. All in all, it is common ground between the Parties that out of

approximately 180,000 Claimants about 120,000 have purportedly withdrawn.

(a) Withdrawal, Discontinuance and Default

With regard to “withdrawals” announced before the Notice of Registration of the
Request for Arbitration on 7 February 2007, they are unproblematic since it is
admitted under Rule 8 ICSID Institution Rules that a claimant may unilaterally
withdraw its request for arbitration before its registration. As such, Claimants listed
in Annex L of 19 and 22 December 2006 and the substitute Annex L of 5 February

2007 are deemed to have validly withdrawn their Request for Arbitration.

With regard to “withdrawals” announced after the date of the Notice of

Registration, the situation is different. After the registration of a request for

243

616.

617.

618.

619.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

arbitration, a claimant may not unilaterally withdraw its request for arbitration
without the consent of the other party. In other words, once a request for arbitration
is registered, a unilateral withdrawal by a party is no longer possible and a party
may only be excluded from the proceedings through the mechanism of

discontinuance under Rules 43 and 44 ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Thus, the notices by which Counsel for Claimants informed the Tribunal and
Respondent of the withdrawal of further Claimants on 7 November 2008 and 5
October 2010 in the form of substitute versions of Annex L cannot, by themselves,

effect the withdrawal of the concerned Claimants from the proceedings.

However, as an expression of the desire of these Claimants not to participate
anymore in the proceedings, these notices may be interpreted in a twofold manner:
(i) as requests for discontinuance of the proceedings pursuant to Rule 44 ICSID
Arbitration Rules and/or (ii) as announcement of default by the concerned Claimant

in the sense of Article 45 ICSID Convention.

In order to determine whether the concerned Claimants’ “withdrawal” is to be
considered a request for discontinuance or a default, the Tribunal has to consider
the following: Did the concerned Claimants wish to withdraw from the ICSID
proceedings, i.e., not participate anymore, or did they merely wish to revoke the
TFA Mandate Package and continue to be part of the proceedings but without being

represented by TFA and White & Case.

Based on Claimants’ submissions, it appears that the intention of the concerned
Claimants was to withdraw from the proceedings in the sense of not being anymore
part thereof, contrary to the wish to continue the proceedings in a different setting
of representation. The latter would anyway not be possible under the terms of the
TFA Mandate Package, which interlinks the withdrawal from the ICSID arbitration

and the revocation of the TFA Mandate Package (see §§ 86 ef seq.).

244

620.

621.

622.

623.

624.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Consequently, the Tribunal holds that the concerned Claimants’ “withdrawal” is to
be considered a request for discontinuance pursuant to Rule 44 ICSID Arbitration

Rules, thereby subject to the conditions and modalities set forth in Rule 44.

(b) Conditions for Discontinuance

According to Rule 44 ICSID Arbitration Rules (quoted at § 600 above), the
Tribunal may only issue an order for discontinuance where the other party has not
objected thereto. In case of objection, Rule 44 provides that “the proceedings shall
continue,” meaning that the Tribunal shall issue an award on the dispute as initially

commenced.

Respondent’s position regarding the concerned Claimants’ withdrawal is the
following: Initially, Respondent objected to the withdrawal of Claimants and
insisted that these Claimants be considered in default, that the proceedings be

continued and that any award be considered binding on these Claimants.?°3

In its communication of 22 October 2010 (see § 217 above), Respondent changed
its position stating as follows:
“[...] the Argentine Republic does not oppose discontinuance of the

proceedings in respect of those Claimants who, among those listed in
Claimants’ Annex L, have entered into the 2010 Exchange Offer.

LJ

In any event, the Argentine Republic would consider agreeing to
discontinuance as to Claimants wishing to withdraw for other reasons,
provided they agree to discontinuance on the same terms as those applicable to
those who tendered into the 2010 Exchange Offer.”

With regard to the terms of discontinuance “applicable to [the Claimants] who

tendered into the 2010 Exchange Offer,” Respondent refers to the acceptance by

203 RMI § 372, R-R-MIJ § 638.

245

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

such Claimants “to abandon, dismiss, withdraw and discontinue such proceedings
(with each party to bear its own attorney fees and costs, except that Argentina shall
not bear any court fees). The full paragraph of the relevant part of the Exchange

Offer 2010 prospectus provides as follows:

“[...] your tendered Eligible Securities are not the subject of any
administrative, litigation, arbitral, or other legal proceedings against Argentina
or the trustee or fiscal agent of such Eligible Securities (including claims for
payment of past due interest, principal or any other amount sought in
connection with your tendered Eligible Securities or for compensation of
lawyers’ costs and court fees), except that, to the extent that your tendered
Eligible Securities are the subject of such proceedings, (a) you agree to
abandon, dismiss, withdraw and discontinue such proceedings (with each
party to bear its own attorney fees and costs, except that Argentina shall
not bear any court fees) in full and final settlement thereof if and to the
extent that cancellation of the tendered Eligible Securities and settlement
(including delivery of your New Securities and payment of cash, if applicable)
occur pursuant to the terms of the Invitation, and you agree to promptly take
any necessary or appropriate steps to implement such withdrawal and
dismissal, including, without limitation, the termination of any power of
attorney or agency agreement, (b) you hereby authorize Argentina (or its legal
counsel) to file any document with any administrative body, court, tribunal or
other body before which any such proceedings are pending or that has issued
or recognized any payment order, judgment, arbitral award or other such order
in order to have the proceedings withdrawn, dismissed and discontinued with
prejudice and (c) you agree to deliver and hereby authorize your legal counsel
to deliver to your custodian, the information agent and Argentina (or its legal
counsel) without undue delay following the Early Settlement Date or the Final
Settlement Date, as applicable, all additional documents, court filings or
further authorizations as requested by Argentina to withdraw, dismiss and
discontinue with prejudice any pending administrative, litigation, arbitral or
other legal proceeding against Argentina in full and final settlement thereof.”
(Emphasis added)

625. In its letter of 22 October 2010, Respondent simplifies the above cost requirements

as follows:

204 See Respondent's letters of 2 November 2010 and C-999B, p. 88 § 20.

246

626.

627.

628.

629.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

“In addition, we note that the terms of the 2010 Exchange Offer provide that
the Argentine Republic would not be responsible for any costs in connection
with any proceeding dismissed pursuant to acceptance of the 2010 Exchange
Offer. Accordingly, the Argentine Republic respectfully requests the Tribunal
to order that the Argentine Republic and those Claimants with respect to
which proceedings will be discontinued under the terms of this letter,
equally bear the arbitration costs, and each of them bear their own costs.”

(Emphasis added)

 

As mentioned above (§623), Respondent also extends those conditions to Claimants

who have purportedly withdrawn for other reasons.

In summary, the terms of the discontinuance under the Exchange Offer 2010 as

simplified in Respondent’s letter of 22 October 2010 are two-fold:

- They imply the acceptance of a specific allocation of costs relating to present

arbitral proceedings, and

- They imply the “full and final” character of the discontinuance, i.e., with

prejudice to reinstatement.

(c) Terms of Discontinuance

The Tribunal can only order discontinuance to the extent it is accepted by
Respondent, i.e., to the extent that such discontinuance would be “full and final”

and that costs be allocated as requested by Respondent.

The Tribunal finds Respondent’s conditions acceptable. It considers that in the
present case a discontinuance under Article 44 ICSID Arbitration Rules is of a “full

and final” character:

- It is “final” in the sense that the discontinuance bears prejudice to
reinstatement and that the Claimants affected by the discontinuance may
neither “resume” the present proceedings nor institute new proceedings based
on the same claim. Based on the circumstances of the present case, in

particular the fact that it is Claimants who decided to withdraw — after several

247

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

years and without specifying any particular reason - from proceedings which
they themselves initiated and which required substantial defense work and
efforts from Argentina, it would not be fair to allow them to withdraw now

and to re-file the same claim later.

- Further, it is “full” in the sense that it applies to the entirety of the claims of
the concerned Claimants and not only to some of them or to some aspects

thereof.

630. With regard to the allocation of costs, Rule 44 ICSID Arbitration Rules does not

631.

provide for any specific rule. The Tribunal therefore refers to Article 61(2) ICSID
Convention, according to which, the tribunal has, unless otherwise agreed by the
parties, the power to determine the expenses incurred by the parties in connection
with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those expenses shall be

paid.

In the exercise of such power and discretion, the Tribunal considers that the terms
of the discontinuance concerning the costs as suggested by Respondent are
reasonable. After all, Claimants are the ones who initiated the present proceedings,
and Claimants, or at least the majority of them, are the ones who decided not to
pursue the proceedings any longer. Thus, it is reasonable that they bear, at least
partly, the arbitration costs. On the other hand, it is also likely that Respondent’s
overall behavior in 2010 with regard to Claimants’ claims played a certain role in
Claimants’ decision to continue or withdraw from the present proceedings. For
example, one of the aims of the Exchange Offer 2010 was to provide a way to
release Argentina from claims related to the bonds; another one was to terminate
legal proceedings against Argentina in respect of the tendered Eligible Securities in
consideration for the issuance of New Securities (see § 93 above). Thus, the
Tribunal finds that both sides bear an equal share of the cost burden. Therefore, the

Tribunal accepts the cost allocation as suggested by Respondent.

248

632.

633.

634.

635.

636.

637.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

In summary, Respondent and the Claimants subject to discontinuance shall each
bear half of the arbitration costs (i.e., the fees and expenses of the Tribunal
members and the charges for use of the Centre’s facilities) and bear their own cost.
In other words, the concerned Claimants and Respondent shall not be held liable for

each other’s cost, which include in particular legal costs.

The manner in which those costs are to be attributed is addressed in Chapter IV

below (“Costs”).

Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal issues the cost order in the Dispositive part of

this Decision (see § 713 below).

In conclusion, the terms of a discontinuance of the proceedings pursuant to Rule
44 ICSID Arbitration Rules with regard to Claimants listed in Annex L as
substituted at 5 October 2010 are not subject to any relevant objection from

Respondent.

(d) Consequences of the Discontinuance

For the sake of clarity, the Tribunal finds it useful to specify the consequences and
implications of a discontinuance of the proceedings with regard to the withdrawing

Claimants.

With regard to the proceedings, discontinuance means that the proceedings
involving the Claimants who are withdrawing will terminate. Within the context of
a claim involving multiple Claimants, and in which only a certain number of the
Claimants withdraw, discontinuance does not mean the termination of the entire
proceedings. Rather, only those Claimants who are withdrawing will stop being
parties to the present proceedings. Thus, as long as one Claimant remains, the

present proceedings will continue. Only once the number of withdrawing Claimants

249

638.

639.

640.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

is equal to the number of Claimants having filed the Request for Arbitration as
adjusted in Annex K before the date of the Notice of Registration of the Request, it

would mean the end of the entire proceedings.”°°

With regard to the scope of application of the present Decision, it means that
Claimants having withdrawn from the proceedings will not be subject to nor bound
by the Decision, except for the considerations in the present section (5) and subject

the cost order at § 713 below.

As mentioned before (see § 629 above), the discontinuance by the concerned

Claimants is in the present case with prejudice to reinstatement.

(e) Conclusion

In conclusion and in (partial) response to Issues Nos. 3(a) and 3(b), the Tribunal
finds that the present arbitral proceedings have been effectively initiated by all
Claimants listed in Annex K as substituted before the Notice of Registration of the
Request for Arbitration of 5 February 2007. The Tribunal further finds that the
present arbitral proceedings are discontinued as of the date of dispatch of the
present Decision with regard to all Claimants listed in Annex L as substituted by

Claimants on 5 October 2010. In particular:

(i) | The addition of Claimants after the filing of the Request for Arbitration and

before its Notice of Registration through the submission of substitute versions

205 ‘See also Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A v.

Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19), Procedural Order No. 1 Concerning the
Discontinuance of Proceedings with Respect to Aguas Argentinas S.A. of 14 April 2006 and Aguas
Provinciales de Santa Fe S.A., Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A, and Interagua
Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17), Procedural
Order No. 1 Concerning the Discontinuance of Proceedings with Respect to Aguas Provinciales de
Santa Fe S.A. of 14 April 2006.

 

250

641.

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(vi)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

of Annex K is admissible and does not contravene any of the provisions of

the ICSID Convention and Rules;

The withdrawal of Claimants before the date of the Notice of Registration of
the Request for Arbitration is admissible and these Claimants are thus

deemed to have validly withdrawn their Request for Arbitration;

The withdrawal of Claimants after the registration of the Request for
Arbitration is to be considered as a request for discontinuance pursuant to
Rule 44 ICSID Arbitration Rules, which is to be granted to the extent that

Respondent does not object thereto;

The terms of a discontinuance of the proceedings pursuant to Rule 44 ICSID
Arbitration Rules with regard to Claimants listed in Annex L as submitted by
Claimants on 5 October 2010 are not subject to any relevant objection from

Respondent;

The request for discontinuance is therefore granted and the proceedings are
herewith discontinued with regard to all Claimants listed in Annex L as
substituted, the latest one have been submitted by Claimants on 5 October

2010;

The Tribunal issues the cost order set forth below at § 713 below (see also §

682 et seg. below).

As an administrative measure, the present proceedings are herewith renamed

“Abaclat et al. v. Argentine Republic,’ Ms. Giovanna a Beccara being one of the

Claimants having withdrawn and Ms. Abaclat being the next Claimant in

alphabetical order.

251

642.

643.

644.

645.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(6) Abuse of Rights — Issue 2(b

(a) Issues
It is disputed between the Parties whether the Tribunal should refuse to hear the
case based on the argument that the initiation of the present proceedings would

constitute an abuse of rights by TFA which should not be entertained by the
Tribunal.

Thus, the specific issues to be determined by the Tribunal are the following:

- As a matter of principle, can the alleged abuse of rights by TFA constitute an

impediment to hearing the case?
- Tf so, has there been an abuse of rights by TFA in the present case?

(b) Parties’ Positions

Respondent contends that the Tribunal should refuse jurisdiction on the grounds of
abuse of process. In Respondent’s view, the initiation of this proceeding constitutes
an abuse of rights by TFA which is pursuing hidden interests, foreign to Claimants’
interest in the present arbitration.” The Tribunal should not exercise its powers for
purposes other than those established by the consent of the Contracting Parties to

the ICSID Convention.

Opposing Respondent’s submissions in this regards, Claimants contend that the
abuse of rights theory is not applicable in international proceedings. Further,
according to Claimants, even if applicable, there is no relevant abuse of rights in

the present case because the alleged abuse of rights would be committed by TFA

206 R-MJ §§ 241 et seq., R-R-MJ §§ 394 et seq., R-PHB §§ 230 et seq.

252

646.

647.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

and not by Claimants. Such abuse of rights is not imputable to Claimants and would

therefore be irrelevant?”

(c) Tribunal’s Findings

The theory of abuse of rights is an expression of the more general principle of good
faith. The principle of good faith is a fundamental principle of international law, as
well as investment law." As such, the Tribunal holds that the theory of abuse of
rights is, in principle, applicable to ICSID proceedings and has, in fact, been
previously applied by several ICSID and non-ICSID tribunals in investment
cases.”” The question is thus whether the conditions of an abuse of rights are met,

and — if so — what the consequences of such abuse may be.

(i) Good Faith in the Context of Treaty Claims

Within the context of treaty claims, a breach of the good faith principle can be

invoked with regard to two main aspects of the claim:

(i) With regard to the context and the way in which the investment was made,

and for which the investor seeks protection (“material good faith”); and

207 CMJ §§ 473 et seq., C-R-MJ §§ 483 et seq., R-PHB § 216 et seq.

208 See e.g. HERSCH LAUTERPACHT, Development of International Law by the International

Court, London, 1958, p. 164. “There is no right, however well established, which could not, in some
circumstances, be refused recognition on the ground that it has been abused.” See also Mobil
Corporation and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/27),
Decision on Jurisdiction of 10 June 2010, §§ 169 et seq. (hereinafter “Mobil”) and references quoted
therein.

2 Mobil, §§ 169 et seq.; Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Company v. The

Republic of Ecuador (UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 34877), Interim Award of 1 December 2008, §§
125-149, § 141 (hereinafter “Chevron”); Phoenix Action Ltd v.The Czech Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/5), Award of 15 April 2009, §§ 107 (hereinafter “Phoenix”); Aguas del Tunari S.A. v.
Republic of Bolivia (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3), Decision on Respondent’s Objections to
Jurisdiction of 21 October 2005, § 321 (hereinafter “Aguas del Tunari”); Tokios Tokelés v.Ukraine
(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18), Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 April 2004, § 56 (hereinafter “Tokios
Tokelés”). Comp. with Rompetrol, § 115.

253

648.

649.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(ii) | With regard to the context and the way in which a party, usually the investor,
initiates its treaty claim seeking protection for its investment (“procedural

good faith”).

With regard to breaches of material good faith, different tribunals have followed
two different approaches.”!° Either they have dealt with the question of material
good faith within the context of the examination of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction or

within the context of the examination of the legality of the investment:

(i) It can be seen as an issue of consent and thus of jurisdiction, where the
consent of the Host State cannot be considered to extend to investments done

under circumstances breaching the principle of good faith;

(ii) It can be seen as an issue relating to the merits, where the key question is
whether the circumstances in which the relevant investment was made are

meant to be protected by the relevant BIT.

With regard to breaches of procedural good faith, there are also two approaches
possible. Either one addresses the issue within the context of jurisdiction or within

the context of admissibility:

(i) It can be seen as an issue of consent and thus of jurisdiction, where one party
considers procedural aspects to be key components of the consent of the Host

State; or

(ii) It can be seen as an issue of admissibility, where the key question is whether

the way in which the investor initiated the proceedings, although in

210 Compare for example Mobil and Phoenix, where the issue was considered one hindering

jurisdiction, with Rompetrol, Aguas del Tunari and Chevron, where the tribunals touched upon the
issue at the jurisdictional phase but considered it had its place at the stage of the merits.

254

650.

651.

652.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

accordance with the applicable provisions, aim to obtain a protection, which

he is — under the principle of good faith — not entitled to claim.

The difference between these various approaches carries important practical
consequences and ought to be carefully examined. There are certainly good reasons
in support for each of these approaches, and the choice of the appropriate approach

will eventually depend on the circumstances of the case at stake.

(ii) _Qualification of the Alleged Abuse of Rights

At present, Respondent’s contentions with regard to abuse of rights are mainly

threefold: *!'

(i) Respondent contends that Claimants did not acquire the investment in
accordance with the principle of good faith due to the Italian banks’ alleged
behavior consisting in the breach of various selling restrictions and other

related obligations;

(ii) Respondent contends that the way these proceedings were initiated and are
conducted amount to an abuse of rights by TFA, who is pursuing its own

interests to the detriment of Claimants’ real interests;

(iii) Respondent has never consented to ICSID proceedings being conducted

under such circumstances.

With regard to Respondent’s first contention referred to in § 651 above, the
Tribunal considers it to relate to the merits of the case. The Tribunal has already set
forth above (see §§ 381-386) that for the purposes of jurisdiction, the Claimants’
investment were to be considered made in accordance with the applicable law and
that any misconduct of the Italian banks could not be imputed to Claimants.

211 REMI §§ 241 ef seq., R-R-MJ §§ 394 ef seq., R-PHB §§ 230 et seq.

255

653.

654.

655.

656.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The only remaining question is whether the circumstances invoked by Respondent
could lead to the conclusion that Claimants’ investments do not deserve the
protection of the BIT. The Tribunal finds that this issue requires to be addressed in

relation to the merits of Claimants’ claim for the following reasons:

- Based on the principle of severability of the arbitration clause: Even if the
investment was considered to be invalid, it would not per se invalidate the

jurisdiction of the Tribunal to decide on its validity;

- The circumstances invoked require a more detailed factual analysis than what
is usually conducted at the stage of jurisdiction (see § 303 above), which
justifies dealing with these issues together with the relevant allegations of

breaches of the BIT by Respondent.

With regard to the second and third contentions referred to in § 651 above, the
Tribunal has already found above (see §§ 489 et seg.) that Respondent’s consent
covered the mass aspect of the proceedings and that TFA’s role therein was not of
such a nature as to vitiate Claimants’ consent (see §§ 455 et seg.). Consequently, a
potential abuse of rights allegedly committed by TFA would not relate to the
jurisdiction of the present Tribunal and could only — if at all — relate to its

admissibility.

Consequently, the Tribunal will limit its analysis to the question whether
Respondent’s allegation that TFA abused the ICSID process to pursue hidden
interests, foreign to the interests of Claimants with regard to their investment, may

render the present proceedings inadmissible.

(iii) Lack of Relevant Abuse of Rights
Respondent’s allegations of abuse of rights and abuse of process are directed
against TFA. Respondent submits that the Tribunal should not allow the present

proceedings because TFA is pursuing its own interests, which conflict with

256

657.

658.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Claimants’ interests, and which are foreign to the interests that the BIT and the

ICSID Convention aim to protect.

The Tribunal finds that, even if TFA was pursuing interests which conflict with
Claimants’ interests, this would not lead to the inadmissibility of Claimants’ claims

for the following reasons:

- For ICSID proceedings to be dismissed based on an abuse of rights, it would
be necessary that the abuse concerns the very rights that ICSID proceedings

aim to protect, i.e., the investors’ rights under the relevant BIT.

- In the present arbitration, the alleged abuse of rights does not concern
Claimants’ rights as arising out of the BIT but TFA’s interests as arising out

of Claimants’ pursuit of ICSID proceedings.

- Respondent has not alleged that Claimants themselves were in any way
abusing their right to resort to ICSID arbitration in order to protect their

investment.

- Dismissing Claimants’ claims would mean depriving them of a remedy they
are entitled to invoke, because of the alleged behaviour of a third party on

which Claimants have no influence.

In conclusion, the fact that a third party, such as TFA, may allegedly have taken a
certain advantage from the conduct by Claimants of the present ICSID arbitration
may be morally condemnable, but it cannot lead to the inadmissibility of
Claimants’ claims to the extent that the rights Claimants intend to seek protection
for are rights protected under the BIT, which are not claimed in an abusive manner

by Claimants.

257

659.

660.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(d) Conclusion

In conclusion and in (partial) response to Issue No. 2(b), the Tribunal finds that
TFA’s role in the proceedings does not amount to an abuse of rights which would

justify dismissing Claimants’ claims for lack of admissibility.

(7) Conclusion on Admissibility
Based on the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes that Claimants’ claims

are admissible to the following extent:

(i) The mass aspect of Claimants’ claims does not constitute an impediment to

their admissibility. In particular:

- The silence of the ICSID framework regarding collective proceedings is

to be interpreted as a “gap” and not as a “qualified silence;”

- The Tribunal has, in principle, the power under Article 44 ICSID
Convention to fill this gap to the extent permitted under Article 44
ICSID Convention;

- The procedure necessary to deal with the collective aspect of the
present proceedings concern the method of the Tribunal’s examination,
as well as the manner of representation of Claimants. However, it does
not affect the object of such examination. Thus, the Tribunal remains
obliged to examine all relevant aspects of the claims relating to
Claimants’ rights under the BIT as well as to Respondent’s obligations

thereunder subject to the Parties’ submissions;

- Such procedure is admissible and acceptable under Article 44 ICSID
Convention, Rule 19 ICSID Arbitration Rules, as well as under the

more general spirit, object and aim of the ICSID Convention; and

258

(ii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Respondent’s policy arguments regarding the appropriateness of ICSID
proceedings in the context of sovereign debt restructuring are irrelevant

for the determination of the admissibility of the claims.

The prior consultation requirement set forth in Article 8(1) BIT does not
constitute an impediment to the admissibility of Claimants’ claims. In

particular:

Consultations did take place between TFA, as representative of Italian

bondholders, and Argentina;

Argentina is precluded from invoking the non-fullfilment by Claimants

of the consultation requirement; and

Even if Claimants were considered not to have fulfilled the consultation
requirement, this non-compliance would simply express that the
premises for an amicable settlement were not given and cannot be
interpreted as constituting a hurdle to the admissibility of Claimants’

claims.

(iii) The disregard by Claimants of the 18 months litigation requirement does not

preclude them from resorting to ICSID arbitration. In particular:

Article 8 provides for an integrated dispute resolution mechanism built
upon a certain hierarchy or order of three interconnected means
whereby the wording of Article 8 itself does not yet suffice to draw
specific conclusions with regard to the consequences of a non-

compliance with the order established by Article 8;

The question whether Claimants’ disregard of the 18 months litigation

 

requirements justifies precluding them from resorting to arbitration
requires a weighing of interests between Argentina’s interest to be

given the opportunity to address the dispute through the framework of

259

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

its domestic legal system and Claimants’ interest in being provided with

an efficient dispute resolution means;

- Based on the circumstances of the present case and in particular the
Emergency Law and other relevant laws and decrees, Argentina’s
interest in pursuing the 18 months litigation requirement does not
justify depriving Claimants of their right to resort to arbitration for the
sole reason that they decided not to previously submit their dispute to

the Argentinean courts; and

- Consequently, the question whether Claimants could have relied on the
MEN clause of Article 3(1) BIT in connection to Article 10(1)
Argentina-Chile BIT in order to evade the 18 months litigation

requirement is moot.

(iv) In conclusion and in (partial) response to Issues Nos. 3(a) and 3(b), the
Tribunal finds that the present arbitral proceedings have been effectively
initiated by all Claimants listed in Annex K as substituted before the Notice
of Registration of the Request for Arbitration of 5 February 2007. The
Tribunal further finds that the present arbitral proceedings are discontinued as
of the dater of dispatch of the present Decision with regard to all Claimants
listed in Annex L as substituted by Claimants on 5 October 2010. In

particular:

- The addition of Claimants after the filing of the Request for Arbitration
and before its Notice of Registration through the submission of
substitute versions of Annex K is admissible and does not contravene

any of the provisions of the ICSID Convention and Rules;

- The withdrawal of Claimants before the date of the Notice of

Registration of the Request for Arbitration is admissible and these

260

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Claimants are thus deemed to have validly withdrawn their Request for

Arbitration;

- The withdrawal of Claimants after the registration of the Request for
Arbitration is to be considered as a request for discontinuance pursuant
to Rule 44 ICSID Arbitration Rules, which is to be granted to the extent

that Respondent does not object thereto;

- The terms of a discontinuance of the proceedings pursuant to Rule 44
ICSID Arbitration Rules with regard to Claimants listed in Annex L as
submitted by Claimants on 5 October 2010 are not subject to any

relevant objection from Respondent;

- The request for discontinuance is therefore granted and the proceedings
are herewith discontinued with regard to all Claimants listed in Annex

Las submitted by Claimants on 5 October 2010;
- The Tribunal issues the cost order set forth below at § 713 below.

(v) TFA’s role in the proceedings does not amount to an abuse of rights by
Claimants which would justify dismissing Claimants’ claims for lack of

admissibility.

661. Consequently, with regard to the relevant Issues of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May
2008, the Tribunal holds:

(i) Issue 1(b): Claimants’ claims are admissible to the extent described in § 660

above;

(ii) Issue 2(b): In the proceedings, TFA is to be seen as Claimants’ agent
pursuant to Rule 18 ICSID Arbitration Rules, and its role in the proceedings
does not amount to an abuse of rights which would justify dismissing

Claimants’ claims for lack of admissibility;

261

662.

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Issue 3(b): It is possible to add further Claimants after the filing of the claim,
to the extent that additions are made before the date of the Notice of

Registration of the Request for Arbitration, i.e., 7 February 2007;

Issue 4: Claimants were entitled to initiate ICSID arbitration
notwithstanding the 18-month domestic litigation clause under Article 8(2)

BIT;

Issue 5: The MFN Clause contained in Article 3(1) BIT has no

consequences on the admissibility of the present proceedings.

The remaining Issue 3(a) concerning the admissibility of substitute annexes is an

issue of procedure and will be dealt with in the section below (see §§ 672-680).

262

663.

664.

665.

666.

667.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

E. OTHER PROCEDURAL ISSUES

In sections C and D above, the Tribunal has established that it has — in principle —
jurisdiction over the present dispute and that the claims raised by Claimants are — in
principle — admissible. In particular, the Tribunal has established that it has the
power to model and design the present procedure so as to make it workable to the

“mass” nature of the present claims.

This section aims at dealing with general and more specific procedural modalities

of such mass proceedings.

(1) In General: Managing the Procedure
(a) Introduction

As mentioned before (see § 537 above), the present case involves a number of
Claimants, which makes it de facto impossible to deal with all them seriatim. Based
thereon, as well as on the homogeneity of the claims (see § 541 above), the
Tribunal considers that it has the power to deal with the present proceedings in the
form of collective proceedings as the Tribunal’s method of examination (see § 529-
533). The Tribunal now needs to determine which specific method of examination

would be appropriate in the light of the circumstances of the case.

During the Hearing the Parties and the Tribunal briefly discussed so-called
“sampling procedure,” also referred to sometimes as “bell weather proceedings,”
“pilot case proceedings,” etc. The Tribunal contemplates the possibility to resort to
such form of collective proceedings in order to deal with certain aspects of the

present case.

However, in order to decide whether, and if so, to what extent such sampling
procedure constitutes an appropriate approach to the present mass claims, the
Tribunal is of the view that it should first obtain an overview with regard to the

merits of the present case.

263

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(b) Splitting of the Merits Phase

668. Therefore, similarly to the jurisdictional phase, the Tribunal rules that the merit

669.

670.

phase shall be split in two phases:

Phase I: In a first phase, the Tribunal will establish which isssues are the
core issues regarding the merits of the case, and, in particular, which
conditions would need to be required in order to further resolve Claimants’

claims;

Phase 2: Ina second phase, and based on the result of the first phase, the

Tribunal will determine how to best address these issues and conditions.

In this respect, the following case scenarios are possible:

qd)

(2)

(3)

Some issues and/or conditions may be of a general nature and thus apply to
all Claimants uniformly. Such issues and/or conditions could be established at

once with regard to all Claimants;

Some issues and/or conditions may, while being generally applicable to all
Claimants, present certain objective features that would require making
certain distinctions among various groups of Claimants. Such issues and/or
conditions could then be established through the putting into place of a

sampling procedure;

Some issues and/or conditions may be so Claimant-specific that their
establishment would require a case-by-case analysis, similarly to the specific

and individual jurisdictional requirements (see § 227 above).

Consequently, the next phase of the proceedings will be dedicated to determining

the core issues regarding the merits of the case, and, in particular, establishing what

conditions must be fulfilled for the granting of Claimants’ claims. This phase would

be implemented through the exchange of written submissions by the Parties, in

264

671.

672.

673.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

which each Party will be invited to comment on whether, and if so to what extent,
these conditions can be established with regard to all Claimants (scenario 1), or
whether they require the putting into place of a specific procedure for their
examination (scenario 2 and/or 3). The exchange of written submissions may be
followed by a hearing, if so required by Claimants and/or Respondent or considered

necessary by the Tribunal.

(c) Conclusion

In the light of the above consideration, the Tribunal rules that the merit phase of the
present case shall be split in two phases. The first phase will be a general phase
aimed at determining the core issues regarding the merits of the case, and in
particular establishing what conditions must be fulfilled for further resolving
Claimants’ claims and determining the best method to examine these issues and
conditions. A second phase during which the Tribunal will rule on how to examine
the relevant issues and conditions, will put in place an appropriate mechanism of

examination and will proceed with such examination.

(2) Specific Procedural Aspects

(a) Admissibility of Substitute Annexes — Issue 3(a)
While the issue of the addition and withdrawal of Claimants has been dealt with
above (see §§ 592 et seq.), this section addresses the amendments to the Annexes
which concern other information relevant to individual Claimants, such as contact

data, bond information, etc.

Thus, in this connection, the specific issue to be determined by the Tribunal is the

following:

To what extent, if any, were Claimants entitled to amend the
information contained in the substitute annexes with regard to
Claimants’ personal information and bond information?

265

674.

675.

676.

677.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

The key legal provisions in dealing with the above issue are the following: Article
36 ICSID Convention, Rule 2 ICSID Institution Rules and Rules 24, 25 and 44
ICSID Arbitration Rules. The wording of these provisions is reproduced in § 596 et

seq. above.

Respondent submits that Claimants have violated the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Rules by misusing the substitute annexes to their Request for Arbitration and
contends that (i) Claimants violated Article 36(2) ICSID Convention by unilaterally
altering the terms of their Request for Arbitration through the substitute annexes
and (ii) Claimants’ repeated revisions of the Annexes violated Article 36 ICSID
Convention. 7! Respondent further contends that the information compiled in
Claimants’ Annexes are unreliable and unmanageable, thereby preventing

Respondent from duly defending its rights.

Claimants contend that the use of the substitute annexes is fully consistent with the
ICSID framework and in particular, authorized by Rule 25 ICSID Arbitration
Rules. In addition, Claimants submit that their Annexes and database are well-
organized, thereby facilitating the searching and management of Claimant-related
information.”""

To the extent that the Tribunal has found that the addition and/or withdrawal of
Claimants was admissible (see § 640 above), changes to the information relating to
the identity of added and withdrawn Claimants is admissible under Rule 25 ICSID
Arbitration Rules.”!* Changes and corrections to the contact information of some

Claimants and/or to other supporting information are further also admissible under

212 R-R-MI §§ 612-641.
C-MI §§ 509 er seq., C-R-MJ §§ 515 et seq.

213

214 Rule 25 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides: “An accidental error in any instrument or
supporting document may, with the consent of the other party or by leave of the Tribunal, be

corrected at any time before the award is rendered.”

266

678.

679.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Rule 25 ICSID Arbitration Rules. For both cases, the Tribunal grants hereby leave
for the corrections. These corrections do not violate Article 36(2) of the ICSID

Convention.

In addition, even if — when examining whether individual claims fulfil all necessary
requirements - certain information contained in the Annexes and/or database
appeared to be missing, erroneous and/or unreliable, this would not justify rejecting
at this stage the admissibility of the Annexes. Indeed, it is Claimants who bear the
burden to prove that all conditions for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and for the
granting of the substantive claims are met. In case relevant information in the
Annexes is missing, erroneous or unreliable, this would be taken into consideration
by the Tribunal when deciding whether Claimants complied with their burden of

proof with respect to the concerned claims and/or Claimants.

With regard to the manageability and reliability of the information contained in the
Annexes, the Tribunal sees no reason why the Annexes and the information
contained therein should — as a matter of principle - be deemed unmanageable or
unreliable. At this stage of the proceedings it is sufficient to note that the Annexes
appear to contain all the information required under Article 36 ICSID Convention
and Rules 1 et seg. ICSID Institution Rules. Further, in conjunction with the online
and the Excel database reproducing the information contained in the Annexes, such
information is presented in a way sufficiently manageable for the examination of
Claimant specific information. The Tribunal considers that this was satisfactorily

demonstrated during the Hearing on Jurisdiction by Mr. Brent Kaczmarek.”'>

218 See Hearing Tr. Day 4 p. 1043/1 — 1051/15; see also NAVIGANT I, §§ 11-24 and NAVIGANT

II, sections III & IV.

267

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

680. Consequently, the Tribunal holds that the Annexes submitted by Claimants are in

681.

principle admissible and the latest version of the Annexes as submitted by

Claimants on 5 October 2010 is hereby accepted into the record.

(b) Other Procedural Aspects

Any further procedural aspect not addressed in the present Decision, as well as the
details of the next phase of the proceedings (see § 671 above) will be discussed at a
procedural meeting by telephone or in person with the Parties to be organized

shortly after the issuance of the present Decision.

268

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

IV. COSTS

682. Claimants submitted the following cost claim in their cost submission of 4 August

2010:

 

INCURRED CosTs INCURRED CosTs
© (ss)
WHITE & CASE LEGAL FEES & EXPENSES
White & Case LLP Procedural Categories

 

Claimants’ Request for Arbitration US$1,057,563.33
Registration of Claimants’ Request for Arbitration US$350,000.00
Constitution of the Tribunal and First Session of the
Tribunal with Attention to Preliminary Procedural Issues: USS$2.474,546.30
Strategy, and Defense to Challenges to the Tribunal
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction US$3,328,452.02
Confidentiality Order Issue US$52,638.75
Respondent's Late Document Production US$109,011.38
Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction US$2,092,369.68
Handwriting Expert Preparation and Testimony US$94,821.00
Respondent's Supplemental Exhibit Document Dumps US$114,370.50
June 2009 Hearing Preparations US$300,663.75
April 2010 Hearing Preparations & Hearing US$3,036,387.16
Arbitration Expenses USS1,421,773.20
Total White & Case Fees & Expenses US$14,432,597.05

Local COUNSEL FEES & EXPENSES

 

Total Grimaldi e Associati Fees & Expenses €3,196,101.93

Total Pérez Alati, Grondona, Benites, Arntsen & Martinez US$653,403.71
de Hoz (Jr.) Fees & Expenses

EXPERT & CONSULTANT FEES & EXPENSES €3,973,024.00 | USS2,796,678.41
ICSID Costs US$825,000.00
ToTAL INCURRED CosTs €7,169,125.93 US$18,707,679.17

 

 

 

269

683.

684.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

At 4 August 2010 the exchange rate between the Euro and the US Dollar was
1.31.76 At that date, Claimants’ costs therefore amounted to approximately
US$ 28,134,604, and after deduction of the ICSID cost (US$ 825,000, including the
registration fee) US$ 27,309,604.

In its cost submission of 4 August 2010, Respondent submitted the following cost

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

claim:
COSTS OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
ITEM Argentine Pesos U.S. dollars EUROS
TRANSLATIONS
various 162,078.58
EXPERTS, 382,065.00 17,950.00 20,600.00
Fees Cleary Gottlieb Steen & 9,497,846.59
Hamilton LLP
AIRTICKETS, HOTELS & PER DIEMS 1,492,000.00
87,304.24

CCA 27,428.00
PHOTOCOPIES 5,631.00
AIRMAIL
DHL’s air mails costs 1,526.00
STATIONARY
Stationary Expenses 870.00
COMMUNICATIONS COSTS
Communications (land lines) 2,500.00
Communications (Nextel-Movistar- 24,107.00
Claro)
ICSIDCOSTS
Note SPTN No. 034/AI/08 125,000.00
Note SPTN No. 025/AI/09 225,000.00
Note SPTN No. 055/AI/10 200,000.00
Note SPTN No. 137/Al/10 250,000.00
PTN’s Costs of the staff 1,241,200.00

1,818,451.58 11,924,054,83 20,600.00
TOTALS IN U.S. DOLLARS 469,884.13 11,924, 054.83 26,401.63
TOTAL COSTS IN U.S. DOLLARS 12,420,340.59

 

216 http://www.xe.com

270

685.

686.

687.

688.

689.

690.

691.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

At 4 August 2010, Respondent’s cost amounted to US$ 12,420,340, and after
deduction of the ICSID cost (US$ 800,000) US$ 11,620,340.

Claimants and Respondent each claim to be entitled to the cost of the proceedings
to date on various grounds. However, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that
it is too early in the present proceedings to rule on costs, except with respect to the
Claimants who are subject to discontinuance of the arbitration. In that regard, it
may be recalled that, on 26 November 2010, the Tribunal issued its Procedural
Order No. 9 in which it announced that the question of the allocation of the
arbitration costs concerning the Claimants who withdrew would be dealt with in the
Tribunal’s upcoming determination on jurisdiction together with the question of the

withdrawal of a number of Claimants.

In §§ 628-635 above, the Tribunal held that Respondent and the Claimants subject
to discontinuance shall each bear half of the arbitration costs (i.e., the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal members and the charges for use of the Centre’s facilities)

and bear their own cost.

The fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal until 15 June 2011 amount to
US$ 1,331,960.45 (see Article 60(2) ICSID Convention; Regulation 14(1) ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulations; Rule 28(1)(a) ICSID Arbitration Rules;

Rule 14 Administrative and Financial Rules).

The charges for use of the Centre’s facilities until 15 June 2011 amount to
US$376,641.95 (see Article 59 ICSID Convention; Rule 28(1)(a) ICSID

Arbitration Rules.

The arbitration cost as defined above, therefore, amount to US$ 1,708,602.4 until
15 June 2011.

It is common ground that out of approximately 180,000 Claimants about 120,000

Claimants are subject to discontinuance. Accordingly, two thirds of the arbitration

271

692.

693.

694.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

costs are to be attributed to the proceedings between the Claimants who are subject
to discontinuance and Respondent, being US$1,139,068.3. They are to be shared
equally between Claimants subject to discontinuance and Respondent. As
Claimants and Respondent have advanced equal amounts on account of the
arbitration costs and those costs are paid out of the advances, neither side has a cost

claim on the other on account of the costs of arbitration.

Similarly, the share of each Party’s own cost that is to be deemed to be attributable
to the proceedings between the Claimants who are subject to discontinuance and

Respondent is two thirds.

The result of the foregoing is that the reserved portions of the costs between the
remaining Claimants and Respondent are insofar as the present phase of the
arbitration leading to the Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility are concerned

with respect to

- the arbitration costs: US$ 569,534.1,

- Claimants’ costs: US$ 9,103,2007!” and
- Respondent’s costs: US$ 3,873,447.718

The Tribunal would like to emphasize that its decision on the amounts mentioned in
the preceding paragraph, including the reasonableness of the claimed Parties’ costs

and the allocation (if any), is reserved until a later stage of the proceedings.

217 Le., one third of US$ 27,309,604.

718 Le., one third of US$ 11,620,340.

272

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

V. THE 11 ISSUES SERIATIM -
ANSWERS AND REFERENCES

695. The Issues set forth in the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008 have been addressed in
this Decision not seriatim for reasons of completeness and consistency (see §§ 225-
231 above). In the present section, the Tribunal will summarize its findings with
respect to the Issues set forth in the List of Issues of 9 May 2008 seriatim for
reasons of convenience. The summary will include cross-references to the

conclusions at the relevant paragraphs.
696. Issue I(a):

“Does the consent of Argentina to the jurisdiction of the Centre include claims
presented by multiple Claimants in a single proceeding?”

- Answer: Argentina’s consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre includes claims

presented by multiple Claimants in a single proceeding.

- References: § 500 above. See also the findings in relation to Issues Nos. 4

and 8 below.
697. Issue 1(b):

“Tf so, are the claims admissible?”

- Answer: Claimants’ claims are admissible to the extent described in § 660

above.
- References: §§ 551 and 660 above.
698. Issue 2(a):
“Ts the Declaration of Consent signed by the individual Claimants submitted

in this proceeding valid[?]”

273

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- Answer: The Declaration of Consent signed by the individual Claimants
submitted in this proceeding is in principle valid, whereby the potential
existence of a fraud, coercion or essential mistake invalidating the consent of
a specific individual Claimant based on the specific circumstances of the
individual case remains open and will be dealt with in a later stage of the

proceedings.
- References: § 466(i)-(ii) above.
699. Issue 2(b):

“TA]nd what is the role and relevance of Task Force Argentina (if any) in this
proceeding?”

- Answer: In the proceedings, TFA is to be seen as Claimants’ agent pursuant
to Rule 18 ICSID Arbitration Rules, and its role in the proceedings does not
amount to an abuse of rights which would justify dismissing Claimants’

claims for lack of admissibility.
- References: §§ 466(iii) and 659 above.
700. Issue 3(a):

“Ts the submission of substitute annexes to the Request for Arbitration
permissible?”

- Answer: The Annexes submitted by Claimants are admissible and the latest
version of the Annexes as submitted by Claimants is hereby accepted into the

record.
- References: § 640 above.
701. Issue 3(b):

“Ts it possible to add further Claimants after the filing of the claim?”

274

702.

703.

704.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- Answer: It is possible to add further Claimants after the filing of the claim, to
the extent that additions are made before the registration of the Request for

Arbitration.
- References: § 640 (i) above.
Issue 4:

“Were the Claimants entitled to initiate ICSID arbitration in light of the 18-
month domestic litigation clause at Article 8(2) of the Argentina-Italy BIT?”

- Answer: Claimants were entitled to initiate ICSID arbitration
notwithstanding the 18-month domestic litigation clause under Article 8(2)

BIT.

- References: §§ S500(iii), 566 and 590 above. See also the findings in relation

to Issues Nos. 1(a) above and 8 below.
Issue 5:

“What are the consequences (if any) of the Most-Favored-Nation-Clause
(MEN) contained in Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT?”

- Answer: The MEN Clause contained in Article 3(1) BIT has no
consequences on the ICSID’s jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s competence or

on the admissibility of the present proceedings.
- References: § 591 above.
Issue 6:

“Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to hear Claimants’ claims for violation of
the MEN provisions contained in Article 3(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT with
reference to the so-called umbrella clause contained in Article 7(2) of the
Argentina-Chile BIT?”

275

705.

706.

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- Answer: Whether the Tribunal may also have jurisdiction based on the
Umbrella Clause of the Argentina-Chile BIT in connection with the MFN
Clause of the Argentina-Italy BIT is irrelevant to the extent that the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction already derives from the treaty nature of the claims at

stake.
- References: § 332 above.
Issue 7:

“Are the Claimants’ claims contract claims or Treaty claims and what (if any)
are the consequences of this determination?”

- Answer: Claimants’ claims are to be considered Treaty Claims arising out of
the BIT and therewith fall under the jurisdiction ratione materiae of the

Tribunal.
- References: § 331 above.
Issue 8:

“Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over claims where the relevant bond
contains a forum selection clause which refers to national courts, but not to
ICSID?”

- Answer: The presence of forum selection clauses referring to national courts
in the bond documents do not apply to Treaty Claims and do thereby not

affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over such Treaty Claims.

- References:

 

§ 387(v) and 500(iv) above. See also the findings in relation to

Issues Nos. 1(a) and 4 above.

276

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

707. Issue 9:

“Do the bonds in question satisfy the definition of ‘Investment’ under Article
1(1) of the Argentina-Italy BIT with respect to the provisions on investment
‘in the territory’ of Argentina and in ‘compliance with the laws and
regulations of Argentina’?”

- Answer: The bonds in question, and in particular the security entitlements
held by Claimants in these bonds, qualify as ’Investment” under Article 1(1)
BIT made “in the territory of Argentina” and “in compliance with the laws

and regulations of Argentina.”
- References: § 387(i)-(v) above.
708. Issue 10:

“Without making a determination with respect to any individual Claimant,
does the Tribunal have jurisdiction ratione personae pursuant to Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention and Article 1(2) of the Argentina-Italy BIT, and its
Additional Protocol, over each Claimant who is a natural person and who
ultimately is found to have the following characteristics: (i) a natural person
with Italian nationality on September 14, 2006 (i.e., the date of the filing of
the Request for Arbitration) and February 7, 2007 (i.e., the date of registration
of the Request); (ii) who on either date was not also a national of the
Argentine Republic; and (iii) who was not domiciled in the Argentine
Republic for more than two years prior to making the investment?”

- Answer: The Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae personae over each Claimant

who is a natural person to the extent set forth above in § 501 (iii).
- References: §§ 422(i) above.
709. Issue 11:

“Without making a determination with respect to any individual Claimant,
does the Tribunal have jurisdiction ratione personae pursuant to Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention and Article 1 of the Argentina-Italy BIT over each
Claimant that is a juridical person with Italian nationality on September 14,
2006 (i.e., the date of the filing of the Request for Arbitration)?”

277

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

- Answer: The Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae personae over each Claimant

who is a juridical person to the extent set forth above in § 501 (iii).
- References: §§ 422(ii) above.
710. Discontinuance:

- Answer: The request for withdrawal, being a request for discontinuance, is
granted and the proceedings are herewith discontinued with regard to all
Claimants listed in Annex L as substituted, the latest one have been submitted

by Claimants on 5 October 2010.
- References: § 640(ii)-(vi) above.
711. Costs:

- Answer: It is too early in the present proceedings to rule on costs, except
with respect to the Claimants who are subject to discontinuance of the
arbitration. In §§ 632-639, the Tribunal held that Respondent and the
Claimants subject to discontinuance shall each bear half of the arbitration
costs (i.e., the fees and expenses of the Tribunal members and the charges for

use of the Centre’s facilities) and bear their own cost.
- References: §§ 628-635 above; 682-694 above.

712. Procedure: See §§ 663-670 above.

278

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

VI. DECISIONS

713. FOR THE FOREGOING REASONS, and in response to the relief sought by the Parties as

quoted in §§ 235-236 above, the Arbitral Tribunal renders the following decisions:

(1) | With regard to the Issues of the List of 11 Issues of 9 May 2008:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

Issue 1(a): Argentina’s consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre

includes claims presented by multiple Claimants in a single proceeding;

Issue 1(b): Claimants’ claims are admissible to the extent described in

§660 above;

Issue 2(a): The Declaration of Consent signed by the individual
Claimants submitted in this proceeding is in principle valid, whereby
the potential existence of a fraud, coercion or essential mistake
invalidating the consent of a specific individual Claimant based on the
specific circumstances of the individual case remains open and will be

dealt with in a later stage of the proceedings;

Issue 2(b): In the proceedings, TFA is to be seen as Claimants’ agent
pursuant to Rule 18 ICSID Arbitration Rules, and its role in the
proceedings does not amount to an abuse of rights which would justify

dismissing Claimants’ claims for lack of admissibility;

Issue 3(a): The Annexes submitted by Claimants are in principle
admissible and the latest version of the Annexes as submitted by

Claimants is hereby accepted into the record.

Issue 3(b): It is possible to add further Claimants after the filing of the
claim, to the extent that additions are made before the date of the Notice

of Registration of the Request for Arbitration, i.e., 7 February 2007;

279

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

Issue 4: Claimants were entitled to initiate ICSID arbitration
notwithstanding the 18-month domestic litigation clause under Article

8(2) BIT;

Issue 5: The MEN Clause contained in Article 3(1) BIT has no
consequences on the ICSID’s jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s

competence or on the admissibility of the present proceedings.

Issue 6: Whether the Tribunal may also have jurisdiction based on the
Umbrella Clause of the Argentina-Chile BIT in connection with the
MEN Clause of the Argentina-Italy BIT is irrelevant to the extent that
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction already derives from the treaty nature of the

claims at stake;

Issue 7: Claimants’ claims are to be considered Treaty Claims arising
out of the BIT and therewith fall under the jurisdiction ratione materiae

of the Tribunal;

(viii) Issue 8: The presence of forum selection clauses referring to national

(ix)

(x)

courts in the bond documents do not apply to Treaty Claims and do

thereby not affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over such Treaty Claims;

Issue 9: The bonds in question, and in particular the security
entitlements held by Claimants in these bonds, qualify as ’Investment”
under Article 1(1) BIT made “in the territory of Argentina” and “in

compliance with the laws and regulations of Argentina”;

Issue 10: The Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae personae over each
Claimant who is a natural person to the extent set forth above in §

501 (iii);

280

(2)

(3)

(4)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

(xi) Issue 11: The Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae personae over each
Claimant who is a juridical person to the extent set forth above in §

501 (iii).

The request for withdrawal, being a request for discontinuance, is granted and
the proceedings are herewith discontinued with regard to all Claimants listed
in Annex L as substituted, the latest one have been submitted by Claimants on

5 October 2010;
With regard to costs:

(i) | The total amount of arbitration cost, comprising the fees and expenses
of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for use of the Centre’s

facilities, until 15 June 2011 amounts to US$ 1,708,602.4;

(ii) Two thirds of the arbitration costs referred to in paragraph 713(3)(i)
above, being US$1,139,068.3, will be borne in half by the Claimants
who are subject to discontinuance on the one hand and Respondent on

the other other;

(iii) The Claimants who are subject to discontinuance on the one hand and
Respondent on the other other shall bear their own cost, which are
quantified at two thirds of the cost claimed by Claimants and

Respondent each in their Cost Submissions of 4 August 2010;

(iv) The decision regarding the remaining one third of the cost of the
present phase is reserved as between the remaining Claimants and

Respondent until a later stage of the proceedings.
With respect to the further conduct of the procedure:

(i) | The merit phase of the present case shall be split in two phases. The

first phase would be a general phase aiming at determining the core

281

(ii)

(iii)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/07/5

issues regarding the merits of the case, and in particular establishing
what conditions must be fulfilled for the granting of Claimants’ claims
and determining the best method to examine these issues and
conditions. A second phase during which the Tribunal will rule on how
to examine the relevant issues and conditions and will then proceed

with such examination (see § 671 above).

The Annexes submitted by Claimants are in principle admissible and
the latest version of the Annexes as submitted by Claimants on 5

October 2010 is hereby accepted into the record (see § 680 above).

Any fruther procedural aspect not addressed in the present order, as
well as the details of the next procedural step (see § 671 above) will be
discussed at a joint conference call with the Parties to be organized

shortly after the issuance of the present Decision.

282

LoS

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg
Arbitrator

[Dissenting Opinion Forthcoming]

Professor Georges Abi-Saab
Arbitrator

—
la.

 

Professor Pierre Tercier,
President

