Archived Content

 

Information identified as archived on the Web is for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It has
not been altered or updated after the date of archiving. Web pages that are archived on the Web are not
subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards. As per the Communications Policy of the Government
of Canada, you can request alternate formats by contacting us.

 

Contenu archivé

 

L'information archivée sur le Web est disponible a des fins de consultation, de recherche ou de tenue de
dossiers seulement. Elle n’a été ni modifiée ni mise a jour depuis sa date d’archivage. Les pages archivées
sur le Web ne sont pas assujetties aux normes Web du gouvernement du Canada. Conformément a la
Politique de communication du gouvernement du Canada, vous pouvez obtenir cette information dans un
format de rechange en communiquant avec nous.

 

Third-Party Information Liability Disclaimer

Some of the information on this Web page has been provided by external sources. The
Government of Canada is not responsible for the accuracy, reliability or currency of the
information supplied by external sources. Users wishing to rely upon this information
should consult directly with the source of the information. Content provided by external
sources is not subject to official languages, privacy and accessibility requirements.

 

 

 

Désistement de responsabilité concernant l'information provenant de tiers

Une partie des informations de cette page Web ont été fournie par des sources externes.
Le gouvernement du Canada n'assume aucune responsabilité concernant la précision,
l'actualité ou la fiabilité) des informations fournies par les sources externes.
Les utilisateurs qui désirent employer cette information devraient consulter directement
la source des informations. Le contenu fournit par les sources externes n'est pas
assujetti aux exigences sur les langues officielles, la protection des renseignements
personnels et l'accessibilité.

 

 

 

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

(ICSID)

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11 OF
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT AND THE UNCITRAL

Between:

Representing the Claimant:

Mr. Michael T. Shor
Ms. Jean E. Kalicki

Mr. Patricio Grané
ARNOLD & PORTER LLP

Mr. Pierre Bienvenu

Mr. Martin J. Valasek
Mr. Paul D. Conlin

Ms. Alison G. FitzGerald
OGILVY RENAULT LLP

Mr. Colm St. Roch Seviour
Ms. Maureen E. Ryan
STEWART MCKELVEY

Date of Dispatch to the Parties:

ARBITRATION RULES

AbitibiBowater Inc.

Claimant/Investor
- and -
The Government of Canada
Respondent/Party
CONSENT AWARD
Arbitral Tribunal:

Professor Andreas Bucher
Mr. Doak Bishop
Dr. Gavan Griffith, Q.C.

Secretary to the Tribunal:

Ms. Eloise Obadia

Representing the Respondent:

Ms. Sylvie Tabet

Mr. Christophe Douaire de Bondy

Mr. Adam Douglas

Ms. Claire McMenemy

DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND
INTERNATIONAL TRADE CANADA

15 December 2010

The Arbitral Tribunal

Composed as above,

After deliberation

Makes the following CONSENT AWARD:

L

1.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 25 February 2010, AbitibiBowater Inc. (the “Claimant”) served a Notice of
Arbitration and Statement of Claim on the Government of Canada (the “Respondent”),
pursuant to Articles 3 and 18 of the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law, 1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules”) and Articles 1116, 1117
and 1120 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”) (the “Notice of
Arbitration’).

In the Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant sought compensation under NAFTA Chapter
11 for damages arising out of an act passed by the Government of Newfoundland and
Labrador on 16 December 2008, An Act to Return to the Crown Certain Rights Relating
to Timber and Water use Vested in Abitibi-Consolidated and to Expropriate Assets and
Lands Associated with the Generation of Electricity Enabled by Those Water Use Rights
(the “Act”), on its own behalf and on behalf of Abitibi-Consolidated Company of
Canada, Abitibi-Consolidated Inc. and AbitibiBowater Canada Inc. (the “Claims”).

On 22 June 2010, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted as follows: Mr. Doak Bishop
(American) and Dr. Gavan Griffith, Q.C. (Australian), were each appointed as arbitrators
by the Claimant and the Respondent, respectively, and Professor Andreas Bucher (Swiss)

was appointed as presiding arbitrator by agreement of the Parties.

On 6 July 2010, further to a joint request by the Claimant and the Respondent (together,
the “Parties”), the Secretariat of the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment

Disputes (the “Centre”) agreed to serve as administering authority in the arbitration.

On 19 July 2010, the Centre conveyed to the Parties the Arbitral Tribunal’s proposal to
hold a first procedural meeting in Washington, D.C. on 26 August 2010, circulating at the

same time a provisional agenda. The Parties were invited to confer on the agenda items

and revert to the Tribunal with their agreement on these items, if any, by 3 August 2010.

On 2 August 2010, the Parties jointly wrote to the Arbitral Tribunal to advise that
significant progress had been made on an agreement concerning the agenda for the first
procedural meeting and requesting that the meeting therefore be held telephonically, as

opposed to in person, with the assistance of the Centre.

On 4 August 2010, the Centre conveyed the Arbitral Tribunal’s agreement to hold the

first procedural meeting telephonically.

On 25 August 2010, the Parties jointly wrote to the Arbitral Tribunal advising of their
agreement on certain procedural matters. In their joint letter, the Parties also advised that
they had reached and executed a final settlement, dated 24 August 2010 (the “Settlement
Agreement”), a copy of which was attached, and had agreed to request that the Arbitral
Tribunal record the Settlement Agreement in the form of a Consent Award, pursuant to

Article 34.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

On the same day, the Arbitral Tribunal wrote to the Parties, requesting their joint
consideration of the effect, if any, on the Tribunal’s continued jurisdiction over these
arbitral proceedings, including its jurisdiction to issue a Consent Award, once the

Settlement Agreement had, by its terms, taken effect.

During the first procedural meeting, held by teleconference on 26 August 2010, the
Parties confirmed their joint request, pursuant to Article 34.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules
and paragraph 9 of the Settlement Agreement, that the terms of the Settlement Agreement
be recorded in the form of a Consent Award, and made submissions on the timing of the
Settlement Agreement’s taking effect vis-a-vis the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction to issue

the requested Consent Award.

On 17 September 2010, the ICSID Secretariat issued Minutes of Meeting for the first
procedural meeting, which record the Parties’ joint request for a Consent Award, and
confirm the basic procedural framework for the arbitration agreed by the Parties in

contemplation of issuance of the present Consent Award.

IL.

THE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT

The Parties provided the Arbitral Tribunal with an original copy of the Settlement

Agreement, which was received on 13 September 2010.

Paragraph 1 of the Settlement Agreement provides that the Claimant “hereby irrevocably
and permanently withdraws its Notice of Arbitration served against the Government of
Canada”. Paragraph 9 further records the Parties’ agreement to request the incorporation
of the Settlement Agreement in the present Consent Award, which will formally and

permanently discontinue the arbitration proceedings:

The Parties agree jointly to request the incorporation in full of this
Settlement Agreement in the form of a Consent Award, pursuant to
NAFTA Article 1136 and Article 34(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, to be
issued by the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under NAFTA Chapter 11 to
hear the dispute between the Parties, which will result in the formal and
permanent discontinuance and termination of the NAFTA Chapter 11
arbitration proceedings commenced by AbitibiBowater with the filing of
its Notice of Arbitration.

The Settlement Agreement takes effect upon the satisfaction of certain conditions. In

particular, paragraph 13 of the Settlement Agreement provides as follows:

This Settlement Agreement shall be executed in three original copies in
counterparts, one original for each Party and one original for the Arbitral
Tribunal, and shall take effect upon the court approval referred to in
paragraph 6 being obtained and all relevant appeal periods for such
approvals having lapsed, and the New Company being constituted.

Paragraph 6 of the Settlement Agreement, referred to above, further provides as follows:

This Settlement Agreement is conditional upon AbitibiBowater [defined
so as to include AbitibiBowater Inc. and its Canadian subsidiaries
Abitibi-Consolidated Company of Canada, Abitibi-Consolidated Inc. and
AbitibiBowater Canada Inc.] obtaining the approval of its terms by the
Superior Court of Quebec in the CCAA Proceedings and by the U.S.
Court in the Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Proceedings and court approval of
AbitibiBowater’s restructuring plan. AbitibiBowater shall apply for such
approvals promptly. Should AbitibiBowater fail to obtain the approvals
referred to in this paragraph 6, this Agreement shall become null and
void and AbitibiBowater shall retain the full benefit of the Claims.

The Settlement Agreement, in its recitals, also notes, among other things, that
“AbitibiBowater is currently finalizing its restructuring process under the Chapter 11

Bankruptcy Proceedings and CCAA Proceedings and intends to continue operations in

-4-

Il.

20.

Canada under a new corporate structure (the ‘New Company’).” Paragraph 5 of the
Settlement Agreement confirms that payment made under that Agreement shall be made

to the New Company.

Accordingly, the Settlement Agreement takes effect once the conditions in paragraphs 6

and 13 of the Settlement Agreement have been met.

In a joint letter to the Arbitral Tribunal dated October 15, 2010, the Parties confirmed
their agreement that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to issue this Consent Award upon the
coming into effect of the Settlement Agreement as the Parties further confirmed their
understanding that, in relation to paragraph 1 of the Settlement Agreement, the Notice of
Arbitration shall be deemed to be withdrawn by AbitibiBowater Inc. no sooner than upon
issuance of the Consent Award, which shall formally and permanently discontinue and

terminate these proceedings.

In a joint letter to the Arbitral Tribunal dated 14 December 2010, the Parties confirmed
that the above-cited conditions having been satisfied, the Settlement Agreement has taken

effect and accordingly, this Consent Award can be issued.

AWARD

Having reviewed the Settlement Agreement, the Arbitral Tribunal now, pursuant to
Article 34.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules, records the Settlement Agreement verbatim as an

Award on agreed terms as follows:

SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT

This Settlement Agreement is made and entered into by and between AbitibiBowater Inc., a

Delaware corporation, and its Canadian subsidiaries Abitibi-Consolidated Company of Canada,

Abitibi-Consolidated Inc. and AbitibiBowater Canada Inc. (collectively “AbitibiBowater”), and

Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada (“the Government of Canada”). AbitibiBowater

and the Government of Canada are hereinafter referred to collectively as the “Parties”.

WHEREAS, on 16 December 2008, the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador (the

“Province’) passed An Act to Return to the Crown Certain Rights Relating to Timber and Water

use Vested in Abitibi-Consolidated and to Expropriate Assets and Lands Associated with the

Generation of Electricity Enabled by Those Water Use Rights (the “Act”);

WHEREAS, on 16 April 2009, AbitibiBowater Inc. and certain of its U.S. and Canadian
subsidiaries filed voluntary petitions in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of
Delaware (the “U.S. Court”) for relief under the provisions of Chapter 11 of the United States

Bankruptcy Code, as amended (the “Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Proceedings”);

WHEREAS, on 17 April 2009, certain of AbitibiBowater Inc.’s Canadian subsidiaries also
sought creditor protection under the Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act with the Superior

Court of Quebec in Canada (the “CCAA Proceedings”);

WHEREAS AbitibiBowater is currently finalizing its restructuring process under the Chapter 11
Bankruptcy Proceedings and the CCAA Proceedings and intends to continue operations in

Canada under a new corporate structure (the “New Company’’);

WHEREAS, on 25 February 2010, AbitibiBowater Inc. served a Notice of Arbitration and
Statement of Claim (the “Notice of Arbitration”) on the Government of Canada, pursuant to
Articles 1116, 1117 and 1120 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”) and
Articles 3 and 18 of the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (the “UNCITRAL Rules”), on its own behalf and on behalf of Abitibi-Consolidated
Company of Canada, Abitibi-Consolidated Inc. and AbitibiBowater Canada Inc., seeking

compensation under NAFTA Chapter 11 for damages arising out of the Act (the “Claims”);
WHEREAS, the Parties wish finally and irrevocably to settle the Claims;

NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises, undertakings and

representations contained in this Settlement Agreement, the Parties agree as follows:

1. AbitibiBowater Inc. hereby irrevocably and permanently withdraws its Notice of

Arbitration served against the Government of Canada.

2. AbitibiBowater Inc. hereby releases and forever discharges the Government of Canada

from the Claims.

AbitibiBowater, or any successor company, hereby waives any right to bring a NAFTA

Chapter 11 claim against the Government of Canada for any loss arising out of the Act.

AbitibiBowater, or any successor company, shall indemnify and hold harmless the
Government of Canada against any claim, action or proceeding that itself, its subsidiaries,
parents, predecessors, successors or assigns, have initiated or may initiate against the
Government of Canada relating to the Act. Nothing in this indemnification shall be
interpreted as extending to any rights or claims of AbitibiBowater’s partners in the Star
Lake Hydro Partnership and the Exploits River Hydro Partnership and/or of lenders or

creditors to those projects.

As consideration for the above-cited final settlement and waiver of any and all legal
action by AbitibiBowater against the Government of Canada arising out of or related to
the Act and/or claims by AbitibiBowater against the Government of Canada relating to
the assets and rights cited therein, including those raised in the Notice of Arbitration, the
Government of Canada shall make a payment of $130 million (CAD), following the
constitution of the New Company, representing not more than the fair market value of the
rights and assets owned by AbitibiBowater expropriated under the Act. Payment made

under this Settlement Agreement shall be made to the New Company.

This Settlement Agreement is conditional upon AbitibiBowater obtaining the approval of
its terms by the Superior Court of Quebec in the CCAA Proceedings and by the U.S.
Court in the Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Proceedings and court approval of AbitibiBowater’s
restructuring plan. AbitibiBowater shall apply for such approvals promptly. Should
AbitibiBowater fail to obtain the approvals referred to in this paragraph 6, this Agreement

shall become null and void and AbitibiBowater shall retain the full benefit of the Claims.

This Settlement Agreement shall not constitute a legal precedent for any person, and shall
not be used except for the sole purpose of giving effect to its terms, and shall not
prejudice or affect the rights or defenses of the Parties or the rights of any other person

except to the extent provided herein.

The Parties agree each to bear their own legal costs and expenses and to pay in equal

shares the fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under NAFTA Chapter

-7-

11 to hear the dispute between the Parties and of the International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment Disputes, incurred as of the date of signature of this Settlement

Agreement.

The Parties agree jointly to request the incorporation in full of this Settlement Agreement
in the form of a Consent Award, pursuant to NAFTA Article 1136 and Article 34(1) of
the UNCITRAL Rules, to be issued by the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under NAFTA
Chapter 11 to hear the dispute between the Parties, which will result in the formal and
permanent discontinuance and termination of the NAFTA Chapter 11 arbitration

proceedings commenced by AbitibiBowater with the filing of its Notice of Arbitration.

In accordance with NAFTA Annex 1137.4, the Parties agree to the publication of this

Settlement Agreement and the resulting Consent Award.

The Parties shall communicate and cooperate with each other prior to any public
disclosure of the transactions contemplated in this Agreement. If one party is required by
law or the rules and regulations of any stock exchange upon which its securities are listed
to disclose the content of this Agreement, then it shall consult with the other party and

allow it to comment on the proposed communication prior to its issuance.

For the purpose of construction and interpretation of this Settlement Agreement the entire
agreement shall be read and construed as a whole without giving any specific effect to

any article separately.

This Settlement Agreement shall be executed in three original copies in counterparts, one
original for each Party and one original for the Arbitral Tribunal, and shall take effect
upon the court approval referred to in paragraph 6 being obtained and all relevant appeal

periods for such approvals having lapsed, and the New Company being constituted.

This Settlement Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the

laws of the Province of Ontario and such rules of international law as may be applicable.

IN WITNESS WHEREOPF, the Parties have executed and delivered this Settlement Agreemer

on August 24% 2010.

AbitjbiBowater A The ma
By: KA Ye By:

OsPuTY Minisrel OF

 

 

Title: Title: TWTe2wATona. TRADG
Dated: August 23,2010 Dated: August 24,2010
Abitibi-C ee of Canada

By: SA — \——

Title: 3

Dated: AvGvsTt 29, 2010

Abitibi- esate

By: 7S aS

Title:

 

Dated: Aveust 2%, 2010

21. In accordance with NAFTA Annex 1137.4, the Parties agree to the publication of this

Consent Award.

MADE at the place of arbitration, agreed for the purpose of the present Consent Award,
Montréal, Québec, Canada, on this \5 day of Decemier 2010.

Bishop Dr. Gavan Griffith, Q.C. {s hg
a Co-Arbitrator

 

Le
"Professor Andreas Bucher
President

AG

