INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
In the arbitration proceeding between
ACCESSION MEZZANINE CAPITAL L.P.
AND
DANUBIUS KERESKEDOHAZ VAGYONKEZELO ZRT.

Claimants
and

HUNGARY

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/3

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Arthur W. Rovine, President
Hon. Marc Lalonde, Arbitrator
Prof. Zachary Douglas QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Mairée Uran-Bidegain

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 17 April 2015

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. Representing Hungary:
and Danubius Kereskedéhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt.:

COVINGTON & BURLING LLP
Mr. Eugene D. Gulland

Mr. Miguel Lépez Forastier

Mr. Alexander Berengaut

Mr. Daniel Matro

One CityCenter

850 Tenth Street, N.W.
Washington D.C. 20001-4956
United States of America

and

BAN, S. SZABO & PARTNERS
Dr. Janos Rausch

Dr. Balazs Unger

1051 Budapest,

Jézsef nddor tér 5-6.

Hungary

ARNOLD & PORTER LLP
Ms. Jean E. Kalicki

Ms. Mallory B. Silberman
Mr. Csaba Rusznak

Mr. Pedro Soto

555 Twelfth Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20004
United States of America

ARNOLD & PORTER (UK) LLP
Mr. Dmitri Evseev

Mr. Peter Nikitin

Mr. Bart Wasiak

Tower 42

25 Old Broad St.

London EC2N 1HQ

United Kingdom

and

KENDE, MOLNAR-BIRO, KATONA
Dr. Janos Katona

Dr. Gyérgy Molnar-Biré

Dr. Tamas Kende

Dr. Gabor Puskas

Villanyitit 47

1118 Budapest

Hungary

Ill.

V.

VI.

INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 2

A.

The Initiation of the Proceedings, Preliminary Objections Pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(5) and the Respondent’s Notice of Jurisdictional Objections and

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Request for Bifurcation 2
B. The Reconstitution of the Tribumal .............ccccccsesssseeseseesesteseseesestesesseseanesssnessaneseaeeneas 4
C. The Proceedings on Jurisdiction 4
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 6
THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 14
A. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON BIFURCATION AND THE SCOPE OF THIS
PHASE OF THE ARBITRATION 14
B. THE CLAIMANTS’ “CHOSE-IN-ACTION” ARGUMENT 17
C. THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTION [B1] 19
(1) Introduction 19
(2) Applicable law: 20
(3) The significance of the Award in Emmis et al. v. HUNQQrY ...c.cccccccsceseecesceseeteeeees 21
(4) The Claimants’ first argument on the incorporation of provisions of
Hungarian law relating to the tender procedure into the Broadcasting
Agreement 21
(i) Section 3.2 of the Broadcasting Agreement ..........0.. cece eeeeeteeeteeeeeeees 22
(ii) Section 2 of the GTT 27
(iii) Conclusion 29
(5) The Claimants’ second argument relating to the specific rights vested by
virtue of the “Contract Framework” ..........csccsseessesseseeseeseeseeseesessesseesneeneeneeseesee 30
(i) The obligations upon the ORTT under the “Contract Framework”.............. 32
(ii) The consequences that follow from the alleged breach of the obligations
upon the ORTT 37
(6) The Claimants’ third and fourth arguments: were the Claimants’ rights as
against the ORTT part of their investment in Hungary and could those rights
be the object of a claim for expropriation? «00.0.0... eee eeneeeeeet ete eeeeeeeeees 42
THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTION [B2]
E. CONCLUSION ON THE IMPACT OF THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS IN
RESPECT OF ITS JURISDICTION ..........c:ccescessessessssssesseeseeseeseeseeseesessssssnteneeseeseenees 54
COSTS 56
AWARD 59

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

1997 CFT
2009 CFT

Advenio

Arbitration Rules

Bifurcation Decision

BIT or Treaty

Broadcasting Agreement

Claimants

Cl. Mem.

Cl. C-Mem. Jur.

Cl. Rej. Jur.

Danubius Radié or Danubius
DHSV

Emmis Award

iii

Call For Tender dated 10 June 1997 (C-50)
Call For Tender dated 29 July 2009 (C-108)

Advenio Zrt.

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Decision on the Respondent’s Notice of
Jurisdictional Objections and Request for
Bifurcation dated 8 August 2013

Agreement between the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Government of the Hungarian
People’s Republic for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated 9
March 1987

Radio Broadcasting Contract between the
National Radio and Television Board and
Orszagos Kereskedelmi Radié
Részvénytarsasdg dated 18 November 1997
(C-51)

Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. and

Danubius Kereskedéhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt.

Claimants’ memorial on the merits dated 11
April 2013

Claimants’ counter-memorial on jurisdiction
dated 7 November 2013

Claimants’ rejoinder on jurisdiction dated 17
December 2013

Danubius Radié Miisorszolgaltaté Zrt.
Danubius Kereskedéhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt.

Award dated 16 April 2014 in Emmis
International Holding B.V., Emmis Radio
Operating B.V., and MEM Magyar Electronic
Media Kereskedelmi és Szolgdltaté Kft. v.
Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2)

Emmis Decision

GTT

Hungary or Respondent

ICSID Convention

ICSID or the Centre

Kérmendy-Ekes & Lengyel First Report

Media Law

Mezzanine

Notice of JO
OKR

OSCE
ORTT

Parties

Requesting Parties

Request for Arbitration

Decision on the Respondent’s Application for
Bifurcation dated 13 June 2013 in Emmis
International Holding B.V., Emmis Radio
Operating B.V. and MEM Magyar Electronic
Media Kereskedelmi és Szolgdltaté Kft. v.
Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2)

General Terms of Tender dated 30 August
1996 (C-48)

Hungary

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

First Report of Dr. Judit Kérmendy-Ekes and
Dr. Mark Lengyel dated 23 September 2013
(submitted with Respondent’s memorial on
jurisdiction dated 23 September 2013)

Act I of 1996 on Radio and Television
Broadcasting entered into effect on 1 January
1996 (C-46)

Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P.

Respondent’s Notice of Jurisdictional
Objections and Request for Bifurcation dated
28 June 2013

Orszagos Kereskedelmi Radio Rt

Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe

Hungary’s National Radio and Television
Broadcasting Board

Claimants and Respondent

Emmis International Holding B.V., Emmis
Radio Operating, B.V., MEM Magyar
Electronic Media Kerekedelmi és Szolgaltaté
Kft., Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. and
Danubius Kereskeddhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt.

Request for Arbitration dated 27 December
2011

Resp. Mem. Jur.

Resp. Rep. Jur.

Revised Request

Rozgonyi First Report

Rozgonyi Second Report

Rozgonyi Third Report

Ruling on Arbitration Rule 41(5)

Slager Radio or Slager
Tr. [Day 1/2], [page]

Respondent’s memorial on jurisdiction dated
23 September 2013

Respondent’s reply on jurisdiction dated 27
November 2013

Revised Amended Request for Arbitration
dated 9 November 2012

Expert Report of Dr. Krisztina Rozgonyi
(undated; submitted with Claimants’ memorial
on the merits dated 11 April 2013)

Second Expert Report of Dr. Krisztina
Rozgonyi dated 7 November 2013 (submitted
with Claimants’ counter-memorial on
jurisdiction dated 7 November 2013)

Third Expert Report of Dr. Krisztina Rozgonyi
dated 17 December 2013 (submitted with
Claimants’ rejoinder on jurisdiction dated 17
December 2013)

Decision on the Respondent’s Objection under
Arbitration Rule 41(5) dated 16 January 2013

Slager Radio Misorszolgaltato Zrt.

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction held
from 26 to 27 May 2014

INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Agreement between
the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments dated 9 March 1987, which entered into force on 28 August
1987 (the “BIT” or “Treaty”), and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States dated 18 March 1965, which
entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

The dispute relates to the alleged unlawful expropriation or nationalization without
compensation of the Claimants’ investments in and related to Danubius Radio
Misorzolgaltaté Zrt. (“Danubius Radi6” or “Danubius”), a Hungarian company, and a
former licencee of one of the two nationwide FM radio-broadcasting frequencies in

Hungary.

The Claimants are Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. (“Mezzanine”) and Danubius

Kereskedéhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt. (“DHSV”).

Mezzanine is a partnership organized under the laws of Bermuda with its principal place of
business in Hamilton, Bermuda. DHSV is a company organized and existing under the
laws of Hungary, allegedly majority owned by Mezzanine. Both companies are jointly

referred to as “Claimants”.
The Respondent is Hungary and is hereinafter referred to as “Hungary” or “Respondent”.

The Claimants and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties”.

The Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

This Award rules on the Respondent’s Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Centre, by
which the Respondent requests that the Tribunal render an award dismissing the
Claimants’ claims in their entirety for lack of jurisdiction ratione materiae to adjudicate

this case.

IL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Initiation of the Proceedings, Preliminary Objections Pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(5) and the Respondent’s Notice of Jurisdictional Objections and
Request for Bifurcation

On 28 October 2011, ICSID received a request for arbitration on behalf of Emmis
International Holding B.V., Emmis Radio Operating, B.V., MEM Magyar Electronic
Media Kereskedelmi és Szolgaltat6 Kft., Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. and Danubius

Kereskeddhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt. against Hungary.

Further to a communication from ICSID dated 9 December 2011, refusing the registration
of the 28 October 2011 request for arbitration, on 27 December 2011, the Claimants in this
case submitted an amended request for arbitration against Hungary (the “Request for

Arbitration’).

On 18 January 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration
in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the

registration.

On 10 October 2012, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted, composed of Professor Arthur
W. Rovine, a national of the United States, President, appointed by agreement of the
Parties; the Honorable Marc Lalonde, a national of Canada, appointed by the Claimants;

and Professor Donald M. McRae, a national of Canada, appointed by the Respondent.

A detailed recount of the procedural history covering the filing and registration of the
Request for Arbitration, the constitution of the original Arbitral Tribunal and its First
Session, and the procedures leading to the decisions on the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5) is included in Section II of the
Tribunal’s Decision on the Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) dated 16 January
2013 (the “Ruling on Arbitration Rule 41(5)”).

In its Ruling on Arbitration Rule 41(5), the Tribunal decided that:

a. The Parties have agreed to arbitrate, pursuant to Article 8 of the Bilateral Investment
Treaty between the United Kingdom and Hungary (BIT), only expropriation rights

and obligations as set forth in Article 6 of the BIT. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction
over any other substantive obligation set forth in the BIT.

b. The BIT between the United Kingdom and Hungary, as any treaty, is to be interpreted
in accordance with international law.

c. The UK-Hungary BIT provides no definition or guidance for determinations with
respect to expropriation. Rules on expropriation constitute a portion of the rules of
customary and general principles of international law, as well as other sources of
international law on expropriation. In the absence of definition and guidance as to
expropriation in the UK-Hungary BIT, the Tribunal will rely on customary and
general principles of international law, as well as contemporary sources of law on
expropriation, in determining whether or not an expropriation has occurred and if so,
the compensation to be awarded. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide international
law questions to the extent relevant and applicable to the determination of
expropriation questions, as well as compensation, if necessary.

d. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to define the scope, extent and content of the
expropriation obligations the Parties agreed to arbitrate under the BIT between the
United Kingdom and Hungary. Article 42(1) is not to be interpreted or applied as an
independent source of obligation.

e. MEN provisions may be relevant in this case and may be utilized to the extent that
they apply to expropriation.
On 8 August 2013, the Tribunal issued its Decision on the Respondent’s Notice of

Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation (the “Bifurcation Decision”).

By paragraph 39 of the Bifurcation Decision, the Tribunal decided to bifurcate the
proceedings, between the jurisdictional and merits phase. It indicated that the analysis of
the Emmis International Holding B.V., et al. v. Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2)
Decision on the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation dated 13 June 2013 was to be

considered as persuasive authority for this case.'

A detailed account of the procedural history covering the period from the Respondent’s
notification of jurisdictional objections and request for bifurcation is included in Section II

of the Tribunal’s Bifurcation Decision.

The Tribunal’s Ruling on Arbitration Rule 41(5) and the Bifurcation Decision constitute an

integral part of this Award, and are incorporated herewith as Annexes A and B.

' See infra §56, including a summary of the conclusion of the Emmis tribunal, as adopted by this Tribunal.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

The Reconstitution of the Tribunal

On 4 March 2014, the Secretary of the Tribunal notified the Parties of the resignation of
Professor Donald M. McRae from the Arbitral Tribunal and of the vacancy resulting
thereof. In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 10(2) and 11(2), the proceedings
were suspended on that same day and the Respondent was invited to appoint an arbitrator

to fill the vacancy.

On 14 March 2014, the Respondent appointed Professor Zachary Douglas QC, a national

of Australia, as arbitrator in replacement of Professor Donald M. McRae.

Professor Douglas QC accepted his appointment on 20 March 2014. On the same date, the

Tribunal was reconstituted and the proceedings resumed.

The Tribunal is therefore composed of Professor Arthur W. Rovine, President; the

Honorable Marc Lalonde; and Professor Zachary Douglas QC.

The Proceedings on Jurisdiction

Following the schedule established by the Tribunal in its Bifurcation Decision, the
Respondent filed its memorial on jurisdiction (“Resp. Mem. Jur.”) on 23 September 2013;
the Claimants filed their counter-memorial on jurisdiction (“Cl. C-Mem. Jur.”) on 7
November 2013; the Respondent filed its reply on jurisdiction (“Resp. Rep. Jur.”) on 27
November 2013; and the Claimants filed their rejoinder on jurisdiction (“Cl. Rej. Jur.”) on

17 December 2013.

A pre-hearing organizational meeting was held with the Parties by telephone conference on

14 May 2014.

A hearing on jurisdiction took place in Washington, D.C. from 26 to 27 May 2014 (the
“Hearing”). In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the Tribunal,

present at the Hearing were:

For the Claimants:

Mr. Eugene Gulland Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Miguel L6pez Forastier Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Alexander Berengaut Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Daniel Matro Covington & Burling LLP
Ms. Ruma Mazumdar (paralegal) Covington & Burling LLP
Dr. Rausch Janos Ban, S. Szab6 & Partners

Mr. Franz Hérhager Claimants’ Representative

For the Respondent:

Ms. Jean E. Kalicki Arnold & Porter LLP
Mr. Dimitri Evseev Arnold & Porter LLP
Ms. Mallory Silberman Arnold & Porter LLP
Mr. Peter Nikitin Arnold & Porter LLP
Mr. Bart Wasiak Arnold & Porter LLP
Mr. Kelby Ballena Arnold & Porter LLP
Mr. Janos Katona Kende Molnar-Biré Katona
Mr. Gyorgy Molnar-Biré Kende Molnar-Biré Katona

25. The Parties filed their statements on costs on 15 August 2014.

26. The proceeding was closed on 17 April 2015.

Ill. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

? United Nations Indus

In the early 1990s, after the fall of the Soviet Union, Hungary began transitioning to a
market-oriented economy by opening certain sectors, including telecommunications and

broadcast media, to private investors.”

On 1 January 1996, Act I of 1996 on Radio and Television Broadcasting (the “Media
Law”) entered into effect.> The Media Law permitted and regulated private broadcasting

licences for otherwise State-owned radio frequencies.*

The Media Law created the National Radio and Television Broadcasting Board (the
“ORTT”). In accordance with Section 32.1 of the Media Law, the ORTT was “an
independent legal entity, under the supervision of Parliament”. It was composed of at least
five members, elected by the political parties represented in Parliament, and chaired by an
appointee nominated jointly by the President and the Prime Minister of Hungary.> Its
members could not “be instructed within the sphere of their official capacity”.®

The ORTT’s functions included: (i) conducting and evaluating open competitive tender
processes for television and radio broadcasting rights; (ii) concluding the relevant
broadcasting agreements; and, (iii) overseeing compliance with the Media Law and the

resulting broadcasting agreements.’

In this context, Section 130(1) of the Media Law mandated that the ORTT issue, within
three months of its entry into force, a competitive tender for broadcasting rights over two
particular national radio frequencies: one for broadcasting rights held by a State-owned

broadcaster under the denomination of “Danubius Radié”; and a second one, for a new

commercial national frequency to be allocated to a commercial broadcaster.

 

ial Development Organization, Recent Experiences with Alternative Forms of Privatization,

25 March 1996 (C-47), pp. 30-31.

3 Act I of 1996 on Radio and Television Broadcasting, | January 1996 (“Media Law”) (C-46).
+ See Constitutional Court Decision No. 71/2009, 14 July 2009 (R-54) (C-102), p. 5.

5 Media Law (C-46), Section 33(1)-33(4).

© Id., (C-46), Section 31(2).

7 Id., (C-46), Section 41(1) (a), (b) and (i), and 90.

32. On 30 August 1996, pursuant to Section 91 of the Media Law, the ORTT adopted the
General Terms of Tender (“GTT”).8 The GTT governed the terms of tender for
commercial radio broadcasting, including: (i) the evaluation and comparison criteria; (ii)
the content and publication of calls for tenders; and (iii) the conclusion and execution of

broadcasting agreements between the ORTT and the winning bidders.?

33. With regard to the tender evaluation criteria, Section 65.3.1 of the GTT established that an
incumbent bidder “shall be preferred [...] if it operates and broadcasts in accordance with
its studio license and the Media Act”. Conversely, Section 65.3.2 of the GTT provided a
corollary rule pursuant to which the incumbent bidder “shall be disadvantaged” by the

ORTT, if it “does not operate in accordance with its studio license and the Media Act”.

34. Against this background and pursuant to Section 130 of the Media Law,'° in June 1997
Hungary conducted a call for tender (the “1997 CFT”) for the broadcasting rights of two

national FM radio frequencies.!!

35. Orszdgos Kereskedelmi Radio Rt (“OKR”), a consortium of foreign and Hungarian
investors led by the Daily Mail Group Radio (U.K.), won the bid for the broadcasting
rights for the existing radio frequency. Accordingly, the ORTT and the OKR concluded a
Broadcasting Agreement (the “Broadcasting Agreement”) on 18 November 1997.'* The
broadcasting rights over the second frequency were awarded to Slager Réadié

Misorszolgaltaté Zrt (“Slager”).'°

36. In 2003, Advent and Mezzanine each invested in OKR, directly and through DSHV, the
second Claimant in this case. In 2004, OKR changed its name to Danubius Radié

Misorszolgaltato Részvénytarsasag (“Danubius Radio” as defined in Part I above). In

8 General Terms of Tender, 30 August 1996 (“GTT”) (C-48).

° GTT (C-48), §74.

10 See supra, $31.

11 1997 Call for Tender, 10 June 1997 (C-50), §1.1.

" Radio Broadcasting Contract between the National Radio and Television Board and Orsz4gos Kereskedelmi
Radié Részvénytarsasdg, 18 November 1997 (“Broadcasting Agreement”) (C-51). In 2000, GWR Radio Hungary
Ltd (UK) acquired OKR and its broadcasting rights.

'3 The shareholders of Sldger Radio instituted separate arbitration proceedings against Hungary (see Emmis
International Holding B.V., Emmis Radio Operating B.V. and MEM Magyar Electronic Media Kereskedelmi és
Szolgdltaté Kft. v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2. See also infra, Section IV.C(3).

 

37.

38.

39.

40.

4

2008, Advent sold its shares in Danubius Radié for a nominal price. DSHV and Mezzanine

remained as investors in Danubius Radio.

Clause 2(3) of the Broadcasting Agreement specified that the agreement was valid for an
initial term of seven years, ending on 18 November 2004. The Broadcasting Agreement

further stated that its “renewal [...] shall be governed by Section 107 of the Media Law”.'+

Section 107(1) of the Media Law provides that broadcasting rights for radio shall be valid
for a maximum of seven years and “may be renewed once upon expiry at the broadcaster’s
request, without inviting a tender, for an additional five years”. On this basis, the ORTT
renewed the Broadcasting Agreement for a period of five years, ending on 18 November

2009.!5

In 2008, the Hungarian Parliament attempted to amend Section 107 of the Media Law, to
permit the renewal, without a tender, of the Danubius and Slager broadcasting licences,
which were set to expire in 2009 (the “Amending Act”).!° The Amending Act was
declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of Hungary and the bill was not
enacted into law.!’ The Court also specified that the expiring rights arising out of

broadcasting agreements could be renewed “on one occasion”.!®

On 4 June 2009, the ORTT published a draft call for tender (“CFT”) for the Danubius and
Slager expiring licences. According to the Media Law, the draft was subject to comments
from any interested parties.!? Danubius submitted a series of observations. On 14 July
2009, the ORTT issued its formal response to the draft questions from Danubius, and
clarified, inter alia, that the [ORTT] “did not wish to favour either old or new actors in the

course of evaluating the bids” and that the maximum score available for broadcasting

 

ds r t (C-51), §2.3 (providing that “the ing Right shall commence on November 18,

1997 and shall be valid for a period of seven (7) years subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement. The

renewal of the Broadcasting Right shall be governed b

Section 107 of the Media Law”). Clause 3.2 of the

 

Broadcasting Agreement further provided that “the provisions of the Media Act relating to the Broadcasting Right

and exercise thereof [.

‘shall be incorporated into th{e] Agreement by reference’”.

 

'5 See Amendment to the Broadcasting Agreement, 17 December 2002 (C-52).
'6 Act T/6829 on the amendment of Act I of 1996 on Radio and Television Broadcasting, November 2008 (C-91),

Art. 2.

"7 See Constitutional Court Decision No. 71/2009, 14 July 2009 (R-54) (C-102).
'8 Constitutional Court Decision No. 71/2009, 14 July 2009 (R-54) (C-102), p. 5.
'° Media Law (C-46), Sections 93 and 95(1).

Al.

42.

43.

experience was 10 points, and that the ORTT “endeavoured to achieve maximum
objectiveness [...] taking into consideration in particular the decision of the Constitutional

Court [...]”,°° regarding the renewal of expiring rights described in §39 supra.

On 29 July 2009, pursuant to Section 41(1) of the Media Law, the ORTT published a
second call for tender for the national FM-radio broadcasting frequencies held by Danubius
Radié and Slager Rédidé, which were due to expire in November 2009.7! Danubius
submitted bids for the broadcasting rights over both the frequency it originally held and the
frequency awarded to Slager in 1997. In the event, Danubius and Slager lost to other

contenders.

From September 2009 onwards, the Hungarian Press reported on secret backdoor
negotiations between the outgoing MSZP political party and the incoming Fidesz party to
split the national radio frequencies and to ensure that the frequencies would be awarded to

investors of their choosing, closely linked to each of the political parties.??

In line with these rumours, Danubius received overtures from Fidesz warning that it would
have to reach accommodations with Fidesz-named investors or lose the tender. According
to the Claimants, Slager received similar overtures from MSZP. Danubius entertained
negotiations with the potential strategic investor, which were ultimately unfruitful.??
Advenio and the FM1 Consortium, the alleged politically-favored bidders (which

ultimately took over the Slager frequency) were created shortly before the call for tenders.

2° Letter from Laszl6 Majtényi to Adém Féldes, 29 July 2009, Attachment 2, §6, p. 12, and Attachment 1, $4 pp. 4-5
(C-109). It is disputed between the Parties whether those comments related to the potential priority to be given to

e

ing broadcasters.

2! Call For Tender, 29 July 2009 (“2009 CFT”) (C-108), pp. 25, 27.

% Danubius and Slager Could Disappear, Népszabadsdg, 30 September 2009 (C-16); Radio: the excluded company
wants to sue, Viléggazdasdg, 9 October 2009 (C-17); Danubius and Slager Under Seige, Népszabadsdg, 17 October
2009 (C-18); Peter Murphy, Politics Killed the Radio Stars, TOL, 10 December 2009 (C-19).

23 See Email from Laszl6 Olah, 15 July 2009, and attached memorandum dated 14 July 2009 (providing details of
the deal proposed to Danubius Rédié shareholders) (C-103); Email from Laszlé Olah and attachment, 24 July 2009
(C-105); Email from Laszlé Olah, 27 July 2009 (C-106); see also Cl. C-Mem. Jur. §71.

44. On 28 October 2009, the ORTT communicated the results of the tender process and

awarded the frequency previously held by Danubius to Advenio Zrt. (“Advenio”), a newly

constituted company.”4

45. The ORTT Chairman and one of the ORTT Board Members resigned shortly after the
winning bidders were announced and condemned the alleged irregularities affecting the
tender process.*> They also issued dissenting opinions on the Board’s decision to admit

Advenio’s bid in disregard of the recommendations of the ORTT’s professional staff.”°
46. On4 November 2009, the ORTT entered into a broadcasting agreement with Advenio.””

47. The results of the tender process sparked the interest and criticism of the international
community. On 18 November 2009 the ambassadors of nine nations in Hungary issued a
joint statement noting “with great concern” that there were “new instances of non-
transparent behaviour affecting investors in such areas as public utilities, broadcasting,
and elements of the nation’s infrastructure”.> In December 2009, the U.S. House of
Representatives passed a resolution in which it “condemn[ed] the recent action by [the
ORTT] that awarded the national community radio licenses” and encouraged Hungary to

“respect the rule of law and treat investors fairly” and “to maintain its commitment to a

free and independent press”?

* ORTT Communication Re Tender Winner for Broadcasting Rights No. 1, 28 October 2009 (R-55), p. 2.

25 Thomas Escritt, Hungary broadcast regulator quits over radio bids, Financial Times, 6 November 2009 (C-10).
See also, ORTT Chairman Claims the Radio Tender is Unclean, Origo, 12 October 2009 (C-132).

26 On 5 October 2009, the Office of the ORTT, composed of professional staff in charge of reviewing all the
relevant bids, recommended to the ORTT (the Board), that the Advenio bid be rejected and concluded that “Advenio
Zrt’s Bid does not comply with the provisions of the law as in the event of its victory, Advenio would be in breach of
the provisions of the Media Act (chapter VIII.) § 123 paragraph (1) and (2), moreover the ownership structure of
Advenio Zrt is already in breach of GTT paragraph 25 and 25.5.”). The recommendations of the ORTT’s office
were not binding. See ORTT Office Proposal No. 1046/2009, 5 October 2009 (C-124), pp. 12-14). See Dissenting
Opinion of Dr. Laszlé Majtényi, Chairman of the ORTT regarding ORTT Resolutions No. 1903, 1905 and
1911/2009 (X.7), 12 October 2009 (C-131); Dissenting Opinion of Dr. Janos Timar, Board Member of the ORTT
regarding ORTT Resolution No. 1903/2009, 8 October 2009 (C-130).

27 Agreement for Broadcasting Services between the ORTT and Advenio Zrt., 4 November 2009 (C-142).

28 See Joint Statement on Transparency, Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs, 18 November 2009 (C-26);
(noting that it was issued with the support of the Embassies of Belgium, France, Germany, Japan. Norway,
Switzerland, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States), see also Hungary's Investment Climate
Worrying Diplomats, Reuters, 19 November 2009 (C-27).

2° H. Res. 915 (111th Cong. 2009), 8 December 2009 (C-147), p. 3.

 

 

10

48.

49.

50.

51.

Danubius challenged the results of the 2009 CFT and the ORTT’s determination before the
Hungarian courts, seeking: (i) interim relief in order to prevent the ORTT from signing a
broadcasting agreement with Advenio; and (ii) requesting that the ORTT be ordered to sign
the Broadcasting Agreement with Danubius. Danubius’s interim relief application was

denied.*°

On 5 January 2010, the Metropolitan Court declared that the ORTT acted unlawfully when
it failed to disqualify Advenio’s bid as formally invalid and executed the agreement with
Advenio. The Court found that Advenio’s bid violated the cross ownership and controlling
interests restrictions of the Media Law. It further rejected Danubius request to declare the

restoration of its broadcasting rights.*!

This judgment was upheld by the Metropolitan
Court of Appeals on 14 July 2010 and was subsequently confirmed by the Supreme Court

of Hungary.

In April 2010, following elections in Hungary, a new coalition formed by the centre-right
Fidesz party and the Christian Democratic People’s Party KDNP took control from the
MSZP Socialist Party. According to the Claimants, the political climate leading up to the

elections affected the results of the tender process.**

In July 2010, the Hungarian Parliament amended the Media Law, including, inter alia,
Section 112(4)(a). This Section, in its original form, provided for the termination of an
unlawful broadcasting agreement in all situations irrespective of how the unlawful situation
came into existence. With the new amendment, the ORTT was required to terminate the

broadcasting agreement only if the unlawful situation was caused exclusively by the

% See Metropolitan Court Decision No. 7.G.411.820/2009/6-II, 11 November 2009 (R-77), p. 1.

3! Metropolitan Court, Judgment No. 7.G.41.820/2009/26 of the Metropolitan Court of Budapest, 5 January 2010,
(Danubius) (C-151), pp. 16, 25-6.

*% Metropolitan Court of Appeals, Judgment No. 14.Gf.40.119/2010/15, 14 July 2010, (C-159); see also Supreme
Court of the Republic of Hungary, Judgment in Pfv.IV.21.908/201/6, 23 February 2011, (C-167) (see p. 10 noting

that the “legal consequence” of a declaration of unlawfulness in a tender

the termination of the disputed contract

 

pursuant to Section 112(4)(a), which it is to be requested in an administrative procedure. Section 112(4) was
subsequently modified by Parliament (see infra §51)).
3 See supra §§42-44 and infra 51, 54-55.

broadcaster but not where the ORTT’s error or omission played any part in the unlawful

situation.**

52. On 28 October 2011, the Requesting Parties, as specified supra §8, including Claimants,
submitted a request for arbitration before ICSID in respect of the alleged expropriation of

the Claimants’ investments in and related to Danubius Radié.*>

53. The Claimants contend that the expropriation resulted from the Respondent’s 2009 tender
procedure when it replaced Danubius Radié as the licencee. According to the Claimants,
the Respondent’s measures infringed the Media Law and the GTT by, inter alia: (i) not
according the incumbent licencees the preferences in the tender provided by law; (ii)
providing for a shorter period of time for the submission of bids than provided by law; and
(iii) awarding the broadcasting rights to bidders with prohibited conflict of interest and
unfeasible business plans with close ties with the two leading political parties in Hungary,

which impacted the ORTT’s final decision to award the licences to two competitors.

54. In December 2011, the Hungarian Parliament enacted Act CLXXXV of 2010 on Media
Services and Mass Media (the “New Media Law”).*° Section 207(7) of the new law
replaced Section 112(4)(a) with a measure that expressly prohibited the new Media
Council from terminating an unlawful broadcasting agreement if the ORTT had any

responsibility for the unlawful situation.

55. The New Media Law also drew the attention of international organizations. The European
Commission,*’ the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE),** and

the Council of Europe urged Hungary to undertake a wholesale review of its legislation to,

4 Act LXXXII (2010) (C-150), Section 24(1).

5 The Claimants to this arbitration submitted an amended Request for Arbitration on 27 December 2011. (supra §9).
36 Act CLXXXV of 2010 on Media Services and on Mass Media, 31 December 2011 (C-173).

37 Letter from Neelie Kroes, Vice-President of the European Commission, to Tibor Navracsics, Deputy Prime
Minister, 21 January 2011 (C-31) (noting that “the Commission services have serious doubts as to the compatibility
of the Hungarian legiaation with Union law”).

38 Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Representative on Freedom of the Media, Hungarian media
legislation severely contradicts international standards of media freedom, says OSCE media freedom
representative, 7 September 2010 (C-34).

  

inter alia, reinstate legislation promoting pluralistic and independent media, and the

strengthening of guarantees of immunity from political influence.*?

% Council of Europe — Commissioner for Human Rights, Opinion of the Commissioner for Human Rights on
Hungary's media legislation in light of Council of Europe standards on freedom of the media, 25 February 2011 (C-
33).

IV. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

A. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON BIFURCATION AND THE SCOPE OF THIS
PHASE OF THE ARBITRATION

56. It is important at the outset to recall the scope of the present phase of the bifurcated
proceedings. By its Bifurcation Decision, the Tribunal referred to the decision on
bifurcation in Emmis International Holding B.V. et al. v. Hungary (the “Emmis Decision’)
“as persuasive authority here” in view of the fact that the “facts and jurisdictional issues in
the instant case overlap very considerably with those of [Emmis]’. The Tribunal then

summarised five key points from the Emmis Decision directly relevant to the present case:

a. The Tribunal is required to identify whether and which investments of
Claimants may properly give rise to an expropriation claim, the only
substantive cause of action within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

b. The existence and nature of any such rights must be determined by reference
to Hungarian and international law.

c. The relevant time for assessment of Claimants’ rights and investments that
may properly give rise to an expropriation claim is the conduct of the 2009
Tender just prior to 18 November 2009.

d. The nature and incidents of the rights and investments held by Claimants are
distinct from the question as to whether such rights were expropriated by
Respondent.

e. If Claimants are successful, it is within the Tribunal’s discretion to
compensate Claimants for increased costs occasioned by Respondent’s
objection to jurisdiction and consequent delay.

57. The Tribunal concluded that:

The jurisdictional issues Respondent raises are significant and deserve a focused
examination in a separate phase that could either make a merits phase
unnecessary or sharpen many factual issues should the Tribunal reach the
merits.“°

58. The jurisdictional issues raised by the Respondent and thus capable of determination in this

phase of the arbitration were set out in the Respondent’s Notice of Jurisdictional

“0 Bifurcation Decision, $39.2.

Objections and Request for Bifurcation dated 28 June 2013 (“Notice of JO”). Those

objections are twofold:

(a) “The absence of a qualifying foreign investment by Claimants”; and.

(b) “The dispute does not ‘aris[e] directly out of an investment

59. Each of these objections breaks down into a series of arguments, which the Tribunal will
now summarise from the Respondent’s aforementioned pleading. The Tribunal will also

designate a number to each objection and argument for convenience.
“The absence of a qualifying foreign investment by Claimants” [A]

e Accession (the first Claimant) provided financing to Advent (an unrelated private
equity fund) for a leveraged buyout of Danubius and DSHV in 2003. A private
contractual arrangement to finance an acquisition does not qualify as an
investment under the ICSID Convention (relying principally on Burimi v.

Albania)? [A1]

e Accession did not expend its own money in Danubius’s Hungarian radio business.
A qualified investment under Article 8.1 of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention requires an “active contribution” (relying principally on Standard

Chartered Bank v. Tanzania“). [A2]

e DSHV does not meet the definition of a UK investor in the BIT because it is a
Hungarian company (majority owned by a Luxembourg company) and could not

itself have been the source of a foreign investment in Hungary.** [A3]

e Claimants’ equity shares in Danubius were worthless at the time of acquisition
(Accession acquired them from Advent for 1 euro) and as such cannot be

recognized as an investment.*° [A4]

+! Burimi SRL and Eagle Games SH.A. v. Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18, Award, 29 May 2013 (RA-27).
* Notice of JO, $4.

8 Standard Chartered Bank v. Tanzania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/10/12, Award, 2 November 2012 (RA-33).

+ Notice of JO, §4.

+ Notice of JO, $4.

60.

61.

“The dispute does not ‘aris[e] directly out of an investment’” [B]

e Claimants did not have a right to a new licence under Hungarian law when their
existing licence expired on 18 November 2009 and hence there was no cognisable
investment in respect of a new licence such that the dispute does not arise directly

out of an investment.*” [B1]

e “As there is no allegation of interference with Claimants’ shareholding of
Danubius, those shares cannot, by themselves, be considered the relevant

investment for purposes [sic] of this dispute”. [B2]

It is incumbent upon the Tribunal to resolve these jurisdictional arguments raised by the
Respondent. The Tribunal must also assess the impact of its decisions on these particular
arguments upon its jurisdiction over the dispute that has been submitted to it. In other
words, the Tribunal must determine whether or not its jurisdiction is vitiated completely by

its decisions on these jurisdictional arguments or in part only.

On the hypothesis that the Claimants are able to identify qualifying investments during this
phase of the arbitration, it is clear from the Tribunal’s Decision on Bifurcation that the
Tribunal cannot, during this phase of the arbitration, make any finding as to whether or not
any such investments have actually been expropriated by the Respondent. Such a finding
could not be characterised as “jurisdictional” and it was clearly recognised in the
Tribunal’s Decision on Bifurcation that “[t/he nature and incidents of the rights and
investments held by the Claimants are distinct from the question as to whether such rights
were expropriated by the Respondent’. The Claimants’ two distinct claims for

expropriation were summarised as follows in their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction:

First, Claimants contend that Hungary indirectly expropriated the full value of
the shares of Danubius and destroyed its ability to repay loans from Claimants.

Second, Claimants contend that Hungary also expropriated the bundle of
proprietary and contractual rights that Danubius enjoyed by virtue of the

 

 

* Notice of JO, §5.
4” Notice of JO, §§6-13.
*8 Notice of JO, §13.

62.

63.

64.

Contract Framework that Hungary created in the 1990s to encourage and protect
investors in the newly-privatized broadcast industry.*?

As the Parties have placed a greater emphasis upon the Respondent’s objection [B] in their
written pleadings and at the hearing (indeed most of the arguments for objection [A] were
not dealt with at all at the hearing), the Tribunal will deal with objection [B] first. Before
doing so, however, the Tribunal must address an additional argument that was raised by the

Claimants at the hearing.

THE CLAIMANTS’ “CHOSE-IN-ACTION” ARGUMENT

At the hearing on jurisdiction, the Claimants introduced what appeared to be a new
argument to the effect that the object of its expropriation claim “is the right to enter into a
new Broadcasting Agreement as a lawful winner, that [...] vested on October 28", 2009”.

The Respondent objected to this argument being raised for the first time at the hearing.*!

At the hearing, the Tribunal requested clarifications from the Claimants as to the origin of

their argument concerning the expropriation of a “chose-in-action”:

ARBITRATOR DOUGLAS: I just have a follow-up question relating to
whether or not this is part of an existing claim or a new claim. In the summary
of the two claims that you make in the first page of your Rejoinder, the first
claim is that Hungary indirectly expropriated the full value of the Shares of
Danubius. That’s the first. The second is that Hungary also expropriated the
bundle of proprietary and contractual rights that Danubius enjoyed by virtue of
the Contract Framework. So, which one of those does the chose in action—

MR. LOPEZ FORASTIER: Neither one of those. It is not summarized there.
ARBITRATOR DOUGLAS: So, it’s a new claim?

MR. LOPEZ FORASTIER: No, it is not a new claim. What I’m saying is that
all the elements of that claim are in the papers. Now, it is the first time that we
are referring to that claim as a chose in action just by reason of the Emmis
Tribunal award making that reference, but you can find references, many
references in there to the removal of the right, the enactment of the retroactive
legislation, the inability of Claimants to enforce those rights in the courts of
Hungary in addition to the right to obtain that license.

Cl. Rej. Jur, §1.
% Tr, Day 2, p. 526 (Lépez Forastier). This was the final formulation of the “chose-in-action” at the Hearing.
5! Tr. Day 2, pp. 293-294 (Kalicki).

65.

66.

67.

68.

ARBITRATOR DOUGLAS: So, on your case, there were three possible things
that might have been expropriated. Firstly the Shares and the loans; two, a right
to the license under the Contractual Framework; and, three, the chose in action
created by the First Instance Decision? Is that a fair summary?

MR. LOPEZ FORASTIER: Yes, essentially, yes.

It is clear from a review of the Claimants’ written pleadings, and this exchange at the
hearing, that the Claimants’ argument in respect of the expropriation of a chose-in-action is
a new claim advanced for the first time at the hearing on jurisdiction. In their written
pleadings, the Claimants had asserted two distinct expropriation claims on the basis of two
distinct objects (i.e. different components of their alleged investment) which they say have
been expropriated. At the hearing, the Claimants introduced a third distinct object—a

chose-in-action—and thus asserted a new expropriation claim.

Apart from the obvious procedural unfairness that would be caused to the Respondent were
the Tribunal to entertain this new argument, the Tribunal simply does not have the
materials before it to assess the Claimants’ theory on their alleged chose-in-action. In
particular, this was not an issue addressed by the Hungarian law experts in their otherwise
comprehensive reports submitted to the Tribunal. Discerning the necessary elements for
the existence of a chose-in-action is likely to be a complex matter in Hungarian law—
assuming that the concept is even recognised under that law—just as it is in the national
legal systems with which the Tribunal is more familiar. The Tribunal cannot take a stab in
the dark on a complex question of national law in respect of which it has had no assistance

from the Parties’ legal experts.

The Tribunal thus concludes that the Claimants’ argument on chose-in-action was raised

too late to be considered in this Award.

The Tribunal’s analysis of the Claimants’ arguments in respect of their alleged rights under
the “Contractual Framework” suggests that, in any event, the Claimants’ chose-in-action
argument would have faced insurmountable difficulties. This is because it is predicated
upon the argument that Danubius either had a right or would have obtained a right as

against the ORTT to enter into a new broadcasting agreement following the 2009 Tender

2 Tr. Day 2, pp. 415-6 (Douglas/Lépez Forastier).

69.

70.

71.

by virtue of its pursuit of litigation in the Hungarian courts. The Tribunal has concluded
in section C.5 below, however, that the Hungarian courts had no power to declare a bidder
in a tender conducted by the ORTT as the winner and therefore no power to make a
declaration to the effect that the ORTT must enter into a new broadcasting agreement with
a particular bidder. In the event that a tender procedure is declared invalid by the

Hungarian courts, the ORTT could only be compelled to organise a new tender.

THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTION [B1]
(1) Introduction

The Respondent’s argument [B1] has been previously summarised by the Tribunal as

follows:

Claimants did not have a right to a new licence under Hungarian law when their
existing licence expired on 18 November 2009, there was therefore no
cognisable investment in respect of a new licence and hence the dispute does
not arise directly out of an investment.**

The Claimants assert that they did have certain rights in connection with the tender for the
broadcasting licence in 2009 and that these rights constitute a protected investment capable

of expropriation. There are four steps in the Claimants’ reasoning.

First, the Broadcasting Agreement between the ORTT and Danubius, dated 18 November
1997, incorporated the regulatory framework that governed Danubius’s broadcasting
rights, including the relevant provisions of the Media Law, the GTT and the 1997 Call for
Tender.** The Claimants’ expert on Hungarian law, Dr Rozgonyi, referred to this as the
“Contract Framework”,*> and this term was adopted by the Claimants as well. Dr.
Rozgonyi did not suggest that this was a “formal concept under Hungarian law”® but used
this term for convenience to describe a complex arrangement that will be explored in detail

below.

53 Notice of JO, §§6-13.

5 Cl. C-Mem. Jur., §160.

55 Rozgonyi First Report, §4.4(a).

5 Rozgonyi First Report, §4.4(a); Rozgonyi Second Report, §4(c).

19

72.

73.

74.

75.

Second, this “Contract Framework” imposed several obligations upon the ORTT in

relation to the conduct of the tender for a broadcasting licence in 2009, including:

(i) a duty to conduct tenders in good faith, according to the law, and on a fair
and transparent basis; (ii) an obligation to publish a call for tender twelve
months prior to the expiration of the current license; (iii) a requirement to
disqualify bidders that either violated cross-ownership restrictions or presented
unsupported business plans; and (iv) a requirement to provide a preference to an
incumbent bidder that had been operating in compliance with its broadcasting
agreement.*”

Third, these obligations on the part of the ORTT correspond to rights on the part of
Danubius and “claims to ... performance under contract having a financial value” for the

purposes of Article 1(1)(a)(iii) of the BIT.**

Fourth, those “claims to ... performance” are capable of being expropriated when there is
an “effective repudiation of the right, unredressed by any remedies available to the
Claimant, which has the effect of preventing its exercise entirely or to a substantial
extent”»° This argument is not directed to establishing that an expropriation actually did
take place—a question clearly reserved for the merits—but rather whether the Claimants’

had a right or interest that in law is capable of being expropriated.

(2) Applicable laws

The question of whether the Claimants had any right to broadcast over a radio frequency in
Hungary at the critical point in 2009 can only be answered by reference to Hungarian law.
Hence the first and second steps of the Claimants’ reasoning as summarised above must be
assessed in accordance with Hungarian law. Upon the ascertainment of the existence of
such rights under Hungarian law as well as their nature and scope, it then falls to consider
whether they are capable of constituting a protected investment for the purposes of Article
1 of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. This question must be resolved by

reference to those treaty provisions as interpreted against the background of general

57Cl. C-Mem. Jur., $161.

58 Cl. C-Mem. Jur.

 

§162.

5° Cl. C-Mem. Jur., §162, quoting from Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, 30 April 2004 (CA-33), §§175-176.

20

76.

77.

78.

international law. This corresponds to the third step in the Claimants’ reasoning. Finally,
the question of whether a protected investment with the characteristics previously
ascertained is capable of being expropriated must be answered by reference to Article 6 of

the BIT and the general international law on expropriation.

(3) The significance of the award in Emmis et al. v. Hungary

The award in Emmis et al. v. Hungary (the “Emmis Award”) was rendered after the
exchange of written pleadings in this arbitration but before the hearing on jurisdictional
issues. The Emmis Award covers many of the same issues relevant to the Tribunal’s
determination of the Respondent’s objection [B1]. Nonetheless, the Emmis et al. v.
Hungary case involved claimants who are unrelated to the Claimants in this case and who,
for the substantial part of the proceedings, were represented by different counsel as well.
The record of the Emmis proceedings on the critical questions of Hungarian law was
evidently different in material respects if only because the claimants in Emmis engaged a
different expert on Hungarian law. The Claimants in this case are entitled to have this
Tribunal approach these disputed issues independently and, for this reason, the Tribunal
has determined the issues of Hungarian law arising from Respondent’s objection [B1]

without reference to the Emmis Award.

(4) The Claimants’ first argument on the incorporation of provisions of Hungarian
law relating to the tender procedure into the Broadcasting Agreement

The first step in the Claimants’ reasoning is that the 1997 Broadcasting Agreement
incorporated various provisions of Hungarian law by reference into the contractual

relationship between the ORTT and Danubius and/or that various provisions of Hungarian

law were incorporated in the Broadcasting Agreement by their own terms.

The Claimants say this incorporation is achieved by virtue of Section 3.2 of the

Broadcasting Agreement and/or Section 2 of the GTT.

© Cl. C-Mem. Jur., §§171-172; Rozgonyi Second Report, $4.1; Rozgonyi Third Report, §4(a).

21

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

The Tribunal is bound, in its interpretation of provisions of the Broadcasting Agreement, to

follow the rules of interpretation set out in Section 207(1) of the Civil Code, which reads:

In the event of a dispute, the parties shall, in light of the presumed intent of the
person issuing the statement and the circumstances of the case, construe
[contractual declarations] in accordance with the general accepted meaning of
the words.

(i) Section 3.2 of the Broadcasting Agreement

Section 3.2 of the Broadcasting Agreement reads:

The Broadcaster undertakes to comply with the provisions of the Media Law.
The Parties agree that the provisions of the Media Law relating to the
Broadcasting Right and the exercise thereof, as in effect at the date of this
Agreement, shall be incorporated into this Agreement by reference. By
concluding this Agreement, the Broadcaster expressly undertakes the obligation
to exercise the Broadcasting Right throughout the entire period thereof in
accordance with the provisions of the Media Law, forming part of the
Agreement in the above manner, whether or not the individual provisions are
repeated herein.

The Tribunal accepts that the plain meaning of Section 3.2 of the Broadcasting Agreement
confirms that provisions of the Media Law are incorporated by reference into the

Broadcasting Agreement. The critical question, however, is which provisions of the Media

Law are thereby incorporated.

Section 3.2 of the Broadcasting Agreement is contained in Chapter III of that Agreement
entitled: “The Contents of the Broadcasting Right”. Section 3.1, the first section of that
Chapter, reads:

The Broadcaster is aware of the fact that under the Media Law, the General
Terms of Tender, the Call for Tender, the Bid and this Agreement, the
Broadcasting Right imposes obligations on the Broadcaster.

Each subsequent section of Chapter III, including Section 3.2, then begins with the phrase:

“The Broadcaster undertakes [...]”

The plain meaning of the words in Section 3.2, as confirmed by the context in which that

provision appears in Chapter III of the Broadcasting Agreement, is that Section 3.2

22

85.

86.

incorporates provisions of the Media Law relevant to the Broadcaster’s exercise of the
Broadcasting Right. The purpose of Section 3.2 is not to incorporate by reference
obligations of the regulator, the ORTT, as set out in the Media Law, in relation to the
exercise of the Broadcasting Right. Moreover, as each provision in Chapter III of the
Broadcasting Agreement, including Section 3.2, is focused exclusively upon the
Broadcaster’s exercise of the Broadcasting Right, it is clear that Section 3.2 does not
operate to incorporate provisions of the Media Law dealing with any other broadcasting
right or broadcasting rights in general. Sections 2.2 and 2.3 of the Broadcasting
Agreement define a specific broadcasting right for the national broadcasting of
programmes specified in Annex 4 to the Broadcasting Agreement on the basis of the key
data of the broadcasting services set out in Annex 5. The Broadcasting Right, defined in
this way, commenced on 18 November 1997 and was valid for an initial period of seven

years pursuant to Section 2.3.

For the sake of completeness, the Claimants’ expert, Dr Rozgonyi, also appears to rely
upon Section 1(a) of the Media Law as an alternative basis for the incorporation of the
provisions of the Media Law into the Broadcasting Agreement®! (although it is not entirely
clear whether this provision is cited merely by way of background for her analysis of
Section 3.2 of the Broadcasting Agreement or as an independent basis for incorporation).

Section 1(a) of the Media Law reads:

This Act shall apply to programming services if the broadcaster has its
registered office (residence) in the territory of the Republic of Hungary, and
carries out the respective editorial decisions on programming in the territory of
the Republic of Hungary.

This provision defines the scope of application of the Media Act. It cannot possibly be
interpreted as having the effect of incorporating all the provisions of the Media Act into
broadcasting agreements with the effect that a broadcaster has a contractual right to enforce
any obligation of the media regulator by means of a claim for breach of contract. If this is
Dr Rozgonyi’s position, then she has misunderstood the distinction between the applicable

Jaw and the obligations arising out of a contractual instrument.

&! Rozgonyi Second Report, §4.2(a).

23

87. Dr Rozgonyi has also placed emphasis on the fact that Section 2.3 of the Broadcasting
Agreement refers to Section 107 of the Media Law that makes reference, inter alia, to a
“tender”. According to the Claimants’ expert, “any ambiguity as to whether Section 3.2
incorporates tender-related provisions of the Media Law is removed by Section 2.3 of the

broadcasting agreement”.

88. Section 2.3 of the Broadcasting Agreement reads:

The Broadcasting Right shall commence on November 18, 1997 and shall be
valid for a period of seven (7) years subject to the terms and conditions of this
Agreement. The renewal of the Broadcasting Right shall be governed by
Section 107 of the Media Law.

89. Section 107 of the Media Law reads, in its entirety:

Title 7 Term of Rights
Section 107.

(1) Broadcasting rights for television shall be valid for maximum ten years and
for radio for maximum seven years, and may be renewed once upon expiry at
the broadcaster’s request, without inviting a tender, for an additional five years.
The request for renewal shall be notified to the Board fourteen months prior to
expiry.

(2) In the absence of the reporting notification referred to in Subsection (1) or if
renewal cannot be awarded, the board shall publish an invitation to tender
twelve months prior to the expiry of the licence.

(3) The licence cannot be renewed if the right—holder violated the contract
repeatedly or seriously.

(4) The provisions relating to the award of rights shall otherwise apply to the
procedure for the renewal of such rights.

90. Section 107 of the Media Law governs the term of broadcasting rights. It envisages in
subsection (1) that a broadcasting right can be renewed once for an additional five years.
Danubius exercised this right of renewal in anticipation of the expiry of the seven year
term of its Broadcasting Right for radio in 2004 under the Broadcasting Agreement. That is
why, in 2009, a tender had to be organised because Danubius had no further right to the

renewal of its Broadcasting Right. Section 2.3 of the Broadcasting Agreement thus refers
© Rozgonyi Second Report, $4.1(a).

24

91.

92.

93.

to the “renewal of the Broadcasting Right”. It does not refer to tenders and Section 107 of
the Media Act does not purport to regulate tenders. Indeed, tenders are regulated by
different “Titles” of the same Chapter VI “Broadcasting Rights”: Title 3 “General Tender
Conditions” and Title 4 “Invitation to Tender”. Title 7 “Term of Rights”, which includes

Section 107, is self-evidently not concerned with the regulation of a tender.

Dr Rozgonyi nonetheless asserts that: “/t]he fact that Section 2.3 refers to Section 107 as a
whole, including subsection (2) on renewal tenders, shows that the Broadcasting
Agreement incorporates the Media Law’s tender-related provisions”. This assertion is
plainly wrong. Subsection (2) of Section 107 of the Media Law prescribes that if the five-
year renewal of a broadcasting right is not possible, then the right will become the subject
of a tender. A renewal is not possible if the broadcaster has failed to notify the Board of its
request for a renewal or, for example, it has violated the broadcasting agreement repeatedly
as envisaged in Subsection (3). If renewal is not possible, and the broadcasting right
becomes the subject of a tender, then the tender will be regulated by the normal provisions
in Titles 3 and 4 of Chapter VI of the Media Law. There is no such thing as a special
category of “renewal tender” as contemplated by Dr Rozgonyi. A broadcasting right can
be renewed once for five years under Section 107 of the Media Law; if it has been renewed

once or cannot be renewed, then it must be the subject of a tender.

The reference to Section 107 of the Media Law in Section 2.3 of the Broadcasting
Agreement simply confirms that Danubius had the right to renew its Broadcasting Right in
accordance with the terms of Section 107. Danubius exercised that right in 2004. Section

107 had no role to play thereafter or in relation to the 2009 Tender.

It is important to note in this context that an amendment to the Media Law was adopted by
Parliament on 8 December 2008 to allow the ORTT to renew broadcasting rights without a
tender upon request of the broadcaster until the digital switchover. The President refused

to sign the amending act on the basis that it violated the Constitution and requested a

© Rozgonyi Third Report, §4.1(d).
Constitutional Court Decision No. 71/2009, 14 July 2009 (R-54) (C-102), p. 1.

25

review of the amending act by the Constitutional Court.%* The Constitutional Court’s

judgment of 2009 reasoned as follows:

Frequencies are currently public goods of high value and importance, the owner
of which is the state.

As the number of frequencies reserved for transmission limits the entry into
market, new players on the media market bidding for frequency [sic] cannot
enter the market in addition to those already on the market, but may only
replace those on the market. Therefore, during a tender for analogue radio
broadcasting right [sic], the freedom of competition may be interpreted in a way
that until the digitalization of the radio, all privately-held, profit-oriented
undertakings have an equal chance to bid for the two national commercial radio
frequencies if they comply with the conditions set forth in the call for tender.

[...]

The currently effective Section 107, Paragraph 1 of the Media Act makes it
possible for the broadcasters complying with the Media Act and the terms of the
broadcasting agreement to renew the expiring right on one occasion. Section
107 of the Media Act ensuring this possibility was known to the entities bidding
during a tender for analogue broadcasting rights and also to others. The two
undertakings currently possessing the national analogue ground-base radio
rights were aware the following renewal of their rights, it would not be possible
to again renew their rights based on the Media Act and that tendering for the
frequencies would be inevitable.

The law-maker wanted to eliminate this and passed the Amending Act (because
of the expiry of the rights of Slager and Danubius) to make it possible to again
renew the rights.

Section 1 of the Amending Act amended Section 107 Paragraph | of the Media
Act in a way that the expression “on one can occasion” was deleted from the
text, thus, it became possible to again renew a broadcasting right which already
expired after a renewal.

94. The Constitutional Court concluded by declaring the proposed amendment to the Media

Law to be unconstitutional and thus the amendment never came into force.

95. The Claimants’ interpretation of Section 107 is inconsistent with how the Constitutional
Court interpreted that provision prior to the amendment introduced by Parliament. Only
one renewal is possible. There is a clear distinction between the “renewal” of a
broadcasting right and the calling of a “tender” for the use of frequencies.

Constitutional Court Decision No. 71/2009, 14 July 2009 (R-54), (C-102) p. 1.
© Constitutional Court Decision No. 71/2009, 14 July 2009 (R-54), (C-102) p. 5.

26

96. In conclusion, neither Section 3.2 of the Broadcasting Agreement nor Section 1(a) of the
Media Law incorporates by reference into the Broadcasting Agreement the provisions of
the Media Law regulating the Broadcaster’s exercise of the Broadcasting Right. In relation
to Section 3.2 in particular, this provision cannot be interpreted to vest any contractual
rights in the Broadcaster in respect of the ORTT’s performance of any of its obligations or

responsibilities as a regulator under the Media Law.

(ii) Section 2 of the GIT
97. The other provision relied upon by the Claimants as effecting incorporation of obligations

concerning the ORTT into the Broadcasting Agreement is Section 2 of the GTT, which

reads:

The GTT shall apply to the radio and television broadcasting rights of the
bidders in Hungary, to the conduct of the contracting authority, to the conduct
of the bidder, the relationship between the bidders among themselves and the
bidders and the contracting authority, and also to the contract and the content
thereof concluded on the basis of a tender.”

98. The question is whether this provision has the effect of incorporating, by its own terms, the
obligations of the ORTT as the “contracting authority” into the Broadcasting Agreement
such that they can be contractually enforced by the Broadcaster, Danubius, against the
ORTT. There is no mention of the GTT in the Broadcasting Agreement and hence if there

is to be incorporation it must be by application of Section 2 of the GTT and not otherwise.

99. The Claimants’ expert, Dr Rozgonyi, relies on three provisions of the Civil Code to answer

this question in the affirmative.
100. First, Section 198(3) of the Civil Code provides:

An obligation or an entitlement to services may be constituted, by virtue of legal
regulation or official order, without the conclusion of a contract if so ordered by
a legal regulation or an authority with proper authorization, and if the obligor,
the obligee, and the service are accurately specified. In such case, the provisions
on contracts shall be duly applied, unless otherwise provided by the legal
regulation or the authority in question.

© GTT (C-48), §2.

27

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

The Tribunal cannot accept that this provision is relevant in the present circumstances.
There was a contract between Danubius and the ORTT—the Broadcasting Agreement.
Section 198(1) deals with the possibility that obligations or entitlements to services may be
constituted in the absence of a contract on the basis of a legal regulation or official order.
It cannot be read as providing a mechanism by which obligations or entitlements can be

introduced into existing contracts.

The second provision relied upon by Dr Rozgonyi is Section 205(2) of the Civil Code,

 

which reads:

It is fundamental to the validity of a contract that an agreement is reached by the
parties concerning all essential issues as well as those deemed essential by
either of the parties. The parties need not agree on issues that are regulated by
legal regulations.

Once again, the Tribunal finds that this provision is inapposite to the question of whether
the GTT, by its terms, incorporated rights and obligations into the Broadcasting
Agreement. Section 205(2) of the Civil Code deals with the validity of a contract. Neither
Party has asserted that the Broadcasting Agreement was invalid because there was no
agreement on essential issues. Moreover, it cannot be said that the GTT regulates matters
that are essential issues for the purposes of the Broadcasting Agreement. The Broadcasting
Agreement concerned a specific broadcasting licence that was valid for an initial term of
seven years and then renewable for a further term of five years. The GTT regulates the

competitive tender for broadcasting licences generally.

The third provision invoked by Dr Rozgonyi is Section 226(1) of the Civil Code, which

reads:

Legal regulations can prescribe certain content elements of contracts and
provide that such elements shall constitute a part of a contract even if the parties
provide otherwise.

The GTT, by its scope of application provision in Section 2, and more generally, does not
purport to lay down rules in respect of existing broadcasting agreements. The GTT applies

to the bidding process during a tender for a broadcasting licence and “also to the contract

28

106.

107.

and the content thereof concluded on the basis of a tender”. To the extent that the GTT
regulated the 2009 Tender, it could not have introduced new rights or obligations into the
Broadcasting Agreement between Danubius and the ORTT that had been concluded in
1997. In short, the GTT did not regulate the same subject matter as the 1997 Broadcasting
Agreement. The 1997 Broadcasting Agreement governed the exercise of Danubius’s
Broadcasting Right, which commenced in 1997 and expired in 2009. The GTT governed
the tender process that was organised to award, at that time, a new broadcasting right upon
the expiry of the Broadcasting Agreement. The subject matters of the 1997 Broadcasting

Agreement and the GTT as it applied to the 2009 Tender are thus completely different.

(iii) Conclusion

The Tribunal has concluded that only provisions of the Media Law relating to Danubius’s
exercise of its Broadcasting Right under the Broadcasting Agreement have been
incorporated into the Broadcasting Agreement by virtue of the express terms in Section 3.2
of the Broadcasting Agreement. No other provisions of the Media Law have been
incorporated into the Broadcasting Agreement. Nor have any provisions of the GTT. It
follows that no legislative provision or provision of any other normative act relating to the
conduct of the 2009 Tender was incorporated into the Broadcasting Agreement such that
Danubius would have a contractual right to enforce any such provision against the ORTT

or any other party.

Taking a step back, it would be surprising, if not illogical, if a broadcasting agreement
governing a broadcaster’s exercise of a right to broadcast on particular frequencies for a
finite period of time vested that broadcaster with contractual rights against the broadcasting
regulator in respect of a competitive tender for the allocation of a new right to broadcast on
those frequencies after the expiry of the broadcaster’s right. The rules governing the
competitive tender may or may not give the incumbent broadcaster a preference of some
sort in the evaluation of the bids submitted to the tender, but one would clearly expect that
the source of any such preference would be the tender rules and not the original
broadcasting agreement. Indeed, if the incumbent broadcaster had certain contractual rights

in respect of the tender procedure that could not, by definition, be vested in any other

29

108.

109.

bidder, then it is doubtful that the tender could properly be described as “competitive”. A
competitive tender implies a level playing field at least in terms of the legal relationship as

between each bidder and the regulator conducting the tender.

(5) The Claimants’ second argument relating to the specific rights vested by virtue of
the “Contract Framework”

The Tribunal has concluded that no provisions of Hungarian law relating to the 2009
Tender were incorporated into the Broadcasting Agreement such that they could be
enforceable at the suit of Danubius against the ORTT or any other party as contractual
obligations. On one reading of the Claimants’ submissions, this conclusion would be fatal
to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over any claim relating to a vested interest in a new
broadcasting right in so far as there is no contractual basis for that interest. The Claimants
appear, however, to make an alternative argument that it had vested interests capable of
constituting an investment and capable of being expropriated by virtue of the applicable
laws and rules governing the tender procedure, whether or not such laws and rules were

incorporated into the Broadcasting Agreement.

The ambiguity arises to some extent because of the Claimants’ reliance on the concept of a
“Contract Framework”, which is not precise in respect of whether or not the rights asserted
by the Claimants are incorporated into the contractual instrument (the Broadcasting
Agreement) or can exist independently of that contractual instrument. The Claimants’
expert’s conclusions on the obligations arising under the “Contract Framework” appear to
be dependent upon establishing a contractual basis for those obligations. Thus, for
example, in responding to the Respondent’s experts on the “/egal basis for the Contract

Framework”, Dr Rozgonyi says:

K&L err in their analysis of this point for three basic reasons. First, they
incorrectly conclude that the Media Law was not incorporated by reference into
the Broadcasting Agreement. Second, they do not take appropriate account of
the provisions of the Media Law, GTT, and CFT that, by their terms,
incorporate relevant provisions of these instruments into the Broadcasting
Agreement. Third, they neglect to acknowledge that even if the Media Law,
GTT, and CFT were not expressly incorporated into the Broadcasting

30

Agreement, they would nevertheless become binding contractual obligations by
operation of the Civil Code.

110. In respect of each of these points, Dr Rozgonyi insists that the ORTT’s obligations had a

contractual basis.

111. The Claimants’ counsel, however, appeared to take the view that a contractual basis for the

ORTT’s obligations was not necessary.”

112. It will be recalled that the Claimants maintain that the “Contract Framework” imposed

several obligations upon the ORTT in the conduct of the 2009 Tender:

(i) a duty to conduct tenders in good faith, according to the law, and on a fair
and transparent basis; (ii) an obligation to publish a call for tender twelve
months prior to the expiration of the current license; (iii) a requirement to
disqualify bidders that either violated cross-ownership restrictions or presented
unsupported business plans; and (iv) a requirement to provide a preference to an
incumbent bidder that had been operating in compliance with its broadcasting
agreement.’°

113. The Claimants maintain that this “Contract Framework required the ORTT to award
Danubius a broadcast agreement for continued operation." More specifically, according

to the Claimants:

Danubius was actually the winning bidder—the law required ORTT to
disqualify Advenio’s bid and award the broadcast rights to the highest-ranking
bidder, Danubius, and enter into a new broadcasting agreement with
Danubius.””

114. The Tribunal will first analyse the alleged obligations imposed by the “Contract
Framework” and then examine the consequences said to follow from these obligations

under Hungarian law.

 Rozgonyi Second Report, §4(d).

Tr. Day 1, pp. 235-6 (Lépez Forastier).
7 Cl. C-Mem. Jur., §161.

7 Cl. Rej. Jur., §7.

% Cl. Rej. Jur., §7.

 

31

115.

116.

117.

118.

(i) The obligations upon the ORTT under the “Contract Framework”

Of the four alleged obligations under the Contract Framework identified by the Claimants,
only the fourth received detailed consideration from the Parties’ experts on Hungarian law.
The obvious difficulty with reliance on the first three obligations as rights capable of
constituting an investment and capable of being the object of an expropriation is that these
are procedural rules for the benefit of all bidders in the tender process. A procedural rule
governing a tender process cannot constitute an “asset” for the purposes of the definition of
an investment in Article 1 of the BIT. Nor is a procedural rule capable of being
expropriated. This explains why, as a first step in the Claimants’ argument, the Claimants
were compelled to submit that the general rules governing the procedure for tenders were
contractually incorporated into the Broadcasting Agreement. This was an attempt to bridge
the gap between a procedural rule and a substantive right capable of constituting an
investment and capable of being expropriated. The Tribunal has rejected the Claimants’
contention that, unlike the other bidders in the 2009 Tender, Danubius was in a special
position because the procedural rules governing the tender were, for Danubius and only for
Danubius, incorporated into its extant Broadcasting Agreement with the ORTT or were

otherwise actionable as contractual rights against the ORTT.

Only the fourth alleged obligation, which was referred to by both Parties as the “incumbent
preference” argument, could be said to be particular to Danubius as against the other
bidders. Being “particular” in this sense is, of course, not conclusive as to whether the
right constitutes an investment and is capable of being expropriated, but it is manifestly
clear that procedural rules that apply in equal measure to all participants in an

administrative process cannot satisfy these requirements.

The dividing line between the Parties on the “incumbent preference” argument was
principally whether GTT 65.3.1, which was the alleged source of the incumbent

preference, only applied to broadcasters that held a “studio license”.

GTT 65.3.1 is located in Chapter III of the GTT entitled “The tender procedure” under
Title 9 “Evaluation of bids”:

32

65.2. If the call for tenders does not set forth deviating criteria, the following
criteria shall govern:

That bidder shall be preferred, who determines a more favorable proportion of
information and public service programs, especially news programs, and in the
case of national and regional television channels, who determines a more
favorable proportion of presentation of films produced in Hungary or offers a
longer or full program transmission time.

65.3.1 That bidder shall be preferred, who has held a broadcasting right
awarded in tender for the frequency forming the subject-matter of the call for
tenders, if it operates and broadcasts in accordance with its studio license and
the Media Act.

65.3.2 That bidder shall be disadvantaged by the ORTT who has held the
broadcasting right for the frequency forming subject of the call for tenders but
does not operate in accordance with its studio license and the Media Act.

119. According to the Respondent’s Hungarian law experts, the reference to “studio licence” is
a reference to a specific instrument of Hungarian law that existed under the legal regime
prior to the entry into force of the Media Law.”* They were granted by the Ministry of
Culture and Education in the period of 1993-1995 to local and regional broadcasters and
had to be converted into “broadcasting right”, which was the new form of licence, under
Section 146 of the Media Law.” The Claimants’ expert does not dispute this description
of a “studio licence” but disputes the assertion that an incumbent preference under GTT

65.3.1 could only be granted to the holder of a studio licence.
120. Section 146 of the Media Law reads as follows:

(1) The holders of studio licenses issued prior to the time of this Act entering
into force for a fixed period may apply to the Board for the transformation of
their licenses into broadcasting contracts by 31 March 1996. Failure to observe
this deadline shall result in the forfeiture of the right and the license shall be
considered withdrawn. The Board may not conclude a contract with the
applicant if the studio does not perform broadcasting or does not perform
broadcasting in compliance with the studio license. The studio license shall be
withdrawn by resolution of the Board.

(2) The Board shall conclude the contract with the applicant for the term of the
studio license defined in the original license and in respect of the area of

3 Kérmendy-Ekes & Lengyel First Report, §§31, 68.
4 Kormendy-Ekes & Lengyel First Report, §31.
5 Rozgonyi Second Report, §5.1(d).

33

reception defined therein, establishing the broadcasting fee, if the applicant
operates in accordance with the provisions contained in the studio license.

(3) The Board shall invite a tender in respect of the frequency (transmission
time) released through the withdrawal of a studio license, except if the
broadcaster refuses to consent under Subsection (3) of Section 100.

(4) Tenders shall be invited in respect of the utilization in accordance with this
Act of the frequencies used on the basis of the studio licenses issued prior to the
time of this Act entering into force for an indefinite period of time or with
reference to the time limit defined in this Act. The Board shall invite tenders in
respect of the frequencies used on the basis of studio licenses issued with
reference to the time limit defined in this Act within nine months, while in
respect of the frequencies used on the basis of studio licenses issued for an
indefinite period of time after one year, but within one-and-a-half years, at the
most. These deadlines shall be reckoned as of the time of this Act entering into
force. The studio licenses shall terminate at the date of the commencement of
broadcasting services provided on the basis of the broadcasting contract
concluded on the basis of the tender, at the latest.

(5) In the tenders defined in Subsections (3)-(4), the former operation of the
person entitled to broadcast on the basis of the studio license on the same
frequency shall be given priority in the course of the assessment process.

(6) The Board may conclude contracts with the companies existing at the time
of this Act entering into force without complying with the provisions contained
in Sections 85-88, Section 108 and Chapter VIII of this Act, subject to the
condition to alter their activity or transform their companies by 31 December
1996.

121. According to the Respondent’s experts, “studio licences” were granted to broadcasters for
either a fixed term or indefinite period.”© This is confirmed by the language of Section
146. Those with fixed term studio licences could convert them into broadcasting rights
pursuant to Section 146(1) of the Media Law on the same terms as reflected in the original

studio licence, as provided in Section 146(2).””

122. In relation to studio licences for an indefinite period, Section 146(4) requires that tenders
must be declared for the frequencies covered by those licences within the deadlines set out
in that subsection. The holders of those studio licences for an indefinite period were,
however, conferred the following benefit by virtue of subsection 5 to Section 146 of the

Media Law:

1 Kérmendy-Ekes & Lengyel First Report, §31.
7 Kormendy-Ekes & Lengyel First Report, §32.

34

In the tenders defined in Subsections (3)-(4), the former operation of the person
entitled to broadcast on the basis of the studio licence on the same frequency
shall be given priority in the course of the assessment process.

123. According to the Respondent’s experts, this provision of the Media Law provides the

rationale for the reference to the incumbent preference in GTT 65.3.1.78

124. The Claimants’ expert disagrees with this interpretation. Dr Rozgonyi states that all
incumbent non-public broadcasters were holders of studio licences at the time the Media
Law was enacted so that “the holders of studio licences were synonymous with
incumbents”.””

125. The Tribunal cannot accept the Claimants’ interpretation of GTT 65.3.1, which would
necessitate ignoring the use of the express term “studio licence”. The term “studio licence”
is a clearly a term of art in Hungarian media law and it is used only twice in the GTT (the
other occasion is in GTT 65.3.2). If the drafter of the regulations had wanted to refer to
any incumbent (i.e. any broadcaster with an existing broadcasting agreement), then it could
have used the term “broadcasting agreement”, which appears in numerous other provisions
of the GTT. In addition, and importantly, the use of the term “studio license” makes
perfect sense in light of Section 146(5) of the Media Law, which is the foundational
normative act for the regulation of the media in Hungary and to which the GTT must

conform.

126. Dr Rozgonyi additionally cited the ORTT’s practice in conducting tenders in 2004-5 when
it “did not identify compliance with former studio licenses as a relevant criteria”®° The
provision of the “Calls for Tenders” relied upon by Dr Rozgonyi*! does not expressly refer
to GTT 65.3.1. It simply says: “Points that can be granted for lawful operation on the
given frequency: 10 points”. The ORTT appears to be exercising its discretion to award

points based on experience in this provision rather than following the mandatory rule in

78 Kérmendy-Ekes & Lengyel First Report, §§68-9.

7° Rozgonyi Second Report, §5.1(e).

8 Rozgonyi Second Report, §5.1(g).

8! Call for Tenders published in the Official Gazette No. 2005/7 for Baja 89.8 MHz, Békéscsaba 88.9, MHz, Eger
101.3 MHz, Gyér 103.1 MHz, 7 March 2005 (C-68), $5.3.2.6.

35

GTT 65.3.1.°* As the Metropolitan Court hearing Danubius’s claims found, whilst the
preference stipulated in GTT 65.3.1 is mandatory, the ORTT nonetheless retains a
discretion to award points on the basis of broadcasting experience more generally.*?
Finally, whatever was meant by the ORTT in this particular call for tender, it cannot
override the express terms of the GTT, which are in turn linked to Section 146(5) of the

Media Law.

127. The true position under Hungarian law is that the ORTT has the discretion to award points
for the experience of incumbent broadcasters but it is not obliged to do so outside the scope
of GTT 65.3.1. In relation to the 2009 Tender, the ORTT provided written answers to
questions filed by prospective bidders in relation to the draft call for bids, which contained

the following statement:

Observing the principles of neutrality of competition and equality of chances,
and in line with media policy considerations, the Board did not wish to favour
either old or new actors in the course of evaluating the bids.**

128. This statement, along with the other questions and answers, was sent by the Chairman of
the ORTT to Danubius under cover of a letter dated 29 July 2009.*° After the 2009 Tender
had concluded, and Advenio had been declared the winner, Danubius did not raise the
“incumbent preference” point on the basis of GTT 65.3.1 before the Hungarian courts as a

ground for the invalidity of the tender.*°

129. In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that Danubius was not entitled to an incumbent
preference under GTT 65.3.1 in the 2009 Tender because it was not the holder of a studio

licence.

® See 2009 ORTT Consultation Paper, 24 September 2009 (R-76), p. 19.

* Metropolitan Court, Judgment No. 7.G.41.820/2009/26 of the Metropolitan Court of Budapest, 5 January 2010
(C-151), p. 23.

* Letter from ORTT to Adam Féldes, CEO of Danubius, 29 July 2009 (C-109), p. 12.

5 Letter from ORTT to Adam Fildes, CEO of Danubius, 29 July 2009 (C-109), p. 1.

*6Danubius’s Statement of Claim, 2 November 2009 (C-139).

36

(ii) The consequences that follow from the alleged breach of the obligations upon the
ORTT

130. The Tribunal has found that Danubius did not have any rights in the context of the 2009
Tender that were particular to Danubius as a party to a broadcasting agreement or as the
incumbent broadcaster more generally. Notwithstanding this conclusion and for the sake
of completeness, the Tribunal will now consider Danubius’s position under Hungarian law

as a result of the 2009 Tender being declared unlawful by the Hungarian courts.

131.

By its decision of 23 February 2011, the Supreme Court upheld the decisions of the

Municipal Court and Court of Appeals and concluded as follows:

Therefore it can be concluded that Defendant I [ORTT] violated Section 99(1)
of the Media Act when based on the ownership structure revealed in the bid it
did not rejected [sic] the formerly invalid bid of Defendant II [Advenio] that
was also violated the GTT [sic] prepared in accordance with the Act. Therefore
the admission, evaluation and declaration of the bid as a winner was unlawful
and as it interfered with the integrity and fairness of bidding, it also violated
Section 7 of the Act LVII of 1996 on the Prohibition of Unfair Trading
Practices and Unfair Competition.®”

132. The ground for invalidity upheld by the Supreme Court thus related to the fact that
Advenio violated the cross-ownership restrictions because Lanchid Radiéd Kft had a

controlling interest in Advenio at the critical time during the 2009 Tender.

133. Although Danubius claimed for a declaration of nullity in respect of the broadcasting
agreement entered into between the ORTT and Advenio, the Metropolitan Court (and the
Supreme Court did not disturb this finding) held that Section 112(4)(a) of the Media Law
governed the legal consequences of an invalid tender procedure and thus displaced the
general provisions of the Civil Code as a lex specialis.*® Section 112(4)(a) states that: “The
contract shall be terminated with immediate effect if the contract could not have been
concluded, and the unlawful status quo still exists”. Hence the remedy granted was a
declaration that the ORTT was obliged to terminate the broadcasting agreement with

Advenio.

*7 Supreme Court of the Republic of Hungary, Judgment in Pfv.IV.21.908/201/6, 23 February 2011 (C-167), p. 13.
88 Metropolitan Court, Judgment No. 7.G.41.820/2009/26 of the Metropolitan Court of Budapest, 5 January 2010
(C-151), pp. 24-5.

37

134. Danubius was clearly successful before the Hungarian courts in establishing that the 2009
Tender was unlawful. The various court judgments, however, make it plain that Danubius,
as the bidder with the second highest score after Advenio, had no legal right to be declared
the winner of the (unlawful) 2009 Tender. The ORTT would have to call a new tender and
Danubius would have the chance to participate and potentially submit a winning bid at that

new tender.

135. The first confirmation of this came from the first court judgment rendered in relation to
Danubius’s application for an interim injunction. The Metropolitan Court of Budapest

reasoned as follows in its judgment of 11 November 2009:

[T]he plaintiff [Danubius] itself notes in its petition that if it wins the
lawsuit, the defendant [ORTT] will be forced to terminate the contract and
issue a new tender, which can be enforced through administrative
proceedings.®°

[ed
A decision made in this lawsuit cannot avert the loss to the plaintiff... because
the claim is directed at establishing that the rules of the tender procedure were
violated, and if the plaintiff wins the lawsuit, the decision in the lawsuit will
not grant it the broadcasting right; the only chance the plaintiff will gain is
that if a new tender invitation is issued, it could become the winning
bidder.”

136. The Metropolitan Court then ruled on the merits of Danubius’s claim and found in its
favour. In its Judgment of 5 January 2010, it had this to say about the powers of the ORTT

versus the powers of the Court:

For the sake of completeness the Court notes that it is the Defendant I’s
[ORTT] discretional right to chose the winning bid from the formally valid
bids, the Court cannot take over this task from the Defendant I [ORTT],
neither the Media Act, nor the provisions of civil law entitled the Court to
overrule this decision of the Defendant I [ORTT] and to award a winner.
Choosing the broadcaster is part of concluding the agreement. While
concluding the agreement the Defendant acts as an entity of civil law and as
such he is entitled to choose with whom he wished to enter into a

* Metropolitan Court Decision No. 7.G.41.820/2009/6-II (Danubius interim injunction), 11 November 2009 (R-77),
p. 3 (emphasis added).
% Metropolitan Court Decision No. 7.G.41.820/2009/6-II (Danubius interim injunction), 11 November 2009 (R-77),
p. 4 (emphasis added).

38

contractual relationship. Within this decision making process, the Civil Court
has only competence to control legality and apply sanctions for unlawful acts if
a claim requires so. That is, the Court can only examine if the agreement that
has been concluded as a result of tender procedure is unlawful either
because of the person of the broadcasting entity or because of the stipulated
terms and conditions of the agreement. The Defendant I [ORTT] can freely
choose the broadcasting entity within the framework of the Act and award
the financial and business plans of the formerly valid bids. In this respect, the
responsibility of the ORTT and its members is not based on civil law
provisions; their liability is not civil law liability.°!

137. Finally, the Metropolitan Court of Appeals in its Judgment of 14 July 2010 ruled:

[T]he competition with equal chances for all participants is the Plaintiff's
main interest. The violation of this interest creates a need to protect rights,
since (with regard to the agreement already concluded between the Defendants)
the Plaintiff may only enforce its right to participate in a lawful tender
procedure by requesting declaration [sic] of the violation of the rules of the
tender procedure and of the nullity of the agreement, as it may not request
obligation [sic]. The plaintiff has such a right even if it does not require a
substantive right for the conclusion of the agreement.”

138. From these passages the Tribunal concludes that in no circumstances would the Courts be
permitted to award the broadcasting right that was the subject of the 2009 Tender to
Danubius. The Courts’ powers over the tender procedure is limited to ensuring that the
process complies with the mandatory provisions of the Media Law and the other rules
governing the process such as the GTT. Moreover, if a tender procedure is declared to be
invalid by the Courts, as the 2009 Tender was in this case, then the ORTT is obliged to
terminate the broadcasting agreement that was concluded as a result of the unlawful tender

and to call a new tender.

139. The Claimants submitted that the ORTT was legally compelled to enter into a broadcasting
agreement with Danubius once the 2009 Tender was declared to be unlawful. According

to the Claimants: “as of October 28, 2009, the date ORTT announced the results of the

°! Metropolitan Court, Judgment No. 7.G.41.820/2009/26 of the Metropolitan Court of Budapest, 5 January 2010
(C-151), p. 24 (emphasis added).

°2 Metropolitan Court of Appeals Decision No. 14.Gf.40.109/2010/12 (Slager), 14 July 2010 (RA-79) (emphasis
added).

39

2009 Tender, Danubius had a vested statutory right to enter into a Broadcasting

Agreement with ORTT”.>

140. This submission contradicts the Judgment of the Metropolitan Court of 11 November 2009
in relation to Danubius’s application for in injunction, which states, inter alia, that “if the

plaintiff wins the lawsuit, the decision in the lawsuit will not grant it the broadcasting

 

right; the only chance the plaintiff will gain is that if a new tender invitation is issued, it

 

could become the winning bidder” .*

141.

The Claimants nonetheless relied upon Section 74 of the GTT,”° which reads: “The ORTT
concludes an agreement with the bidder who — taking into account the evaluation criteria —
has made the most favourable bid”.°® It would be fair to say that the Claimants’ reliance
on this provision was not prominent until the hearing, prior to which it was mentioned only

once in their expert’s first report and in a footnote at that.”
142. The Claimants submitted that:

Section 74 was critical because once ORTT terminated the Contract with
Advenio, either on its own motion or after being [compelled to do so] in an
administrative proceeding, Section 74 meant that ORTT had to award the
Contract or the license to Danubius.”*

143. It is clear to the Tribunal, however, that Section 74 of the GTT does not purport to regulate
the consequences of a tender procedure being declared unlawful by the Hungarian courts.
The ORTT entered into a broadcasting agreement with Advenio because, in its assessment,
it had “made the most favourable bid” in accordance with Section 74 of the GIT. The
procedure by which that assessment was made was then declared to be unlawful by the
Hungarian courts. At that point, the ORTT must start again. It is not under an obligation
pursuant to Section 74 of the GTT simply to enter into an agreement with the bidder who
received the next highest score in the evaluation of the ORTT. If the procedure leading to

3 Tr, Day 1, p. 235 (L6pez Forastier).

°4 Metropolitan Court Decision No. 7.G.41.820/2009/6-II (Danubius interim injunction), 11 November 2009 (R-77),

i ty Day 1, pp. 234-5 (L6pez Forastier).

9% GTT (C-48).

° Rozgonyi First Report, footnote 177; Tr. Day 2, p. 458 (Lopez Forastier).
°8 Tr. Day 2, pp. 458-9 (Lépez Forastier).

40

the outcome of the 2009 Tender was unlawful, then it could have no legal significance for

any of the bidders in that tender.

144. The Claimants also relied upon the decision of the Metropolitan Regional Court in the case
of Klubradio. In that case, the ORTT had announced Klubradio to be the winner of the
tender by adopting a formal resolution and then it communicated this to Klubradio in
writing. The ORTT then refused to enter into a broadcasting agreement with Klubradio.
This case is thus distinguishable from the present case because Danubius was not declared

to be the winner of the 2009 Tender.

145. In conclusion, after Danubius had successfully obtained a declaration from the Hungarian
courts to the effect that the 2009 Tender was unlawful, its position under Hungarian law
was that it had the opportunity to bid at a new tender for the same frequencies. The ORTT,
as a result of the court decisions, was obliged to terminate the existing broadcasting
agreement with Advenio in respect of those frequencies. This obligation could have been
enforced by Danubius in administrative proceedings against the ORTT in the event that the
ORTT refused to comply. As a result of the adoption of Act LXXXII by the Hungarian
Parliament on 22 July 2010, however, the ORTT was no longer obliged to terminate the
broadcasting agreement with Advenio due to the retroactive amendment of Section
112(4)(a) of the Media Law. This amendment reads: “The contract shall be terminated
with immediate effect if: a) the contract could not have been concluded, and the unlawful

100 As a result of this

situation — attributable to the broadcaster only — still exists’
amendment, Danubius was deprived of the right to seek the annulment of the broadcasting
agreement that had been concluded between the ORTT and Advenio as well as the
possibility of bidding at a new tender for the frequencies that were the subject matter of
this agreement. At no point, however, did Danubius have a right to a new broadcasting

agreement under Hungarian law that could be enforced in the Hungarian courts.

® Metropolitan Regional Court, Decision No. 14.Gf.40.197/2012/8 (C-224). Tr. Day 1, pp. 212-7 (Gulland).
10 Act LXXXII (2010) (C-150), Section 24(1).

41

(6) The Claimants’ third and fourth arguments: were the Claimants’ rights as
against the ORTT part of their investment in Hungary and could those rights be
the object of a claim for expropriation?

146. The Tribunal has concluded that the Claimants did not have a property right, contractual

right or any other vested legal right in Hungarian law in relation to the exploitation of a
national radio frequency in Hungary on the critical date of the alleged expropriation. The
question of what precisely can be the object of an expropriation has thus been rendered
moot by the Tribunal’s findings in respect of the Claimants’ first and second arguments as
set out above. The Parties have, however, made detailed submissions on the question of
what rights are capable of being expropriated and it is appropriate for the Tribunal to
present a summary of its views.!°' As will be clear, the Tribunal is in substantial

agreement with the Emmis tribunal on this question.

147. The Respondent submits that only property rights are capable of being the object of an

expropriation. !°

Although the Tribunal need not decide this question in light of its
previous findings, it is important to recognise that there is a profound difference between
property rights and purely personal rights in the context of adjudging a claim for
expropriation. The defining characteristic of a property right is that it is capable of
alienation or assignment. One investor’s property right might just as well be the property
of another investor or of the state. It is precisely because property rights can be alienated
or assigned that makes them susceptible to being appropriated or expropriated. What
cannot, on the other hand, be appropriated or expropriated are personal rights because the
right is not separable in law from the person who has it. A personal right cannot enter
circulation in a market like a property right can. By way of example, taxi licenses in some
countries are capable of alienation and hence are a property right. But it is unlikely that a
licence to practise medicine is alienable in any country because it cannot be separated from

the person to whom it is granted. It is not, therefore, a property right.

See in general: Z. Douglas, Chapter 12: Property, Investment and the Scope of Investment Protection

Obligations in The Foundations of International Investment Law: Bringing Theory into Practice (OUP: 2014), pp.
363-406.
102 Resp. Mem. Jur. §§100-106.

42

148.

149.

150.

151.

103 Bg.
224-6.

This is not, of course, to suggest that personal rights cannot be interfered with by the state
in a manner that violates international law. A licence to practise medicine can be annulled
by a state regulatory body on an arbitrary basis. That might give rise to complaints of a
lack of due process or breach of a legitimate expectation. But it makes no sense to talk
about the annulment as an “expropriation”. The state has not taken the licence and used it
for its own purposes or given it to someone else because that is impossible: it is not capable

of alienation or assignment.

There are compelling reasons of justice that demand that only property rights in this sense
be considered as the potential objects of an expropriation. It is widely accepted that a state
can be liable for an indirect or de facto expropriation regardless of whether the state
intended to expropriate the rights in question or whether it even had actual knowledge of

the existence of the investor’s rights to property. !°

This is defensible because everyone,
including the state and its organs and officials, has constructive notice of property rights.
Property rights are good against the whole world. For this reason, in many national legal
systems, liability for the usurpation of control over someone else’s property does not
require actual notice of the rights to that property and liability for damage to someone

else’s property is also imposed without the requirement of actual notice.

This is not defensible, however, in relation to rights that are not property rights, such as

pure contractual rights.

A contractual right is a right to the performance of someone. The characteristics of that
someone, the dutyholder, are of fundamental importance to the rightholder. Is the
dutyholder good for the money? Does the dutyholder have the necessary expertise or
qualifications or resources or reputation or experience to give the performance that the
rightholder has bargained for? In contrast, the holder of a property right has no means of
ascertaining the identity of the potential dutyholders and their personal attributes ex ante.
For this reason, the obligations of third parties in respect of property rights are simple and

straightforward: property rights always generate duties of abstention.

. Tippetts, Abbett, McCartgy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA Consulting Engineers of Iran, 6 lran—U.S. C.T.R. 219,

43

152.

153.

154.

155.

In national legal systems, liability for interferences with contractual rights can only be
imposed on the basis of actual notice; whereas in relation to property rights there is no
requirement for actual notice. In the contractual context, a party to a contract has actual
notice of its counterparty’s rights under the contract and of course can be liable for
breaching its corresponding obligations. In the limited circumstances in which a third
party can be liable for interferences with contractual rights, there must also be actual notice
of such rights in the form of a specific intent to cause prejudice to them; this is domain of
the intentional tort for procuring a breach of contract that exists in many national legal

systems.

It is not possible to expropriate a pure contractual right because it is not a thing that has an
independent existence from the personalized contractual relationship in which it is
embedded. This is why scholars of the US constitution have maintained that pure

contractual rights cannot be “taken” under the Fifth Amendment:

Contract rights are not property rights for takings purposes insofar as they
reflect nothing more than a bilateral agreement; as contractual rights break free
from the initial contracting parties and enter into general circulation as
investments or money, they become property.!°*

Pure contractual rights cannot be expropriated or taken because they are incapable of being
alienated to a third party. For that reason they cannot be equated with property rights.
Contracts can, however, be the source of intangible property such as debts and other
choses-in-action. There is no doubt that debts and other choses-in-action are capable of
being expropriated. But the object of the expropriation in such a case is the debt or chose-

in-action and not the contract itself.
The Emmis tribunal made the same point in the following terms:

[T]he loss of a right conferred by contract may be capable of giving rise to a
claim of expropriation but only if it gives rise to an asset owned by the claimant
to which a monetary value may be ascribed [...]. It is the asset itself—the

104 Merrill, ‘The Landscape of Constitutional Property’, 86 VA. Law Rev. (2000) 885, at 993-4.

44

property interest or chose in action—and not its contractual source that is the
subject of the expropriation claim.!°

156. Most of the older cases now cited for the proposition that contract rights in general are

capable of being expropriated actually concerned debts and other choses-in-action and

therefore intangible property. !°°

157. The distinction between a contract as a source of bilateral personal obligations and the

contract as a source of property rights is critical because international law distinguishes
between a state’s mere non-performance of its contractual obligations to a foreign party,
which cannot constitute an expropriation, and a state’s taking of intangible property, which

can.!°7

158. To conclude: had the Tribunal found that the Claimants had vested rights under Hungarian

law to the exploitation of radio frequencies at the critical date of the alleged expropriation,
the claim for expropriation would only have been cognisable in respect of rights that had

the characteristics of property rights under Hungarian law.

THE RESPONDEN'

 

°S OBJECTION [B2]

159. In its Notice of Jurisdictional Objections, the Respondent stated: “faJs there is no

allegation of interference with Claimants’ shareholding of Danubius, those shares cannot,

by themselves, be considered the relevant investment for purposes [sic] of this dispute” .'°

160. Despite having raised this objection in its Notice of Jurisdictional Objections, the

105

overwhelming focus of the Respondent’s written pleadings was to demonstrate that there is
no right incorporated into the Broadcasting Agreement that is capable of expropriation (i.e.

its objection [B1]). The Respondent has prevailed in respect of that objection.

Emmis International Holding, B.V., Emmis Radio Operating, B.V., and MEM Magyar Electronic Media

Kereskedelmi és Szolgdltat6 Kft. v. Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2), Award, 16 April 2014, $169.

106 See Z. Douglas, International Law of Investment Claims (2009), §§426-7.

"7 See, e.g. Robert Azinian and others v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2), Award, 1
November 1999, §87; Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Award,
30 April 2004 (CA-33), §§174-175; EnCana Corporation v. Ecuador (LCIA Case No. UN3481), Award, 3 February
2006 (CA-39), $192; Bureau Veritas, Inspection, Valuation, Assessment and Control, BIVAC B.V. v. Republic of
Paraguay (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/9), Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 May 2009, §117.
108 Notice of JO, §13.

45

161. The Respondent elaborated upon its objection [B2] at the hearing and, crucially, the

relationship with its objection [B1]. The Respondent made three main points.

 

the Claimants’ indirect expropriation claim in respect of the shares is wholly
contingent in law upon establishing a proprietary right to a new broadcasting agreement.
In other words, if the Respondent succeeds with its objection [B1], then its objection [B2]
deprives the Tribunal of jurisdiction over the Claimants’ expropriation claim in respect of

their shares!

163. Second, the Claimants’ indirect expropriation claim in respect of the shares is wholly

 

contingent in fact upon establishing a proprietary right to a new broadcasting agreement in

the sense that if the Claimants had no proprietary right to a new broadcasting agreement,

0

then Danubius’s shares were worthless on the critical date.!!? In the words of the

Respondent’s counsel:

And their second argument... was that even without any such special rights,
they could demonstrate expropriation simply by showing that they held shares
in loan assets whose value is alleged to have been destroyed by the challenged
Government conduct. For the record, that’s Paragraph 33 of their Rejoinder.!!!

The only way Claimants can even get to the notion that their shares were worth
more before the Government act is to postulate some kind of pre-existing
proprietary right to a new license term, which is theoretically inherent in their
incumbent status, although apparently unrecognized by the market at the time
they tried to sell their shares, but that right is exactly what they need to prove,
not just postulate, to move forward with this claim. And so, we're right back
where we're started.!!?

164. In relation to this point, the Respondent relied upon evidence at the hearing such as

Danubius’s balance sheet to demonstrate that Danubius’s shares were worthless at the

9 Tr, Day 1, p. 120 (Silberman); Day 1, pp. 134-135 (Kalicki).
40 Tr, Day 1, p. 134 (Kalicki).

41 Tr, Day 1, p. 27 (Kalicki).

'2 Tr, Day 1, p. 28 (Kalicki).

46

165.

166.

167.

critical date.''? It was also noted that Volksbank, and not the Claimants, would have first

claim on any de minimis value recoverable through the liquidation of Danubius.!!*

Third, even if Danubius’s shares did have some de minimis value on the critical date, there

 

is no causal connection between any acts attributable to Hungary and the evisceration of

that value.!!5

The Claimants reject each of these points. The Tribunal will deal with their response to the

first point at length below. In relation to the second point, the Claimants maintained that

 

Danubius did have value prior to the 2009 Tender and referred the Tribunal to evidence of
an offer made in respect of Danubius’s shares prior to the 2009 Tender that appeared to
reflect a substantial value for those shares despite the uncertainty as to whether Danubius
would win that tender.''!® Indeed the value of Danubius was the subject of conflicting
expert reports from both sides.!!” The Claimants also maintained that the State of Hungary

was the author of the destruction of this value in response to the Respondent’s third point.

In relation to the Respondent’s first point, the Tribunal asked several questions of the
Claimants during the hearing to explore the relationship between the Claimants’ two

expropriation claims. The following was one such exchange:

ARBITRATOR DOUGLAS: [...] I just want to ask for a clarification on your
expropriation claim. As I said before, there appear to be two different claims.
The first is that Hungary indirectly expropriated the full value of the Shares, and
the second is that Hungary expropriated the bundle of proprietary and
contractual rights that Danubius enjoyed by virtue of the Contract Framework.

Now, as I understand the second one, there is no question there that you’re
asserting a proprietary right to the license. I’ve been a little bit puzzled about
whether or not that is implicit in the first clam. The way I just read the
formulation from Paragraph | of your Rejoinder appears to be neutral.

If we go into the pleading, though, and this is at Paragraph 32, you say that “the
Claim based on the indirect expropriation of Claimants’ equity and debt

113 DSHV Balance Sheet (as at 31 December 2009) (2009 DSHV Balance Sheet), 17 August 2010 (R-57); Tr. Day 1,
pp. 57-61 (Evseev).

14 Ty, Day 2, p. 318 (Evseev).

115 Ty, Day 1, p. 102 (Silberman); Day 1, p. 118 (Silberman); Day 1, p. 139 (Kalicki).

16 Ty, Day 1, p. 192 (Gulland).

117 See First and Second Jonscher Reports submitted on behalf of Respondent and First, Second and Third Expert
Report of Vienna Capital Partners submitted on behalf of Claimants

47

investments is an independent ground for jurisdiction, that does not hinge on
Claimants’ possession before the 2009 Tender of any guaranteed legal right to
broadcast beyond November 2009”.

So, in the first sentence you say it’s not contingent upon a right to the license,
but in the second you say: “Instead, it’s premised on Hungary’s arbitrary,
corrupt, and unlawful conduct of the 2009 Tender and refusal to award renewed
broadcasting rights to Danubius as the lawful winner of the 2009 tender.” So,
it's a claim that is based upon an assumption that you will get the license, but
how is that assumption different from saying you have a proprietary right to the
license, given that at the end of the day, the way you’ve formulated the
compensation claim, for both of these Expropriation Claims, is the value of the
company based upon its renewal of the license? That’s what I’m slightly
unclear about.

MR. GULLAND: Wholly apart from a so-called “contractual framework”
claim, the claim we are making here is a Tecmed/Metalclad claim. That is to
say that we have an investment in Hungary, an investment that has been built
and nurtured, promoted, and improved year after year with the hope and
expectation that, under the laws of Hungary, when there is a new tender, we will
have a guaranteed equal chance to participate in that tender that the law
provides and that Hungary agrees we have.

We participate in that tender. In doing so, we win the Tender under all the rules
that exist. Our lottery ticket is the winning ticket, to use Ms. Kalicki’s analogy
here, and when we try to cash it in, we can’t, and we can’t because the official
Hungarian authorities unlawfully refuse to recognize the rights that we have
won and that we are trying to perfect, and we're saying that that is a clear
analogy with the situation that was presented in Tecmed and Metalclad.!!®

168. Leaving to one side the Tecmed and Metalclad cases for a moment, it is clear from counsel
for the Claimants’ response to the Tribunal’s question that the first expropriation claim is
also premised upon an entitlement to a new broadcasting agreement after the original
agreement expired in accordance with its terms. That alleged entitlement resulted from the
Claimants’ participation in the Tender. In the words of the Claimants’ counsel: “We
participate in that tender. In doing so, we win the Tender under all the rules that exist.
Our lottery ticket is the winning ticket [...] and when we try to cash it in, we can’t, and we
can’t because the official Hungarian authorities unlawfully refuse to recognize the rights
that we have won [7 This submission, however, falls into the same error as was

discussed in relation to the Respondent’s objection [B1]. Danubius was indeed successful

48 Tr, Day 2, pp. 428-430 (Douglas/Gulland).
49 Tr, Day 2, p. 430 (Gulland).

48

16!

17

171.

©

0.

in demonstrating before the Hungarian courts that the Tender was unlawful. But this did
not mean, as a matter of Hungarian law, that Danubius’s second place in the Tender
became automatically converted into the “winning ticket” in the words of the Claimants’
counsel. A new tender would have to be conducted and Danubius had no special right
under Hungarian law that would guarantee its success at that new tender. That was the
conclusion of the Metropolitan Court of Budapest in its judgments of 11 November 2009
and 5 January 2010 and this conclusion was endorsed by the Metropolitan Court of
Appeals in its Judgment of 14 July 2010. The Claimants have not sought to impeach these

judgments.

That the Claimants’ first expropriation claim is, like the second expropriation claim,
contingent upon procuring a new broadcasting agreement from the ORTT, is also obvious
from the Claimants’ approach to compensation. The Claimants have asserted a single
methodology for compensation for both expropriation claims, which is “a discounted cash
flow analysis to determine the fair market value of the Danubius Radio business as of 18
November 2009”.' In the determination of the project cash flows, three periods were

assessed as part of this analysis:

(i) the initial seven-year broadcasting period (19 November 2009 to 18
November 2016), (ii) the five-year extension period (19 November 2016 to 18
November 2021), and (iii) the period 2022 and beyond by estimating
“normalized” cash flows for 2022, which [the Claimants’ valuation expert]
projected would grow at a constant rate thereafter.!?!

Thus it is implicit in this assessment that Danubius was in fact granted a right to broadcast
for seven years by the ORTT on or before 18 November 2009 and, moreover, that such
right was extended on 19 November 2016 for a further five years. For the reasons already
given, this assumption is legally unsustainable because Danubius had no right to broadcast

as a matter of Hungarian law on the critical date of 18 November 2009.

The Claimants have, therefore, assessed their loss in respect of the first expropriation claim

as the value of Danubius as a going concern as a radio operator in circumstances in which

20 Cl, Mem., §244.
21 Cl, Mem., §248.

49

172.

173.

174.

Danubius had no right to continue that business on the critical date. Whilst the object of
the expropriation is said to be the value of the shares in and the loans to Danubius, that
value has been assessed by the Claimants as reflecting the value of Danubius as a going

concern. But to continue as a going concern, Danubius needed a right to broadcast.

The next question is whether any of these findings should be revisited in light of the
Claimants’ reliance on Metalclad v. Mexico and Tecmed v. Mexico. The Claimants rely
specifically on these cases for the proposition that measures of the host State can be
tantamount to an expropriation if the value of an investment is destroyed in whole or in

part even if the object of the taking is not a property right:!2?

[A]n indirect expropriation does not depend on the claimant’s possession of a
proprietary right beyond the protected investments—here the shares and loan
assets—whose value is alleged to have been destroyed by the respondent’s
internationally wrongful conduct.'”>

In the subsequent paragraph of their rejoinder on jurisdiction, the Claimants also rely on
Quasar de Valores SICAV SA vy. Russian Federation. All three cases will now be

considered.

In Metalclad, the tribunal first considered a claim for a breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard in Article 1105 of NAFTA. Metalclad contended that the denial of a
construction permit by the municipality at the site of Metalclad’s hazardous waste landfill
(its investment in Mexico) was a breach of Article 1105. The tribunal’s key findings in
upholding that claim were as follows: (i) Metalclad had received permits to operate the
landfill from the Federal Government of Mexico and the State Government of San Luis
Potosi (where the land was located); (ii) officials of the Federal Government had assured
Metalclad that no further permits had to be obtained to operate the landfill prior to its
investment; (iii) even if it were correct that a construction permit from the municipality at
the site of the landfill was required as a matter of Mexican law, such permit could not be
denied on the basis of environmental considerations because such considerations were

within the controlling authority of the Federal Government; and (iv) the municipality

'2-Tr, Day 1, p. 150, pp. 221-228 (Gulland).
3 Cl, Rej. Jur, §33.

50

denied the construction permit once the landfill had been substantially completed for

reasons that had nothing to do with the physical construction of the landfill and was thus

improper.!74

175. The tribunal then upheld Metalclad’s claim for expropriation under Article 1110 of
NAFTA on precisely the same basis:

By permitting or tolerating the conduct of [the municipality] in relation to
Metalclad which the Tribunal has already held amounts to unfair and
inequitable treatment breaching Article 1105 and by thus participating or
acquiescing in the denial to Metalclad of the right to operate the landfill,
notwithstanding the fact that the project was fully approved and endorsed by the
federal government, Mexico must be held to have taken a measure tantamount
to expropriation in violation of NAFTA Article 1110(1).!?5

176. There is little force in this statement as persuasive authority because it amounts to a
conclusion that what is a breach of the fair and equitable standard must also be an
expropriation. The Tribunal cannot accept this to be a correct statement of the law. There
is no further analysis in the award as to whether the particular requirements of an
expropriation have been satisfied; instead the Metalclad tribunal’s principal findings in

respect of the Article 1105 claim are simply repeated for the Article 1110 claim.

177. The Tribunal also notes that the Metalclad tribunal’s decision on the Article 1105 claim,
and its decision that its findings in respect of the fair and equitable treatment standard also
resulted in an expropriation under Article 1110 (as quoted above), were annulled upon a
subsequent challenge to the Supreme Court of British Columbia. The basis for that
annulment was, in the estimation of the Tribunal, controversial, however, it is a factor that
must at least be acknowledged in an assessment of the Metalclad award. The finding that
was left undisturbed by the Supreme Court was the Metalclad tribunal’s decision that there

had been an expropriation on a separate and alternative basis upon the issuance by the

24 Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award, 25 August 2000
(“Metalclad Award”) (CA-21), §874-101.
25 Metalclad Award (CA-21), §104.

51

178.

179.

180.

Governor of San Luis Potosi of an “ecological decree” that “had the effect of barring

forever the operation of the landfill” '?°

In any event it is clear that the situation in Metalclad is distinguishable from the present
case. In Metalclad the investment was the property rights associated with the landfill. The
effect of the denial of the construction permit by the municipality and the issuance of the
ecological decree was to deprive Metalclad of the right to use its property. The right of use
is a fundamental right of ownership and its deprivation can certainly amount to an
expropriation even if formal title to the property remains with the owner. This was
precisely the situation in Mertalclad and explains the Metalclad tribunal’s statement that
“expropriation under NAFTA includes not only open, deliberate and acknowledged takings
of property, such as outright seizure or formal or obligatory transfer of title in favour of
the host State, but also covert or incidental interference with the use of property [...]”'7"
Metalclad was then awarded compensation to reflect its deprivation of the right to use the

landfill by reference to the “cost of its investment in the landfill” .'°

In the present case, the property rights said to be the object of the Claimants’ first
expropriation claim are the shares in and loans to Danubius. There is no allegation in these
proceedings that a measure of the State of Hungary has interfered with the Claimants’ right

of use in respect of these property rights.

The Claimants’ reliance on Tecmed is also inapposite. In Tecmed, the investment was
“real property, buildings and facilities and other assets relating to ‘Cytrar’, a controlled
landfill of hazardous waste”.'?? The Tecmed tribunal, before engaging with the merits of
the claimant’s claims, undertook an exercise similar to one in this Award, namely, an
analysis of precisely which property rights comprised the investment. It was Tecmed’s
submission that, as part of the purchase price it paid to Promotora, a municipal agency, it
acquired intangible property “consisting of permits issued by municipal and federal

authorities of [Mexico] which enabled and empowered [Tecmed] to operate the Las

26 Metalclad Award (CA-21), §109.

"27 Metalclad Award (CA-21), §103 (emphasis added).

28 Metalclad Award (CA-21), §122.

9 Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2), Award, 29 May
2003 (“Tecmed Award”) (CA-31), §35.

52

181.

182.

183.

Viboras site as a hazardous waste landfill”.'°° After a careful analysis of the transactional

documents, the Tecmed tribunal upheld that submission. '?!

It was only after that analysis of what rights actually comprised the investment that the
Tecmed tribunal went on to consider whether the resolution of the Mexican authority not to
renew the permit to operate the hazardous waste landfill constituted an expropriation. The
claim was that “the resolution deprived Cytrar [Tecmed’s investment company] of its
rights to use and enjoy the real and personal property forming the Landfill in accordance
with its sole intended purpose [because] the Resolution put an end to the operation of the
Landfill as an ongoing business exclusively engaged in the landfill of hazardous waste, an
activity that is only feasible under a permit, the renewal of which was denied”.'** The

Tribunal upheld this claim.'*?

Tecmed is thus distinguishable from the situation confronting Danubius in the present case
for two reasons. First, the Tecmed tribunal specifically found that Tecmed had acquired an
intangible property right to the permits necessary to operate the landfill as part of the
consideration it paid for its investment in the first place. By contrast, in considering the
Respondent’s objection [B1], the Tribunal has found that the Claimants had no proprietary
or other right to acquire a broadcasting agreement on the critical date or thereafter.

Second, and similar to Metalclad, the expropriation was consummated in Tecmed because

 

the investor was deprived of its right to use the property associated with the landfill. Once
again, there is no allegation in the present case that a measure of the State of Hungary has

interfered with the Claimants’ right of use in respect of its shares in and loans to Danubius.

Finally, the Claimants have relied upon Quasar de Valores SICAV S.A. v. Russian
Federation. This case is different from Metalclad and Tecmed in the sense that there was a
direct relationship between the state measures said to constitute an expropriation and the
deprivation of the Claimants’ investment in shares (in Yukos). As a result of tax
assessments and bankruptcy proceedings, which the Quasar de Valores tribunal

characterised as being directed to the seizure of Yukos’s assets and their transfer to the

80 Tecmed Award (CA-31), §75.
8! Tecmed Award (CA-31), §91.
'2 Tecmed Award (CA-31), §96.
83 Tecmed Award (CA-31), $117.

53

184.

185.

186.

187.

state-owned company Rosneft,'** Yukos was struck of the register for Russian companies

and the Claimants’ shares were extinguished in law.'*>

The Quasar de Valores case is thus an instance where the state measures said to constitute
an expropriation have directly interfered with an investment in shares. For the reasons

already given, this is not the situation in respect of Danubius.

The Tribunal thus affirms, following an analysis of the precedents relied upon by the
Claimants, that their first expropriation claim is, like their second expropriation claim,
contingent upon procuring a new broadcasting agreement from the ORTT. The dispute
concerning the first expropriation claim does not, therefore, arise out of the Claimants’
investment in shares and loans but rather out of an alleged investment right that the
Claimants never had. The Tribunal thus upholds the Respondent’s objection [B2] in

respect of the Claimants’ first expropriation claim.

CONCLUSION ON THE IMPACT OF THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS IN
RESPECT OF ITS JURISDICTION
Tt will be recalled that the Claimants have advanced two claims for expropriation in this

arbitration:

First, Claimants contend that Hungary indirectly expropriated the full value of
the shares of Danubius and destroyed its ability to repay loans from Claimants.

Second, Claimants content that Hungary also expropriated the bundle of
proprietary and contractual rights that Danubius enjoyed by virtue of the
Contract Framework that Hungary created in the 1990s to encourage and protect
investors in the newly-privatized broadcast industry.!°°

The Tribunal has concluded in respect of the Respondent’s objection [B1] that no
legislative provision or provision of any other normative act relating to the conduct of the
2009 Tender was incorporated into the Broadcasting Agreement such that Danubius would

have a contractual right to enforce any such provision against the ORTT or any other party.

The Tribunal has also concluded that Danubius had no other right under Hungarian law

"4 Quasar de Valores SICAV SA et al. v. Russian Federation (SCC Case No. 24/2007), Award, 20 July 2012
(“Quasar Award”) (CA-86), $177.

85 Quasar Award (CA-86), §§168, 189.

86 C], Rej. Jur., §1.

54

188.

189.

190.

independently of the Broadcasting Agreement to be awarded a new broadcasting
agreement upon the former’s expiry. It follows that the Tribunal is without jurisdiction
ratione materiae over the second of the Claimants’ claims because the Claimants never had

any rights to the alleged object of the expropriation.

The Tribunal has also upheld the Respondent’s objection [B2] in resolving that the
Claimants’ first expropriation claim, as pleaded, is also contingent upon establishing a
right to a new broadcasting agreement under Hungarian law and thus is not a claim relating
to an investment that the Claimants owned or controlled in Hungary. The Respondent has
pleaded this objection as a jurisdictional one relating to the required nexus between the
claim and the investment: it has submitted that the first expropriation claim does not relate,
when properly analysed, to an investment in shares or loans but instead to an investment
that the Claimants did not have (the right to a new broadcasting agreement). The objection
might have also been pleaded as a failure to state a claim that meets the prima facie
standard in the sense that, even if the Tribunal were to assume the correctness of the
Claimants’ characterisation of the Respondent’s acts said to constitute an expropriation, the
true object of the expropriation claim is not part of the Claimants’ investment in Hungary.
Whichever way the objection is formulated, the Parties have proceeded on the basis that
the Respondent’s objection [B2] is an issue relating to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction during
this phase of the arbitration. Having upheld the Respondent’s objection [B2], it follows
that the Tribunal is without jurisdiction ratione materiae over the first of the Claimants’

expropriation claims as well.

The Tribunal’s conclusions in respect of the Respondent’s objections [B1] and [B2] thus
result in the termination of these proceedings as the Tribunal is without jurisdiction over
the merits of the dispute that has been submitted to it. No purpose would, therefore, be

served in addressing the Respondent’s other objections [A1] to [A4].

This conclusion should not be interpreted as excusing or vindicating in any way the
Respondent’s conduct in relation to Danubius, and in particular the illegality, as held by
the Supreme Court of Hungary, of both the tender process and the choice of Advenio as the

winner of the tender process. We cite as well the Hungarian Parliament’s legislation

55

191.

192.

193.

introduced in December 2010 to prohibit the ORTT from terminating an unlawful
broadcasting agreement if the ORTT had any responsibility for the unlawful situation.
Given that Danubius had been successful in the Hungarian courts in demonstrating that the
ORTT had acted unlawfully by failing to disqualify Advenio during the tender process, it
seems clear that this legislation was enacted for the very purpose of shielding Advenio’s
broadcasting agreement from termination by the ORTT upon an order of the court. This,
and subsequent amendments to the Media Law, have attracted criticism from the

international community, and for very good reason in the estimation of this Tribunal.

The Tribunal also recognizes that the jurisdictional issues determined in this Award were
by no means straightforward. Their resolution depended, in part, upon complex
and technical questions of Hungarian law. It cannot be said that either Party was
advancing an extreme or untenable view of these issues during the proceedings. This was
a close case in the sense of reaching or not reaching the merits. But in the end the Tribunal
has determined that it does not have jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims and as a result

it will not have the opportunity of adjudging the Respondent’s conduct on the merits.

COSTS

The Respondent requests an award of costs in respect of all the costs incurred in
connection with this proceeding, including the Tribunal’s legal fees and expenses and the
costs of its representation.'*” The Claimants request “that they be permitted to address the

question of costs and sanctions in the subsequent stages of this case”.'°*

As provided in the Claimants’ statement of costs dated 15 August 2014, the Claimants’
paid legal fees and expenses incurred in connection with this proceeding amount to USD
2,447,929.70, including USD 249,950.00 paid to ICSID on account of the fees and

expenses of the Members of the Tribunal and the ICSID administrative fees and expenses.

57 Resp. Rep. Jur., §75.
38 Cl, C-Mem. Jur., $199.

56

194.

195.

196.

197.

x

198.

As provided in the Respondent’s statement of costs dated 15 August 2014, the
Respondent’s legal fees and expenses amount to USD 1,908,335.54, including USD
249,924.50 advanced to ICSID.

The fees and expenses of the Tribunal and ICSID’s administrative fees and expenses

amount to USD 390,688.04, divided as follows (in USD):!?

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses:

Arthur Rovine 89,886.24
Marc Lalonde 71,757.41
Zachary Douglas 86,744.39
Donald McRae (up to 30 November 2013) 19,800.00
ICSID’s administrative fees: 96,000

ICSID’s expenses (estimated): !4° 26,500.00

The Tribunal’s fees and expenses as well as ICSID’s administrative fees and expenses are
paid out of the advances made by the Parties. As a result, each Party’s share of the costs of

arbitration amounts to USD 195,344.02.!4!
Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides that:

[t]he Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses
incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings and shall decide how
and by whom these expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the
Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid.
Such decision shall form part of the award.

Rule 47(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides that the Tribunal’s Award “shall

contain [...] (j) any decision [...] regarding the cost of the proceeding”.

‘3° The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account as soon as
all invoices are received and the account is final.

‘40 The amount includes estimated charges (courier, printing and copying) in respect of the dispatch of this Award.
141 Any and all remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced
to ICSID.

57

199.

200.

201.

202.

Article 61 of the ICSID Convention gives the Tribunal discretion to allocate all costs of the
arbitration, including attorney’s fees and other costs, between the Parties as it deems

appropriate.

The Tribunal’s ultimate conclusion in this Award is that it is without jurisdiction in respect
of the Claimants’ claims. The Respondent has, therefore, prevailed. The Tribunal does
not, however, consider that the Claimants acted unreasonably in pursuing their claims
under the Treaty before this Tribunal. To the contrary: the Claimants had been successful
before the Hungarian courts in obtaining a declaration that the tender process through
which Advenio had procured its broadcasting agreement was unlawful, only for the
Hungarian Parliament to scupper the possibility of a new tender. Hence there was no
possibility for the Claimants to obtain justice in Hungary and it was natural for them to

look to an international tribunal.

This Tribunal is, however, a judicial body with a limited jurisdiction that is carefully
prescribed in the international instruments that are binding upon it. The Tribunal has no
discretion to depart from the rules applicable to its jurisdiction, but it does have the
discretion to take into account broader considerations of fairness and justice in exercising

its power to award costs under Article 61 of the ICSID Convention.

In light of these factors and in the exercise of this discretion, the Tribunal has decided that
each Party shall bear in full its own legal costs and expenses incurred in connection with
the proceedings and that each Party should bear in equal shares the fees and expenses of

the Tribunal and ICSID’s administrative fees and expenses.

58

VI. AWARD

203. For the foregoing reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal, decides as follows:

(1) The Arbitral Tribunal is without jurisdiction over the claims advanced by the

Claimants; and

(2) Each Party shall bear in full its own legal costs and the payment of the fees and
expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and the administrative fees and expenses for use of

the Centre shall be paid in equal shares by each Party.

59

  

C11 hee te tonde

Hon. Mare Lalonde PC OC QC _ of. Zachary Douglas QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: 04/0 ¥¢/7 5 Date: AS-+ 3. ters

Pr ‘ovine
President of the Tribunal

Date: @% layly

 

60

Annex A

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

ACCESSION MEZZANINE CAPITAL L.P. AND DANUBIUS KERESKEDOHAZ
VAGYONKEZELO ZRT

Claimants

and

HUNGARY

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/3

 

DECISION ON RESPONDENT’S OBJECTION UNDER
ARBITRATION RULE 41(5)

 

Members of the Tribunal
Arthur W. Rovine, President
Hon. Marc Lalonde, Arbitrator
Donald M. McRae, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mairée Uran Bidegain

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 16 January 2013

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Accession Mezzanine Capital | Representing Hungary:
L.P. and Danubius Kereskedohaz
Vagyonkezeld:

COVINGTON & BURLING LLP ARNOLD & PORTER LLP

Mr. Eugene D. Gulland Ms. Jean E. Kalicki

Mr. Miguel Lépez Forastier 555 12th Street, NW

Mr. Alexander O. Canizares Washington, D.C. 20004

1201 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW United States of America

Washington, D.C. 20004-2401

United States of America ARNOLD & PORTER (UK) LLP
Mr. Dmitri Evseev
Tower 42

25 Old Broad St.
London EC2N 1HQ United Kingdom

and

KENDE, MOLNAR-BIRO, KATONA
Dr. Janos Katona

Dr. Gyérgy Molar-Biré

Dr. Gabor Puskas

Villanyi tit 47

1118 Budapest,

Hungary

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2
A. The Request for Arbitration 2
B. Constitution of the Tribunal 3

 

C. Preliminary Objections pursuant to Article 415)... ccc eee nen ee eeteeeeeeeeeees 4

D. First Session of the Tribunal 4

Il. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 5
A. The Dispute 5

B. The Claims 6
7

8

 

 

 

C. Relief Sought
IV. RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS

 

 

 

 

 

A. The ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules...........cccccceeeseseeteseeteseenene 8
B. The UK-Hungary Bilateral Investment Treaty... ccc eee eeeenereeeeeeeteteteteeeeeees 9
V. POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES 10
A. Respondent’s Objection 11
B. Claimants’ Position 14
VI. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S REASONS AND DECISION ........:c0scessesesssssessesseeseese 16
VII. COSTS 20

 

VIIL OPERATIVE PART 20

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Arbitration Rules

BIT

ICSID Convention

ICSID or the Centre

RA - [x]

Request or RfA

Preliminary Objections

Claimants’ Response

Revised Request

Respondent’s Reply

Claimants’ Rejoinder

Respondent’s Sur-Reply

iii

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Agreement between the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Government of the Hungarian
People’s Republic for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated 9
March 1987

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated March 18, 1965

The International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Respondent’s Legal Authorities

Request for Arbitration dated 27 December
2012

Respondent’s Objections pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(5) dated 2 November 2012

Claimants’ letter responding to Respondent’s
Arbitration Rule 41(5) Objection dated 6
November 2012

Revised Amended Request for Arbitration filed
by Claimants on 9 November 2012

Respondent’s letter to ICSID dated 16
November 2012

Claimants’ letter to ICSID dated 29 November
2012

Respondent’s letter to ICSID dated 4
December 2012

L

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Agreement between the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments dated 9 March 1987, which entered into force on 28 August
1987 (the “BIT” or “Treaty’”), and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, which entered into force on

October 14, 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

The dispute relates to the allegedly unlawful expropriation or nationalization without
compensation and without complying with other requirements imposed by the BIT and
applicable law, of Claimants’ investments in and related to Danubius Radio
Misorzolgaltaté Zrt (“Danubius Radio” or “Danubius”), a Hungarian company, and a
former licensee of one of the two nationwide FM radio-broadcasting frequencies in

Hungary.

The claimants are Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P., hereinafter referred to as
“Mezannine” and Danubius Kereskedéhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt., hereinafter referred to as

“DHSV.”

Mezzanine is a partnership organized under the laws of Bermuda with its principal place of
business in Hamilton, Bermuda. DSHV is a company organized and existing under the
laws of Hungary, allegedly controlled by Mezzanine, a national of the United Kingdom.

Both companies will be jointly referred to as “Claimants.”
The Respondent is Hungary and is hereinafter referred to as “Hungary” or “Respondent.”

The Claimants and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

The Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

IL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

A. The Request for Arbitration

On 28 October 2011, ICSID received a request for arbitration on behalf of Emmis
International Holding BV, Emmis Radio Operating, B.V., MEM Magyar Electronic Media
Kerekedemi és Szolagdltat6 Kft., Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. and Danubius
Kereskeddhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt (collectively the “Requesting Parties”) against the

Republic of Hungary.

Hungary submitted communications dated 16 and 22 November 2011, and 4 and 7
December 2011, objecting to the registration of the 28 October 2011 request. The
Requesting Parties submitted a response to such letters on 18 and 30 November, 2011 and

6 December 2011.

On 9 December 2011, the Centre notified the parties that “[i]n the absence of consent by all
disputing parties to join disputes relating to manifestly separate investments, the Secretary-
General cannot proceed to register the Request for Arbitration as submitted to the Centre.”!
The Requesting Parties then proceeded to submit two separate requests: one on behalf of
investors in Danubius Radio and a second one of behalf of the investors in Slager Radié

Miisorzolgaltaté Zrt.2

On 27 December 2011, the Centre received an amended request for arbitration as

submitted by Claimants in this case, against Hungary (the “Request” or “RfA”).

On 18 January 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in accordance

with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the registration.

' Letter from Ms. Meg Kinnear, Secretary-General of ICSID, to the Parties, dated 9 December 2011.

? The request for arbitration submitted by the remaining Requesting Parties is the basis of a separate ICSID
arbitration proceeding registered under ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2. See Emmis International Holding B.V.,
Emmis Radio Operating B.V. and MEM Magyar Electronic Media Kereskedelmi Szolgdltaté Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2), Procedural Details, publicly available on the ICSID website at
https://icsid. worldbank.org, last visited on 30 November 2012. See also, Request for Arbitration at { 1, FN 2.

2

B. Constitution of the Tribunal

In accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention, the Parties agreed to
constitute an Arbitral Tribunal composed of three arbitrators: one arbitrator to be appointed
by each party, and the third arbitrator and President of the Tribunal to be appointed by

agreement of the two co-arbitrators in consultation with the Parties.

The Parties further agreed that in the absence of an agreement between the co-arbitrators
and the Parties regarding the constitution of the Tribunal, the Secretary-General of ICSID,
rather than the Chairman of the Administrative Council, shall act as the appointing

authority.

On 31 August 2012, Claimants requested the Secretary-General to make a default
appointment. Consistent with ICSID practice, before making her appointment, the
Secretary-General engaged in consultations with the Parties on potential candidates for
President through a ballot procedure. At the issue of this process, both Parties agreed to

the appointment of Professor Arthur W. Rovine as President of the Tribunal.

The Tribunal is therefore composed of Professor Arthur W. Rovine, a national of the
United States, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; the Honorable Marc
Lalonde, a national of Canada, appointed by Claimants; and Professor Donald M. McRae,

a national of Canada, appointed by Respondent.

On 10 October 2012, the Secretary-General notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been
constituted on that date, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”). Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain, ICSID

Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 18 October 2012, the Secretary of the Tribunal transmitted to the Parties a draft Agenda

of the items to be discussed at the first session of the Tribunal (the “Draft Agenda”).

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

C. Preliminary Objections pursuant to Article 41(5)

On 2 November 2012, Respondent submitted Preliminary Objections pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(5) (“Preliminary Objections”).

On 5 November 2012, the Parties submitted their Joint Statement on the Draft Agenda,

detailing, inter alia, their respective positions on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections.

On 6 November 2012, Claimants submitted their Response on Respondent’s Preliminary

Objections.

On 9 November 2012, Claimants submitted a Revised Amended Request for Arbitration

striking through certain passages of the Request for Arbitration (the “Revised Request”).

On 16 November 2012, and further to a communication from the Tribunal dated 9
November 2012 granting Respondent permission to file a Reply, Respondent submitted
observations, enclosing as Annex A an alternative strike-through version of the Revised

Amended Request for Arbitration.
On 29 November 2012, Claimants submitted additional observations in a Rejoinder letter.

On 4 December 2012, Respondent submitted a Sur-Reply.

D. First Session of the Tribunal

On 30 November 2012, the Tribunal held a first session by video conference with the
Parties. In accordance with their 5 November 2012 Joint Statement described in paragraph
19 above, the Parties confirmed that the Members of the Tribunal had been validly
appointed. It was further agreed inter alia that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be
those in effect from 10 April 2006, that the procedural language would be English and that
the place of proceeding would be Washington D.C.

The agreement of the Parties was embodied in Procedural Order No. 1, signed by the

President and circulated to the Parties on 17 December 2012.

Ill.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Tribunal will provide a brief description of the factual background that has led to the
dispute as far as it needs it to examine Respondent’s Rule 41(5) Objection and as currently
pleaded in Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, by providing a short description of (i) the

dispute; (ii) the claims; and (iii) the relief sought.

A. The Dispute

According to the Request, Mezannine and DSHV each hold stock in Danubius Radio, a
Hungarian company, and a former licensee of one of the two nationwide radio-

broadcasting FM frequencies in Hungary.’

The dispute arises out of the alleged unlawful expropriation or nationalization without
compensation and without complying with other standards of treatment set forth in the
BIT, customarily international law and applicable law, of Claimants’ investments in and

related to, Danubius Radio and its operating activities, by Hungary.*

Claimants contend that this resulted from Respondent’s decision to conduct a tender
procedure through which it replaced Danubius Radio as the licensee of one of the two
national FM radio-broadcasting frequencies, after Danubius had successfully operated the

said radio-broadcasting frequency for twelve years.”

In particular, in 1997 after participating in an international call for tender of the licenses,
Hungary’s National Radio and Television Broadcasting Board (ORTT) awarded Danubius
Radio one of the two licenses for a period of seven years, following which, the license was
renewed for an additional period of five years, starting in 2004 through 2009.° On 29 July
2009, ORTT published a call for tender for the issuance of licenses for the two FM radio

> See Request at J 9.

* See Request at {fl 1, 5.

* See Request at {{[ 2-3; see generally Request at ff 34-49.
° See Request at J 34.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

frequencies, including the one held by Danubius Radio, for a period starting in November

2009.”

Claimants contend, inter alia, that this tender procedure infringed the applicable 1996
Media Law and its regulations (referenced as the General Terms of Tender), among others
by inter alia (i) not according the incumbents licensees the preferences in the tender
provided by law, and (ii) providing for a shorter period of time for the submission of bids

than provided by law.®

The Request for Arbitration further contends that although the prevailing bidders had (i)
prohibited conflicts of interest in violation of the antimonopoly rules governing the tender,
the Media Law and its regulations, (ii) no national broadcasting experience, and (iii)
unfeasible business plans, they were owned by Hungarian nationals with close ties with the
two leading political parties in Hungary, which impacted the ORTT’s final decision to

award the licenses to two competitors.”

Finally, Claimants allege that Danubius Radio attempted to challenge the results of the bid

before the Hungarian judicial system without avail.'°

B. The Claims

Claimants contend that through these and other measures, Respondent indirectly
expropriated or nationalized without compensation Claimants’ investment, including the
value of the stock of Danubius Radio, the rights granted by the licenses and operations, and

other related assets.'!

Claimants further contend that the measures summarized above constitute further
violations of Hungary’s obligations under the BIT (as well as the provisions of the treaties

with other States that are incorporated by the most-favored-nation principle of Article 3 of

7 See Request at J 36.

§ See Request at {ff 3, 36.

° See Request at {ff 3, 44, 47-49.
© See Request at {f] 50-58.

"| See Request at J 61.

37.

38.

the BIT), including, without limitation, the obligation to (i) observe obligations attendant
upon a direct or indirect expropriation of an investment; (ii) ensure and afford fair and
equitable treatment to investments; (iii) avoid impairing by unreasonable or discriminatory
measures the operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of
investments; (iv) not engage in nationality discrimination against Claimants and in favor of
Hungarian nationals in the award of radio-broadcasting licenses; and (v) observe

obligations entered into with regard to investments.'?

In addition, Claimants contend that Respondent’s measures as described above violate their
obligations under customary international law, including (i) the breach of the international
minimum standard of treatment of foreign investors, and (ii) expropriation without
compensation of Claimant’s investments without observance of due process and payment
of prompt, adequate and effective compensation equal to the fair market value of the

investments.'*

C. Relief Sought

As pleaded in the Request for Arbitration, Claimants seek from the Tribunal the following

formal relief :

a. Declaring that the Respondent has breached the Treaty:

i. by expropriating the Claimants’ investments without complying with the
requirements of the Treaty, including payment of prompt, adequate and
effective compensation;

ii. by failing to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’
investments;

iii. by taking unreasonable or discriminatory measures that impaired the
operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of the
Claimants’ investments; and

iv. _ by discriminating against the Claimants and in favor of Hungarian
nationals in the award of the radio-broadcasting license; and

”? See Request at {| 63-64.
'S See Request at {| 63-65.

39.

IV.

40.

Al.

42.

iv.[sic] by failing to observe obligations entered into with respect to Claimants’
investments;

b. Declaring that the Respondent has breached customary international law
i. by violating the minimum standard of treatment of foreign investors; and

ii. by expropriating the Claimants’ investments without observance of due

process and payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation. vid

The Claimants further request payment of full reparation in accordance with the Treaty and
customary international law, the costs and expenses of the arbitration and compound
interests on all compensatory damages, as well as other and additional relief that may be

just and proper.

RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS

The Tribunal sets forth below the the legal texts relevant to decide on Respondent’s

Objections under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5).

A. The ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, provides, in relevant part:

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.

(..)

Arbitration Rule 41 “Preliminary Objections” provides in pertinent part:

4 Request at ] 68.
'S See Request at J 68.

43.

44.

(5) Unless the parties have agreed to another expedited procedure for making
preliminary objections, a party may, no later than 30 days after the constitution of the
Tribunal, and in any event before the first session of the Tribunal, file an objection that a
claim is manifestly without legal merit. The party shall specify as precisely as possible
the basis for the objection. The Tribunal, after giving the parties the opportunity to
present their observations on the objection, shall, at its first session or promptly
thereafter, notify the parties of its decision on the objection. The decision of the Tribunal
shall be without prejudice to the right of a party to file an objection pursuant to paragraph
(1) or to object, in the course of the proceeding, that a claim lacks legal merit.

(6) If the Tribunal decides that the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre
or not within its own competence, or that all claims are manifestly without legal merit, it
shall render an award to that effect.

B. The UK-Hungary Bilateral Investment Treaty

Article 3 of the BIT “National Treatment and Most-Favoured-Nation Provisions” provides
in relevant part:

Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investments or returns of
investors of the other Contracting Party to treatment less favourable than that which it
accords to investments or returns of its own investors or to investments or returns of
investors of any third State.

Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investors of the other
Contracting Party, as regards their management, use, enjoyment or disposal of their
investments, to treatment less favourable than that which it accords to its own
investors or to investors of any third State.

Article 6 of the BIT “Expropriation” provides in relevant part:

Neither Contracting Party shall nationalise, expropriate or subject to measures having
effect equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation... the investments of investors of
the other Contracting Party in its territory unless the following conditions are
complied with:

(a) the expropriation is for a public purpose related to the internal needs of that Party
and is subject to due process of law;

(b) the expropriation is non-discriminatory; and

(c) the expropriation is followed by the payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation.

(..)

4S.

46.

Vv.

47.

Where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a company which is constituted
under the law in force in any part of its own territory, and in which investors of the
other Contracting Party own shares, it shall ensure that the provisions of paragraph 1
of this Article are applied to the extent necessary to guarantee prompt, adequate and
effective compensation in respect of their investments to such investors of the other
Contracting Party who are owners of those shares.

Article 8 of the BIT “Reference to International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes” provides in relevant part:

1. Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit to [ICSID]... any legal dispute
arising under Article 6 of the Agreement [Expropriation] between that Contracting
Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party concerning an investment of the
latter in the territory of the former. A company which is constituted or incorporated
under the law in force in the territory of one Contracting Party and in which before
such a dispute arises the majority of shares are owned by the investors of the other
Contracting Party shall in accordance with Art. 25(2)(b) of the Convention, be treated
for the purposes of the Convention as a company of the other Contracting Party.

Article 11 of the BIT “Application of Other Rules” provides:

If the provisions of law of either Contracting Party or obligations under international
law existing at present or established hereafter between the Contracting Parties in
addition to the present Agreement contain rules, whether general or specific, entitling
investments by investors of the other Contracting Party to a treatment more
favourable than is provided for by the present Agreement, such rules shall to the
extent that they are more favourable prevail over the present Agreement.

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

In its submission dated 2 November 2012, Hungary presented an objection under Rule
41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, asserting that Claimants had failed to identify a
source of consent to arbitrate the claims set forth in Claimants’ Request for Arbitration
unrelated to direct or indirect expropriation of an investment described under paragraphs
38(a)(ii)-(iv), 38(b) and 39 above (hereinafter referred to as the “Non-Expropriation
Claims”). Respondent alleges in particular that Hungary’s limited consent to arbitration as
expressed in the BIT does not cover the Non-Expropriation Claims. As such they are

“manifestly without legal merit” and should be dismissed by the Tribunal with prejudice,

48.

49.

50.

together with an order that Claimants bear all costs and expenses associated with this phase

of the proceedings, including attorney’s fees.'°

A. Respondent’s Objection

Hungary advances three arguments in support of its contention that Claimants’ claims are

manifestly without legal merit.

First, it states that on the face of the BIT it is clear that Hungary consented to arbitrate only
disputes concerning expropriation obligations set forth in Article 6 of the Treaty. In
support of this proposition, it states inter alia that the “dispute resolution clause in the UK-
Hungary BIT is entirely characteristic of Hungary’s consistent, limited approach to consent
to ICSID arbitration at the time the treaty was signed.”!” It further cited to the decisions in
Telenor v. Hungary,'® William Nagel v. Czech Republic” and Saipem S.p.A. v.
Bangladesh,” and commentary from Professor Schreuer for the proposition that
“[c]ommentators and tribunals alike have recognized that the effect of Hungary’s limited

consent to arbitration is to limit an ICSID tribunal’s jurisdiction.””!

Second, Respondent alleges that it has not consented to arbitrate claims arising from
customary international law, which Claimants have treated as a distinct base for liability,
and have considered it to be applicable under Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention. On
this point, Hungary contends that “Article 42 creates no independent obligation on the part

of the host State to act in accordance with customary international law, much less does it

'© Preliminary Objections at {{ 37-39

"” Preliminary Objections at 21.

'S See Preliminary Objections at {| 24 (citing Telenor Mobile Communications A.S. v. Hungary, ICSID Case
No. ARB/04/15 (holding that the claimant’s fair and equitable treatment claims were “outside the Tribunal’s.
jurisdiction, which is limited by Article XI [dispute resolution] to expropriation claims” subject to the
argument that the tribunal’s jurisdiction could be extended through the treaty’s MFN clause), Award of 13
September 2006 at {81 (RA-20)).

"° See Preliminary Objections at { 26 (citing William Nagel v. Czech Republic, SCC Case No. 049/2002,
(concluding that Mr. Nagel’s claims resulting from obligations arising out of the relevant treaty and not
covered by the relevant dispute resolution provision “are not admissible and must be rejected”), Final Award
of 9 September 2003 at | 271 (RA-14).

9 See Preliminary Objections at J 28 (citing Saipem S.p.A. v. Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/5,
(referring to the claimant’s admission during the hearing that the relevant treaty “restrict[ed] the tribunal’s
jurisdiction to a claim for expropriation”), Award of 30 June 2009 at § 121 (RA-17).

?! Preliminary Objections at J 22.

ll

51.

52.

53.

provide a source of consent to arbitrate such claims before ICSID.””” Instead, Respondent
alleges, this provision of the ICSID Convention “only guides the tribunal’s task in defining
the scope of the treaty obligations that the host State has agreed to arbitrate.””*

Furthermore, Respondent rejects that stand-alone customary international law claims
whether on expropriation or otherwise, would be covered by Article 8 of the Bir. Citing
the Generation Ukraine Tribunal, Hungary contends “[n]either the BIT, nor Article 42(1)
of the ICSID Convention, entitles Claimants to assert customary international law as an

, att 2
independent cause of action. 5

It further says that the Claimants’ attempt to construct
consent for those claims on the basis of Article 11 of the BIT is “difficult, if not
impossible, to understand” since “Article 11 does not extend the scope of the dispute
resolution clause to customary international law claims any more than it extends it to
arbitrate disputes under national law.””°

Third, Respondent says that the Request for Arbitration does not allege the existence of
advance consent to arbitrate the additional claims.” In particular, it asserts that by
separating its claims in two categories under the Request, the first category relating to
investment disputes arising under Article 6 of this Agreement relating to expropriation, and
the second one relating to claims subject to the Parties’ mutual consent —the Non-
Expropriation Claims— Claimants tacitly acknowledge that no advance consent exists to

arbitrate these claims.”*

As it pertains to Claimants’ proposal to strike-through passages of the Request for
Arbitration referring to the Non-Expropriation Claims, as detailed below, Respondent
suggests that this constituted a tactic “to circumvent Hungary’s Objections without either

contesting its substance or removing most of the offending passages in the Request for

» Preliminary Objections at J 33; see also, Respondent’s Reply at p. 3, Respondent’s Sur-Reply at p. 4.
3 Preliminary Objections at {[ 33.
4 Respondent’s Sur-Reply at p. 3-4.

25 See Respondent’s Sur-Reply at p. 4 (citing Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9
(“[t]he Tribunal does not, however, have general jurisdiction over causes of action based on the obligations
of states in customary international law”), Award of 16 December 2003 at J 11.3 (Annex D to Sur-Reply)).

26 See Respondent’s Sur-Reply at p. 3-4.
?7 See Preliminary Objections at | 35; see also Respondent’s Sur-Reply at p. 2.
8 See Preliminary Objections at { 35; see also, Respondent’s Reply at p. 2.

12

54.

55.

2

Arbitration.””? In addition, “Claimants’ Revisions fail to remove most of the key passages
that are the subject of Hungary’s Objection” and they “have used their Revisions to re-
write the Request for Arbitration” and they have “maintained the request that the Tribunal
declare that Hungary has breached customary international law, even though Hungary’s
Objection clearly asserted that the Tribunal manifestly lacks jurisdiction over such

claims.”*°

Since the expropriation claims based on customary international law and the Non-
Expropriation Claims against which Hungary objected continue to be pending in this
proceeding, the Tribunal should issue a decision confirming that it lacks jurisdiction to
consider allegations of breaches that are outside the scope of Article 6 of the BIT.’ In
support of its position it cites to Trans-Global Petroleum Inc. v. Jordan, where allegedly,
the claimant withdrew a claim in response to respondent’s objection that the claim was
manifestly without legal merit and the tribunal proceeded to render a decision on this
claim.” It considers that the operative request for arbitration should be the one it filed
identifying the “offending passages” and requests that the “Tribunal’s
decision. ..enumerate the specific allegations of Claimants’ Request for Arbitration that are

no longer pending before this Tribunal.”*4

Finally, it is well established that Rule 41(5) may be jurisdictional as well as merits-based,
as supported by ample authority and Respondent asserts that the Claimants lack of prior

consent to submit certain claims to arbitration confirms that those are “without legal

merit.”*>

?° Respondent’s Reply at p. 1.

* Respondent’s Reply at p. 3.

*! See Respondent’s Reply at pp. 1, 5; see also Sur-Reply p. 4-5.

* See Respondent’s Reply at p. 5 (citing Trans-Global Petroleum Inc. y. Jordan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/25, Decision on Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) of 12 May 2008 at 4124, (RA-21))
(“Trans-Global’).

% See Respondent’s Reply at pp.1, 4 and 5.

™ Respondent’s Sur-Reply at p. 5.

See Respondent's Sur-Reply at p. 2; see also Preliminary Objections at J] 8, 12, 18 (referencing Aurélia
Antonietti, The 2006 Amendments to the ICSID Rules and Regulations and the Additional Facility Rules, 21
ICSID REVIEW-F.LL.J. 427, 439-40 (Fall 2006) (RA-1); see also Brandes Investment Partners, LP v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/3, Decision on the Respondent's Objection

13

56.

57.

58.

B. Claimants’ Position

With regard to their “Expropriation Claims,” Claimants consider that Respondent’s
insistence on the Tribunal’s dismissal of Claimants’ allegation that Respondent has
breached customary international law when Respondent expropriated Claimants’
investment, ignores the provisions of Articles 6 [Expropriation], and Article 8 [Dispute
Resolution provision].*° Claimants further consider that in accordance with Article 11 of
the BIT [Application of Other Rules], “the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Article 8.1 allows
it to find that Hungary’s expropriation under Article 6 ‘breached customary international
law’ to the extent that applicable rules of international law, including customary, are more

937

favorable than those in Article 6 of the Treaty. In any case, “whether Respondent

breached customary international law is a question that cannot be summarily dismissed as

manifestly without legal merit at this early stage of the proceeding.”**

With regard to the “Non-Expropriation Claims,” Claimants oppose the Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections noting that the filing of such objections was “entirely unnecessary”
because Respondent knew that the Non-Expropriation Claims were included in the Request
only to the extent that Respondent consented to arbitrate those claims before ICSID, and

after learning that it declined to do so, Claimants proposed to drop the claims.”

Claimants further assert that “[nJothing prevented Respondent from agreeing to submit to
arbitration the non-expropriation claims asserted in the Amended Request for Arbitration
and resolve — once and for all — every single claim related to the breach of Respondent’s
international obligations under the Treaty as well as customary international law.”“° They

however conclude that “Respondent has declined to consent to arbitrate the non-

 

under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules of 2 February 2009 (RA-4); Global Trading Resource Corp.
and Globex International, Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/11, Award of | December 2010, (RA-8);
Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg, and RSM Production Corporation v.
Grenada, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6, Award of 10 December 2010) (RA-16).

* See Claimants’ Rejoinder at pp. 1-2.
* Claimants’ Rejoinder at p. 2.

8 Claimants’ Rejoinder at p. 2.

* See Claimants’ Response at p.1.

*° Claimants’ Response at p. 2.

59.

60.

61.

62.

expropriation claims in this proceeding” but that it “does not make the international wrongs
ool

it committed to go away.
As set forth in the cover letter accompanying Claimants’ Revised Request dated 9
November 2012, Claimants have allegedly stricken through passages referring to the so-
called “Non-Expropriation Claims.” Claimant’s position is that such claims “are not
before this Tribunal due to Respondent’s refusal to submit those disputes to arbitration”
and that “both parties concur that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over those claims.”*”

Claimants further consider that the Revised Request should be the operative request for
arbitration of these proceedings. They allege that “[t]here is no basis for Respondent’s
argument that Claimants have ‘fail[ed] to remove’ certain ‘offending’ passages in their

Revised Amended Request for Arbitration”

and that they are within their rights to keep
passages of the Request stating that Respondent has breached other standards of Treaty
besides expropriation, while at the same time acknowledging that those breaches are not
subject to arbitration because Respondent refused to arbitrate those disputes and therefore

striking the requests for relief related to those claims.“

Respondent’s reliance on the Trans-Global decision is unavailing according to Claimants
“since in that case, unlike here, the parties had fully briefed and argued the merits of
Jordan’s Rule 41(5) objections and Claimants later withdrew one of the three claims at
issue while pursuing the others making it logical for the Tribunal no issue a written award
deciding the objections as to all three, [but the Tribunal] did not state that a decision

resolving a Rule 41(5) objection was compelled in every situation.”

In sum, the circumstances of this case warrant the Tribunal exercising its discretion to

refrain from deciding on the merits of the Objection, as Claimants’ Non-Expropriation

+! Claimants’ Response at pp. 1-2.

* See Joint Statement at 2.1.3 and 2.1.5 and Claimants’ Letter of 9 November 2012 transmitting the
Revised Request.

* Claimants’ Rejoinder at p. 4.
* See Claimants’ Rejoinder at p. 4.
* Claimants’ Rejoinder at pp. 4-5; citing Trans-Global at {ff 19-22, 118-119.

15

VI.

63.

64.

65.

66.

claims have “legal merit” but the Tribunal cannot decide them because Respondent refuses

to consent to their arbitration.“

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S REASONS AND DECISION

Respondent in this case has submitted an Arbitration Rule 41 (5) Objection, maintaining
that Claimants’ claim in respect of “non-expropriation” issues is “manifestly without legal

merit.”

In the instant case, whatever the legal merit of the several claims initially filed, it is clear
from the BIT, from the Revised Amended Request for Arbitration, the written submissions,
and the oral discussion at the Tribunal’s First Session, that Claimants and Respondent are
now agreed that expropriation under Article 6 of the BIT is the only substantive issue over
which the Tribunal has jurisdiction.” The most recent communication from the Claimants.
on this matter, dated 29 November 2012, refers to “the so-called ‘non-expropriation’
claims, which both Parties agree are no longer before the Tribunal.”“* The Parties also
agree that the Tribunal's jurisdiction includes the calculation of compensation, should the
Tribunal find that there has been an expropriation, either direct or indirect. None of the

other substantive obligations set forth in the BIT are subject to arbitration.

In view of this agreement of the Parties, the Tribunal sees no need to rule on the Parties’
positions with respect to striking through certain passages in the Revised Request, or
failing to remove them, or keeping the passages on the ground that Respondent has
breached other BIT obligations besides expropriation even though they are not subject to
arbitration. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over BIT Article 6 issues, nothing more and

nothing less.

Despite their agreement on arbitrating expropriation, however, the Parties appear to

disagree, though not sharply, as to the inclusion, or not, of customary international law as

#6 See Claimants’ Rejoinder at {] 5-6.
a

 

s set forth under Section IV, above, Article 8 of the BIT calls for reference to ICSID of “any legal dispute
arising under Article 6 of this it” for by ili or arbi Article 6 add:
expropriation in the usual BIT format. There is no provision in the BIT authorizing arbitration of disputes
generally or particular disputes beyond expropriation.

+8 Claimants’ Rejoinder at p.1.

16

67.

68.

69.

being within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. As summarily explained above, Respondent has
stated that, “the purpose of its Objection is not to exclude all references to customary
international law. Nor is Hungary’s position that the Tribunal should disregard customary
international law entirely when determining the scope and content of Hungary’s
obligations under Article 6 of the UK-Hungary BIT. The point is that the claims
themselves must remain predicated on alleged breach of Article 6. Neither the BIT, nor
Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, entitles Claimants to assert customary international

law as an independent cause of action.”””

There are a few essential points to be made in this context. First, the interpretation and
application of the BIT is governed by international law, as is any treaty, and the
expropriation clause is, obviously, a key part of the BIT. Second, it may not be possible to
consider the scope and content of the term “expropriation” in the BIT without considering
customary and general principles of international law, as well as any other sources of

international law in this area.

The BIT in this case, as in almost all cases, has no definition of “expropriation” within its
text, nor does it contain guidelines that would assist the Tribunal in determining whether or
not there has been a compensable taking of property. Expropriation has been and is now
part of international law, and the change from dispute resolution under the system of
diplomatic protection to investor-state arbitration has not modified that. It is true that BITs
have become the most reliable source of law in this area, as have the awards of ICSID,
other investor-state tribunals acting under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and other
modern-day tribunals, such as the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal, state practice, and writings of
scholars. But that is not inconsistent with the continuing relevance of customary and
general principles of international law, at least as to BIT obligations that are silent as to
scope and content, as well as any other sources of international law with respect to

expropriation.

UK BITs, including expropriation provisions, have tended to use consistent wording since

the early 1970s, trying to invoke but not go beyond customary international law

*° Respondent’s Sur-Reply at p. 4.

70.

71.

72.

standards.©” Given the absence of definitions of expropriation in BITs, the normal practice
for investment tribunals is to focus on expropriation within the framework of international
law standards, meaning state practice, treaties and judicial interpretations of
“expropriation” in the cases.”! As one example, the 2012 U.S. model BIT, at Annex B,
states the “shared understanding” of the parties that expropriation (Article 6(1)) “is
intended to reflect customary international law concerning the obligation of States with

respect to expropriation.”

In the present case, “the Parties agreed that Article 42 of the ICSID Convention shall
govern the issue of applicable law in the present proceeding.” Since the Parties have not
agreed otherwise, the Tribunal “shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the
dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as
may be applicable.” However, in this case, any international law rules applied by the
Tribunal will be confined to expropriation. There is no basis in the consent of the Parties,
in the BIT or in the Convention, to expand the Tribunal’s jurisdiction beyond expropriation

and attendant rules of international law.

Respondent maintains, in its Preliminary Objections, as defined above, that Article 42 of
the ICSID Convention “only guides the tribunal’s task in defining the scope of the treaty

obligations that the host State has agreed to arbitrate.”

The Tribunal agrees, while noting
that the function of international law in guiding the Tribunal's task in defining the scope of
expropriation rights and obligations under Article 6 is not insignificant. Defining the scope
of treaty obligations the host State has agreed to arbitrate (in this instance expropriation)

can be determinative.

The Tribunal also agrees with Respondent that Article 42(1) “does not authorize a tribunal
to consider claims for relief that are independent of the treaty terms.”™* But, of course,

expropriation is not independent of the treaty terms, i.e., in this instance the obligation to

°° See E. Denza and S. Brooks, “Investment Protection Treaties: United Kingdom Experience” (1987), 36
ICLQ 908 at 911-912.

*! SD Myers Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, First Partial Award of 13 November 2000 at J 280.
* Procedural Order No. | of 17 December 2012, Section 11.
% Preliminary Objections at J 33; see also {49 above.
sa
Id.

18

73.

74.

arbitrate Article 6 issues pursuant to Article 8 of the Treaty. At least to that extent, and
applying Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, international law has application in this
case. Given those necessarily applicable frameworks, and to that extent, international law
is within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. This is not to say that customary international law is a
distinct and separate basis of potential liability in this case, which it is not, but rather that
customary international law is intertwined with expropriation law and cannot be treated

separately.

Claimants maintain that the Respondent’s expropriation measures permit Claimants to
utilize the BIT Articles 3 and 11 to bring in most-favored-nation treatment with respect to
expropriation.”° Care has to be taken in this context. MEN clauses are not and should not
be interpreted or applied to create new causes of action beyond those to which consent to
arbitrate has been given by the Parties. In view of the relief sought at pages 31-32 of the
Revised Amended Request for Arbitration, it is the Tribunal’s understanding that
Claimants are not now claiming that the MFN provisions allow more than Articles 3 and
11 would properly permit, that is, the Tribunal jurisdiction over customary international
law insofar as that law is relevant to the Parties’ rights and obligations pursuant to Articles

6 of the BIT.

The Tribunal is of the view that an investor may properly rely only on rights set forth in the
basic treaty, meaning the BIT to which the investor’s home state and the host state of the
investment are directly parties, but not more than that. The question should be whether the
rights and benefits sought by virtue of the MFN clause are included within the arbitrable
scope of the basic treaty. In the instant case, the arbitrable scope of the basic treaty is
expropriation, including fact and law questions related thereto. In that light, Claimants are
entitled to rely on the MFN provisions of the BIT, but only insofar as such provisions

relate to expropriation.

* See Revised Amended Request for Arbitration at p. 29, | 63; see also Claimants’ Rejoinder at p. 2.

* See C. McLachlan, QC, L. Shore & M. Weiniger, International Investment Arbitration, Oxford University
Press, 2007, at p. 254: “...it is essenti i

relied upon as constituting more favourable treatment in the other treaty are properly applicable, and will not
have the effect of fundamentally subverting the carefully negotiated balance of the BIT in question.”

 

19

Vil. COSTS

75. Under Rule 47 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal has a discretionary power in
its award to decide the amount and allocation of legal and arbitration costs recoverable by

one Party against the other Party.

76. At this stage, the Tribunal takes due note of the Parties’ positions and requests with respect
to costs. It will deal with costs at a later stage, when it will be able to make an overall

assessment.

VII. OPERATIVE PART

77. Having read the Parties’ written submissions and heard their oral arguments at the

Tribunal’s First Session on 30 November 2012, the Tribunal’s Conclusions are as follows:

a. The Parties have agreed to arbitrate, pursuant to Article 8 of the Bilateral Investment
Treaty between the United Kingdom and Hungary (BIT), only expropriation rights
and obligations as set forth in Article 6 of the BIT. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction

over any other substantive obligation set forth in the BIT.

b. The BIT between the United Kingdom and Hungary, as any treaty, is to be interpreted

in accordance with international law.

c. The UK-Hungary BIT provides no definition or guidance for determinations with
respect to expropriation. Rules on expropriation constitute a portion of the rules of
customary and general principles of international law, as well as other sources of
international law on expropriation. In the absence of definition and guidance as to
expropriation in the UK-Hungary BIT, the Tribunal will rely on customary and
general principles of international law, as well as contemporary sources of law on
expropriation, in determining whether or not an expropriation has occurred and if so,
the compensation to be awarded. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide international
law questions to the extent relevant and applicable to the determination of

expropriation questions, as well as compensation, if necessary.

20

d. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to define the scope, extent and content of the
expropriation obligations the Parties agreed to arbitrate under the BIT between the
United Kingdom and Hungary. Article 42(1) is not to be interpreted or applied as an

independent source of obligation.

e. MEN provisions may be relevant in this case and may be utilized to the extent that

they apply to expropriation.

78. Respondent’s Article 41(5) Objection is granted in part and denied in part, in accordance

with the Tribunal’s Conclusions as set forth in paragraph 77 above.

21

xe :

Donald M. McRae
Arbitrator

Atha V. Rene

Arthur W. Rovine
President

22

[OL aw Zz Oonky

Hon. Marc Lalonde

Arbitrator

Annex B

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

ACCESSION MEZZANINE CAPITAL L.P. AND DANUBIUS KERESKEDOHAZ
VAGYONKEZELO ZRT.

Claimants

and

HUNGARY

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/3

 

DECISION ON RESPONDENT’S NOTICE OF
JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS AND REQUEST FOR
BIFURCATION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Arthur W. Rovine, President
Hon. Marc Lalonde, Arbitrator
Prof. Donald M. McRae, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 8 August 2013

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Accession Mezzanine Capital Representing Hungary:
L.P. and Danubius Kereskedéhaz
Vagyonkezelé:

COVINGTON & BURLING LLP ARNOLD & PORTER LLP.

Mr. Eugene D. Gulland Ms. Jean E. Kalicki

Mr. Miguel Lopez Forastier 555 12th Street, NW

Mr. Alexander O. Canizares Washington, D.C. 20004

1201 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW United States of America

Washington, D.C. 20004-2401

United States of America ARNOLD & PORTER (UK) LLP.
Mr. Dmitri Evseev
Tower 42

25 Old Broad St.
London EC2N 1HQ
United Kingdom

KENDE, MOLNAR-BIRO, KATONA.
Dr. Janos Katona

Dr. Gyérgy Molnar-Bird

Dr. Gabor Puskas

Villanyiut 47

1118 Budapest

Hungary

Il.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY.

 

A. The Initiation of the Proceedings and Preliminary Objections Pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(5)

 

B. Respondent’s Notice of Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation...........

RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS

 

A. The ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules............ccceceseesesseeeeeeeees
B. The UK-Hungary Bilateral Investment Treaty... ccseeeeeeeseeseseeeseeneseeeeeeeeneeeneees

PARTIES’ POSITIONS.

 

A. Respondent’s Position

a. Summary of Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections ..........ccseeeeeeeeeeeeeee

db. Respondents Bifurcation Request........c.ccsessssesseseessseeeseesseesseeeseesseeseeenees

B. Claimants’ Position

 

a. Claimants’ Reply to Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections............cceee

db. Claimants’ Opposition to Respondent’s Bifurcation Request .........cceeee

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S REASONS AND DECISION .......cscssescssessesesseseeseseeneee

L

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre’”) on the basis of the Agreement between
the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments dated 9 March 1987, which entered into force on 28 August
1987 (the “BIT” or “Treaty”), and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States dated 18 March 1965, which
entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

The claimants are Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. (“Mezzanine”) and Danubius
Keresked6haz Vagyonkezelé Zrt. (““DHSV”). Mezzanine is a partnership organized under
the laws of Bermuda with its principal place of business in Hamilton, Bermuda. DSHV is
a company organized and existing under the laws of Hungary, allegedly majority owned by

Mezzanine. Both companies will be jointly referred to as “Claimants.”
The Respondent is Hungary and is hereinafter referred to as “Hungary” or “Respondent.”

Claimants and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The

Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

The dispute relates to the allegedly unlawful expropriation or nationalization without
compensation and without complying with other requirements imposed by the BIT and
applicable law, of Claimants’ investments in and related to Danubius Radio
Miisorzolgaltaté Zrt. (“Danubius Radio” or “Danubius”), a Hungarian company, and a
former licensee of one of the two nationwide FM radio-broadcasting frequencies in

Hungary.

This decision rules on Respondent’s 28 June 2013 notification of jurisdictional objections
and request for bifurcation, seeking that the Tribunal suspend the proceedings on the merits
and resolve its objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the

Tribunal as a preliminary matter.

IL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

A. The Initiation of the Proceedings and Preliminary Objections Pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(5

On 28 October 2011, ICSID received a request for arbitration on behalf of Emmis

International Holding BV, Emmis Radio Operating, B.V., MEM Magyar Electronic Media

Kerekedemi és Szolagaltato Kft., Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. and Danubius

Kereskeddhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt. against Hungary.

Further to a communication from ICSID dated 9 December 2011 refusing the registration
of the 28 October 2011 request for arbitration, on 27 December 2011, Claimants in this
case submitted an amended request for arbitration against Hungary (the “Request for

Arbitration’).

On 2 November 2012, following the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, Respondent
submitted Preliminary Objections pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5) (“Preliminary
Objections”).

On 9 November 2012, Claimants submitted a Revised Amended Request for Arbitration,
striking through certain passages of the Request for Arbitration (the “Revised Request for
Arbitration’).

A detailed recount of the procedural history covering the filing and registration of the
Request for Arbitration, the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and its First Session, and
Respondent’s Preliminary Objections pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5) is included
in Section II of the Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) dated
16 January 2013 (the “Ruling on Arbitration Rule 41(5)”).

In its Ruling on Arbitration Rule 41(5), the Tribunal decided that :

a. The Parties have agreed to arbitrate, pursuant to Article 8 of the Bilateral Investment
Treaty between the United Kingdom and Hungary (BIT), only expropriation rights
and obligations as set forth in Article 6 of the BIT. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction
over any other substantive obligation set forth in the BIT.

The BIT between the United Kingdom and Hungary, as any treaty, is to be interpreted
in accordance with international law.

The UK-Hungary BIT provides no definition or guidance for determinations with
respect to expropriation. Rules on expropriation constitute a portion of the rules of
customary and general principles of international law, as well as other sources of
international law on expropriation. In the absence of definition and guidance as to
expropriation in the UK-Hungary BIT, the Tribunal will rely on customary and
general principles of international law, as well as contemporary sources of law on
expropriation, in determining whether or not an expropriation has occurred and if so,
the compensation to be awarded. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide international
law questions to the extent relevant and applicable to the determination of
expropriation questions, as well as compensation, if necessary.

The Tribunal has jurisdiction to define the scope, extent and content of the
expropriation obligations the Parties agreed to arbitrate under the BIT between the
United Kingdom and Hungary. Article 42(1) is not to be interpreted or applied as an
independent source of obligation.

MEN provisions may be relevant in this case and may be utilized to the extent that
they apply to expropriation.

On 20 March 2013, Claimants requested a temporary suspension of the proceedings,
including a suspension of the procedural calendar fixed under paragraph 14.6. of the
Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1 dated 17 December 2012, to which Respondent
objected by letter of that same date. The Parties exchanged further correspondence on this

issue on 22 March 2013.

On 22 March 2013, the Tribunal rejected Claimants’ suspension request and granted them
a three-week extension to file their Memorial. The Tribunal further amended the

procedural calendar for the case as follows:

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits: 11 April 2013
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits: 30 August 2013
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits: 29 October 2013
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits: 30 December 2013

On 11 April 2013, in accordance with the revised schedule of pleadings, Claimants

submitted their Memorial on the Merits and accompanying documents.

Il.

20.

21.

B. Respondent’s Notice of Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation

On 28 June 2013, Respondent filed a Notice of Jurisdictional Objections and Request for
Bifurcation (the “Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request”), following which the

Tribunal invited Claimants to present their observations, if any.

On 18 July 2013, Claimants filed their Opposition to Respondent’s Notice of Jurisdictional
Objections and Request for Bifurcation (the “Opposition’’).

On 19 July 2013, Respondent wrote to the Tribunal, answering Claimants’ Opposition
(“Respondent’s Reply”), to which Claimants responded on 22 July 2013 (Claimants’
Reply”).

In order to examine and decide on Respondent’s Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation
Request, the Tribunal will now rely on the factual background of the case as summarized
in Section (III) of the Tribunal’s Ruling on Arbitration Rule 41(5). Such section, including
a description of the dispute, the claims and the relief sought, is hereby incorporated by

reference thereto, and constitutes an integral part of this Decision.

RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS

The Tribunal sets forth below the legal texts relevant to decide on Respondent’s

Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request.

A. The ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, provides, in relevant part:

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.

(..)

22.

23.

24.

Article 41 of the ICSID Convention, headed “Powers and Functions of the Tribunal,”

provides in relevant part:

(1) The Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence.

(2) Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within the jurisdiction
of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the competence of the Tribunal, shall be
considered by the Tribunal which shall determine whether to deal with it as a preliminary
question or to join it to the merits of the dispute.

Arbitration Rule 41, headed “Preliminary Objections,” provides in pertinent part:

(1) Any objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the jurisdiction of
the Centre or, for other reasons, is not within the competence of the Tribunal shall be
made as early as possible. A party shall file the objection with the Secretary-General no
later than the expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of the counter-memorial, or,
if the objection relates to an ancillary claim, for the filing of the rejoinder—unless the
facts on which the objection is based are unknown to the party at that time.

(2) (...).

(3) Upon the formal raising of an objection relating to the dispute, the Tribunal may
decide to suspend the proceeding on the merits. The President of the Tribunal, after
consultation with its other members, shall fix a time limit within which the parties may
file observations on the objection.

(4) The Tribunal shall decide whether or not the further procedures relating to the
objection made pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be oral. It may deal with the objection as a
preliminary question or join it to the merits of the dispute. If the Tribunal overrules the
objection or joins it to the merits, it shall once more fix time limits for the further
procedures.

B. The UK-Hungary Bilateral Investment Treaty

Article 1 of the BIT, which is headed “Definitions” provides in relevant part:

1. (a) the term “investment” means every kind of asset connected with economic
activities which has been acquired since 31 December 1972 and in particular,
though not exclusively, includes:

(i) movable and immovable property and any other property rights such as
mortgages, liens or pledges;

(ii) shares, stocks, bonds and debentures and any other form of participation in a
company;

25.

26.

(iii) claims to money and other assets or to any performance under contract
having a financial value;

(iv) intellectual property rights and goodwill;

(v) business concessions conferred by law or under contract, including
concessions to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources;

(b)(...)

(c) the form in which assets are invested does not affect their character as
investments.

2. (.)
3. The term “investors” means:

(a) in respect of the United Kingdom: physical persons deriving their status as United
Kingdom nationals from the law in force in the United Kingdom, and
corporations, firms and associations constituted or incorporated under the law in
force in any part of the United Kingdom or in any territory to which this
Agreement is extended in accordance with the provisions of Article 12;

(b) (..)
4. The term “territory” means:

(a) in respect of the United Kingdom; Great Britain and Northern Ireland and any
territory to which this agreement is extended in accordance with the provision of
Article 12.

Article 8 of the BIT, which is headed, “Reference to International Centre for Settlement of

Investment Disputes” provides in relevant part:

1. Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit to [ICSID]... any legal dispute
arising under Article 6 of the Agreement [Expropriation] between that Contracting Party
and an investor of the other Contracting Party concerning an investment of the latter in
the territory of the former. A company which is constituted or incorporated under the law
in force in the territory of one Contracting Party and in which before such a dispute arises
the majority of shares are owned by the investors of the other Contracting Party shall in
accordance with Art. 25(2)(b) of the Convention, be treated for the purposes of the
Convention as a company of the other Contracting Party.

Article 12 of the BIT, which is headed “Territorial Extension” provides in relevant part:

At the time of entry into force of this Agreement, or at any time thereafter, the provisions
of this Agreement may be extended to such territories for whose international relations the
Government of the United Kingdom are responsible as may be agreed between the
Contracting Parties in an Exchange of Notes.

IV. PARTIES’ POSITIONS

A. Respondent’s Position

Ss

a. y of R dent’s Jurisdictional Obj

27. In its Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request, Respondent summarized as follows its

jurisdictional objections:

[T]he dispute Claimants attempt to bring before this Tribunal does not “aris[e] directly
out of an investment” as required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and does not
concern either an “asset” within the meaning of BIT Article | or “an investment of” a
U.K. national in Hungary within the meaning of BIT Article 8.1. Furthermore, the dispute
largely concerns non-existent rights that are not cognizable as vested property rights
under Hungarian law and therefore cannot, at the threshold level, be the subject of an
expropriation claim under the BIT — the only claim for which Hungary has consented to
arbitration. The dispute therefore is beyond the Tribunal’s jurisdiction due to the failure
to meet the requisite conditions ratione materiae, ratione personae, and ratione
voluntatis.'

28. In particular, Hungary advances the following arguments in support of its contention.

29. First, Respondent submits that neither Mezzanine nor DSHV made “investments” for
purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and Article 8(1) of the BIT because “not a
penny of Accession’s money was actually invested in building Danubius’ Hungarian radio
business. This is inconsistent with Article 8(1) of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention, both of which require an active contribution for jurisdiction to exist.”

Furthermore, Danubius was insolvent even before the allegedly improper actions, and

therefore “Claimants apparently worthless equity shares in Danubius [...] cannot be

recognized as an ‘investment’ of a U.K. national in Hungary.”* In its view, Tribunals such

' Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request at § 3.
? Id. at 44.
3 Id. at 45.

as the ones in Burimi and Standard Chartered have found an absence of investment on

materially similar facts.*

30. Second, Respondent alleges that DSHV “does not independently meet the definition of a
U.K. ‘investor’ in the BIT because it is a Hungarian company (majority owned by a
Luxembourg company) and could not itself be considered a source of foreign investment in

Hungary.”*

31. Third, Respondent alleges that the dispute does not “arise directly out of an investment.” It
asserts that “the dispute concerning the 2009 Tender is based on an assertion of rights that
do not exist under Hungarian law, do not constitute an ‘asset’ or an ‘investment of’ a U.K.
national in Hungary within the meaning of the BIT, and do not meet the conditions of

ICSID Convention Article 25(1).”° Specifically, Respondent explains that:

It is true that Danubius held a broadcasting license covering virtually the same
frequencies under a 1997 broadcasting agreement (“1997 Broadcasting Agreement”).
That license was granted for the maximum seven-year term, and Hungarian law
allowed exactly one renewal for an additional five-year term. Danubius received the
full benefit of that extended twelve year term, which expired on 18 November 2009
in accordance with the relevant agreements and the applicable provisions of
Hungarian law.

Notably, Claimants do not claim in these proceedings that Hungary interfered in any
way with the twelve-year term of the 1997 Broadcasting Agreement. Instead, they
assert an entitlement to a new license (and, indeed, to further new licenses and
renewals) based on an alleged “right” to a supposedly almost dispositive incumbent
preference. This “right” is conspicuously absent from any agreement between the
parties and, as Hungary is prepared to demonstrate, simply does not exist under
Hungarian law and cannot be used as the basis of an expropriation claim under the
BIT. Without this alleged right to parlay their prior license into a new license,
Claimants cannot rely on the 1997 Broadcasting Agreement or any investments
associated therewith.”

* See Id. at §§ 1, 4; Respondent’s Reply at p.3 (citing to Burimi SRL and Eagle Games SH.A v. Albania, ICSID Case
No. ARB/I1/18, Award of 29 May 2013, §| 144 (Exh, RA-27), and Standard Chartered Bank v. Tanzania, {CSID
Case No. ARB/10/12, Award of 2 November 2012, {| 198-201, 257 (Exh. RA-33).

* Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request at § 4.
Id. at 414.
7 Id. at {§ 8-9 (citations omitted).

b. Respondent’s Bifurcation Request

32. Respondent asserts that Article 41 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 41
grants tribunals discretion to determine whether to bifurcate the proceedings.* Hungary
further asserts that in accordance with Arbitration Rule 41, Respondent’s Jurisdictional
Notice and Bifurcation Request was timely, made “a full two months before the due date”

fixed by Arbitration Rule 41(1) and “neither the Tribunal nor Claimants have made any

request for an earlier notification.”!° In addition, Claimants’ references to prior ICSID
cases are unavailing for the proposition that Hungary’s request was not filed “as early as

possible”, since none featured jurisdictional objections that were raised before the deadline

for the filing of the Counter-Memorial.'!

33. Respondent further posits that in deciding on bifurcation arbitral tribunals mainly focus on
the question of “procedural efficiency” by considering different criteria. Those criteria

favour bifurcation in the present case for the following reasons: '”

a. Respondent’s intended jurisdictional objections as described above are not
frivolous, but instead they raise substantial and serious questions, as confirmed by

the Emmis tribunal.'?

b. Such objections would effectively dispose of the entire case, save the parties a
lengthy and costly merits proceeding and thereby enhance procedural efficiency.

According to Respondent, Hungary’s objection, even if rejected, would “inevitably

8 Id. at 4 15.
° Respondent’s Reply at p.1.
Td.

' 1q., n.1, referring to Claimants’ Opposition at § 7-10 (citing Desert Line Projects LLC v. Yemen, ICSID Case

No. ARB/05/17, Award of 6 February 2008, §f] 57, 59 (Exh. CA-65); Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi
v. Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Award of 1 June 2009, §] 108, 207 (Exh. CA-55); Generation Ukraine, Inc.
v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award of 16 September 2003, {] 16.1 (Exh. CA-66)).

!2 Td. at {4 16-17, citing the criteria identified by the Tribunal in Glamis Gold Ltd v. United States of America,
Procedural Order No. 2 (revised) of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RA-30).

'S Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request at {] 18, citing Emmis International Holding, B.V. et al v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2), Decision on Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation of 13 June 2013 (the “Emmis
Bifurcation Decision”), § 47 (the tribunal finding that the similar objection Hungary raised in the Emmis case
“raise[d] a substantial question which requires clarification in the interests of both the parties and the Tribunal.”).
See also, Respondent’s Reply at p.4.

34.

... Serve to clarify the exact nature of [Claimants] investment or rights, in relation
to which aspects of Hungary’s challenged conduct would need to be assessed in the

ld

merits phase. Respondent further proposes a detailed procedural calendar to deal

with the jurisdictional phase.'*

Hungary’s jurisdictional objections are not inextricably intertwined with the merits.
In particular, “[a]t the jurisdictional phase, the focus would be on whether Claimants
had legally cognizable investments and rights capable of expropriation, and whether
this dispute ‘aris[es] directly out of any such investments within the meaning of
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. At the merits phase, by contrast, the focus would
be on whether Hungary’s conduct surrounding the 2009 Tender did, in fact, amount to
an expropriation and, if so, what damage was caused to Claimants as result.””'*

Bifurcation would not result in any irreparable harm or prejudice to Claimants. In fact
“{ajny delay could be fully compensated by the Tribunal through an award of pre-
judgment interest” or through the allocation of costs of the proceedings.'? The
Claimants have failed to demonstrate how any of the prejudice they claim to have

suffered, could not be made whole through these means. 18

B. Claimants’ Position

a. Claimants’ Reply to Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections

In their pleadings, Claimants allege the following with respect to the jurisdictional

arguments advanced by Respondent:

a. Claimants actively contributed to Hungary by, inter alia, owning all of the equity

shares in Danubius radio and actively controlling the broadcasting company. In

any event, this is irrelevant, because the term “investment” does not require ‘active

'4 Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request at {] 19-20 (citations omitted); see also Respondent’s Reply at p. 3.

'S Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request at {| 24.
16 Id. at § 22 (citing the Emmis Bifurcation Decision at 9] 44-46).

"Td. at 423.
18 .

Jur

Notice and Bi ion Request at 23; dent’s Reply at p. 3.

contribution’ for jurisdiction to exist pursuant to the Treaty.'® Furthermore,
Claimants Memorial and the expert testimony of Dr. Krisztina Rozgonyi,
extensively showed that Claimants had legal rights entitling them to renew their
broadcasting agreement in 2009. In particular, in her legal opinion, Dr. Krisztina

Rozgonyi, an expert on Hungarian law governing broadcast media concluded that:

(1) Claimants possessed recognized rights under the Hungarian Media Law
and regulations issued thereunder that were incorporated into Danubius’s1997
Broadcasting Agreement under which Danubius’s broadcasting rights should
have been renewed, (2) Hungary (acting through ORTT) violated those rights
in the 2009 tender, (3) Hungarian law required ORTT to award Danubius a
renewal of its broadcasting rights in the 2009 tender, even without regard to
its incumbent preference and (4) after Danubius successfully challenged the
lawfulness of the tender in Hungarian courts and sought revocation of the
broadcast rights awarded to its rival Advenio, the Hungarian Parliament
overruled the courts, prevented the cancellation of Advenio’s broadcast
contract, and foreclosed Claimants from obtaining any effective remedy in
Hungary.

Without submitting any remotely comparable analysis of Hungarian law and
Claimants’ rights thereunder, Hungary’s “notice of objections” simply denies
that those rights exist under Hungarian law and asserts that Respondent’s
future objections will support its position. But if Claimants only had
“imaginary rights or hopes” in connection with the 2009 tender, why did
Hungary’s Supreme Court declare in Danubius’s lawsuit that ORTT’s call for
tender and awarding of the broadcast rights to Advenio, was unlawful? And
why did Parliament, days after Danubius prevailed in the Metropolitan Court
of Appeals, amend the Media Law to prevent Danubius from regaining its
rights by forbidding ORTT from terminating its illegal agreement with
Advenio?

Hungary’s ‘Notice’ asserts, without supporting authority, that ‘there is no
provision in Hungarian law requiring ORTT to hold any tender’ upon expiry
of a broadcasting agreement that has been renewed once. This misstates
Hungarian law.”

b. “[M]ultiple authorities confirm that companies like DSHV qualify as an investor

under BITs that, like the UK Treaty, contain an exception to the ‘negative

nationality requirements’ of the ICSID Convention that confer treaty protection to

'° Opposition at § 13.
29 Td. at §§ 15-17 (citations omitted).

companies organized under the laws of the host country that are controlled by

investors who are nationals of the other contracting party.

v2

c. Respondent’s reliance in the Burimi and Standard Chartered awards is unavailing

acc

ording to Claimants because “neither case bears any relevant resemblance to this

one.” In particular:

b. Cl

In 2003, Claimant Accession Mezzanine Capital, L.P. (“AMC”), acting through
subsidiaries under its control, provided senior and mezzanine loans to finance
Advent’s acquisition of Danubius Radio for the express purpose of investing in
Danubius, a well-established radio station operating in Hungary. That same
year, Claimant Danubius Kereskedéhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt. (DSHV) became an
equity investor in Danubius Radio, acquiring all of its equity. DSHV also sold
advertisements for Danubius, organized radio promotions, and marketed the
Danubius brand in Hungary. In January 2008, AMC through subsidiaries
acquired all of the equity in Danubius and took over control of its management
and operations, and this ownership structure and active management continued
throughout the relevant period in 2009 during which Hungary carried out its
unlawful expropriatory tender of the radio frequencies (citations omitted).

laimants’ Opposition to Respondent’s Bifurcation Request

35. With regard to the applicable standard, Claimants are in agreement with Respondent that

the Tribunal shall consider as an overarching question whether fairness and procedural

efficiency would be preserved or improved. They allege that past tribunals, including those

relied upon by Respondent, “have recognized that joinder of jurisdictional questions to the

merits is preferred where there is an overlap between them.

36. The Claim:
discretion
exercising

timeliness

923

ants further agree that ICSID Arbitration Rule 41 provides Tribunal with broad
to suspend the proceedings on the merits. Claimants assert, however, that “in
that discretion, the Tribunal should accord special weight to a Respondent’s

in asserting such objections in light of the ‘as early as possible’ requirement.”

2! Opposition at § 13.

» Claimants’ Reply

at pp. 2-3.

> Opposition at § 14 (citing to Burimi SRL and Eagle Games SHA y. Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18, Award
of 29 May 2013, § 63 (Exh, RA-28), and Glamis Gold Ltd v. United States of America, UNCITRAL (Procedural
Order No. 2 (Revised) of 31 May 2005, 25 (Exh. RA-30)).

4 Opposition at { 6.

12

In particular, they contend that under Arbitration Rule 41(1) respondents shall make their

jurisdictional objections as early in the proceedings as they can do so.”°

37. Considering these elements, Claimants request that Respondent’s Notice and Bifurcation

Request be denied for the following reasons:

Id.

Hungary’s Request is untimely under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1). According to
Claimants “while Rule 41(1) permits a party to raise preliminary objections as late
as the filing of the counter-memorial, it does not entitle it to postpone objections

that it was able to assert earlier.””°

Respondent has been on notice of Claimants’
legal position since December 2011, when Claimants filed a detailed Request for
Arbitration, and it received Claimants’ Memorial on the merits in April 2013.7”
Furthermore, Hungary raised similar objections in the Emmis case on
28 May 2013, and yet it did not reveal its jurisdictional argument in this case until

28 June 2013, when it filed a mere notice of future objections.”*

Fairness and procedural efficiency weigh strongly in favour of preserving the

existing procedural schedule, instead of introducing a new “jurisdictional phase.”””

Respondent’s objections arguing the lack of qualifying “investment” or “investor”
are insubstantial (based on the arguments described in paragraph 34 above), and

can be readily addressed at the merits stage.

Bifurcating the proceedings would “ordain that a decision on jurisdictional issues

alone would take longer than a full decision on the merits under the existing

26 Opposition at § 7 (citing Dessert Line Projects LLC v. Yemen, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award of 6 February

2008 4 97).

27 Opposition at 4 1-5.

8 Td. at $92, 5.
? Td. at 4 12.

9930

schedule. Therefore, Hungary’s proposed schedule would not ‘shorten or

streamline’ these proceedings.*!

“Hungary’s further objection that the dispute does not ‘arise out of an investment’
turns on questions that are inextricably intertwined with the merits.”** According
to Claimants “[t]he central question Hungary raises — whether Claimants had legal
rights entitling them to renew their broadcasting agreement in 2009 — is extensively
addressed in Claimants’ Memorial and the expert testimony of Dr. Krisztina

»33 and the case on jurisdiction substantially overlaps with the Hungarian

Ruzgony,
Law and treaty violations described in Claimants’ Memorial.** Claimants further
explain that “the body of evidence and legal opinion relevant to providing the
existence and nature of an incumbent preference and other legal rights for
jurisdictional purposes is the same body of evidence and legal opinion against

which the lawfulness of ORTT’s conduct must be measured.”*°

If granted, bifurcation would signify “financial, procedural and tactical forms of

3936

prejudice””” which cannot be compensated “through an award of interest covering

37 Claimants do not have other

the additional duration of the proceeding.
continuing operations to sustain their activities since they were expropriated nearly
four years ago, and “they require support on a month to month basis from their
investors.”** Furthermore, bifurcation “would also give Respondent far more time
to present its case than Claimants enjoyed [...] in violation of the principal of

equality of arms.”*”

*° Opposition at § 20.
5! Opposition at { 20, referring to the Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request at § 23.

? Tdat | 14.
33 Id. at] 15.
* Td. at] 19.
5 Id. at] 18.
Id. at 421.
"Id.
Id.
* Id.

Vv.

38.

39.

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S REASONS AND DECISION

With regard to the applicable standard, Claimants are in agreement with Respondent that
the Tribunal shall consider as an overarching question whether fairness and procedural

efficiency would be preserved or improved. The Tribunal agrees.

HAVING READ THE PARTIES’ WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS, THE TRIBUNAL DECIDES
AS FOLLOWS:

1. The case shall be bifurcated, using the schedule for briefing and hearing, as follows:

a. Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction 45 days from the Tribunal’s decision
on bifurcation (i.e. by no later than Monday, 23 September 2013)

b. Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction 45 days from the Memorial (i.e.
by no later than 7 November 2013)

c. Reply on Jurisdiction 20 days from Counter-Memorial (i.e. by no later than 27
November 2013)

d. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction 20 days from Reply (i.e. by no later than 17
December 2013)

e. Hearing on Jurisdiction at least 40 days from Rejoinder (i.e. starting on
Monday, 27 January 2014).

2. The facts and jurisdictional issues in the instant case overlap very considerably with
those of Emmis International Holding B.V., et. al, v. Hungary. The Tribunal
believes that the analysis of the bifurcation issue in Emmis is sound and should
serve as persuasive authority here. The jurisdictional issues Respondent raises are
significant and deserve a focused examination in a separate phase that could either
make a merits phase unnecessary or sharpen many factual issues should the
Tribunal reach the merits. There is no need to repeat the Emmis analysis in the
instant case. Its bifurcation decision can be found on the ICSID website. In brief

summary of a few key points from Emmis:
a. The Tribunal is required to identify whether and which investments of

Claimants may properly give rise to an expropriation claim, the only
substantive cause of action within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

b. The existence and nature of any such rights must be determined by reference to
Hungarian and international law.

c. The relevant time for assessment of Claimants’ rights and investments that may
properly give rise to an expropriation claim is the conduct of the 2009 Tender
just prior to 18 November 2009.

d. The nature and incidents of the rights and investments held by Claimants are
distinct from the question as to whether such rights were expropriated by
Respondent.

e. If Claimants are successful, it is within the Tribunal’s discretion to compensate
Claimants for increased costs occasioned by Respondent’s objection to
jurisdiction and consequent delay.

Notwithstanding its decision in favor of bifurcation in the instant case, the Tribunal
has concerns as to the timeliness under Arbitration Rule 41(1) of Respondent’s
Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request. There is an important and undecided
question in investment arbitration law as to the proper interpretation and application
of the “as early as possible” requirement in Rule 41(1). Respondent’s Notice and
Request was submitted on 28 June 2013. The virtually identical Objection and
Request by Respondent in Emmis was submitted on 28 May 2013. The Revised
Request for Arbitration, submitted by Claimants on 9 November 2012, is a detailed
31-page Request that appears to contain virtually all of the issues argued by
Respondent in its 28 June 2013 Jurisdictional Notice and Bifurcation Request. In
light of this, the Tribunal feels obliged to consider whether the Respondent’s
request for bifurcation was filed “as early as possible” within the meaning of Rule

4l(1).

The Tribunal invites Claimants and Respondent to file, with their submissions on
jurisdiction pursuant to the schedule indicated above, written submissions stating
why they believe that there has or has not been compliance with Rule 41(1)’s “as
early as possible” requirement, and the meaning of that requirement. What
jurisdictional issues were missing from Claimants’ Amended Request for
Arbitration, submitted on 9 November 2012, that justified Respondent’s waiting
until 28 June 2013 to submit a notice of objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction?

Could Respondent’s Rule 41(1) request have been submitted at the same time as its

16

Rule 41(5) request? What is the relationship between the two? Should “as early as
possible” mean as early as possible after the submission of Claimant(s)’ Memorial?
Can it mean by 30 August 2013 in this case, i.e. the deadline for Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial, in accordance with Respondent’s argument in its Notice of

Objection?

Since the Tribunal has decided to bifurcate without deciding the timeliness issue, a
consequence of lack of timeliness does not affect the decision to bifurcate, but can

be dealt with in costs, which shall be addressed at a later stage of this proceeding.

ON BEHALF OF THE TRIBUNAL

Asta V. Rome

Prof. Arthur W. Rovine
President

Date: 8 August 2013

