PCA Case No. 2008-13
IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
BEFORE A TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
AGREEMENT ON ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF
INVESTMENTS BETWEEN THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS AND
THE CZECH AND SLOVAK FEDERAL REPUBLIC, SIGNED ON 29 APRIL 1991,
ENTERED INTO FORCE ON 1 OCTOBER 1992 (“TREATY”)
-and-

THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW
ARBITRATION RULES (“UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES”)
-between-

ACHMEA B.V.
(formerly known as “Eureko B.V.”)

(“Claimant”)
-and-

THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

(“Respondent,” and together with Claimant, the “Parties”)

 

FINAL AWARD

 

7 December 2012

Tribunal
Professor Vaughan Lowe
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg
Mr V.V. Veeder

Secretary to Tribunal

Judith Levine, Permanent Court of Arbitration

. HISTORICAL AND FACTUAL BACKGROUND...

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 1

A. The Claimant
B. The Respondent
C. The Dispute.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Commencement of the Arbitration vo

B. Constitution of the Tribunal, Language and Place of Arbitration

C. Preliminary Jurisdictional Phase

D. Consent to Publication of Award 8
E. Scheduling Matters and Renewed Suspension Request ............ccccceeeeeeseeeseseeeeeees 8
F. Written Proceedings on Liability... ccc cece ceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteneneeeeeeeenenenes 9
G. Written Proceedings on Quantum 11
H. Hearing on the Merits 13
I. Further Proceedings on Quant 15
J. Post-Hearing Proceedings. 17
K. Developments before the German Courts .........

 

 

A. The Independence of the Slovak Republic and its Accession to the European Union .19

 

B. The Evolution of the Slovak Heath Insurance Sector.
C. Eureko’s Entry into the Slovak Health Insurance Market
D. Reforms in the Slovak Health Insurance Sector in 2006-2009 .........c.sccseesesteseeteeeee 23
E. Eureko’s Response to the 2007 Reforms.
F. Judicial Challenges to the 2007 Reforms
G. Political Developments in the Slovak Republic ....

 

 
 

 

. AN OVERVIEW OF THE PARTIES’ PRINCIPAL SUBMISSIONS .........esseeeeeee 36

. THE TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION.

=

THE PARTIES’ FORMAL REQUESTS FOR RELIEF .......scsssssessessessesoesneeneenneenes 40

 

 

A. The Parties’ Arguments on Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae
B. The Parties’ Arguments on Jurisdiction and the Scope of Substantive EU Law

  

C. The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction

. THE PARTIES’ CHARACTERISATION OF THE FACTUAL RECORD .......... 56
A. The Parties’ Characterisation of the 2004 Reform ...........cccccscssesteesteesteeeteseeeseeee 56
B. Eureko’s Investment and the Political Situation in 2004 and 2006...........ccsceeeee 59

 

C. Characterising the 2007 Reforms ......
D. The Significance of the Slovak Constitutional Court Decision.

 

VIILTHE TRIBUNAL’S OBSERVATIONS ON THE WITNESS TESTIMONY......... 68

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

IX. LIABILITY AND THE MERITS
A. The Parties’ Arguments on Liability and the Merits

  
 
 
   

1. Expropriation

 

 

 

 

 

2. Fair and Equitable Treatment
3. Unreasonable and Discriminatory Treatment.
4. Full Protection and Security
5. Restrictions on Transfer
B. The Tribunal’s Decision on Liability and the Merits .0...0.0.0.c cece 93
1. The Investment
2. The Applicable Law.
3. Fair and Equitable Treatment and Article 3 of the Treaty..
4. The Free Transfer of Payments and Article 4 of the Treaty
5. Expropriation and Article 5 of the Treaty... cece eee eeeeneneneneneneeeneeees
X. THE CALCULATION OF DAMAGES .....ccssssssssssessessessesseesscescenceneencenesseeneeneennesneene 99
A. The Parties’ Arguments on Damages ............:cccceeeeeeeseseseeeeseseeteeeceseseeeeeeeeenenenees 99
1. Causation, Mitigation and Eureko’s “Hibernation” Strategy 0.0.0.0... 99

 

2. “Duty” to Mitigate
3. The Calculation of Damage:
B. The Tribunal’s Decision on Damages ...............

 

 

1. The “Hibernation” and Mitigation of Damage: :
2. Calculation of Compensation .......0..c cece ee ceeeeeseeeeeeececeteeeeeeeneneeeenenenees
3. Other Relief.

XI. COSTS
XII. DECISION 115

 

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

LIST OF DEFINED TERMS

Term Definition

2004 Liberalisation (or 2004. See “2004 Reform” below
Reform)

2004 Reform (or 2004 The series of legislative changes to the legal framework

Liberalisation) governing the health insurance market in the Slovak
Republic, introduced by the Slovak Government in
2004, principally in Act No. 580/2004 Coll. and Act No.
581/2004 Coll.

2007 Reforms The series of legislative changes to the legal framework
governing the health insurance market in the Slovak
Republic, introduced by the Slovak Government
between 2006 and 2009 (principally in 2006 and 2007);
identified variously by the Parties as the “2007
Reversal” or the “2006 Stabilisation”

amended network requirement Amendment of Act No. 578/2004 Coll. by Act No.
653/2007 Coll. and amendment of Decree 751/2004
Coll. by Decree 504/2007 Coll. and adoption of Decree
No. 640/2008 Coll., relating to the network of
healthcare providers contracted with by health insurance
companies; also identified by the Parties as the
“Minimum Network Provision”

Award on Jurisdiction, Eureko B.V. v. Slovak Republic, PCA Case No. 2008-13,

Arbitrability and Suspension Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension,
26 October 2010, available at: ~— <http://www.pca-
cpa.org/showpage.asp?pag_id=1414>

ban on brokers Amendment of Sections 6(15) and 6(16) of Health
Insurance Companies Act by Act No. 12/2007 Coll.,
relating to the use of brokers by health insurance
companies; also identified by the Parties as the “Broker
Provision”

iii

Term

ban on profits

ban on transfers

BIT (or Treaty)

cap on operating expenses

Claimant (or Eureko)

Counter-Memorial on the Merits

Counter-Memorial on Damages

CSFR

ECHR

EC Treaty

EC]

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Definition

Amendment of Section 15(6) of Health Insurance
Companies Act by Act No. 530/2007 Coll. and
amendment of Section 86d of Health Insurance
Companies Act by Act No. 594/2007 Coll., relating to
the use of the “positive result of economic operations”
or profit by health insurance companies; also identified
by the Parties as the “Profit Provision”

Amendment of Section 61 of Health Insurance
Companies Act by Act No. 192/2009 Coll., relating to
the sale of insurance portfolios by health insurance
companies; also identified by the Parties as the
“Portfolio Transfer Provision”

Agreement on Encouragement and _ Reciprocal
Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic, signed on 29 April 1991, entering into force
on | October 1992

The provisions of Act No. 522/2006, dated 6 September
2006, relating to the operating expenses of health
insurance companies

Achmea B.V., formerly known as Eureko B.V., a Dutch
private company with limited liability with its statutory
seat in Amsterdam and its head office at Handelsweg 2,
3707NH Zeist, The Netherlands, Company Reg. No.:
33235189

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, dated
14 February 2011

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Damages, dated
11 November 2011

The Czech and Slovak Federative Republic (from 1990)

European Convention for the Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed on
21 February 1991, entering into force on 18 March 1992

Treaty Establishing the European Community, adopted
25 March 1957, entering into force on 1 January 1958

Court of Justice of the European Union

Term
EU

Eureko (or Claimant)

Europska

Health Care Authority

Hearing on the Intra-EU
Jurisdictional Objection
Hearing on the Merits
Hearing on Quantum

Indge Letter

Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection

Joint Expert Report

Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial

Jurisdiction Memorial

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Definition
The European Union

Achmea B.V., formerly known as Eureko B.V., a Dutch
private company with limited liability with its statutory
seat in Amsterdam and its head office at Handelsweg 2,
3707NH Zeist, The Netherlands, Company Reg. No.:
33235189

Health Insurance Company Eurépska zdravotna
poistoviia, a.s. v likviddcii (joint stock company, now
liquidated)

Health Care Surveillance Authority (in Slovak: Urad pre
dohl'ad nad = zdravotnou _ starostlivostou), address:
Grésslingova 5, 812 62 Bratislava, The Slovak Republic

Hearing on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection held in
London, United Kingdom, on 24 April 2010

Hearing on the Merits held in London, United

Kingdom, from 12 to 14 December 2011

Hearing on Quantum held in London, United Kingdom,
on 30 January 2012

Letter from Claimant’s Expert Witness, Mr Richard
Indge, to the Tribunal, dated 7 December 2011

Respondent’s jurisdictional objection based on the
Slovak Republic’s membership of the EU, comprising
the arguments that, as a matter of international law,
EU law, Slovak law and German law, the accession of
the Slovak Republic to the EU in May 2004 terminated
the BIT or rendered its arbitration clause inapplicable,
and accordingly that this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction

Expert Report, dated 13 January 2012, prepared by
Claimant’s Expert Witness, Mr Richard Indge, and
Respondent’s Expert Witnesses, Mr Michael Peer and
Ms Zuzana Kepkova, following their meeting in Prague
on 5 January 2012

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the  Intra~-EU
Jurisdictional Objection, dated 26 February 2010

Respondent’s Memorial on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional
Objection, dated 29 January 2010

Term

Jurisdiction Rejoinder

Jurisdiction Reply

Lisbon Treaty (or TFEU)

Memorial on Damages

Memorial on the Merits

Ministry of Health

Notice of Arbitration

Oberlandesgericht

PCA

Post-Hearing Briefs

Rejoinder on the Merits

Reply on the Merits

repositioning of the Regulator

Respondent (or Slovak Republic)

Slovak Constitutional Court

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Definition

Claimant’s Rejoinder on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional
Objection, dated 16 April 2010

Respondent’s Reply on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional
Objection, dated 23 March 2010

Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, done
in Lisbon 13 December 2007, entering into force
1 December 2009

Claimant’s Memorial on Damages, dated 24 August
2011

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, dated 30 July 2010,
(also called “Statement of Reply” by Claimant at the
time)

Ministry of Health of the Slovak Republic (Ministerstvo
zdravotnictva Slovenskej republiky)

Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration, dated 1 October 2008

Oberlandesgericht Frankfurt am Main (the Court of
Appeal located in Frankfurt, Germany)

Permanent Court of Arbitration, serving as registry in
this arbitration

Post-Hearing Briefs dated

21 February 2012

filed by each Party,

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, dated 10 May
2011

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, dated 28 March 2011

Amendment of Section 22 of Health Insurance
Companies Act by Act No. 12/2007 Coll., relating to
the functions of the Health Care Authority; also
identified by the Parties as the “Health Care Authority
Provision”

The Slovak Republic, represented by the Ministry of
Finance

The Ustavny tid Slovenskej republiky (the
Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic)

vi

Term

Slovak Republic (or Respondent)

SMER

Statement of Claim

Statement of Defence

SZP

TEU

TFEU

Transcript

Treaty (or BIT)

Tribunal

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Definition

The Slovak Republic, represented by the Ministry of
Finance

SMER - socidlna demokracia, a Slovak political party
led by Mr Robert Fico

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, dated 16 June 2009

Respondent’s Statement of Defence, dated 30 October
2009

Spoloénd zdravotné poistovna, as. (joint stock
company), registered seat: Ondavské 3, 820 05
Bratislava, The Slovak Republic, Company Reg. No.:
35 936 835

Treaty on European Union, signed on 7 February 1992;
amended by the Treaty of Lisbon, signed on
13 December 2007; amendments entered into force on
1 December 2009

Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
signed on 25 March 1957 (as the Treaty establishing the
European Economic Community); amended by the
Treaty of Lisbon, signed on 13 December 2007;
amendments entered into force on 1 December 2009

Transcript of the Hearings on the Merits and on
Quantum held on 12-14 December 2011 at 30 January
2012, respectively, in London

Agreement on Encouragement and _ Reciprocal
Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic, signed on 29 April 1991, entered into force on
1 October 1992

Arbitration tribunal established pursuant to Article 8 of
the BIT in the present case Achmea B.V. (formerly
Eureko B.V.) v. Slovak Republic

The United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law Arbitration Rules (1976)

Term

Union Healthcare

Union Insurance

VCLT (or Vienna Convention)

VZP

ZPO

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Definition

Union zdravotné poist’ovia, a.s., registered seat:
Bajkalskaé 29/A, Bratislava 821 08, The Slovak
Republic, Company Reg. No.: 36 284 831, a wholly
owned subsidiary of Eureko

Union poistoviia a.s. (joint-stock company), registered
seat: Bajkalské 29/A, 813 60 Bratislava, The Slovak
Republic, Company Reg. No.: 31 322 051

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, signed on
23 May 1969, entered into force on 27 January 1980

VSeobecné zdravotnd poistoviia, as. (joint stock
company), registered seat: Manateyova 17, 850 05
Bratislava, The Slovak Republic, Company Reg No.: 35
937 874

The German Code of — Civil Procedure
(Zivilprozessordnung), Book 10 of which contains the
German Arbitration Act

viii

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

INTRODUCTION

The Claimant

Claimant in this arbitration is Achmea B.V., a Dutch private company with limited
liability, having its statutory seat in Amsterdam and its head offices in Zeist,
the Netherlands. Claimant was previously known as “Eureko B.V.,” until it changed its
name through an amendment of the articles of association of Eureko B.V. that was
executed at the occasion of the merger between Eureko B.V. and Achmea Holding N.V.
on 18 November 2011 (Eureko B.V. being the surviving entity in that merger).
Throughout the relevant period of events underlying the claim, Claimant was known as
“Eureko” and, for convenience, the Tribunal will refer to Claimant as “Eureko” or

“Claimant” throughout this Award.

The group of companies headed by Eureko is a financial services group that offers a
range of insurance products internationally, including health insurance, life and non-life
insurance, pension products, asset management and banking. Eureko operates in the
Slovak Republic through two companies: (i) Union poistoviia a.s. (“Union Insurance’),
incorporated in 1991 by the Government of the Slovak Republic and privatised in 1992,
in which Eureko acquired shares in 1997; and (ii) Union zdravotnd poist‘oviia, a.s
(‘Union Healthcare”), a wholly owned subsidiary of Eureko incorporated in 2006 and
funded by Eureko.' This arbitration primarily concerns Eureko’s investment in Union

Healthcare.

Eureko is represented in this arbitration by Mr Marnix Leijten, Mr Albert Marsman,
and Mr Igor Zubov of De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek N.V., Claude Debussylaan 80,
1082 MD Amsterdam, the Netherlands; and by Mr René Visser of Achmea B.V.

The Respondent

The Slovak Republic (“Slovak Republic” or “Respondent’) is a sovereign State,
formerly a part of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic. It gained independence on
1 January 1993 and acceded to the European Union (“EU”) on 1 May 2004. The

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {{fII.2, 4-12

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Slovak Republic is a multiparty parliamentary democracy, with executive power lying

with the government headed by a Prime Minister.”

Respondent is represented in this arbitration by Ms Andrea Holikova of the Slovak
Republic Ministry of Finance, Stefanovicova 5, 817 82 Bratislava, the Slovak Republic;
and by Dr Martin Maisner, Mr Milo Olik, Mr David Fyrbach, Mr Martin Subrt and
Mr Ludovit Micinsky of Rowan Legal s.r.o., Namestie slobody 11, 811 06 Bratislava,
the Slovak Republic.

The Dispute

Claimant initiated this arbitration on the basis of claims that the Slovak Republic has
violated the 1992 Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak

Federal Republic (“Treaty” or “BIT”)?

Claimant complains that various legislative measures introduced by Respondent after a
change in government in July 2006 constituted a systematic reversal of the
2004 liberalisation of the Slovak health insurance market that had prompted Eureko to
invest in the Slovak Republic’s health insurance sector. According to Claimant, these
actions effectively destroyed the value of Eureko’s investment. Claimant characterises
the measures as constituting an unlawful indirect expropriation of its investment in
Union Healthcare, in breach of Article 5 of the BIT. Claimant further alleges that
Respondent’s conduct amounts to a violation of the BIT’s standards of protection
contained in its provisions on (i) fair and equitable treatment including as to
non-discrimination (Article 3(1) of the BIT), (ii) non-impairment by discriminatory or
unreasonable measures (Article 3(1) of the BIT), (iii) full protection and security
(Article 3(2) of the BIT), and (iv) free transfer of profits and dividends (Article 4 of
the BIT). Claimant seeks, inter alia, compensation in the vicinity of €65 million, or
any other lower or higher amount of damages that the Tribunal considers as

appropriate, as well as interest, tax and all costs of the proceedings.” Claimant also

Claimant's Statement of Claim, {{II.16-22.
Signed on 29 April 1991, entered into force on | October 1992 (Exhibit C-10).
Claimant’s Statement of Claim, IV; Memorial on Damages, {V.1.

Notice of Arbitration, (10; Claimant’s Statement of Claim, V.2; Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 4342;
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, {277; Memorial on Damages, {V. 1.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

considers Respondent’s position in this arbitration irreconcilable with developments

that have taken place in the Slovak Republic since 2010 (see below at paragraph 117ff).

The Slovak Republic denies that it has expropriated Eureko’s investment or otherwise
violated any obligation—international or otherwise—purportedly owed to Eureko, that
any of Eureko’s claims are viable as a matter of fact or law, and that Eureko has
suffered any cognizable damages or injury. Respondent asserts that it has complied
fully with all applicable international legal requirements.° Respondent respectfully
requests the Tribunal to dismiss all claims made by Claimant and to declare that
Respondent (a) has not breached the BIT; and (b) has not interfered with Claimant’s

investment. Respondent further requests the Tribunal to award Respondent costs.

The Slovak Republic also initially challenged the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the
dispute. A preliminary phase of these proceedings dealt exclusively with Respondent’s
jurisdictional objection based on the Slovak Republic’s membership of the EU. In
essence, Respondent had argued that, as a matter of international law, EU law, Slovak
law and German law, the accession of the Slovak Republic to the EU in May 2004
terminated the BIT or rendered its arbitration clause inapplicable, and that accordingly
this Tribunal lacked jurisdiction to hear the dispute (the “Intra-EU Jurisdictional
Objection”). On 26 October 2010, the Tribunal issued its Award on Jurisdiction,
Arbitrability and Suspension dismissing the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection,
confirming that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide the dispute, and declining to
suspend the proceedings until the European Commission and/or the European Court of
Justice (the “ECJ”) came to a decision on EU law aspects of related alleged

infringement proceedings.

In May 2011, the Parties agreed that the remainder of the proceedings would be
addressed within a single phase addressing both liability and quantum arguments.
Accordingly this Award addresses Respondent’s remaining objection to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction ratione materiae, Respondent’s alleged violations of the Treaty, and the

damage allegedly suffered by Claimant as a result of such violations.

Respondent’s Statement of Defence, f]1, 2, 128; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {2, 672.

Il.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

This Tribunal’s Award on _ Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension of
26 October 2010 recounts in detail the procedural history of the arbitration from its
commencement up until the date that Award was issued.’ This Part of the Award
recalls key procedural details from the early phase of the proceedings and summarises

developments in the proceedings since October 2010.

Commencement of the Arbitration

Pursuant to Article 8 of the Treaty and Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
Eureko sent a Notice of Arbitration to Respondent on 1 October 2008, which

Respondent received on 3 October 2008.
Article 8 of the Treaty provides in the relevant parts as follows:

(1) _ All disputes between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party concerning an investment of the latter shall if possible,
be settled amicably.

(2) Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit a dispute referred to in
paragraph (1) of this Article, to an arbitral tribunal, if the dispute has not
been settled amicably within a period of six months from the date either
party to the dispute requested amicable settlement.

ted

(4) — The arbitration tribunal shall determine its own procedure applying the
arbitration rules of the United Nations Commission for International
Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the law, taking into
account in particular though not exclusively:

* the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned;

the provisions of this Agreement, and other relevant Agreements
between the Contracting Parties;

the provisions of special agreements relating to the investment;

the general principles of international law.

Eureko B.V. v. Slovak Republic, PCA Case No. 2008-13, Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension
(‘Award on Ju ion, Arbitrability and Suspension”), 26 October 2010, available at: http://Awww.pca-
cpa.org/showpage.asp?pag_id=1414, 410-42.

 

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Constitution of the Tribunal, Language and Place of Arbitration

The Tribunal is composed of Professor Albert Jan van den Berg (appointed by Claimant
on 17 October 2008), Mr V.V. Veeder (appointed by Respondent on 6 May 2009, as
substitute for Judge Peter Tomka who resigned on 7 April 2009), and Professor

‘Vaughan Lowe (appointed as Presiding Arbitrator on 20 December 2008).

The Tribunal and the Parties signed Terms of Appointment on 5 March 2009,
confirming the constitution of the Tribunal and designating the International Bureau of
the Permanent Court of Arbitration (“PCA”) to act as registry in the arbitration. It was

agreed that the language of the proceedings would be English.

On 19 March 2009, following a preliminary procedural hearing in The Hague, the
Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, determining among other things, Frankfurt,
Germany to be the place (seat) of the arbitration, while reserving the Tribunal’s right to

conduct hearings and meetings at any location considered appropriate.”

Preliminary Jurisdictional Phase

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, Claimant filed its Statement of Claim,

with accompanying exhibits, on 16 June 2009.

Respondent filed its Statement of Defence, with accompanying exhibits, on 30 October
2009. In addition to rejecting Claimant’s claims on the merits, Respondent asserted that
Eureko had not presented sufficient facts to establish either jurisdiction ratione personae
or ratione materiae.'° Respondent also introduced the Intra-EU Jurisdictional

Objection. "

On 3 December 2009, following a teleconference with the Parties, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 2. In Procedural Order No. 2, the Tribunal decided to hold a
preliminary jurisdictional phase dedicated to Respondent’s Intra-EU Jurisdictional
Objection, and set a schedule for the Parties’ submissions, for requests for document
disclosure and for a hearing on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection. It was decided

that no action needed to be taken on the question of jurisdiction ratione personae, and

Terms of Appointment, 493, 5 and 11.
Procedural Order No. 1, 1.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, {f125-126.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, {ff 19-124.

20.

21.

22.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

that document production would take place on the question of jurisdiction ratione
materiae (relating, inter alia, to the objective criteria of an “investment” and
Claimant’s compliance with Slovak law). The Tribunal also noted that there had been
no agreement between the Parties on any form of consolidation of the hearings in this
case with those in other pending cases against the Slovak Republic in which similar

issues might arise.

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 2, Respondent submitted its Memorial on the
Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection on 29 January 2010 (“Jurisdiction Memorial’) and
Claimant submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection on
26 February 2010 (“Jurisdiction Counter-Memorial’). Respondent submitted its
Reply on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection on 23 March 2010 (‘Jurisdiction
Reply”) and Claimant submitted its Rejoinder on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection
on 16 April 2010 (“Jurisdiction Rejoinder”).

Document production on Respondent’s jurisdiction ratione materiae concerns took
place in February and March 2010. Further correspondence amongst the Parties ensued
and the Tribunal held a teleconference on 8 April 2010 after which it informed the

Parties that:

i. The Tribunal has decided not to order any disclosure at this time.

ii. The Partial Award on Jurisdiction will decide only the “Intra EU”
challenge.

iii. The Tribunal is not minded to arrange a second jurisdictional stage
devoted to the ratione materiae challenge if it rejects the “Intra EU”
challenge.

iv. Points (ii) and (iii) above are without prejudice to the right of the
Respondent to raise arguments based on ‘illegality’ and / or ‘business
risk’ in relation to questions of liability and / or quantum, if the case
proceeds that far.

Vv. Similarly, both Parties will be able to make fresh requests for disclosure
in relation to questions of merits and / or quantum, if the case proceeds
that far.

On 24 April 2010, a Hearing on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection was held at
the International Dispute Resolution Centre in London. The Tribunal discussed with
the Parties the possibility of approaching the European Commission and_ the

Netherlands Government to provide comments to the Tribunal.

23.

24.

25.

26.

E-SR Final Award

7 December 2012
On 10 May 2010, the Tribunal contacted the Director General of the Legal Service of
the European Commission and the Netherlands Ministry of Economic Affairs, inviting
them to provide to the Tribunal any further observations they might have on the
jurisdictional question. The Netherlands Government submitted observations to the
Tribunal on 23 June 2010 and on 7 July 2010 the European Commission provided its
observations to the Tribunal. The Parties were given an opportunity to submit written
comments, inter alia, on the European Commission and Netherlands Government

observations on 19 July 2012.

On 12 July 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4, in which among other
things, recalling both Parties’ desire for the expeditious and efficient resolution of the
dispute, and Claimant’s willingness to proceed to prepare immediately for the merits
“at its own risk” without waiting for the Award on Jurisdiction to be rendered, the
Tribunal set 2 August 2010 as the date by which Claimant should submit its Memorial
on the Merits, which Claimant proceeded to do on 30 July 2010, accompanied by

exhibits, four witness statements and an expert report.

On 16 August 2010, the Tribunal confirmed to the Parties that it considered that it had

all the material needed for its deliberations on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection.

On 26 October 2010 rendered its Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and

Suspension which included the following decisions at paragraph 293:

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal:

(a) DISMISSES the “Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection”
advanced by Respondent and decides that it has jurisdiction
over the dispute;

(b) REJECTS Respondent’s request to suspend the
proceedings until the European Commission and/or the ECJ
have come to a decision on the EU law aspects of the
infringement proceedings;

(c) RESERVES all questions concerning the merits, costs, fees
and expenses, including the Parties’ costs of legal
representation, for subsequent determination; and

(d) INVITES the Parties to confer regarding the procedural
calendar for the merits phase of the arbitration, and to
report to the Tribunal in this respect within 14 days of
receipt of this Award.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Consent to Publication of Award

In November 2010, the Parties consented to make copies of the Award on Jurisdiction,
Arbitrability and Suspension available to the European Commission and the

Netherlands Government.

In May 2011, the Parties consented to make the Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability
and Suspension available on the PCA’s website and for it to be published in the

International Law Reports.

Scheduling Matters and Renewed Suspension Request

Pursuant to paragraph 293(d) of the Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and

Suspension, the Parties conferred on scheduling matters.

On 26 November 2010, Respondent informed the Tribunal that it had applied to the
Oberlandesgericht Frankfurt am Main (the “Oberlandesgericht”) for a declaration of
the invalidity of the Award on Jurisdiction and for a declaration that the Tribunal
lacked jurisdiction to decide the dispute between Eureko and the Slovak Republic. In
light of this development, Respondent requested that the Tribunal reconsider the
question of suspending the proceedings pending the final decision of the
Oberlandesgericht. Claimant declined to agree to a suspension and expressed its view
that the matter of suspension had already been extensively debated before the issuance

of the Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension.

On 3 December 2010, following oral and written consultation with the Parties, the
Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, in which it (i) reaffirmed its jurisdiction over
the case and declined to suspend the proceedings, underscoring its reasoning in
paragraphs 292 and 293 of the Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension,
(ii) set a schedule for document production to precede the filing of Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (iii) invited the Parties to comment on preferred
venues for the hearing on the merits, and (iv) set forth a schedule for the remainder of
the written proceedings. The schedule at that point envisaged a hearing on liability to
be held in May 2011 and reflected an understanding between the Parties that the
remaining proceedings would be bifurcated between a liability part and, to the extent

necessary, a quantum part.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

On 10 December 2010, the Parties jointly proposed that the May hearing on the Merits

be held at the International Dispute Resolution Centre in London.

Written Proceedings on Liability

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 5, and following the exchange of document
disclosure requests and objections, on 4 January 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural

Order No. 6, deciding the outstanding document requests.

Throughout January 2011, the Parties exchanged correspondence with the Tribunal

concerning compliance with Procedural Order No. 6.

On 26 January 2011, Respondent informed the Tribunal of a recent development in the
Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic (the Ustavny stid Slovenskej republiky or
“Slovak Constitutional Court”). The Slovak Constitutional Court had found that
Section 15(6) of Act No. 581/2004 Coll., as amended by Act No. 530/2007 Coll. (the
“ban on profits” discussed below at paragraph 96ff), was unconstitutional. Respondent
asserted that the unconstitutionality of the Profit Provision alone does not establish a
breach of the BIT by Respondent and noted that since the Profit Provision is no longer
in force, Eureko’s investment would not be hindered from generating a profit in the
future. In response, on 7 February 2011, Claimant commented that although the Slovak
Constitutional Court had not yet published an official opinion, the preliminary finding

of the Slovak Court confirmed Eureko’s position in this arbitration.

On 14 February 2011, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 5, Respondent
submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Merits with accompanying exhibits and an
expert report. On 2 March 2011, Respondent submitted an additional witness statement

to support its Counter-Memorial on the Merits.

On 28 March 2011, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 5, Claimant submitted its
Reply on the Merits with accompanying exhibits and a provisional translation of the
26 January 2011 judgment of the Slovak Constitutional Court. In its cover e-mail,
Claimant expressed its views regarding aspects of the judgment, including that
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits could not be reconciled with (i) the
petition made by members of the then Government of the Slovak Republic to the

Slovak Constitutional Court back in 2008 and (ii) the adoption and issuance of

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

legislation amending the “2007 Reversal” in 2010 and 2011 (discussed below at 119ff).

Claimant requested Respondent to comment on these points.

By e-mail dated 30 March 2011, Respondent replied that Claimant’s e-mail of
28 January 2011 contained “comprehensive conclusions” which it would only be able

to address in its Rejoinder on the Merits.

On 15 April 2011, Claimant informed the Tribunal that it had obtained a translation of
the full opinion of the Slovak Constitutional Court decision of 26 January 2011 and
requested that the hearing on liability scheduled for May 2011 be postponed to the
second half of 2011 and that such hearing address both liability and quantum issues.
Claimant justified its proposal by noting that the Slovak Constitutional Court had ruled
on the legitimacy of crucial pieces of legislation underlying the present arbitration and
that new legislation had been submitted to the Slovak Parliament that will
“fundamentally affect the scope of the arbitration.” Claimant pointed to the
discrepancy in the views of the Slovak Republic in the current proceedings and the
public statements of its new administration. Claimant also requested the Tribunal to

order the testimony of the then Slovak Minister of Finance.

By letter dated 21 April 2011 Respondent rejected the reasoning advanced by Claimant
concerning the effect of the Slovak Constitutional Court decision, but agreed in
principle to a postponement of the hearing, subject to some other adjustments to the
timetable. Respondent also raised again the question of suspending the proceedings
until the Oberlandesgericht ruled on the annulment, reporting that the European
Commission had recently initiated “Pilot Proceedings” against Respondent because of

Respondent’s application of the BIT in this case.

During a teleconference held amongst the Parties, the PCA and the Presiding Arbitrator
on 27 April 2011, it was agreed by the Parties that a hearing on the merits (covering

both liability and damages) would take place in London from 12 to 16 December 2011.

In accordance with a request from the Tribunal, the Parties submitted a joint proposal
on 6 May 2011 for the remaining procedural schedule which provided for written

submissions and document production on quantum issues.

On 6 May 2011, Respondent, again, formally requested the suspension of proceedings
pending the completion of the proceedings in the Oberlandesgericht, providing an

update on the proceedings before the Oberlandesgericht, including the participation of

44.

4S.

46.

G.

47.

48.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

the Netherlands, and the interest shown by the European Commission and the Czech
Republic. Respondent expressed concerns that the European Commission, having
commenced proceedings against the Slovak Republic, considered Respondent to be in
breach of EU law in continuing to participate in these arbitration proceedings.
Respondent also considered the decision on liability to be no longer urgent in light of

the ineffectiveness of the ban on profits.

Claimant opposed the revived request for suspension by letter dated 6 May 2011.
Claimant explained that the proceedings concerned the future use of the BIT, and were
therefore not relevant to the resolution of the present dispute. Eureko emphasised its
desire for resolution of the present arbitration in order for Eureko to remain active in
the Slovak market and to avoid “hibernating” its investment further. Claimant
considered the potential new legislation not to be a valid reason to suspend the

proceedings.

On 27 May 2011, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it did not consider the
attendance of the Slovak Finance Minister, Mr Ivan Miklo8, to be necessary for the fair
and efficient conduct of the remaining proceedings of the case and declined Claimant’s
request to order his appearance as a witness. The Tribunal also stated that it did not
consider the possibility of the initiation of proceedings by the European Commission,
or the possibility of a reference of questions by the German courts to the ECJ, or
Respondent’s legislative program, to provide sufficient reason to suspend the
proceedings. It recalled paragraphs 292 and 293 of its Award on Jurisdiction,

Arbitrability and Suspension and declined to suspend the arbitration.

On 10 May 2011, Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on the Merits with

accompanying exhibits and an expert report.

Written Proceedings on Quantum

On 24 August 2011, in accordance with the schedule agreed by the Parties and
confirmed by the Tribunal on 19 July 2011, Claimant filed its Memorial on Damages
accompanied by exhibits, an expert report on damages, and a supplementary witness

statement.

On 31 August 2011, in accordance with the schedule agreed by the Parties, Respondent

filed document requests relating to damages. Claimant responded to the document

49.

50.

S1.

52.

53.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

requests on 5 September 2011. On 8 September 2011, Respondent replied to
Claimant’s objections. On 12 September 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order
No. 7 granting some of Respondent’s document requests, denying some of

Respondent’s document requests and deeming it unnecessary to decide on others.

On 5 October 2011, Claimant produced documents pursuant to Procedural Order No. 7.

On 12 October 2011, Claimant acceded to a further document request by Respondent.

On 11 November 2011, in accordance with the agreed schedule, Respondent filed its

Counter-Memorial on Damages accompanied by exhibits and an expert report.

On 22 November 2011, the Parties submitted the names of witnesses that they intended
to call for cross-examination. Hearing attendees and other logistical matters were dealt
with in correspondence dated 25 November 2011, and during a 29 November 2011
teleconference. Follow-up submissions were exchanged on 30 November 2011 and

hearing arrangements were finalised on 2 December 2011.

One week before the scheduled hearing, on 7 December 2011, Claimant’s expert
witness, Mr Indge (of Ernst & Young), sent a letter to the Tribunal wishing to “revise
and clarify certain areas” of his expert report dated 24 August 2011, in order to assist
the Tribunal and address certain points made by Respondent’s expert witnesses from
KPMG (the “Indge Letter”). This included: (1) a revision of the administration costs
in Model E of his report and the method of estimating expected dividends;
(2) acorrection of the data used for Appendix F, addressing an error made in his
original report; and (3) a resultant amendment to the present value of Union under his

Methodology 1. Mr Indge attached to his letter revised Appendices D and F.

By letter dated 8 December 2011, Respondent’s expert witness, Mr Peer of KPMG,
stated that they “would need time to understand the revised calculations relied upon by
Mr Indge and to consider those changes in light of the remainder of the model.” The
same day, Respondent wrote to the Tribunal, requesting a postponement of the hearing
to provide adequate time to react to the Indge Letter, or alternatively to proceed with
the hearing but exclude the question of damages, which question should be rescheduled
to a later time. Claimant wrote to the Tribunal that it considered Respondent’s response
disproportionate to the types of changes made in the Indge Letter and that Respondent

was seeking an excuse to delay the hearing.

54.

55.

56.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The Tribunal conveyed a message to the Parties on 9 December 2011 that it would not

at that moment postpone the hearing, but would address the procedural aspects raised

by the Parties on the morning of the first day of the hearing.

On 9 December 2011, the Parties submitted brief summaries of their main submissions.

Hearing on the Merits

From Monday, 12 December 2011 to Wednesday, 14 December 2011, a Hearing on

the Merits was held at the International Dispute Resolution Centre in London. Present

at the hearing were:

Tribunal:

Claimant:

Respondent:

Professor Vaughan Lowe
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg
Mr V. V. Veeder

Counsel

Mr Marnix Leijten, De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek N.V.
Mr Rogier Schellars, De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek N.V.
Mr Albert Marsman, De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek N.V.
Mr Igor Zubov, De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek N.V.

Party Representative
Mr René Visser, Eureko B.V.

Witnesses

Mr Willem van Duin
Mr Fred Hoogerbrug

Mr Bjarne Jorgen Slorup
Mr Tibor Borik

Mr Peter Pazitny

Mr Richard Indge

Counsel

Mr Martin Maisner, Rowan Legal

Mr Milos Olik, Rowan Legal

Mr David Fyrbach, Rowan Legal

Mr Martin Subrt, Rowan Legal

Mr Ludovit Mi¢insky, Rowan Legal
Ms Bohdana Jedli¢kova, Rowan Legal
Ms Isabela Vrskova, Rowan Legal

Party Representatives

Mr Matej Sapak, Ministry of Finance, Slovak Republic

Mr Radovan Hronsky, Ministry of Finance, Slovak Republic
Mr Matej Bobovnik, Ministry of Finance, Slovak Republic

57.

58.

59.

60.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Witnesses

Professor Dr Dr Thomas Gerlinger
Mr Michael Peer, KPMG

Ms Zuzana Kepkova, KPMG

Registry: Ms Judith Levine, Permanent Court of Arbitration
Ms Gaélle Chevalier, Permanent Court of Arbitration

Court Reporter: Merrill Legal Solutions

Interpreters: Ms Brigitte Puhl
Ms Silke Schoenbuchner
At the outset of the hearing, the Presiding Arbitrator invited the Parties to address
several outstanding procedural issues. The first was the matter of the Indge Letter and
its effect on the remainder of the proceedings. After hearing from the Parties, the
Tribunal decided to continue with the hearing on liability and, in the meantime, asked
the expert witnesses on damages from both sides to confer about the possibility of
proceeding with their testimony. The second matter concerned the presence at the
hearing of two Ernst & Young employees, Ms Victoria Wall and Ms Elizabeth Perks, to
assist Claimant’s counsel. The Tribunal ruled that they could be present. The third
matter concerned scheduling of witnesses and the fourth matter concerned the
characterisation of Claimant’s witness, Mr Peter Pazitny, whom the Tribunal decided

could be treated as an expert witness.

Each Party then presented arguments on the merits and answered questions from the
Tribunal. The above-listed witnesses were subject to direct examination, cross-
examination, and re-direct examination as well as questions from the Tribunal, as

recorded in the Transcript.

The Tribunal consulted further with the Parties and the expert witnesses on damages
about the timing and nature of their oral evidence. It was decided that the experts
would meet and produce a joint report setting out areas of agreement and disagreement,
that the Parties would be offered an opportunity to comment on the joint report, and
that the experts would then appear as witnesses on 30 January 2012. A draft version of
Procedural Order No. 8, setting out these procedural steps, was circulated to the Parties

for their review and comment.

At the close of the hearing, the Tribunal remarked that it had a sense “that a settlement

in this case would be a good thing, in that the aims of both sides seem to be

61.

62.

63.

64.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

approximately aligned, and that the black and white solution of a legal decision in
which one side wins and the other side loses is not the optimum outcome in this case.”
The Tribunal emphasised that it was not its role to “get involved in this in any way at
all” but suggested that should the Parties desire to seek out somebody who might act as
a mediator or reconciliator, the Secretary-General of the PCA might be in a position to
assist. The Tribunal noted that any such steps would be taken in parallel with the
continuation of the case.'* The Tribunal also kept well in mind (as it had done before
and still does) that the Parties have not expressly authorised it to decide their dispute as
“amiable compositeur” or “ex aequo et bono” under Article 33(2) of the UNCITRAL

Arbitration Rules.

Further Proceedings on Quantum

On 16 December 2011, having consulted with the Parties, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 8, setting out the procedural steps for the Parties’ expert
witnesses on damages to confer and report to the Tribunal in advance of a one-day
hearing; as well as directions with respect to documenting Claimant’s name change,

and submitting any amendments to the hearing transcript.

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 8, the Parties’ expert witnesses on damages
exchanged correspondence and data, and then met in person in Prague on 5 January
2012. On 13 January 2012, they submitted a Joint Expert Report setting out their

areas of agreement and disagreement, and the reasons for their disagreement.
On 20 January 2012, the Parties exchanged comments on the Joint Expert Report.

Also on 20 January 2012, Claimant submitted documents evidencing Eureko B.V.’s
name change to Achmea B.V. It explained that the name change was effective through
an amendment of the articles of association of Eureko B.V. that was executed at the
occasion of the merger between Eureko B.V. and Achmea Holding N.V. (Eureko B.V.
being the surviving entity in that merger) on 18 November 2011. Claimant attached the
deed of merger and amendment of the articles of association; the filing of the name
change with the commercial register; and an overview of historical information for

Achmea B.V. from the commercial register.

Transcript, 14 December 2011, pp. 140-142. See also pp. 45-46.

65.

66.

67.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012
Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 8, on Monday, 30 January 2012, a Hearing on
Quantum was held at the International Dispute Resolution Centre in London. Present
at the hearing were:
Tribunal: Professor Vaughan Lowe

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg
Mr V. V. Veeder

Claimant: Counsel
Mr Marnix Leijten, De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek N.V.
Mr Albert Marsman, De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek N.V.
Mr Igor Zubov, De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek N.V.

Witnesses
Mr Richard Indge, Ernst & Young

Other
Ms Victoria Wall, Ernst & Young
Ms Elizabeth Perks, Ernst & Young

Respondent: Counsel
Mr Martin Maisner, Rowan Legal
Mr Milos Olik, Rowan Legal
Mr David Fyrbach, Rowan Legal
Mr Ludovit Mi¢insky, Rowan Legal

Party Representatives
Mr Matej Sapak, Ministry of Finance, Slovak Republic
Mr Matej Bobovnik, Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic

Witnesses
Mr Michael Peer, KPMG
Ms Zuzana Kepkova, KPMG
Registry: Ms Judith Levine, Permanent Court of Arbitration

Court Reporter: Merrill Legal Solutions

The Presiding Arbitrator noted that Claimant had changed its name to Achmea B.V.,
but expressed the Tribunal’s preference to continue referring to Claimant by the name

“Eureko” during the hearing.

Claimant’s counsel expressed regrets on behalf of Claimant’s representative, Mr René

Visser, who was unable to attend the hearing for personal reasons.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Each Party presented arguments on damages and answered questions from the Tribunal.
The above-listed witnesses were subject to direct examination, cross-examination, and
re-direct examination as well as questions from the Tribunal to the witnesses separately

and collectively, as recorded in the Transcript.

At the close of the hearing, the Tribunal consulted with the Parties and indicated that
they would request Post-Hearing Briefs as well as submissions on costs shortly after the

hearing.

Post-Hearing Proceedings

On 6 February 2012, the Tribunal confirmed to the Parties its request for “concise Post-
Hearing Briefs” as discussed at the hearing. In accordance with the Tribunal’s

directions, the Parties submitted Post-Hearing Briefs on 21 February 2012.

In accordance with the Tribunal’s further directions of 18 February 2012, the Parties
submitted Submissions on Costs on 27 February 2012. As set forth in the Parties’
submissions, Claimant’s costs amounted to €4,235,212.27;° Respondent’s costs
amounted to €13,102,971.21. On 28 February 2012, Claimant wrote to the Tribunal,
requesting that Respondent be ordered to clarify its Submission on Costs by providing a
breakdown of counsel fees by law firm and of expert fees by each individual expert.
Following further correspondence from the Parties, the Tribunal requested on 7 March
2012 that both Parties update their Submissions on Costs with further details regarding
counsel and expert fees and a breakdown of such costs according to the phases of the

arbitration. On 12 March 2012, the Parties submitted Revised Submissions on Costs.

In accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, the Parties submitted Reply Submissions
on Costs on 16 March 2012. On 19 March 2012, Respondent wrote to the Tribunal
regarding what it considered to be misrepresentations in Claimant’s Reply Submission

on Costs. On 20 March 2012, Claimant replied to Respondent’s comments.

On 21 March 2012, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it considered that it had all
the materials it needed for its deliberations on the outstanding issues and requested the
Parties to refrain from further correspondence in the absence of a formal application by

a Party to the Tribunal.

This figure reflects a correction issued by the Tribunal on 14 December 2012, in accordance with Article 36 of the
UNCITRAL Rules, which is incorporated into this consolidated electronic version of the Final Award.

74.

75.

Til.

76.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Developments before the German Courts

The Tribunal takes arbitral notice, from the public record, of the following
developments. On 10 May 2012, the Oberlandesgericht issued a decision rejecting
Respondent’s application for a declaration that the Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability
and Suspension was invalid as a result of the Tribunal’s lack of jurisdiction over the
dispute between Eureko and the Slovak Republic.'? The Oberlandesgericht held that
Article 344 TFEU (prohibiting EU Member States from submitting a dispute
concerning the interpretation or application of the TEU or TFEU to any method of
settlement other than those set forth in the Treaties) was applicable only to disputes
between EU Member States and not in the context of the investor-State dispute at hand.
The Oberlandesgericht also declined to request a preliminary ruling from the ECJ under
Article 267 TFEU, noting that the role of the ECJ in such a procedure was to address
the validity of EU law in general terms, not to decide on the validity of Article 8(2) of
the BIT. The Oberlandesgericht also observed that a reference to the ECJ was
unnecessary as the Oberlandesgericht had no reasonable doubts regarding the

interpretation of Article 344 TFEU.

The Tribunal understands that Respondent is appealing the aforementioned decision in
the German Federal Supreme Court (the “Bundesgerichtshof”’) in Karlsruhe. As of the
date of this Award, that Court has not determined whether to make a reference to the

ECJ under Article 267 TFEU.

HISTORICAL AND FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The following summary of the historical and factual background is drawn from the
Parties’ pleadings and is presented to give context to Claimant’s investment and alleged
violations of the BIT. In the course of the Parties’ submissions, however, it became
apparent that the Parties differed significantly in respect of the factual implications of
these developments, as well as their relevance within the framework of the BIT. The
Parties’ competing characterisations of the factual record, and the Tribunal’s

observations thereon, are presented subsequently.

Oberlandesgericht. Frankfurt am Main (decision dated 10 May 2012, reference no. 26 SchH 11/10)
lareda hessen. g psml ?doc.hl=1 &doc.id=JURE120010262

%3.Ajuris-100 doc part=L

(available only in German).

 

 

 

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The Independence of the Slovak Republic and its Accession to the European Union

Starting in 1989, Czechoslovakia (from 1990 the Czech and Slovak Federative
Republic (“CSFR”)) underwent a profound transformation from a socialist system of
central economic planning to a free market economy in a democracy under the rule of
law. According to the Slovak Republic (and as the Tribunal accepts), this
transformation necessitated the creation of a “sufficient legal framework, which would
safeguard the functioning of the new system and protection of the participating

subjects.”'*

Integration into the European Community and Council of Europe was a priority in
fostering the economic and political stability desired, while ensuring the protection of

foreign entities entering a then-emerging free market. Is

In 1989 Czechoslovakia initiated contact with the European Community. Negotiations
resulted in the conclusion on 16 December 1991 of the European Agreement
Establishing an Association between the European Community on the one hand, and
the CSFR, Hungary and Poland on the other.'° That Agreement was subject to

ratification.

During the same period, the CSFR concluded, among other things, bilateral agreements
on the promotion and protection of investments, including the BIT with The Netherlands,

which was signed on 29 April 1991 and came into force from 1 October 1992.17

The CSFR became a member of the Council of Europe and a signatory to the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“ECHR”)

on 21 February 1991. The ECHR has been in force for the CSFR since 18 March 1992.

The Slovak Republic separated from the CSFR and became an independent State on
1 January 1993. It succeeded to the CSFR-Netherlands BIT, as well as to the ECHR, as
of the day of its independence. Because of the split of the CSFR, the CSFR
Association Agreement of 16 December 1991 was never ratified. The Slovak Republic

renegotiated its relationship with the European Community by concluding the

Respondent’s Memorial on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection, {7.
Respondent’s Memorial on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection, {{[7-8.
Respondent’s Memorial on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection, {{[7-9.

Respondent's Memorial on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection, 9-10. The Netherlands has been a member of the
EU since it became party to the Treaty of Rome Establishing the European Economic Community on 25 March 1957.
The Netherlands had become a party to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms on 31 August 1954.

83.

84.

85.

86.

20

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Agreement Establishing an Association between the European Communities and their
Member States [including The Netherlands] and the Slovak Republic on 4 October
1993. This Association Agreement has been in force since 1 February 1995.'8

On 16 April 2003, the Slovak Republic signed the Accession Treaty,’ and its
membership of the EU became effective when the Accession Treaty entered into force
on 1 May 2004.

On 1 December 2009, the Lisbon Treaty entered into force for all EU Member States,

including the Slovak Republic and the Netherlands.

The Evolution of the Slovak Heath Insurance Sector

The Constitution of the Slovak Republic, adopted on 1 September 1992, provides in
20

 

Article 40 as follow:

 

Every person shall have the right to protect his or her health. Through medical
insurance, the citizens shall have the right to free health care and medical
equipment for disabilities under the terms to be provided by law.

In 1993, the Slovak Republic established a mandatory and universal public health
insurance system in which the payment of a dedicated healthcare levy was made the

shared responsibility of employers and employees. Under this system, the State makes

21

contributions for economically-inactive members of the population.” The system was

created by Act No. 9/1993 Coll.” Initially administered by a single state-owned Health
Insurer, this system was modified in 1994 by Act No. 273/1994 Coll. to permit the

creation of other state-owned and private entities to perform public healthcare

Respondent’s Memorial on the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection, {{[12-13.

Treaty between the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Hellenic
Republic, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic, Ireland, the Italian Republic, the Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Republic of Austria, the Portuguese Republic, the Republic of
Finland, the Kingdom of Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Member States of the
European Union) and the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia,
the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of
Slovenia, the Slovak Republic, concerning the accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the
Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of
Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovak Republic concerning the Accession of The
Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania,
the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak
Republic to the European Union, signed on 23 September 2003, entered into force on 1 May 2004, (2003) O.J. L 236
of 23 September 2003. Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/JOHtml.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:236:SOM:en:HTML.

 

Respondent's Statement of Defence, 45. Given the language of this arbitration, all quotations from a non-English
text are here given in English translation, as agreed or not disputed by the Parties.

Respondent’s Statement of Defence, 6. Act No. 9/1993 Coll. (Exhibit R-2).
Exhibit R-2

87.

88.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

functions.”? As some individuals are likely to require more healthcare expenditure than
others, the system provided for the aggregation of the greater part of the funds
collected, and their redistribution among the health insurance entities in accordance
with a formula that reflects the different predicted needs of the policyholders of each of
the separate entities. Act No. 273/1994 Coll. also prohibited the use of levied funds for
non-healthcare purposes and capped the administrative expenses of health insurers at

4 percent of collected premiums.

By 2004, the Slovak healthcare system had accumulated a deficit of approximately
SKK 26 billion2* The Government of the Slovak Republic contributed over
SKK 20 billion to reduce the debt and set about to reform the system. This was the
“2004 Liberalisation” (or the “2004 Reform”) of the health insurance sector. The
2004 Reform aimed at achieving a mix of public and private investment.” Among the
reforms, two Acts adopted on 21 October 2004 are particularly important in the context

of this case: Act No. 580/2004 Coll.”° and Act No. 581/2004 Coll.?”

The most significant aspects of the 2004 Reform may be summarised as follows:

(a) health insurance companies were permitted to make profits and to dispose
of profits subject to the laws applicable to other commercial entities;

(b) health care providers, including State-owned hospitals, were privatised and
free to compete in the provision of health care services ordered by health
insurance companies;

(c) no cap was imposed on the administration costs of health insurance
companies;

(d) health insurance companies were free to compete for clients;

(e) existing health insurance companies were privatised and converted into
joint stock companies;

(f) an independent Regulator, neither controlled nor under the influence of the
Government, was established to supervise the health insurance sector;

Respondent’s Statement of Defence, (10. Act No. 273/1994 Coll. (Exhibit R-4). See also Claimant’s Statement of
Claim, {MI .1-11.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, (116.

Claimant's Statement of Claim, {§II1.12-14, Acts No. 580/2004 Coll. and No. 581/2004 Coll. (Exhibits C-20 and C-
21).

Exhibit C-20.
Exhibit C-21

89.

90.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

(g) citizens could switch between licensed health insurance companies once
each year;

(h) _ the insurance premium for the basic level of health insurance was fixed by
law;

i the system of premium redistribution was applied to 85.5 percent of the
y' P PP P
premiums that each health insurance company was entitled to receive from
its clients;

it was intended that the scope of the (mandatory) basic level health care

j) i intended that thi f the (mand; ) basic level health
package would be reduced and could be supplemented by any insured
person who wished to pay for (voluntary) additional health insurance; and

(k) a user fee was introduced, payable by the insured on the occasion of each

se ‘ 0

visit to a healthcare provider and on each prescription.”*
The 2004 Reform made the Slovak health insurance market attractive to private
investors, but it was unpopular with part of the population. Further, the liberalisation
faced strong political opposition within parts the Slovak Parliament; and it was made

the subject of a constitutional challenge.”

Eureko’s Entry into the Slovak Health Insurance Market

Eureko has been active in the Slovak Republic since 1997, when it purchased shares in
Union Poist’oviia a.s. (“Union Insurance”), a Slovak corporation privatised in 1992
which offered a range of insurance products, including travel insurance.” In December
2005, shortly after the 2004 Reform, Eureko applied for a license to operate a health
insurance company* ' and incorporated in the Slovak Republic a new company, Union
Healthcare (“Union Healthcare”), on 9 March 2006 as a ‘greenfield’ operation to

2 Union Healthcare was established with an

offer basic level healthcare insurance.*
initial investment of SKK 110 million upon incorporation and a_ further
SKK 2,180,300,000 prior to 25 October 2006, the date of Claimant’s last cash
investment in Union Healthcare. By 1 January 2007, Union Healthcare had obtained a

share of around 8.5 percent of the Slovak health insurance market.**

See Exhibit C-19, C-20, C-21; Statement of Claim III. 14—I11.22.

Statement of Defence 19-22, 27; Exhibit C-110.

Statement of Claim {I1.9-10.

Claimant's Memorial on the Merits, (71.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, 26; Claimant's Statement of Claim, (11.11, TI.15, 111.24.
Claimant's Statement of Claim, 911.15, III. 25; Exhibit C-22

91.

92.

93.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Reforms in the Slovak Health Insurance Sector in 2006-2009

On 17 June 2006, parliamentary elections in the Slovak Republic resulted in the victory
of the SMER Social Democracy party (“SMER”), led by Mr Robert Fico, who assumed
the office of Prime Minister. Over the course of 2006 and 2007, the new Slovak
Government introduced a series of changes to the legal framework governing the health
insurance market. These measures were referred to by Claimant as the “2007 Reversal”
and by Respondent as the “2006 Stabilisation.” It will be convenient here to refer to
them neutrally as the “2007 Reforms,” despite the fact that not all of the relevant
measures were adopted in 2007. It is also convenient to summarise all of the legislative

reforms together, before turning to other developments.

Act No. 522/2006 Coll., adopted on 6 September 2006, introduced a cap on the
operating expenses of health insurance companies (the “cap on operating expenses”)

in the following terms:

§6a(1) A health insurance company may spend, in the relevant calendar year,
for operational activities of health insurance company not more than
4% of the sum of premium prior to redistribution of premium for the
relevant calendar year (the “annual sum”).

The cap on operating expenses took effect from 1 January 2007 and was subsequently
reduced to 3.5 percent of premium revenue by Act No. 530/2007 Coll., adopted on
25 October 2007.

Act No. 12/2007 Coll., adopted on 12 December 2006, introduced a ban on the use by
health insurance companies of brokers to sell health insurance (the “ban on brokers”)

as follows:*°

§6(17) A health insurance company must not carry out recruitment of insured
under a mandate agreement or intermediary agreements with natural
persons or legal entities for financial or non-financial consideration.

§6(18) A health insurance company must not give to the insured, for receipt
and acceptance of application for public health insurance, a financial
reward, non-financial reward or other financial, material or immaterial
benefit, to which the insured is not entitled under public health
insurance.

Exhibit C-40.
Exhibit C-47,

94.

95.

96.

97.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The Act further gave the Government the right to remove the Chairman of the Health
Care Authority, on the initiative of the Minister of Health, for reasons other than those

provided by statute (the “repositioning of the Regulator’).

Government Resolution 462/2007, adopted on 23 May 2007, instructed the Minister
of Health to draft a legal regulation to ban the generation of profit from public health
insurance and to reduce health insurers’ operational funds from four percent to three
percent; and also to submit a project for the establishment of a single health insurance

company governed by public law.*°

Decree 504/2007, adopted on 24 October 2007, ended the ability of health insurance
companies to contract freely with healthcare providers and imposed a requirement that
the health insurance companies contract with 34 named state hospitals for the provision
of facilities (the “amended network requirement”).” Decree 504/2007 was
subsequently replaced by Decree 640/2008, which maintained and supplemented the

requirements of the 2007 decree.**

Act No. 530/2007 Coll., adopted on 25 October 2007, introduced a requirement that all

profits from health insurance be used for healthcare purposes (the “ban on profits”):*

§15(6) If, following the fulfilment of the requirement set in paragraph | letter
(b) the result of economic operations in public health insurance is
positive, it may be used only for payments to such extent as is set in a
special regulation 25) by no later than the end of the calendar year
following that calendar year for which positive result of economic
operations was reported, and in a manner not posing a risk for
systematic and effective fulfilment of obligation owed by the health
insurance company to ensure available healthcare under this Act
(paragraph 1(a)) and not contradicting the obligation of the health
insurance company to make proper and timely payments for healthcare
provided.

Act No. 594/2007 Coll., adopted on 28 November 2007, supplemented the provisions
of Act. No. 530/2007, in the following terms:*°

Exhibit C-37.
Statement of Claim {HI.177-121.
Exhibit C-55.
Exhibit C-41
Exhibit C-61

98.

99.

100.

101.

4

8

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

§86d A health insurance company shall meet its obligation to use the positive
economic result generated from public health insurance to pay for
healthcare under § 15 paragraph 6 for the first time in 2009, and in
respect of the financial year 2008.

The reforms continued in 2008 and 2009. Act No. 581/2008 Coll., adopted on
25 November 2008, increased from 85.5 percent to 95 percent the portion of received
premiums to be redistributed among health insurance companies in accordance with the
expected needs of their particular client portfolios, obliged health insurance companies
to submit their budgets for scrutiny by the Government, and amended the solvency
requirements imposed on health insurance companies, requiring that the financial

obligations of insurers be met within 30 days.""

Act No. 192/2009 Coll., adopted on 30 April 2009, ended the possibility of a health
insurance company selling its insurance portfolio to another health insurance company
and required that in the case of insolvency of an insurance company its portfolio must
be transferred without payment to one of the two State insurance companies (the “ban

sy) 42
on transfers”).*

Alongside these measures, officials of the Slovak Government made a number of
statements, both publicly and in the course of correspondence exchanged with Eureko.
Although the Parties differ as to the meaning and significance of these statements and

exchanges, their content is recounted here.

In August 2006, the incoming Slovak Government issued a Manifesto setting forth its
positions on a wide range of issues. In relevant part, with respect to healthcare, the

Manifesto provided as follows:

The Government considers health, equality in health care provision, and health
care availability as the fundamental right of every citizen. Maintenance and
improvement of health is the best investment for a strong economy and satisfied
society. The Government considers health care to be one of its priorities. The
mission of health care is the provision of care to the public using public money
and therefore it has to be under public scrutiny.

The Government will ensure the principle of solidarity in health care. A socially
oriented state must not dispose of the responsibility for ensuring access to
adequate health care to all its citizens. The scope of this care must be defined by
the law and, to that extent, health care must be financed from health insurance.

Exhibit C-68, C-69.

Exhibit C-72
Exhibit C-16, pp. 33-35

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Already in 2006, the Government will cancel some fees that are not directly
related to the provision of health care and ensure compensation for the providers.

The Government is aware that the discrepancy between the lack of funds and the
expectations of the population can only be solved by maintaining economically
and socially sustainable participation in selected types of health care. The
Government considers the support of voluntary health insurance to be critical
while enabling access to health care not paid from the health insurance and to a
reduction of the immediate financial impact of such participation. The Government
will consider the possibility of tax relief against payments of the voluntary health
insurance.

L.-J

The Government will ensure an increase of funds for health care in 2007 by
increasing insurance premium payments for citizens where the payer is the state
from 4% of the average wage to 5%. The Government will ensure that public
spending in health care expressed in GDP percent has a growth tendency and that
it respects the principle of approximation to advanced states of the European
Union.

The Government will support multi-source financing of health care. It will
contribute to the fund for compensation of extremely demanding procedures. The
Government considers the constitutionally guaranteed system of health insurance,
based on the solidarity principle, to constitute the basis of health care funding. The
Government will restore the public character of the VSeobecnd4 zdravotnd
poistoviia and Spoloéné zdravotnd poistovia health insurance companies. The
Government will enforce such a legal environment, in which all health insurance
companies have equal conditions regardless of their legal form, and which
prevents insurance companies from inefficient management of the funds of the
insured. The Government will enforce that the amount of health insurance
companies’ operating costs as of 2007 be limited by law to a maximum of 4% of
the mandatory health insurance premiums collected.

The Government will not admit such legislative changes in health care that could
lead to damaging the reputation of the Slovak Republic by failing to ensure an
adequate protection of domestic and foreign investments. The Government accepts
all forms of ownership of health care facilities and it will create conditions for
their multi-source financing.

The Government will revoke the present form of insurance premiums accounting.

The Government will pay maximum attention to the use of all possibilities of
financing investment activities in health care, including the EU funds.

L.-J

The Government supports decentralisation in health care management while
introducing the methodological, regulatory, and control role of the state vis-a-vis
all health care facilities. In hospital care, it will enforce the role of the state as the
owner of faculty health care facilities, facilities with nationwide scope, and those
performing special tasks in emergency situations.

 

The Government will ensure availability and quality of health care for all citizens
and it will prevent uncontrolled and inefficient extension of the network of health
care facilities. At the same time, it will support the restructuring of the network of
health care facilities giving preference to the transfer of activities to the outpatient
sphere — including walk-in care, to achieve purposeful specialisation and growth in

26

102.

103.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

quality and productivity of the services provided. Medically and financially highly
demanding health care procedures will only be provided at accredited workplaces
of selected facilities.

The Government will support the creation of conditions for transparent
competition of health care providers. At the same time, it will support creation of a
system of a dif iated approach in blishing contractual relati
between health insurance companies and health care providers according to the
criteria of efficiency and quality of health care provided.

L.-J

The critical objective of the government will be to develop the health care system
informatisation at all levels. The Government will ensure legislative and
institutional conditions for implementation of information and communication
systems that will assist in improvement of quality, cost efficiency and time
availability of services. In this area, the Government will support the project of
health care informatisation and gradually implement the objectives of the national
eHealth strategy.

An important objective of the Government will be the support of new, more
transparent payment mechanisms for health care procedures.

The Government will enforce substantial debureaucratisation of health care and
cancel all unnecessary administration and duplicity in the activities of the Ministry
of Health, Healthcare Surveillance Authority, and other institutions. In 2007, these
institutions will be subject to thorough activity audit with subsequent
reconsideration of the headcount only for the activities that are inevitable,
necessary for the entire society, and that are prescribed by law.

According to Eureko, the first signs of a significant intervention by the Government in
the health insurance market came in November 2006. Eureko says that it then became
aware that on 9 November 2006 the chairman of the Slovak Parliament had said to a
closed meeting of the ‘health care club’ that he believed that all public funds (including
the health care levy) should be under public control, that non-State health insurance
companies should not be permitted to make profits, that clients whose healthcare
contributions are paid by the State should not have a free choice of insurer, and that

there should be restrictions on the ownership rights of health insurance companies.

According to Eureko, it was a report from Mr Borik, the CEO of Union Healthcare and
a prominent and well-connected member of the Slovakian Association of Insurance
Companies, that alerted Eureko to the possibility of a significant change in the system
and triggered the request for a meeting between Eureko and Mr Ivan Valentovié, the

Minister of Health, at short notice.*

Statement of Claim {IL38
Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 30-32.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

104. On 24 November 2006, Eureko’s CEO, Mr Willem AJ van Duin, met with
Mr Valentovié to discuss developments in the Slovak health insurance sector.

Following this meeting, Mr Van Duin wrote to the Minister as follows:*°

Dear Mr Minister,

Herewith I would like to thank you for the time you have made available on Friday
24" November to discuss the developments on the health insurance market with
me and particularly recent information we received on potential proposals to
change legislation.

After I have given you information on Eureko, our European insurance group with
a strong presence in health insurance, I explained that Eureko is a long term
investor who entered from this perspective a.o. on the Slovakian health insurance
market with Union Zdravodna Poist’ oviia.

Union z.p. is for many years seen in the Slovakian market as a very trustworthy
insurance company with a reliable position. I informed you that Eureko has made
considerable investments in the health sector and expects to have a break even
situation only after a number of years with a pay back period of over 10 years.
This underlines the long term approach with entering the health insurance market
in Slovakia, where we foresee - as in other European countries - only marginal
profits but a strong client relationship which supports our other insurance
businesses.

You mentioned the necessity to create stability in the market which of course we
understand. But as we can see in other European countries, we feel that this
stability is not by any means influenced through the ownership of the health
insurance company, either private or state owned. I offered to share the knowledge
that we have within Eureko with you in supporting governments, like we did
before in the Netherlands, Romania and Greece.

We also discussed the proposals set out in de press [sic] to change current
legislation. Although we prefer not to react on articles in the press, we do see a
considerable threat to developing our business as planned. I pointed out to you that
possible proposals as we see now, will be in conflict with European regulations
and bilateral treaties between the Netherlands and the Slovakian Republic. You
will understand that, we will have to defend our investments if necessary.

In spite of our discussions last Friday, to our disappointment we had to find out
that on Monday 27" November a parliamentary committee discussed proposals to
change current legislation which fully conflict with the interests of private health
insurers and Eureko as a share holder of Union z.p, in particular. To our
interpretation these proposals are very conflictive with the current legislation on
which we have based the decision to commit to our investments. You will
understand that - separate from controversy with EU-legislation - we will have to
confront you with considerable damages claims if these proposals become
legislation. In that case we will inform you later about our next steps. Of course it
is still our preference that proposed changes in legislation will not take place and
that the good business climate will not be affected.

“6 Exhibit C-13,

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Again, I would like to thank you for your hospitality and I value the discussions
we have had. However, we are disappointed by the fact that you did not mention
any of the proposed changes in legislation at all.

Yours sincerely,

Willem van Duin

105. On 9 December 2006, the Prime Minister, Mr Robert Fico, made the following

statement:"”

We expect, quite legitimately, that our Minister of Health will issue decisions with
respect to health insurance companies in the next year. After all, it is not normal
that, for instance, health insurance companies — some of them privately owned —
generate profit. Clearly, their revenues are not generated from business activities
but rather from the collection of health insurance contributions, that is, from public
resources.

106. On 3 January 2007, Mr Valentovié replied to Eureko’s letter of 24 November 2006 as

follows (the “January 2007 Letter”):**

Dear Mr van Duin,

Allow me to thank you for your letter of November 28, 2006, referring to our
discussion about the development on the health insurance market.

As regards to the other part of your letter about the proposals discussed in a
parliamentary committee, I would like to inform you that up to now the Ministry
of Health of the Slovak Republic did not present the final conception of state
insured persons in state-owned health insurance companies. Currently, there are
some problem solving proposals being discussed and the final resolution has not
yet been adopted. I would like to assure you that the procedure of the Ministry of
Health of the Slovak Republic will be in compliance with the Slovak legal system
and in accordance with the EU regulations and bilateral treaties between the
Slovak Republic and the Netherlands. The Ministry of Health of the Slovak
Republic will adopt the optimal alternative to the benefit of the citizens of
Slovakia.

Yours sincerely,

Ivan Valentovié

107. On 23 May 2007, Mr Valentovié made the following statements in a press

conference:

Therefore the Government instructed the Minister of Health to present a draft law
that would prohibit generation of profit from public health insurance and guarantee

Exhibit C-24.
Exhibit C-27.
Exhibit C-33.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

that the funds coming from the public health insurance will be managed only by
health insurance companies.

L.-J

The Government’s vision is to have “non-commercial”, i.e. not profit-oriented,
public health insurance companies and this differs substantially from the situation
in the past.

L.-J

[. . .] could one say that these steps will later, through legislative restrictions, result
in the same scenario, i.e. that there will be only one insurance company?

L.-J

I clearly said we have found the other way how to achieve the goal of having one
public health insurance company that provides public health insurance.

108. On 26 May 2007, Prime Minister Fico made the following statement during a radio

interview:”

We would like to gradually achieve a situation with one health insurance company
in such a way that we will create such conditions in public health insurance which
will not be interesting for private health insurance companies.

L.-J

We want that public health insurance — it means the basic one — will cover the
standard care, which much be given free of charge to everybody, no matter what
are his possibilities. If somebody wants a luxury, he should pay for it in a private
health insurance company. We want to squeeze out private health insurance
companies from this space, but we want to squeeze them out in a way, which is not
contestable, both from the legal point of [view], and from international — legal
point of [view], or political or other point of view.

109. Also on 26 May 2007 Prime Minister Fico made the following statement during a

second radio interview:*!

L.-J

We had to take a serious note of rather significant legal objections, which referred
to potential impacts of the use of constitutional concepts that the Minister of
Health considered to use, in his projects, against private health insurance
companies. So we have subscribed to a view that we want to gradually get to a
single health insurance company, but this by creating conditions in public health
insurance that will not be interesting for private health insurance companies, this is
our underlying philosophy. We are still against private health insurance companies
getting rich on public health insurance. It is not possible that someone has a
portfolio of clients, cuts 700 million crowns from that money in profit, plus has a

50 Exhibit C-28.

Exhibit C-29.

110.

111.

112.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

4% as administration fund which covers expensive cars, personal assistants,
comfortable office buildings and pretends to make business in this field.

L.-J

Let’s imagine now something like a basic mandatory [liability] insurance covering
cars, and also you have say accident insurance which I may take on of my free will
just for the case that I will have a crash and chop up my car. We want that public
health insurance, meaning basic insurance, covers the normal standard [of care],
that what everyone must get for free in healthcare system, irrespective of his or her
means. If anyone wants to enjoy luxury, excessive luxury, he may pay for it in a
private health insurance company. This is the same road we wanna [go], I'll tell it
in good Slovak [in plain words], may I? We want to drive out private health
insurance companies from this area but we want to do that taking such steps that
cannot be contested legally, nor from the perspective of international law, nor
politically, nor otherwise. Moreover, what’s interesting that as long as we have not
debated health insurance companies, all attacked us that healthcare and problem
and I-don’t-know what else [sic]. As soon as we have opened the issue of a single
health insurance company, the whole opposition got hooked on that moment and
started to defend private health insurance companies [. . .]

On 28 May 2007, Prime Minister Fico was quoted in the press as having stated that
“[t]he Government will drive the four private health insurance companies out of the

9952
market.””

On 13 June 2008, Prime Minister Fico was quoted by the Slovak Press Agency SITA as
having made the following statements:**
What is the lost profit? [. . .] We will never let them profit from the money that
people compulsorily send into the system.
L.-J

We refuse to let plain market business principles to dominate the Slovak health
care market, we view it as a public service.

L.-J

We still insist that the private health insurance companies cannot cut money from
the public health insurance, it is unacceptable for us and we will fight with all our
might to prove that the law is in line with the constitution.

Eureko’s Response to the 2007 Reforms

Eureko remained active in the Slovak Republic following the 2007 Reforms, but took a
number of steps in response. Most significant in the present context was its decision to

go into “hibernation” (its phrase); that is, to stop trying to expand its business and to

Exhibit C-31
Exhibit C-36.

113.

114.

115.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

accommodate only its existing clients. Claimant says that this strategy delayed its
planned growth and caused it financial loss. The hibernation strategy is described

below.

Claimant also took other steps. On 28 February 2008, Eureko filed a complaint with
the European Commission. According to Eureko, this filing was made in order to
impress upon the Slovak Government Eureko’s view that its policies were not in line
with basic EU law principles that had been a cornerstone of Eureko’s confidence in
deciding to invest in the Slovak Republic. The complaint led to the opening of an
infringement procedure by the European Commission against the Slovak Republic

under Article 226 of the EC Treaty.

Noting that Eureko’s influence on the progress and direction of this complaint
procedure is “limited,” that “ancillary proceedings in the European Court of Justice can
by their very nature not result in a damages award,” and that Eureko’s damages “cannot
be redressed through other EU-channels,” Claimant explained that it was forced to turn
to arbitration to seek redress.°° On 4 March 2008, Eureko sent to the Prime Minister of
the Slovak Republic a “trigger letter” setting out its grievances with respect to the
reforms to the health insurance sector and formally notifying its intention to commence
arbitration proceedings under the BIT. After attempts at amicable settlement failed,
Eureko formally commenced this arbitration by a Notice of Arbitration dated

1 October 2008.°”

Judicial Challenges to the 2007 Reforms

On 25 June 2008, 52 members of the Slovak Parliament lodged a petition with the
Slovak Constitutional Court pursuant to Article 125(1)(a) of the Constitution of the
Slovak Republic, challenging the compliance of the ban on profits with the Slovak

Constitution, the European Convention on Human Rights, and the Treaty Establishing

See below, paragraph 296 et seq.
Article 226 TEC provides that: “If the Commission considers that a Member State has failed to fulfil an obligation
under the Treaties, it shall deliver a reasoned opinion on the matter after giving the State concerned the opportunity
to submit its observations. If the State concerned does not comply with the opinion within the period laid down by
the Commission, the latter may bring the matter before the Court of Justice of the European Union.” That provision
is now Article 258 TFEU. The complaint procedure was registered under reference number 2008/4268.

Claimant's Statement of Claim, {{f1.17; Exhibit R-45.

Notice of Arbitration, Annex 1; Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {{]1.8-14.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

the European Community.** On 26 January 2011, the Constitutional Court adjudged
that the ban on profits violated Articles 1(1), 20(1), and 35(1) of the Slovak

Constitution, in relevant part, as follows:*?

The Constitutional Court, basing itself on legal considerations and conclusions
stated in the preceding parts of this Ruling, submits that the following occurred as
the consequence of Section 15(6) of the Health Insurance Companies Act:

(a) Material restriction of ownership rights of private (non-State owned) health
insurance companies having the nature of forced restriction of the ownership right
of those health insurance companies and/or their shareholders in the form of
material restriction of the possibility to dispose of their own shares as property
value which are integral part of their ownership right. Concurrently, material
modification of the contents of their licences for performance of the public health
insurance business occurred, while legislative intervention is concerned here
having a material impact on their legitimate expectations associated with the
exercise of their property rights. At the same time, the legislator intervened in the
property rights of private health insurance companies without providing/ensuring
adequate compensation, while legal regulation is concerned having also the nature
of non-genuine retroactivity which, given the circumstance in which it has been
passed, the Constitutional Court does not deem necessary in terms of the objective
pursued by the legislator and which is, in terms of its consequences, clearly
disproportionate to the restriction of rights of the health insurance companies and
their shareholders under Article 20(1) of the Constitution and Article 1 of the
Additional Protocol.

(b) Unconstitutional intervention in the fundamental right of private (non-State
owned) health insurance companies to carry out business under Article 35(1) of
the Constitution in the area of public health insurance occurred, such right having
been conferred on them in the original wording of the Health Insurance Companies
Act, and this was corroborated — until the effective date of the amendment to the
Health Insurance Companies Act through Act No. 530/2007 Coll. — also by the
procedure for application of the amendment, namely by deprivation of the
possibility to decide autonomously on the manner of application of the profit
earned in the area of public health insurance, while legislative measure of the
nature of non-genuine retroactivity is concerned not respecting the essence and
sense of the fundamental right under Section 35(1) of the Constitution and which,
at the same time, was not necessary in terms of the objective pursued by the
legislator and being, in terms of its consequences, clearly disproportionate with
respect to the legitimate interests and legally/validly acquired rights of private
(non-State owned) health insurance companies and their shareholders.

(c) Occurrence of a constitutionally impermissible intervention in the general
principle of State governed by law as expressed in Article 1(1) of the Constitution,
including both the legal certainty principle and proportionality principle.

[1

Exhibit C-75.

The judgment of the Court is Exhibit C-135, translated as Exhibit C-149. Cf., Part VI (“Conclusions”) of the
Judgment and the Court’s Press Communique No. 2/2011, Exhibit C-143.

116.

G.

117.

118.

119.

60

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

In essence, the Constitutional Court ruled that the ban on profits was an impermissible
interference with the private health insurance companies’ right of ownership and
freedom to do business. Accordingly, the ban on profits ceased to have legal effect

following the Court’s decision.”

Political Developments in the Slovak Republic

On 12 June 2010, parliamentary elections resulted in a change in the Government of the
Slovak Republic and the election of a new coalition headed by the new Prime Minister,
Ms Iveta Radiéova. Ms Radicova and other key members of her government were
amongst those Members of Parliament who had brought the constitutional challenge to

the ban on profits in June 2008.°!

The Program Theses of the new government, released on 23 June 2010, announced the
Government’s intention to reverse several elements of the 2007 Reforms in the

following terms:

L.-J

We will restore the possibility to create profit for health insurance companies
under strictly defined conditions in a way which would not worsen the position of
the state in ongoing litigations on investment protection.

L.-J

We will consider increasing of the percent of premium which will not be subject to
redistribution.

L.-J

We will restore independency of UDZS [the Health Care Authority]

L.-J

We will resolve the minimal network of specialised out patients healthcare and
inpatient healthcare (re-evaluation of healthcare network and restructuring of
network of providers).

Thereafter, the Government of Prime Minister Radi¢ova began to implement its

proposed changes, passing legislation on 28 December 2010 to restore the

According to Respondent, the decision took effect upon publication of the judgment on 24 March 2011, pursuant to
the Slovak Constitution (see Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (8). According to Claimant there is a
six-month delay from the date of publication of the judgment (unless rectifying legislation is introduced earlier) (see
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {64 ).

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 131-34.

Exhibit C-124.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

independence of the Healthcare Authority. On 22 March 2011, the Government
issued for public comment a draft law amending Act No. 581/2004 in relation to
operational expenses, financial reserves, and network requirements. This new
legislation on health insurance was adopted on 8 July 2011 and entered force on
1 August 201 1, and provided as follows:

(a) health insurers were permitted to earn profits, subject to the creation and

maintenance of a reserve fund to ensure the provision of healthcare to
individuals on waiting lists;°°

(b) the network requirements were amended to require that each insurer
“conclude an agreement on the provision of health care in each district of
the Slovak Republic within the fixed network,” rather than with one
provider in each group of districts;

(c) the Health Care Authority was empowered to monitor diagnoses and costs
in assessing redistribution rates;°°

(d) the cap on operating expenses was amended to allow smaller insurers to
spend a higher percentage of revenue on operating expenses;

(e) _ the ban on brokers remained in place;”°

(f) the possibility to transfer an insurance portfolio for value was restored, but
insured individuals were given the opportunity to opt out of such a transfer
or to select a different insurer;”!

(g) _ the scrutiny of the budgets of health insurers was removed;” and

(h) _ the solvency requirements were adjusted.”

120. On 11 October 2011, the Government of Prime Minister Radiéova fell; and in elections
held on 10 March 2012, Mr Robert Fico was re-elected as Prime Minister, assuming

office on 4 April 2012.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, (21
“ Exhibit C-137

Claimant's Damages Memorial, {II1.9; Respondent's Damages Memorial, 7.

66 Respondent's Damages Memorial, Annex A-9, (5-7.
ov Respondent's Damages Memorial, Annex A-9, 9.

6s Respondent's Damages Memorial, Annex A-9, (11.
«9

Respondent's Damages Memorial, Annex A-9, 14.

Respondent’s Damages Memorial, Annex A-9, (16.

  
 
 

Respondent’s Damages Memorial, Annex A-9, (20.

Respondent’s Damages Memorial, Annex A-9, (22.

Respondent's Damages Memorial, Annex A-9, 25.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Iv. AN OVERVIEW OF THE PARTIES’ PRINCIPAL SUBMISSIONS

121. The Tribunal has considered in full the submissions made by the Parties in their written
pleadings and oral arguments. The Tribunal has summarised most of those submissions
below; and all of the points made by the Parties have been taken into account by the
Tribunal, even though not here expressly summarised and although it is not necessary
to address and decide in turn each and every one of those submissions and observations

for the purpose of this Award.

122. Before turning to the specifics of the Parties’ arguments, the Tribunal recalls that the
Parties were requested to file brief summaries of their main submissions prior to the
hearing on the merits, and each did so on 9 December 2011. It is helpful to set them

out here as points of reference for the following analysis:
123. Claimant’s Summary reads as follows:

1 Respondent breached the BIT

1.1 Respondent breached Article 3(1) of the BIT: It denied Eureko’s investment
fair and equitable treatment by fundamentally altering the legal and business
framework after Eureko had invested, and by taking measures with the ulterior
and bad faith aim of eliminating privately-owned health insurers from the
market.

1.2 Respondent breached Article 3(1) of the BIT: It impaired Eureko’s
investment by unreasonable and discriminatory measures including the cap on
operating expenses, the Ban on Brokers, the Ban on Profits, an increase in the
redistribution rate and EUR 65M in state-aid for VZP, all of which favoured
the dominant and incumbent state-owned insurers to the detriment of Eureko’s
much smaller and newly-entering investment, Union Health.

1.3 Respondent breached Article 3(2) of the BIT: It denied Eureko’s investment
full security and protection by bringing the powerful Health Care Authority
under political control, by publicly harassing Eureko’s investment, by
enacting unreasonable and unpredictable solvency requirements and by
directing Eureko’s investment to provide its budget to the state for
“deliberation”.

1.4 Respondent breached Article 4 of the BIT: It denied Eureko’s investment the
free transfer of profits and dividends through the Ban on Profits.

1.5 Respondent breached Article 5 of the BIT: It expropriated Eureko’s
investment in 2007 through the Ban on Profits, the ban on portfolio transfer
against value, and/or the collective measures comprising the 2007 Reversal,
with the admitted intent to “drive out” privately-owned health insurers from
the Slovak market.

1.6 Eureko has been invited to invest in the Slovak Republic by the Slovak
Minister of Health in 2004, and has received specific assurances by the Slovak
Minister of Health in January 2007 that its investment would be treated in
accordance with the BIT.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

2 Respondent’s liability is an admitted fact

Nv

Members of Respondent’s present government asserted in a Constitutional
Court petition that the Ban on Profits deprived Eureko of a fundamental
property right, interfered with Eureko’s legitimate expectations, constitutes
expropriation and forms part of a scheme to drive privately-owned insurers
out. In this assertion, these members of the present government were
supported by a large number of other members of parliament.

2.

iy

Respondent’s Constitutional Court has found that the Ban on Profits forcibly
restricted the ownership rights of privately-owned health insurance
companies, that the legitimate expectations of their shareholders had been
breached, that in interfering with the ownership rights of privately-owned
health insurers no compensation had been provided, and that the interference
violated provisions protecting against expropriation in the Slovak Constitution
and the ECHR.

2.

io

Slovak state advisory bodies have warned the Slovak government not to enact
the 2007 Reversal because it breaches Slovak law, international law and the
BIT.

2.

BR

Respondent’s government acknowledged that the 2007 Reversal was not
necessary from a policy perspective by reversing part of the measures.

3 _Eureko is entitled to damages and further relief

»

Eureko suffered damages as a consequence of the enactment of the 2007
Reversal, as set out in the expert report of Ernst & Young.

124. Respondent’s Summary reads as follows:

Part A The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to rule on the dispute

1. The BIT is not applicable due to EU law (part D.1 Statement of Defence, part
D.2 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part H Rejoinder on Merits)

(a) The BIT provisions are not applicable due to supremacy, direct effect and
direct applicability of EU law (part D.2 Counter-Memorial on the Merits)
(b) The alleged discrimination with respect to preferential treatment of VZP
is also governed by EU law (part E.2 Counter-Memorial on the Merits)
2. The Claimant’s investment is not protected by the BIT (ratione materiae
objection)

(a) Claimant’s investment into the portfolio of Union Healthcare is not
protected by the BIT, as it has been established contrary to Slovak law
(part E.1 Counter- Memorial on the Merits, part I Rejoinder on Merits)

(b) Future investments, which are only planned but were not conducted, are
not protected by the BIT (paragraph 39 Rejoinder on Merits)
Part B The Respondent has not breached any of its obligations under the BIT
3. The 2006 Stabilisation was adopted within the regulatory powers of the
Respondent and thus it is not compensable (part B.4 Statement of Defence,
part D.4.1 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part D Rejoinder on Merits)

(a) The health insurance system holds public character consistently (part
C.3.1 Counter-Memorial on the Merits)

(b) The 2004 Acts were economically and factually incorrect in some aspects
(part C.4 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part B.4 Rejoinder on Merits)

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

(c) The 2006 Stabilisation was adopted to remove risks brought by the 2004
Acts (part C.5.2 Counter-Memorial on the Merits)

(d) The 2006 Stabilisation pursued the public interest and proportionate to
the public interest it pursues (part D.4.1.2 and D.4.1.5 Counter-Memorial
on the Merits, part D.3 and D.6 Rejoinder on Merits)

(e) The 2006 Stabilisation was non-discriminatory and within due process
without any promise to the Claimant that it will not be adopted (part
D.4.1.2 and D.4.1.3 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part D.4 Rejoinder
on Merits)

The ruling of the Constitutional Court with respect to the Profit Provision

does not establish international responsibility of the Respondent (part A.2

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part D.6.3 Rejoinder on Merits)

(a) The Constitutional Court did not consider any individual circumstances
of the present dispute.

(b) The Constitutional Court did not analyse the Profit Provision pursuant to
the standards of protection under the BIT.

(c) Any possible breach of national law does not automatically imply a
breach of any of the international obligations of the Respondent.

(d

The Profit Provision was effective only for two years (the Constitutional
Court assessed constitutionality of a valid and effective Profit Provision
whereas the Tribunal assesses, if two years of effectiveness of the Profit
Provision breached the BIT).

There has been no deprivation or expropriation of an investment of the
Claimant in the Slovak Republic (part C.1.1 Statement of Defence, part D.4.2
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part C Rejoinder on Merits)

(a) The Claimant’s investment has not been effectively neutralized by none
of the contested provisions (part D.4.2.2 Counter-Memorial on the
Merits)

(b) There was no loss of control with respect to the Claimant’s investment
(part C.1 Rejoinder on Merits)

(c) The Profit Provision was applicable only temporarily (part C.2 Rejoinder
on Merits)

The standard of fair and equitable treatment has not been breached (part C.1.2
Statement of Defence, part D.4.3 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part E
Rejoinder on Merits)

(a) The 2006 Stabilisation was adopted in good faith and in public interest
(part D.4.3.2 Counter-Memorial on the Merits)

(b) The 2006 Stabilisation was in compliance with the non-impairment
standard, i.e. non-discriminatory and reasonable (part D.4.3.4 Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, part F.2 Rejoinder on Merits)

The Claimant could not legitimately expect that the 2004 Acts would remain
unchanged (part D.4.3.1 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part E.2 and E.3
Rejoinder on Merits)

(a) The 2004 Acts were highly unpopular and were rejected both by
professionals and the general public (part B.2 Statement of Defence, part
C.5.1 Counter- Memorial on the Merits)

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

(b) The 2004 Acts were subject to the complaint submitted to the
Constitutional Court.

(c) The Claimant incorporated Union Healthcare one month after the early
elections were declared, where election polls indicated that the parties
opposing the 2004 Acts were gaining popularity (part B.3 Statement of
Defence, part C.5.3.3 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part E.2.1
Rejoinder on Merits)

(d

Circumstances surrounding the Claimant’s entrance into the health
insurance sector clearly suggested adoption of the 2006 Stabilisation
(part C.5.3 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part E.2.2 Rejoinder on
Merits)

8. The standard of full security and protection has not been breached (part C.1.3
Statement of Defence, part D.4.4 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, part F.1
Rejoinder on Merits)

9. The Claimant did not face any limitations as regards transfer of payments
(part C.1.4 Statement of Defence, part D.4.5 Counter-Memorial on the Merits,
part F.3 Rejoinder on Merits)

Part C The Claimant did not suffer any damage due to the 2006 Stabilisation

(none of its provisions)

10. The Claimant did not bear its burden of allegation and burden of proof with
respect to the alleged hibernation (part B Counter-Memorial on Damages)

(a) The Claimant’s allegations regarding the hibernation are inconsistent and
insufficient (part B.2 Counter-Memorial on Damages)

(b) The hibernation did not occur (part B.2.2 Counter-Memorial on
Damages)

11. There is no causal link between the alleged breach of the BIT and the alleged
damage (part C Counter-Memorial on Damages)

(a) The alleged hibernation was not caused by the 2006 Stabilisation (part
C.1 Counter-Memorial on Damages)

(b

The alleged hibernation did not cause any damage to the Claimant (part
C.2 Counter-Memorial on Damages)

(c) There is no sufficient causal link between the contested provisions of the
2006 Stabilisation, the breach of the duties by the Respondent through
these provisions and the Claimant’s alleged damage (part C.3 Counter-
Memorial on Damages)

12. The alleged damage could not occur if the Claimant had not breached the
Slovak law (part C.4 Counter-Memorial on Damages)

Part D The Claimant’s calculation of damages is flawed (Part D Counter-

Memorial on Damages)

13. Union Healthcare has insufficient track record for the use of DDM (DCF)
method (part D.1.1 Counter-Memorial on Damages)

14. The profitability of the Claimant’s investment is highly speculative (part
D.1.2 Counter-Memorial on Damages)

15. The tribunals do not award damages in the cases where the claims are highly
speculative or the track record is missing (part D.1 Counter-Memorial on
Damages)

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

16. The assumptions underlying Mr Indge’s expert report are wrong (part C.2
Counter-Memorial on Damages

17. Any potential damage is nil (part D.2 Counter-Memorial on Damages)”

125. These summaries are intended to give, for the purpose of this Award, a fair overview of

Vv.

the arguments raised in the Parties’ respective written pleadings and at the hearings,

and of the main areas of disagreement.

THE PARTIES’ FORMAL REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

Claimant’s Request for Relief

126. In its Notice of Arbitration, Claimant made the following request:”4

In this arbitration, Eureko primarily requests:

@

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

the payment by the Slovak Republic of an amount in excess of
€ 100 million, which amount will be specified and substantiated in the
course of the arbitral proceedings, in compensation for damages suffered
and to be suffered by Eureko as a result of the Slovak Republic’s breach
of the BIT;

the payment by the Slovak Republic of all costs incurred by Eureko
associated with these proceedings, including but not limited to the costs
and expenses of the arbitral tribunal, all professional fees and
disbursements of Eureko’s counsel, witnesses and experts;

Pre-award and post-award interest at a rate to be determined by the
arbitral tribunal;

A declaration to the effect that the Slovak Republic has breached and
continued to breach its obligations under the BIT, in particular articles 3,
4 and 5 thereof;

An order from the arbitral tribunal to the Slovak Republic to comply
with its obligations under the BIT, in particular articles 3, 4 and 5
thereof, subject to a financial penalty for non compliance with the said
order to be determined by the arbitral tribunal; and

Such further relief that the arbitral tribunal may deem appropriate.

127. In its Statement of Claim, Memorial on the Merits, and Reply on Merits, Claimant

makes the following request:”>

Eureko requests the Arbitral Tribunal to render a final arbitral award in which the
Slovak Republic is ordered to pay to Eureko:

@

an amount of damages that is to be fully specified and supported in the
quantum phase of these proceedings;

Notice of Arbitration, (10.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {VI.2; see also Claimant's Memorial on the Merits, (342; Claimant's Reply on

Merits, 1277.

40

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

(ii) applicable interest on such damages; and

(iii) all costs of the arbitral proceedings, including but not limited to the costs
and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and Eureko’s costs of legal
assistance, costs of other expertise and expenses.

subsequent to the completion of the second, i.e. damages, phase of these
proceedings.

128. In its Post-Hearing Brief, Claimant makes the following request:”°

Eureko maintains its request for relief set out in § 10 of the Notice of Arbitration
and §§ VI.1 and VI.2 of the Statement of Claim.

Respondent’s Request for Relief
129. In its Statement of Defence, Respondent makes the following request:””

The Slovak Republic requests that the Tribunal:
(a) _ find that it lacks jurisdiction to hear this dispute;

(b) issue a final award dismissing the Claimant’s claim for lack of
jurisdiction;

(c) award the Slovak Republic reimbursement of its full costs, expenses and
attorneys’ fees to defend this proceeding.

130. In its Counter-Memorial, Respondent makes the following request:”*

The Slovak Republic respectfully request that this Tribunal: (a) decline jurisdiction
of this dispute on the grounds of the objections ratione materiae submitted in the
Counter-Memorial; or, alternatively, (b) reject the Claimant’s claims in their
entirety and with prejudice; and (c) order the Claimant to pay the costs of this
arbitration, including the Respondent’s legal representatives’ fees and expenses,
expert fees and expenses, and fees and expenses of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration and Tribunal Members.

VI. THE TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION

A. The Parties’ Arguments on Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae
Respondent’s Position

131. The Slovak Republic, in accordance with Article 21(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules, raised
an objection in its Statement of Defence to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae

over this dispute. It stated that it would challenge Eureko’s assertions of “the existence

Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, {93
Respondent’s Statement of Defence, {[129.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial, 673. See also Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {[75-76.

41

132.

133.

134.

135.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012
of a bona fide investment.” Respondent proceeded to seek relevant documents from
Claimant in this respect in February and March of 2010. After consultations with the
Parties, the Tribunal decided on 8 April 2010 to defer questions of the jurisdiction
ratione materiae challenge to the merits phase of the case, if the case were to proceed

that far.

Respondent develops this jurisdictional objection further in its Counter-Memorial on
the Merits. Respondent recalls that the alleged investment made by Claimant relates
not only to the ownership of its subsidiary, Union Healthcare, but also, according to
Claimant’s own statements, to Union Healthcare’s portfolio. Claimant considers this

portfolio as its “most precious asset.”*°

Respondent contends that this health insurance portfolio cannot be considered as an
“asset” within the sense of Article 1(a) of the BIT.*! According to Respondent:*”
the insurance portfolio is not capable of being the subject of ownership under
Slovak law since a health insurance provider (i) may not dispose of the insured;
(ii) may not decide if it accepts a particular insured or not; (iii) may not withdraw

from a relationship with the insured; (iv) may not decide the amount and due dates
of the health insurance levies; and (v) may not force the insured to leave.

In Respondent’s view, because the health insurance portfolio represents a mere
collection of applications for public health insurance whose composition is mandated

by law, it cannot be protected by the BIT.

Respondent also contends, that even if the Tribunal finds that an investment has been
made, Article 8(6) of the BIT as well as international arbitral practice require that an
investment has been made “in accordance with” the laws of the host State.“
Respondent alleges that Claimant has breached three provisions of Slovak law in

making its investment, and cannot now invoke the protections of the BiT:*

(a) The Claimant, when establishing Union Healthcare’s portfolio by means
of recruiting brokers and other intermediary companies, was in breach of
its duty not to provide false or misleading information, and harmed the
legitimate rights of the insured.

Respondent’s Statement of Defence, 117.

Memorial on the Merits, (41, quoted in Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[633, 657.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (634.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (520.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {635.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, [636.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4638 [footnotes omitted].

42

136.

137.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

(b) The Claimant, by its aggressive campaign aiming at the acquisition of
new insured, harmed the legitimate rights of the other health insurers and
was in breach of the rules on fair competition.

(c) The Claimant, when recruiting brokers and other intermediary companies
for the acquisition of the insured breached the rules on public
procurement, as Union Healthcare is a legal entity pursuing a public
function.

Respondent first alleges that Claimant disseminated incorrect and misleading
information to beneficiaries, bribed prospective beneficiaries and benefited from illegal
advantages in contravention of Act No. 581/2004 Coll., an Act making it illegal to use
“untrue or misleading information, conceal important facts and offer advantages that
cannot be assured, when promoting its activity.”*° Respondent contends that in 2006,
5,782 complaints were filed against Union Healthcare in connection with beneficiaries
who claimed that Union Healthcare had conducted an “unauthorised” transfer of health
insurers or that it had offered “false or misleading information.” Respondent submits
that 69 percent of these complaints were justified and that in connection with
Claimant’s breach of Section 6(13) of Act No. 581/2004 Coll., Claimant was fined
SKK 3,000,000.*”

Respondent argues next that by providing both directly, and through its brokers,
“misleading information about itself and other health insurance companies” to
beneficiaries, Claimant violated the Slovak Republic’s competition law, which
prohibits health insurance companies from breaching the standards of “economic

competition.”**

As a consequence, according to Respondent, two privately owned
insurance companies filed complaints against Union Healthcare, which Claimant
settled. Respondent argues that the fact that Claimant concluded a settlement with the
companies reveals that it “admitted” its breaches of Slovak law.” Respondent observes
that it “can hardly imagine any other reason” why Claimant would have concluded the
settlement and notes that Claimant declined the opportunity to provide the terms of the

settlement agreement during document production.”

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 641, Exhibit R-71: Section 6(13) of Act No. 581/2004 Coll.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {642.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {]646-648; Exhibit R-79: Section 41 of Act No. 513/1991 Coll., Commercial Code.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (1649-650.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 4220.

43

138.

139.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Finally, Respondent submits that Claimant violated Respondent’s mandatory
procurement laws.”! According to Respondent, all public entities are required to
undergo the public procurement process for purchases exceeding a certain value.
Respondent submits that Claimant breached this obligation by concluding contracts with
brokers in excess of that value.” In doing so, Respondent argues that Claimant was able
to use brokers’ services to attract more beneficiaries than it could have legally obtained

had it participated in the procurement process which typically takes eight months.”

Respondent concludes that because Claimant’s investment has not been made in
accordance with Slovak law or the principle of good faith, the Tribunal should not hear

the dispute.”

Claimant’s Position

140.

141.

Claimant argues that its insurance portfolio is a proper object of ownership and
protection under the BIT, to which it “legitimately acquired” rights.”° Claimant recalls
that the explanatory note to Act 581/2004, upon which Claimant relied in making its
investment, stipulated that investors could hold ownership rights in their portfolios: %6
Given that health insurance companies are players in the insurance market, it is
possible that insurance portfolio, as a set of executed and valid insurance
contracts/policies will be the subject of trading between health insurance companies.
Claimant further points out that the Slovak Constitutional Court has recently reaffirmed

that an investment portfolio may be owned by an investor.”

Claimant argues that it can additionally justify its reasoning that the insurance portfolio
is an asset capable of private ownership, by reference to the letter dated 23 November
2009 from the European Commission, in which the EC concluded that the ban on
transfer of the insurance portfolios “constitutes a breach of the freedom of

establishment guaranteed by Article 43 Ec.”*8

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {[652-657; Exhibit R-165: Section 9(1) of Act No. 25/2006 Coll., Public Procurement
Act.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {655.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {656;

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, [662.

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, {{[76, 258.

Exhibit C-19, cited in Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, (79.

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, (78; Exhibit C-135, Exhibit C-136, Exhibit C-143.
Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, (80; Exhibit C-131.

44

142.

143.

144.

145.

100

101

102

103

104

los

106

107

E-SR Final Award

7 December 2012
Claimant denies that it has offered incorrect and misleading information to prospective
beneficiaries.” First, Claimant points out that even if all 5,782 complaints against it
were legitimate, this figure amounts to a marginal percentage, of only 1.25 percent, of
Claimant’s total portfolio which is comprised of 462,169 beneficiaries. In addition,
Claimant contends that its application process rigorously screened for irregularities and
that any beneficiary, who complained of the transfer or established that he or she had
not applied to join Union, would have had his or her previous insurance restored.!°
Claimant further points out that although it was fined in the amount that Respondent
contends, the Slovak Supreme Court has recently overturned the imposed fine.'!

Claimant also denies that it has violated any competition laws in the Slovak

2

Republic.'° According to Claimant, the settlement with its competitors does not,

contrary to Respondent’s allegation, “include or imply any admission of liability on the

part of either Dévera or Union.”!

Claimant also refutes Respondent’s contention that it has violated any laws in its use of
brokers. Claimant submits that it had instructed all of its brokers on applicable Slovak
law and supplied them with a standard broker’s contract that it submitted to the
Tribunal and Respondent as an exhibit during the document production phase of these

«104
proceedings.

In any case, Eureko argues that it is the establishment of an investment and not its
performance that is relevant for assessing whether it is in compliance with the law of
the host state and the BIT.' Claimant submits that its investment was established in
accordance with the laws of the Slovak Republic, a fact that it claims Respondent has
not disputed.' According to Claimant, the fact that it has a license to operate a health
insurance company in the Slovak Republic, which the Slovak Republic has never

challenged,'”” indicates the Slovak Republic’s acceptance of its investment.'°*

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, ({[121-126.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 123.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 4270, Exhibit C-135, Exhibit C-136, Exhibit C-143, Exhibit C-144.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 125.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 126.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 1125; Exhibit C-147.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 4256-269.

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, (259.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 4265.

45

146.

B.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Consequently, Claimant contends that even if any of the allegations advanced by
Respondent are true, they would not result in Claimant’s loss of protection under the

BIT.”

Even if the Tribunal were to decide that it needs to determine whether the performance
of the investment has been legal, Claimant points out that: (i) only breaches of
fundamental norms of a legal order, and not minor infractions, may have the effect of
depriving the Tribunal of jurisdiction; (ii) none of the allegations have caused the
Slovak authorities to challenge Union’s legality or licence since 2006; (iii) the fine has
been overturned by the Supreme Court; (iv) any disputes between Union and other
private health insurers are irrelevant; (v) the procurement allegations are entirely
unsubstantiated and have never been investigated; (vi) in any event, all of the alleged
breaches of Slovak law are subject to a limitation period of three years which would

now have lapsed.! 10

The Parties’ Arguments on Jurisdiction and the Scope of Substantive EU Law

Respondent’s Position

147.

148.

Respondent raises a further objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction based on the
interaction of the BIT with the substantive provisions of EU law. Although Respondent
recognises that the Tribunal has ruled that the Slovak Republic’s accession to the EU
has not terminated the Treaty, Respondent submits that the Tribunal nevertheless lacks
jurisdiction as Articles 3, 4, and 5 of the BIT are inapplicable due to the supremacy of
EU law.'"!

Respondent bases this objection on the Tribunal’s statement, in its Award on
Jurisdiction, Arbitrability, and Suspension that “[t]he Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction to rule on alleged breaches of EU law as such.”!!? In Respondent’s view,

the Tribunal recognised that the substantive protections of EU law overlap significantly

 

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 260.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 262.

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, 4267-269.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (401.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (405, quoting Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability, and Suspension,
{290. (The full quotation, given that Eureko’s claims were and remain based on the BIT, reads materially as follows:
“On the other hand, the Tribunal notes that its jurisdiction is confined to ruling upon alleged breaches of the BIT.
The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to rule upon alleged breaches of EU law as such ...”)

   

46

149.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

with the protections offered by the BIT, that EU principles (including supremacy) apply
where EU law is involved, and that the Tribunal is only entitled under the doctrine of
acte clair to apply EU law where the application of such law is clear.''? The ECJ,
Respondent argues, has clearly ruled that the “[EEC] Treaty takes precedence over
agreements concluded between Member States before its entry into force.”!'* And the
application of the acte clair doctrine, Respondent submits, follows from the Tribunal’s
statements in its Award on Jurisdiction that it had the power to apply EU law, but not to

rule on breaches of EU law “as such.”!!°

With respect to specific provisions of the BIT, Respondent argues (i) that the provisions
on the free movement of capital are duplicated in EU law and the BIT, and the ECJ has
not ruled on whether restrictions on the distribution of profits from public health

insurance would breach EU law;'!¢

(ii) that the BIT’s protection of “assets and
investments” from expropriation overlaps with EU law’s narrower protection of
“possessions and property,” but that shares in a joint stock company fall within the
narrower category and are covered by EU law;'"” (iii) that the BIT’s provisions on fair
and equitable treatment are covered by the EU law concepts of free movement of
capital, non-discrimination, freedom of establishment, and protection of legitimate

: 118
expectations;

and (iv) that the BIT’s provision on “full protection and security is
partly afforded by provisions on the freedom of establishment under EU law." In
sum, Respondent submits that “the subject matter of the dispute is governed by
EU law,” which the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to invoke due to insufficient clarity as to

the manner of its application.'”°

Claimant’s Position

150.

Claimant submits that Respondent has mischaracterised the relationship between

EU law and the substantive provisions of the BIT; in Claimant’s view, the Tribunal

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 1406.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 208, quoting Annunziata Matteucci v. Communauté francaise of Belgium
and Commissariat général aux relations internationales of the Communauté francaise of Belgium (ECI, 235/87),
Judgement, 27 September 1988, 22.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 4210.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 409-10.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 411-14.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4415-20.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4422.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (399.

47

151.

14

Ls

126

27

128

129

E-SR Final Award

7 December 2012
retains jurisdiction to rule on claims brought pursuant to the BIT.”?! According to
Claimant, the issue is not whether EU law overlaps with the protections of the BIT, but
whether it is “incompatible” with the BIT under the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties.'?? Such “incompatibility arises only when one treaty prescribes or mandates
conduct that, if executed, breaches the terms of a second treaty”;!?? and “While EU law
is superior to national law,” Claimant notes, “it is not superior to other (instruments of)

international law.”!~*

Moreover, incompatibility as a matter of treaty law is only
relevant when it pertains to the actual circumstances of a dispute. According to
Claimant, “[t]he mere existence of a theoretical incompatibility that is unconnected to
the specific facts and circumstances at hand” will not prevent the applicability of both
treaties.'*° This stems from the basic principle that “‘states should honour their treaty

obligations to the largest extent possible.”!7°

In Claimant’s view, Respondent has not only failed to demonstrate actual
incompatibility between the BIT and provisions of EU law in the circumstances of this
case, but ignores the Tribunal’s decision in its Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and
Suspension that the protections of the BIT are not incompatible with EU law.'?”
Claimant further notes the Tribunal’s recognition that “[f]ar from being precluded from
considering EU law the Tribunal is bound to apply it to the extent that it is part of the

99128

applicable law(s) . . Respondent’s attempt to invoke the acte clair doctrine,

Claimant argues, is an inapposite attempt to apply a doctrine developed solely to
govern when national courts are required to refer questions of EU law to the ECJ, a

power not granted to arbitral tribunals in any event.'””

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, {{[173-75.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, ${1304-05.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, $310.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 178.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 9311.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, $312.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, {{[180-81.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 177, quoting Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension, 4281.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 185.

48

152.

153.

154.

155.

156.

157.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction

The Tribunal’s jurisdiction is based upon the BIT, namely the Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Republic, which was signed on 29 April 1991
and entered into force on 1 October 1992. It is common ground that the Slovak
Republic became a Party to that Treaty upon the dissolution of the Czech and Slovak
Federal Republic, in accordance with the joint declaration made by the Netherlands and
the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic, and that as a matter of international law

the Treaty was thereafter in force at all material times.

Respondent challenged the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on a number of grounds, set out
in its Statement of Defence dated 30 October 2009. In summary, the grounds were
(i) that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction over the dispute because of the dispute’s intra-
EU character, which rendered it subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the EU, and
(ii) that Eureko had not presented sufficient facts to establish that the Tribunal had

jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae.

The Tribunal dismissed the first, ‘intra-EU’, objection to jurisdiction in its Award on
Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension, dated 26 October 2010. That Award is final
and binding upon the Parties, in accordance with Article 32(2) of the UNCITRAL
Rules and the Jex loci arbitri. The Tribunal accordingly rejects Respondent’s

jurisdictional objection based on the applicability of EU law.

As to the second objection to jurisdiction, in its Statement of Defence, Respondent
disputed that Eureko had standing or has made an investment in the territory of the
Slovak Republic.'*° Provision was made in Procedural Order No. 2, dated 3 December
2009,'3' for the disclosure of documents relating to this jurisdictional objection.

Various documents were produced in accordance with these provisions.

In the telephone conference on 8 April 2010, Respondent confirmed that it had no

ratione personae jurisdictional objections.'*

Respondent’s ratione materiae objection has two elements. The first element relates to

the question of what may be counted as an investment. Respondent says that “The

Respondent's Statement of Defence, (4125, 126.
Procedural Order No. 2, 3.

Summary of Teleconference of 8 April 2010, 94.

49

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012
alleged investment made by the Claimant relates not only to the ownership of its
subsidiary, Union Healthcare, but also, according to Claimant’s own statements to

9133

Union Healthcare’s portfolio, and that “[T]he health insurance portfolio cannot be

considered as an “asset” in the sense of Article 1(a) of the Bit.”!*4

158. Article 1(a) of the Treaty defines “investments” as

159.

160.

every kind of asset invested either directly or indirectly through an investor of a
third State and more particularly, though not exclusively:

 

movable and immovable property and all related property rights;

ii. shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in companies and joint
ventures, as well as rights derived therefrom;

iii. title to money and other assets and to any performance having an
economic value;

iv. rights in the field of intellectual property, also including technical
processes, goodwill and know-how;

Vv. concessions conferred by law or under contract, including concessions to
prospect, explore, extract and win natural resources.

The Tribunal considers that Eureko clearly made an investment in the Slovak Republic
within the meaning of Article 1(a) of the Treaty. It did so by incorporating its
subsidiary company, Union Healthcare, in the Slovak Republic on 9 March 2006, in
which Eureko held, and still holds, 100% of the shares.'*> That is an investment within
the meaning of Article 1(a)(ii) of the Treaty. That shareholding (as well as rights
derived therefrom) is a sufficient basis for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae;
and it follows that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Article 8 of the Treaty exists in

respect of that shareholding.

Having determined that Eureko made an investment in the form of its shareholding in
Union Healthcare it is, strictly speaking, unnecessary to consider whether Union
Healthcare’s portfolio is in itself capable of constituting an “asset” for the purposes of
Article 1(a) of the Treaty. As Respondent explicitly recognised, the shares of Union
Healthcare were, at least from one perspective, a vehicle for the possession of the

insurance portfolio.'*° Whatever value the portfolio might have had will be taken into

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 633.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 634.
See paragraph 90 above.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 4214.

161.

162.

163.

164.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012
account by assessing the value of Union Healthcare, which was both the investment

made by Claimant and the addressee of the measures of which Claimant complains.

In any event, the insurance portfolio is an asset akin to goodwill, which is included in
the non-exclusive list of assets in Article 1(a)(iv) of the Treaty. Both goodwill and the
insurance portfolio are commercial assets that result from an investment in the
cultivation of the loyalty of a pool of customers; and the very fact of the adoption of the
ban on transfers indicates that as a matter of Slovak law an insurance portfolio could in

principle have been sold by one insurer to another. '*”

The second element of Respondent’s jurisdictional objection ratione materiae is the
argument that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the investment was made in
violation of the law of the Slovak Republic. More specifically, it says that Union

88 and that

Healthcare’s insurance portfolio was acquired in breach of Slovak law,
Claimant therefore cannot claim any breach of the Treaty that would relate to the
portfolio and is not entitled to any damages regarding the alleged value of the

portfolio. 19

Respondent says that in order to acquire a large client portfolio Union Healthcare
engaged in (i) the dissemination of incorrect and misleading information about other
health insurers; (ii) bribing the insured; (iii) offering illegal advantages in connection
with public health insurance, all contrary to Act No. 581/2004 Coll.'“° It cites in this
regard the imposition by the Slovak Republic’s Health Care Surveillance Authority of a

1

number of fines on Union Healthcare,'*! in connection with reported malpractice by

12 and the

brokers soliciting applications for insurance on behalf of Union Healthcare,
number of complaints received by the Heath Care Surveillance Authority concerning

Union Healthcare.'*

Respondent also says that Union Healthcare violated the rights of other, competing,

health insurers by unfair practices contrary to Section 41 of the Commercial Code, and

See paragraph 99 above.

 

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[636-664; Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 214-220.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 1640.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (642.

Certain fines were cancelled on appeal: see, e.g., the decision of the Supreme Court dated 8 December 2008, Exhibit
C144,

See Exhibits R-155, R-166, R-167, R-168, R-169.
Exhibit R-170; Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (643.

165.

166.

167.

168.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

in 2008 settled a legal action brought against it by other insurers.'“* And further, it says
that Union Healthcare failed to comply with the requirements of Slovak law concerning

public procurement.'*°

Respondent argues that the Treaty guarantees protection only to investments that are
made in accordance with the host State law. It cites Article 2 of the Treaty, which
provides that “Each Contracting Party shall in its territory promote investments by
investors of the other Contracting Party and shall admit such investments in accordance

with its provisions of law.”

The Tribunal construes this provision differently. Article 2 of the Treaty is concerned
with the duty of each State Party to promote inward investment, and to admit
investments in accordance with its law, where those investments are made by investors
of the other State Party. Article 2 does not purport to qualify the definition of an
investment. That definition is set out in Article 1(a) of the Treaty (set out in
paragraph 158, above) which, unlike provisions in certain other bilateral investment
treaties, does not contain a requirement that investments be made “in accordance with

the laws and regulations” of the host State.

Respondent has a further argument: that “extensive and uniform” international
arbitral practice establishes that “only investments made in full compliance with the
laws of the host State” and made in good faith benefit from protection under a BIT. 46

7

It cites the awards in Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. the Czech Republic,'* and Inceysa

Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador in support of its argument. '“

The Tribunal is not free to rewrite the Treaty: it must interpret and apply the text
adopted by the Parties; and it cannot decide their dispute as amiable compositeur or
ex aequo et bono (no such authority having been granted to the Tribunal under
Article 33(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules). The questions to be answered here are
(i) whether it is proper to read into the definition of an investment in Article 1(a) of the

Treaty a requirement that every investment within the meaning of the Treaty be made

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[646-650.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[652-657.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (637.

Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. the Czech Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, q§101, 106-107
(hereinafter “Phoenix Action’).

Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006, 230.

169.

170.

171.

172.

149

150

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

‘in accordance with the laws and regulations’ of the host State, or (ii) whether the
undoubted principle that the Treaty must be interpreted and applied in accordance with
the principle of good faith entails a similar conclusion. That is an exercise that is

governed by international law and the law of treaties.

The rules on treaty interpretation, set out in Articles 31-33 of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties,'”” are familiar. The basic rule is that the treaty shall be interpreted
in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the

treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.

The Treaty is intended, as its title and Preamble make clear, to record the agreement of
the Parties upon the encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments. The
definition of an investment in Article 1(a) does not expressly stipulate that the
investment must have been made in accordance with the laws of the host State in order
that the investment be protected by the Treaty. But in the view of the Tribunal, it is
wholly unreasonable to suppose that the Parties could have intended to protect
investments that violate, for example, a prohibition on foreign investment in a specified
sector of the economy. The terms of the Treaty could not be interpreted in good faith to

require such protection.

On the other hand, it is in the view of the Tribunal entirely reasonable to interpret the
terms of Article 1(a) without reading in a requirement that there must be no infraction
of the host State’s law in the course of the making of the investment, if the investment

is to be within the scope of the Treaty protection.

That distinction, between compliance with laws that limit the scope of permissible
investments and compliance with each and every law of the host State, appears to

underlie the decisions of other tribunals. In Phoenix Action the Tribunal said that:

If a State, for example, restricts foreign investment in a sector of its economy and a
foreign investor disregards such restriction, the investment concerned cannot be
protected under the ICSID/BIT system. These are illegal investments according to
the national law of the host State and cannot be protected through an ICSID
arbitral process. And it is the Tribunal’s view that this condition — the conformity
of the establishment of the investment with the national laws — is implicit even
when not expressly stated in the relevant BIT.

Both the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic were Parties to the Vienna Convention when the
Treaty was signed. The Slovak Republic subsequently succeeded to the Vienna Convention.

Phoenix Action, {101.

173.

174.

175.

176.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

That passage makes evident the focus of the Phoenix Action tribunal upon
circumstances in which foreign investment in a particular sector is prohibited or
restricted by the law of the host State. The illegality resulting from the violation of
some such prohibition or restriction cannot, however, be equated with the illegality that
is common to each and every violation of the host State’s law that may occur in the
context of the making of an investment. The (hypothetical) fact that a Union
Healthcare broker committed a road traffic offence while driving to a client would
clearly not render the investment “illegal” for the purposes of any implicit requirement
of legality, although (as already stated) violation of a prohibition on foreign investment

in a particular economic sector would do so.

Which side of the line are the violations that Union Healthcare was found or said to
have committed? There is no suggestion in the present case that it was unlawful per se
for Eureko to make an investment in the health insurance sector. Respondent’s point is
that some aspects of the specific manner in which the investment was made constituted
violations of Slovak law. While any violation of a State’s laws is a matter to be taken

seriously, not all violations have or should be given the same legal consequences.

The Tribunal observes that Respondent has fined Union Healthcare for the misconduct
of its brokers, that no action appears to have been taken in respect of the alleged breach
of the rules on public procurement, and that the legal claims of other insurers arising
from alleged violations of the fair competition rules were settled. More particularly,
Union Healthcare has since 2006 operated under a licence granted by Respondent, and
no attempt has been made to cancel or revoke that licence. It does not appear that the
authorities in the Slovak Republic have taken the view that the violations referred to or

alleged by Respondent (whose account is challenged by Claimant)'*!

are of such a kind,
or of such a degree of seriousness, as to require the cancellation or termination of the

investment.

A tribunal should be very slow indeed to decide that the interpretation in good faith of a
definition of an investment, particularly a definition that contains no express ‘in
accordance with the laws and regulations’ stipulation, requires that the making of the
investment must have involved no infraction (however peripheral or incidental) of the

host State’s law. The Tribunal finds no warrant for reading any such requirement into

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, {{[267-273.

177.

178.

179.

152

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Article 1(a). Further, the Tribunal does not consider that the violations of Slovak law
alleged in the present case are of a nature that fall into the same category as a violation
of a prohibition on foreign investment in a particular sector. The fact that the Slovak
Republic has not revoked Union Healthcare’s licence is, in the view of the Tribunal, a
highly significant indication that it regards the alleged violations as compatible with the
continued existence of the investment and also powerful confirmation that a good faith
interpretation of Article 1(a) of the Treaty does not require the exclusion of Claimant’s

investment from its scope.

The Tribunal accordingly rejects Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction because the investment was made in violation of the law of the Slovak
Republic. This conclusion goes to the question of the jurisdictional objection. The
present Tribunal is aware that in other cases tribunals have considered whether an
investment that satisfies the jurisdictional requirements ratione materiae of a BIT may
yet be denied protection under that BIT because, for example, the investor acted in bad
faith by resorting to fraud or corruption in order to make the investment. The
Tribunal has considered whether the established or alleged violations of Slovak law
similarly require the denial of protection to the investor under the Treaty, and it has
concluded that they do not. Appropriate remedial steps have been taken by
Respondent, according to its own laws, in respect of the violations; no violation of
fundamental principles of probity or public policy is alleged, such as exists in cases of
material corruption or deceit by an investor; and the Tribunal concludes that there is no

basis for the denial of the benefits of protection under the Treaty.

Respondent also argued that “future investments, which are only planned but were not
conducted, are not protected by the BIT.” It says that “the BIT does not protect
investments which never occurred, and much less still, the profits that these

hypothetical investments could have generated.'**

The Tribunal considers that this is a question of the existence or quantum of any
recoverable loss, rather than of jurisdiction. The question might typically arise in the
context of a claim for loss of expected profits; and in that context distinctions might
have to be drawn between a continuing investment in the planned development of an

World Duty Free v. Kenya, Award, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/7, 4 October 2006; Plama Consortium Limited v.
Bulgaria, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award, 27 August 2008.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 439.

180.

VIL.

181.

A.

=

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

existing project and an investment in a new and distinct project. But it is not necessary
to consider such questions in the present context, because the Tribunal has already
satisfied itself that it has jurisdiction on the basis of the investment made by Claimant.

It accordingly rejects this argument in so far as it is raised as an objection to jurisdiction.

The Tribunal accordingly rejects all of Respondent’s objections to its jurisdiction.

THE PARTIES’ CHARACTERISATION OF THE FACTUAL RECORD

While the Parties are in agreement with respect to the basic content of the Slovak
legislation introduced in 2004 and 2006/2007 and set forth in the above statement of
facts (see above at paragraph 76ff), they differ significantly with respect to the
implications of these developments. In particular, they differ as to the degree to which
the 2004 Reform marked a departure from the Slovak Republic’s previous health
insurance framework; the policy underpinnings of the 2004 Reform and the relation
between the 2004 Reform and Claimant’s decision to invest in Union Healthcare; and
the political landscape which led to the reversal of the 2004 legislation in the 2007

Reforms. The following sections summarise their respective accounts.

The Parties’ Characterisation of the 2004 Reform

Claimant’s Position

182. According to Claimant, the series of legislative reforms enacted in 2004 represented a

“fundamental change” in the legal framework regulating health insurance in the Slovak
Republic, introducing a “wide ranging” and “competitive market place in which profits
could be made” and health insurers would operate as commercial businesses.'** In
Claimant’s view, this transformation involved (i) permitting companies to use their
discretion in the distribution of profits, including in distributing surpluses as dividends;
(ii) giving companies the opportunity to make independent decisions regarding the
allocations of their budgets, such as the relative amounts to be dedicated to
administrative and other fixed costs; and (iii) allowing companies to compete for

5

clients.'°> In Claimant’s view, the 2004 Reform envisaged the overhaul of a heavily

indebted public health insurance system and its replacement with a private and

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (20.

Claimant's Statement of Claim, {{III.16.

183.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

competitive one. Competition within this system was managed through the creation of

“an independent Health Care Authority with a fully independent executive board.”!°6

Claimant contends that in light of Respondent’s accession on 1 May 2004 to the
European Union and its adoption of the Euro on | January 2009,'°” the changes seemed
to represent a “natural evolution in the development of a health care system” which

7158 These reforms, Claimant submits, were

Claimant regarded as “irreversible.
“instrumental in making investment in the Slovak health insurance sector attractive to

99159
Eureko.

Respondent’s Position

184.

185.

Respondent disagrees with Claimant’s characterisation of both the scope and objective
of the 2004 Reform. In Respondent’s view, the 2004 Reform was never intended to
replace the public health insurance framework of the Slovak Republic with a private,

competitive one.'® Rather, Respondent contends that Slovak public health insurance

161

has always operated in accordance with certain “fundamental principles’ which have

not significantly changed since 1993 (being the date when Respondent became an

162

independent State). In short, this comprises a system in which citizens are

mandatorily insured and pay health insurance levies in an amount fixed by statute (with
the State paying the levies for a portion of the population). The extent of coverage
provided is established by law; insurers are not free to reject applicants; and the

relationship between insurer and insured is based on statute, not contract.

Rather than change these characteristics entirely, Respondent considers that the 2004

Reform aimed to introduce ‘“‘a number of limited amendments into the healthcare

19163

insurance system to enhance managed competition within the system, and to redress

inefficiencies which had accumulated in its operation over the years, specifically, a

large accumulated deficit! and a lack of transparency, !°> In Respondent’s view,

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{[38, 44.
Claimant's Statement of Claim, (19.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (65.
Claimant's Statement of Claim, {III.15.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (112-115.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, (14.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (27.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (27.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, (116.

186.

187.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Claimant greatly exaggerates the magnitude of the changes introduced, as the majority

of legislation either amended already existing provisions or introduced minor changes.

Respondent contends that Claimant is mistaken in its assumption that the conversion of
public health insurance providers into joint stock entities had as its purpose the creation
of companies “capable of generating profit and functioning in a competitive
environment.”!©° Instead, Respondent argues, the 2004 Reform had the more modest
goal of forcing health insurance companies to improve budget transparency by
introducing balance sheet accounting requirements and corporate governance rules.'°”
In support of its argument, Respondent submits that under Slovak law, the legal
difference between a health insurer “‘sui generis’ and a health insurer as a joint stock
company, relates to the accounting methods used by joint stock companies and the
manner in which they manage the premiums they hold”! In Respondent’s view, this
is merely a technical difference which does not speak to the fundamental character and
purpose of a health insurance company: the Slovak Commercial Code provides that a
joint-stock company may function for a purpose other than the generation of profits,
with the provision of public health insurance being one such purpose.'® Respondent
argues that the “privatisation of health insurers never occurred, nor should it have

99170
occurred.

Respondent submits that Claimant also exaggerates the independence of the Health
Care Authority. Respondent notes that the Authority had always been responsible to
the Ministry of Health, which decides policy, and that the Authority is merely an organ
for implementing the policy of the Ministry of Health and “executing the surveillance
of the sector under strict conditions set by law and as such is not independent.”'7!
Respondent observes that in light of the backgrounds of the individuals previously
appointed to the post, Claimant should have been on notice that the Authority was not

politically independent.'””

 

Respondent’s Statement of Defence, (17.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {1 12.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {1 13.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {1 16.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 117.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (125.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (128.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (130.

188.

B.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Finally, Respondent argues that Claimant makes other errors in its description of the
changes introduced by the 2004 Reform. Respondent contends that (i) insurance
companies always had the option of selectively contracting with health care providers,
as long as the provider was properly licensed;'”* (ii) beneficiaries did not gain the right
to switch insurance companies once a year with the introduction of the 2004 Reform,
because the right had existed in the Slovak system since 1995, and could be exercised
once every six months instead of once a year as under the 2004 Reform;!”4 and (iii) the

scope of the mandatory health package was never actually reduced.'”°

Eureko’s Investment and the Political Situation in 2004 and 2006

Claimant’s Position

189.

190.

Claimant contends that in deciding to invest in the Slovak Republic, it “acted upon a

vlT6

well thought-out identification of an opportunity to invest, and the expectation that

the 2004 Reform would constitute an enduring change. Claimant submits that this
expectation was justified by its experience in other European markets and by statements
from the Slovak Health Minister, Mr Rudolf Zajac, made prior to Eureko’s
investment.!”” Claimant refers to the testimony of Mr Willem van Duin, then a member

of Eureko’s board, that;!78

Eureko was prepared to further invest in the Slovak Republic because it was
confident that it had acquired sufficient knowledge of the country, market and
legislative framework to be confident that the making of a long term investment —
which is the nature of investments in the insurance industry — would be opportune
and pay off. In this respect, Eureko took into account the Slovak Government’s
statements, the Slovak Republic’s EU aspirations and later EU membership, the
EU and national legal framework and also the manner in which it would be able to
take recourse if the investments would be impaired.

Claimant submits that its decision to invest closely followed the adoption of the
2004 Reform.!” According to Claimant, interviews with Slovak officials conducted

near the time of its investment shed light on the Slovak Republic’s intentions in

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 131-134.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 135-136.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (139.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 64.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 64.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (78; Witness Statement by Mr. Willem van Duin (Exhibit CW-1), {1 1.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {(70.

191.

192.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

enacting the 2004 legislation. Claimant recounts a “specific invitation” to invest made
by Minister Zajac in December 2004, during which he “made considerable efforts to
explain the basis of the new health care legislation.”'® In public statements in 2005,

Minister Zajac further emphasised that the 2004 Reform was intended to “open doors
for private investors into state-owned health insurance companies.”'*!

Claimant concedes that it expected a return on its investment that would be “marginal

in terms of percentage of premium income,” but argues that this was nonetheless an

. as . «1 182
appealing prospect insofar as premium amounts were generally substantial.

Although cross-selling the products of Union Insurance was an element of Eureko’s

anticipated business model, Claimant submits that it had planned for Union Healthcare

9183

to provide “independent profit generation. According to Claimant, the yearly

profits attributable to cross-selling never exceeded €105,000. 184

Claimant filed for registration with the Slovak Healthcare Authority in 2005, before

p7!85

“the elections and any announcement thereo: and further maintains that the prospect

of elections in 2006 did not upset its calculations.'*° The outcome of an election is

187

never certain ’’ and, according to Claimant, “SMER itself focused on the abolishment

of user fees” during its campaign, rather than more fundamental changes.'** Most of
SMER’s potential coalition partners did not oppose at least the core provisions of the
2004 Reform'® and a majority of the ultimate coalition was comprised of parties that
had supported the 2004 Reform.'” It was not until December 2006, Claimant argues—
after it had established Union Healthcare and made a substantial investment—that
Eureko could have appreciated the extent of the changes being contemplated.'*! On

9 December 2006, the Chairman of the Slovak Parliament, Mr PaSka, publicly

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 481.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 437.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 81; Claimant's Reply on the Merits, (108-1110.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 184; Claimant's Reply on the Merits, (131-134.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 184; Claimant's Reply on the Merits, (131-134.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 490.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 436.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 34.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 493; Claimant’ s Reply on the Merits 437.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 494.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 494; Claimant’ s Reply on the Merits 437.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, 1111.37; Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {102; Claimant's Reply on the Merits, (35.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

expressed the position that “‘all public funds should be under public control.”'? Prior to
that point, Claimant observes, the coalition manifesto stated that the Government would
not fundamentally alter the legal framework established by the 2004 Reform;!”? and,
upon request by Eureko, the acting Slovak Minister of Health, Mr Valentovi¢,
confirmed that “no systemic changes were imminent that would be at odds with

Eureko’s interests as an investor in the Slovak health insurance sector.”!**

Respondent’s Position

193.

194.

Respondent submits that, in light of all the circumstances, Claimant could not
reasonably have believed that the 2004 Reform would remain in effect and that any

such belief indicates a lack of due diligence.!°° The 2004 Reform, Respondent notes,

6

was extremely unpopular!” and by the time of the 2006 election, political parties

opposing the 2004 Reform had a “20% lead over parties who had supported the
2004 Acts.”!°7 In Respondent’s view, Claimant understates the predictability of the
changes that were made with the 2007 Reforms and overstates the importance of the
reassurances it claims to have received from the Respondent as regards the

2004 Reform. According to Respondent, “Union Healthcare could have, and should
have terminated its activities to avoid the consequences of expected regulation.”!

First, Respondent contests the timeline of Claimant’s investment. Although Claimant
may have contemplated investing in 2004 and 2005, Respondent argues that Claimant

did not in fact establish any investment before it obtained the “licence to perform

6,199

public health insurance” on 13 February 200 Union Healthcare, in turn, was

registered only on 9 March 2006; and Claimant did not insure beneficiaries until

Claimant's Statement of Claim, {III.38.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, $94;. Claimant’s Statement of Claim, 4{1.23-24; Claimant's Reply on the
Merits, 37, 42.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (94; Claimant’s Reply on the Merits 42.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (50.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 49.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (369.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (365.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (360.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (361.

195.

196.

197.

201

202

203

208

205

206

207

208

209

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

September 2006, a date significantly later than the call for early elections which had

been made on 9 February 2006.2"

Second, Respondent argues that Claimant misconstrues the significance of comments
made by Mr Zajac, as well as the importance of Mr Zajac’s presentations on the 2004
Reform.” Mr Zajac’s presentations, Respondent contends, were nothing more than a
public description of how the new system would function and were not an attempt to
induce foreign investors into the Slovak market.2°? Respondent similarly discounts the
importance of the January 2007 Letter from the former Minister of Health
Mr Valentovié, insofar as it was written significantly after Claimant had made its

: 2
investment.?™

Third, Respondent submits that changes were to be expected in light of the Slovak
political landscape. Respondent disagrees with Claimant’s assessment that the main
coalition partners of the new Government “were in favour of a stability [sic] of at least
the key pillars of the 2004 Liberalisation.””°> The final coalition, Respondent contends,
included 85 members out of 150 in Parliament who were against the 2004 Reform.2”
In Respondent’s view, “only a blind businessman would have believed that such a
coalition would allow public health insurers to retain the ability to distribute dividends

ee «99207
from insurance levies.

All of these assessments, Respondent argues, are confirmed by Claimant’s March 2006
Business Plan, which reveals an awareness of impending changes in the investment

climate.7°* Respondent cites the following excerpts from Claimant’s 2006 plan:

One could argue that due to the parliamentary elections in June 2006 it would be
better to wait and see what changes a new government would introduce to the
healthcare system before deciding whether to enter or not.

L.-J

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4367.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4126; Reply on the Merits 429.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4126.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4390.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4374.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4375.

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4376.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, {{96.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, 430; Exhibit C-14, pp. 1, 9.

c.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Political intervention after June 2006 elections could make the health insurance
market less attractive and in the extreme see a renationalisation.

On the basis of this excerpt, Respondent argues that Eureko’s assertion that it did not

anticipate a changed legislative framework is “at best, disingenuous.”?!”

Characterising the 2007 Reforms

Claimant’s Position

198.

199.

According to Claimant, the 2007 Reforms represent a “comprehensive policy with the

ultimate aim to drive private investors out of the Slovak health insurance sector.”7!!

The measures represented a “turning of the tide” and revealed a “new attitude towards

99212

health insurance. In enacting these measures, Claimant contends the Government

intended to re-concentrate control of the health insurance sector with the state,?!
ultimately by establishing a single, public health insurance provider.?! Claimant points

in particular to the rhetoric of Prime Minister Fico, to his statements that it is “not

215

normal” for health insurance companies to make a profit,” and to his professed

intention to “drive out private health insurance companies.””!°
Claimant disputes that this shift in the investment climate from “highly favourable” to

217

“extremely hostile” was underpinned by any economic rationale. In general,

Claimant submits that Respondent’s policy explanation for the change amounts to
“unsupported assertions about cost overruns and escalation in the health care system,

destabilising effects of the 2004 Reforms and various forms of illegal conduct and

misbehaviour by private parties active in the Slovak Health Insurance Market.”?'*

Respondent further, in Claimant’s view, resorts to “discrediting Eureko’s general

economic and business understanding” through assertions that are themselves

Respondent's Statement of Defence, 30.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (103.
Claimant's Statement of Claim, {{III.32.
Claimant's Statement of Claim, {{III.36.
Claimant's Statement of Claim, {{JIII.44 and IIL.48.
Claimant's Statement of Claim, {III.39.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (105.
Claimant's Statement of Claim, {{III.56.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 138.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

9219

“defamatory. Rather than engage with what it considers to be speculative

arguments, Claimant submits that it is “not necessary to debate the economic rationale

7220

of the health care system at lengtl According to Claimant, the Parties are in

agreement that consideration of the policy rationale for the 2007 Reforms is

unnecessary to the matter before the Tribunal.”?!

Respondent’s Position

200.

201.

202.

223

204

Respondent disputes both Claimant’s characterisation of the 2007 Reforms and the
assertion that the Tribunal need not examine the policy rationale behind the Reforms.
The reasonableness of the changes, Respondent argues, relates directly to the question
of Claimant’s expectations and Respondent’s contention that the measures fall within
the ambit of Respondent’s regulatory discretion. In Respondent’s words, “[a] proper
and legitimate health insurance policy outlines what is commonly acceptable in a
country that has a public health insurance system and on which a reasonable investor

should count.”””

The 2007 Reforms, Respondent argues, were crafted to address problems arising from

99223

the 2004 Reform “that jeopardised the whole system. The effort took place against
the background of what remained after 2004 a public health care system—not a
privatised one—insofar as health insurance remained the subject of a mandatory
government levy. The Slovak Republic, accordingly, remained responsible for the
system. According to Respondent, “[t]he fact that the health insurance system
continued to exist as a public health insurance system during the period of effectiveness
of the 2004 Acts is of enormous importance in deciding what changes Respondent is

entitled to make in this field.”"**

Respondent submits that the 2004 Reform attempted to introduce a system of managed
competition, yet failed to appreciate the need for managed competition in health
insurance “to be heavily regulated to avoid adverse risks,” in particular the risk that “a

health insurer will maximise its efforts to cut costs at the expense of the quality of

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 168.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 163.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 163.
Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 451.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4183.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 459.

203.

225
226
207
228

229

230

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

health care.”””° Among the defects of the 2004 Reform identified by Respondent was
the introduction of a profit provision into an underfinanced system in which the
generation of profits was structurally impossible without adverse effects.°° Because
health insurance levies were fixed by law, insurers’ only options to reduce expenditures
were to lower the prices paid to health care providers, limit the provision of health care
by providers, or employ marketing to acquire a healthier portfolio of insurees.”””
Respondent takes particular issue with the contracts entered into with health insurance
providers, which imposed annual limits on the amount of care that would be covered
and employed a “degressive rate,” reimbursing providers at a lower marginal rate as
additional patients were cared for. Respondent characterises these practices as
“unsafe,” leading to the generation of profits “to the detriment of patients who are not
provided with care despite having paid their levies” or to health care providers who
may go uncompensated for duly provided care.”> The ban on profits was introduced in
2007 in response to the failure of elements in the 2004 Reform to enforce a duty to

provide continuous care.”

Notably, Respondent observes, comparable systems (in
which multiple health insurers are permitted, but prevented from generating profits) are

found in other European countries.?*°

Respondent further draws attention to the amended network requirements of the 2004

Reform, which gave insurers greater flexibility in contracting with health providers.

 

The effect of this provision, Respondent argues, was to give insurers a

°31 This weakened

“disproportionately strong bargaining position” vis-a-vis providers.
the position of providers to the extent that they had no choice but to accept
disadvantageous contracts that drove up debts among providers. Respondent
emphasises that the 2004 network requirements were based on specialisation, rather
than facility, making it difficult for providers to offer coordinated care; while an

insurer’s network would include a full range of specialists, they would be scattered at

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 148-49.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[153-58.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (174.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[175-78.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[196-98; Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 94.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {(78.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 202

204.

E-SR Final Award

7 December 2012
different facilities throughout a region and unable to work together.?*” Additionally,
Respondent submits that insurers prioritised cost over quality in placing contracts with
health providers.”* The amended network requirements, in Respondent’s view, were
created to address these problems.” However, while health insurance companies were
obliged to contract with a specific “minimum network” of health care providers under
the 2007 Reforms, Respondent notes that this did not prevent them from recommending

doctors and specialists outside the minimum network to their insured.?*°

Other aspects of the 2007 Reforms, Respondent argues, were equally in the public
interest and directed at identified problems stemming from the 2004 Reform. The cap
on operating expenses was intended to halt a “wasteful drain of public resources from
the public health insurance system” and address a situation in which the private insurers
all indicated substantially higher operating costs than the State-owned insurance
companies.”*° The ban on brokers sought to remedy what Respondent characterises as
the large number of complaints concerning the unfair or illegal practices of brokers.”*”
Adjusting the percentage of health insurance levies subject to redistribution,
Respondent argues, was an appropriate response to the efforts of insurers to attract a
healthier (and accordingly, more profitable) portfolio, notwithstanding their obligation
to accept any applicant. Redistribution rates in the Slovak Republic have changed
many times previously, and a number of European states in fact redistribute 100 percent
of health insurance levies. Finally, according to Respondent, the ban on transferring
insurance portfolios was justifiably intended to protect patients’ rights, preventing the
situation in which an individual might be transferred involuntarily from one insurer to
another and forced in the process to change doctors to those in the network of the new

8

insurer."** The ban does not, Respondent emphasises, prevent the transfer of an

insurer’s interest in other ways that preserve established relationships between patients

and their doctors.*?

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 205.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 202.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[279-83.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (286.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[213, 289.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{[302-04.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (310.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, [31 1-12.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

205. For a further group of the 2007 Reforms, Respondent denies that they in fact represent

D.

significant changes. In Respondent’s view, the office of the Chairman of the Health
Care Authority was not politicised by the 2007 Reforms; Respondent notes that the
Regulator was at all times a political appointee and submits Claimant exaggerates the
independence of the Regulator under the 2004 Reform.” Similarly, Respondent
contends that enhancing budget scrutiny over insurance companies did not significantly

241 and amounted

242

change Claimant’s existing legal obligations to report on its business

to nothing more than an additional “administrative duty” on Claimant.” Even before

the 2007 Reforms, Claimant had been required to send an annual “[rJeport on the

fulfilment of the budget for the other subjects of public administration” to the State

243

Treasury.” Finally, Respondent notes, the solvency requirements of the 2007 Reforms

“merely serve[] to confirm the fulfilment of the Claimant’s previously existing

pad Only in the event that Claimant neither

245

obligation to cover its due liabilities.

challenges nor pays an invoice is the mechanism for solvency sanctions triggered.

The Significance of the Slovak Constitutional Court Decision

Claimant’s Position

206. In striking down the ban on profits, Claimant submits that the Constitutional Court’s

240

24

242

243

decision of 26 January 2011 effectively established a breach of the Bir.** Equally
important, Claimant argues, the Constitutional Court confirms three aspects of the
factual record: (i) that the 2004 Reform was intended to establish a competitive
environment in which health insurers would act as entrepreneurs on a profit basis;
(ii) that this constituted a significant change in the nature of the Slovak healthcare
framework;"*” and (iii) that the 2007 Reforms were not carried out in a legitimate

fashion within the margin of appreciation for regulatory measures.""*

Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4330.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (333-337.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4337.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4336.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4345.
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4347.

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, 62.

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, 62.

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 205.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Respondent’s Position

207.

208.

VII.

209.

210.

Respondent submits that the Constitutional Court decision striking down the ban on
profits is only significant insofar as the ban on profits is no longer applicable. The
standard of protection under the BIT, however, “differs from the protection of the
Constitution applied by the Court” and no conclusions with respect to the BIT follow
automatically from the decision.” The difference stems, in Respondent’s view, from
the fact that the Constitutional Court approached the matter from the perspective of
protecting the Slovak legal order, whereas this Tribunal is asked to consider more
specifically “whether the Claimant’s investment was impaired by the conduct of the
state in breach of the BIT.”?° The Constitutional Court, Respondent notes, did not
consider the facts of the present case, and its finding of a restriction of property rights
is, in Respondent’s view, more limited than expropriation and without an analogue

under the BIT.?*!

According to Respondent, the Constitutional Court’s decision further establishes the
constitutionality of other measures of which Claimant complains — in particular the cap
on operating expenses, the solvency requirements, and the changes in the percentage of

. . : soy 2
insurance premiums subject to redistribution.?*?

THE TRIBUNAL’S OBSERVATIONS ON THE WITNESS TESTIMONY

In witness statements submitted with the Parties’ pleadings and during the hearings
held in December 2011 and January 2012, the Tribunal received the testimony of a
number of individuals involved in the events underlying the Parties’ dispute in this

arbitration.

The following witnesses appeared at the hearing on behalf of Claimant: Mr Willem
van Duin, Chairman of the Executive Board of Eureko; Mr Fred Hoogerbrug, Director
of European Affairs of Eureko, and former member of Union Insurance’s Supervisory
Board; Mr Tibor Borik, Chairman of the Managing Board of Union Healthcare; Mr
Bjarne Slorup, who served as a board member of Union Insurance, and by Government

invitation as a board member of state-owned insurance company VZP, and on the

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 119.
Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 4120.
Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 491122, 125.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 118.

211.

212.

213.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

managing board of Union Healthcare during the “hibernation”; Mr Peter Pazitny a
former advisor to the Slovak Health Minister during the design and implementation of
the 2004 Reforms, presented as an expert witness on the Slovak health insurance sector;
and Mr Richard Indge, of Ernst & Young, presented as an expert witness on damages.
The following witnesses appeared at the hearing on behalf of Respondent: Professor Dr
Dr Thomas Gerlinger, an expert witness in international comparative health care
systems; and Mr Michael Peer and Ms Zuzana Kepkova of KPMG, who provided
expert witness testimony on damages. The Tribunal is grateful to all of these witnesses
for their participation. The following section will address one aspect of the witness

testimony that the Tribunal found particularly helpful.

Eureko’s CEO, Mr Willem van Duin, testified before the Tribunal on 14 December
2011. He started working for Eureko in 1987, and was appointed to the Executive
Board in 2004, becoming its Vice-Chairman on 1 October 2008 and Chairman on
10 February 2009. Prior to taking on this overall responsibility for Eureko he was
supervisory director of a number of Eureko entities, including Union Insurance and
Union Healthcare. The Tribunal considered him to be a candid and impressive witness,
who was clearly knowledgeable and experienced in health insurance, and also well
qualified to explain decisions taken by Eureko during the relevant period. His
testimony, in his witness statement and particularly before the Tribunal, put the
documentary evidence in the case into much clearer perspective." The Tribunal
records that much of Mr Van Duin’s testimony was not specifically challenged by
Respondent, which limited itself (from its own choice) to a very short cross-
examination at the hearing in December 2011. The Tribunal accepts, as factually

accurate and credible, the testimony of Mr Van Duin.

In his testimony, Mr Van Duin explained that it was the knowledge (known to him
personally at the time) that Slovakia was moving to a private health insurance system,
of a kind with which Eureko was familiar, that was the key to Eureko’s decision to

enter into concrete discussions regarding its entry into the Slovakian market?

At around this time Eureko was also considering entry into certain other east European

markets, but concluded that the regimes in those countries, and the future developments

Witness Statement, 15 July 2010; Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 1-56.
Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 8-13.

214.

215.

216.

217.

255

256

257

258

259

260

261

262

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012
that the respective Governments had in mind, were not such as to make investment in

those markets attractive.?°°

Eureko was aware of the unpopularity of the Slovak reforms and of the risk of a change
of policy following the elections in the Slovak Republic, which were known at the time
to be imminent. Eureko considered that those risks were not so great as to require
postponement of its entry into the market. The point was made in Eureko’s March

2006 Business Plan: **°

it is our judgement that even a social-democratic lead government would not undo
the unpopular, but necessary health reform. It is our judgement that they would
change the most unpopular elements, but leave the basic structures in place.

Mr Van Duin was asked about the basis on which, at the time when Eureko made its
investments in the Slovak Republic, he was satisfied that there was no significant
chance of a reversal of the health insurance policy of the Government of the Slovak

Republic over the life of the investment. He replied as follows:?°7

It’s hard to explain why I did not think what I didn’t think. But we made an
assessment. And in those days when the changes were implemented, and based on
the meetings we had, we were confident that that would be the way to go forward.
So there was no reason for us to think that that would change so dramatically at
such a short time.

Answering questions from the Tribunal, Mr Van Duin stated that Eureko would have

been able to modify its operations so as to work with the reforms regarding the cap on

258 259 260

administrative expenses,” the ban on brokers,” the network requirements,” and the

1

solvency requirements.”° Similarly, Eureko could have accommodated the obligation

to submit its budgets to the Government.”

 

On the other hand, asked if Eureko could have worked with the ban on profits, Mr Van

Duin said “No. If we would have known in advance I would not have made any

Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 7-11.
Exhibit C-14, p. 1

Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 30.
Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 12-14, 16.
Hearing Tr. (D:
Hearing Tr. (D:
Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 17.
Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 17, 18.

   

ay

, 14 December 2011 at 12, 14, 16.

   

ay 3), 14 December 2011 at 16, 17.

218.

219.

IX.

220.

263

265

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

263 He took the same view of the ban on transfers of

proposals to invest in Slovakia.
insurance portfolios.” The combined effect of those measures was that Eureko could
neither remain active and making profits in the Slovak Republic, nor sell its business

and withdraw from the Slovak Republic.

In practical terms, after the 2007 Reforms Eureko’s only possibility of earning income
from its operations in Slovakia arose from its right to take out operating expenses up to
the permitted maximum, and the possibility of extracting further value from its

investment in Slovakia by using its reputation there to sell other forms of insurance.

Eureko accordingly had to decide whether to try to expand its health insurance business
despite the 2007 Reforms (and if so, how) along the lines that it had planned, or to put
its operations into some sort of suspension, servicing existing clients but not seeking to

expand its client base.

LIABILITY AND THE MERITS
The Parties’ Arguments on Liability and the Merits

1. Expropriation
Article 5 of the BIT provides as follows:?°°

Neither Contracting Party shall take any measures depriving, directly or indirectly,
investors of the other Contracting Party of their investments, unless the following
conditions are complied with:

(a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of
law;

(b) the measures are not discriminatory;

(c) the measures are accompanied by provision for the payment of just
compensation. Such compensation shall represent the genuine value of
the investments affected and shall, in order to be effective for the
claimants, be paid and made transferable, without undue delay, to the
country designated by the claimants concerned and in any freely
convertible currency accepted by the claimants.

Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 19; cf., Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 20-22.
Hearing Tr. (Day 3), 14 December 2011 at 22.

Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and
the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, Art. 5 (Exhibit C-10)

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Claimant’s Position

221.

222.

223.

267

268

270

on

22

273

274

275

276

27

Eureko submits that the definition of expropriation under the BIT is broad and
encompasses “indirect expropriation” that does not require a finding that legal title has

been transferred to others.”°°

Whether governmental action qualifies as indirect
expropriation depends, according to Claimant, on the “intensity of interference,” and
whether such action extends beyond “normal regulatory influence” and affects “the
core of the of essential attributes of property.” 267 Arbitral tribunals evaluating this

question in other matters, Claimant submits, have generally applied three tests.
First, Claimant notes, tribunals have examined “whether events demonstrate that the

owner was deprived of fundamental rights of ownership.”?% This standard was applied

by the tribunals constituted in Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA

 

Consulting Engineers of Iran et. al.,; Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Eg)
CME Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic;?”° Generation Ukraine, Inc. v.
Ukraine;"' Occidental Exploration and Production Co. v. Republic of Ecuador?”

Biwater Gauff Ltd. v.

273

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentine Republic;
Tanzania?" Archer Daniels Midland Co. and Tate & Lyle Ingredients Americas, Inc.

. . . 2
v. Mexico?” and Azurix v. Argentine Republic."”°

Second, Claimant argues, tribunals have considered whether the “enjoyment or benefit

of the asset is effectively neutralised.””’ Such a standard was applied by the tribunals

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {{IV.16-17; Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (1147.
Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {{IV.26, IV.29; Claimant's Memorial on the Merits, 147.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (148, quoting Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA Consulting
Engineers of Iran et. al. 6 Iran-United States C.T.R. 210,225.

Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No.ARB/98/4, Award, 8 December 2000, {99
(hereinafter “Wena Hotels Ltd.”).

CME Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL (Czech/Netherlands BIT), Partial Award, 13 September
2001, 4608 (hereinafter “CME”).

Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, 1CSID Case No ARB/00/9, Partial Award, 16 September 2003, 420.23.

Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN3467, Final
Award, | July 2004, {88 (hereinafter “Occidental”).

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Award, 12 May 2005, {262
(hereinafter “CMS Gas Transmission Co.”)

Biwater Gauff Lid. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award, 24 July 2008, 4509
(hereinafter “Biwater Gauff’).

Archer Daniels Midland Company and Tate & Lyle Ingredients Americas, Inc. v. Mexico, 1CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/04/5, Award, 21 November 2007, 245.

Azurix v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Award, 14 July 2006, (322 (hereinafter “Azurix”).

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (150.

224.

225.

278

279

280

281

282

283

284

285

286

287

288

289

291

202

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

in Lauder v. Czech Republic? Occidental?” BG Group Plc v. Argentina? Toto
Construzioni Generali S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon;"*' CMS Gas Transmission Co.
LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine
Republic; and CME

Third, Claimant submits, tribunals have evaluated the actions complained of “against

what may be described as a catalogue of measures that are considered to qualify as

indirectly expropriatory.””*° Such “catalogue,” Claimant observes, has included

 

restrictions on the distribution of dividends to shareholders in the decisions taken by
tribunals in Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada;*® PSEG Global et. al. v. Turkey;5" Walter
Bau vy. Thailand;** Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine

Republic; Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic; and BG Group.”'

In evaluating governmental conduct against these standards, Claimant argues, a finding

of expropriatory intent is not required, although it may “weigh in favour of showing a

99292

measure to be expropriatory. Although expropriation may be lawful when taken in

the public interest, in a non-discriminatory fashion, and accompanied by compensation,

Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL (Czech/U.S. BIT), Award, 3 September 2001, {200 (hereinafter
“Lauder”.

Occidental, 484.

BG Group Ple v. Argentina, UNCITRAL (Argentina/UK BIT), Final Award, 24 December 2007, {264 (hereinafter
“BG Group”) (annulled Republic of Argentina v. BG Group, 665 F.3d 1363 (DC Cir. 2012), petition for cert. filed,
81 U.S.L.W. 3070 (U.S. July 27, 2012) (No. 12-138)).

Toto Costruzioni Generali S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon, CSTD Case No. ARB/07/12, Decision on Jurisdiction of
11 September 2009, 7183.

CMS Gas Transmission Co., 262.

LG&E Energy Corp. LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability of 3 October 2006, 198 (hereinafter “LG&E”).

CME, 4604.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 41153.

Pope & Talbot Inc. v. The Government of Canada, Interim Award, 26 June 2000, 4100.

PSEG Global et al. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award, 19 January 2007, 4278.
Walter Bau v. Thailand, Award, | July 2009 10.16.

Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Award, 22 May
2007, {245 (hereinafter “Enron”).

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award, 28 September 2007, 9284
(hereinafter “Sempra”

BG Group, (211.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 158, quoting Compaiid de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Award, 20 August 2007, 7.5.20 (hereinafter “Vivendi”).

226.

227.

293

204

295

207

298

300

301

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Claimant submits that an evaluation of lawfulness should “only be done after it has
been held that an expropriation has occurred.”?°>
On the facts of this case, Claimant argues that Respondent’s actions have amounted to

an “intense interference” such that “a substantial deprivation has taken place.”?"* In

Claimant’s view, it has been “strongly and profoundly affected” in both its manner of

conducting business in the Slovak Republic and in its ability to realise returns or profits

5

on its investment.” According to Claimant, the ban on profits and the ban on the

transfer of insurance portfolios each independently meet the threshold for
expropriation. Additionally, Claimant submits that the “effect of all measures that form

part of the 2007 Reversal” collectively constitutes expropriation.”°

In Claimant’s view, the ban on profits meets all three commonly-used tests for
expropriation. The ban “constitutes a manifest deprivation of a fundamental ownership
right,” thereby meeting the first standard for expropriation.” The ability to distribute
profits as dividends, Claimant notes, along with supervision of the company through its

boards, is one of the two fundamental rights deriving from shareholding in a Slovak

298

joint-stock company. Equally, Claimant argues, the ban on profits has met the

second standard by neutralising “the benefit and enjoyment of shares in Union

99299

Healthcare. The right to receive a dividend is a principal benefit of holding shares

and the ban on profits has rendered such share unmarketable, removing shareholders’
“ability to convert the investment into cash.”°°° Respondent’s actions, Claimant

contends, have made it inconceivable that a “commercial entity considering a presence

301

in the Slovak health insurance market” would purchase Union Healthcare.” Claimant

rejects the relevance of the sale of shares in another insurance company during the

summer of 2009, noting it may rather reflect speculation that the ban on profits would

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (161.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {{§IV.24-29.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {IV.24; Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, {{[210-211.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (1143.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (169.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (169.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (173.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{[173-74.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {IV.25

228.

229.

307

308

309

310

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

302

be reversed, rather than the existence of a market. Claimant also discounts the

relevance of its continued ability to cross-sell other insurance products from Union

Insurance, arguing that this was never a major element of its business plan or source of

303

profit. Finally, Claimant notes that, in impeding the distribution of dividends to

shareholders, the ban on profits falls squarely in the “catalogue of measures” that other

tribunals have considered to constitute indirect expropriation.“

In the alternative, Claimant submits that the ban on portfolio transfer also constitutes

305

expropriation.” An insurance portfolio is by far the most “precious asset” of a health

insurance company and a “primary determinant for its profitability.” Union’s
portfolio was acquired at significant effort and expense, Claimant argues, and its value
has been “wiped out,” constituting a “gross interference with ownership rights.”°°7

Finally, Claimant asserts that the actions taken by Respondent in the 2007 Reforms
collectively amount to “creeping expropriation”. The net effect of these measures is to
reinforce the ban on profits and the prohibition on the sale of portfolios and to further
restrict “Union Healthcare’s ability to generate and distribute profits.”>8 Although

expropriatory intent is not required for a finding of expropriation, Claimant concurs

9

with the position of the tribunal in Vivendi that such intent is relevant.” Here,

Claimant notes, Respondent’s course of action was motivated by the goal of “creat[ing]

such conditions in public health insurance which will not be interesting for private

99310

health insurance companies. Claimant references the Slovak Republic’s

Government Resolution 462/2007, arguing that it demonstrates that the Slovak

Republic deliberately aimed at reducing the value of investment in private insurance

1

companies.*! In addition, Claimant relies on statements made by members of the

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 175-80.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{[183-186.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (187.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (190; Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, (214.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 190-92.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 193-94.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (197.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (158.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (196.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {{§IV.31-35.

230.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Slovak Government, in particular the Government’s promise that it would “drive out

private health insurance companies” from the market.*!

Having argued that its interest in Union Healthcare was expropriated within the
meaning of Article 5 of the BIT, Claimant further submits that this expropriation was
unlawful. Eureko received no compensation as required by Article 5(c) and,
accordingly, Claimant submits that it need not establish that the taking was not in the
public interest or was discriminatory. Claimant notes, in any event, that members of
the Slovak Parliament (including members of the Government between June 2010 and
April 2012) argued successfully before the Slovak Constitutional Court that elements of
the 2007 Reforms were unconnected to the public interest and discriminatory.°° The
Constitutional Court’s decision, Claimant submits, also reaffirmed that the distribution

31d

of dividends is “undoubtedly one of the fundamental rights of shareholders and

deemed the ban on the distribution of profits to be expropriatory, unconstitutional, and

a violation of the European Convention on Human Rights.*!5

Respondent’s Position

231.

232.

Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over this claim on the grounds that
Article 5 of the BIT is superseded by or inapplicable under EU law (see above at
paragraph 147ff).

With respect to the standard applicable to claims of indirect expropriation under the
BIT, Respondent submits that expropriation can only occur if the adopted measure is
(i) “not within the regulatory powers of the state” and (ii) “constitutes an effective
neutralisation of the investment.”*!° According to Respondent, whether an investment
has been “effectively neutralised” depends upon whether it has been subjected to a
“substantial deprivation.”*!” In support of this standard, Respondent notes the decisions
of arbitral tribunals in Methanex v. United States;!8 Saluka v. Czech Republic,” and

we 2
CMS Gas Transmission Co.**°

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 1199.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 4210.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 4210.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 197.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 1496.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4497.

Methanex Corporation v. United States of America, Final Award, 3 August 2005.

233.

234.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

In assessing whether a substantial deprivation has occurred, Respondent argues that the
“most decisive” factors considered by arbitral tribunals are the effect of measures on
the value of an investment and control over it, and the duration of the measures in
question.*7! Respondent relies upon the decisions in Waste Management, Inc. v. United
Mexican States? Marvin Feldman v. Mexico; Azurix v. Argentine Republic; CMS
Gas Transmission Co.3? LG&E;*® and S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Canada;?’ In
Respondent’s view, Claimant understates the severity of the interference that must have
occurred to support a finding of expropriation. In relying on a series of arbitrations
involving Argentina, Respondent notes, Claimant neglects the critical fact that none of
the tribunals in Sempra, CMS Gas Transmission Co., Enron, Azurix, or LG&E actually
found expropriation to have occurred, notwithstanding the “sudden, drastic and
comprehensive dismantling of the legal and regulatory framework . . . resulting from
the 2001 economic crisis in Argentina.”*?* Respondent further notes the high threshold
for expropriation identified by the European Court of Human Rights in its decision in
Sporrong and Lénnroth v. Sweden, declining to find expropriation where the ability to
make use of the property in question remained, even though the right had “lost some of

A 993
its substance.”*”?

Turning to the breaches alleged by Claimant, Respondent denies that it has expropriated

Eureko’s investment.’ In Respondent’s view, Claimant cannot establish that its

investment was subject to a substantial deprivation and neutralised insofar as:

 

324

325

326

327

328

329

330

Saluka Investments B.V. (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL (Czech/Netherlands BIT), Partial
Award, 17 March 2006 (hereinafter “Saluka”).

CMS Gas Transmission Co., 4262.
Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 427.

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Final Award, 30 April 2004,
{159 (hereinafter “Waste Management”)

Marvin Feldman v. Mexico, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Award on Merits, 16 December 2002, 152
(hereinafter “Feldman”

Azurix, (322.

CMS Gas Transmission Co., 9263-64.

LG&E, J193.

S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Canada, Partial Award, 13 November 2000, {283 (hereinafter “S.D. Myers’)
Respondent's Statement of Defence, 64.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 429, quoting Sporrong and Lénnroth v. Sweden (ECHR, Application nos
7151/75, 7152/75), Judgment, 23 September 1982, (63.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, {{J56-80.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (500.

235.

236.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

(a) the Claimant is still successfully providing public health insurance;

(b) the Claimant conducts business in the area of supplementary health
insurance;

(c) the Claimant benefits from cross-selling effects;

(d) the Claimant has never met the conditions for the application of the
Profit Provision; and;

(e) _ the Profit Provision is no longer effective.

Respondent considers allegations of expropriatory intent and Claimant’s reliance on

Vivendi to be inapposite, arguing instead that the actions of the Slovak Republic
comprised “general, non-discriminatory legislative measures.”*?

According to Respondent, the restriction on profits cannot form the basis for a claim of
expropriation because the provision has since been repealed and because Claimant,

during the time it was in effect, never generated sufficient profits for it to have legally

distributed a dividend pursuant to the Slovak Commercial Code.

Expropriation,
Respondent asserts, “must always concern existing property”—not a hypothetical right

334

to distribute dividends. In any event, Respondent argues, the decision in LG&E

335 and Azurix makes clear that a

establishes that “expropriation must be permanent,
“substantial deprivation occurs only when an investor has been deprived of all
attributes of the ownership of its investment.”**° In turn, Feldman establishes that no
expropriation will occur where “[t]he Claimant is free to pursue other continuing lines

of business activity.”>°”

Even if effective, the restriction on profits never removed
Claimant’s ownership of Union Healthcare, which continued to operate throughout the
relevant period, nor restricted its ability to market supplementary insurance or to

engage in cross-selling.***

Similarly, Respondent submits that the restriction on the transfer of insurance portfolios
cannot be considered to have restricted fundamental ownership rights or to have

effectively neutralised Claimant’s investment. In particular, Respondent notes that

Respondent's Statement of Defence, (66.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {509-13

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4510.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 433, quoting LG&E, 193.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {508 (emphasis in original).
Respondent's Statement of Defence, 67.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (508.

237.

238.

E-SR Final Award

7 December 2012
restricting the sale of insurance portfolios did not prevent Claimant from transferring its
portfolio through other means that would have included the transfer of contractual
obligations entered into with healthcare providers, thereby maintaining continuity and
protecting the rights of the insurees. Claimant could have effected such a transfer,
Respondent submits, “by means of a (i) transfer of undertaking; (ii) transfer of shares;

or (iii) transformation.”>*?

Further, Respondent contends that a health insurance
portfolio is not capable of being the subject of ownership and that, in any event,
Claimant’s portfolio was acquired in violation of Slovak law (see above at paragraph

131ff).4°

Finally, Respondent is of the view that Claimant’s argument that actions taken by the
Slovak Republic collectively amount to expropriation is undeveloped. According to
Respondent, Claimant fails to explain “which fundamental rights of ownership it was

supposedly deprived of 74!

In Respondent’s view, Claimant only elaborated on the
restriction on the use of brokers, which is insufficient insofar as the possibility of using

. . : 2
other marketing practices remained.*””

Although Respondent denies that any substantial deprivation of Claimant’s investment
occurred, Respondent further argues that a finding to the contrary would still fall short

of expropriation because the Slovak Republic’s actions were “adopted within the ambit

9343

of the Respondent’s regulatory powers. As set forth previously in the Parties’

characterisation of the factual record (see above at paragraph 201ff), Respondent
contends that the measures taken by the Slovak Republic in 2006 and 2007 were
broadly in the public interest and were intended to remedy genuine problems within the
Slovak health care sector. Viewed in the context of alleged expropriation, Respondent
quotes the arbitral tribunal in Saluka for the proposition that:*4
It is now established in international law that States are not liable to pay
compensation to a foreign investor when, in the normal exercise of their regulatory

powers, they adopt in a non-discriminatory manner bona fide regulations that are
aimed at the general welfare.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4518.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4519-20.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4523.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4525.
Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 426.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 433, quoting Saluka, [255.

239.

240.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Arbitral tribunals in Feldman; LG&E,” Telenor Mobile Communications A.S. v.

7

Republic of Hungary, and Too v. Greater Modesto Insurance Associates,**

49

Respondent notes, have reached the same conclusion.* Accordingly, Respondent

argues, the Slovak Republic is “entitled and obliged to regulate its public health
insurance system and to freely choose from the commonly acceptable public health

: 993
insurance system models. 50

In evaluating whether a measure falls within the regulatory powers of the Slovak
Republic, Respondent submits, the Tribunal should respect the legislature’s assessment

of the public interest “unless that judgement be manifestly without reasonable

9351

foundation. Similarly, Respondent invokes the decisions of the tribunals in

Feldman and Saluka for the proposition that governmental measures need not be
strictly proportionate to the interest they are intended to serve.” Should the Tribunal
consider proportionality relevant, however, Respondent submits that liability would

exist only where “the State’s action is obviously disproportionate to the need being

9353
47735

addresse Based on the link to the public interest established by the factual record,

Respondent submits that Claimant has “failed to prove that the 2006 Stabilisation was

7354

not adopted within the regulatory powers frameworl and correspondingly failed to

establish expropriation pursuant to Article 5 of the BIT.

2. Fair and Equitable Treatment
Article 3(1) of the BIT provides as follows:

Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment to the investments
of investors of the other Contracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures, the operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment
or disposal thereof by those investors.

Feldman, (112.
LG&E, 4195.

Telenor Mobile Communications A.S. v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15, Award, 13 September
2006, 464.

Too v. Greater Modesto Insurance Associates, Award, 29 December 1989, 23 Iran-United States Cl. Trib. Rep. 378.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4433.
Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 453.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 465, quoting James and others v. The United Kingdom (ECHR, Application
No. 8793/79), 21 February 1986, {46 (emphasis added by Respondent).

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 106.
Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 107, quoting LG&E, 4195.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, 4140.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Claimant’s Position

241.

242.

According to Claimant, the obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment is broad

and overarching, encompassing the obligation that the host State “honour legitimate

expectations,” “act transparently,” and abstain from “arbitrary treatment of

investments.”*°° Claimant does not accept Respondent’s contention that the content of

fair and equitable treatment is determined by customary international law and the

356

international minimum standard. In the context of these proceedings, Claimant

invokes two elements that it identifies as part of the fair and equitable treatment
standard: (i) the obligation to provide a stable and predictable legal framework, and

(ii) the obligation to act in good faith with respect to investments of investors.

Drawing on the decisions of arbitral tribunals in Metalclad Corporation v. Mexico,"

CMS Gas Transmission Co.,>8 Occidental,? Enron?” LG&E, and Técnicas

362

Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. Mexico,” Claimant submits that the obligation to

provide a stable and predictable legal framework is a standard element of fair and
equitable treatment.°* In the words of the Meralclad tribunal, this requirement forbids
State action “which entirely transforms or alters the legal or business environment” in
which the investment was made.** The standard, Claimant contends, is encompassed
within the understanding of fair and equitable treatment irrespective of the precise
wording of the treaty in question.*° According to Claimant, the obligation imposed on
the host State is also linked to legitimate expectations. Although a State is not barred

from introducing any change to its laws and regulations, it may not “by amending its

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 212.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 224.

Metalclad Corporation v. Mexico, ICSD Case No. RB(AF)/97/1, Award, 30 August 2000, 999 (hereinafter
“Metalclad”).

CMS Gas Transmission Co., 99274, 276.
Occidental, 4191.

Enron, (259

LG&E, {131.

Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2, Award,
29 May 2003, {154 (hereinafter “Tecmed”).

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 213-17.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 214.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (216.

243.

244.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

legal framework exceed what the investor justifiably expected at the time of making its

investment.”*°°

In Claimant’s view, the 2004 Reform established a legal framework based upon
competition among joint stock insurance companies. The central features of this
framework were the ability to dispose of profits, in particular to shareholders; the
development of insurance portfolios through brokers, creative marketing, and portfolio
trading; limited governmental involvement in the market through an independent
Health Care Authority; and market determination of contracts with healthcare providers
and the efficient level of operating expenses.*” In 2006 and 2007, Claimant submits,
each element of this framework was significantly changed by new legislation,
introducing legal uncertainty and removing its ability to generate a return on
investments in the health insurance sector.**® Not only was this a fundamental change,
Claimant argues, but it exceeded what Claimant justifiably could have expected at the
time. Eureko should not, Claimant asserts, have expected measures in contravention of
the Slovak Constitution, EU law, or the BIT; nor should it have assumed that an
election would lead to fundamental reforms “for the purpose of removing all private

99369

capital from the [health insurance] sector. Claimant points to its March 2006

Business Plan and the testimony of Eureko’s witnesses for evidence of its actual
expectations at the time, and to the Slovak Government’s August 2006 Manifesto and
the statements of Mr Valentinovié in November 2006 and January 2007 for “explicit

assurances from the Slovak Republic that it would not enact fundamental changes to the

health insurance system.”>”°

Turning to the obligation to act in good faith, Claimant draws on the decisions in

573 for the proposition

that good faith is an underlying and integral aspect of fair and equitable treatment. In

Tecmed,"' Siemens A.G. v. Argentina,” and Waste Management

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 217.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, $§227-31.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, $91236-39.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, $§1246-47, 249.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, $§1242-43, 248.

Tecmed, (153.

Siemens A.G. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/08, Award, 6 February 2007, 4308.
Waste Management, 4138.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 218-21.

245.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

particular, Claimant argues, the State should “not deliberately . . . set out to destroy or
frustrate the investment by improper means.”*”> Moreover, Claimant submits, not only
does the duty of fair and equitable treatment require that a host state refrain from
interfering with an investment once made, it also confers on the host state an

“obligation to act” in a manner that positively fosters the investment.>”®

In Claimant’s view, the Slovak Republic’s bad faith is demonstrated by the absence of a
genuine public motive behind the 2007 Reforms and by its objective of driving private
health insurers from the Slovak market. According to Claimant, the Slovak Republic
sought a single, publicly-owned health insurance company, but could not directly
expropriate private health insurers.>”” Accordingly, Respondent sought to “make the
lives of privately-owned health insurance companies so miserable that they would exit
the market ‘voluntarily’ .”°78 These objectives, Claimant submits, are evident from the
statements made by members of the Slovak Government at the time of the
2007 Reforms and by the position taken by members of the Slovak Parliament in their
2008 petition to the Slovak Constitutional Court.*” Even in the face of repeated
complaints and legal action, Claimant submits, the Slovak Republic has “not even
paused to seriously discuss the intrusion of Eureko’s rights or even acknowledged the

-: «ee 99380
consequences of its policies.

Respondent’s Position

246.

247.

Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over this claim on the grounds that
Article 3(1) of the BIT is superseded by or inapplicable under EU law (see above at
paragraph 147ff).

In the event that the Tribunal has jurisdiction, Respondent contends that the standard of

fair and equitable treatment required by Article 3(1) of the BIT is limited to the

381

international minimum standard required by customary international law. Drawing

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (220, quoting Waste Management, 1138.

Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {{IV.61-62, citing MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Award, 25 May 2004 (hereinafter “MTD vy. Chile”), {113.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 253-54.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 257.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 254-59.
Claimant’s Statement of Claim, {IV.76.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 535.

248.

249.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

on the decisions in Saluka and Genin et. al. v. Estonia,**

Respondent submits that
evaluating governmental conduct under this standard involves a process of “weighing
of the Claimant’s legitimate and reasonable expectations on the one hand and the

383° As set forth in the

Respondent’s legitimate regulatory interests on the other.
discussion of expropriation (see above at paragraph 238ff), Respondent considers the

2007 Reforms to fall well within the ambit of the Slovak Republic’s regulatory powers.

Respondent rejects the proposition that either or both Article 3(1) of the BIT
specifically and the standard of fair and equitable treatment generally includes any
obligation to maintain a stable legal environment. The arbitral decisions relied upon by
Claimant, Respondent notes, arose from investment treaties that specifically provided
for the maintenance of a stable framework and are, accordingly, inapposite to the BIT
at issue in this arbitration.*** On the contrary, Respondent argues, the Slovak Republic
has a sovereign right to develop its legal framework and, as noted by the Tribunal in
AES v. Hungary, “a legal framework is by definition subject to change as it adapts to
new circumstances day by day.”*5 The BIT, in Respondent’s view, “is not a shield
against any risks resulting from changes of the legal and business framework of the

host state,” and Respondent denies that it made any more specific commitment to

6

refrain from changing its laws.*° In the absence of such a commitment, the

expectation that laws can and will evolve should be within the expectation of “any
reasonably informed business person.”**7

Although Respondent denies that it was under an obligation to refrain from changing

the legal framework governing health insurance, Respondent further disputes that the

8

2007 Reforms constituted such a change,** in particular when viewed in light of

Claimant’s legitimate expectations at the time. In assessing the scope of legitimate

Genin and others v. Estonia, (CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Award, 25 June 2001, 367 (hereinafter “Genin”.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 532, quoting Saluka, [306.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (537.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (540, quoting AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza
Erémii Kft v. The Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22, Award, 23 September 2010, 9.3.29
(hereinafter “AES v. Hungary”).

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 541-42.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (542.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 574.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 544-46.

250.

251.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012
expectations, Respondent invokes the holding of the tribunal in Duke Energy, to the
effect that:*°
To be protected, the investor’s expectations must be legitimate and reasonable at
the time when the investor makes the investment. The assessment of the
reasonableness or legitimacy must take into account all circumstances, including
not only the facts surrounding the investment, but also the political,
socioeconomic, cultural and historical conditions prevailing in the host State. In

addition, such expectations must arise from the conditions that the State offered
the investor and the latter must have relied upon them when deciding to invest.

Legitimate expectations, Respondent emphasises “cannot be solely the subjective
expectations of the investor,” but must be reasonable and based on an objective

assessment of the circumstances.*”!

In Respondent’s view, Eureko’s expectations could never have been legitimate because
it was clear when Claimant made its investment that an imminent legislative change

would likely take place?

and because Claimant failed to exercise due diligence.
According to Respondent, Eureko’s March 2006 Business Plan cannot evidence
legitimate expectations as it was not prepared at the time Claimant established Union
Healthcare.*”? Indeed, Respondent argues, Claimant has not submitted any
contemporaneous analysis of the 2004 Reform, or evidence that it conducted such
analysis.°°* Moreover, by the time Claimant began incurring expenses in developing
Union’s insurance portfolio in May 2006, Respondent submits that the publicly
available information made clear that “SMER would win the 2006 elections and that

public health insurance policy would be changed.”*”°

Turning to Claimant’s allegations of bad faith, Respondent submits that the factual
record establishes that Respondent’s intent was solely “to regulate the existing public
health insurance system” and that the measures taken were legitimately within the
scope of its regulatory discretion.*°° In Respondent’s view, the individual statements

upon which Claimant relies for its narrative of bad faith “are misquoted and largely

Respondent's Statement of Defence, {90 quoting Duke Energy Electroquil Partners & Electroquil S.A. v. Republic
of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19, Award, 18 August 2008 (emphasis added by Respondent)

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 547, quoting Saluka, [304.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, (93-94.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (547.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (549-53.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (560.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (582.

252.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

taken out of context” and “constitute standard political proclamations that are used in
the Slovak media.”*”’ Such statements are insufficient to overcome the policy record of
a series of measures aiming to address genuine problems with the outflow of funds
from the health care system, the increasing indebtedness of health care providers, and

infringements on patients’ rights.°

3. Unreasonable and Discriminatory Treatment

In addition to ensuring fair and equitable treatment, Article 3(1) of the BIT provides
that the Parties “shall not impair, by unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the
operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal thereof by those

investors.”

Claimant’s Position

253.

Claimant submits that its investment was impaired by both discriminatory and
unreasonable measures. Claimant identifies five measures that it considers to have
been discriminatory and thereby prohibited by the BIT. First, Claimant submits that
the restrictions on operating expenses as a percentage of premium incomes
disproportionately favoured large insurance companies, such as the State-owned
vzp.* Second, Claimant argues that the increase in the percentage of premium
income that was subject to redistribution was discriminatory in that it favoured those
insurance companies that were net beneficiaries of the redistribution system, in
particular vzp.* Third, Claimant contends that the prohibition on the use of brokers

401

disproportionately affected new entrants to the health insurance market. Fourth,

Claimant notes that the Slovak Republic provided VZP with a capital injection of €65.1

million, and financed this by lowering premiums for those individuals covered by the

402

State, to the detriment of other insurers. Fifth, Claimant submits that the ban on

profits was discriminatory in favour of State-owned health insurers that are not profit-

motivated. In assessing the effects of these five measures, Claimant emphasises that

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 441, 443.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 447-64.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{[283-84.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (285.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 286.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 287.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (288.

254.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

“although measures may formally apply to all parties, the effects and intended

404

application of the measures can be discriminatory. In Claimant’s view, such

discriminatory effect is a breach of Article 3(1) of the Bit.“

In addition to discriminatory measures, Claimant contends that its investment was
subjected to unreasonable measures. In Claimant’s view, the intent to “drive privately-
owned insurers out of the market” was both egregious and unquestionably
unreasonable.*°° Claimant also submits that the ban on profits was unreasonable, both
because it “completely destroys private investors’ most basic rationale for making an
investment” and because it limited the ability of insurers to earn profits from what the
Slovak Republic has insisted were “public” funds while permitting health care

providers and other actors to continue to do so.47

Respondent’s Position

255.

256.

257.

Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over this claim on the grounds that
Article 3(1) of the BIT is superseded by or inapplicable under EU law (see above at
paragraph 147ff).

In the event that the Tribunal has jurisdiction, Respondent denies that it acted in a
discriminatory or unreasonable manner. In Respondent’s view, “[t]he state is entitled
to adopt . . . measures resulting in different treatment, if such different treatment is
justified by legitimate public policy and pursued in a reasonable manner."
Respondent looks to the tribunal decisions in Genin,” S.D. Myers,*"° and Saluka*"' in

support of this standard.

Turning to the measures themselves, Respondent notes that “[a]ll measures contested
by the Claimant apply in the same manner to all health insurers.”"'? The redistribution

provision, for instance, operates identically with respect to all insurers, and “merely

Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 239.
Claimant's Reply on the Merits, 239.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 291.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 292.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4589.
Genin, 368.

S.D. Myers, 4246.

Saluka, 4460.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (590.

258.

259.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

requires that every health insurer obtains a reasonable amount of the whole sum of

collected health insurance levies.”*"*

The effect of restrictions on brokers and profits,
Respondent emphasises, is the same for all health insurers. With respect to the
limitation of operating expenses, Respondent denies that this favours larger insurers;
the State-owned SZP was able to maintain the limit with a portfolio of insured similar
to that held by Union. Finally, Respondent asserts that as the owner of VZP, it is
entitled to support it financially, just as Claimant may raise capital on behalf of Union.
Quoting Saluka, Respondent contends that “[t]he ‘fair and equitable treatment’ standard

cannot easily be assumed to include a general prohibition of State aid”"4

As regards the measures Claimant alleges to be unreasonable, Respondent argues,

citing Saluka, that the relevant question is whether the measures “bear a reasonable

relationship to some rational policy.”4!5

In Respondent’s view, the factual record
establishes a reasonable connection between the 2007 Reforms and the Slovak
Republic’s efforts to address inefficiencies in the provision of health care to the
public.*!° Respondent also recalls its arguments (see above at paragraph 239ff)

regarding the proportionality of the 2007 Reforms in relation to the public interest.*"7

4. — Full Protection and Security
Article 3(2) of the BIT provides as follows:

More particularly, each Contracting Party shall accord to such investments full
security and protection which in any case shall not be less than accorded either to
investments of its own investors or to investments of investors of any third State,
whichever is more favourable to the investor concerned.

Claimant’s Position

260.

Claimant submits that its investment was denied full protection and security by the
Slovak Republic. In interpreting this standard, Claimant contends that full protection
and security is not limited to physical security.‘"* In Claimant’s view, this

interpretation is supported in the jurisprudence of other arbitral tribunals, notably in

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4592.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, $660, quoting Saluka, 4445.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4597, quoting
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4597-600.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 600.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 264.

261.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Azurix;? Biwater Gauff:° National Grid, plc v. The Argentine Republic;*?' and
Vivendi.*” It also follows logically, for Claimant, from the interpretation of the treaty
itself. The treaty, Claimant notes, extends full protection and security to all covered
investments, including several non-physical categories that clearly cannot be protected
by the provision of physical security.*?? Equally, Claimant notes that the BIT employs
encompassing language—full protection and security—that would be at odds with a
significant implicit limitation." Following the reasoning adopted in Biwater Gauff,
Claimant submits that there is “no rationale for limiting the application of a substantive
protection of the Treaty to a category of assets—physical assets—when it was not

restricted in that fashion by the Contracting Parties.”*?°

In substance, Claimant argues that the legal security of its investment and the
investment environment were damaged by the introduction of full government control
over the Health Care Authority. The Authority has the power to terminate Union’s
business, impose “crippling fines,’ and intrude on its operations through on-site
inspections.*”° Such threats are not hypothetical, Claimant contends, given the actual
use of government influence in the replacement of the heads of the Authority’s boards,
which has “critically undermined the credibility of the Health Care Authority.”"””
Claimant further submits that the harassment it faced from high officials of the Slovak
Government in the form of disparaging press statements would “fatally poison any due
diligence” by a party considering investment in the health insurance sector and “‘is

irreconcilable with the duty to provide a secure investment environment.”*7*

Respondent’s Position

262. In interpreting Article 3(2) of the BIT, Respondent relies upon the holding reached in

20

21

22

23

24

425

26

27

428

Saluka, and asserts that full protection and security guarantees “more specifically the

Azurix, J408.
Biwater Gauff, (729.

National Grid ple v. Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL (Argentina/UK BIT), Award, 3 November 2008, {187
(hereinafter “National Grid”).

Vivendi, (7.4.15, 7.4.17.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 1266.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (268.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, (269.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 275.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{[274-75.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{[279-80.

263.

E-SR Final Award

7 December 2012
physical integrity of an investment against interference by use of force.”“”? Even if the
standard might sometimes reach beyond physical security, Respondent emphasises that
it “does not represent an absolute protection against physical or legal interventions”**°
and urges the Tribunal to follow the approach adopted in AES v. Hungary, limiting
protection where a State’s right to regulate is exercised in a reasonable manner in

pursuit of rational public policy goals.**!

In the event the Tribunal interprets
Article 3(2) to extend beyond physical security, however, Respondent argues that it
would be covered by the provisions of EU law on freedom of establishment and that
accordingly the Tribunal would lack jurisdiction over this claim (see above at

paragraph 1476f).4

Turning to Claimant’s contentions, Respondent notes that Claimant has not alleged any
physical interference with its investment. Respondent further argues that Claimant has
not shown that its investment was actually impacted by the conduct of which it

complains. According to Respondent, “Claimant did not substantiate any actions that

99433

were taken by the Health Care Authority against its investment. Moreover,

Respondent notes, many competencies of the Health Care Authority existed prior to the

2007 Reforms and, even afterwards, Claimant retained recourse to appeal the decisions

434

of the Authority to the Slovak courts. In Respondent’s view, the structure of the

Health Care Authority was within the Slovak Republic’s discretion to organise at it saw
fit, provided that the results where not discriminatory or arbitrary, and Claimant has
failed to establish such an occurrence.**° Similarly, with respect to statements in the
press, Respondent submits that Claimant has not identified any insured whose departure
from Union Healthcare followed from the media portrayal of private health insurers, or

that any sale was actually thwarted. “Unfounded and speculative assertions,”

Respondent submits, are insufficient.*°

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4604.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 605.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 603, quoting AES v. Hungary, 13.3.2.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4423-24.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (608.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 4610.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 611 n. 440, citing Genin, 4370; Lauder, 4242.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 614-15.

264.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

5. Restrictions on Transfer
Article 4 of the BIT provides as follows:

Each Contracting Party shall guarantee that payments related to an investment may
be transferred. The transfers shall be made in a freely convertible currency,
without undue restriction or delay. Such transfers include in particular though not
exclusively:

(a) profits, interests, dividends, royalties, fees and other current income;
(b) funds necessary

i. for the acquisition of raw or auxiliary materials, semi-fabricated or
finished products, or

ii. for the development of an investment or to replace capital assets in
order to safeguard the continuity of an investment;

(c) funds in repayment of loans;
(d) _ earnings of natural persons;

(e) _ the proceeds of sale or liquidation of the investment.

Claimant’s Position

265.

266.

Claimant submits that Respondent has unequivocally violated Article 4 of the BIT as a
result of the introduction of the ban on the distribution of profits.**” In interpreting this
provision, Claimant points to the Explanatory Note of the BIT, which explains that

738 which is

Article 4 is intended to guarantee the “completely free transfer of funds,
obviously contravened by restrictions on transfer. This breach has occurred, Claimant
argues, irrespective of whether the investment in Union Healthcare has actually
generated profits.” Nor is it relevant, in Claimant’s view, that the Slovak
Constitutional Court has struck down the ban on profits, as damages remain from the

period in which the restriction remained in force."

In Claimant’s view, Respondent’s defence—that insurance premiums represent “public
monies” and are therefore not “payments related to an _ investment”—is
“incomprehensible.”**! Claimant notes that insurance premiums are private before they

are paid by employees and private once they are paid to health care providers and

Claimant's Statement of Claim, {1V.109; Claimant's Memorial on the Merits, $9292-300; Claimant’s Reply on the
Merits, $91244-252.

Claimant's Statement of Claim, {1V.112; see also Exhibit C-11, p. 4.
Claimant's Statement of Claim, {1V.117.
Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, 249.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 1296.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

suggests that Respondent’s scenario would consider premiums to be public monies only
during the time they are held by an insurance company.*? Claimant considers this
argument to be “obviously irrational” and submits that, in any event, premiums were
clearly not considered public funds under the legislation in place when Eureko made its

. 3
investment.

Respondent’s Position

267.

268.

269.

270.

445

47

448

Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over this claim on the grounds that
Article 4 of the BIT is superseded by or inapplicable under EU law (see above at
paragraph 147ff).

In the event that the Tribunal has jurisdiction, Respondent submits that a restriction on
issuing dividends cannot “be recharacterised by Eureko as a restriction on transfer.”“*
Claimant has always been free to transfer any asset that may be distributable to
shareholders. In Respondent’s view, “[w]hile Eureko may disagree with the regulatory
standard that limits Union Healthcare’s ability to declare dividend payments, that

standard is unrelated to the very different issue addressed by Article 4 of the Bit.

Further, Respondent submits that health insurance premiums are to be considered
public monies insofar as they are levied as a tax in an amount determined by the State.
Because the collection of health insurance premiums is governed by public law, so too
is their distribution.” Respondent could and did regulate the uses to which such public
monies could be put during the time they were held by insurers. The determination that
the “remainder of the public health insurance levies would be used to cover health care,
the original purpose for which these funds were levied,” was well within the legitimate

scope of Respondent’s regulatory authority.“

In any event, Respondent argues, Eureko was never in a position to distribute a
dividend from insurance levies, and thus cannot have been harmed within the scope of

this portion of the BIT.“

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, 299.

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, {{[301-302.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, {1 10-11.
Respondent’s Statement of Defence, {1 10.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, {{][621-22.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (623.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 626.

271.

272.

273.

274.

49

450

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The Tribunal’s Decision on Liability and the Merits

1. The Investment

As is apparent from the paragraphs above, the Tribunal has concluded that Eureko’s
investment in the Slovak Republic consists of its 100% shareholding in Union

Healthcare (as well as rights derived therefrom).*”

2. The Applicable Law
Article 8 (6) of the Treaty provides that

The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the law, taking into account in
particular though not exclusively:

. the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned;

. the provisions of this Agreement, and other relevant Agreements
between the Contracting Parties;

. the provisions of special agreements relating to the investment;

. the general principles of international law.”

In the jurisdictional phase of this arbitration the relevance of EU law was considered.
In its Award on Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension dated 26 October 2010, at
paragraphs 287-290, the Tribunal decided that questions of the applicability of EU law
would be addressed at the merits stage. The Tribunal reaffirms its analysis in that
award of the relationship between EU law, the Treaty, and the role and jurisdiction of

the Tribunal.

The Tribunal has considered whether there are any issues of EU law that bear upon its
decision or its reasoning in relation to claims that Respondent has acted in violation of
its obligations under the Treaty. Respondent maintained its position that the Treaty is
inapplicable because of the operation of EU law.’ Its reasoning, in essence, was

that:**!

if the same subject is regulated by both EU law and national law (the BIT), EU
law prevails. Therefore, the Tribunal would be actually deciding on a breach of EU
law by the Slovak Republic.

See paragraphs 90, 157-161, above.
See part D.1 Statement of Defence; part D.2 Counter-Memorial on the Merits; part H Rejoinder on Merits.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 409.

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

452

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The Tribunal does not accept this analysis. Neither Party in the present case argued
that any specific provision of EU law bore upon the case in a manner that would affect
the decision or reasoning of the Tribunal under this particular BIT. Having considered
the position, the Tribunal is satisfied that no such question of EU law arises, and that it
may apply the terms of the Treaty without exceeding its jurisdiction and without

misapplying the applicable law.

In the present case, the Treaty sets out standards of treatment that the Contracting
Parties have expressly agreed to apply to investors of the other Contracting Party.
Insofar as they are applicable to the facts in the present case, nothing in those Treaty
standards is in conflict with any provision of EU law. Nothing in this Award amounts
to, or implies, a decision that Respondent or Claimant has acted in conformity with
EU law or contrary to EU law in any respect. This Award has no bearing upon any
question of EU law. This Award relates only to the compliance by Respondent with the
terms of the obligations it has assumed under the agreement that it made in the Treaty
in relation to its treatment of a class of persons of which Claimant is a member; and this
Award is rendered pursuant to a procedure to which the Contracting Parties agreed in
Article 8 of the Treaty, and which Claimant accepted in its Notice of Arbitration dated
1 October 2008.

Claimant alleges violations by Respondent of Articles 3, 4 and 5 of the Treaty.

3. Fair and Equitable Treatment and Article 3 of the Treaty

Claimant alleges a violation of its rights under Article 3(1) of the Treaty, which reads
as follows:
Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment to the investments
of investors of the other Contracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures, the operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment
or disposal thereof by those investors.
The Tribunal considers that the removal of the right to generate profits, coupled with a
ban on the transfer of the portfolio, effectively deprived Claimant of access to the

commercial value of its investment. The investment could neither be maintained so as

The closest that the argument comes to EU Law appears to be the point at which the Respondent argues that the duty
of fair and equitable treatment does not extend to questions concerning State aid: see paragraph 257 above. The
Tribunal does not need to address that question

280.

281.

282.

283.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

to generate profits nor be sold. There was no way in which Claimant could recover the

commercial value of its investment.

The Tribunal is satisfied that the ability to distribute profits (and even more, the ability
to distribute profits coupled with the ability to transfer a client portfolio for value) was
as a matter of fact an essential precondition of Eureko’s decision to invest in the Slovak
Republic. It accepts the evidence of Mr Van Duin that, had Eureko’s management been
aware of a real possibility that a ban on profits (and subsequently a ban on transfers)
was about to be introduced by the Government, the investment in the Slovak Republic
would not have been made at all. It accepts also that, while Eureko’s management were
aware of the possibility of far-reaching reforms being introduced in the organisation of
health insurance in the Slovak Republic after the 2007 election, they were not aware
that such reforms would include a ban on profits and a ban on transfers that would

prevent the realisation of any profits from their investment.

The Tribunal is also satisfied that the imposition of the ban on profits and the ban on
transfer of the portfolio were measures that self-evidently and unequivocally put
Eureko’s investment into a situation that was incompatible with the most basic notions
of what an investment is meant to be, and that the imposition of those measures upon
the investment after it had been made was incompatible with the obligation to accord
the investment fair and equitable treatment under the Treaty. To characterise
expenditure on the establishment of a business operation in another State as an
‘investment’ necessarily implies the right to enjoy the possibility of a return on the
investment, if it proves profitable. Locking in accrued profit is incompatible with that
right. The Tribunal returns below to the question of the consequences of this
incompatibility.

This decision by the Tribunal fixes the date at which the violation occurred as
25 October 2007. That is the date on which the ban on profits was introduced by law
and the date on which it became necessary for Claimant to take steps to protect its
position, even though the implementation of the ban on profits followed later, in

financial year 2008.4

Claimant argued that Respondent had acted in breach of the duty not to impair, by

unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the operation, management, use, enjoyment

See Act No. 594/2007 Coll., adopted on 28 November 2007; Exhibit C-61.

284.

285.

454

455

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

or disposal of the investment. The Tribunal has found that the adoption of the ban on
profits on 25 October 2007 was a violation of the fair and equitable treatment provision
in Article 3(1) of the Treaty. It also finds that the ban on transfers in Act No. 192/2009
Coll.,** consolidated that violation, although it is not clear that Claimant could in
practice have recovered any of its investment by transferring its portfolio after the ban
on profits — it is difficult to see why any other investor would have paid to put itself
into Claimant’s shoes. The Tribunal, having regard to the evidence of Mr Van Duin,
does not find that the other measures adopted by Respondent as part of the
2007 Reforms constituted separate violations of Article 3(1), as Mr Van Duin had

indicated that Eureko could work with those measures.**°

Claimant argued that there was also a violation of Article 3(2) of the Treaty, which
requires each Contracting Party to accord “full protection and security” to the
investment. Where, as here, the complaint is essentially that the investment was not
protected against government policies, the question whether there has been a breach of
the Treaty is inseparable from the question whether the policies in question were fair
and equitable. The Tribunal sees no need in the circumstances of this case to consider
the claim under Article 3(2) separately from the claim under Article 3(1). It regards its

decision in respect of the claim under Article 3(1) as disposing of both claims.

4. The Free Transfer of Payments and Article 4 of the Treaty

Claimant also alleges that Article 4 of the Treaty was breached. Article 4 reads as
follows:

Each Contracting Party shall guarantee that payments related to an investment may

be transferred. The transfers shall be made in a freely convertible currency,

without undue restriction or delay. Such transfers include in particular though not
exclusively:

(a) profits, interests, dividends, royalties, fees and other current income;
(b) funds necessary

i. for the acquisition of raw or auxiliary materials, semi-fabricated or
finished products, or

ii. for the development of an investment or to replace capital assets in
order to safeguard the continuity of an investment;

(c) funds in repayment of loans;

Exhibit C-72.

See paragraphs 216 and 217 above.

286.

287.

288.

289.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

(d) _ earnings of natural persons;

(e) _ the proceeds of sale or liquidation of the investment.”

The Tribunal finds that the ban on profits was inconsistent with Respondent’s
obligations under this Article. In principle, any losses arising from the application of
that ban to Claimant would be recoverable in damages. In the present case, however,
the facts are such that the violation and the injury arising from the temporary adoption
of the ban on profits are subsumed within the violation and the injury arising from the
breach of the ‘fair and equitable treatment’ obligation. The Tribunal accordingly
records that Respondent was in breach of Article 4, but it is not necessary to consider

the question of losses arising from that breach any further.

5. Expropriation and Article 5 of the Treaty
Article 5 reads as follows:

Neither Contracting party shall take any measures depriving, directly or indirectly,
investors of the other Contracting Party of their investments unless the following
conditions are complied with:

(a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of
law;

(b) the measures are not discriminatory;

(c) the measures are accompanied by provision for the payment of just
compensation. Such compensation shall represent the genuine value of
the investments affected and shall, in order to be effective for the
claimants, be paid and made transferable, without undue delay, to the
country designated by the claimants concerned and in any freely
convertible currency accepted by the claimants.”

This provision provides protection against expropriation; but not all provisions against
expropriation have the same scope and legal effect. Article 5, for example, protects
only against the direct or indirect deprivation of an investor of its investment. While
some measures that interfere with the enjoyment by an investor of its rights of
ownership of an investment may be so severe as to amount in law to such a deprivation,
not all measures of interference are capable of doing so. In the present case the ban on
profits, if maintained, would have violated Article 5. But the ban was declared

unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic.

This might be argued to amount to a ‘temporary expropriation’; but this controversial

label is particularly unhelpful in this case. There is an important distinction between

290.

291.

292.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

(i) a ‘deprivation’ for what is from the outset intended to be a limited (and relatively
short) period, and (ii) a ‘deprivation’ that is intended at the time of its adoption to be
permanent but which, in the event, is in fact reversed after a relatively short period of
time. Deprivations of the former kind would not ordinarily amount to an expropriation,
although they may amount to interferences with the property-owner’s rights that violate
other protections under a treaty, such as a provisions protecting against discriminatory

treatment or against treatment that is not fair and equitable.**°

In the present case, however, the ‘deprivation’ was temporary because of a reversal of a
policy that had been enshrined in law and was intended to operate indefinitely. The
imposition of the ban on profits was reversed by the Constitutional Court as a result of
an application, made on 15 October 2008 and supplemented on 13 February 2009, by a
group of Deputies of the National Council of the Slovak Republic (the Parliament of
the Slovak Republic). That application was made about 12 months after the ban on
profits, and in the wake of internal Governmental memoranda that questioned the

legality of the ban on profits.”

Had this present BIT case been decided before the decision of the Constitutional Court
and the declaration that the ban on profits was unconstitutional, it is likely that this
Tribunal would have held that there was a ‘permanent’ deprivation that could amount to
an expropriation in violation of Article 5 of the Treaty. The question is, therefore,
whether such a temporary deprivation should be treated differently now that the

Constitutional Court has given its decision.

In the view of the Tribunal, the facts must be taken as they exist at the time of the
hearing. The declaration of unconstitutionality by the Constitutional Court cannot be
ignored. While there is no duty to exhaust local remedies under the Treaty, there is no
reason to ignore such remedies as have in fact been obtained. Although the episode did
constitute a temporary interference with the investment and cause injury to the investor,
it is not to be regarded as having resulted in a permanent deprivation of the investor of
its investment. It was a wrong corrected by the proper operation of checks and
balances within the Slovak legal system. This analysis is consistent with the approach

adopted by other tribunals to the question of the necessary characteristics of an

See, for example, LG & E, 1132-9, 193, 200, 267; Tecmed, $116, 151, 174, 201.

See the memorandum of the Ministry of Justice, 12 June 2007, Exhibit C-63, and the memorandum of the
Legislative Board, 10 July 2007, Exhibit C-64.

293.

294.

295.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

expropriation and the significance of the permanence of interference with property

rights.*° 8

In the circumstances of the present case, therefore, the Tribunal finds that there is no
violation of Article 5 of the Treaty. Losses arising from the 2007 Reforms prior to their
reversal are fully, and appropriately, accommodated within the finding that there was a
violation of the ‘fair and equitable treatment’ provision in Article 3(1) of the Treaty

arising from the ban on profits.

Nothing in these findings of the Tribunal should be taken to suggest that the Treaty is
hostile towards particular policies on the provision of healthcare facilities. The
Contracting Parties are free to adopt the policies that they choose. The Treaty focuses
on the manner in which policies may be changed and implemented, not on the policies
themselves. The decision in a case such as the present could be very different if, for
example, reforms had been introduced in a phased manner together with provision for
the compensation of any private health insurance providers who were caused loss by
the reforms. Indeed, the Contracting Parties could go further, and exclude health care
altogether from the coverage of the BIT if they so wish. But as long as the provisions
of the Treaty remain in force and applicable, they must be respected. That is what the
Governments of the Contracting Party intended when they chose to conclude the

Treaty, for what they judged to be the benefit of their States and their nationals.

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal has determined that Respondent has breached
Articles 3 and 4 of the Treaty. Accordingly, Claimant is entitled to damages. This

subject will be discussed below.

THE CALCULATION OF DAMAGES
The Parties’ Arguments on Damages

1. Causation, Mitigation and Eureko’s “Hibernation” Strategy

Claimant’s Position

296.

458

According to Claimant, the damages incurred by Eureko were caused by the Slovak

Republic’s introduction of the 2007 Reforms. The Slovak Republic sought to drive

See, for example, LG & E, #1193, 200; Tecmed, $1116.

297.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012
private health insurers from the Slovak market and amended its legislation to do so.4?
In response, Claimant states that it adopted a “hibernation strategy,” based upon
“(i) a strong reduction in marketing efforts and expenses, (ii) a reduction in benefits
offered to insured above the statutory minimum coverage and (iii) a reduction in

operating costs, for instance, by decreasing IT expenses."

In Claimant’s view, hibernation was a reasonable mitigation strategy that reduced the
damages Eureko would otherwise have suffered by leaving the Slovak Republic and

we 461
abandoning its investment.

Contrary to Respondent’s argument, Claimant does not
consider hibernation to have been part of the cause of the damages inflicted on it, but
rather a response on Eureko’s part to harm that was fully manifest once the 2007

Reforms were introduced.*?

Respondent’s Position

298.

Respondent contests both the existence of the alleged hibernation strategy and any

alleged causal link between the 2007 Reforms, any alleged hibernation, and any harm

463

allegedly inflicted on Eureko. Respondent notes that the hibernation strategy was

described only late in the proceedings, in the additional witness statement of Mr Bjarne

Jorgen Slorup, and the alleged decision is not supported by any contemporaneous

4

documentary evidence.“ On the contrary, Respondent argues, Union Healthcare’s

annual reports from this period state that the company had not changed its long term
strategy, and Union Healthcare attempted to purchase the insurance portfolio of EZP in
mid-2008. Moreover, Respondent outlines, Claimant continued to introduce benefits
above the statutory minimum level of coverage,‘ increased its marketing budget in

2008,* and continued to increase IT expenditures throughout the relevant period.*®” In

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, (§[11.2-3.
Claimant’s Damages Memorial, 1.6.

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, 11.3.

Hearing Tr. (Day 1), 12 December 2011 at 73:11 to 74:16.
s Memorial, 434.

s Memorial, 444.

s Memorial, 9147-49.

s Memorial, (9150-54.

s Memorial, (9155-56.

Respondent's Damag:

 

Respondent's Damag:

 

Respondent's Damag:

 

Respondent’s Dama

 
 

Respondent's Damag:

299.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

the face of this contrary evidence, Respondent submits, Claimant has offered only

highly general assertions of the cost reductions allegedly comprising the hibernation.“**

In Respondent’s view, Eureko’s alleged hibernation forms part of the causal chain
between the 2007 Reforms and any harm suffered by Eureko. Relying on the
jurisprudence of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal and the decisions of tribunals in Biwater
Gauff and S.D. Myers,” Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to establish the

requisite degree of proximate causation.‘7!

Even if a decision to place Union
Healthcare in hibernation was taken and carried out, Respondent submits, Claimant has
failed to draw a link between the legislative actions of the Slovak Republic and that
decision. The cap on operating expenses, the ban on brokers, and the repositioning of
the Regulator all took place significantly before, and do not appear to have triggered,

2

the alleged decision to hibernate.” In contrast, the amended solvency requirements,
amended redistribution rate, and ban on transfers were all introduced after the decision
to hibernate was allegedly taken.*”? Claimant, Respondent notes, identifies the ban on
profits as the trigger for its decision to hibernate,‘ but in Respondent’s view, Claimant
was legally obliged by the cap on operating expenses to lower its expenditures in any
event.4”> Not only is the causal link not proven, Respondent submits, but there were
“many other reasons” why Claimant may have sought to reduce its expenses, including
general attention to efficiency, economic crisis, losses by Claimant’s holding company

outside the Slovak Republic, and ordinary business decision-making.*”°

2. “Duty” to Mitigate

Claimant’s Position

300.

Claimant contends that its hibernation strategy was intended to mitigate the damages

caused by the 2007 Reforms, but notes Respondent’s position that Eureko should have

Respondent’s Damages Memorial, {{39-40.
Biwater Gauff, 4779.

S.D. Myers, $316.

Respondent's Damages Memorial, {{57-60.
Respondent's Damages Memorial, 65.
Respondent's Damages Memorial, (70.
Respondent's Damages Memorial, (64.
Respondent's Damages Memorial, {73.

Respondent's Damages Memorial, {79.

101

301.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

terminated its operations prior to 30 September 2006 in anticipation of coming legislative
changes.‘”” In Claimant’s view, this argument “makes no sense” as Eureko would then
been entitled to the full value of its investment, or €144.9 million—more than it now
seeks.‘”* Claimant further submits as a factual matter that it could not have anticipated

the 2007 Reforms and should not have had to anticipate a breach of the Bit.”

In any event, Claimant argues, the duty to prove a failure to mitigate lies with the Party
raising the defence. Citing the holdings of the tribunals in AJG v. Kazakhstan,*° and
Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt,"*!
Claimant contends that this burden is a high one: not every failure to accurately assess
risks gives rise to a mitigation defence and a plausible explanation for a claimant’s

actions will suffice.“**

Respondent’s Position

302.

Respondent submits that the 2007 Reforms were predictable—and were, in fact,
anticipated by Claimant—well before Eureko made its investment in Union Healthcare
(see above at paragraph 193). Early elections had already been called in February 2006,
before the incorporation of Union, and “[a]t any point prior to 30 September 2006,
Union Healthcare could have, and should have terminated its activities, to avoid the

- «59483
consequences of the expected regulation. 48

3. The Calculation of Damages

Claimant’s Position

303.

Claimant submits that the standard for calculating damages in international law is set
out generally in the decision of the Permanent Court of International Justice in its

Factory at Chorz6w decision as follows:***

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {III.7.

 

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {III.8.
Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {III.8.

AIG Capital Partners, Inc. and CISC Tema Real Estate Company v. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/OI/6, Award, 7 October 2003, 10.6.5 (3).

Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/99/6, Award,
12 April 2002, 170.

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {HI 13-14.
Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, (365.

Factory at Chorz6w (Merits), Judgment of 13 September 1928, P.C.L.J. Series A, No. 17 at p. 47.

102

304.

305.

306.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

Reparation must, so far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act
and re-establish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if the
act had not been committed.

This standard, Claimant argues, has been subsequently incorporated into the Articles on
State Responsibility developed by the International Law Commission*** and applied by

arbitral tribunals in cases such as Vivendi.‘*°

Relying on the Expert Report of Mr Richard Indge (of Ernst & Young), Claimant
outlines two calculation methods, both based upon a discounted dividend model (a form
of discounted cash flow modelling), and a third method as a ‘reasonableness check’.
Claimant submits that discounted cash flow represents the approach to damages

adopted in most investment treaty arbitrations.**”

Methodology 1. The first method offered by Claimant is based on a comparison
between the dividends that Eureko would have received in the absence of the 2007
Reforms (“Model E”) and the dividends that it anticipates receiving now that the 2007
Reforms have been both enacted and reversed (“Model A”). For the purposes of this
calculation, Claimant dates the 2007 Reforms to 25 October 2007, the date of the ban
on profits, notwithstanding that certain measures were introduced before that date."
Claimant treats the 2007 Reforms as having ended on | August 2011, the date on which

9

the further reforms adopted in July 2011 entered into force.**? Claimant’s first

methodology assesses the damages suffered by Eureko to be €47 million.*”°

Methodology 2. Claimant’s second method is based on a comparison between the value
of Eureko’s investment before the 2007 Reforms and its value at 1 August 2011.
Claimant’s 1 August 2011 valuation is based upon dividends anticipated in the
Model A calculation and amounts to €138.7 million. Claimant’s pre-2007 Reforms
valuation is based on a model prepared by Union’s Management Board and Eureko’s
Group Strategy and Performance Group to reflect Claimant’s legitimate expectations at
24 October 2007 (“Model 2007”). Although both models are based upon a scenario in
which the 2007 Reforms did not take place, Model 2007 differs from Model E in that it

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {111.2
Vivendi, §8.2.7.

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, (111.6.
Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {IV.6.
Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {IV.3.

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {IV.5.

103

307.

308.

309.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

reflects assumptions for other factors as at October 2007, rather than actual events and
the revised assumptions forecast in 2011 in Model E.*°! Model 2007 assesses the value
of Claimant’s investment in October 2007 at €144.9 million, an amount that is then
uplifted to reflect anticipated returns between October 2007 and August 2011.
Applying three possible rates, this results in a value of €203.4 to €189.5 million and a

resulting loss, as a result of the 2007 Reforms of €64.7 to €50.8 million”?

Methodology 3. Claimant verifies the reasonableness of its two methodologies against
a simplified methodology representing the borrowing cost of the €72 million which
Eureko invested in Union Healthcare. Although not reflective of actual damages,
Claimant submits that at the 7.375 to 8.375 percent rate allegedly applicable to
Eureko’s debts, its damages should amount to no less than its borrowing cost of €22.1

to €25.5 million.”

Claimant identifies a discount factor of 9.4 percent and claims compound interest at
that rate, irrespective of the method adopted.* Claimant further notes that it may be
subject to taxes on damages that would not have been applicable to dividends and
requests an order that Respondent bear any taxes owed as a result of awarded

damages.*”°

Evaluating its models, Claimant rejects the points of disagreement raised by
Respondent (see below at paragraph 312). Specifically, Claimant contends that its
models do account for the lapse of newly acquired policyholders*”® and that its prediction
of gradually decreasing broker commissions reflects Union Healthcare’s decreasing

7

reliance on brokers at it gained market share and recognition.” Claimant similarly

defends its ratio of premium income to claims, noting that Respondent seeks to apply the
average rate among Slovak health insurers. In effect, Claimant argues, this negates the
very efficiencies Eureko entered the market in order to create and takes as a starting

point that no greater efficiency was possible.*”* Next, Claimant defends the omission

Expert Report of Richard Indge, {7.8.
Expert Report of Richard Indge, 7.21-25.

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {1V.16.

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {1V.18.

Claimant’s Damages Memorial, {1V.20.

Joint Expert Report, pp. 9-10.

Joint Expert Report, pp. 13-14; Hearing Tr., 30 January 2012 at 23:24 to 24:6.
Hearing Tr., 30 January 2012 at 21:9 to 22:15.

104

310.

E-SR Final Award

7 December 2012
of a small company premium in calculating discount rates, arguing that Union Healthcare
is not, in fact, a small company, but is backed by the much larger Eureko group.”
Finally, Claimant defends its use of a single date—2024—for calculating the terminal
value in Models A and E. As a “matter of pure logic,” Claimant argues, terminal value,
being the “value of the company beyond a point that can reasonably be estimated” should

500

end at the same year for both models. Moreover, Claimant submits, its first calculation

method requires the use of a single terminal value for both models to avoid capturing

growth relating only to the underlying economic assumptions of the models.*”!

On the whole, Claimant considers the outcome reached by Respondent’s expert
witnesses on damages to be “simply not credible.”*” Claimant notes that Respondent’ s
methods would value Union Healthcare at negative €96.1 million in October 2007 and
would treat the effect of the 2007 Reforms as beneficial to Claimant, preventing it from

losing still further amounts of money.>

This amounts, in Claimant’s view, to a
statement that Union Healthcare was financially doomed, a position Claimant considers
irreconcilable with the factual record. Moreover, Claimant notes, KPMG—the same
accounting firm preparing Respondent’s expert report—had previously audited Claimant,

treated it as a going concern, and never raised concerns regarding its viability.

Respondent’s Position

311.

500

501

502

503

505

506

507

Respondent objects to the damages methodology employed by Claimant and its expert.
In Respondent’s view, the use of the discounted dividend model is inappropriate in
light of the short period of Claimant’s investment prior to the alleged breach and its
lack of a track record of profitability. Respondent notes that arbitral tribunals in
Metalclad, Wena Hotels Lid. and Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East)
Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt” all declined to apply a discounted cashflow

Hearing Tr., 30 January 2012 at 20:20 to 21:8.
Hearing Tr., 30 January 2012 at 19:19 to 20:5.
Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, {{{70-73.
Hearing Tr., 30 January 2012 at 10:20.

Hearing Tr., 30 January 2012 at 10:18 to 13:12.
Hearing Tr., 30 January 2012 at 17:21 to 18:22.
Metalclad, {120-21

Wena Hotels Ltd., (123.

Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/84/3, Award,
20 May 1990, 188.

105

312.

313.

314.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

method where the claimant in those matters lacked a record of past performance.°°*
According to Respondent, this is “exactly the case of Union Healthcare,” and Claimant
itself bases its claim on models, rather than any established track record. Of the
arbitrations noted by Claimant, Respondent observes that the Vivendi tribunal
ultimately declined to apply a discounted cashflow model on the grounds that future
profitability was insufficiently established.°” Respondent submits that the same situation

prevails here and that Claimant has not established a likelihood of profitability.°"°

Examining Claimant’s models, Respondent notes a number of points of disagreement,
the most significant of which are recounted here. First, Respondent argues that
Claimant’s second method and its use of Model 2007 are inappropriate insofar as

Model 2007 does not take into account the 2008 financial crisis.*!!

Accordingly, the
second method compensates Claimant for events not related to legislative or other
actions by the Slovak Republic.>! Respondent further questions the fact that all three
models were prepared with the involvement of Claimant’s personnel and objects
particularly to the fact that Claimant’s expert witness (Mr Indge) did not “carry out a

full verification of the assumptions” underlying Model 2007.5

Second, Respondent believes that Claimant’s models overstate the projected growth of
Union Healthcare’s portfolio, in particular by understating the lapse rates of new
policyholders. Respondent submits that the structure of Model 2007 omits lapse rates
entirely from the calculation thereby omitting the costs of acquiring replacement
policyholders and invalidating the results.°! Respondent also considers the lapse rates
used in Model E to be low in light of the use of brokers projected therein, as broker-
acquired policy holders lapse at a significantly higher rate than individuals acquired

through an insurer’s own network.>!°

Third, Respondent disagrees with the estimate employed in Model E that average

broker commissions per policyholder acquired would have decreased significantly over

Respondent's Damages Memorial, {132-33
Respondent's Damages Memorial, 1138-39, citing Vivendi, (98.3.4, 8.3.5, 8.3.8.
Respondent's Damages Memorial, {140-42

Expert Report of Michael Peer and Zuzana Kepkova, 45.1.6.

Joint Expert Report, p. 3.

Joint Expert Report, p. 3.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, 64; Joint Expert Report, p. 9-10.

Expert Report of Michael Peer and Zuzana Kepkové, 996.2.14 to 6.2.19.

106

315.

316.

317.

318.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012
time. Respondent considers that, had brokers remained permitted, new entrants to the
market and the use of brokers by Union Healthcare’s competitors would have

maintained broker fees at a stable level.°'°

Fourth, Respondent does not consider Claimant’s projected ratio between its income
from insurance premiums and its expenditures on health care to be reasonable. In
Respondent’s view, the primary driver of the claims ratio in the long term is the ageing of

the Slovak population, which would not support a decreasing rate."'7

Moreover,
Respondent argues, the poor state of the Slovak health sector would not suggest that
significant reductions in expenditures, if achievable, would be sustainable in the long

term.>'$

Fifth, Respondent disagrees with the discount rate of 9.4 percent applied by Claimant.
In particular, Respondent disagrees with the use of a single discount rate in all three
models, notwithstanding the differing circumstances prevailing in 2007 and 2011,
and the omission of a small company premium reflecting the scope of Union
Healthcare’s operations. Respondent considers a small company premium to be

standard in valuation in the Slovak Republic.°”°

Finally, Respondent rejects the approach to terminal value adopted in Claimant’s
models. According to Respondent’s experts, Claimant applies a terminal value, ending
the model, at the point where a stable number of policyholders is reached in the case of
Model A and Model 2007 (in the years 2024 and 2016, respectively), but continues
Model E for six additional years after reaching a stable number of policyholders. In
Respondent’s view, Model E should end in 2018, rather than 2024, reducing the

ultimate loss under the first calculation method by €44.5 million”!

Respondent did not expressly challenge Methodology 3 except insofar as it was

affected by the challenges raised to Methodologies | and 2.

Expert Report of Michael Peer and Zuzana Kepkové, 46.5.1 to 6.5.6; Joint Expert Report, p. 13.
Expert Report of Michael Peer and Zuzana Kepkova, 46.7.3.

Expert Report of Michael Peer and Zuzana Kepkové, 96.7.6; Joint Expert Report, pp. 12-13.

Joint Expert Report, p. 5.

Expert Report of Michael Peer and Zuzana Kepkové, 46.10.14 to 6.10.15; Joint Expert Report, p. 4.
Joint Expert Report, pp. 5-6.

107

319.

320.

321.

322.

522

524

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The Tribunal’s Decision on Damages

1. The “Hibernation” and Mitigation of Damages

The question of the extent of the loss caused by Respondent’s breach of its Treaty
obligations, for which Respondent is liable, remains. Respondent argued that no losses
were caused by measures taken by Respondent. In essence, it claimed that it was

Claimant’s own choice to put its operations into ‘hibernation’.

The Tribunal does not accept Respondent’s view of the matter. The Tribunal accepts
that Claimant reasonably regarded the 2007 Reforms (and particularly the cap on
operating costs, the ban on profits and the ban on transfers) as putting it in a position in
which it might be unable to recover its existing investment and any further sums
invested in its business plans in Slovakia. The suspension (or “hibernation”) of its
operations in Slovakia was a reasonable response to that situation, and one that does not
break the chain of causation and responsibility in this case. The suspension was a
reasonable defensive measure, intended to minimise the risk of further losses. The
Tribunal takes this view both from the perspective of questions of liability and
causation, and from the perspective of the determination of compensation payable.

The Tribunal rejects Respondent’s submission that Claimant failed to mitigate its loss.

2. Calculation of Compensation

The Tribunal has found that the 2007 Reforms violated Article 3(1) of the Treaty. It
has found that the 2007 Reforms violated Article 4 of the Treaty, but that the violation
and the injury are subsumed within the violation and the injury arising from the breach
of the ‘fair and equitable treatment’ obligation in Article 3, and that it is not necessary
to consider them further. It has also found that there was no violation of Article 5 of
the Treaty. Accordingly, the task is to quantify the losses for which compensation is

due under Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

In principle, according to the well-established approach reflected in the Chorzéw
Factory case™? and in the ILC Articles on State Responsibility,” Respondent is under

an obligation “to compensate for the damage caused”** by its breach of the Treaty.

See Article 39 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility.
(1928) PCIJ, Series A, No. 17, p. 47.
Articles 35, 36, 39.

108

323.

324.

325.

326.

327.

328.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

It is for Claimant to prove its case regarding the ‘damage caused’. That said, the
requirement of proof must not be impossible to discharge. Nor must the requirement
for reasonable precision in the assessment of the quantum be carried so far that the
search for exactness in the quantification of losses becomes disproportionately onerous

when compared with the margin of error.

In the present case, Claimant put forward a number of different methodologies. Two
were based upon calculations of the value of the business and the estimated impact

upon that value of the 2007 Reforms.

That approach is often used in the case of an expropriation, to put a value on that which
has been taken. Here, there is no ‘deprivation’ or expropriation. Further, the
investment was in its early stages, in years that saw the very considerable disruption
caused by various global economic crises. With a very short track record it is difficult
to extrapolate to a robust estimate of the probable future value of Claimant’s
investment. It is also difficult to separate out the effect of the ban on profits and the
ban on transfers from the effect of other measures, which the Tribunal has not found to

constitute breaches of the Treaty.

Perhaps most importantly, since Claimant’s losses were the costs of defending its
position against what proved to be temporary measures in breach of the Treaty, it is

right to focus upon what those costs were.
In its Post-Hearing Brief, Claimant said:

Claimant’s Methodology 3, which assesses Eureko’s damages from a conservative
borrowing cost perspective and estimates damages in the amount of EUR 22.1M —
22.5M, has been left uncontested by Respondent. It calculates solely Eureko’s
costs for funding Union during the time that its business was delayed as a
consequence of the 2007 Reversal, and does not account for the return that Eureko
~ like any other investor — would require over and above the funding cost.°”°

The rationale of this methodology, used by Claimant as a “reasonableness check” on
the results gained from its methodologies based upon the valuation of the business, was
that the sum represents the borrowing cost of the capital tied up in Eureko during the

time that the ban on profits was in force.*°’ Claimant set that period as from

 

525

526

527

Article 36 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility.
Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, (14.

See Claimant's Memorial on Damages, {{fIV.15, IV.16.

109

329.

330.

331.

332.

333.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

25 October 2007 to 1 August 2011, the date when new legislation on health insurance

entered into force.

Claimant may recover lost ground, and at some point in the future reach the same
position on the market that it would have reached in the absence of the ‘hibernation’
that it adopted during the ban on profits. That possibility cannot be predicted with
sufficient certainty. Moreover, profits ploughed back into healthcare are not profits
dissipated or seized by the State without benefit flowing to Claimant. But in any event,
some losses will not be recovered within the foreseeable future; and even if they are
recovered in the future that recovery will not compensate for the loss of the present

value of the monies.

Faced with a freeze imposed by law, locking its investment in the Slovak Republic into
that country, and without the possibility of being able to transfer any profits out of the
State, the investment became essentially ‘lost’. Hibernation was an entirely reasonable
response by Claimant; and the cost of that hibernation is the loss that it suffered as a
result of Respondent’s failure to comply with its Treaty obligations. It is that cost that
should be the quantum of compensation.

As to what that cost was, Claimant has calculated that the borrowing cost of the

* The sum is derived from the

invested capital was not less than €22.1 million.”
application of a borrowing rate achieved by Eureko on a senior debt issue of €750m in

2009 of 7.375%.° The actual calculation was not contested by Respondent.

The Tribunal regards that sum as a reasonable approximation to the cost of the
‘standstill’ that was triggered by the 2007 Reforms and specifically by the ban on
profits.

The Tribunal accordingly awards Claimant damages in the sum of €22.1 million, to be
paid by Respondent net of any taxes that might be due to be paid by Claimant to

Respondent on that sum.

Exhibit CE-2, § 8.10.

 

110

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

334. As is common practice in the present type of investment arbitration, interest,

335.

336.

530

compounded quarterly, will be payable on that sum as from 1 August 2011, up to the
date of payment, to ensure full reparation.” The German Arbitration Act is also silent
with respect to interest. The Treaty itself contains no specific provision on interest, but
the applicable law provision in Article 8(5) refers to “the law in force of the
Contracting Party concerned” and “principles of international law.” Claimant requested
pre-award and post-award interest “at a rate to be determined by the arbitral
tribunal.”**! In its Memorial on Damages Claimant suggested “compound interest at a
rate of 9.4% per year as of 1 August 2011” (based on what Mr. Indge had assessed as
the time value of money in the context of determining a discount rate) or “any lower or

higher interest that the Tribunal considers appropriate.”**

Respondent did not
comment on interest rates. In these circumstances, the Tribunal has the power under
international law to award interest, and discretion to determine a reasonable rate of
interest, in order to ensure full reparation. The Tribunal has considered a range of
interest rates including Euribor, Eurozone official and market rates, and the statutory
rates for unpaid debts under German, Slovak and Netherlands law, and has decided that
interest shall be applied at the Eurozone official rate for “main refinancing operations”
(as published on the website of the European Central Bank www.ecb.int) plus 2%,

compounded quarterly.

3. Other Relief

The Tribunal declares that the Slovak Republic breached its obligations under
Article 3(1) and Article 4 of the BIT by adopting the ban on profits, and later by
adopting also the ban on transfers. The Tribunal declines to make an order as requested

by Claimant**

concerning future compliance with the Treaty by Respondent. It is not
for the Tribunal to grant relief on the basis of speculations about the future conduct of

the Parties. Nonetheless, the Tribunal notes that the Treaty remains in force.

The requests for relief made by Respondent are dismissed.

See, for example, Article 38 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility; Azurix, [440; LG&E, {| 54-56, 103-105;
MTD v. Chile, 251; and Wena Hotels Ltd. {{[128-129.

See paragraphs 126-128, above.
Claimant’s Memorial on Damages, {IV.17-19.

See paragraphs 126-128, above.

1

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

XI. COSTS

337. The Tribunal observes that the Treaty contains no provisions on the allocation of the
costs of arbitration arising out of an “investment dispute” (as opposed to a dispute
concerning the Treaty’s interpretation or application). The provisions regarding the
Tribunal’s decision in the matter of costs are instead to be found in Articles 38 to 40 of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
defines the “costs of arbitration” as follows:

The arbitral tribunal shall fix the costs of arbitration in its award. The term “costs”
includes only:

(a) The fees of the arbitral tribunal to be stated separately as to each
arbitrator and to be fixed by the tribunal itself in accordance with
article 39;

(b) The travel and other expenses incurred by the arbitrators;

(c) The costs of expert advice and of other assistance required by the arbitral
tribunal;

(d) The travel and other expenses of witnesses to the extent such expenses
are approved by the arbitral tribunal;

(e) The costs for legal representation and assistance of the successful party if
such costs were claimed during the arbitral proceedings, and only to the
extent that the arbitral tribunal determines that the amount of such costs
is reasonable;

(f) Any fees and expenses of the appointing authority as well as the
expenses of the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration
at The Hague.

338. Meanwhile, paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

provide the criteria to be applied by the Tribunal in awarding costs:

1. Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration shall in
principle be borne by the unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral
tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the
circumstances of the case.

2. With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance referred to
in article 38, paragraph (e), the arbitral tribunal, taking into account the
circumstances of the case, shall be free to determine which party shall
bear such costs or may apportion such costs between the parties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable.

339. The Parties deposited with the PCA a total of €800,000.00 (€400,000.00 by Claimant;
€400,000.00 by Respondent) to cover the costs of arbitration.

112

340.

341.

342.

343.

344.

345.

346.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The fees of Professor Albert Jan van den Berg, the arbitrator appointed by Claimant,
amount to €205,583.33 (€78,750.00 for the period up to the issuance of the Award on
Jurisdiction, Arbitrability and Suspension (the “Jurisdiction Phase”); and €126,833.33
for the subsequent period up until the issuance of this Final Award (the “Merits
Phase”). His expenses amount to €6,800.08 (€2,287.17 for the Jurisdiction Phase and
€4,512.91 for the Merits Phase, reflecting in particular travel to and accommodation in

London for hearings and deliberations).

The fees of Judge Peter Tomka, the arbitrator originally appointed by Respondent,
amount to €5,000.00 (for the Jurisdiction Phase only). Judge Tomka incurred no
expenses. The fees of Mr V.V. Veeder, the arbitrator appointed by Respondent
following the resignation of Judge Tomka, amount to €100,250.00 (€25,000.00 for the
Jurisdiction Phase and €75,250.00 for the Merits Phase). Mr. Veeder’s expenses amount
to €434.65 (€22.00 for the Jurisdiction Phase and €412.65 for the Merits Phase).

The fees of Professor Vaughan Lowe, the Presiding Arbitrator, amount to €209,567.50
(€79,437.50 for the Jurisdiction Phase and €130,130.00 for the Merits Phase). His
expenses amount to €1,328.86 (€1,193.86 for the Jurisdiction Phase and €135.00 for
the Merits Phase).

Pursuant to the Terms of Appointment and the agreement of the Parties, the
International Bureau of the PCA was designated to act as Registry in this arbitration.
The PCA’s fees for registry services amount to €79,470.00 (€33,877.50 for the
Jurisdiction Phase and €45,592.50 for the Merits Phase).

Other tribunal costs, including court reporters, hearing rooms, meeting facilities, travel,
bank charges, and all other expenses relating to the arbitration proceedings, amount to
€70,742.67 (€12,063.59 for the Jurisdiction Phase and €58,679.08 for the Merits
Phase).

Based on the above figures, the combined tribunal costs, comprising the items covered
in Articles 38(a) to (c) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, total €679,177.09
(€237,631.62 for the Jurisdiction Phase and €441,545.47 for the Merits phase).

These tribunal costs are deducted from the deposit, and any unexpended balance shall

be returned to the Parties in accordance with Article 41(5) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

113

347.

348.

349.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The principle governing the awarding of the costs of arbitration, according to
Article 40(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, is that an arbitral tribunal shall
determine that the costs shall be borne by the unsuccessful party, unless it finds an
apportionment of the costs between the parties to be reasonable under the
circumstances of the case. With respect to the costs of legal representation and
assistance (Article 38(e)), Article 40(2) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides
that the arbitral tribunal, taking into account the circumstances of the case, is free to
determine which party shall bear such costs or may apportion such costs between the
parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable. Articles 40(1) and (2) grant

wide discretion to an arbitration tribunal in awarding the costs of arbitration.

The Tribunal is aware of a certain practice in investment treaty arbitration that each
party bears its own costs and that the parties divide tribunal costs equally. That practice
is not binding on this Tribunal, which prefers the more recent practice in investment
arbitration of applying the general principle of “costs follow the event,” save for
exceptional circumstances, such as when concerns regarding access to justice are
raised. That approach is the more compelling one in the present case which is governed
by the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules that expressly contemplate the rule of “costs
follow the event” in Article 40(1) by its emphasis on “success” or lack thereof. This
conclusion is reinforced by the fact that both sides in this case indeed argue that the
unsuccessful side in this arbitration should have to bear the full amount of tribunal costs
as well as the other side’s costs of legal representation. Further, Section 1057 of the
German Arbitration Act provides for an arbitral tribunal to “allocate costs, including
those incurred by the parties necessary for the proper pursuit of their claim or defence,”
and that an arbitral tribunal shall do so “at its discretion and take into consideration the

circumstances of the case, in particular the outcome of the proceedings. 534

In the present case, Claimant has succeeded in a substantial part of its claim on the
merits. Moreover, it has done so on the basis that the ban on profits, which had been
found unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic in January
2011, was a violation of the Treaty. As these costs concerning liability and damages in
the Merits Phase have been incurred in order to recover losses arising from the violation
of the Treaty, the Tribunal considers that they should in principle be paid by Respondent.

The same is true in respect of the Tribunal and administrative costs for the Merits Phase.

German Code of Civil Procedure (Zivilprozessordnung, or “ZPO”), Book 10.

114

350.

351.

XII.

352.

E-SR Final Award
7 December 2012

The Jurisdiction Phase, in contrast, raised a difficult and novel question in the form of

the Intra-EU Jurisdictional Objection. In respect of that phase, each Party should bear

its own costs and one-half of the Tribunal costs.

On the basis of the figures set out in the Revised Costs Submissions of 12 March 2012,

Respondent is accordingly directed to pay to Claimant the sum of €2,905,350.94. This

amount represents Claimant’s fees and expenses of legal representatives and experts for

the liability and quantum phases of the case. The Tribunal considers such costs to have

been reasonably incurred and reasonable in amount.

DECISION

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal:

(a)

(b)

(©)

(d)

(e)

@)

DISMISSES each of the remaining jurisdictional objections advanced

by Respondent and decides that it has jurisdiction over the dispute;

DECLARES Respondent to have breached Article 3 and Article 4 of

the Treaty by adopting the ban on profits and the ban on transfers;

ORDERS Respondent to pay to Claimant damages in the sum of
€22.1 million, net of any taxes that might be due to be paid by

Claimant to Respondent on that sum;

ORDERS Respondent to pay to Claimant interest on the amount of
€22.1 million, as from 1 August 2011 up to the date of payment, at
the Eurozone official rate for “main refinancing operations” (as
published on the website of the European Central Bank

www.ecb.int) plus 2%, compounded quarterly;

ORDERS Respondent to pay to Claimant the amount of
€220,772.74 to reimburse Claimant for costs of this Merits Phase of

the arbitration; and

ORDERS Respondent to pay to Claimant the amount of
€2,905,350.94 for its legal representation and assistance in the

Merits Phase of this arbitration.

115

E-SR Final Award

Place of Arbitration: Frankfurt, Germany

Date: # Decomber 2012

\ 7 okay Ver NetVaw

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg Mr V.V. Veeder
Co-Arbitrator Co-Arbitrator

 

Le po howe

Professor Vaughan Lowe
Presiding Arbitrator

116

