INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
ACP Axos CAPITAL GMBH

Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF KOSOVO

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/22

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Philippe Pinsolle, President
Dr. Michael Feit
J. Christopher Thomas QC

Secretary of the Tribunal
Anna Holloway

Date of dispatch to the Parties: May 3, 2018

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing ACP Axos Capital GmbH:

Dr. Dirk Hamann

Dr. Patricia Nacimiento

Herbert Smith Freehills Germany LLP
Berliner Freiheit 2

10785 Berlin

Germany

and

Mr. Andrew Cannon

Herbert Smith Freehills Paris LLP
66 Avenue Marceau

75008 Paris

France

Representing the Republic of Kosovo:

Mr. Luka S. Misetic

Mr. Stephen Anway

Mr. Mark Stadnyk

Squire Patton Boggs (US) LLP
30 Rockefeller Plaza

New York, New York 10112
United States of America

and

Mr. Rostislav Pekat

Mr. Vladimir Polach

Squire Patton Boggs, v.o.s., advokatni
kancelat

Vaclavské namésti 57/813

110 00 Prague 1

Czech Republic

and

Mr. Stephan Adell

Squire Patton Boggs (UK) LLP
7, rue du Général Foy

75008 Paris

France

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 2
A. The Parties 2

1. The Claimant 2

2. The Respondent 3

B. Arbitration Clause and Governing Law. 4
C. Procedural Language and Place of the P: di 5

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 5
Cc of the Pr di 5

 

First Session of the Tribunal and Issuance of Procedural Order No. 1

 
 

A
B
C. Written Pleadings, Document Production and Course of the Arbitration
D

Hearing

 

III. DECISION ON JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY.

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

  

 

 

 

A. The Parties’ Respective Prayers for Relief. ll
B. Principal Facts 12
1. The Decision to Privatize PTK 13
2. The Tender Process 13
3. The Award of the Contract to the Axos/Najafi Consortium
4. Events Following the Award of the Contract 26
5. The Cancellation of the Privatization Process 36
C. Decision of the Tribunal Regarding Jurisdiction and Admissibility
1. Preliminary Observations 38
2. Axos’ Claim that the Exchange of 3 April 2013 and 18 April 2013 Constituted a Contract which is a
Protected Investment Al
3. Axos’ Alternative Jurisdi | Theory 67
IV. COSTS OF THE ARBITRATION 69

 

Vv. AWARD 74

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

 

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration

Arbitration Rules
rbitration Rules Proceedings 2006

 

Axos ACP Axos Capital GmbH

 

Treaty Between the Federal Republic of Germany
and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

 

 

BIT or Treaty Concerning the Reciprocal Protection and
Encouragement of Investments

BT BT Sp Zoo

Claimant ACP Axos Capital GmbH

 

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits and Quantum

Claimant’s Memorial dated 24 June 2016

 

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and

Claimant's Rejoind.
aumant's Sejoinder Admissibility dated 29 September 2017

 

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits and Quantum and
Claimant’s Reply Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility dated 16 June 2017

 

 

 

 

CL-[#] Claimant’s Legal Authority
Columbia Columbia Capital V LLC
Exhibit C-[#] Claimant’s Exhibit

Exhibit R-[#] Respondent’s Exhibit

 

 

Government Privatization Committee of the

GPC
Republic of Kosovo

 

 

 

 

Hearing on jurisdiction, merits and quantum held

 

 

 

 

 

Hearing from 6 November 2017 to 13 November 2017

ICSID Convention Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other
States dated March 18, 1965

ICSID or the Centre International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes

IPQ Instructions for Pre-Qualification

ITP Instructions for Tender Participants (Exhibit C-7)

Kosovo Republic of Kosovo

 

Law on PoEs

Law No. 03/L-087 on Publicly Owned Enterprises

 

 

 

 

 

 

Law on PPP Law No. 04/L-045 on Public-Private-Partnership
PoEs Publicly Owned Enterprises

PIU Project Implementation Unit

PPP Public-Private-Partnership

PTK Post and Telecommunications of Kosovo J.S.C.
Respondent Republic of Kosovo

 

 

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

 

Respondent’s — Counter-Memorial (Corrected
Version) dated 23 December 2016

 

iii

 

 

Respondent’s Rejoinder

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits and Quantum
and Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 1
September 2017

 

 

 

RL-[#] Respondent’s Legal Authority
SHA Shareholder Agreement
SPA Share Purchase Agreement

 

Tr. Day [#] [Speaker(s)] [page:line]

Transcript of the Hearing

 

Transaction Advisors

Lazard Fréres SAS and Raiffeisen Investment AG

 

 

Tribunal

 

Arbitral tribunal constituted on 3 December 2015

 

 

INTRODUCTION

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Treaty between the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia concerning the Reciprocal Protection and
Encouragement of Investments, which entered into force on 25 October 1990 (the “BIT” or
“Treaty”) and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and

Nationals of Other States, which entered into force on October 14, 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

A. The Parties!
1. The Claimant

The Claimant is ACP Axos Capital GmbH (‘‘Axos’’), a company incorporated under the laws of

Germany. Its address is:

ACP Axos Capital GmbH
Magdalenenstrasse 5
D-20148 Hamburg
Germany

In this arbitration, Axos is represented by:

Dr. Dirk Hamann

Dr. Patricia Nacimiento

Herbert Smith Freehills Germany LLP

Berliner Freiheit 2

10785 Berlin

Germany

Tel: +49 30 2215 10400

Fax: +49 30 2215 10499

Email: dirk.hamman @hsf.com
patricia.nacimiento@hsf.com

' Capitalized terms have the meaning ascribed to them in the Parties’ submissions or the relevant underlying documents found
in the record.

Mr. Andrew Cannon

Herbert Smith Freehills Paris LLP
66 Avenue Marceau

75008 Paris

France

Tel: +33 153577070

Fax: +33 153577080

Email: andrew.cannon@hsf.com

2. The Respondent

The Respondent is the Republic of Kosovo (“Kosovo”).
In this arbitration, the Republic of Kosovo is represented by:

Mr. Luka S. Misetic

Mr. Stephen Anway

Mr. Mark Stadnyk

Squire Patton Boggs (US) LLP

30 Rockefeller Plaza

New York, New York 10112

United States of America

Tel: +1 212 872 9838 (Mr. Misetic)
+1 212 407 0146 (Mr. Anway)
+1 212 407 0141 (Mr. Stadnyk)

Fax: +1 212 872 9815

Email: luka.misetic@squirepb.com
stephen.anway @squirepb.com
mark.stadnyk @squirepb.com

Mr. Rostislav Pekat

Mr. Vladimir Polach

Squire Patton Boggs, v.o.s., advokatni

kancelat

Vaclavské namésti 57/813

110 00 Prague 1

Czech Republic

Tel: +420 221 662 289 (Mr. Pekai)
+420 221 662 247 (Mr. Polach)

Fax: +420 221 662 222

Email: rostislav.pekar@squirepb.com
vladimir.polach @ squirepb.com

Mr. Stephan Adell

Squire Patton Boggs (UK) LLP

7, rue du Général Foy

75008 Paris

France

Tel: +33 1 5383 7588

Fax: +33 1 5383 7401

Email: stephan.adell @squirepb.com

B. Arbitration Clause and Governing Law

6. Article 9 of the Treaty concerning the reciprocal protection and encouragement of investments

entered into between the Federal Republic of Germany and Yugoslavia provides as follows:

Article 9

(1) Differences of opinion regarding investments between either Contracting Party
and an investor of the other Contracting Party shall, as far as possible, be settled
amicably between the parties to the dispute.

(2) If a difference of opinion cannot be settled within six months from the time of
its assertion by either of the parties to the dispute, it shall upon the request of the
investor of the other Contracting Party be submitted for arbitration within the
scope of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of Other States of 18 March 1965.

(3) The arbitration award shall be binding and shall not be subject to appeal or
any legal redress other than those provided for in the Convention mentioned above.
The arbitration award shall be enforced under national law.

(4) The Contracting Party which is party to the dispute shall not, at any stage of
the arbitration proceedings or enforcement of an award, raise as an objection the
fact that the investor of the other Contracting Party has received in pursuance of
an insurance policy an indemnity in respect of some or all of the losses.”

? The original text of the Treaty is in German and Serbo-Croatian. For ease of reference, this Award refers to the United
Nations’ translation to English, as published in the United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 1707, I-29533, pages 605-612, Exhibit
C-1. The Treaty was ratified by Kosovo on 2 September 2011 and by the Federal Republic of Germany on 10 June 2011,

Exhibit C-1.

IL.

Cc. Procedural Language and Place of the Proceedings

The procedural language of the arbitration is English,* and the place of the proceeding is Paris,

France.*

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A. Commencement of the Proceedings

Axos’ Request for Arbitration was submitted to ICSID on 22 April 2015. The Request was
supplemented by three further letters from the Claimant, of 22 May 2017, 27 May 2017 and 3 June
2015.

On 4 June 2015, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in accordance with Article

36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the registration.

In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an
arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of ICSID’s Rules of Procedure
for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings. The Parties agreed to constitute the
Tribunal in accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention as follows: the Tribunal
would consist of three arbitrators, one to be appointed by each Party and the third, presiding
arbitrator to be appointed by agreement of the Parties or, in the absence of such agreement, by the

Secretary-General of ICSID pursuant to an agreed ballot procedure.

On 18 September 2015, Arbitrator Dr. Michael Feit, a national of Switzerland and Israel, appointed

by the Claimant, issued his declaration of independence.

On 23 September 2015, Arbitrator J. Christopher Thomas QC, a national of Canada, appointed by

the Respondent, issued his declaration of independence.

On 3 December 2015, the ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties that Mr. Philippe Pinsolle, a
national of Switzerland and France, President, appointed by the Secretary-General pursuant to the

agreement of the Parties, as well as Dr. Michael Feit and Mr. J. Christopher Thomas QC had all

3 Procedural Order No. 1, 11.1.
4 Procedural Order No. 1, { 10.1.

accepted their appointments as arbitrators in the case. The Tribunal was constituted as of 3
December 2015, pursuant to Article 38(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 6.

Ms. Celeste Mowatt, Legal Associate, ICSID, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

B. First Session of the Tribunal and Issuance of Procedural Order No. 1

The first session of the Tribunal was held on 1 February 2016 by telephone conference, in

accordance with Arbitration Rule 13(1).

Following this session, on 10 February 2016 the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1| setting

out the Procedural Rules governing the arbitration as well as a timetable of the proceedings.
On 18 August 2016, the timetable set forth in Procedural Order No. | was amended.

On 17 October 2016, Mr. Pinsolle informed the Parties that Ms. Isabelle Michou, previously a
partner at Herbert Smith Freehills and counsel of record for Axos in this arbitration, had joined the
partnership of Quinn Emanuel where Mr. Pinsolle is also a partner. Mr. Pinsolle stated that this
did not affect his independence or impartiality towards the Parties and asked for the Parties’
comments on this disclosure. On 24 October 2017, each Party confirmed that it did not object to

Mr. Pinsolle continuing to serve in this arbitration.

Cc. Written Pleadings, Document Production and Course of the Arbitration

On 24 June 2016, Axos sent the Tribunal its Memorial on Merits and Quantum and hyperlinked
indexes of factual and legal exhibits. The Memorial on Merits and Quantum was accompanied by
three factual witness statements: the witness statement of Mr. Jan Budden, dated 24 June 2016, the
witness statement of Mr. Robert Woog, dated 23 June 2016, and the witness statement of Mr.
Andrew Bullock, dated 17 June 2016; and two expert reports: the expert report of FTI Consulting,
dated 24 June 2016, and the expert report of Dr. Nina PlavSak, dated 23 June 2016.

On 23 December 2016, Kosovo submitted its Counter-Memorial and hyperlinked indexes of
factual and legal exhibits. The Counter-Memorial was accompanied by a factual witness
statement, the witness statement of Mr. Besim Beqaj, dated 22 December 2016; and two expert
reports, the expert report of Professor Qerim Qerimi, dated 22 December 2016, and the expert
report of KPMG (Mr. Michael Peer), dated 23 December 2016.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

On 16 January 2017, Kosovo submitted a corrected version of its Counter-Memorial, rectifying
minor typographical errors and citations. The Respondent submitted a clean and a redline version
of the Counter-Memorial in order to show the changes made. The Respondent sent a letter with its

rectified Counter-Memorial explaining the changes made on the same date.

On 13 February 2017, the Parties exchanged documents by way of voluntary production.

On 23 February 2017 the Parties submitted their respective Redfern Schedules containing their
requests for production of documents. Axos further enclosed a letter with its request in which it
responded to some of Kosovo’s objections and made a number of observations in relation to its

own application.

On 23 February 2017, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of Axos’ Redfern Schedule and

Kosovo’s Redfern Schedule and stated that it would render its decision by 6 March 2017.

On 6 March 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 containing its decision on the

Redfern Schedules and the production of documents.

Following this, Axos sent a letter to the Tribunal dated 14 June 2017, attaching correspondence
between the Parties dated 23 May 2017 and 2 June 2017. In this letter, Axos sought clarification
from the Tribunal regarding the proper scope of Procedural Order No. 2, in particular, relating to
privilege and commercial confidentiality. As Axos was at the time preparing its Reply Memorial,
it requested that it be permitted to make limited additional submissions to take account of any

further documents arising from an order of disclosure of further documents.

On 16 June 2017, Axos submitted its Reply on Merits and Quantum and Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility and hyperlinked indexes of factual and legal exhibits. The Reply
on Merits and Quantum and Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility were
accompanied by hyperlinked indexes of factual and legal exhibits; two factual witness statements,
a second witness statement of Mr. Jan Budden, dated 15 June 2017, and the witness statement of
Mr. Dixon Doll, dated 12 June 2017; as well as two expert reports, a second expert report prepared
by Dr. Nina PlavSak, dated 19 May 2017, and a second expert report prepared by FTI Consulting,
dated 16 June 2017.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Kosovo replied to Axos’ letter of 14 June 2017 on 21 June 2017, attaching two appendices,
addressing the points raised by Axos in its letter. Kosovo requested that the Tribunal reject Axos’

allegations of breaches of the Tribunal’s Order in the document production phase of the arbitration.

Axos then sent a letter dated 28 June 2017 whereby it repeated its positions stated in its letter of

14 June 2017.

Kosovo sent an email on | July 2017 indicating that it maintained the position stated in its letters

of 2 June 2017 and 21 June 2017 and noting that it had nothing further to add.

On 5 July 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 deciding on outstanding issues related

to document production.

On 10 July 2017, Kosovo wrote to the Tribunal in reply to Procedural Order No. 3 and confirmed
that it “has not withheld correspondence solely on the basis that it was copied to counsel of

Respondent and that all document withheld contained request for or the giving of legal advice.

Kosovo further confirmed that it had no further documents to produce.

On 1 September 2017, Kosovo submitted its Rejoinder on Merits and Quantum and its Reply on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility. The Rejoinder and the Reply were accompanied by a second expert
report of KPMG (Mr. Michael Peer), dated 1 September 2017, as well as a second expert report of
Professor Qerim Qerimi as a commentary of the second expert report of Dr. Nina PlavSak, dated
19 May 2017. The Respondent also submitted a witness statement of Mr. Kreshnik Gashi, a
witness statement of Mr. Fadil Ismajli, and a second witness statement of Mr. Besim Begqaj, all

dated 31 August 2017.

On 5 September 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the Tribunal that Ms. Anna
Holloway would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal effective immediately in replacement of Ms.

Celeste Mowatt.

On 29 September 2017, the Claimant submitted its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility in
response to the Respondent’s Rejoinder on Merits and Quantum and Reply on Jurisdiction and

Admissibility. The Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility was accompanied by a third expert

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

report prepared by Dr. Nina PlavSak to provide her opinion on the points raised in Professor Qerim

Qerimi’s second report of 31 August 2017.

D. Hearing

On 3 October 2017, the President of the Tribunal and the Parties held a telephone conference to

discuss the organization of the forthcoming hearing on jurisdiction and merits (the “Hearing”).

Prior to the call, on 18 September 2017, a draft agenda was circulated to the Parties, who were
invited to confer and submit a joint proposal advising the Tribunal of any agreements they had
been able to reach on any of the agenda items, or of their respective positions where they had been

unable to reach an agreement.

By the same letter, the Parties were also invited to agree to notify each other, and the Tribunal, by
29 September 2017, regarding the witnesses each wished to call for cross-examination at the

Hearing. The Parties confirmed their agreement to this proposal on 22 September 2017.

On 28 September 2017, in accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, the Parties jointly submitted

a “Summary of Parties’ Positions.”

On 29 September 2017, each Party notified the other Party and the Tribunal of the witnesses they

intended to cross-examine at the Hearing.

On 6 October 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 deciding on the organization of
the Hearing, namely the location, the schedule, the allocation of time, the attendance, the witness
and expert examination, the documentation and hearing materials, the post-hearing briefs and

statements of costs/submissions on costs, and the hearing logistics.

The Hearing was held in Paris from 6 November 2017 to 13 November 2017. The following

persons were present at the Hearing:

Tribunal:
Mr. Philippe Pinsolle President
Dr. Michael Feit Arbitrator
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC Arbitrator

42.

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Anna Holloway

For the Claimant:
Mr. Andrew Cannon
Ms. Patricia Nacimiento
Mr. Dirk Hamman
Mr. Peter Archer
Ms. Rosalind Axbey
Mr. Alessandro Covi
Mr. Jerome Temme
Mr. Arjun Doshi

Mr. Jan Budden (also a witness)

Dr. Ulrich Hammerschmidt

For the Respondent:
Mr. Luka S. Misetic
Mr. Stephen P. Anway
Mr. Rostislav Pekar
Mr. Stephan Adell
Mr. Mark Stadnyk
Mr. Vladimir Polach
Ms. Fazile Bekteshi

Ms. Marcelé Restelica Ponosheci
Ms. Leonita Shabani Mullarama

Mr. Heset Mazrekaj

Court Reporters:
Ms. Anne-Marie Stallard
Ms. Kirsten Bell

Secretary of the Tribunal

Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
ACP Axos Capital GmbH

ACP Axos Capital GmbH

Squire Patton Boggs

Squire Patton Boggs

Squire Patton Boggs

Squire Patton Boggs

Squire Patton Boggs

Squire Patton Boggs

Ministry of Economic Development of Kosovo
Ministry of Economic Development of Kosovo
Ministry of Economic Development of Kosovo
Ministry of Justice of Kosovo

The Court Reporter LLC
The Court Reporter LLC

During the Hearing, the following persons were examined:

On behalf of the Claimant:
Mr. Jan Budden
Mr. Robert Woog
Mr. Dixon Doll
Dr. Nina PlavSak
Mr. James Nicholson
Mr. Richard Edwards

On behalf of the Respondent:
Mr. Besim Beqaj
Mr. Kreshnik Gashi

Mr. Fadil Ismajli
Professor Dr. Qerim Qerimi
Mr. Michael Peer

ACP Axos Capital GmbH

FTI Consulting
FTI Consulting

Minister of Innovations and Entrepreneurship of Kosovo
Chairmen of the Regulatory Authority of Electronic and
Postal Communications of Kosovo

Former Minister of Economic Development of Kosovo
University of Prishtina

KPMG

43. The Parties filed their submissions on costs on 12 December 2017, and observations on the other

Party’s statement of costs on 20 December 2017.
44. The proceeding was closed on 4 April 2018.

Ill. | DECISION ON JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY
A. The Parties’ Respective Prayers for Relief

45. Axos’ prayer for relief contained in its last pleading, i.e., the Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and

Admissibility, dated 29 September 2017, requests the Tribunal to:

a. reject the Respondent's jurisdictional objections in their entirety;

b. declare that it has jurisdiction over the present dispute, including all of the
Claimant's claims under the BIT;

c. grant the relief sought by the Claimant on the merits of its claims;

d. order that the Respondent pay the cost of these arbitration proceedings,
including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, as well as legal and other expenses
incurred by the Claimant, including the fees of its legal counsel, experts and
consultants, plus interest thereon at a reasonable rate from the date on which such
costs are incurred to the date of payment; and

e. grant such other relief as the Tribunal may deem just and proper.

46. The “relief sought [...] on the merits” of Axos’ claims is stated in full in Axos’ Reply Memorial,

dated 16 June 2017:

a. a declaration that the Respondent has breached Article 4(2) of the BIT by
expropriating the Claimant’s investment;

b. a declaration that the Respondent has breached Article 2(1) of the BIT by failing
to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimant’s investment;

c. a declaration that the Respondent has breached Article 2(3) of the BIT by taking
arbitrary measures that have prejudiced the Claimant’s use of its investment;

d. a declaration that the Respondent has breached Article 7(2) of the BIT by failing
to observe obligations entered into with regard to the Claimant’s investments;

47.

48.

49.

e. an order that the Respondent make full reparation for the Claimant’s loss arising
out of the Respondent's treaty violations, in the amount of €380.3 million, as well
as interest thereon;

fi an order that the Respondent pay the cost of these arbitration proceedings,
including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, as well as legal and other expenses
incurred by the Claimant, including the fees of its legal counsel, experts and
consultants, plus interest thereon at a reasonable rate from the date on which such
costs are incurred to the date of payment; and

g. such other relief as the Tribunal may deem just and proper.

On 5 November 2017, Axos noted that FTI Consulting intended to update its table dealing with
Axos’ asserted lost profit. The revised figures in the updated table quantified Axos’ asserted lost
profit under the Reduced Profitability Scenario at the amount of EUR 194.3 million and under the
Maintained Profitability Scenario at the amount of EUR 339.8 million. These figures appeared to

reduce the quantum of Axos’ claim for full reparation.

Pursuant to Kosovo’s Counter-Memorial, dated 23 December 2017, and Rejoinder on Merits and
Quantum and Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, dated 1 September 2017, Kosovo seeks for

its part a Final Award:
(a) declaring that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction;
(b) alternatively, dismissing Axos’ claims;
(c) awarding Kosovo such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate; and
(d) ordering Axos to pay the costs of this arbitration, including the costs of the
Arbitral Tribunal and the legal and other costs incurred by Kosovo on a full
indemnity basis, plus interest in an amount to be determined by the Tribunal.

B. Principal Facts

For the sake of clarity, the Tribunal will first provide a brief account of the facts of this case. This
account is not intended to be exhaustive. It serves merely as a guide for the reader. To the extent
that certain specific facts are relevant for the claims made by either side, they will be discussed in

the analysis of the claim in question.

50.

51.

52.

53.

1. The Decision to Privatize PTK

Following the declaration of independence of Kosovo in 2008, the Government of Kosovo decided
in early 2011 to offer for tender and sale 75% of the shares of Post and Telecom of Kosovo

(“PTK”), the postal and communication authority of Kosovo.

To that effect, on 9 March 2011, the Government of Kosovo issued Decision No. 02/03 to offer
for tender and sale 75% of the shares of PTK and granting authority to the Government

Privatization Committee (“GPC’’) to conduct the tender and sale of the shares:

DECISION

1. To offer for tender and sale 75% (seventy five percent) of the shares of the
publicly Owned Enterprise PTK J.S.C.

2. To establish the Government Privatization Committee (GPC) for the
privatization of PTK J.S.C. [...]

3. The Government Privatization Committee (GPC) should follow an open,
transparent and competitive procedure in accordance with the procedural
conditions set out in the laws of the Republic of Kosovo and by the highest
international standards.

[15
This decision was subsequently approved by the Assembly of Kosovo on 31 March 2011,° and
Kosovo appointed financial advisories Lazard Fréres SAS and Raiffeisen Investment AG to act as
transaction advisors for the privatization process in early 2012 (the “Transaction Advisors”).’

2. The Tender Process

The tender process started in April 2012,* and a first conference for potential investors was

organized by the Transaction Advisors in London on 22 May 2012.° Another conference for

> Exhibit C-59.

© Exhibit C-4.

7 Exhibit R-10.

8 Exhibit R-1.

° Exhibits R-2, R-14.

54.

55.

56.

potential investors was organized one week later, on 29 May 2012, in Istanbul.!° Claimant was

among the 20+ potential investors who participated in those conferences. '!

The following month, Kosovo formally announced a public invitation for participation in the
public tender process for the shares in PTK and issued the Instructions for Pre-Qualification

(“IPQ”). The IPQ is the document containing the instructions issued by Kosovo, notably:
- describing the contemplated transaction (Section 3);
- stating the pre-qualification requirements for potential bidders (Section 4);
- describing the consortium structure to be adopted by potential bidders (Section 5);

- describing the form and content of applications for pre-qualification and manner in which

such applications should be submitted (Sections 6 and 7); and
- describing the evaluation process for such applications (Section 8).!”

Shortly thereafter, on 17 July 2012, Axos was incorporated under the laws of the Federal Republic

of Germany, with Mr. Jan Budden as sole managing director. '?

A number of potential bidders submitted pre-qualification applications pursuant to the IPQ, and
on 15 August 2012, the Transaction Advisors prepared a 30-page pre-qualification report
evaluating eight investors’ applications for pre-qualification submitted up to 13 August 2012.
Among those potential investors was a consortium comprising Columbia Capital V LLC

(“Columbia”), acting as lead member, and Axos.

10 Exhibits R-3, R-14.

1 Exhibit

 

R-2, R-3, R-14; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {{ 26.

"2 Exhibit C-5.
'3 Exhibit C-2.
'4 Exhibit R-4.

57. The report found Columbia and Axos’ application compliant with the IPQ,'> and on that basis, the
GPC announced on 17 August 2012 a list of five pre-qualified applicants, including the
Columbia/Axos Consortium. That announcement stated:

1.2. Pre-qualified Applicants

On August 17, 2012 the Contracting Authority announced 5 Economic Operators
as Pre-Qualified Applicants in accordance with the IPQ. On September 11, 2012
the Contracting Authority invited the Pre-Qualified Applicants to start the Tender
process.

List of Pre-qualified Applicants:

+ Albright Capital Management, LLC, USA

* Columbia Capital V, LLC, USA (in consortium with AP Axos, Germany)

¢M 1 International, British Virgin Island

¢ Turkcell, Turkey

¢ Twelve Hornbeams, UK (in consortium with Avicenna, UK). 16

58. The pre-qualification was notified to the Columbia/Axos Consortium by letter on that same date:

Title: Public tender for the privatisation of 75% (seventy five percent) of shares of
Publicly Owned Enterprise Post and Telecommunications of Kosovo J.S.C. PTK
IS.C.

[J

Your prequalification application has been thoroughly evaluated according to the
conditions given in the Instructions for Pre-Qualification (IPQ) document which
was issued based on the aforementioned laws.

We have the pleasure to inform you that your company/application has prequalified
and we will invite you in for the second phase of this tender after all the required
processes are finalised."

59. The second phase of the tender process began on 11 September 2012, when the pre-qualified

applicants were each provided with the Instructions for Tender Participants (“ITP”), along with a

'5 Exhibit R-4, p. 8.
16 Exhibit C-7, Section 1.2.
'” Exhibit C-6.

tender dossier comprised of an Information Memorandum and draft Transaction Documents,
including a draft Share Purchase Agreement (“SPA”), draft Shareholder Agreement (“SHA”), and

draft Escrow Agreement.!®
60. The ITP notably contained provisions relating to:
- atentative time schedule for the deal (Section 2);
- data room, due diligence, questions and clarifications (Sections 4 and 10);
- the Bid Submission Deadlines and Submission Requirements (Section 5);
- the form and content of the Bid (Section 6);

- the requirements of and rules for the applicant consortia (Sections 3 and 7); and

- evaluation criteria and procedure (Sections 8 and 9).!?

6l. With respect to the draft Transaction Documents, the ITP provided in particular for very limited
comments on the part of a tender participant, with Kosovo retaining the last word on accepting or

rejecting any proposed amendment to the draft documents:

6.6. Amendments to the Transaction Documents

There will be no negotiations of Transaction Documents in this Tender. Pre-
Qualified Tender Participants shall submit their suggested amendments to the
Transaction Document drafts provided together with this ITP until 08 October
2012. Pre-Qualified Tender Participants are requested to keep their proposed
amendments to a minimum. Any change to the Transaction Documents requires
the approval of the GPC.

The amendments to the Transaction Documents by the Pre-Qualified Tender
Participants shall also include input to any items indicated as being subject to input
from Pre-Qualified Tender Participants. For example, the Pre-Qualified Tender
Participants shall submit their proposal of an escrow bank and shall facilitate
contacts to such escrow bank in order to have the escrow bank agree to the escrow
agreement as set out in the Transaction Documents.

 

'9 Exhibit C-7.

[...] General comments will not be taken into account, unless such comments are
accompanied with a wording proposal. The amendments shall be made in such a
form that by simply accepting the amendments, the respective document can be
signed without changing the non-amended parts of the document.

The Transaction Advisor will organise a joint session (in the form of a physical
meeting or a telephone conference) with each Pre-Qualified Tender Participant, in
which the Pre-Qualified Tender Participant may explain the reasons for its
proposed amendments. This will not be a negotiation, and the Transaction Adviser
will not comment save where it requires clarification of any proposed amendment.

The GPC may in its sole discretion take into account the Pre-Qualified Tender
Participants’ proposed amendments and may in its sole discretion accept or reject
all or a part of the comments of the Pre-Qualified Tender Participant.

The Transaction Advisor will issue a final set of Transaction Documents prior to
the Bid Submission Deadline. This final version of the Transaction Documents shall
be considered as final and shall form the basis on which the Bidder shall make his
Bid and shall constitute the version of the Transaction Documents which will be
signed by the Bidder (the “Final Transaction Documents” ).

20

 

62. The ITP also contained a broadly worded legal disclaimer which provided in express terms that no

compensation shall be due in the event of cancellation of the privatization:

The Contracting Authority further reserves the right to cancel the Tender or declare
it void or otherwise without effect either in relation to the entire Tender or in
relation to an individual Bidder, for any reason whatsoever, until the signing of the
Transaction Documents, and that such action does not entitle the Bidder/Selected
Bidder to any claim whatsoever against the GPC, the GoK, or any of their
respective agents, representatives, advisors or consultants.!

63. The ITP provided in addition a specific liability regime of joint and several liability for the
members of the winning consortium which would continue to apply in the event that the successful
bidder should decide to incorporate a special purpose vehicle for the purpose of carrying out the

proposed transaction:

20 Exhibit C-7, Section 6.6.
2! Exhibit C-7, Section 1.1 in fine.

6. 7. Special Purpose Company

In the event that a Selected Bidder forms a Special Purpose Company to enter into
the Transaction Documents, the Selected Bidder (and, in case of a Consortium, all
members of the Consortium) shall remain jointly and severally liable with the
Special Purpose Company for any liabilities incurred under the Transaction
Documents and such relationship and liability shall be proven to the Contracting
Authority by co-signing of the Transaction Documents by the Bidder.

The Special Purpose Company needs to be registered in a country that recognizes
Kosovo.”

64. The law applicable to the ITP was the law of the Republic of Kosovo:

These ITP and any disputes or claims arising out of or in connection with its subject
matter (including noncontractual disputes or claims) are governed by and
construed in accordance with the law of the Republic of Kosovo.

65. On 12 September 2012, Axos entered into a framework agreement for Business Consultancy
Services with BT Sp Zoo (“BT”).* The scope of services, as described in Schedule 1 of the
framework agreement, was for BT to “review and assess quality, capital requirements and
potential operational improvements in Client’s target’s network [i.e. PTK].” The BT Project

Representative was Mr. Andrew Bullock.?>

66. The due diligence process continued for some time and, on 29 October 2012, counsel for Axos

circulated mark-ups of the SPA, SHA, and Escrow Agreement to the Transaction Advisors.7°

67. After a meeting of the Project Implementation Unit (“PIU”) of Kosovo, the Transaction Advisors,
and certain prospective bidders, including Axos, held negotiation meetings on 8-10 November
2012 in Vienna.”’ Axos then circulated a mark-up of the ITP to the Transaction Advisors on 21

November 2012.78

» Exhibit C-7, Section 6.7.
it C-7, Section 13.5.
it C-73.

it C-73; Schedule 1.

 

28 Exhibit R-57.

68. Axos’ view at the time was that, should Kosovo accept the proposed changes to the Transaction

Documents, as circulated by counsel to Axos on 29 October 2012, those changes should be

reflected in the ITP, and an amended ITP should be issued. As it noted in its cover email to the

Transaction Advisors of 21 November 2012:

We are referring to the mark ups on the transaction documents submitted on 29th
of October and the meeting for discussion of the mark ups held in Vienna on 8th of
November.

Please note that, subject to acceptance of the substantial elements of our mark ups,
we reasonably conclude that the ITP document should suffer adequate changes too.
Therefore, please find attached changes of the ITP reflecting possible acceptance
of substantial elements from our mark ups. Please note also that the authorities,
should they decide to accept the substance of our mark ups, would have to issue
another decision for amending the part of the IPQ reflecting changes of relevant
dates for undertaking procedural actions.”

69. Axos’ mark-up of the ITP called, in particular, for amendments to:

29 Exhibit R-57.

the legal Disclaimer of Section 1.1, suggesting that language be added to the effect that
Kosovo “shall provide cost compensation in case privatization is terminated or not

finalized for unpredictable Kosovo internal political reasons”; and

the liability regime attaching to a bidder should they set up a Special Purpose Company to
enter into the Transaction Documents, effectively eliminating such liability (Section 6.7).
The proposed amendment read: “Jn the event that a Selected Bidder forms a Special
Purpose Company to enter into the Transaction Documents, the Selected Bidder (and, in

case of a Consortium, all members of the Consortium) shall choose to issue statement

 

declaring not to be y [sic] liable with the Special Purpose Company for any liabi

     

incurred under the Transaction Documents. In such case the Contracting Authority will
have right to ask special performance guarantees from the Special Purpose Company or
extension of validity of the Completion Security for maximum duration of 5 years”

(emphasis added).

70.

71.

72.

723.

74.

Following discussions with the various prospective bidders, on 28 November 2012 Kosovo issued
Amendment No. | to the ITP, extending the bid submission deadline from 19 November 2012 to
15 January 2013.*°

On 11 December 2012, Axos entered into a framework agreement for Business Consultancy
Services with Telecom Italia.*! Although the Form of Statement of Work was not filled out in the
agreement,°? the Tribunal understands from Axos’ pleadings that the intent was, inter alia, to
introduce 3G and 4G products developed by Telecom Italia (as well as by BT) on a “white label”

basis.*

Further to the discussions with prospective bidders, the Transaction Advisors circulated amended
drafts of the Transaction Documents on 18 December 2012.*4 On the same date, Kosovo issued

Amendment No. 2 to the ITP amending various sections of the ITP, including:
- the Signing Date (Section 5.4);
- the Rules of Consortia (Section 7); and
- The Bid Submission Form (Annex 1).*°

Neither the legal disclaimer (Section 1.1) nor the liability regime for special purpose companies

(Section 6.7) was however modified.

On 27 December 2012, Columbia (which had up to that point been the lead member of the
Consortium) by email informed the GPC and the Transaction Advisors of changes in the
consortium structure, including most notably its withdrawal from the Consortium:

We are hereby informing you that there is a change in our consortium structure.

The new structure is as follows:

30 Exhibit C-83.

3! Exhibit C-85.

* Exhibit C-85, Schedule 1.
3 Claimant’s Memorial, 518.
Exhibit C-88.

38 Exhibit C-87.

20

ACP AXOS CAPITAL GMBH, Hamburg Germany shall become a Lead Member of
our consortium, and

NAJAFI COMPANIES, LLC shall enter as a new member of the consortium.
COLUMBIA CAPITAL V, LLC shall no longer be part of the consortium.
TELEKOM ITALIA joins next to British Telecom as a strategic partner.

We have attached the relevant documentation for your consideration and are happy
to address any questions you might have at your convenience.*®
75. A few days after Columbia’s withdrawal from the Consortium, on 7 January 2013, Axos circulated

new mark-ups of the draft SHA, SPA, and Escrow Agreement.*”

76. On 30 January 2013, Kosovo issued Amendment No. 4 to the ITP, further extending the bid
submission deadline to 14 March 2013.** The Transaction Advisors circulated the final SHA and

SPA and the Disclosure Letter around one month later, on 21 February 201 3.9

77. On 4 March 2013, two and a half months after it had been informed by Columbia of its withdrawal
from the Consortium with Axos and Columbia’s replacement by Najafi Companies, the GPC
approved the change in consortium. The approval was first communicated by email in the

following terms:

This is to inform you that the Government Privatisation Committee (GPC)
confirmed in its todays meeting your request for consortium change. Further to
this approval, ACP Axos Capital GmbH can be appointed as a team leader and
Najafi Companies LLC is approved as Consortium Member to the consortium led
by ACP Axos Capital GmbH.

A formal notification will be sent to all Pre-qualified Tender Participants.”

78. The following day, on 5 March 2013, Koha Ditore, a local newspaper, reported that Members of
the Assembly from the opposition party, the League for Democratic Kosovo (LDK), questioned

the lawfulness of the privatization tender:

36 Exhibit C-91.
37 Exhibit C-92.
38 Exhibit C-98.
°° Exhibits C-101 and C-8.
4° Exhibit C-9.

 

21

79.

80.

81.

Muhamet Mustafa, a Kosovo MP, suspects whether members of the consortium can
be changed once the pre-qualification phase has ended, and companies to remain
part of the privatization race.

“If some companies are prequalified and have expressed interest but the
qualification period has ended, it shouldn't be possible to change the consortium
without announcing a new expression of interest and without a verification,” said
Mustafa. “I don't believe that a change of consortia in this way is permitted by
international procurement rules, or either by bidding rules in Kosovo. I don't know
what the inter-ministerial council was based on, they ought to explain this
action.[”]

“For an economic expert, the process of privatization of PTK is unlawful.”

“The biggest problem is that the whole procedure is being conducted without a
decision of the Assembly regarding the arrangements.”

[“]The decision which is referred to by the Ministry of Economic Development was
never made in the Assembly, and the budget law — which in a way legalized the
process of privatization — has only a one year validity, and ended on 31 December
2011,” said Mustafa. “There is no legal basis for the privatization of PTK.”*!
Two days after this article was published, on 7 March 2013, Kosovo issued Amendment No. 5 to
the ITP regarding the Bid Submission Form‘? and the Transaction Advisors circulated the
Disclosure Letter as well as Schedule 10 of the SPA (listing “Assets Essential to the Operation of
the Company’s Telecom Business”).*7
The following week, on 13 March 2013, the bid submission deadline was once more extended

from 14 March 2013 until 3 April 2013.44

Having received Schedule 10 to the SPA on 7 March 2013, Axos wrote to the Transaction Advisors
on 20 March 2013 raising concerns with the Schedule, as its reading of the document suggested

that PTK might be privatized without the underlying telecommunication infrastructure:

Since the guarantee catalogue from SPA never included the telecommunication
infrastructure belonging to PTK, and only place where the infrastructure may be
listed was the planned schedule 10 of the SPA (according to the clause 9.5.), we
sent through our mark ups and repeatedly with separate letters the request to

4! Exhibit R-6.

 

it C-106

+ Exhibit C-107.

22

include the infrastructure in to the guarantee catalogue. Since it never happened
actually, we reasonably expected that PIU will use at least the possibility to list the
essential infrastructure in to the schedule 10. Now we understand, and from your
last letter it is definitely confirmed, that PIU or ¢ li s never had considered
to guarantee that the essential telec ication infrastructure would be granted
to PTK, meaning that the target entity should be totally dependent on the owner of
the infrastructure in the future. And more, as seen from your letter, PIU does not
make a single commitment that at least the three items listed in the schedule 10 are
the telec ication infrastructure belonging to PTK. Therefore, to back up your
stand point that it may come to misunderstanding over the essential element of the
sale process (if the telecommunication infrastructure and belongs to PTK and
where is the list of such infrastructure), please refer to the relevant clause of SPA
where such guarantee had been provided.** (emphasis added)

82. Axos noted that if that understanding was correct, it would have a substantial impact on its analysis
of the deal, and would cause it to seek compensation for expenses incurred in connection with the

tender process:

In opposite, we will conclude that the whole process was designed and conducted
not to inform the participants in a transparent manner about the main element of
the sale — the target entity PTK shall not be privatized with the belonging
telecommunication infrastructure! Such assumption, if confirmed, will have_a
massive impact on our legal, technical and ial efforts done so far, and we
will reconsider not only participation with the bid as planned, but also will request
remedies for the financing of expenses of the procedure under non-transparent
terms.*° (emphasis added)

83. However, on the same date (20 March 2013), Axos received confirmation via the German
ambassador to Kosovo that the telecommunication infrastructure was to be included in the sale of

the shares in PTK. The email from the ambassador stated:

Ihave confronted Minister Beqaj with your accusations over the phone today. After
having conferred with his colleagues, he called me back and assured me that no
changes were made to the conditions to tender. Later, when we met in person, he
explained that merely the buildings would be excluded from the sale. However, this
would have been clear from the beginning of the tender process and known to the
tender participants for a long time; moreover, they could be rented under
favourable conditions.

4 Exhibit C-108.
46 Exhibit C-108.

23

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

The entire rest of the physical infrastructure of the company would be included in
the sale.”
The ambassador further conveyed to Axos that Kosovo would not be amenable to a further

extension of the bid deadline:

He [Minister Beqaj] asked that the changes you have claimed to the tender
procedure should be communicated to the transaction advisers so they can make
the necessary corrections. He also made it clear that another delay of the tender
deadline would not be possible.**

Two weeks later, on 3 April 2013, two of the pre-approved tender participants, M1 International

Limited and the Axos/Najafi Consortium, submitted bids for the purchase of shares of PTK.

The Axos/Najafi bid was for EUR 277 million for 75% of the shares of PTK,”? while M1

International Limited’s bid was for EUR 150 million.°°

The financial bids submitted by Axos/Najafi and M1 International Limited were opened at a

meeting held in Pristina, Kosovo, on 12 April 2013, attended by the press and television.*!

3. The Award of the Contract to the Axos/Najafi Consortium

Having received and reviewed Axos/Najafi’s and M1 International Limited’s respective bids, on
16 April 2013 the GPC issued the Privatization Report summarizing the privatization process and
declaring Axos/Najafi the winning bidder in the privatization tender. The Privatization Report

stated:

Setting from the above, and after a transparent, professional procedure, and in full
compliance with the legislation of the Republic of Kosovo, with the support of
Transaction Advisor and Strategic Advisor, confirmed the consortium "ACP
AxosCapitalGmbh - Najafi Companies LLC" as the most economically responsive
bidder for the privatization of 75% of PTK shares.

47 Exhibit C-109.
48 Exhibit C-109.

4° Exhibit

 

C-111, R-60, R-64, R-67, R-68, and R-75.

°° Exhibit R-10.
5! First Witness Statement of Besim Beqaj, { 29.
» Exhibit R-10.

24

89. On that same date, the Government approved the Privatization Report and directed the GPC to

proceed with the privatization process:

90. Two days later, on 18 April 2013, the Transaction Advisors forwarded to Axos a letter from the

GPC.

DECISION

1. Approving the Report of the Government Committee for Privatization of 75% of
the Publicly Owned Enterprise Post and Telecommunications of Kosovo JSC
(PTK), for proclaiming the Consortium ACP Axos Capital Gmbh - Najafi
Companies LLC as the most economically responsive bidder.

2. the Government Committee for Privatization of 75% of the PTK shall further
proceed with the privatization and sale of shares as per procedures defined in the
bidding documentation for the privatization of 75% of shares of the PTK and
applicable legislation.*

The letter informed Axos that the Axos/Najafi Consortium had submitted the highest

financial bid for 75% shares in PTK and stated:

91. The letter from the GPC went on to state that the contract award was provisional and conditional

Please find attached the official notification of the award:

L

 

In accordance with the Instructions for Tender Participants, the Contracting
Authority has treated the highest offered Purchase Price to be the economically
most advantageous offer. We have the pleasure to inform you that you have
submitted the highest Purchase Price as a reply to the Instructions for Tender
Participants for the above-mentioned procurement activity.

The contract has been awarded to you with the price specified in your Financial
Bid and in compliance with the terms and condition of the Instruction for Tender
Participants.™*

on potential requests for review by unsuccessful tenderers:

The contract award is provisional and does not constitute a contractual
arrangement until the interval has elapsed during which unsuccessful tenderers can
seek a review of the decision.*> (emphasis in the original)

°3 Exhibits R-11, C-113.

54 Exhibit C-12.
°5 Exhibit C-12.

 

25

92. A few days later, on 23 April 2013, Axos issued a press release announcing that the Axos/Najafi
Consortium, with its European and US investors, had won the privatization tender for 75% of the
shares in PTK.*° The same day, Deloitte, Axos’ financial and tax advisor, provided Axos with the

final draft of their Financial and Tax Due Diligence Report.*”

93. The following day, 24 April 2013, Kosovo issued a formal contract award notice to “ACP Axos

Capital GmbH in Consortium with Najafi Companies LLC.” The contract award notice stated:

11.1.1) Contract title attributed by the contracting authority:

Privatisation of 75 % of the shares of Post and Telecommunications of Kosovo
J.S.C. (PTK)

[..]
11.1.3) Brief contract description

Offer for tender and sale of 75% (seventy five per cent) of shares of Publicly Owned
Enterprise Post and Telecommunications of Kosovo J.S.C. (PTK)

[J

IV.4) Name and addresses of the economic operator to whom the contract has been
awarded

Official name: ACP Axos Capital GmbH in Consortium with Najafi Companies
LLC.

4. Events Following the Award of the Contract
94. On 24 April 2013, the very day that Kosovo issued the formal contract notice, Najafi by letter
terminated its cooperation agreement with Axos and requested that Axos notify Kosovo of the

same. Najafi’s letter of termination stated:

Pursuant to Section 8 of the Cooperation Agreement, we are hereby terminating
the Cooperation Agreement and our participation in the Consortium and the
Tender. Such termination is effective immediately.

°© Exhibit R-69.
57 Exhibit C-114.
58 Exhibit C-115.

26

95.

96.

97.

98.

Kindly ensure that there is no reference to, or mention of, Najafi as a member of
the Consortium or, in any manner whatsoever, as being affiliated with Axos or the
Consortium in connection with the Tender or the privatization of Kosovo Post. Also,
kindly notify all regulating authorities who have been told that Najafi is a member
of the Consortium (including the Government Committee for Privatization of Post
and Telecommunications of Kosovo J.S.C. (PTK)) that we are no longer a member
of the Consortium and have no interest in Kosovo Post or its privatization. Please
provide us with a copy of your correspondence to the Privatization Committee
informing them of the foregoing within five business days; note that if we do not
receive such correspondence within five business days, we shall ourselves make the
communication to the Privatization Committee.

This was not immediately notified by Axos to Kosovo, and Najafi wrote to Axos again on 16 May

2013, indicating that it was “getting increasingly uncomfortable about the current situation.”

Also on 24 April 2013, the Transaction Advisors had circulated a presentation identifying next
steps with timelines, such as the preparation of Final Transaction Documents between 17 May
2013 and 16 July 2013 with the latest date for signing of the Transaction Documents then
envisaged to be 16 July 2013.°!

However, a few days later, on 7 May 2013, Axos’ financial and tax advisors sent the Transaction
Advisors a list of questions which, in Axos’ view, had not been fully addressed during the due

diligence process.

In addition, on 27 May 2013, the GPC met and proposed that the Government submit the
Privatization Report to the Assembly for review. The GPC wrote to the Government confirming

its proposal:

The Government Committee for the Privatization of 75% shares of the Publicly
Owned Enterprise “Post and Telecommunications of Kosovo JSC” (GPC), upon a
meeting held on 27 May 2013, based on the Decision of the Government No.
01/125, of 16 April 2013, approving the GPC Report on Proclaiming the Most
Economically Responsive operator for the privatization of 75% shares of the PTK,
hereby proposes to the Government of the Republic of Kosovo to submit the report

°° Exhibit R-46.

 

© Exhibit C-28.

27

approved by the Government for further review to the next session of the Assembly
of the Republic of Kosovo.

The GPC considers that the privatization process pursued a_ transparent,
professional procedure, and in full compliance with laws of the Republic of Kosovo.
This is confirmed by the Transaction Advisor and Strategic Advisor in their reports.
Since we are now in the stage of contract signature and final closure of transaction,
we consider that it is important that the same report is reviewed by the Assembly of
the Republic of Kosovo. The GPC finds that the review of this report by the
Members of Assembly of Kosovo would contribute to the transparency, and add
value to an important process for impl. a structural reform in the economy
of our country.® (emphasis added)

99. For ease of understanding, the Tribunal will now provide a brief description of the subsequent
events turning first to discussions between Axos and Kosovo (notably the GPC and Transaction
Advisors) relating to the particulars of the deal (a) and second to the discussions related to the
privatization process which took place at the same time, in parallel, but were internal to Kosovo

(b).

a. Discussions between Axos and Kosovo relating to the particulars of the deal

100. Following Axos’ issuance of a series of questions to the Transaction Advisors on 7 May 2013,°*
the Parties engaged in a lengthy process of discussions relating to the terms of the Transaction
Documents and the evolution of the performance of PTK. While the Tribunal will not engage in
an exhaustive account of the back-and-forth communications between Axos and the GPC and
Transaction Advisors for the period covering the end of June to mid-August 2013, the following

exchanges are of note.

101. First, on a number of occasions, Axos circulated amended drafts of the Transaction Documents,

which Kosovo then reviewed:
- On 12 June 2013 Axos circulated marked-up versions of the SPA and SHA;

- On 25 June 2013, the proposed mark-up was rejected by Kosovo;°°

© Exhibit R-12, see also Exhibit C-190.
© Exhibit C-28.

6 Exhibit C-117.

66 Exhibit C-14,

28

On 2 July 2013, the Transaction Advisors followed up on the proposed amendments,
confirming that the GPC could not accept any amendment to the Transaction Documents,
but indicating that it might be prepared to consider certain specific proposals if those did

not alter the documents;

On 4 July 2013, Axos responded, proposing various “side agreements and consents” that

it suggested should be executed alongside the Transaction Documents;°*

Those proposals were examined in GPC internal meetings and in meetings between GPC
and the Transaction Advisors on 12 July® and 15 July 2013” and were rejected on 16 July
2013;7

On 6 August 2013, Kosovo reiterated its refusal to amend the Transaction Documents but
confirmed that the GPC was committed to long-term post-completion arrangements to

ensure that the transaction would go through.”

102. Second, the Parties also discussed PTK’s financial performance on a number of occasions:

7 Exhibit C-15.

68 Exhibit C-125.

    

it C-119.

On 13 June 2013; the Transaction Advisors provided recent financial data showing a

decrease in PTK’s revenues in the first quarter of 2013;73

On 20 June 2013, Axos wrote to the Transaction Advisors with a list of specific questions

concerning PTK’s financial performance;

On 21 June 2013, the Parties held a conference call to discuss PTK’s financial performance

and the Transaction Advisors followed up on 24 June 2013;7°

7 Exhibits C-120, C-121, C-122.

29

- On 26 June 2013, the Parties met in Pristina to discuss, inter alia, Axos’ concerns about

PTK’s financial performance in early 2013;”°

- On 26 July 2013, the Parties met again in Pristina to further discuss PTK’s financial

situation;”7

- On 2 August 2013, Kosovo submitted an overview of PTK’s planned investments, which

Axos commented on three days later, on 5 August 2013.7*

103. Third, having been informed by Innova on 13 June 2013 that it would not participate in the
privatization or its financing,’? Axos attempted to restructure the financing of the transaction. This

became an object of discussions during the Parties’ meeting of 26 June 2013.°°

104. The discussions crystallized in early August 2013, when both Parties restated their interest in

closing the transaction in a timely manner.

105. In particular, Axos confirmed on 9 August 2013 by letter that it was “ready to come and sign the

Transaction Documents”:

We would like to express that it is in both of our greatest interests to accelerate the
final closing date of the transaction and are available to meet in person to review
the various positions any time.

With that understanding in place, we are ready to come and sign the transaction
documents.

We are confident that all open issues will be solved in a mutually satisfactory way.*!

106. Also in a letter of 9 August 2013, the Transaction Advisors, while stating that Kosovo could not
agree to any changes to the Transaction Documents, confirmed that Kosovo was committed to the

success of the privatization process:

76 Exhibit C-123.

77 Exhibit C-129; First Witness Statement of Jan Budden, { 171; Witness Statement of Robert Woog, {] 46.
78 Exhibits C-29, R-39, R-41.

” Exhibit R-53.

8° Exhibit C-123.

8! Exhibit C-131.

30

Further to your letter dated August 9, 2013, we are instructed by the Government
Privatization Committee (the “GPC”) to inform you that the GPC remains
committed to achieving a successful privatization of PTK.

As previously notified to you, GPC regrets that it cannot agree to any changes to
the Transaction Documents which you have indicated in your binding bid that you
are prepared to sign.**
107. In keeping with this position, the Transaction Advisors wrote to Axos on the same day to obtain

the information necessary to complete the Transaction Document templates.*?

108. A few days later, on 13 August 2013, Axos confirmed that it would sign the Transaction
Documents as drafted in the bid submitted on 3 April 2013, stating: “We confirm we will sign the
transaction documents in the form they are initialized by us as part of our binding bid dated April
3rd 2013 submitted according to process” .*4

109. On that same day, the Transaction Advisors reached out to Axos again, asking for the necessary
“information/documents needed to finalise the Transaction Documents”, and indicating that the
GPC reserved its rights under the ITP in the event that the Consortium failed to provide the

requested information by 30 August 2013:

1 am instructed to inform you that your failure to provide this information within
the time limits mentioned will be considered by the GPC as breach of the condition
applying to the extension, in which circumstances the GPC reserves all its rights
under the Instruction for Tender Participants and at law, including the existing Bid
Bond.

110. Among the information sought by the Transaction Advisers was the documentation related to the

SPV which would sign the Transaction Documents:

© Exhibit R-19.

 

85 Exhibit C-22.

31

111.

112.

113.

This extension is however strictly conditional on your sending

[J

- the previously requested information, including in particular details of the SPV

company which will execute the Transaction Documents, no later than 30 August

2012 [sic].*° (emphasis added)
Nearly two weeks later, on 28 August 2013, Axos Telecom B.V., the Axos entity that would sign
the Transaction Documents, was incorporated in the Netherlands, with Axos as the sole
shareholder,®” and on 30 August 2013 Axos provided the requested information to the Transaction

Advisors, reiterating in its cover email its interest in closing the transaction:

Please find attached the list of information that you have requested for signing of
the SPA.

We wish to emphasize again that we are interested and ready to sign the documents

and proceed to close the process and are dedicated to finalize the transaction.*®
Having received the necessary information, on 3 September 2013 the GPC wrote to the Chairman
of the Assembly, requesting that the review of the Privatization Report be placed on the agenda
for the next plenary session.®® (This review process is described in more detail in the following

sub-section of this Award.)

The discussions at the Assembly took some time. In parallel, Axos expressed renewed concerns
about PTK’s performance and on 3 November 2013 requested additional information on several

issues:

Thank you for the financial report for the first 3 quarters 2013. We assume that
these results are valid and audited and are a qualified base for our future
cooperation.

Based on the reports we have the following initial questions for explanation and
clarification to be received latest by mid of next week (Nov 6th). Moreover we

require an expl ion for this dramatic underperformance.

[J

86 Exhibit C-22.

 

it C-136.

89 Exhibit R-20.

32

114.

115.

116.

117.

 

 

underperformance of PTK which is in the sole responsibility of the seller. Finally
we remind you to respond in a constructive approach in the interest of a successful
closing of the privatization process to our letter of position we submitted by
tomorrow 12 days ago.°*° (emphasis added)

Axos’ concerns were discussed at a meeting held in Pristina on 22 November 2013,?! and Axos

followed up via email on the next day.°”

Following those last exchanges, Kosovo circulated a checklist for the signing of the Transaction
Documents on 16 December 2013, and informed Axos on 20 December 2013 that the cut-off
date for signing the Transaction Documents would be 30 December 2013.°* A further checklist

was circulated a few days later, on 23 December 2013.9
As will be explained below, Kosovo decided to cancel the transaction on 30 December 2013.

b. Parallel discussions related to the privatization process internal to Kosovo

In parallel with the Parties’ ongoing discussions over the terms of the transaction, and following
the GPC’s proposal of 27 May 2013 that the Government submit the privatization process to
scrutiny by the Assembly,*° on the same day the Government wrote to the President of the

Assembly to ask for the Assembly’s review of the Privatization Report:

The GPC established by the Government of Kosovo, pursuant to the legal
framework, in its last meeting recommended the review of the report also by the
Assembly of the Republic of Kosovo. The Government of the Republic of Kosovo
requests the Assembly Presidency to review the report in one of the upcoming
plenaries of the Assembly of the Republic of Kosovo.

[J

We consider that the discussion and the review of the GPC report by MPs in the
process of PTK privatization at a stage when the entire process is not yet completed,

°0 Exhibit C-144.
°! First Witness Statement of Jan Budden, { 189-190.

 

it C-148.

it C-153.

% Exhibit R-12, see also Exhibit C-190.

33

will contribute the transparency and will add value to this important process for
the implementation of structural reforms in our country’s economy.”
118. Following that request, on 25 June 2013, public meetings were held by the Assembly Committee
for Economic Development, Infrastructure, Trade and Industry, with members of the GPC, the

Transaction Advisors, and representatives of the British and German embassies in attendance. *®

119. This apparently sparked discussions in the Assembly, and the following day, 26 June 2013, the
Head of the Assembly Committee for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Albin Kurti, wrote to the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, questioning whether Axos had the capability to take

over PTK and indicating that his political party would try to halt the privatization process:

However, equally concerning is the fact that Axos Capital Partners, which leads
the winning consortium for the privatization of the telecom in Kosovo is, an
unknown entity lacking the financial assets to engage in this privatization, as I will
outline below.

L

 

We have therefore requested a parliamentary committee of inquiry into the
privatization of PTK, and we are undertaking all measures in place internationally
and locally to investigate and stop this process.”

120. Nevertheless, the Economic Committee, which had held the 25 June 2013 public hearing, endorsed

the privatization process and referred the Privatization Report to a plenary session of the Assembly

on 30 July 2013:

Committee on Economic Development, Infrastructure, Trade and Industry
(hereinafter: the Committee), pursuant to article 62 of the Rules of Procedure of
the Assembly, in its regular meeting of 30 July 2013, with a majority vote, decided
to submit to the Assembly the following

Recommendation

1. To endorse the Government Committee Report for the Privatization of 75%
shares of PTK.'°

°7 Exhibit R-13.
°8 Exhibit R-15.
°° Exhibit R-78.
100 Exhibit R-18.

34

121. When the Privatization Report was brought before the plenary session of the Assembly, first on 12
September, and then again on 19 September and 26 September 2013, the Assembly could not vote

on it, as it was not quorate on either of those sessions. !!

122. This prompted the PIU to write to Axos on 24 September 2013 to confirm the GPC’s mandate for
privatization of PTK, but also to convey that the outcome of parliamentary discussions might have

an impact on that mandate:

We would like to draw your attention to the fact that even though the GPC, based
on Kosovo Constitution and legal framework, has a clear mandate for the
privatization of PTK, the outcome of the parliamentary decision on PTK
privatization report can impact on the GPC’s position towards this project.‘

123. As the political review process was not completed, the Transaction Advisors wrote to Axos on

14 October 2013, requesting a further extension of the signing date:

Following the letter sent to you on September 25th, 2013, we are instructed by the
Government Privatization Committee (the “GPC”) to inform you that the report on
Privatization of PTK Kosovo covering the process of privatization is still in a
process of discussion in the Assembly of Republic of Kosovo. Therefore GPC is
considering and would like to ask you if you are ready for a further extension of the
signing date by end of December 2013 (or latest first week of January 2014) and
completion by end of January 2014.'

124. This further extension of the completion date was agreed to by Axos two days later, on 16 October
2013. In its letter, Axos stated “/w]e understand the importance of this and again agree to your
requested delay for the promulgation” .!°*

125. Inthe last days of 2013, however, the GPC and PIU held a series of meetings to discuss the progress
of the Privatization Report in the Assembly and address further postponement of the signing of the

Transaction Papers. !°°

101 Exhibit C-139.

102 Exhibit C-21.

103 Exhibit C-23.

104 Exhibit C-24.

105 Exhibits C-201, C-194.

35

126.

127.

128.

On 26 December 2013, the Privatization Report was again discussed at the Assembly, but the

discussion did not result in a vote as the Assembly was again not quorate. !°°

5. The Cancellation of the Privatization Process

On 30 December 2013, the GPC held a last meeting to discuss the situation resulting from the
Assembly’s failure to vote on the Privatization Report, and concluded that there was no basis for
further postponement of the transaction. This decision was summarized in minutes of the meeting

in the following terms:

The Government Privatization Committee of PTK (GPC) has analysed the situation
appearing upon failure in the Assembly of Kosovo, in the session of 26 December
2013, in reviewing the report on the privatization of 75% of the PTK shares.

As you may have been aware before, based on the tender documents for the PTK
privatization, which made the basis for the application of bidders to the tender, the
date of 30 December 2013 was the last date for signature of the contract. Based on
the legal opinion received from the Transaction Advisor, there is no legal basis for
any further postponement of the date.'""

Although the minutes of the meeting do not explicitly mention the cancellation of the privatization
process, Mr. Fadil Ismajli clarified in his witness statement filed in the arbitration that it was at
this meeting that the GPC decided to cancel the privatization process. However, he cited the GPC’s
loss of confidence in Axos, rather than the situation at the Assembly, as the reason for such

cancellation:

At the end of the GPC’s meeting of 30 December 2013, the GPC’s ministers and I
concluded that Axos had not acted as a credible investor and potential majority
shareholder in PTK, along with serious issues raised by the Long Stop Date. The
GPC had gradually lost trust in Axos’ ability and seriousness to perform its
obligations in the privatization process. We, thus, decided _to_cancel_the
privatization of PTK under Article 1.1 of the ITP that permitted the GPC to cancel
it “until the signing of the Transaction Documents.” We never doubted at the time
that this provision of the ITP allows the GPC for the cancelation of the privatization
of PTK.'°8 (emphasis added)

  

 

106 Exhibit C-155.
107 Exhibit R-21.
108 Witness Statement of Fadil Ismajli, J 33.

36

129. This decision was conveyed to Axos the following day, 31 December 2013, during a conference

1, 109

call and subsequently publicly announced on the website of the Ministry of Economic

Development:

GPC decides to close the PTK privatization process

Prishtina, 31.12.2013 — Government Privatization Committee (GPC) for PTK met
yesterday to analyze and discuss on the situation in relation to the privatization of
PTK, after a lack of quorum in the plenary session of the Assembly of Kosovo on
December 26, 2013, to review the privatization process report for 75% shares of
this publicly owned enterprise.

 

GPC wishes to inform the public that according to the PTK privatization tender
documents, which constitute the basis for application of tender participants,
December 30, 2013, was the final possible date for the signing of this tender
contract. According to the legal opinion of the Transaction Advisor, GPC has no
legal basis, to further postpone this date.

Faced with this situation and unable to proceed with the signing of the contract for
the sale of PTK shares, GPC has decided to close the privatization process of 75%
shares of PTK.''°

130. | The cancellation was officially notified to Axos by letter the following week, on 6 January 2014:

We refer to the above matter, in particular the telephone conference call on 31%
December 2013 at which you attended and to the Instructions for Tender
Participants dated September 11" 2012 (ITP). This letter is by way of confirmation
of the notice provided during the telephone conference namely: that the government
of the Republic of Kosovo, duly represented by the GPC, and inter alia in
accordance with its right referred to in paragraph 1.1 of the ITP, has cancelled the
privatisation of PTK.

The cancellation was effective from the date of notification on 31“ December
2013.11!

109 First Witness Statement of Jan Budden, { 195.
110 Exhibit C-32.
1 Exhibit C-33.

37

131.

132.

133.

134.

Axos subsequently filed an appeal against the cancellation notice under the Kosovo Law on
Private-Public Partnerships on 16 January 2014,''? and on 30 January 2014 notified Kosovo of its

intention to seek redress through arbitration. !'*

To date, PTK remains publicly owned by Kosovo, and no further attempts have been taken to

privatize it.

Cc. Decision of the Tribunal Regarding Jurisdiction and Admissibility

1. Preliminary Observations
Kosovo has raised several jurisdictional and admissibility objections. Kosovo’s principal
objection is that Axos has not established the existence of a protected investment within the
meaning of Article 1(1) of the Treaty.''* Relatedly, Kosovo argues that Axos has not established

that it has made an investment within the meaning of the ICSID Convention. !!>

With respect to Kosovo’s principal objection, Article 1(1) of the Treaty defines the term
“investments” as follows:
Article 1
(1) The term “investments” shall comprise every kind of asset which has been
invested in conformity with national legislation, more particularly but not
exclusively:

(a) Movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem, such as
liens and pledges of all kinds and similar rights;

(b) Shares of companies and similar forms of investment;
(c) Claims to money which has been used to create an economic value or claims to

services or benefits in kind which have an economic value and are connected with
an investment;

12 Exhibit C-34.

43 Exhibit C-163.

14 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, Section III, Subsections B, C, and D.
285 Respondent’ s Counter-Memorial, Section III, Subsection E.

38

(d) Copyrights, industrial property rights such as inventor’s rights including
patents. trade marks, trade names, industrial patterns and models, technical
processes, know-how and goodwill;

(e) Business concessions under public law. including concessions in connection
with the use of natural resources.

Any alteration of the form of the investment shall not affect its classification as
investment within the meaning of this Treaty.''6

135. Axos has advanced two distinct jurisdictional theories to justify the existence of a protected

investment under the Treaty.

136. Its main jurisdictional theory is based on the existence of a contract arising from the exchanges
between the Parties on 3 April 2013 and 18 April 2013.'!” This theory was described as follows

during the hearing:

Now, it’s the Claimant's position that the contract which it concluded with the
Respondent constituted an asset invested in conformity with national legislation,
and therefore an investment under the BIT, as well as the ICSID Convention [. p's

So to conclude, sirs, the Claimant maintains its position that a valid contract was
concluded, that entered into effect following the expiry of the ten-day period after
receipt of the award notice dated 18th April 2013, and that this constituted Axos’
investment for the purposes of the BIT.'"°

U6 Exhibit C-1.

117 Exhibits C-111 and C-12, respectively. (At paragraph 144 of the Claimant’s Reply, when dis
Nordzucker v Poland to the present case, the Claimant asserted that “even if the Tribunal were to accept the (erroneous)
contention from Kosovo that the Contract had not been formed, it would still have jurisdiction over Axos’ claims in respect of
FET’. This sentence was neither repeated in the Claimant's Rejoinder nor at the hearing. It is unclear whether it is maintained
by the Claimant. The Rejoinder rather suggests that this position was abandoned. When analysing Nordzucker v Poland at
paragraphs 62 to 68 of the Claimant’s Rejoinder, the Claimant concluded its argument by stating “/g/iven that (i) a binding
agreement had been concluded between Axos and the State and (ii) Axos’ investment was in fact more advanced than that of
Nordzucker in the Szczecin Group, it is clear that the Contract was, at the very least, an investment in the making”. Here, the
Claimant seemed to have now taken the position that even though the SPA had not been signed, the conclusion of a binding
agreement by way of the exchange between the Parties on 3 April 2013 and 18 April 2013 amounted, at the very least, to an
investment in the making. This reading is further confirmed by the header under which the Respondent made that argument;
TIL.3.1.1(B)(1) reads “The Contract is an ‘asset’, and therefore a protected ‘investment’”. To the extent the Claimant maintains
the position it had taken in the Claimant’s Reply, that argument was never explained to the Tribunal with any degree of
specificity. Presented as such, it remained a mere assertion. As a result, to the extent that this would constitute a distinct
jurisdictional theory, it can only be rejected.)

118 Ty, Day 1, 40:21-25. See also Claimant’ s Memorial, Section 5.1.2(A) and Claimant’s Reply, Section 4.1.2(A).

119 Ty, Day 6, p. 68:17-22.

 

sing the relevance of

39

137. The alternative jurisdictional theory is that Axos has a “claim to money” as defined in Article
1(1)(c) of the Treaty arising from the monies spent for the preparation of the tender and for know-

how it said it had transferred to Kosovo.

138. This alternative jurisdictional theory was not pressed at the hearing, as was made clear during the

Claimant’s opening at the hearing:

In addition, the Claimant also submits that it has: “Claims to money which has
been used to create an economic value ...” within the meaning of Article I(1)(c) of
the BIT. This latter point has been set out in detail in Axos’ pleadings. See, for
example, section 5.1.2(c) of its first memorial and 4.1.2(b) of its second memorial.
So I shall concentrate on Axos' primary position of the contract today.'°

139. This alternative position was described as follows in Axos’ Memorial:

(C) The Claimant also has claims to money which has been used to create an
economic value

269. As explained above, the Contract constituted an investment that is protected
under the BIT. In addition, the money spent by the Claimant in connection with the
Contract is also protected by the BIT, as “money which has been used to create an
economic value” (under Article 1(c) of the BIT).

270. As explained above in Section IV, the Claimant incurred significant costs and
expenses in the preparation of its Bid. As detailed in Mr. Budden’s witness
statement, the Claimant’s Bid set out in significant detail the ways in which the
business of PTK could be made more profitable, and was the product of the
considerable experience, know-how and strategic insight of the consortium and its
strategic partners. This information was compiled and collated at the Claimant’s
cost, was clearly of economic value, and was provided by the Claimant on the basis
that the Claimant reasonably understood that the bidder not only complied with the
requirements of the tender process but also presented the most attractive bid and
would become the successful bidder.‘

140. _ This alternative jurisdictional theory was also confirmed in the Reply Memorial:

167. First, the Respondent again misrepresents Axos’ case. Axos’ submission that
its “[c]laims to money which has been used to create an economic value” are an
“investment” under the BIT is not, as Kosovo claims, “based on the sole fact that
it spent money in the Tender”. In_fact, it is the sums spent (and_know-how

20 Tr, Day 1, p. 41:2-10.
2! Claimant’s Memorial, {{{ 269-270.

40

contributed) by Axos in connection with the Contract which constitute “[c]laims to

money”. Kosovo attacks an argument which Axos has not made.

     

168. Second, as further set out in this Reply, Axos has provided details of the know-
how which it shared, both before and after the Contract's conclusion, and “how
much” expenditure was incurred in connection with the Contract. The latter sum
totals €702,728.21, as further set out in the Second Witness Statement of Mr.
Budden. | (emphasis added)

141. | The Claimant’s alternative theory is thus part of Axos’ case and will be addressed as such.

142. — The Tribunal will therefore examine each of these two jurisdictional theories in turn.

2. Axos’ Claim that the Exchange of 3 April 2013 and 18 April 2013 Constituted a
Contract which is a Protected Investment

a. The Parties’ arguments

143. In this arbitration, Axos does not rely specifically on any of the subparagraphs of Article 1(1) in
advancing its argument that it has a protected investment in the form of a contract. Rather, it
argues that the exchange of 3 April 2013 and 18 April 2013 constituted a contract which falls

within the scope of the “every kind of asset” language of the Treaty. As it states in its Memorial:

159. Article 1(1) of the BIT defines “investments” as “every kind of asset”. As has
been explained above:

a. Pursuant to the Award Notice, Axos and Kosovo concluded a binding contract
(the Contract).

b. Pursuant to the Contract, Axos obtained a substantive right to acquire 75% of
the shares in PTK, in return for which it was bound to pay a purchase price of €277
million.

c. The Contract, and Axos’ rights under it, constitute an “asset” under Kosovan
law.

160. It follows that the Contract was an “investment” within the meaning of Article
1(1) of the BIT.'

'22 Claimant’s Reply, 141 167-168. See also Claimant’s Rejoinder, Section 3.1.2.
23 Claimant’s Reply, {4 159-160.

41

144.

145.

146.

Axos contends that by submitting its binding offer on 3 April 2013,'?* it made an offer in the sense
of the Kosovo Law on Obligations and that, on 18 April 2013,'> the GPC accepted this offer by
sending a letter to Mr. Budden confirming the award of the privatization contract. '?° This

contention was set forth in the Claimant’s Memorial:

In this Dispute, the Respondent initiated a tender for the sale of 75% of the shares
in PTK in accordance with the terms of the ITP. On 3 April 2013, the Claimant
submitted the Bid Submission Form together with an initialled copy of the Final
Transaction Documents, which specified the property being purchased, and the
Financial Bid, which set out the purchase price, pursuant to Article 6.1 of the ITP.
Thus, the Claimant's Bid constituted a legally binding and irrevocable offer which
contained all the essential elements of a sales contract, namely (1) the proprietary
rights and (2) the purchase price.

On 18 April 2013, the Respondent accepted the Claimant’s offer through the Award
Notice. The binding, contractual language of the Award Notice demonstrates the
Respondent's clear statement of intent to conclude a contract with the content and
the price specified in the Claimant’s offer.'27

Kosovo has denied that there was either an offer or an acceptance as required by Kosovar law for
the formation of a valid contract, but has not denied the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to decide

whether, under Kosovar law, a contract was validly formed. As it stated in its Counter-Memorial:

As Mr. Qerimi confirms, Axos acquired no binding legal right over PTK’s shares.
Axos argues that Kosovo’s “acceptance became legally binding, and a contract
(the Contract) between the Claimant and the Respondent for the purchase of 75%
of PTK shares for €277 million, with the content of the Final Transaction
Documents, was formed (Articles 59(2) and 13 of the LOR).” This argument is
demonstrably wrong.*?8

Kosovo adds that the issue whether a valid contract was formed must not only be examined under
the Kosovo Law on Obligations but rather that it must also be examined under the relevant Kosovar

administrative public laws which prescribe certain additional formal requirements.

124 Exhibit C-111.

125 Exhibit C-12.

126 Claimant’s Memorial, Section 5.1.2(A).
127 Claimant’s Memorial, {Jf 238-239.
'28 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, { 116 (footnote reference omitted)

42

It is therefore clear that Kosovar public procurement law—made applicable by the
Law on POEs, the Law on PPPs, and the Law on Public Procurement—governed
the Tender, including the alleged rights acquired by Axos in the course of the
Tender,'°

[J

The applicable public law regulations also clearly require that any contracts
arising from the procedures of privatization, public and private partnership and/or
public procurement be signed. Article 50 of the Law on PPPs is unmistakably clear
on this point.'°°
147. For its part, Axos and its expert deny that Kosovar administrative law has any role to play in the
formation of the alleged contract. They contend that only the Kosovo Law on Obligations is

relevant. This contention was set forth by Axos’ expert in her third expert report:

Accordingly, for all of the above reasons, the only conclusion that can be reached
is that the LOR applies to the formation of the contract between Axos and Kosovo
regardless of the Law on PoEs, Law on PPP or Law on Public Procurement.'*!

148. The corresponding legal materials, '*? relevant case law and commentaries!*? have been submitted

to the Tribunal. Each side’s expert has also opined on these materials at the hearing.

149. As aresult, the Tribunal is satisfied that, by agreement of the Parties, it has jurisdiction to decide,
first, whether there was, as claimed by Axos, a contract validly formed under Kosovar law and,
second, if such a valid contract was formed, whether that contract is properly characterized as a

protected investment under Article 1 of the Treaty.

150. Of course, if the Tribunal concludes that no valid contract was formed under Kosovar law as
claimed by Axos this would be sufficient to dismiss Axos’ main jurisdictional theory. This is
because the existence of such a valid contract is predicate to Axos’ jurisdictional theory in this

arbitration.

29 Respondent’ s Counter-Memorial, J 115.

130 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, J 118 (footnote reference omitted).

131 Third Expert Report of Nina Plavgak, J 11.

!2 Exhibits C-35, C-36, C-37, C-38, C-39, C-45.

133 First, Second and Third Expert Reports of Nina Plavgak and First and Second Expert Reports of Qerim Qerimi and exhibits
thereto—notably exhibits Qerimi-1, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23.

43

151.

152.

153.

It follows that the Tribunal will therefore examine whether a valid contract was entered into at the
occasion of the exchange between the Parties consisting of the bid submission of 3 April 2013 and

the GPC letter of 18 April 2013.'**

b. Was a valid contract entered into between Axos and Kosovo?

Having carefully reviewed the material on the records, the Tribunal concludes that no valid
contract for the purchase of the shares of PTK was ever formed between Axos and Kosovo. There
are many reasons leading to this conclusion, each of which taken individually is sufficient to reach
that conclusion. The Tribunal nonetheless believes that it is preferable to go through each of these
reasons. As explained in the subsections that follow, there is no valid contract because the bid
submission of 3 April 2013 is not an offer within the meaning of the Kosovo Law on Obligations
(i). In addition, irrespective of whether there had been an offer, the 18 April 2013 letter would not
constitute an acceptance (ii). Moreover, the bidder at the time of the exchange is not the Claimant
in this arbitration. The bidder was the Consortium comprised of Axos jointly with Najafi whilst
the Claimant is Axos alone (iii). Further, there could be no contract prior to the signing of the SPA
because Kosovo retained the unfettered right to “cancel the Tender” until that date (iv). The
Tribunal also accepts that Kosovar administrative law is relevant to determine whether the contract
for the privatization of PTK was entered into and that the requirements of Kosovar administrative
law were not complied with (v). Finally, the Tribunal notes that the conduct of the Parties after
the exchanges of 3 April 2013 and 18 April 2013 also does not support the Claimant’s position

that the Parties believed at the time that they had entered into a binding contract (vi).

i. The 3 April 2013 Bid Submission is not an offer within the
meaning of the Kosovo Law on Obligations

Article 15 of Kosovo Law on Obligations classically provides that “[a] contract shall be deemed

concluded when the contracting Parties agree upon essential elements of the contract.” !°5

14 Exhibits C-11 and C-12.
135 Article 15, Exhibit C-35.

154.

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

It further defines an offer as follows:

1. An offer is a proposal made to a specific person for the conclusion of a contract
and contains all the essence of the contract, such that through the acceptance
thereof a contract could be concluded.

2. If after reaching agreement on the essence of the contract the contracting parties
defer any accessory points, the contract shall be deemed to have been concluded,
while if the contracting parties fail to reach agreement themselves on the accessory
points they shall be regulated by the court, which in so doing shall take into
consideration the previous negotiations, the practice established between the
parties, and custom.

3. A proposal addressed to an Indeterminate number of persons that contains the
essence of a contract shall be deemed an invitation to submit offers unless it follows
otherwise from the circumstances. ©

An offer is therefore a proposal that is of such nature that, upon acceptance thereof, the contract

can be concluded and both parties will be bound by its terms.
The bid submission of 3 April 2013 does not contain the elements of an offer.

The bid submission comprises many documents, among which the most important are the

“Detailed Bid Document’”!*” and the “Binding Financial Offer.” '**

The Detailed Bid Document is not an offer to acquire the shares of PTK, but an offer to be selected
as a “Preferred Bidder”, as this term is defined in the ITP, with a view to eventually concluding
the acquisition. The Detailed Bid Document thus indicates that it was prepared “Jn reference to

your Tender Specifications distributed to us by Lazard & Raiffeisen’, in other words, the ITP.'°°
By its plain terms, the Detailed Bid Document provides that the “Consortium”:

is pleased to submit this binding bid proposal (“Proposal”) for the acquisition of
not less than 75% of the issued share capital of PTK J.S.C., (“Telekom” or the
“Company” ). We appreciate the opportunity to participate in this process and look

136 Article 22, Exhibit C-35.
137 Exhibit C-111, R-68.
138 Exhibits C-11, R-60.
139 Exhibit C-111, R-68, p. 2

45

forward to finalizing this transaction in the best-balanced interests of the

Government and those of the people of Kosovo...'*° (emphasis added)

160. This document concludes:

We appreciate the opportunity to present this proposal and look forward to working
with you on an exclusive basis for a successful privatization. '*' (emphasis added)

 

161. For its part, the Binding Financial Offer likewise makes an express reference to the ITP. It
provides for a Purchase Price “as defined in the ITP”.'*? It also states that this Purchase Price is
based on certain assumptions, implying therefore that it could be adjusted if those assumptions
proved to be inaccurate: “The Purchase Price is based on the assumption that at Closing of the

Transaction, the net debt shall be zero (0).”'*

162. It is therefore clear that the Binding Offer was made under the ITP and that its proposed terms

were subject to further discussions.

163. The ITP, for its part, makes clear that it is not, in itself, an offer to sell the shares of PTK or to
conclude a SPA: “None of the information set forth herein constitutes a formal offer to enter into

an SPA, nor does this ITP document oblige the GoK, the GPC, or any other related entity to

proceed with the Tender.” *

140 Exhibit C-111, R-68, p. 1
'4 Exhibit C-111, R-68, p. 5.
12 Exhibits C-11, R-60, p. 2.
143 Exhibits C-11, R-60, p. 2.
'4 Exhibit C-7, Section. 1.1.

46

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

Rather, the ITP contemplates various steps following the selection of the first-ranked Bidder that

would lead to the signature of the SPA. Those steps are described at section 2, as follows: 45

 

 

 

Milestone Time
Tender Launch September 11, 2012
Due diligence and visits to the Company September 17 — November 16, 2012

 

Submission of mark-ups of Transaction Documents and | October 08, 2012
proposal of escrow bank

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bid-submission November 19, 2012
Selection of first-ranked Bidder November 26, 2012
Signing of the SPA December 14, 2012
Closing of the Transaction February 13, 2013

 

It is clear from the above that the signing of the SPA and the closing of the transaction was
contemplated to take place after the selection of the first-ranked Bidder. By submitting a binding

offer under the ITP, the Consortium accepted as much.
This is also confirmed by the definitions of the terms “Award” and “Selected Bidder” in the ITP.

The term “Award” is defined as “the act of legally bestowing the status of Selected Bidder to a

Bidder in accordance with the eligibility and evaluation criteria set forth in the IPQ and ITP.”*°

The term “Selected Bidder” is defined as “a Bidder who has received the Award and has been

invited _by the Contracting Authority to enter into the Transaction Documents.” '*" (emphasis
added)

There is therefore no ambiguity that, in submitting a binding offer under the ITP, the Consortium

did not make an offer to buy the shares of PTK, but rather it made an offer to become a Selected

145 Exhibit C-7, Section. 2.
'46 Exhibit C-7, p. 2. Emphasis added.
147 Exhibit C-7, p. 4.

47

Bidder, as this term is defined in the ITP. There is no indication in the binding offer made by the

Consortium that it intended it to be something other than a binding offer under the ITP.

170. This finding is further confirmed by the legal consequences provided for under the ITP in case the
Selected Bidder fails to sign the Transaction Documents within a specified time period. Under
Article 5.4, such failure “entitles the Contracting Authority to exercise its rights under the Selected
Bidder’s Completion Security”. Article 11(1)(iii) of the ITP foresees the same legal consequence.
Article 11(2) further provides that in the event of such a failure, the GPC may award the Tender
to the Second Ranking Bidder. Annex 6 of the ITP contains the template for the Completion
Security in the sum of EUR 10,000,000. Under Article 4.1 of Annex 6, the GPC may demand
payment under the Completion Security if it states that “the Contractor has failed to sign or execute
and return the Contract in the form required by the ITP, within 15 days of the date of the Award
Notice”. Under Amendment (2) to the ITP, certain changes were made (in particular the
Completion Security would only need to be submitted at the time of the signing of the SPA, and
bidders would instead be required to submit a Bid Bond for an amount of EUR 3,000,000 with
their bids),'** but the principle remained the same.'#? The Tribunal therefore notes that the ITP
did not provide for specific performance, i.e., the payment of the purchase price for the shares, but
rather for a demand under the security provided from the Selected Bidder during the tender process,
allowing the GPC at the same time to continue with that process by awarding the Tender to the
Second Ranking Bidder. Consistent with the ITP, the Transaction Advisors indeed reminded the
Claimant by letter dated 16 July 2013 of their right to exercise the Bid Bond if Axos, as the Selected
Bidder, did not execute the Final Transaction Documents within a specific time frame.!°° That
mechanism further suggests that the selection of the first-ranked Bidder did not constitute the
conclusion of the contract to buy the shares, but was only a further milestone in the tender process

leading to the potential conclusion of such a contract.

148 Exhibit C-87.

49 Under Article 1.2 of the Bid Bond (Exhibit R-67, p. 1), Axos “proposed to respond to the ITP with a Bid (Bid), dated 03
April 2013, to enter into a share purchase agreement (Contract) with you in connection with the Transaction”. And under
Article 4.3, the GPC may demand payment under the Bid Bond if “[t]he Bidder was aw[a]rded the contract on the basis of its
Bid and the Bidder then refused or failed to conclude the Contract” within the specified time.

150 Exhibit C-126.

48

171.

172.

173.

174.

The offer to become a Selected Bidder does not therefore qualify as an offer that could be readily
accepted, such that a contract would be formed for the acquisition of the shares of PTK. Rather,
when its offer was accepted, the Consortium’s status changed, moving from that of a “Bidder” to
that of the “Selected Bidder.” There was no other purpose for the binding offer. Its acceptance
merely enabled the Bidder to move to the next step, that of Selected Bidder (or, as Axos itself
seemed to have put it, a status that allowed it to work on “an exclusive basis” in the further course
of the tender process!>!), not to conclude the SPA. As a result, it does not qualify as an offer within
the meaning of the Kosovo Law on Obligations which would be “such that through the acceptance

thereof a contract could be concluded” .'°*

ii. The 18 April 2013 letter by Kosovo was not an acceptance either

If the bid submission is not an offer, it necessarily follows that the 18 April 2013 letter cannot be
an acceptance either. But even irrespective of the qualification of the 3 April 2013 letter, the
selection by Kosovo of the first-ranked Bidder by letter dated 18 April 2013 still did not constitute
an acceptance. It was what it was meant to be under the ITP, namely, the choice of the “Selected
Bidder.” Axos drew considerable attention to the letter dated 18 April 2013 sent by the GPC to
Mr. Jan Budden and communicated to the same by email from the Transaction Advisors. !** This,
however, is only one document evidencing Kosovo’s selection of the Axos/Najafi Consortium as

the Selected Bidder.

Kosovo claims for its part that the official document is not this letter, but rather the publication in
the official Kosovo Gazette on 24 April 2013, which constitutes the official selection of the

Bidder. !5

Be that as it may, the Tribunal has to examine whether, interpreted against the background of all
relevant documents, the letter of 18 April 2013 can be characterized as an acceptance of a putative

offer by the Consortium to purchase 75% of the shares of PTK for EUR 277 million.

'5! Exhibit C-111, R-68, p. 5.

82 Article 22.1, Exhibit C-35.

153 Exhibit C-7.

1S Exhibit C-12. See also Tr. Day 1, 150:21-153:23.

'85 Exhibit C-115. See also Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, J 61.

49

175. At this juncture it is helpful to reproduce the contents of this letter in full:

Thank you for participating in the above-mentioned public tender. The procedure
has been conducted in accordance with the applicable Law, including but not
limited Kosovo Law No. 03/L-087 on Publicly Owned Enterprises and with Kosovo
Law No. 04/L-045 on Public- Private-Partnerships.

Your bid has been thoroughly evaluated according to the conditions and
requirements given in the Instructions for Tender Participants (ITP) document
which was issued based on the aforementioned laws.

In accordance with the Instructions for Tender Participants, the Contacting
Authority has treated the highest offered Purchase Price to be the economically
most advantageous offer. We have the pleasure to inform you that you have
submitted the highest Purchase Price as a reply to the Instructions for Tender
Participants for the above-mentioned procurement activity.

The contract has been awarded to you with the price specified in your Financial
Bid and in compliance with the terms and condition of the Instructions for Tender
Participants.

The contract award is provisional and does not constitute a contractual
arrangement until the interval has elapsed during which unsuccessful tenderers
can seek a review of the decision.
176. The first observation of the Tribunal is that this letter must be understood in the context of the ITP.
This conclusion derives from the wording of the letter itself: there are no less than four express

references to the ITP in this six-paragraph letter.

177. It is therefore clear that the letter is to be interpreted as constituting a milestone in the timetable
set out in the schedule found at Article 2 of the ITP. More precisely, this letter constitutes the
“Selection of [the] first-ranked Bidder”.'*"

178. The letter itself does not say otherwise. It informs the Consortium that its bid “has been thoroughly

evaluated” in accordance with the ITP, that this bid contained “the highest Purchase Price” and

156 Exhibit C-12.
157 Exhibit C-7, p. 6.

50

179.

180.

181.

182.

that, accordingly, “the contract has been awarded to [the Consortium] with the price specified in

[its] Financial Bid and in compliance with the terms and condition” of the ITP. 158

 

Read in the context of the ITP, therefore, it is very difficult to understand this letter as being
anything other than a document which informed the Bidder of its change in status, i.e., that its bid
has been selected. It is in particular very difficult to interpret this letter as an acceptance of an
offer to buy shares. There is no reference to such an offer and there is no reference to an
acceptance. The Tribunal observes that a declaration by Kosovo at that stage giving its binding
acceptance of an offer to buy shares would have substantially deviated from the tender procedure
as foreseen in the ITP. The 18 April 2013 letter does not allow such a construction. Indeed, the
letter emphasised that the notification was clearly made within the framework of the ITP, stating
that “/t]/he contract has been awarded to you ... in compliance with the terms and conditions of
the Instructions for Tender Participants” (emphasis added). 159

Axos places particular emphasis on the last sentence because it suggests that once the interval in
question elapsed the “contract award” must constitute a “contractual arrangement”.'® (The last
sentence reads as follows: “The contract award is provisional and does not constitute a contractual
arrangement until the interval has elapsed during which unsuccessful tenderers can seek a review

of the decision’”’®).

The Tribunal accepts that Axos’ reading is plausible. But the interpretation founders on a specific

question, namely, what “contractual arrangement” was contemplated here?

It is clear to the Tribunal that, whatever the term “contractual arrangement” after the expiry of the
challenge period may have been intended to mean, it could not and did not mean the conclusion of
the SPA. This is because the letter refers expressly to the ITP which, in turn, provides that the

signature of the SPA was a step subsequent to the selection of the Selected Bidder.

158 Exhibit C-12.
159 Exhibit C-12.
160 Claimant’s Memorial, {[ 364-365; Claimant’s Reply, | 126.
161 Exhibit C-12.

51

183. This is also confirmed by the definition of the term “Award” found in the ITP. According to the
ITP, “award” means “the act of legally bestowing the status of Selected Bidder to a Bidder in
accordance with the eligibility and evaluation criteria set forth in the IPQ and ITP” .' And the
term “Selected Bidder” is defined as “a Bidder who has received the Award and has been invited
by the Contracting Authority to enter into the Transaction Documents”.'® And if, as the ITP
makes clear, the Selected Bidder failed to enter into the contract, the legal consequence was only
a right to demand the security provided from the Selected Bidder and to award the Tender to the
Second Ranking Bidder.

184. While the Tribunal can follow Axos’ argument insofar as that it accepts that the last sentence of
the 18 April 2013 letter is ambiguous, it disagrees, however, with Axos’ position that this sentence
could be construed to mean that Kosovo declared its acceptance to sell the shares. When that
sentence is read in the context of the whole letter and within the framework of the ITP (to which

this letter repeatedly refers), Axos’ proposed reading finds no support.

185. The Tribunal also notes that, upon receipt of this letter, the Consortium did not react specifically
and did not claim at the material time that a contract for the purchase of shares of PTK was formed
following the lapse of the time interval provided for in the letter of 18 April 2013. The Tribunal
further observes that the contract was said to have been awarded “with the price specified in [the]

Financial Bid’'® and that this price was itself contingent on the absence of debt as at the closing.

186. The 18 April 2013 letter is therefore not an acceptance of an offer to purchase 75% of the shares
of PTK. It is a letter informing the Consortium that it has been chosen as the Selected Bidder

under the ITP, nothing more.

162 Exhibit C-7, p. 2. Emphasis added.
63 Exhibit C-7, p. 4. Emphasis added.
164 Exhibit C-12.

52

187.

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

iii. Axos alone cannot avail itself of the rights, if any, belonging to
the Consortium formed by Axos and Najafi
The Claimant is this arbitration is Axos and Axos alone. According to Axos, a protected
investment would arise from the rights acquired by the Selected Bidder following its selection as

such.

Assuming arguendo that such rights exist and regardless of the nature and scope of these rights,
the rights of the Selected Bidder belonged to the Consortium formed by Axos and Najafi, not to

Axos alone.
It is not in dispute that the bid submission was made by the Consortium.

The detailed Bid Document defines the “Consortium” as follows: “The consortium
(“Consortium”) composed of ACP Axos Capital GmbH (“Axos”), Najafi Companies (Najafi)”'®.
The cover page of the Financial Bid identifies ACP Axos Capital GmbH as the “Consortium Lead

Member” and Najafi Companies as the “Consortium Member”.

Similarly, it is not in dispute that the privatization contract was awarded to the Consortium
comprising Axos and Najafi. The Contract Award Notice of 24 April 2013 indicates that the
contract has been awarded to “ACP Axos Capital GmbH in Consortium with Najafi Companies
LLC”.191

The Selected Bidder was therefore the Consortium Axos/Najafi, not Axos alone. Whatever rights
are attached to the status of a Selected Bidder those rights belonged to the Consortium, not to Axos

alone.

The Claimant’s expert, Dr. PlavSak, expressly confirmed this point during cross-examination at

the hearing:

A. Yes, but their offer was a joint offer: we two, together, offer to buy you 75% of
shares.

[J

165 Exhibit C-111, p. 1.
166 Exhibit R-60, p. 1.
167 Exhibit C-115, Section IV.4.

53

A. If it was one offer then you would have to — because they were -- 75% of shares
is the subject of sale, and they gave a joint offer, by which they became joint
creditors. It's a term, it's a position of joint creditors, two or more persons having
the same right, proprietary right. So they can only exercise it jointly.'°* (emphasis

added)
194. By accepting that these rights can “only” be exercised jointly, Dr. PlavSak admitted by the same
token that they cannot be exercised unilaterally by Axos. Further, Axos did not claim that it was
the legal successor to the Axos/Najafi Consortium or that the rights of the Consortium were

transferred to it by way of assignment or any other legal mechanism.

195. It follows that Axos cannot avail itself of the rights of the Axos/Najafi Consortium in this
arbitration. This finding is fatal to Axos’ jurisdictional theory regardless of the other reasons

leading to the dismissal of this case.

iv. There could be no contract prior to the signing of the SPA
because Kosovo retained the unfettered right to cancel the
privatization until that date

196. Regardless of the issue of the identity of the Claimant, the Tribunal is also convinced that no
contract between the Selected Bidder and Kosovo could have arisen prior to the signing of the SPA
for a further reason. That is, as has been acknowledged by all Parties, and their experts, that
Kosovo was entitled to call off the privatization process at any time prior to the signing of the SPA.
It is thus difficult to conceive of a contract when one party only is bound, the Selected Bidder, but
not the other party, Kosovo. Not only could Kosovo cancel the privatization at any time, but at

the time of the making of their bids, all bidders accepted that no indemnification would be due.
197. | This is provided in unambiguous terms by the ITP, at Article 1.1:

The Contracting Authority further reserves the right to cancel the Tender or declare
it void or otherwise without effect either in relation to the entire Tender or in
relation to an individual Bidder, for any reason whatsoever, until the signing of the
Transaction Documents, and that such action does not entitle the Bidder/Selected
Bidder to any claim whatsoever against the GPC, the GoK, or any of their
respective agents, representatives, advisors or consultants.‘

68 Tr, Day 4, 46: 16 to 47:3.
169 Exhibit C-7, Article 1.1.

54

198. The negotiating history leading up to the bid submission reveals that Axos attempted to amend
that provision and Mr. Budden was aware of Kosovo’s refusal to agree to such an amendment.!”°

Mr. Budden confirmed the right of cancellation during cross-examination at the hearing:

Q. Again, you were aware that Kosovo reserved the right to cancel the tender or
declare it void without effect either in relation to the entire tender or in relation to
an individual bidder for any reason whatsoever until the signing of the transaction
documents; right?

A. Yes, but these -- these are standard documents, you don’t argue. Right? You just
take them, you know there's the process, you get the -- and you just sign it. It's more

of an administrative issue. At least that's how I did -- put this.

Q. So your view is these are standard words that don’t necessarily -- (overspeaking)

A. Standard words that use copy and paste from other transactions and, you know

Q. Right. But they, in your view, don’t have any legally binding effect on you?
A. Of course they do. Mm (emphasis added)

199. The Claimant’s expert, Dr. PlavSak, also testified that she understood Article 1.1 as giving Kosovo

an unfettered right to cancel the privatization at any time:

THE PRESIDENT: So can I summarise your opinion as being that that cancellation
right applies until the SPA is entered into?

A. Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Regardless of the form of the way it’s entered into?
A. Yes,!?

200. The existence of this cancellation right calls into question the very notion that a contract could be
entered into when a Bidder is selected. Clearly, the Bidder was bound by its offer and must proceed

in accordance with the various steps of the ITP, but its putative counterparty, the Government,

190 Tr, Day 2, 6:21 and 10:17-19. See also Exhibit R-57.
"Tr, Day 1, 295:21 to 296:2.
Tr, Day 4, 109:17-25.

55

201.

202.

enjoyed different rights. Under the ITP, the Government could cancel the process at any time until
the signing of the Transaction Documents and the Bidder had no remedy whatsoever. This is
hardly a contract where both Parties are bound. Rather, it is a unilateral process that the
Government can, until the very last moment, discontinue at will. The language of the ITP, which
allowed for Kosovo’s “right to cancel the Tender [...] until the signing of the Transaction

Documents”!

indeed further strengthens the conclusion that only with the signing a contract with
mutual rights and duties came into being and that up until that point, Kosovo was not bound in any

way.

During the hearing, Axos sought to challenge the discretionary nature of Article 1.1 of the ITP by
relying on Kosovan case law. More specifically, Axos relied on a decision of the Special Chamber

of the Supreme Court, dated 10 September 2015.!7

The Tribunal is not convinced by this argument. First, the decision of the Special Chamber of the
Supreme Court is a decision on a preliminary injunction, not a decision on the merits of the
underlying right. Second, it is unclear whether the bid documents in the case referred to the
Supreme Court were drafted in terms identical to Article 1.1 of the ITP. When cross-examined on
this, Professor Qerimi denied that the bid documents were the same, a proposition with which
counsel for the Claimant disagreed.'7> Professor Qerimi was then asked to assume that the bid

documents were the same:

Q. A right of cancellation under a tender procedure can only be exercised once the
tenderer has been informed of that decision and reasons have been provided; do
you accept that?

A. You know, in this case I can’t accept what is in the relevant applicable rules of
tender because —

Q. If it were not, I’m going to ask you for an assumption again, Professor Qerimi.

A. That's -- yes, that’s an assumption.

"3 Exhibit C-7, Article 1.1.
"74 Qerimi-18 pp. 137 et seq., see Tr. Day 4, 198:13 to 210:13.
"5 Tr, Day 4, 200 to 205.

56

203.

204.

205.

Q. Yes. So if it were not, would you accept that this decision of the court influenced
your view?

A. But that’s an assumption, right?

Q. It is.

A. Hypothetically?

Q. I’m asking you for that assumption.

A. Can I abstain from responding to the questions with assumptive content?

THE PRESIDENT: I believe the assumption is, and you will correct me if Iam
wrong, that the relevant provision which enables the authority, privatisation
authority, to cancel are the same. And if the relevant provisions were the same,
would this decision provide guidance? I think that’s the question put to you, and I
don't think it's an unfair question.

A. Yes, if the procedures were the same they will certainly provide guidance.!”

As a result, the Tribunal notes that the relevance of that case to the present arbitration has remained
vague and it finds that not much can be derived from it. The ITP, for its part, is unambiguous and

it was expressly accepted by all bidders, including the cancellation right contained therein.

The continuing existence of the cancelation right is another reason why Axos’ jurisdictional theory
fails regardless of the issue of the identity of the Bidder. Even if the Selected Bidder was the
Claimant, which is plainly not the case, the Tribunal would not be convinced that a valid contract

had been entered into with the selection of this Bidder as a Selected Bidder.

v. No contract was entered into because the requirements of
Kosovar Public Law on the identity of the Government’s
signatory were not satisfied.
Irrespective of the above, there is another reason why no contract could have been validly formed
at the time of the selection process, namely that the mandatory requirements of Kosovar public

law have not been complied with.

"6 Tr, Day 4, 209:7 to 210:7.

57

206. Kosovo has offered convincing evidence on this aspect with the testimony of Professor Qerimi
and the relevant Kosovo statutes. Axos has challenged the interpretation of the Kosovo statutes
and case law but has not provided expert evidence on this aspect. Dr. PlavSak readily agreed under
cross-examination that she was no expert of Kosovar public law and that she did not offer evidence

on this issue:

Q. And are you an expert in Kosovar Public Law?
A. No.

Q. Are you an expert in the Law on Publicly Owned Enterprises of the Republic of
Kosovo?

A. No.
Q. Did the Law on Publicly Owned Enterprises apply to the privatisation of PTK?

A. I can’t answer that question because I am not an expert on Kosovo law and I
was not requested to analyse the provision of Kosovan law. On any public Kosovan
laws.\7

207. This is also apparent from Dr. PlavSak’s expert reports, which show that she reasoned by analogy

with Slovenian law. Thus, in her first expert report, Dr. PlavSak stated:

3. Based on the comparison described above I can confirm that the provisions of
the Kosovo LOR, relevant to the subject matter of the Dispute, are not only
substantially the same as the relevant provisions of the former Yugoslav ORA, but
are also formulated using practically the same wording and the same structure
(chapters, sections etc.)

4. The provisions of the Slovenian OC are also substantially the same when
compared to the former Yugoslav ORA. Comparison of the Kosovo LOR (which
was adopted in 2012) with the Slovenian OC (which was adopted in 2002, i.e. ten
years earlier) shows that the Kosovo LOR was also modeled on the Slovenian OC.
I base this conclusion on the comparison of the following Articles adopted in
Slovenian OC which were not contained in the former Yugoslav ORA and were
adopted in the Kosovo LOR, e.g.: [...]'7*

17 Ty, Day 4, 15:16-25.
"8 First Expert Report of Nina Plavéak, p. 6.

58

208.

209.

210.

211.

By contrast, Professor Qerimi is an expert on Kosovar public law. As he explained in his first

expert report:

Iam a University Professor at the University of Prishtina Faculty of Law. The
University is the oldest and largest public institution of higher learning in the
country. I joined the Faculty of Law in 2006. First, as a research and teaching
assistant, then as a lecturer and, as of 2011, was promoted to the professorial rank.
My expertise and teaching experience lie within the public domain of the study of
law, including from an international perspective.'”
Professor Qerimi explained convincingly at the hearing that three distinct Kosovar statutes applied
cumulatively to the proposed privatization transaction, Law No. 03/L-087 on Publicly Owned
Enterprises (“Law on PoEs”), Law No. 04/L-045 on Public-Private-Partnership (“Law on PPP”),

and Law No. 04/L-042 on Public Procurement:

So these three laws have the special and mandatory character in relation to this

arbitration, so the law on POEs, the law on PPP and the Law On Public

Procurement regulate cumulatively different aspects of the tendering negotiations

and then formation of contractual relationships stemming from the privatisation

public procedure. So these three laws constitute the body of relevant public laws,

(1) and (2) you have lex specialis character.'*°
During the cross-examination of Professor Qerimi, Axos did not really challenge the applicability
of these statutes. Rather, Axos challenged the hierarchy of norms under Kosovar law and whether
those three laws were lex specialis or lex generalis as compared to the Law on Obligations.!*!

There is therefore no serious dispute that these laws apply in principle.

The Tribunal is not convinced that the Law on Obligations can trump the Law on PoEs, the Law
on PPP and the Law on Public Procurement as a general proposition. These laws have clearly
distinct scopes of application and are sensibly applicable to different aspects of the process of
privatizing of State-owned assets and the Tribunal has not identified any reason why they should

not be applied cumulatively in their respective scope of application.

19 First Expert Report of Qerim Querimi, p. 1.
180 Ty, Day 4, 113:13-21.
181 Ty, Day 4, 133 et seq, esp at 140, 141.

59

212.

213.

214.

215.

216.

It is possible, therefore, that certain specific provisions of the Law on PoEs, Law on PPPs or the
Law on Public Procurement impose certain additional requirements on the Government in defined
circumstances. Again, this is not necessarily in contradiction with the Law on Obligations but
merely an additional requirement that applies to the Government only in situations that each law

defines.

One such provision is Article 50 of the Law on PPPs. Article 50 provides that the “Agreement” is
to be signed by the “highest representative of the contracting authority”: “The Agreement shall be

signed by the authorized representative of the Private Partner and the highest representative of

the Contracting Authority.” |?

The experts for both Parties have accepted that this provision applies to the contemplated

privatization contract.

183

Professor Qerimi opined on this in his written expert reports” and confirmed it at the hearing in

the following terms:

In my view, it is especially relevant that the letter in the first place mentions the
basis upon which the procedure has been conducted. And it, using again,
“including but not limited” refers to the law on POEs and the law on PPP. So, in
my view, this is the first relevant factor, and the law on PPP requires different
procedures. For instance, we can note the difference with the form used by the GPC
in the case of the award notice. And this is, as far as I can see, a typical public
procurement form, but not the one that derives from the Law On Public-Private
Partnerships.

It is very significant to me that the letter is signed -- I believe I don’t see a signature
here, but here we have the name of a procurement officer, whereas the law that this
letter refers to, the law on PPP, Article 50, requires that the signature is from the
highest representative of the contracting authority, which, in this case, is the
minister who chairs the Government Privatisation Committee. '*4

At the hearing, Dr. PlavSak concurred during cross-examination that the signatory to the 18 April

2013 letter was not the highest representative of the public authority:

182 Exhibit C-36.

183

First Expert Report of Qerim Querimi, {70 (footnote references omitted).

Tr, Day 4, 179:2-20.

60

217.

218.

219.

220.

Q. And therefore, from a purely contractual perspective, if this letter were supposed
to be acceptance, written acceptance of a written offer, for it to be valid it would
have to be signed by the highest representative of the public authority; correct?

A. By the person authorised under the Kosovan public law to represent Republic of
Kosovo.

Q. And the public law applicable in this case is Article 50 of the PPP law, which
requires the highest representative of the public authority; correct?

A. Yes, 185

There is therefore no dispute among the experts that, in order to constitute a valid acceptance, the
letter of 18 April 2013 had to be signed by the “highest representative” of the Government of

Kosovo.

It is not disputed either that this letter was signed by Mr. Selami Berisha, a procurement officer at
the Ministry of Economic Development. Mr. Berisha is plainly not the “highest representative” of
the Ministry of Economic Development. Presumably, the Minister chairing the GPC himself
would be that person (this is what Professor Qerimi opined'**) or any person that would act with
delegated authority from the Minister. It has not been argued, and no evidence in that regard is on
record, that Mr. Berisha was acting upon delegated authority of the Minister to conclude a

privatization agreement.

It follows that the letter of 18 April 2013 was incapable of constituting a valid acceptance from a
Kosovar public law perspective. This reason too leads to the rejection of Axos’ jurisdictional

theory.

vi. The conduct of the Parties following the bid selection confirms
that no binding contract was entered into as of April 2013.

  

Asa final matter on this issue, the Tribunal turns to the conduct of the Parties after the bid selection.

 

It is not in dispute that, under Kosovar law, the parties’ conduct after a contract is concluded is

85 Tr, Day 4, 71:8-18.
286 Tr, Day 4, 179:17-20.

61

relevant for contract interpretation. Axos’ expert, Dr. PlavSak, eventually acknowledged this
during the hearing:

THE PRESIDENT: Do [the courts in Kosovo] also look at the correspondence
exchanged between the parties after concluding the contract?

A. Not in the meaning of interpretation of the contractual provisions.

THE PRESIDENT: Why not? Because many common legal civil law systems do
that: they look at what the parties did and they try to ascertain their intentions
based on their performance of the contract.

A. But not for the interpretation of the contract.
THE PRESIDENT: I’m asking you why not. Is it impermissible as a matter of law?
A. No.

[J

THE PRESIDENT: And would your answer be different if both parties in the letter
had referred to a specific provision of the contract, purporting to applying it? Both
parties say: Article 5. One says Article 5 contains an exclusivity provision. The
other says: yes, but it works differently. And Article 5 does not contain an
exclusivity provision, but both parties seem to agree that there is a—

A. Yes, in that case it would be relevant for the interpretation because in that case
the only relevance of the dispute, of concentration of the dispute, would be how it
applies. Because they both agree it contains the exclusivity. '°7
221. The Tribunal sees no practical difference between the situation where one looks at the conduct of
the parties to interpret an existing contract and the situation where one looks at the conduct of the

parties to decide whether a contract was concluded in the first place.

222. In both cases, the goal is to ascertain the real intentions of the parties and to check the consistency
of their legal position (i.e. whether a contract was concluded or not) against their subsequent

conduct.

81 Tr, Day 4, p. 102, 1-20 to p. 104, 1-24.

62

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

In any event, the Tribunal understands Dr. PlavSak’s position to be that in order to ascertain
whether or not a contract has been concluded, the parties’ subsequent conduct is relevant. In the
present case the Parties are indeed in dispute as to whether a contract has been entered into. So
following Dr. PlavSak’s testimony, the Parties’ subsequent conduct is relevant and will thus be

taken into consideration.

In the instant case, for example, one would have expected Axos to claim immediately that it had
an enforceable contract if Axos was genuinely convinced that a contract had been entered into with
the exchange of 3 April 2013 and 18 April 2013. At the very least, one would have expected Axos
to mention the existence of this contract. In particular, if Axos believed that it had a binding
contract in April 2013, it would have immediately signed the Transaction Documents, or at least

offered to do so.

The record shows that Axos did not do so. It eventually offered to sign the Transaction Documents,

but four months later, on 13 August 2013, in circumstances that the Tribunal will discuss later. '88

In the meantime, Axos actively sought to negotiate the terms of the Transaction Documents which,
by the time of the Bidder Selection were supposed to be fixed. There were various episodes in this
negotiation and the Tribunal need not review them in detail. Suffice it to say that, in June and July
2013, Axos engaged in attempts to extensively renegotiate the terms of the Transaction

Documents.

According to Mr. Budden’s written evidence, the stated purpose of this renegotiation was to “bring

them in line with international standards.” '*°

Whatever the reason for these requested changes, they were significant.

On 12 June 2013,' Axos sent a mark-up of the Transaction Documents which contemplated a
complete restructuring of the proposed transaction. Instead of buying 75% of the shares of PTK,

as contemplated in the Transaction Documents, the Consortium would buy 100% of PTK, then

'88 Exhibit R-35. See below at para. 237 et seq.

'89 First Witne:

 

Statement of Jan Budden, { 145.

190 Exhibit R-34.

63

merge with it, at which point 25% of the shares would be sold to the Government. This was

explained in a “Drafter’s Note” in the mark-up as follows:

Drafter’s Note: This draft has been prepared on the basis that a ‘traditional LBO’
acquisition-finance structure (followed by a post-completion merger) will be
deployed whereby the GoK will sell 100% of the share capital of PTK to the Bidder
and then re-invest a proportionate amount of such sale proceeds into the Bidder so
as to acquire a 25% stake therein; promptly after Completion a merger of the
Bidder and PTK will take place, following which the Bidder will directly own 75%
of PTK and the GoK will own 25% of PTK (and be able to participate in and benefit
from the leverage introduced by way of the relevant acquisition debt finance).'°!

230. The net effect of such structure is to transfer the debt of the Bidder at the level of the target

company and to have the Government bear 25% of it. This, by any measure, is not an insignificant

change.

231. Subsequently, on 4 July 2013, Axos sent an 8-page letter to the Transaction Advisors where it
sought to justify a number of other requested changes.!*? This letter refers in its first sentence to
the “on-going privatization process” and makes multiple references to the “Proposed Transaction”

thereby suggesting that in the drafter’s mind the transaction was not yet concluded.

232. The letter also requested a side-agreement enabling the Consortium to exit the proposed transaction
in the event that the lenders to the Bidder would themselves withdraw from the proposed

transaction:

In recognition thereof, we would like to see the Government agree, by way of a side
letter, to permit the termination of the Transaction Documents (and return to the
Consortium the completion security bond) in the event that the Lenders terminate
their funding commitments with the Consortium I BidCo at any time prior to
Closing. We believe that such a finance contingency is balanced and that it is not
fair or equitable to penalize a purchaser relying on third-party debt financing for
exposing itself to a risk, which derives from third parties over whom neither the
seller nor the buyer has any control.'°

19! Exhibit R-34.
12 Exhibit C-125.
193 Exhibit C-125, p. 3.

64

233.

234.

235.

236.

237.

At the hearing, Mr. Budden confirmed that the intention was indeed for the Consortium to have a

way out in circumstances where the financing would no longer be secured:

THE PRESIDENT: I realise that, but what you are saying, if I’m not mistaken, is
that: if the financing parties, what you call exactly the lenders — [withdraw] --
terminate their funding commitments with the consortium, we want to be able to
terminate the deal. That’s how I read it, but if you mean something —

A. No, yes, this is correct. 194
According to the 4 July 2013 letter, this requested change, among others, was characterized by the

Consortium as a “must have” for the transaction to be concluded:

We should point out that the following list is not a ‘wish list’. but is a very narrowly
ific_‘must haves

 

   

Transaction...'°° ‘emphasis in original)

At the hearing, Mr. Budden also conceded that the requested changes were imperative for the
transaction to be concluded:
Q. But what you’re conveying -- what you are officially conveying is: these are

must-haves in order to conclude a proposed transaction which means if we don’t
get them, we don’t have to conclude the proposed transaction.

A. Yes, one thing is what you write down, the other thing is of course something to

sit down and find a solution.'°°
Such a request, which would lead to the Consortium not being bound to buy the PTK shares if
financing was not certain, is difficult to reconcile with the Claimant’s argument in the present

proceeding that a binding agreement was already concluded for the purchase of 75% of PTK.

In further confirmation of this finding, the Tribunal notes that, approximately a month later, on 13

August 2013, Axos changed its position and indicated that it was ready to “sign the transaction

' Tr, Day 2, 250:10-16.
195 Exhibit C-125.
9 Tr, Day 2, 154:25 to 155:5.

65

238.

239.

240.

documents in the form they are initialized by us as part of our binding bid dated April 3rd
2013..."1°7

Notably, Axos did not refer to an already concluded agreement, but only to its “binding bid”.

Further, the Tribunal is not convinced that this 13 August 2013 proposal was anything more than

a new negotiating position, for two reasons.

First, at that time, unbeknownst to Kosovo, Najafi had long since withdrawn from the Consortium.
It is established that Najafi sent a withdrawal letter to Axos on 24 April 2013.'%8 It is also
established that Axos did not inform Kosovo immediately of this withdrawal but waited at least
until the end of August 2013 to inform it of this fact.!°? The Claimant attached much weight on
the identification of the shareholding of the SPV, Axos Telecom B.V., sent by Axos to Kosovo at
the end of August 2013, because that document showed that the Netherlands incorporated SPV
was a wholly-owned subsidiary of Axos and no shareholding was to be held by Najafi.?°°
According to Mr. Budden and Mr. Robert Woog, the Transaction Advisors were also informed

3,201

orally of Najafi’s withdrawal at a conference call held on or about 30 August 201 Kosovo

denies this, pointing out that, even after August 2013, Axos itself made multiple references to the

202 Kosovo notes further that the

Consortium with Najafi which Kosovo considers misleading.
responsible Minister, Mr. Ismajli, made a statement to the Assembly in September 2013 when the
privatization was discussed in which he referred to the Consortium’s comprising two parties, one

being American, and also during that time the GPC stated that it remained “committed to entering

197 Exhibit R-35.
198 Exhibit R-46.
1 At various times during his cross-examination, Mr. Budden acknowledged that this was a “delicate” issue that could have
caused “extra trouble” if disclosed to Kosovo because he was aware that certain political parties had doubts about Axos’ ability
to run the privatized telecoms company and were strongly challenging the award of the bid to it. Tr. Day 2, 136, 18 and 158,

15.

200 Tr, Day 1, 27:16 to 22.
21 Tr. Day 2, 156:23 to 157:5; 159:1-14; and 337:18 to 338:1.
2 Tr, Day 2, 156-159.

66

241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

246.

into a long-term mutually beneficial relationship with Axos and Najafi’.7°? Mr. Budden

acknowledged that the government wanted an “American/European group”.?4

The Tribunal need not decide if or when Kosovo’s decision-makers became aware that Najafi was
no longer participating in the Consortium. What is abundantly clear, even accepting Axos’ account
of the facts, is that on 13 August 2013, Najafi had long since withdrawn from the Consortium and
that the Consortium that submitted the Bid was no longer in a position to execute the Transaction

Documents.

Second, and this is linked to the previous finding, the SPV that was supposed to execute the
Transaction Documents, was not even incorporated before the end of August 2013.2 It was
therefore not in a position to execute the Transaction Documents two weeks earlier, had Kosovo

decided to accept this new buyer in lieu of the original consortium.

The discussions continued thereafter until Kosovo decided to put an end to the process at the end
of 2013. These events are however not relevant for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Axos’ main

jurisdictional theory.

‘What matters is that the events that took place in the summer of 2013 are incompatible with the
notion that a valid binding contract for the sale of 75% of the share of PTK had been entered into

in April 2013, which is Axos’ main jurisdictional theory.

Independently of the multiple hurdles from a strict legal perspective that Axos fails to clear, its

theory is also not supported by the facts of the case.

3. Axos’ Alternative Jurisdictional Theory
Axos’ alternative jurisdictional theory underlying its contention that it has a protected investment
within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the Treaty is based on Article 1(1)(c) of the Treaty which

provides that “claims for money” are protected investments.

23 Tr, Day 2, 337:1-15.
2 Tr, Day 2, 302:7.
205 Exhibit C-136.

67

247. According to Axos, “it is the sums spent (and know-how contributed) by Axos in connection with

the Contract which constitute ‘[c]laims to money”?

248. This argument is rather difficult to follow insofar as Axos has not indicated what the basis of its
purported “claims for money” would be.”°’ As presented by Axos, this argument seems to imply

that it is its claim under the Treaty which constitutes its investment.

249. The Tribunal does not need to engage in an extensive discussion as to what type of claims would
be protected under the language of the Treaty, but one thing is clear: it cannot be a claim under the
Treaty itself. Otherwise, the definition would be circular and would result in the paradoxical
situation that it would suffice for a claimant to advance any claim under a bilateral investment

treaty containing this language to subsequently claim that it has a protected investment.

250. The “[c]laims to money” phrasing referred to in Article 1(1)(c) of the Treaty must therefore have
a basis other than the Treaty itself. This basis may be contractual, tortious, statutory, regulatory

or otherwise, but it cannot be only the Treaty itself.

251. In the instant case, Axos has not advanced any basis at all. Moreover, a claim for the wasted
expenses for the bid, as this alternative claim is, would, whatever its legal basis, be expressly

barred by the clear language of the ITP, which provides:

The Contracting Authority reserves the right to change the time schedule and,
generally, any terms of these ITP. The Contracting Authority further reserves the
right to cancel the Tender or declare it void or otherwise without effect either in
relation to the entire Tender or in relation to an individual Bidder, for any reason
whatsoever, until the signing of the Transaction Documents, and that such action
does not entitle the Bidder/Selected Bidder to any claim whatsoever against the
GPC, the Gok, or any of their respective agents, representatives, advisors or
consultants.”°* (emphasis added)

206 Claimant’ s Reply, | 167.
207 See Claimant’s Rejoinder, Section 3.1.2.
208 Exhibit C-7, Article 1.1.

68

252.

253.

254.

255.

256.

IV.

257.

258.

The Tribunal notes that Axos’ own expert agreed at the hearing, and rightly so in the opinion of
the Tribunal, that the cancellation right contained in the ITP continued to apply until the SPA was

entered into.” There is no reason for this provision to be treated differently.

As a result, it is clear that there is no discernible basis for Axos’ claim for wasted expenses. This

may also explain why this alternative jurisdictional theory was not really pursued at the hearing.

In the end, the Tribunal can only conclude that there is no basis for the Article 1(1)(c) “[c]laims

for money” claim and such claim would in any event be barred by the express terms of the ITP.
As a result, Axos’ alternative jurisdictional theory also fails.

Because the Tribunal concludes that there is no investment under the BIT, there is no need for the
Tribunal to address the issue whether there is an investment for the purpose of the ICSID
Convention (on the assumption that this is a separate requirement, an issue that the Tribunal needs

not address here) nor is there a need to address the merits of the claim.

COSTS OF THE ARBITRATION

Turning to the costs of the arbitration, Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides that the
Tribunal shall, except if the parties otherwise agree, assess expenses incurred by the parties and

decide how and by whom those expenses should be paid:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties
otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the
proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and
expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities
of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.

Article 61(2) consequently confers a broad discretion on the Tribunal to decide how and by whom
costs are to be borne (subject always to its consideration of whether particular costs were

reasonably incurred).

2® Tr, Day 4, 109:17-23.

69

259.

260.

261.

Further, Rule 28 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings provides that each
of the parties should submit to the Tribunal a statement of costs reasonably incurred or borne by it

in the proceeding:

(1) Without prejudice to the final decision on the payment of the cost of the
proceeding, the Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, decide:

(a) at any stage of the proceeding, the portion which each party shall pay,
pursuant to Administrative and Financial Regulation 14, of the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre;

(b) with respect to any part of the proceeding, that the related costs (as
determined by the Secretary-General) shall be borne entirely or in a particular
share by one of the parties.

(2) Promptly after the closure of the proceeding, each party shall submit to the
Tribunal a statement of costs reasonably incurred or borne by it in the proceeding
and the Secretary-General shall submit to the Tribunal an account of all amounts
paid by each party to the Centre and of all costs incurred by the Centre for the
proceeding. The Tribunal may, before the award has been rendered, request the
parties and the Secretary-General to provide additional information concerning
the cost of the proceeding.

In accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, the Parties filed Submissions on Costs on

13 December 2017 followed by Reply submissions on 20 December 2017.

Axos submits that it has incurred the following costs in connection with this arbitration:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Description Total incurred (EUR)
Herbert Smith Freehills fees 2,509,248.00
Herbert Smith Freehills disbursements 288,289.30
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer fees 15,000.00
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer disbursements 1,744.15
Dr. Nina Plavsak fees 48,100.00
Dr. Nina Plavsak disbursements 3,343.48
FTI Consulting fees 450,000.00
FTI Consulting disbursements 5,936.36
Other Disbursements 114,514.35
Arbitration costs 374,205.93
Total Incurred (EUR) 3,810,381.57

 

 

 

 

70

262. Kosovo submits that it has incurred the following costs in connection with this arbitration:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Description Total incurred | Total incurred
(in USD) (in EUR)

‘Squire Patton Boggs fees 1,613,542.50

Squire Patton Boggs expenses 46,596.18

Squire Patton Boggs expenses in EUR 3,566.67

Professor Qerimi fees 15,000

Professor Qerimi expenses 1142.73

KPMG fees 100,000

KPMG expenses 740

‘Witness expenses 5,335.72

Party representative expenses 6,661.08

Arbitration costs 400,000

Totals Incurred 2,060,138.68 | 132,446.2 Euro
USD

 

 

 

 

 

263. The actual costs of the arbitration, which include the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in USD):

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Mr. Pinsolle $238,433.35
Dr. Feit $105,335.50
Mr. Thomas $70,737.47
ICSID’s administrative fees $106,000.00
Direct expenses $113,000.12
Total $633,506.44

71

264.

265.

266.

267.

268.

269.

The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties in equal parts. As a result,

each Party’s share of the costs of arbitration amounts to USD 316,753.22.7!°

Regarding the allocation of costs, Axos requests in its last pleading (i.e., the Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 29 September 2017) that the costs be allocated to Kosovo in
full:
d. order that the Respondent pay the cost of these arbitration proceedings,
including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, as well as legal and other expenses
incurred by the Claimant, including the fees of its legal counsel, experts and
consultants, plus interest thereon at a reasonable rate from the date on which such
costs are incurred to the date of payment;
Similarly, Kosovo requests, in its Counter-Memorial dated 23 December 2017 and Rejoinder on
Merits and Quantum and Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 1 September 2017, the full

allocation of costs to Axos:

(d) ordering Axos to pay the costs of this arbitration, including the costs of the
Arbitral Tribunal and the legal and other costs incurred by Kosovo on a full
indemnity basis, plus interest in an amount to be determined by the Tribunal.
It follows that the prayers for relief of both Parties contain a request to order the other party to pay
the arbitration costs. Put differently, both Parties agree to the application in the present case of the
“cost follows the event” rule, pursuant to which the successful party should recover its reasonable

costs. The Tribunal sees no reason to depart from this rule and will proceed accordingly.

In the present case, Kosovo has been successful in its defence. It is consequently entitled to
reimbursement from Axos of its reasonably incurred costs, including the costs of arbitration and

Kosovo’s legal fees and expenses.

The Tribunal has examined Kosovo’s claim for its legal fees. It notes that Kosovo has subjected
a portion of its legal fees (“Squire Patton Boggs fees”) to a “success fee arrangement’, described

as follows “Squire Patton Boggs has been paid USD 500,000 of the above fees. Payment of the

210 The remaining balance in the case account will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced
to ICSID.

72

270.

271.

272.

273.

274.

remainder of its fees are contingent upon a success fee arrangement with the Republic of Kosovo

which is capped at USD 850,000”?!

Kosovo has thus incurred USD 500,000 in legal fees to date. However, it follows from this
“success fee arrangement” that Kosovo, having been successful in its defence, will incur an
additional USD 850,000 in legal fees (a cap which Kosovo will reach, considering the fees
recorded by its counsel Squire Patton Boggs). Consequently, Kosovo will incur a total of

USD 1,350,000 in legal fees.

The Tribunal further notes that the amount of USD 1,350,000 of legal fees is perfectly reasonable
for defending the full case. The Claimant’s legal fees, which are perfectly reasonable too given
that it is the Claimant’s duty to put forward the full case, amount to EUR 2.5 million which is

twice as much. The amount of USD 1,350,000 should therefore be recoverable in full.

The remainder of the “Squire Patton Boggs” fees set forth in Kosovo’s Submissions on Costs,
which will not be incurred by Kosovo, cannot be recovered under Article 61(2) of the ICSID

Convention.

The Tribunal notes that Respondent has requested that it be granted interest on any costs awarded
to it “in an amount to be determined by the Tribunal.” However, the Respondent has not provided
any arguments or evidence in support of this request, nor has it explained the basis on which the
Tribunal could make such an order under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention. In these

circumstances, the Tribunal declines to grant Respondent’s claim for interest.

Asa result, the Tribunal finds that Axos is to pay Kosovo in total the amounts of USD 1,713,349.40
and EUR 132,446.20.

21! Respondent’s Statement of Costs.

73

275.

AWARD

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal decides as follows:

(i) The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the present dispute;

(ii) The Claimants shall bear the entirety of the costs of this arbitration, including the
fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID’s administrative fees, and direct expenses,
as well as the Respondent’s reasonable legal fees and expenses incurred in
connection with this arbitration. The Claimants shall thus pay to the Respondent
USD 1,713,349.40 and EUR 132,446.20.

(iii) All other requests for relief are dismissed.

74

[SIGNED] [SIGNED]

 

J. Christopher Thomas QC Dr. Michael Feit
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 2 May 2018 Date: | May 2018
[SIGNED]
Philippe Pinsolle

President of the Tribunal

Date: 3 May 2018

75

