INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

1818 H STREET, NW | WASHINGTON, DC 20433 | USA
TELEPHONE (202) 458 1534 | FACSIMILE (202) 522 2615
WWW.WORLDBANK.ORG/ICSID

©ICSID

By email

Mr. Adel A Hamadi Al Tamimi

c/o Mr. Arif H. Ali, Mr. Theodore R. Posner,
Ms. Patricia Saiz, and Ms. Lindsay Bourne

Weil, Gotshal and Manges LLP

1300 Eye Street NW, Suite 900

Washington, D.C. 20005

US.A.
and

c/o Ms. Samaa A. Haridi

Weil, Gotshal and Manges LLP

767 Fifth Avenue

New York, NY 10153

US.A.

September 29, 2012

Sultanate of Oman

c/o His Excellency Saeed Al-Shuaibi

c/o Director General of Organizations and
Commercial Relations

Ministry of Commerce and Industry

P.O. Box 550

Muscat 113

Sultanate of Oman
and

c/o Ms. Claudia T. Salomon, Ms. Kiera Gans,
and Mr. Leon Skornicki

DLA Piper LLP (U.S.)

1251 Avenue of the Americas

New York, NY 10020
US.A.

Re: Abdel A Hamadi Al Tamimi v. Sultanate of Oman
(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/33)

Dear Mesdames and Sirs,

The President of the Tribunal has asked me to convey to the parties the Tribunal’s decision on the
Claimant’s request of today’s date:

“The Tribunal has considered the Claimant’s request of 29 September 2012 for
reconsideration of the timing aspects of Procedural Order No. 2.

Having conferred, the Tribunal rejects the Claimant’s request and confirms the directions
contained in Procedural Order No. 2.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant has made no effort to explain why its request for a
site visit could not have been made earlier and in good time. Absent such an explanation,
the Tribunal considers that it would be inappropriate and unjustifiable to burden the
Respondent in the manner proposed by the Claimant. Especially in view of the fact that
the timetable for these proceedings has been known to the Claimant for a long time, it
was incumbent upon the Claimant to arrange its affairs so as to be able to meet the agreed
deadlines. There was no basis for the Claimant’s apparent expectation that it would be
entitled to inspect the site at its own convenience and without proper notice to the
Respondent or the Tribunal.

In the Tribunal’s view, the fact that the timetable has recently been extended by
agreement between the parties does not assist the Claimant since it is now clear there will
be ample time for an orderly inspection by Claimant at an appropriate time.

The Tribunal stresses that the Claimant is entitled to an inspection — the only question is
and has been when it should occur and under what conditions.”

Sincerely yours,
[signed]

Frauke Nitschke
Secretary of the Tribunal

cc: Members of the Tribunal

