INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

ADEM DOGAN
(Claimant) (Respondent on Annulment)
v.
TURKMENISTAN

(Respondent) (Applicant on Annulment)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/09/9
ANNULMENT PROCEEDING

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Professor Piero Bernardini, President
Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Member
Dr. Jacomijn van Haersolte-van Hof, Member

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Lindsay Gastrell

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 15 January 2016

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Turkmenistan:

Mr. Peter M. Wolrich

Ms. Sabrina Ainouz

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
6, avenue Vélasquez

75008 Paris

France

Mr. Ali R. Giirsel

Ms. Jennifer Morrison Ersin

Ms. Svetlana Evliya

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Maya Akar Center

Buyukdere Caddesi No. 100-102

Kat 23, No.89 Esentepe 34394

Istanbul

Turkey

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Rubén Dario 281, Piso 9

Col. Bosque de Chapultepec

11580 Mexico, D.F.

Mexico

Representing Mr. Adem Dogan:

Dr. Stephan Wilske

Dr. Martin Raible

Dr. Lars Markert

Mr. Todd J. Fox

Dr. Laura Brauninger

Dr. Melanie Eckardt

Ms. Sarah Kimberly Hughes
Gleiss Lutz Rechtsanwiilte
LautenschlagerstraBe 21
70173 Stuttgart

Germany

Prof. Dr. R. Alexander Lorz
Heinrich-Heine-Universitat Diisseldorf
Juristische Fakultat

UniversitatsstraBe 1

40225 Diisseldorf

Germany

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES .....c.ccccsccccssesssseeseseessseeseseensseessseessseessseensaeneae 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY .......ccsccccssesessesssseesseeseseessseessseessseensseessseensseessseensaeneas 2
THE APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK: ARTICLE 52 OF THE ICSID

CONVENTION 6
GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT ........csccccsccssssesseseeeseessseessseessseessseessseessseensaeneas 6

 

MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS..

 

 

 

 

1. The Respondent's Position 9
2. The Claimant's POSition .....cececceccecsecssessessessesseeseeseeseeseesesssesnssnesneeneeneeaes 22
3. The Ce ittee’s Analysis 32
SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE .......seeeeeee+ 56
1. The Respondent's Position 56
2. The Claimant's POSition .....cececceccecsecssessessessesseeseeseeseeseesesssesnssnesneeneeneeaes 63
3. The Ce ittee’s Analysis 68

 

FAILURE TO STATE REASONS.

 

 

 

 

1. The Respondent's Position

2. The Claimant's POSition .....cececceccecsecssessessessesseeseeseeseeseesesssesnssnesneeneeneeaes 80
3. The Ce ittee’s Analysis 85
COSTS 90
DECISION 92

 

iii

Arbitration Rules
Award

Application
BIT or Treaty

Claimant
Counter-Memorial

Committee

Decision on Jurisdiction or DOJ

Farm or Poultry Business

Gurbannazarovs
Hearing
ICSID

ICSID Convention or
Convention

Memorial
Parties
Rejoinder
Reply
Respondent
Tr. [page:line]
Tribunal

Turkmen Companies

GLOSSARY

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, April
2006

Award rendered on 12 August 2014 in Adem Dogan v.
Turkmenistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/9)

The Respondent’s Application for Annulment

Treaty Between the Government of the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Government of Turkmenistan Concerning
the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments,
which entered into force on 19 February 2001

Mr. Adem Dogan, the respondent on annulment
The Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment

The ad hoc Committee composed of Professor Piero
Bernardini, Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan and Dr. Jacomijn van
Haersolte-van Hof

Decision on Jurisdiction issued on 29 February 2012 in Adem
Dogan v. Turkmenistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/9)

A poultry business venture which involved the leasing of land
near Ashgabat, and the restoration, outfitting and use of
buildings for a poultry business (as defined in the Award)

Turkmen nationals involved in the Farm
Hearing on annulment held in Paris, France, on 21 July 2015
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States

The Respondent’s Memorial on Annulment
Mr. Adem Dogan and Turkmenistan

The Claimant’s Rejoinder on Annulment
The Respondent’s Reply on Annulment
Turkmenistan, the applicant on annulment
Transcript of the Hearing on annulment
The tribunal that rendered the Award

Sdhrat-Anna and Samsyt

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This annulment proceeding concerns an application dated 25 August 2014 (the
“Application”) by which Turkmenistan requests annulment of the award rendered on 12
August 2014 (the “Award”) in the ICSID arbitration proceeding No. ARB/09/9 between Mr.
Adem Dogan and Turkmenistan. This Decision will continue to use the “Claimant” to refer

to Mr. Dogan and the “Respondent” for Turkmenistan, as in the original proceeding.

The Respondent filed the Application with the Secretary-General of ICSID on 26 August
2014, pursuant to Article 52 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention”) and Rule 50 of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”). The
Application was submitted within the time period specified in Article 52(2) of the ICSID

Convention.

The Claimant is a national of the Federal Republic of Germany. He submitted the original
dispute to ICSID on the basis of the Treaty Between the Government of the Federal Republic
of Germany and the Government of Turkmenistan Concerning the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments, which entered into force on 19 February 2001 (the

“BIT” or “Treaty’).

The Award was rendered by an arbitral tribunal composed of Professor Jan Paulsson
(President), Professor Philippe Sands and Dr. Markus Wirth (the “Tribunal”). The Award
incorporates the Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 February 2012 (the “Decision on
Jurisdiction” or the “DOJ”), in which the Tribunal found that it had jurisdiction over the

Claimant’s claims.

In the Award, the Tribunal decided that the Respondent had violated its obligations under
Articles 4(2) (expropriation) and 2(1) (fair and equitable treatment) of the BIT. It ordered

the Respondent to pay the Climant in damages (including interest),

plus for the cost of the arbitration am for

“costs reasonably incurred in presenting his case”.!

This Decision of the ad hoc Committee (the “Committee”) rules on the Respondent’s request
to annul the Award based on the grounds set forth in Article 52(1)(b), (d) and (e) of the
ICSID Convention, namely that: (i) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers; (ii) the
Award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based; and (iii) there has been a serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 28 August 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application in
accordance with Rule 50(2) of the Arbitration Rules and transmitted the Notice of
Registration to the Parties. As the Application contained a request for a stay of enforcement
of the Award, the Secretary-General also notified the Parties that enforcement of the Award

was provisionally stayed pursuant to Rule 54(2) of the Arbitration Rules.

By letter of 30 September 2014, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules, the
Secretary-General notified the Parties that the Committee had been constituted, composed
of Professor Piero Bernardini (Italian) as President and Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan (Pakistani)
and Dr. Jacomijn van Haersolte-van Hof (Dutch) as Members. Thus, the annulment
proceeding was deemed to have begun on that date. The Parties were also informed that Ms.

Lindsay Gastrell, ICSID Legal Counsel, would serve as Secretary of the Committee.

On 6 October 2014, the Committee set a schedule for the Respondent to file a request
specifying the circumstances requiring the stay of enforcement, and the Claimant to file his
observations on that request. In accordance with this schedule, the Respondent filed its
Request for a Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award on 15 October 2014,
and the Claimant filed his Observations on the Stay Request on 24 October 2014. In his
observations, the Claimant asked the Committee to terminate the provisional stay of

enforcement or, in the alternative, to order the Respondent to post a security in the total

Award, 9316(ii).

amount of the Award plus interest. He also requested that the Committee rule on the matter

within 30 days, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 54(2).

On 27 October 2014, the Committee proposed a second round of written submissions on the
request for a stay of enforcement. The Respondent filed its Reply to the Claimant’s
Observation on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award on 4 November 2014, and the
Claimant filed his Rejoinder to Respondent’s Reply to Claimant’s Observations on the Stay

of Enforcement of the Award on 11 November 2014.

The Committee held the first session by telephone conference on 7 November 2014, during
which the Committee and the Parties discussed the procedure that would govern the
annulment proceeding. On the same date, following the session, the Committee issued
Procedural Order No. | reflecting the Parties’ agreements and the Committee’s decisions on

procedural matters.

On 24 November 2014, the Committee issued its Decision on Turkmenistan’s Request for a
Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award (the “Decision on the Stay”). The

Committee decided that:

[T]he stay of enforcement of the Award is confirmed on condition that
Turkmenistan, within 30 days from the date of this Decision, provides an
irrevocable and unconditional bank guarantee from an internationally
reputable first-class bank having its principal office outside of
Turkmenistan in the total amount of the award plus interest as security for
compliance with the Award, if upheld.”

By email of 17 December 2014, counsel for the Respondent informed the Committee that

the Respondent had provided the Claimant with an unconditional and irrevocable bank

guarantee issued on 16 December 2014 by Deutsche Bank (the “Payment Guarantee”), a

copy of which was attached to the email.

The Payment Guarantee requires that a demand for payment from the beneficiary be
accompanied by a copy of a letter from the ICSID Secretary-General stating that a final

decision by the Committee has been rendered and that the Award has not been annulled and

2 Decision on the Stay, §61(a).

has become payable. In response to an inquiry from the Claimant regarding this provision,
on 18 December 2014, the ICSID Secretariat confirmed that the Secretary-General would

provide such a letter if required.

On 23 December 2014, the Claimant wrote to the Committee concerning the Payment
Guarantee, noting the expiration date of 31 January 2016. The Claimant asked the
Committee to indicate whether a final decision was likely to be rendered and served upon
the Parties by mid-January 2016, so that the Claimant would have sufficient time to benefit
from the Payment Guarantee should the Committee uphold the Award. By a letter of 24
December 2014 from the Secretary, the Committee informed the Parties that it was

reasonable to expect a final Decision on Annulment by mid-January 2016.

Subsequently, the Parties filed the following written submissions:

a) Respondent’s Memorial on Annulment dated 21 January 2015 (the “Memorial”);

b) Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment dated 2 April 2015 (the “Counter-
Memorial”);

c) Respondent’s Reply Memorial on Annulment dated 11 May 2015 (the “Reply”); and

d) Claimant’s Rejoinder Memorial on Annulment dated 19 June 2015 (the “Rejoinder”).

A hearing on annulment was held at the ICC Hearing Centre in Paris, France on 21 July 2015

(the “Hearing”). The following persons attended the Hearing:

 

Ad hoc Committee

 

 

 

Prof. Piero Bernardini President
Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan Member
Dr. J.J. van Haersolte-van Hof Member

 

 

ICSID Secretariat

 

Ms. Lindsay Gastrell Secretary of the Committee

 

On behalf of the Claimant

 

 

 

 

 

Counsel:

Dr. Stephan Wilske Gleiss Lutz
Dr. Lars Markert Gleiss Lutz
Mr. Todd J. Fox Gleiss Lutz

 

 

 

20.

21.

 

Dr. Laura Braeuninger Gleiss Lutz

 

 

 

 

Dr. Melanie Eckardt Gleiss Lutz
Ms. Sarah Kimberly Hughes Gleiss Lutz
Parties:

 

Mr. Adem Dogan

 

Mr. Volkan Dogan |

 

On behalf of the Respondent

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Counsel:
Mr. Peter Wolrich Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Ali R. Giirsel Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Sabrina Ainouz Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Victor Datry Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Court Reporter
Mr. Trevor McGowan | The Court Reporter Ltd.
Interpreters
Ms. Barbara Bethaussar | Independent interpreter
Ms. Brigitte Schneider | Independent interpreter

 

The Committee met to deliberate in Paris, France on 22 July 2015 and continued its

deliberations thereafter by various means of communication.

Also on 22 July 2015, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 2, which reflected the
Parties’ agreements and the Committee’s decisions on certain procedural matters addressed
at the close of the Hearing. Specifically, Procedural Order No. 2 set forth the process of

correcting the Hearing transcripts and the guidelines for the Parties’ submissions on costs.

As contemplated by Procedural Order No. 2, the Parties filed their joint corrections to the

Hearing transcripts on 31 July 2015.

Subsequently, on 21 September 2015, each Party submitted its Statement of Fees and Costs,
together with brief reasoning supporting its position on the allocation of costs, in accordance

with paragraph 6.1 of Procedural Order No. 2. On 12 October 2015, each Party submitted

22.

Ill.

23.

24.

observations on the other Party’s Statement of Fees and Costs, in accordance with paragraph

6.2 of Procedural Order No. 2.

The annulment proceeding was declared closed on 17 December 2015, pursuant to ICSID

Arbitration Rules 38(1) and 53.

THE APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK: ARTICLE 52 OF THE ICSID
CONVENTION

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention governs applications for annulment of ICSID awards

and provides in relevant part:

(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in
writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following
grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

(2) The application shall be made within 120 days after the date on which
the award was rendered [...].

(3) On receipt of the request the Chairman shall forthwith appoint from the
Panel of Arbitrators an ad hoc Committee of three persons. [...] The
Committee shall have the authority to annul the award or any part thereof
on any of the grounds set forth in paragraph (1).

(4) The provisions of Articles 41-45, 48, 49, 53 and 54, and of Chapters VI
and VII shall apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the Committee.

[J
GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT

The Respondent seeks annulment of the Award in its entirety on the basis that: (i) the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b) of the

Convention; (ii) the Tribunal committed serious departures from fundamental rules of

25.

26.

27.

28.

procedure, in violation of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention; and (iii) the Award has

failed to state the reasons on which it is based, contrary to Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention.

The Claimant contends that the Respondent has failed to establish any of the asserted
grounds for annulment of the Award and instead simply reargues the merits of the underlying
arbitration in an attempt to appeal the Award, which is impermissible under the ICSID
Convention. Even if an annullable error were present, the Committee should exercise its

discretion under Article 52(1) and decline to annul the Award.*

This Section addresses the submissions of the Parties on the three grounds for annulment.
For each ground, the Committee summarises the Parties’ positions and then sets forth its
analysis. The Committee has considered all of the extensive factual and legal arguments
presented by the Parties in their written submissions and oral argument during the Hearing.
The fact that a specific argument, document or legal authority is not cited does not mean that

the Committee has not considered it.

Before examining the Parties’ positions with regard to the grounds of annulment relied on
by the Respondent, it is convenient to recall that under the ICSID system annulment is a
limited remedy with the aim of achieving a careful balance between the Convention’s
objective to ensure the finality of awards and the need to guarantee the fundamental integrity

of the arbitral process.

Annulment is a remedy of limited scope. Article 53 provides for the finality of awards by
stating that they shall not be subject to “any appeal or any other remedy except those
provided for in this Convention”. Article 52 sets out the limits of that exception by listing
the grounds on which a party may seek annulment. The list is exhaustive. The decision to
annul cannot be based on a ground other than the five listed in Article 52(1). It is now well
settled that this exhaustive list of grounds safeguards the integrity and not the outcome of

the arbitration proceedings. The Committee agrees with Professor Schreuer that:

3 Rejoinder, Section IV; Tr. 111:5. The Claimant submits that there is a presumption in favor of the validity of ICSID
awards, Rejoinder, §346, citing Exhibit RL-153, Kléckner v. Republic of Cameroon, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2,
Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, {52(e).

29.

30.

There are two potentially conflicting principles at work in the review
process. One is the principle of finality; the other is the principle of
correctness. Finality is designed to serve the purpose of efficiency in terms
of an expeditious and economic settlement of disputes. Correctness may be
an elusive goal that takes time and effort and may involve several layers of
control, a phenomenon that is well known from domestic court procedure.
In international arbitration the principle of finality is often seen to take
precedence over the principle of correctness. The desire to see a dispute
settled is regarded as more important than the substantive correctness of the
decision. Annulment is the preferred solution to balance these two
objectives. It is designed to provide emergency relief for egregious
violations of a few basic principles while preserving the finality of the
decisions in most respects.*

Accordingly, it is not within the Committee’s remit to review the substantive correctness of
the Award, either in fact or in law. However, the Committee must examine the legitimacy of
the arbitration proceedings resulting in the Award. This means that it is not the Committee’s
function to sit in appeal on the Award of the Tribunal. It must not substitute its views for

those of the Tribunal.

The Committee must carefully consider whether the Tribunal ensured the correctness,
fundamental fairness and hence the legitimacy of the arbitration proceedings. In this case it
must particularly do so because of the repeated observations, in the Decision on Jurisdiction
and the Award, of the scarcity and ambiguity of the evidentiary material and the investor’s
“operat[ion] in an artisanal fashion” in the absence of professional advice in properly
structuring and documenting the nature and extent of his investment.> These circumstances
lead the Respondent to contend that the Tribunal’s reasoning is full of compassion for an
unsophisticated and inexperienced investor and that the Award should be annulled since the

Tribunal exercised ex aequo et bono powers that it did not have.

* Christoph Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press (2009)
(hereinafter Schreuer, The ICSID Convention), p. 903.

5 DOI, 485.

A. MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS

1. The Respondent’s Position

31. The Respondent states that its “one main argument in support of its claim for the annulment
of the Award” is that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers within the meaning of

Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention “by assuming ex aequo et bono powers that the Parties

never agreed to give it”.°

32. The Respondent observes that the Parties appear to generally agree regarding the applicable
legal standard for “manifest excess of power”.’ To fall within Article 52(1)(b), there must
be an excess of the scope of the Tribunal’s powers as defined in the Parties’ agreement to
arbitrate, which may happen when a “tribunal fails to apply the proper law, or otherwise fails
to exercise its mandate in accordance with the parties’ agreement”.* The Respondent agrees
with the Claimant’s point that an error of law or fact is not a ground for annulment, but
further submits that “an egregious error of law can justify annulment, if it amounts to non
application of the law”.? In addition, any such excess of powers must be “manifest”, which
is defined by reference to “the ease with which it is perceived”.!° In this regard, however,

the Respondent asserts that “ad hoc committees have held that a detailed analysis of the

award does not prevent them from concluding that there is a manifest excess of powers”.!!

© Reply, 3. See Memorial, Section II.C; Reply, Section IV.A.2, B.2 and C.2.

7 Reply, 416.

* Memorial, 17, citing Exhibit RL-148, Dolzer and Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law, Oxford
University Press (2008) p. 281. See Reply, § 17.

° Reply, 18.

© Reply, 419, quoting Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, p. 938, 135. See Memorial, 18.

4 Reply, 422, citing Exhibit RL-156, Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25, Decision on the Application for Annulment, 23 December 2010, 45; Exhibit RL-195,
Victor Pey Casado and Foundation “President Allende” v. Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision
on the Application for Annulment, 18 December 2012, $170; Exhibit CL-137, Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002,
4993-115; Exhibit RL-169, Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision on the Application for Annulment, 30 July 2010, 9355-393; Exhibit CL-8, Malaysian
Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Decision on the Application for Annulment,
16 April 2009, §9]56-80.

33.

34.

35.

36.

According to the Respondent, it is undisputed that a tribunal’s unauthorized assumption of
ex aequo et bono powers constitutes a manifest excess of powers warranting annulment.!”
The Respondent points to Article 42(3) of the ICSID Convention, which provides that an
ICSID tribunal only has “the power to decide a dispute ex aequo et bono if the parties so
agree”, and argues that ad hoc committees have consistently held that a violation of this

provision can constitute a manifest excess of powers under Article 52(1)(b).!°

The Respondent identifies ex aequo et bono powers as those allowing a tribunal to disregard
the substantive rules of the governing law if they would lead to a decision that would
contravene equity.'* The main features are the power to depart from the applicable law, rules
of evidence and contract terms, as well as greater freedom in the assessment of damages.!*
In determining whether a tribunal assumed unauthorized ex aequo et bono powers, “a careful

review of a decision is particularly warranted”.!°

The Respondent argues that “an overall reading of the Decision on Jurisdiction and the

Award shows that the Tribunal decided significant aspects of the case ex aequo et bono”.!”

In particular, the Respondent asserts that:

the Tribunal departed from the applicable law whenever the application of
such law would have led it to dismiss Claimant’s claims, ignored classic
tules of evidence and the evidentiary record and, more generally, let its
sense of what it thought was required by fairness prevail over any other
consideration. '*

According to the Respondent, the Tribunal thereby manifestly exceeded it powers, notably

when it: (i) decided that it had jurisdiction on the basis of an “undefined and undocumented”

2 Memorial, §9]35-45; Reply, 54.

3 Memorial, 4940-45; Reply, 454, citing, inter alia, Exhibit RL-153, Kléckner v. Republic of Cameroon, ICSID Case
No. ARB/81/2, Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, 459; Exhibit RL-154, Maritime International Nominees
Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment, 14 December 1989, 45.03.
4 Memorial, 21.

'S Memorial, 421-32; Reply §9]38-53. According to the Respondent, the Claimant artificially limits the notion of ex
aequo et bono decisions to those explicitly and solely based on equity. Reply, 437.

6 Reply, 421.

"7 Reply, $56. See Tr. 7:10-15.

'S Reply, 14.

37.

38.

39.

investment; (ii) found that the Claimant owned “some kind of contractual interest” for
liability purposes; and (iii) artificially quantified and awarded damages in the absence of any

reliable documentary evidence.!°

i. Jurisdiction

With respect to the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal
exercised ex aequo et bono powers and manifestly exceeded its powers in two main ways:
first, it departed from the applicable law prescribed by Article 42(1) of the ICSID

Convention,”° and second, it departed from basic rules of evidence.7!

Regarding the applicable law, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal departed from the
objective jurisdictional requirement of the ICSID Convention and the BIT that the dispute
be shown to arise from an investment. The Tribunal failed to identify the Claimant’s
investment forming the basis of its jurisdiction. Rather, it upheld jurisdiction on the basis of
“vague ‘cumulative or alternative’ conclusions that the Claimant may have owned either an
investment in the form of movable property and/or some kind of contractual interest in the

Poultry Business.”??

However, according to the Respondent, the Tribunal never identified any form of “movable
property”, presumably equipment, that could have constituted an investment under Article
1(1)(a) of the BIT.?? Further, there is nothing in the record to show that the Claimant ever
owned any poultry equipment. The Respondent alleges that “the Tribunal merely deduces
the existence of Dogan’s contribution from the absence of evidence that the Gurbannazarovs
99 24

financed such equipment”,”* citing the Tribunal’s statement that:

19 Memorial, 947; Reply, 60; Tr. 7:16-21.

20 Article 42(1): “The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by the
parties. In the absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute
(including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as may be applicable”.

2! Memorial, §4[50-98; Reply, 164-100.

22 Reply, 466, quoting DOJ, 4460-61. See Memorial, 449; Tr. 8:1-18.
23 Reply, 66; Tr. 8:5-7.

24 Memorial, 453; Reply, 66.

40.

Al.

42.

There is no evidence that the Gurbannazarovs or anyone else provided such
finance [...]. The state-of-the-art facility did not fall from the heavens.
Accordingly the Claimant at a minimum qualifies under Article 1(1)(a) of
the BIT.?>
The Respondent argues that in the Award the Tribunal appears to contradict its finding of an
investment under Article 1(1)(a) of the BIT. There, it found that the Turkmen Companies,

not the Claimant, owned the relevant equipment.”°

The Respondent also points to the Tribunal’s finding of a “further or alternative” form of
investment under Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT as a departure from the Convention and the
BIT.”’ The Tribunal found that the Claimant had established an investment through a
contractual interest in the Turkmen companies “akin to what is commonly referred to as a
‘carried interest’”; yet, it recognized that “the nature and extent of [the Claimant’s]
contribution cannot be determined fully at this stage”.’* Notably, Article 1 of the BIT does

not include contractual interests among the forms of investment as some treaties do.”°

The Respondent argues that in the Award the Tribunal identified another basis of jurisdiction
under Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT (“claims to money which has been used to create economic
value”) without offering any reason for doing so.*’ To the Respondent, this “further
confirmed the Tribunal’s manifest inability to identify, at the jurisdictional stage, and even
less at the merits stage, the investment which it found formed the basis of its jurisdiction”.*!
Further, the Tribunal never demonstrates how the Claimant’s alleged investment in the form
of a contractual interest falls under any of the three subparagraphs of Article 1 of the BIT.”
In this way, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by departing from the Convention

and BIT.

25 DOJ, 460.

26 Memorial, 53; Reply, 66, citing Award, $167.

27 Memorial, 54; Reply, 66, quoting DOJ, 461.

28 Reply, 66, quoting DOJ, $108, 125. See Tr. 32:21-34:12.

2 Tr, 32:21-33:3.

3” Memorial, §f57-59; Reply, 66, citing Award, §]109; Tr. 34:12-35:10.
5! Reply, 466.

2 Tr. 35:4-10.

43.

44.

The Respondent submits that the Claimant’s only response in this regard is to rely on a
diplomatic letter from the Deputy Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan
referring to Im-und Export Dogan GmbH’s activities as a “direct private investment”.*?
However, the existence of an investment cannot be established by the views of the Parties,

and in any event, the letter does not identify what the “investment” is.**

In addition, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal disregarded applicable Turkmen law.*>
It notes that the BIT explicitly requires that an investment be made in accordance with the
laws of the host State (Articles 2(1) and 9 of the BIT and Article 2(a) of the Protocol).*° The
Respondent recognizes that the Tribunal devoted an entire section of the Decision on
Jurisdiction to the alleged investment’s conformity with Turkmen law, but argues that the
Tribunal did not in fact apply Turkmen law.*” Instead, the Tribunal found Turkmen law to
be irrelevant to determining whether the Claimant had a qualifying investment.*® For
example, in addressing the structure of the alleged investment, the Tribunal, without citing
any legal authority, states that “local law becomes important in this respect only if its role is
expressly reserved by the relevant international instruments”.*? In this way, according to the
Respondent, the Tribunal disregarded numerous violations of Turkmen law, such as the
Claimant’s failure to: formalize any ownership interest, register any investment, declare any

benefit or profit from his alleged activities to tax authorities and comply with the regulatory

33 Reply, 67. See Exhibit C-26, Letter of the German Minister of Economics and Labor, Wolfgang Clement, to the
President of Turkmenistan, Saparmurat Atajevich Niyazov, 22 March 2004.

Reply, 467.

35 Memorial, 4460-68; Reply, 72-74; Tr. 36:3-39:1.

56 Reply, 470. The Articles cited provide as follows: Article 2(1): “Each Contracting State shall in its territory promote
as far as possible investments by nationals or companies of the other Contracting State and admit such investments in
accordance with its respective laws.”; Article 9: “This Treaty shall also apply to investments made by nationals or
companies of either Contracting State in the territory of the other Contracting State, in accordance with the legislation
of the latter, before the entry into force of this Treaty”. Article 2(a) of the Protocol: “Investments made in accordance
with the legislation of either Contracting State in its territory by nationals or companies of the other Contracting State
shall enjoy the full protection of the Treaty”.

37 Reply, 471, citing DOJ, Section 7.3 (“Was the Investment in Conformity with Turkmen Law?”); Tr. 36:21 -24.

38 Memorial, 60; Reply, 71, citing DOJ, Section 7.2(C) (“Structural and Legal Complications”).

»° Memorial, 61; Reply, 71, quoting DOJ, 4124; Tr. 37:6-17.

45.

requirements applicable to exporter-importer (747) accounts.*? In the Respondent’s view,

this constitutes a failure to apply the law.

The Respondent’s second main argument under this heading relates to the Tribunal’s
treatment of the evidence. The Respondent acknowledges the power of a tribunal to assess
and weigh the evidence in the record before it, but argues that this power is not unlimited.*!

In this case, according to the Respondent, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by

equitable’ approach to jurisdiction”?

departing from basic rules of evidence, following its
Specifically, the Respondent alleges that the Tribunal based its decision “on what it
considered to be fair instead of ... the applicable law and the evidentiary record”.** To the

Respondent, this is made obvious by, inter alia, the following points:

a) The Tribunal relied on the Participation Agreement as primary evidence for its finding
of an investment, even though it is a one-page “fraudulent, forged document, which the
Tribunal itself admitted was ‘recreated,’ ... incoherent and contradicted by other

admissions of Claimant in the record”.

b

The Tribunal ignored all documentary evidence showing that the Claimant “was
exclusively a seller of poultry equipment to the Turkmen entities”, including (i)
equipment sales contracts between the Claimant (and his companies); (ii) the 747 account
statement of Im-und Export Dogan GmbH; and (iii) the “Claimant’s own testimony

before the Turkmen courts stating that he was a seller of equipment”.*°

c

2

Although it is uncontested that the Claimant bore the burden of proving the existence of
his investment, the Tribunal excused the Claimant from meeting this burden,
emphasizing his alleged unsophistication as a foreign investor.*° For example, the

Tribunal excused the Claimant for: (i) presenting the recreated Participation Agreement

“© Memorial, 480; Reply, 72.

41 Reply, 475.

* Reply, 75.

+8 Reply, 4100.

“4 Reply, 87, citing DOJ, 945-49, 8. See Memorial, §§69-79; Tr. 39:2-20.
45 Memorial, 4]80-86; Reply, 9]89-92; Tr. 43:4-11.

46 Reply, 497; Tr. 43:12-25.

46.

47.

48.

as an original document; (ii) not offering any evidence of making the “first capital
contribution” of DM 500,000 required by the Participation Agreement; (iii) failing to
produce any documentary evidence of his alleged interest in the Farm; (iv) not complying
with Turkmen law; and (v) lying in the Turkmen courts.” On the other hand, the Tribunal
made multiple unjustified inferences against the Respondent, blaming it for not having
filled in the gaps in the Claimant’s case, and in particular for the absence of testimony
from the Gurbannazarovs.*® This constitutes an unjustified reversal of the burden of

proof.

ii. Liability
According to the Respondent, the Tribunal continued to take an ex aequo et bono approach
in the merits phase and thereby manifestly exceeded its powers under Article 52(1)(b) of the
ICSID Convention.” As with the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Respondent raises two main
arguments in this regard: first, that the Tribunal departed from the applicable law, and

second, that it departed from basic rules of evidence.*”

With respect to the first argument, the Respondent notes that, because expropriation concerns
an interference with rights in property, tribunals must be careful about identifying claimants’
rights at the time of the alleged interference.*! Indeed, in the Decision on Jurisdiction, the
Tribunal noted “the possible need for further clarification as to the precise nature and extent
of the Claimant’s investment, as relevant to issues arising at the merits stage”.>*

However, in the Respondent’s view, “the Award blatantly fails to identify or describe the
nature and extent of Claimant’s purported interest that was allegedly subjected to

expropriation and unfair treatment by Turkmenistan”.** In particular, regarding the supposed

47 Memorial, 4]87-92; Reply, 4993-98.

+8 Memorial, 493; Reply, $99, citing DOJ, 451.
Tr, 44:19-24,

5° Memorial, 102; Reply, 135.

5! Memorial, 1104; Reply, 136; Tr. 45:7-13,

iting Exhibit RL-57, Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, I\CSID Case

 

No. ARB/00/9, Award, 16 September 2003, 46.2.
2 Reply, 4136, citing DOJ, 461.
53 Reply, 136.

49.

50.

Sl.

“contractual interest” in the revenue stream of the Farm, the Tribunal never identified the
terms, parties, consideration or the Claimant’s rights and obligations.*+ The Respondent

points to the Tribunal’s statement that:

In essence, the Claimant’s alleged entitlements cannot repose on formal
entitlements in any legal entity, for example by way of a shareholding.
Rather, their only conceivable existence is as a creature of contract. Yet
even as a matter of contract, the record is fragmented and ambiguous.*>
The Respondent submits that the Tribunal’s inability to identify the contractual interest is
underlined by its addition in the Award of a third basis of jurisdiction, under Article 1(1)(c)
of the BIT (“claims to money which has been used to create an economic value”).>°
According to the Respondent, the Tribunal gave no explanation for including this additional

ground and never identified any funds that could have been used to create economic value.*”

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s characterisation of this as a “confirmation” by the
Tribunal that the Claimant’s investment was covered under any of the first three
subparagraphs of Article 1 of the BIT.** According to the Respondent, the Tribunal could
not confirm something that it never found in the Decision on Jurisdiction. In sum, the
Tribunal’s failure to identify the Claimant’s interest amounts to a failure to apply the

Convention and the BIT.

The Respondent also argues that the Tribunal disregarded applicable Turkmen law in the
merits stage. °° In this respect, the Respondent asserts that “in its Decision on Jurisdiction,
the Tribunal repeatedly noted that the issue of compliance with Turkmen law would find its

relevance at the merits stage”, quoting the Tribunal’s statement that:

Of course an investor who does not follow requirements of the applicable
law (given the ICSID Convention’s Article 42, this frequently points to the
law of the host state) may not be able to prevail on the merits, but this is

54 Reply, 133; Tr. 46:13-22.

55 Award, 4183.

5 Memorial, 1108; Reply, 136, citing Award, 109; Tr. 47:11-21.
57 Memorial, 1108; Reply, 136.

58 Reply, 136, citing the Counter-Memorial, 494.

5° Memorial, {1 11-118; Reply, 138-147; Tr. 47:15-48:13.

different from the investment being disqualified ex ante and thus defeating
arbitral jurisdiction.

52. However, according to the Respondent, the Tribunal ignored Turkmen law in the Award. In
particular, the Tribunal failed to address the consequences of the Claimant’s non-compliance
with applicable corporate, financial, accounting and tax regulations in carrying out his
alleged investment activities.°! For example, it found that the alleged interest in the Farm
would consist of an oral agreement on a “joint entrepreneurial activity” but ignored Article
239 of the Turkmen Criminal Code which, according to the Respondent, makes such interest
unenforceable under Turkmen law unless it is properly registered, which it was not. In
addition, the Tribunal never considered the enforceability of the Participation Agreement
under Turkmen law.* Instead, it “merely presumed the Gurbannazarov’s good faith in
executing an oral, non-registered contractual interest, on the sole basis of a one page
backdated document.” To the Respondent, by this alleged failure to apply Turkmen law,

the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

53. As its second main argument under this heading, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers by departing from basic standards of evidence in its finding
on liability.° The Respondent points to the Decision on Jurisdiction, in which the Tribunal

stated that the structure and documentation of the investment “might not be ... a sufficiently

solid basis to establish quantifiable rights to the value and/or earnings of the business”.

According to the Respondent, the Tribunal contradicted this statement in the merits stage
and did not require the Claimant to produce any additional evidence of his alleged interest

in the investment.”

© DOJ, 4130.

©! Memorial, 41 18; Reply, 145-147.

© Reply, 143, citing Exhibit KMA-19, Criminal Code of Turkmenistan, 12 June 1997, Article 239.
© Memorial, [1 14; Tr. 48:8-13.

& Reply, 4146.

© Memorial, 4{]1 19-134; Reply, 4]148-157; Tr. 48:14-49:11.

© Reply, 150, citing DOJ, 486.

© Memorial, §{]1 20-128; Reply, 152.

54.

55.

56.

57.

The Respondent asserts that in the Award the Tribunal relies only on the Participation
Agreement and never points to evidence of a specific interest in the Farm.°* Instead, the

Tribunal acknowledged that:
a) the Claimant “demonstrated a limited concern to obtain well-prepared or relevant
documentation, indeed on some occasions any documentation at all”;

b) the record concerning the Claimant’s interest was “fragmented and ambiguous”;”° and

c) the Claimant had not produced “evidentiary material one might normally expect to be

made available for an investment of this kind”.”!

The Respondent also asserts that the Tribunal relied on equitable considerations and excused
the Claimant for failing to document his interest by stressing his alleged inexperience and
unsophistication.”* At the same time, according to the Respondent, the Tribunal applied

unjustified inferences against Respondent, thereby reversing the burden of proof.”
Considering the above, the Respondent’s position is that:

It is manifest from the Tribunal’s Award that had the Tribunal applied those
rules instead of what it considered to be equitable considerations, and had
it assessed the evidentiary record in light of [basic rules of evidence], the
Tribunal would and should have dismissed Claimant’s claim for lack of
evidence of his alleged interest in the Poultry Business.”*

iii. Damages
With regard to quantum, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers by assuming ex aequo et bono powers and awarding “entirely artificial damages”.”°

In particular, the Tribunal departed from the valuation standard agreed by the Parties and

Memorial, 4120-121; Reply, 152.

© Reply, 152, quoting Award, 48.

7 Reply, 152, quoting Award, 148-9.

7! Reply, (158, quoting Award, 148-9.

™ Memorial, §f129-134; Reply, 155.

73 Memorial, §f129-134; Reply, 156, citing Award, 181.
74 Reply, 155.

75 Memorial, 135-169; Reply, 170-180; Tr. 50:1-56:4.

58.

59.

60.

then proceeded with an “artificial exercise of damage assessment” to award damages in the

absence of any reliable historical data.”

In respect of the valuation standard, the Respondent submits that in the original arbitration,
it was undisputed that the appropriate standard was fair market value (“FMV”),”’ defined as
“the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller in circumstances in which each
had good information ... and neither was under duress or threat”.’* At the Hearing, it also

alleged that this standard of compensation was required by the BIT.”

In particular, the Respondent points to the Claimant’s statements in his Memorial on the
Merits in the original proceeding that FMV was “the most appropriate basis” to evaluate the
investment, and that “Claimant is entitled to a sum which reflects the fair market value of the
components ofhis investment. This isthe only means ofcompensation which
would ‘wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act’”.8° The Respondent asserts that this
position “was consistent with the established view that full reparation is usually assessed on
the basis of fair market value”.*!

According to the Respondent, while the application of the FMV standard was undisputed,
the Parties differed on the result of that application, with the Respondent arguing that the
FMV of the investment was nil.*? Indeed, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal
recognized that it would be impossible to award any damages using the FMV standard, given
the complete lack of documentary evidence of the Claimant’s interest and profits. Notably,
in the Award the Tribunal referred to the Respondent’s argument that “no rational business

managers would have been the least inclined to acquire Mr. Dogan’s poorly documented

% Memorial, $137.

7 Memorial, 4138.

*8 Memorial, §{[138-139, citing Exhibit R-121, Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits (excerpt), {f]214-216 (adopting the
definition of FMV in Starrett Housing Corporation v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, Award, 14 August 1987, 16 Iran-
U.S. C.T.R. 112, 918); Exhibit R-110, Turkmenistan’s Counter-Memorial on Merits and Quantum, 128 (also citing
Starrett Housing).

9 Tr, 22:7-8.

89 Exhibit R-121, Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits (excerpt), 9215-216.

*! Reply, (184.

*® Reply, (185.

61.

62.

63.

stake in the Farm” and acknowledged “[t]hat may well be true”.** The Tribunal also stated
that the value of the Claimant’s rights “is evidently affected by the unlikelihood that an
unrelated third party ... would pay anything at all to obtain ownership of Mr. Dogan’s
entitlements”.*4

The Respondent argues that the Tribunal, guided by its sense of fairness, departed from the
FMV standard to avoid the “ineluctable conclusion that no damages could be awarded”.*>
Instead, “the Tribunal proceeded with an unprecedented, artificial exercise of damage
assessment based on purely theoretical, optimal figures entirely disconnected from the reality

of the Poultry Business’ operations.”*°

In this regard, the Respondent asserts there was an “absolute lack of any reliable
documentary historical data in support of the Claimant’s damage claims”.*’ The Claimant
produced no evidence of his interest in the business, of the productivity and profitability of
the business, or of the extent (if any) to which the business was denied import

authorizations.**

According to the Respondent, the Tribunal acknowledged this absence of evidence, notably

stating in the Award that:*?

“the details of the quantification of the loss are by no means a simple matter, having
regard to the manifest insufficiency of the Claimant’s documentary record and the

limited evidence he has seemingly been able to cobble together after the event”;°° and

 

  

8 Memorial, 144; Tr. 21:17-23, quoting Award, 4190.
* Memorial, 1146, quoting Award, 4183.

8S Memorial, 1147. See Reply, 4177.

* Memorial, 147. See Reply, 4177.

®7 Memorial, 148-152.

*8 Memorial, 148-152.

* Memorial, 153-157.

% Award, 179. See also 182 (“the evidentiary record has not been well furnished”; “[the Tribunal] is left to reach
[its] decision on the basis of evidence that is best described as patchy and scant”).

20

- “there appears to be little to be gained by seeking to identify and confirm the existence
of reliable financial records with regard to the transactions involving the Claimant and
the Farm. In our view it is unlikely that they exist, or that they ever existed”.”!

64. The Respondent argues that the Tribunal nevertheless excused the Claimant for failing to
meet his burden of proof, apparently on the basis of his unsophistication and relative modesty

of means.*? The Respondent complains that:

a) The Tribunal assumed without any evidence that the Gurbannazarovs, in the absence of
any legal obligation to share their company’s profits with the Claimant, would have

done so in good faith;

b) Having no documentary evidence of the business’ past productivity, the Tribunal
calculated damages by “constructing an artificial scenario” based on “purely theoretical
data”, relying on “optimal, idealistic production figures included in so-called
‘management guides” produced by Western poultry equipment suppliers for

marketing;** and

c) The Tribunal relied on the testimony of Mr. Geiselhart, who was in business
relationships with the Claimant and visited the site only three times, while disregarding

the testimony of the production manager of the Farm.°>

65. The Respondent recognizes that tribunals have broad discretion when it comes to assessing
and awarding damages but argues that this “departure from the most basic standard of

damage assessment and calculation of entirely artificial damages” constitutes an

1 Award, 4188

2 Memorial, (4158-160.

°3 Memorial, $163, citing Award, 183 (“The Tribunal proceeds on the assumption that the Gurbannazarovs would in
good faith acknowledge contractual obligations on the basis of what was understood rather than of what could be
denied. Still, the scope of that entitlement would depend to a significant degree on the good will of the
Gurbannazarovs”). See Tr. 53:8-20.

4 Memorial, 9164-166. See Tr. 53:21-54:19.

°5 Memorial, fj 167-168; Tr. 54:22-55:4.

21

66.

67.

68.

unauthorized exercise of ex aequo et bono power and a manifest excess of the Tribunal’s

powers.°°

The Respondent rejects the Claimant’s defence of the damages calculation, in particular his
argument that the Tribunal “sharply reduced [the Claimant’s] recovery due to a lack of
certainty with respect of particular aspects of his claim”, as expressly stated in the Award.””
The Respondent notes that annulment committees cannot rely solely on a tribunal’s
description of what it is doing but must also look to what a tribunal does. In any event, based
on the record, the Tribunal should not have awarded any damages at all; its statement about
reducing recovery only “underscores the Tribunal’s discomfort as to the emptiness of the

evidentiary record”.°*

2. The Claimant’s Position

As an initial matter, the Claimant submits that the ICSID Convention provides for a very
high threshold for annulment. He notes that the annulment procedure is not an appeal and is
“only concerned with the legitimacy of the process of the decision and not with its
substantive correctness”.”” Even if a committee finds a ground for annulment, it is within the
committee’s discretion whether to annul the award, and there is a presumption in favour of

the validity of ICSID awards.!°°

With regard to Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, the Claimant submits that a
manifest excess of powers is present only if there is an excess of power that is both “textually
obvious as well as substantively serious”.'°! The Claimant points to certain issues that he
considers cannot be grounds for annulment and are excluded from a committee’s review,

including: tribunals’ discretion when assessing the interaction between international and

°6 Memorial, 41169.
°7 Reply, 176, quoting Counter-Memorial, 11.
°8 Reply, 176.

%® Counter-Memorial, 15, citing Exhibit CL-40, CDC Group ple v. Republic of the Seychelles, Decision on the
Application for Annulment, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14, 29 June 2005, 934.

10 Counter-Memorial, 17; Rejoinder, 346; Tr. 11:7-8.
©! Counter-Memorial, (20. See Rejoinder, 429-33.

22

69.

70.

71.

national law, an error of fact and an incorrect application or partial non-application of the

applicable law.'°*

The Claimant notes that he “for the most part concurs” with the Respondent as to the
requirements for an excess of powers to be “manifest”.!°° In particular, the Parties agree that
such an excess “can be discerned with little effort and without deeper analysis” and that an

error of fact or law is not a ground for annulment.!°*

However, the Claimant rejects the Respondent’s assertion that an “an egregious error of law
can justify annulment, if it amounts to non application of the law”.'°> To the Claimant, this
would go to the substance of the Award, which is not reviewable.'°° The Claimant also
disagrees with the Respondent’s position that an unauthorized assumption of ex aequo et
bono powers would automatically warrant annulment; rather, the burden is on the
Respondent to prove that there was an exercise of ex aequo et bono powers, that such excess

of powers is “manifest”, and that it warrants annulment in the present case.!°7

As to identifying an exercise of ex aequo et bono powers, the Claimant submits that it
involves going beyond positive law and choosing equity, not simply “filling gaps in the
applicable law.”!°8 To the Claimant, it is important to differentiate between an actual
decision ex aequo et bono and considerations of equity or fairness that are inherent in the
law.' According to the Claimant, what the Respondent characterises as ex aequo et bono

powers in fact form part of a tribunal’s task in rendering a reasoned decision, in particular:

102 Counter-Memorial, §28-42; Tr. 79:21-23.

63 Counter-Memorial, (21. See Reply, 429.

'04 Counter-Memorial, 18-27, citing Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, Article 52, 4135. See Rejoinder, §30; Tr.
78:6-13.

5 Rejoinder, 435, citing Reply, 18.

106 Rejoinder, 4435-43.

07 Rejoinder, 46-49; Tr. 77:24-75:2.

68 Counter-Memorial, 60, citing Schreuer, Decisions Ex Aequo et Bono Under the ICSID Convention, 11 ICSID
Review — Foreign Investment Law Journal 37, 41 (1997).

© Counter-Memorial, §62-67.

23

72.

73.

74.

the evaluation of evidence,'!” the interpretation of agreements in accordance with the Parties’

intention!!! and the assessment of damages.!!*

In any event, the Claimant submits that the Respondent has failed to identify a single passage
in the Award in which the Tribunal stated that it was deciding ex aequo et bono; nor can the
Respondent “point to any facts that would allow one to easily perceive that the Tribunal’s
decision was rendered solely on the basis of equity”.''? Instead, according to the Claimant,
the Respondent’s allegations regarding ex aequo et bono powers rest on false or misleading

factual allegations, which have no place in annulment proceedings. !!#

 

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s position that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers by departing from the applicable law and by departing from basic rules of evidence
when it upheld jurisdiction.'!> According to the Claimant, the Respondent’s argument is
based on false factual allegations, and even if those allegations were true, they could not

amount to a manifest excess of powers.!!°

With respect to the alleged departure from the ICSID Convention and the BIT, the Claimant
argues that such “departure” is merely “what Turkmenistan perceives to be an incorrect
application of the requirements for finding an ‘investment””.!'’ Yet, even if the Tribunal
erred in its finding, this would not be a ground for annulment.'!* The Claimant asserts that
the Respondent never alleges that the Tribunal failed to apply the ICSID Convention and the

BIT, or the requirement of an “investment”.''? Nor does it attempt to show that the alleged

410 Counter-Memorial, 968-72.

"1 Counter-Memorial, 73-77.

42 Counter-Memorial, 478-81.

43 Counter-Memorial, 440.

"4 Counter-Memorial, 484; Rejoinder, (46-8; Tr. 75:4-76:3.
45 Rejoinder, 4452-79. See Memorial, {f]147-155.

46 Rejoinder, 4455-72.

47 Rejoinder, 58.

48 Rejoinder, 58. See Counter-Memorial, 432-36.

49 Rejoinder, 58.

24

75.

76.

77.

“departure” is so egregious that it meets the Respondent’s “purported sub-standard for an

excess of power”.!?°

In any event, according to the Claimant, the Respondent’s allegation that the Tribunal failed
to identify the nature and extent of the Claimant’s investment is incorrect.'?! First, the
Tribunal concluded in the Decision on Jurisdiction that “the Claimant at a minimum qualifies
under Article 1(1)(a) of the BIT” (“movable property”) based on its finding that “[t]he
overwhelming evidence is to the effect that the Western equipment physically procured,
transported, and installed at the Farm was financed in part or in whole by the Claimant”.!7?
Contrary to the Respondent’s allegation that the Tribunal failed to identify this equipment,

the Claimant asserts that it “was discussed in detail numerous times”.!7>

In addition, the Claimant points to the Tribunal’s conclusion that the Claimant had a
contractual interest in 30% of the profits of one of the Turkmen Companies through a joint
venture agreement with the Gurbannazarovs, and that such interest was a “kind of company

interest” under Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT.!*4

According to the Claimant, the Respondent misrepresents the Decision on Jurisdiction by
claiming that the Tribunal found the investment “might” consist of either movable property
or a kind of company interest, or that the Claimant “may have” had an investment in one of
these forms.'?> In fact, the Tribunal came to a “confident conclusion”!”® that the Claimant

made an investment under the ICSID Convention and under either basis in the BIT.!7”

'20 Rejoinder, 59.
2! Counter-Memorial, 147-155; Rejoinder, 136-143.
22 Counter-Memorial, 96; Rejoinder, 4138, quoting DOJ, 460.

123

Counter-Memorial, 496, citing DOJ, {101 as an example (“Big Dutchman required the Claimant’s personal

guarantee before releasing equipment to a Turkmen sole proprietorship”). See Tr. 83:9-18.

'24 Rejoinder, 139, citing DOJ, 4100-103, 108.

25 Counter-Memorial, $94, citing Memorial, $9, 52, 55, 233; Rejoinder, 1137, citing Reply, 66.
26 DOS, 60.

27 Counter-Memorial, 494; Rejoinder 4137. See Tr. 79:12-20.

25

78.

79.

80.

The Claimant also rejects the Respondent’s submissions concerning the Tribunal’s alleged
departure from Turkmen law in finding jurisdiction.'?* The Claimant submits that, even if
the Respondent’s allegations were true, they could not amount to a manifest excess of
powers; only a complete failure to apply the law can warrant annulment, as opposed to a
misapplication or partial non application of the law.'? According to the Claimant, there was
no such complete failure in this case. Indeed, as recognised by the Respondent, the Tribunal
devoted an entire section of the Decision on Jurisdiction to the issue: “Was the Investment

in Conformity with Turkmen Law?”.'°°

In the Claimant’s view, the Respondent is simply repeating its arguments from the
underlying arbitration, which the Tribunal considered and rejected. In particular, the
Respondent attempts to give the BIT a meaning it does not have by stating that an alleged
investment must be “carried out in accordance with the laws of the host State in order to
benefit from ICSID jurisdiction,” when in fact the BIT refers only to the legality of an
investment at the time it was made.'*' This point was confirmed by the Tribunal.'*? As a
consequence, according to the Claimant, most of the Respondent’s allegations are irrelevant

to jurisdiction.

As for the Respondent’s remaining allegations (that the Claimant failed to formalize his
ownership interest and register the investment), the Claimant argues that the Tribunal dealt

with them in detail.!*> For example, the Tribunal found that:

the Respondent has been unable to point to any legal authority to the effect
that Turkmen law requires the registration of any foreign investment. On
cross-examination, Mr Akmamedoy[, Turkmenistan’s expert on Turkmen
law,] was repeatedly asked to identify the legal source of such a
requirement, but failed to provide a clear answer.!*+

28 Counter-Memorial, 156-170; Rejoinder, 961-72, 187-196.

29 Rejoinder, 468.

'30 Counter-Memorial, 156; Reply, 69; Tr. 80:3-7 and 109:5-7, citing DOJ, Section 7.3.
'3! Rejoinder, 63-67 (emphasis in original).

32 Rejoinder, 67, citing DOJ, 4135.

33 Rejoinder, 68.

4 DOJ, 4137.

26

81.

82.

83.

Finally, even if there had been a violation of Turkmen law when the investment was made,
the Tribunal would not have been automatically required to deny jurisdiction; ICSID
tribunals have found that this determination is discretionary and is inappropriate when the

violation of law is de minimus.'°5

Responding to the Respondent’s second main argument, the Claimant submits that the
Tribunal’s alleged “departure” from basic standards of evidence in finding jurisdiction, even
if true, would provide no ground for annulment.'*° According to the Claimant, the
Respondent never refers to the legal standards for annulment when setting forth these
allegations, as they “would not meet even Turkmenistan’s own standards for a manifest

excess of powers”.'>7 As stated by the ad hoc Committee in Alapli v. Turkey:

pursuant to Arbitration Rule 34(1), the tribunal is the judge of the
admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its probative value. It is
certainly not the role of an annulment committee to verify whether a tribunal
correctly established the facts of a case.!?*
In any event, in the Claimant’s view, the Tribunal did not in fact depart from any basic
evidentiary rules. In response to the Respondent’s arguments, the Claimant asserts, inter

alia, the following points:

a) With regard to the Participation Agreement, the Respondent “simply disagrees with the
Tribunal’s judgment on the admissibility and probative value of the evidence”; in both
the jurisdictional and merits phase, the Tribunal found that there was no evidence of fraud
or bad faith in relation to the Participation Agreement, yet the Respondent continues to
argue that it is a one-page, fraudulent, forged document that should not have been

accepted.!*?

85 Rejoinder, 71.
36 Rejoinder, 4173-79.
37 Rejoinder, 475.

'38 Rejoinder, 76, quoting Exhibit CL-169, Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, Decision on Annulment, ICSID
Case No. ARB/08/13, 10 July 2014, 234.

39 Rejoinder, 4124-135, citing DOJ, #449, 90 and Award, 115.

27

84.

b) Contrary to the Respondent’s position, the Tribunal did not ignore the documentary

evidence that the Respondent put forward in an attempt to show that the Claimant was
merely a seller of poultry equipment, not an investor. Rather, the Tribunal: (i) cited and
rejected the Respondent’s arguments relating to the “equipment sales contracts”'°; (ii)
could not have considered the 747 account statement of Im-und Export Dogan GmbH
because the Respondent did not submit it in the jurisdictional phase;'*! and (iii) dealt “in

depth” with the issue of the Claimant’s submission to the Turkmen courts. !47

c

2

The Tribunal in no way excused the Claimant from meeting his burden of proving he had
made an investment.'*? Rather, the Claimant met that burden by producing a wealth of
documentary evidence (in addition to the Participation Agreement) and credible witness
testimony showing the existence and nature of his investment. '*+ Furthermore, he showed
that the Respondent had expressly recognized the Claimant as an investor within the
context of the BIT, and “the Tribunal held that Turkmenistan was accordingly estopped

from denying Mr. Dogan’s investor status”.!4°

ii. Liability
The Claimant contends that the Respondent has also failed to prove that the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its power in finding that the Claimant had a contractual interest in the
Farm for the purpose of liability. To the Claimant, the Respondent’s submission that the
Tribunal departed from the applicable law and basic rules of evidence in the merits phase is

“essentially a repeat of its argument on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction”, and can be similarly

dismissed.'*°

40 Rejoinder, 4165-169, citing DOJ, #465, 102, 160, 132-133.

41 Rejoinder, 4171-176.

42 Rejoinder, 4177-179; DOJ, $f 88, 97, 98.

45 Rejoinder, 4197-200.

44 Rejoinder, $193 et seq. (citing several exhibits from the underlying arbitration); 4199; Tr. 89:22-93:12.

45 Counter-Memorial, (490-93, citing DOJ, 4155-161 and Exhibit C-26, Letter of the German Minister of Economics
and Labor, Wolfgang Clement, to the President of Turkmenistan, Saparmurat Atajevich Niyazov, 22 March 2004. See
Tr. 90:11-92:9.

46 Rejoinder, 480.

28

85.

86.

87.

88.

With regard to the Tribunal’s alleged departure from the ICSID Convention and the BIT, the
Claimant argues that, as with jurisdiction, the Respondent has failed to show any such
“departure”, and even if it could, “this could at most qualify as a non-annullable

misapplication of the law”.'47

The Claimant considers the only difference from the Respondent’s arguments concerning
jurisdiction to be the Respondent’s criticism of the Tribunal for adding a third potential basis
of jurisdiction in the Award (“claims to money which has been used to create economic
value” under Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT). However, in the Claimant’s view, the Respondent’s
position is “contradictory” and in any event offers no ground for annulment; even if the
Tribunal had been incorrect, it could amount only to an error of law not subject to review by

the Committee. !8

Similarly, according to the Claimant, the Respondent’s claims of a departure from Turkmen
law “remain detached from any of the legal standards Turkmenistan claims are applicable”
and could not warrant annulment even if correct.'*? In any case, according to the Respondent,
these allegations are not correct. As discussed in the context of jurisdiction, and contrary to
the Respondent’s misleading paraphrasing of the BIT, the BIT does not require that an

investment be “carried out” in accordance with Turkmen law.!*?

The Claimant also rejects the Respondent’s further argument that the Tribunal failed to
examine the enforceability of the Participation Agreement under Turkmen law.'*! In fact,
the Tribunal expressly dealt with the issue in the Decision on Jurisdiction and concluded that
there was no contradiction between Turkmen law and the ICSID Convention and BIT.'*
The Respondent’s criticism of the Tribunal for having “merely presumed the

Gurbannazarov’s good faith” regarding the Participation Agreement is misplaced, given that

47 Rejoinder, 483.

48 Rejoinder, 4484-85.

49 Rejoinder, 486.

150 Rejoinder, 486.

'5! Rejoinder, 489, citing DOJ, 4107.

52 Counter-Memorial, 171-190; Rejoinder, 88-89, citing DOJ, $107.

29

89.

90.

91.

good faith is a principle recognized in Turkmen law.'* Finally, the Claimant considers the
Respondent’s reference to Article 239 of the Criminal Code as “laughable”; it is irrelevant
to the enforceability of the Participation Agreement and was mentioned by the Respondent

in the underlying arbitration only in a footnote. !*4

In regard to the Respondent’s contentions that the Tribunal departed from basic rules of
evidence, the Claimant states that they are “fully addressed and rebutted by Claimant’s
observations made in connection with the Tribunal’s finding on jurisdiction”.!*> Evaluating

evidence is the prerogative of tribunals, not subject to review in an annulment proceeding. !*°

Furthermore, the Respondent is incorrect that the Tribunal did not require the Claimant to
present evidence of the nature and extent of his investment. Notably, the Tribunal indicated
in the Decision on Jurisdiction that there was a “possible need for further clarification” in
this regard, and then in the Award it denied the Claimant recovery for his interest in Samsyt
and the Farm’s broiler production business (which were not mentioned in the Participation

Agreement).!*7

iii. Damages
According to the Claimant, the Respondent’s contention that the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers in awarding damages fails for a number of reasons. Notably, the
Respondent argues that the Tribunal “departed from the most basic standard of damage
assessment” without identifying what that standard is or establishing its significance.!>*
Moreover, the Respondent’s allegations concerning how the Tribunal purportedly departed

from this standard, if true, could amount to nothing more than a misapplication of damages

standards, which is not a ground for annulment.!*?

'53 Rejoinder, $9]90-92, citing Exhibit CL-194, Civil Code of Turkmenistan, Article 375.
54 Rejoinder, $190.

'55 Rejoinder, 94.

156 Rejoinder, 478.

'57 Rejoinder, 141-143

'58 Rejoinder, 497.

'59 Rejoinder, 498-99.

30

92.

93.

94.

95.

The Claimant contends that, given the degree of uncertainty inherent in damages
calculations, it is accepted and indeed acknowledged by the Respondent that “tribunals have
broad discretion when it comes to assessing and awarding damages”.'®° The Respondent’s
incorrect characterisation of the Tribunal’s use of this discretion as the assumption of ex

aequo et bono powers must be rejected.'*!

In particular, regarding the Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal departed from the
Parties’ agreed FMV standard on the basis of equitable considerations, the Claimant
contends that Tribunal had no obligation to apply that standard.'©* The Claimant states that
“the tribunal can base its damages assessment on the methodological approach it considers

to be the most appropriate, which need not be identical with the parties’ submissions”.!°

In any event, according to the Claimant, the Parties did not agree on the FMV standard.'**
The Claimant states that “the fundamental principle of full reparation is derived from the
Chorz6w Factory case relied upon by Claimant, which states that ‘reparation must, as far as
possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act””.!°> The Tribunal considered the
circumstances of the case, including “the brooding presence of an antagonistic Government”,

and concluded that the FMV standard would not result in full reparation. The Tribunal stated:

the applicable standard is not what this beleaguered Farm might have been
worth to a hypothetical third-party purchaser, but—as noted above—what
it would have been worth to Mr. Dogan in the absence of any breach of the
Treaty, including by reference to the stream of income that would have
flowed from the sale of eggs.'

The Claimant asserts that the Tribunal then carried out a comprehensive analysis of the
evidence provided (Witness Statements, Expert Reports and related documents) to calculate

damages according to this standard. The Parties agreed on some variables and disagreed on

60 Counter-Memorial, (204, quoting Memorial, 169; Rejoinder, 119.
'6! Rejoinder, 121.

162. Counter-Memorial, (204.

6 Rejoinder, 119.

64 Tr, 97:18-98:10.

165

Counter-Memorial, 204, quoting Exhibit CL-178, The Factory at Chorz6w (Germany y. Poland) (Claim on

Indemnity, Merits), Publications of the PCIJ, Series A, No. 17, 13 September 1928, p. 47.
'66 Counter-Memorial, (204, quoting Award, 191.

31

others, and the Tribunal decided those in dispute.'®’ In fact, the Tribunal applied the

Respondent’s expert’s formula for determining yearly egg production.'® Thus, the

Respondent’s allegation that the Tribunal conducted an artificial exercise of damage

assessment based on fabricated prices and theoretical, optimal production figures is

“baseless”.!

96. For example, according to the Claimant, the management guides relied on by the Tribunal
are not advertisements as the Respondent alleges, but are a useful source of information for
poultry farms worldwide.'’° Indeed, the experts of both Parties relied on the guides in their
testimony, and the Respondent’s own expert called them “a reputable source in the
industry”.'’! Furthermore, the figures in the management guide were confirmed by the
Claimant’s expert, who had actually visited the farm and whom the Tribunal found

credible.!””

97. Finally, the Claimant submits that the Respondent’s allegation that the Tribunal decided
quantum ex aequo et bono is further undermined by the fact that the Tribunal ruled according
to the Respondent’s request and sharply reduced the Claimant’s recovery due to a lack of

certainty as to particular aspects of his claim.'7*

3. The Committee’s Analysis

98. A few preliminary comments are appropriate regarding the Respondent’s contention that the

Award should be annulled because the Tribunal exercised ex aequo et bono powers. A

‘67 Counter-Memorial, §205. The Claimant also asserts that the “Tribunal employed the exact method Turkmenistan
employed with its series of variables in Turkmenistan’s post-hearing brief on merits and quantum”. Rejoinder, 120.

168 Tr, 100:13-101.24.

1 Rejoinder, 4223.

1 Rejoinder, 4202-210.

171 Rejoinder, 4205, quoting Exhibit C-224, Expert Report of Joost Gerrits dated 14 November 2012 (excerpt), 436.
See Tr. 94:22-95:18.

12 Rejoinder, 4210, citing Award, §218 (“In [accepting the Claimant’s assumption regarding the number of hens] we
rely primarily on the testimony of Mr. Geiselhart, which confirmed that the targets set in the management guide had
been reached by the Farm”); Tr. 95:23-96:17. The Claimant points to the Tribunal’s assessment of the credibility of
the Respondent’s expert, Mr. Soyunov: “Mr Soyunov appears to do little more than echo Respondent’s legal
arguments, a startling aspect of the testimony of a veterinarian employed as the Farm’s production manager”.
Memorial, 41145; Tr. 96:21-97:15.

13 Counter-Memorial, 411, 208, citing Award, §[8, 174-175, 194.

32

99.

100.

tribunal’s power to decide a dispute ex aequo et bono is subject to the parties’ agreement
under Article 42(3) of the ICSID Convention. It is undisputed between the Parties that the
Tribunal had not been granted such a power. A decision ex aequo et bono without the parties’
authorization is a failure to apply the proper law amounting to an excess of powers. If

manifest, it may found the ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention.

A tribunal empowered to decide a dispute ex aequo et bono “may disregard the rules of law
otherwise applicable under Art. 42(1) in favor of justice and fairness”.'* A decision ex aequo
et bono may be distinguished from equitable considerations inherent in any legal system, be

it international or national. As held by the International Court of Justice:

Whatever the legal reasoning of a court of justice, its decisions must by

definition be just, and therefore in that sense equitable. Nevertheless, when

mention is made of a court dispensing justice or declaring the law, what is

meant is that the decision finds its objective justification in considerations

lying not outside but within the rules, and in this field it is precisely a rule

of law that calls for the application of equitable principles. There is

consequently no question in this case of any decision ex aequo et bono, such

as would only be possible under the conditions prescribed by Article 38,

paragraph 2, of the Court’s Statute.!7>
In the present case, in the original arbitration, the Tribunal made repeated references, both
in the Decision on Jurisdiction and in the Award to the ICSID Convention, the BIT and
Turkmen law to found its decision regarding jurisdiction and liability. Nowhere in the
Decision on Jurisdiction or in the Award did the Tribunal indicate or even indirectly suggest
that these were premised entirely on equitable considerations. Insofar as equitable
considerations had any bearing at all on the Decision on Jurisdiction or the Award, these
were inherent in the interpretation of the law applied by the Tribunal. This, however, does
not absolve the Committee of its obligation to examine whether the Tribunal decided the
questions before it by resorting to an unauthorized exercise of ex aequo et bono powers
instead of applying the relevant law; and, if so, what would be its effect on the validity of

the Decision on Jurisdiction or the Award. Based on the principles outlined above, this issue

174 Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, Article 42, 4249.

"5 Exhibit CL-181, International Court of Justice, North Sea Continental Shelf Cases, Judgment of 20 February 1969,
ICJ Reports, 1969, 3, 488. Article 38, 42 of the Court’s Statute provides: “This provision shall not prejudice the power
of the Court to decide a case ex aequo et bono, if the parties agree thereto”.

33

101.

102.

103.

104.

will be examined in some detail in the context of the Committee’s analysis of the ground of
manifest excess of powers. To the extent that it is relied upon by the Respondent, it will also

be examined with regard to the other grounds of annulment.

The Parties appear to agree on the standard for annulment under Article 52(1)(b), including
the condition that the excess of powers must be “manifest”, meaning thereby that the excess
“can be discerned with little effort and without deeper analysis”.!’° This raises the question

whether in the case before the Committee the excess of powers, if any, is “manifest”.

The Respondent asserts that an “egregious error of law can justify annulment, if it amounts

2177

to non-application of the law’ which is disputed by the Claimant.!’* The latter asserts that

in order to be “manifest”, the excess of powers must not only be “textually obvious” but

needs also to be “substantively serious”.'””

The Committee does not agree with the Parties’ respective interpretations of the concept of
“manifest”. It notes that the scope of the term “manifest” must not expand the concept
beyond “the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in
the light of its object and purpose” as provided in the Vienna Convention.'®° The dictionary

o> «6, > 181

meaning of “manifest” is “clearly apparent”, “obvious”.

This meaning must be understood in the context of the object and purpose of the Convention
which, as made clear by its drafting history, is to ensure the finality of awards by fixing a
high threshold for annulment and providing a limited scope of review, while safeguarding
against “the violation of the fundamental principles of law governing the Tribunal’s

proceedings”. !*?

176 Memorial, 418; Counter-Memorial, 21.

17 Reply, (18.

178 Rejoinder, 935-43.

‘7° Claimant’s Opening Statement at the Hearing, slide 13.

180 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969, Article 31(1).

181 The American Heritage Dictionary of English Language, Sth ed. (2015) defines “manifest” as “clearly apparent

to the sight or understanding; obvious” (available at https://www.ahdictionary.com/word/search.html?q=manifest).
See also Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, Article 52, 4135.

'82 ICSID Background Paper on Annulment, 10 August 2012, 72.

34

105.

106.

The Committee recognizes that, as held by other ad hoc committees, a simple error of law
does not warrant annulment. At the same time, it has been held that an error of law may,
however, be so egregious that it amounts to a failure to apply the proper law. Such an error
would constitute a manifest excess of power and may result in annulment. The Committee
further recognizes that when deciding issues relating to its jurisdiction, in particular, a gross
misapplication of the applicable law by a Tribunal can amount to a manifest excess of
powers.!*? This would be the case when such misapplication leads a tribunal to conclude that
it has jurisdiction when jurisdiction is lacking or when a tribunal exceeds the scope of its
jurisdiction. It would also be the case when the tribunal rejects jurisdiction where jurisdiction
exists. An exercise of authority without jurisdiction or in excess of jurisdiction as well as a

rejection of jurisdiction are all capable of being annulled under Article 52(1)(b).

Ad hoc committees have observed that a failure to apply the proper law would constitute a
manifest excess of powers but its erroneous application would not. No clear line, however,
separates a failure to apply the proper law from its erroneous application. As noted by the

Soufraki Committee:

ICSID ad hoc committees have commonly been quite clear in their
statements — if not always in the effective implementation of these
statements — that a distinction must be made between the failure to apply
the proper law, which can result in annulment, and an error in the
application of the law, which is not a ground for annulment. As stated in
Kléckner I, the distinction between “non-application” of the applicable law
and mistaken application of that law is a “fine distinction.” ... If the general
statement to the effect that a wrong application or interpretation of the law
is not a ground for annulment is quite uncontroversial and endorsed by
this ad hoc Committee, its practical application to concrete sets of facts may
at times not be self-evident.!*

'83 Exhibit RL-155, Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, (CSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision of the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, 5 June 2007, | 86, Exhibit CL-8, Malaysian Historical Salvors
SDN, BHD y. Malaysia, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Decision on the Application for Annulment, 16 April 2009,
9974, 80.

'84 Exhibit RL-155, Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision of the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, 5 June 2007, 485. See also Exhibit CL-8, Malaysian Historical
Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Decision on the Application for Annulment, 16 April
2009 4974, 80.

35

107.

108.

109.

110.

The Committee then suggested a possible way out of this difficulty by referring to the manner
in which domestic courts in most common law jurisdictions decide applications for judicial

review or writ petitions:

Misinterpretation or misapplication of the proper law may, in particular
cases, be so gross or egregious as substantially to amount to failure to apply
the proper law. Such gross and consequential misinterpretation or
misapplication of the proper law which no reasonable person (“bon pére de
famille”) could accept needs to be distinguished from simple error — even a
serious error — in the interpretation of the law which in many national
jurisdictions may be the subject of ordinary appeal as distinguished
from, e.g., an extraordinary writ of certiorari.'*>

This Committee acknowledges the difficulties inherent in such line drawing and has decided
to follow with caution the course charted by earlier ad hoc committees’ decisions. It has
accordingly sought to distinguish carefully between the failure to apply the applicable law
as a ground for annulment from a misinterpretation of the applicable law which it considers
beyond its mandate. It will do that while continuing to remind itself that gross or egregious
misapplication or misinterpretation of the law where it is tantamount to a failure to apply

the proper law may lead to annulment.!*°

According to the Respondent, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in three
situations: (i) when finding jurisdiction; (ii) when finding liability; and (iii) when awarding

damages.'*? The Committee will consider all three contentions.

  

i. Jurisdiction
Regarding the finding of jurisdiction, it is the Respondent’s contention that the Tribunal
failed to identify the investment forming the basis of its jurisdiction under the ICSID

Convention and the BIT, and that it disregarded applicable Turkmen law.'** The Tribunal

85 Exhibit RL-155, Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, (CSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision of the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, 5 June 2007, §86.

'86 ICSID Background Paper on Annulment, 10 August 2012, 994 and fn. 171.
87 Memorial, Section II.C; Reply, Section IV.A, B, C.
'88 Reply, $64 et seq.

36

111.

112.

113.

allegedly failed to observe the jurisdictional requirement contained in the Convention and
the BIT that the dispute must be shown to arise from an investment, since it based its decision
on the “vague, ‘cumulative or alternative’ conclusions that the Claimant may have owned
either an investment in the form of movable property and/or some kind of contractual interest

in the Poultry Business”.!*

The Committee notes that, according to the part of the Decision on Jurisdiction to which the
Respondent makes reference, the Tribunal reached “the confident conclusion”, based on
“overwhelming evidence” that the Claimant, “at a minimum qualifies under Article 1(1)(a)
of the BIT”. In addition, the Tribunal held “[fJurther or alternatively” that it “is also of the
view that the Claimant acquired a contractual interest that qualifies under Article 1(1)(b) of

the BIT”.!°°

The Respondent contends that the Tribunal failed to apply Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention and Article 1(1) of the BIT when determining that the Claimant had an
investment. The Committee notes initially that the Tribunal’s conclusions regarding the
Claimant’s investment follow a reference it made to the text of Article 25 of the ICSID

Convention'®! and to Article 1(1) of the BIT, which defines “investments”.!°?

The Respondent did not argue that the Award be annulled on the basis that the Claimant’s
“investment” did not qualify under Article 25 of the Convention. Attention must, therefore,

turn to Article 1(1) of the BIT, which, inter alia, provides:

The term “investments” shall comprise all kinds of assets, in particular:

a. Movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem,
such as mortgages, liens and pledges;
b. Shares of companies and other kinds of company interests;

189 Reply, 66.

199 DOJ, 461.

19! DOJ, 452, transcribing part of Article 25 of the Convention.
192 DOJ, 453, transcribing Article 1(1) of the BIT in full.

37

114.

115.

116.

c. Claims to money which has been used to create an economic value,
or claims to any performance having an economic value.'”*
Subparagraphs (a) and (b) were relied upon by the Tribunal in the Decision on Jurisdiction
to hold that the Claimant had made an “investment” and that the Tribunal, therefore, had

'°4 Tf the Committee finds either of these findings to be

jurisdiction in the matter.
unobjectionable then, irrespective of its views with regard to the other, the Award must not
be annulled on the ground that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in holding that

there was an investment within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT.

The Tribunal appears to have relied primarily on the Claimant’s investment in the form of a
contractual interest, holding that the financing of equipment was the Claimant’s contribution

to the business entitling him to an interest in the future income stream of Sdhrat-Anna.!°

In the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal referred to the Claimant’s assertion that his
interest in the Turkmen Sole Proprietorship qualifies as “other kinds of company interests
under Article 1(1)(b)”.'°° The Tribunal then outlined in the following part of its decision!*”
its findings and reasoning in relation to this assertion, and on that basis concluded that the
Claimant had acquired a contractual interest that qualified as an investment under Article
1(1)(b) of the BIT.!** In the Award, the Tribunal referred to the Claimant’s contractual
entitlement to a portion of the Farm’s income stream “which was the counterpart of his
contribution to the business”, where the contribution includes the financing of the movable

property. 199

193 Article 1(1) of the BIT contains under (d) and (e) two additional kinds of “investments”, which are of no interest
for the present analysis since the former was rejected by the Tribunal (DOJ, §{]59, 62) and the latter was not relied on
by the Claimant.

194 All three sub-paragraphs were referred to in the Award in concluding that the claim qualified as an “investment”.
Award, 4109.

195 Award, 4129.

196 DOS, 459.

197 DOS, 4962 et seq.

198 DOJ, 61.

199 Award, 9129.

38

117.

118.

119.

120.

The Committee has considered the fact that Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT does not include an
express reference to “contractual interests”. However, it is of the view that the reference in
Article 1(1)(b) to “other kinds of company interests” is sufficiently broad to include the

contractual interest in Shrat-Anna described by the Tribunal.”

The Committee is conscious of the fact that Article 1(1)(b) refers to “shares and other kinds
of company interests”. The words, “other kinds of company interests” are, however neither
qualified by the word “shares” nor are these to be read ejusdem generis. The rule of ejusdem
generis applies when general words follow special words. The general words are limited by
the genus (class) indicated by the special words.”°! No general words in this case precede the
words “other kinds of company interests”. There is no genus or class established by an
enumeration of specifics. At least two words are required to establish a class. The lone word

“shares” does not constitute a class.

The words “other kinds of company interests” are of very wide import. They are wide enough
to cover any interest in a company including a contractual interest in a future stream of
income from a company. The Committee sees no reason to read these words narrowly or to

place an artificial or strained construction on them.

The Committee is conscious of the fact that “companies” is a defined expression under the

BIT. Under Article 1(1)(4) of the BIT in reference to Turkmenistan it means:

Any juridical person or cooperative society or other company or
association with legal personality which has been established in
accordance with Turkmenistan’s legislation and has its seat in the territory
of Turkmenistan.
In view of this definition, a contractual right to a stream of income from an entity, which
lacked legal personality, would not have amounted to “company interests”. If either Séhrat-

Anna or Samsyt did not fall within the definition of “company” in the BIT, then any interest

200 Award, $9]108-109.
201 Sir Anthony Aust, Modern Treaty Law and Practice, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2007), p.

249.

39

121.

122.

123.

in them would not have qualified as “company interests”. It would not have been an

investment covered under Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT.

In view of this, the Committee examined the pleadings of the Parties and the transcript of
the proceedings before the Tribunal. It appears that the Respondent did not argue that either
Sdhrat-Anna or Samsyt, the proprietary entities in which the Claimant claimed to have an
interest, were not juridical persons. The legal personality of Séhrat-Ana and Samsyt was,
therefore, never an issue in the arbitration proceedings. The Tribunal, therefore, rightly did
not consider this argument and nothing would turn on the Committee proceeding to examine

it in any further detail.

Instead, the Respondent focused its submissions before the Tribunal on whether the Claimant
had shares or any other interest in the companies. The Respondent argued that the Claimant
did not have such interests because such interests, if any, were never properly registered
under Turkmen law and, further, that his alleged investments were not made in accordance
with Turkmen law. According to the Respondent the companies, therefore, only had
Turkmen investors, i.e. the individuals legally registered under the sole proprietorships. All
of these arguments were carefully considered and rejected by the Tribunal. The findings of
the Tribunal that the Claimant had made an investment within the meaning of Article 1(1)(b)
of the BIT cannot, therefore, be interfered with by the Committee in exercise of its Article

52 Convention remit.

In light of this determination, the Committee need not further examine the Tribunal’s finding
whether the Claimant had also made an investment under subparagraph (1)(a) of Article 1.
Nor is it necessary to delve into the Tribunal’s additional reliance, in the Award, on
subparagraph (c). As the Tribunal identified a valid basis for its jurisdiction under Article 1
of the BIT, these sub-questions would have no effect on the outcome of the Decision on
Jurisdiction or the Award. Any discussion of these sub-questions would be academic. In this
respect, the Committee adopts the reasoning of previous ad hoc committees which have

stated that a manifest excess of power exists only where the action in question “is clearly

40

capable of making a difference to the result”,?°? and similarly that “the excess of power

should [be] substantively serious”.?°?

124. The Committee, therefore, concludes that the Tribunal did not fail to apply the ICSID
Convention and the BIT when finding jurisdiction. It identified the investment out of which
the dispute had arisen in accordance with Article 25 of the Convention and Article | of the

BIT."

125. The Respondent also contends that the Tribunal found Turkmen law to be irrelevant to
determine whether the Claimant had a qualifying investment. This contention appears to be
based on the Tribunal’s assertion that “local law becomes important in this respect only if
its role is expressly reserved by the relevant international instruments”.?°° However, the
Committee does not need to review the validity of this statement since in any case the

Tribunal did not fail to give due consideration to Turkmen law.

126. The Committee notes initially that an entire section of the Decision on Jurisdiction is devoted
to the conformity of the investment with Turkmen law.” The Tribunal referred at the outset
to the Respondent’s contention that the Claimant does not qualify for access to ICSID by
reason of Articles 2(1) and 9 of the BIT and Article 2(a) of the Protocol to the BIT.”°’ These
three articles are reproduced textually in the Decision on Jurisdiction.?°* The Tribunal then
drew a distinction between investments that are disqualified ex ante, thus defeating arbitral
jurisdiction, and those that do not follow the applicable law (frequently the host State law

under Article 42 of the ICSID Convention) when carried out. In the latter case, the investor

202 Exhibit CL-137, Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, §86; Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1
Lid. v. Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee, | March 2011, 4229.

203 Exhibit RL-155, Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision of the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, 5 June 2007, 40.

204 See also infra, 4142, regarding the finding of liability.

205 Supra, 44 quoting DOJ, 124.

26 DOJ, Section 7.3 (“Was the Investment in Conformity with Turkmen Law?”).
27DO5, 4129.

208 DOJ, $f] 54-56; see supra, fn. 36.

41

127.

128.

129.

may not be able to prevail on the merits, but the failure to comply with local law would not

defeat jurisdiction.”

According to the Tribunal, the Respondent’s objection would have found its most plausible
justification in Article 9 of the BIT, which it reasoned “would clearly proscribe an investment
in an area which is off-limits to foreign capital”.*!° The Tribunal therefore did not consider
the other two Articles to require that the Claimant’s investment complied with Turkmen law
at the time it was made. This interpretation does not appear to be erroneous, but even if it

were, a mere erroneous interpretation would not be a ground for annulment.

Based on this interpretation, the Tribunal proceeded to examine compliance with Turkmen
law at the time the investment was made, rather than during “the course of post-investment

management of the venture”,?!!

in particular whether the investment needed to be registered
in order to be valid under local law.?!? In the Tribunal’s view, other failures to comply with
Turkmen law alleged by the Respondent?! related to the implementation of the investment.
An entire subsection of Section 7.3 of the Decision on Jurisdiction is devoted to the analysis

of the issue of registration in light, on the one hand, of the factual evidence showing repeated

 

reference by authorities in both Germany and Turkmenistan to the Claimant’s investment

39214

with no mention of a “supposedly required registration and, on the other hand, the

Respondent’s inability to identify any registration requirement under the BIT or Turkmen

law.2!5

It is not within an ad hoc committee’s remit to re-examine the facts of the case to determine
whether a tribunal erred in appreciating or evaluating the available evidence. A tribunal’s

discretion in such matters of appreciation and evaluation of evidence is recognized by the

20DO5, 4130.
2DOS, 4131.
2"DOJ, 4134.
2205, 4135.
213 Memorial, 462; Reply, 72.
214 DOJ, 4136.

21SOJ, 4938-142, referring to Desert Line Award requiring very explicit terms “for a formal registration requirement
to be added to a bilateral treaty by a unilateral legislation or regulation”.

42

ICSID system.?! An ad hoc committee cannot sit in appeal on a tribunal’s assessment of the
evidence. If the Committee were to proceed to a re-examination of the facts of the present
case and an assessment of how the Tribunal evaluated the evidence before it, it would act as

an appellate body. That is not a function envisaged for it by the ICSID Convention.?!”

130. This view is supported by the decisions of a number of ad hoc committees. In Wena Hotels
v. Egypt, the Committee stated that “it is in the Tribunal’s discretion to make its opinion
about the relevance and evaluation of the elements of proof presented by each Party”.?!* In
Rumeli v. Kazakhstan, the Committee held that “[a]n ad hoc committee is not a court of
appeal and cannot therefore enter, within the bounds of its limited mission, into an analysis
of the probative value of the evidence produced by the parties”.7!° As stated by the ad hoc
Committee in Alapli v. Turkey, “[i]t is certainly not the role of an annulment committee to
verify whether a tribunal correctly established the facts of a case”.?”° And as held by the ad
hoc Committee in CDC v. Seychelles, even if the Tribunal erred in the appreciation of the

evidence the error would not in itself constitute a ground for annulment.”?!

131.

In the Committee’s view, the Tribunal’s finding of the absence of a registration requirement
under Turkmen law falls well within its discretion in the field of evidence. As explained in
the Decision on Jurisdiction, this finding was based largely on the evidence of the
Respondent’s legal expert, Mr. Akmamedov, who after conceding that Article 971(1) of the

Turkmen Civil Code allows agreements on “joint entrepreneurial activity” to be concluded

216 Arbitration Rules, Rule 34(1): “The Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any evidence adduced and
of its probative value”.

217 ICSID Convention, Article 53: “The Award... shall not be subject to any appeal”.

218 Exhibit CL-157, Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on
Application for Annulment, 28 January 2002, 965.

219 Exhibit CL-172, Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of
Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee, 25 March 2010, 496.

220 Exhibit CL-169, Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/13, Decision on Annulment,
10 July 2014, 4234, referred to in the Rejoinder, 476.

221 Exhibit CL-40, CDC Group ple v. Seychelles, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Annulment, 29 June 2005,
4959-61, reported by Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, Article 52, 4330. This holding was followed by other ad hoc
committees, as in Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision on the
Application for Annulment, 5 June 2007, 487.

43

222

orally,*** failed to provide an answer to the specific question whether Turkmen law required

the registration of a foreign investment.?”

132. The Tribunal also examined the issue of the conformity with Turkmen law of the

Participation Agreement and of the Claimant’s investment by way of a contractual interest,
in light of the Respondent’s reference to various laws of Turkmenistan. In particular, the
Respondent argued that the Participation Agreement did not accord with the Law on
Enterprises, which would have required an amendment to the foundation documents of
Sdhrat-Anna or its reorganization from a sole proprietorship into a joint-stock company to
permit an investment by a third party.?*+ According to the Tribunal, even if the Law on
Enterprises would not recognize the Participation Agreement, potentially depriving the
Claimant of his status as a shareholder in that enterprise, that “would not, however,
necessarily or automatically deprive the Claimant of a contractual right to the 30% portion

of income” of Séhrat-Anna.??>

133. The Committee notes in this context that the Tribunal excluded the possibility that the

Claimant’s investment was in the form of the acquisition of a corporate equity or of a formal
status within $Ghrat-Anna or Samsyt.?° Regarding the Respondent’s argument that “the
exercise of the rights and the enjoyment of the benefits of an equity-holder in the absence of
an appropriate corporate form constitutes a violation of Turkmen law”, the Tribunal found

that to relate “to possible unenforceability, not ‘violation of Turkmen law’”.??7

134. Further, the Tribunal’s finding regarding the absence of a registration requirement for

222

223

224

225

226

foreign investments answers the Respondent’s further allegation that the Tribunal “entirely

DOJ, 4106.

DOJ, 4137.

DOJ, 9143.

DOJ, 4144.

DOJ, §§110, 145; Award, 119. The reference to the two Turkmen companies owned by the Gurbannazarovs is

explained by the fact that each of them had entered into a separate lease with the Government on which the Farm was
located (DOJ, 6). When a single lease in the name of Séhrat-Anna replaced the two leases on | January 2002 (DOJ,
8), the Claimant had no further involvement in Samsyt.

227

DOJ, 4146.

44

disregarded the Turkmen Law on Foreign Investment”, which requires all investors to

choose a corporate form or a form of business activity which would have to be registered.”
135. The same holds true regarding the Respondent’s fleeting reference to Article 239 of the
Criminal Code of Turkmenistan. According to this provision, “Engagement in an
entrepreneurial activity without registration ... shall result in a fine ... or correctional
work”.””° In the absence of a registration requirement for the Claimant’s investment, this
provision is of no effect as to the finding on jurisdiction. Even if registration had been
required, which the Tribunal excluded, the only consequence under the Criminal Code would
have been a sanction of a criminal nature, with no direct consequences on the Farm’s

business activity.

136. For the reasons above, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal duly considered and
applied Turkmen law based on the available evidence. It is of the same view as Professor
Schreuer that “[a]s long as the Tribunal identifies the applicable law correctly and strives to
apply it, it is impossible to conclude that it has disregarded law for the sake of equity”.>*” It

holds that the Tribunal did not exercise ex aequo et bono powers for the purpose of finding

jurisdiction.

137. The Respondent has further alleged that the Tribunal ignored the documentary evidence
showing that the Claimant was exclusively a seller of poultry equipment to the Turkmen
entities.7*! The Committee notes that by deciding that the Claimant had financed the
procurement, transport and installation of said equipment, the Tribunal clearly excluded the
possibility, based on the available evidence, that the Claimant had acted as a seller of that

equipment. According to the Tribunal, “[t]he record leaves no room for doubt. All the

28 Reply, 472, 2nd bullet point.
29 Reply, 472, 3rd bullet point.

230 Exhibit CL-179, Schreuer, Decisions Ex Aequo et Bono Under the ICSID Convention, 11 ICSID Review-Foreign
Investment Law Journal (1997), 37, p. 61.

281 Supra, $45(b).

45

evidence, such as it is, points to the Claimant as a true participant in contributing financially

and by other means to the establishment and operation of the Farm”.?>?

138. As previously mentioned, it is not within the Committee’s remit to interfere with the
appreciation and evaluation of evidence by the Tribunal. However, the Committee has the
power and is indeed in duty bound to determine whether the Tribunal improperly reversed
the burden of proof as to the nature of the Claimant’s investments, as alleged by the
Respondent.?*? What the Respondent in essence contends in this regard is that the Tribunal
violated the fundamental rule of evidence “actori probatio incumbit”, using ex aequo et bono
powers that it did not have.?** The Committee shall revert to this question when examining

the second ground of annulment on which the Respondent relies.

ii. Liability
139. The Respondent contends that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when, in the
Award, it: (i) found liability without identifying the nature and extent of the Claimant’s

alleged interest;?*> (ii) did not require the Claimant to meet his burden of proof;?*° (iii)

237

departed from the applicable law;**’ and (iv) ignored the evidentiary record relying on ex

aequo et bono powers.3*

140. With respect to (i) above, the Respondent argues in particular that the Tribunal failed to

identify “the terms of th[e] supposed contract, the parties to it, the consideration exchanged

or even Dogan’s rights or obligations under it and whether he met those obligations”.?*?

22 DOJ, 4125.

233 Memorial, 87-98; Reply, 493-100.

2 Reply, 9106-107.

235 Memorial, 4107; Reply, 4130, 133, 136; Respondent Oral Argument, slides 28-29.
236 Memorial 4120; Reply, #4133, 151-152, 157; Respondent Oral Argument, slide 30.
237 Memorial, {1 11-118; Reply, 4138-147, 168; Respondent Oral Argument, slide 30.
238 Memorial, 118; Reply, (4134-135.

239 Memorial, 4103.

46

141.

142.

143.

144.

As stated by the Tribunal and recalled by the Respondent, “even as a matter of contract the
record is fragmented and ambiguous”.”*? However, this circumstance did not prevent the
Tribunal from making a decision regarding liability based on the assessment of the facts and
the available evidence, in particular the Participation Agreement. The Committee believes
that, contrary to the Respondent’s contention, the elements of the Claimant’s contractual

interest were identified as part of the Tribunal’s analysis.

In the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal identified the form and content of the Claimant’s
interest when referring to the Participation Agreement as creating “a 30% contractual interest

in $ohrat-Anna”*4!

and when qualifying the interest as “what is commonly referred to as a
‘carried interest’”.?*? The Tribunal also considered the qualification of this interest as an
“investment” under the ICSID Convention and the BIT, as well as its conformity with
Turkmen law. The Committee will not revisit this particular part of the Tribunal’s decision,
as it has already been examined with regard to the Tribunal’s finding of jurisdiction. The
Committee’s conclusions above apply equally to the allegations made by the Respondent

regarding the Tribunal’s finding of liability.

With respect to the Respondent’s allegation that the Tribunal did not identify the parties to
the “supposed contract”, the Committee notes that an English translation of the Participation
Agreement is reproduced in full in the Decision on Jurisdiction, showing the parties thereto.
The Agreement has the following title: “The company ‘Im- und Export Dogan GmbH?’ is
participating (dormant partner’s interest) in the company ‘Séhrat-Anna’ by means of project-
related capital contributions”.’*? The Agreement was signed by Adem Dogan in the name of
his German company referred to in the title. The formal party to the Participation Agreement

appears therefore to be Import & Export Dogan GmbH.

In light of this fact, the Tribunal expressly examined whether the Claimant could be

considered a party to the Participation Agreement. According to the Tribunal, the Claimant,

240 Award, 183; Reply, 136; Tr. 47: 3-4.
241 DOJ, 4107.
242 DOJ, 108.

243

According to the certified translation from the original German text reproduced in DOJ, 487.

47

rather than any of his German companies, was the party that “directly and materially
participated in carrying out the activities associated with the investment”, being also “the
source of all funds available to his two companies”.*“ To the Tribunal, the words in the
Participation Agreement: “[f]inally Mr Dogan agrees...” suggested that “it was understood
that the Claimant himself was a party to the Participation Agreement through his wholly-
owned company”.?> The Tribunal, citing a prior investment treaty case, determined that
although the Claimant “held his participation in the joint venture investment” through a
corporate vehicle that was the formal party to the Participation Agreement, the Claimant
himself, a natural person, was “the qualifying investor” as the source of all funds available

to his companies and the beneficiary of all revenues.”“°

145. Inthe Committee’s view, the Tribunal clearly indicated that even if the Claimant’s corporate
vehicle was the formal party to the Participation Agreement, the Claimant himself was the
party entitled to a 30% contractual interest in Sdhrat-Anna. The latter assumed the
corresponding liability, as confirmed by the last sentence of the Participation Agreement:
“The company ‘Sdhrat-Anna’ assumes full liability for the capital and for the correct
disbursement of income”.?4” The other party to the Participation Agreement is in effect
Sdhrat-Anna, Mr. Gurbannazarov having signed the Agreement in the name of this

Company.*8

1,249

146. Based on the Tribunal’s interpretation of the Participation Agreement the Claimant was

entitled to 30% of Séhrat-Anna’s income stream in exchange for his contribution to the
business. According to the Tribunal, “[tJhe record leaves no room for doubt. All the

evidence, such as it is, points to the Claimant as a true participant in contributing financially

244 DOJ, 4113. The reference to “his two companies” is to the two German companies as defined in DOS, 45.

245 DOJ, 494, where “his wholly-owned company” is one of the German companies, namely Import & Export Dogan
GmbH.

246 DOJ, 113.

247 Exhibit C-15.

248 As shown by the text reproduced in DOJ, §87.
4 DOJ, 4992 et seq.

48

147.

148.

149.

150.

and by other means to the establishment and operation of the Farm, even if the nature and

extent of that contribution cannot be determined fully at this stage”.*°°

The Committee does not accept the Respondent’s argument that the reservation in the final
clause of that quote points to any failure by the Tribunal to identify the Claimant’s
contribution and contractual interest for the purpose of liability.2°' As explained in the
Award, this reservation was intended to make clear that the Decision on Jurisdiction “did
not prejudge any aspect of the merits of the case, in particular whether the structure and the
documentation of Mr. Dogan’s interest had a ‘sufficiently solid basis’ to be assigned a
compensable value”.?** The Tribunal meant “to keep open the possibility ... that matters

might be clarified, one way or the other, during the merits phase”.?>?

As the word “might” indicates, such clarifications were considered by the Tribunal only as
a possibility, although a desirable one, to better establish the facts of the case. No such
clarifications having been offered, the Tribunal was left with evidence that it described “as

patchy and scant”.?*

At the risk of repeating itself, the Committee observes that it does not have the authority to
sit in judgment on the Tribunal’s appreciation and evaluation of the evidence and its
conclusion, “not without hesitation but eventually by a balance of the evidence”, that the
Gurbannazarovs did likely agree that the Claimant “would have an entitlement to the Farm’s
profits”, with the enforceability of such entitlement depending “to a significant degree on

the good will of the Gurbannazarovs”.”*°

The Respondent’s allegation regarding the Tribunal’s disregard of Turkmen law, including
the alleged unenforceability of the Participation Agreement, have been examined by the
Committee when dealing with the finding of jurisdiction. Even assuming that the Tribunal

made an error in applying or omitting to apply individual provisions of Turkmen law, a mere

25 DOJ, 125.
251 DOJ, 4468-83.

252

‘The Memorial refers to this reservation in 4100.

253 Award, 181.
254 Award, 182.
255 Award, 183; see also 4129.

49

151.

152.

153.

154.

error or omission would not be a ground for annulment of the Award. In any event, this is
merely an assumption. The record before the Committee does not support such an

assumption.

Also regarding the Tribunal’s finding on liability the Respondent alleges that the Tribunal
reversed the Parties’ burden of proof by blaming the Respondent for not providing evidence
as to the nature of the Claimant’s alleged investment.?*° According to the Respondent, the
Tribunal drew unjustified adverse inferences against the Respondent.?*” These contentions

are unwarranted, as will be discussed when examining the second ground of annulment.”**

In sum, the Committee has concluded that the Tribunal properly identified the nature and
extent of the Claimant’s investment based on the evidence made available by the Parties.
The Tribunal was therefore in a position to decide whether the Respondent had expropriated
the investment as so identified, and whether it had breached the BIT in other respects
regarding such investment. Clearly, the legal dispute had arisen out of the investment made
by the Claimant and its treatment by the Respondent. The Committee concludes that no ex

aequo et bono powers were exercised by the Tribunal for the purpose of finding liability.

iii. Damages
Regarding the finding of damages, the Respondent’s main argument is that “the Tribunal did
not assess damages based on the evidentiary record and accepted damage valuation

standards”, which in the Respondent’s view is obvious from the Award.?*?
As detailed in the Respondent’s oral argument at the Hearing:

a) The Tribunal itself recognized that Dogan failed to submit appropriate documentary

evidence and historical data in support of his damage claim;?°”

256 Memorial, 4130-131.

257 Memorial, 132.

258 Infra, $9204 et seq.

259 Reply, 4170.

260 Turkmenistan’s Oral Argument, slide 31.

50

b) The Tribunal chose to ignore the fair market value of Dogan’s alleged interest, which is
the standard for measuring damages set forth in the BIT and agreed upon by the

Parties;?°! and

c) The Tribunal’s manner of assessing damages manifestly demonstrates that it acted ex

aequo et bono?

155. As pointed out by the Respondent, the Tribunal repeatedly made reference to the limited
record available regarding the Claimant’s loss. According to the Tribunal, “the details of the
quantification of the loss are by no means a simple matter, having regard to the manifest
insufficiency of the Claimant’s documentary record, and the limited evidence he has
seemingly been able to cobble together after the event”.? The Tribunal acknowledged that
“the evidentiary record has not been well furnished ... and we are left to reach our decision
on the basis of evidence that is best described as patchy and scant”.?™ As recalled by the
Respondent, the Tribunal also stated that “there appears to be little to be gained by seeking
to identify and confirm the existence of reliable financial records with regard to the
transactions involving the Claimant and the Farm. In our view it is unlikely that they exist,

or that they ever existed”.

156. There is, however, a significant difference between the sufficiency and absence of evidence.
The passages from the Award referred to above demonstrate that here the former and not the
latter was the case. The Tribunal relied primarily on the evidence provided by the Parties’
respective experts who estimated prices and production based on various management
guides for poultry farms. While the Respondent argues that the Tribunal’s reliance on these
management guides amounts to an “artificial exercise of damage assessment based on
fabricated prices and purely theoretical, optimal production figures”,?° the Respondent’s

own expert, Mr. Gerrits, relied on the same management guides. In his first Expert Report,

261 Turkmenistan’s Oral Argument, slide 32.

26 Turkmenistan’s Oral Argument, slide 33; Reply, §]170.
26 Award, 179.

264 Award, 4182.

265 Award, 188.

266 Reply, 4170.

51

Mr. Gerrits states that “[i]n my assumptions I used recommendations by Hy-Line as well as
Big Dutchman”. Mr. Gerrits also called the Hy-Line International Online Management
Guide “a reputable source in the industry”.?°* The Respondent’s contention is, therefore,

contradicted by its own expert.

157. Nothing prevented the Respondent from producing documents proving actual prices and
production figures for the Farm. The Respondent, however, failed to produce any such
documents. As acknowledged by the Tribunal “[d]espite allegedly being in possession of
records, he [Mr. Soyunov] produced none of them in this arbitration. The Respondent did
not produce them either, although it appears to have access to the warehouse in Ashgabat
where it is said that the original records (or a copy thereof) are kept”.” Similarly, even
though the Respondent disputed the eight invoices produced by the Claimant for sales of
eggs from the Farm to the Government of Turkmenistan, it did not produce any other
invoices to show a different picture. This was in spite of the fact that the Government
regularly purchased eggs from the Farm and, therefore, such invoices could not have been

absent from its possession.

158. In these circumstances, the Tribunal relied on the material produced before it. Simply
because this material did not include the actual prices and production figures for the Farm
did not require the Tribunal, in law, to ignore it or to reject it altogether as a basis for
quantification of damages. There is no one size fits all formula for quantification of damages.
It necessarily involves an appreciation of evidence and drawing of conclusions therefrom. It
may, at times, also require a tribunal, in light of the facts and circumstances of a particular
case, to make certain assumption from both the evidence produced by one party and by the
failure of the other party to produce evidence. A tribunal is at liberty to reach conclusions
from the evidence produced and to draw inferences from a failure to produce it. It was well
within the domain of the Tribunal to rely on the best evidence before it and to draw
conclusions therefrom. This evidence included not only the respective Expert Reports, but

also Witness Statements and related documents submitted by the Parties. The Committee is,

?67 Expert Report of Joost Gerrits dated 14 November 2012, 4/5.
268 Expert Report of Joost Gerrits dated 14 November 2012, §36.
269 Award, 4213.

52

therefore, of the view that there was sufficient evidence on record for the Tribunal to form a
judgment as to the quantification of the Claimant’s damages. That this evidence was limited
was taken into account by the Tribunal and is clearly reflected in the Award where it
“severely limit[ed] what might have been the full extent of his [Claimant’s] possible
entitlements, if his claim had been fully documented”.?” In the facts of this case, calculating

damages in this manner was fully understandable.

159. The Committee also cannot accept the Respondent’s argument that FMV was the standard
provided by the BIT. “Fair market value” is set forth in various investment treaties as the
only method to establish the amount of compensation due in case of expropriation of an
investment. This is not the case in the BIT. Article 4.2 of BIT provides that in case of
expropriation, nationalization or measures tantamount to expropriation the “compensation
shall be equivalent to the value of the expropriated investment immediately before the date

on which [any such measure] has become publicly known”.

160. “Value” is a general term encompassing any valuation method to assess compensation due,
including but not limited to “fair market value”. By referring to “value”, the BIT permitted
the Tribunal to choose a standard other than FMV in light of the specific circumstances of

the case.

161.

The Committee is also of the view that there was no clear agreement between the Parties on
the application of FMV as the only appropriate valuation method. The Respondent relies on
the Claimant’s Memorial on Merits and Quantum in the underlying arbitration to contend
that the Claimant had requested compensation based on FMV as the only means of
compensation, which would “wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act” (citing the
Chorzéw Factory Case).””! However, based on the record before the Committee, it appears

that the Claimant’s position was more nuanced than the Respondent suggests.

162. In his Reply on the Merits and Quantum, the Claimant relied on the Chorzéw Factory

standard to request the Tribunal to award “a level of compensation which recognizes the

2 Award, 4175.
271 Exhibit R-121, Claimant’s Memorial on Merits and Quantum dated 29 June 2012 (excerpts), 4216, and fn. 298.

53

163.

164.

value that his investment would have had, were it not for Respondent’s commission of
deliberate, illegal acts”.°”? Unlike in his Memorial on the Merits and Quantum (cited by the
Respondent), the Claimant did not focus on the FMV standard as the only means of attaining
full reparation as defined in Chorzéw Factory. Nor did the Claimant agree with the

Respondent’s formulation of FMV.2”

Addressing the contention that the FMV standard be employed, the Tribunal noted that it
was “unlikely that many would buy into a venture in which the principal partners were
languishing in prison, or where the brooding presence of an antagonistic Government could
only be kept at bay with the energetic intervention of diplomats”.?” In these circumstances,
the Tribunal chose as the applicable standard “not what this beleaguered Farm might have
been worth to a hypothetical third party, but ... what it would have been worth to Mr. Dogan
in the absence of any breach of the Treaty, including by reference to the stream of income
that would have flowed from the sale of eggs”.?”> The Tribunal clearly considered the
applicability of the FMV standard and came to the conclusion that it would not be appropriate

in the given circumstances.

As is well known, the ICJ in Chorzéw Factory observed that “reparation must, as far as
possible, wipe out all consequences of the illegal act and re-establish a situation which
would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been committed”.?”° FMV is not the
only valuation method that achieves this. As pointed out by the Claimant, “while fair market
value is one recognized standard for valuation, other valuation methods such as, inter alia,

book value, sunk investment costs, discounted cash flow or market comparables are also

272 Exhibit C- 209, Claimant’s Reply on the Merits and Quantum dated 28 February 2013, 168. At the Hearing, Mr.
Fox for the Claimant asserted that there was no agreement on FMV, relying on the Claimant’s Memorial on Merits
and Quantum in which the Claimant had pointed to Chorzéw Factory standard as the applicable standard for the
assessment of damages. The record before the Committee does not contain the passage of the Claimant’s Memorial
to which Mr. Fox made reference. However, the Committee does have the Claimant’s Reply on the Merits and
Quantum, in which the Claimant also relies on Chorzéw.

273 Exhibit C- 209, Claimant’s Reply on the Merits and Quantum dated 28 February 2013, 4168

274 Award, 4191.

275 Award, 4) 191.

216 The Factory at Chorzéw (Germany v. Poland) (Claim on Indemnity, Merits), Publications of the PCIJ, Series A,
No. 17, 13 September 1928, p. 47.

54

used in investment arbitration to provide for full reparation”.?”’ The Tribunal was entitled to
choose the most appropriate method of valuation in the given facts and circumstances. In
determining the financial benefit of which the Claimant had been deprived, the Tribunal
found that such deprivation consisted of 30% of Séhrat-Anna’s share of the Farm’s lost
profits due to import restrictions and the dismantling of its assets. In turn, lost profits were
assessed by the Tribunal as the difference between lost revenues and the cost of egg
production (as these terms are defined in the Award) during the period 2006-2011.?”8 In the
Committee’s view, the valuation method chosen by the Tribunal fairly reflects the Chorzéw

Factory standard to which the Claimant had made reference.

165. As discussed above, in quantifying damages the Tribunal relied primarily on the evidence
of the Parties’ experts. It also relied on the Parties’ Witness Statements and related
documents. A tribunal has broad discretion when evaluating the probative value of evidence.
As stated by Professor Schreuer “ICSID arbitration is not governed by formal rules nor by
national laws on evidence. ICSID tribunals have full discretion in assessing the probative
value of any piece of evidence introduced before them”.°” To the same effect is a passage
from Professor Waincymer, who refers to Article 34(1) of the ICSID Convention and states

that:

It is commonly accepted that broad discretions cover all the necessary
evidentiary powers regardless of whether the rules expressly refer to particular
matters such as documents, witnesses, experts or inspections. The International
Court of Justice has considered that a tribunal generally has a broad discretion
as to the way to approach the evaluation of evidence. It has stated that ‘(t)he
appraisal of the probative value of documents and evidence appertained to the
discretionary power of the arbitrator and is not open to question.’?°”

166. The exercise of this discretion is different from the exercise of ex aequo et bono powers. The

former, as expressed by Schreuer and Waincymer, is a power vested in every tribunal. The

latter is the application of principles of equity and fairness in place of the applicable

2” Reply, 4119.

28 Award, 4279.

2” Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, Art. 43, 41104.

280 Jeff Waincymer, Procedure and Evidence in International Arbitration, Kluwer Law International (2012), p. 750.

55

167.

168.

169.

principles of law. In the present case, the Tribunal evaluated the evidence proffered by the
Parties. It chose a particular valuation method that it considered appropriate in the
circumstances of the case. It then applied this valuation method and quantified the damages.
The entire process of damage valuation followed by the Tribunal, including the dismissal of
some of the Claimant’s claims for compensation,”*! based as it was on the Parties’ evidence
and the Tribunal’s well considered appreciation of that evidence, was not based on the
exercise of ex aequo et bono powers but on the exercise of discretion vested in it. In the view
of the Committee, the Tribunal exercised its discretion in accordance with the applicable

principles of law.

The Committee concludes that, contrary to the Respondent’s contention,?** the Tribunal has
not exercised ex aequo et bono powers for the purpose of assessing damages. The Committee
thus rejects the Respondent’s request for annulment of the Award on the ground that the

Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

B. SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE

1. The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent requests that the Committee annul the Award for violation of Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, arguing that the Tribunal seriously departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure by: (i) misallocating the burden of proof and improperly

283

making adverse inferences against the Respondent;~*’ (ii) depriving the Respondent of its

right to be heard;?** and (iii) failing to treat the Parties equally.?*°

Regarding the legal standard for annulment under Article 52(1)(d), the Respondent states
that the relevant procedural rule must be “fundamental”, and the departure “serious”.

According to the Respondent, the concept of a fundamental rule covers many principles,

?8! Such as damages for dismantled equipment or any confiscated harvest (Award, {177) or in respect of the project
to produce chicken meat (broilers) (Award, 178).

282 Turkmenistan’s Oral Argument, slides 32 (at the end) and 33; Reply, {]170-197.
283 Memorial, 180 et seq. See Tr. 65:16-23.

284 Memorial, 4194 et seq.

285 Memorial, 4200 et seq.

56

including the principles of natural justice, “actori probatio incumbif’, equal treatment of the
parties and the right to be heard.”*° In particular, an inappropriate allocation of the burden of
proof may fall within Article 52(1)(d). To the Respondent, the Claimant’s assertion that only
a reversal of the burden of proof, rather than a misallocation, would be covered “is incorrect

and in clear contradiction with the straightforward rulings of ad hoc committees”.?°’

170. In response to the Claimant’s argument that tribunals are free to adopt their own reasoning
according to the principle iura novit curia, the Respondent contends that a tribunal’s
reasoning must not go beyond the legal framework established by the parties.”** In any event,
such “freedom” may not excuse a violation of a fundamental right such as the right to be

heard.

171. Regarding the requirement that the departure be “serious”, the Respondent notes the Parties’
agreement that the departure must have a material effect on the outcome or have “caused the
Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it would have awarded had [the]

rule been observed”.?*?

172. The Respondent argues that the Tribunal made a number of serious departures from
fundamental rules of procedure, all of which meet this standard for annulment, in its

decisions on jurisdiction, liability and damages.

286 Memorial, 4174, 176.

287 Reply, §25, citing, inter alia, Exhibit RL-195, Victor Pey Casado and Foundation “President Allende” v. Republic
of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Application for Annulment, 18 December 2012, 73 (referring
to “the proper allocation of the burden of proof” as one of the fundamental rules that may lead to annulment); Exhibit
RL-196, Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/17, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee on
the Application for Annulment, 24 January 2014, 9165.

288 Reply, 426, citing Exhibit RL-153, Kléckner v. Republic of Cameroon, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Decision on
Annulment, 3 May 1985, §91; Exhibit RL-195, Victor Pey Casado and Foundation “President Allende” v. Republic
of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Application for Annulment, 18 December 2012, 267. Sce also
Reply, 426, quoting Exhibit RL-203, Christian P. Alberti, “lura Novit Curia in International Commercial Arbitration
How Much Justice Do You Want?” in Stefan Michael Kréll, Loukas A. Mistelis, et al (eds.), International Commercial
Law: Synergy, Convergence and Evolution (Kluwer), pp. 3-32 (“Tribunals should provide the parties with an
opportunity to be heard if they intend to base their decision on legal reasoning that has not been advanced by the
parties and that could otherwise lead to a reasonably unforeseen decision”).

289 Reply, §28, quoting Exhibit CL-157, Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/4,
Decision on Application for Annulment, 28 January 2002, 58.

 

57

i. Jurisdiction

173. According to the Respondent the Tribunal assumed ex aequo et bono powers in the
jurisdictional phase and thereby: (i) discharged the Claimant of his burden of proof; (ii)

denied the Respondent the right to be heard; and (iii) failed to treat the Parties equally.?°°

174. With regard to the first of these allegations, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal failed
to draw the consequences of the Claimant’s “obvious failure” to prove he had a protected
investment, violating the fundamental rule of evidence actori probatio incumbit2*! In
particular, the only document on which the Tribunal relied to find an investment is the one-
page, backdated Participation Agreement. Moreover, that Agreement requires the
Claimant’s company to make a make a “first capital contribution” of DM 500,000, but the
Tribunal never pointed to any evidence of such contribution. Similarly, the Tribunal found
that the Claimant had contributed equipment to the Farm without ever identifying any such
equipment.?” The Tribunal nevertheless concluded that the Claimant was “a true participant
in contributing financially and by other means to the establishment and operation of the

Farm”.23

175. The Respondent argues that the Tribunal’s departure from the actori probatio incumbit

principle is “serious” because the Tribunal could not have found jurisdiction if it had required

the Claimant to meet his burden of proof, rather than taking on ex aequo et bono powers.?"*

Furthermore, the Claimant cannot cure the Tribunal’s actions with citations to purported
evidence of his contribution from the underlying arbitration, some of which was not even

referenced in the Decision on Jurisdiction.?”°

2°0 Reply, 101.

291 Memorial, 4181-186; Reply, 4102-107.

2 Reply, 4104.

2°3 Reply, 4104, citing DOJ, 4125.

2°4 Reply, 4107.

?°5 Reply, 105, citing Counter-Memorial, 4265. The Respondent also states that, in any case, the documents on which
the Claimant relies do not show that he made any contribution.

58

176. The Respondent also submits that the Tribunal “deprived Turkmenistan of its right to be
heard on the Tribunal’s novel theory of a contractual interest”.?°° According to the
Respondent, the Claimant’s submissions on jurisdiction never put forth the theory that he
had a contractual right to the income stream of the Farm.’’ Rather, the Claimant’s two
arguments were that he had an equity interest in the Turkmen companies and a joint venture
with the Turkmen partners, and the Respondent’s defence therefore centred on these

theories.?°*

177. However, according to the Respondent, the Tribunal realised that neither of these theories
could support a finding of investment and proceeded to construct its novel theory of an
investment in the form of a contractual interest in the income stream of the Turkmen
Companies.””? Indeed, the Tribunal first introduced the concept of a contractual interest at
the hearing on jurisdiction.*”° As a result, the Tribunal denied the Respondent an opportunity
to present its case on this purported form of investment and thereby seriously departed from

a fundamental rule of procedure.

178. Finally, the Respondent submits that in the jurisdictional phase the Tribunal failed to treat

the Parties equally in several ways.*”! In particular, the Tribunal:

a) expressly assumed that an expropriation had occurred, thereby prejudging the merits.*°*

For example, it excused the Claimant for testifying that he was a seller of equipment

296 Memorial, 4195-198; Reply, (4108-112.

2°7 Reply, 4110, citing Exhibit R-107, Turkmenistan’s Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction dated 29 July 2010, pp.
39-54; Exhibit C-214, Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 29 November 2010, 415.

298 Reply, 4110, citing, inter alia, Exhibit R-106, Request for Arbitration, §81; Exhibit C-209, Claimant’s Reply on
the Merits and Quantum dated 28 February 2013, 921-26, 28; Exhibit C-213, Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction
dated 13 June 2011, 4150-151.

2° Reply, 4112.

300 Reply, 111, citing Exhibit C-221, Jurisdiction Hearing Tr., Day 1, Dogan, p. 42, II. 10-23 (“You have discussed
how there couldn’t be an investment, in your submission, in accordance with Turkmen law, but what about the
proposition that it’s purely contractual?”).

301 Reply, 4113-118.
32 Memorial, 209; Reply, 115.

59

179.

180.

181.

before the Turkmen court based on the assumption that the Respondent was committed

to expropriating the Farm;>°

b

took a “backwards” approach when it “inferred from the existence of the Poultry
Business that Dogan had an investment in it, and did not consider any other possible

origin of the business”;3

c) ignored documentary evidence showing that the Claimant was a salesman, and not an
investor, and generally took a selective approach to the evidentiary record in favour of

the Claimant;?°> and
d) made unjustified adverse inferences against Turkmenistan.>°°

In the Respondent’s view, this unequal treatment of the Parties “undeniably had an impact
on the Tribunal’s decision as to its jurisdiction” and therefore warrants annulment of the
Award.*°7

ii. Liability
The Respondent argues that the Tribunal, in reaching its decision on liability, again departed

from the same three fundamental rules of procedure.

First, the Respondent asserts that the Tribunal ignored the actori probatio incumbit principle
when it “obviously excused Claimant’s failure to provide evidence for his alleged interest in
the Farm”. The Tribunal appeared to recognize this failure when it stated that “Claimant
has struggled to present evidence of a specific interest in the business of the Farm”, but it

nevertheless went on to find a contractual interest.*°? According to the Respondent, if the

33 Memorial, 4209; Reply, 4115, citing DOJ, 497 (“At a time when (to assume the accuracy of the Claimant’s

contentions on the merits) the Respondent appears to have been committed to the effective expropriation of the Farm,
it would have made sense for the Claimant to save what he could”).

304 Memorial, 4208; Reply, 116.

305 Reply, (117.

306 Memorial, 487-98; Reply, 4118.

307 Reply, (118.

5° Reply, 4159. See Memorial, 4187-190. In this regard, the Respondent also refers the Committee to its arguments
relating to the Tribunal’s alleged manifest excess of powers.

309 Memorial, 190, citing Award, 4174.

60

182.

183.

184.

185.

Tribunal had applied the burden of proof, it would have dismissed the Claimant’s claims for

his failure to establish the existence and nature of his alleged interest in the Farm.>!°

Second, the Respondent argues that it was denied the opportunity to be heard regarding the
forgery of the Participation Agreement.?!! The Tribunal refused to consider an Expert Report
submitted by the Respondent “which proves beyond any doubt that this document is
inauthentic.”*!? Yet, the Tribunal relied primarily, if not exclusively, on the Participation

Agreement as evidence of the Claimant’s interest in the Farm.

Third, according to the Respondent, the Tribunal continued to treat the Parties unequally at
the merits phase, in particular with respect to the assessment of evidence.*!> The Tribunal
“selectively relied on evidence that purportedly showed that Dogan was an investor, while
at the same time closing its eyes to the whole set of evidence showing that he was merely
selling equipment to the Turkmen entities”.*'* It also selectively applied the presumption of
good faith and, more generally, showed compassion towards the Claimant and “inversely

proportional severity” to the Respondent.*!>

iii. Damages
With respect to the Tribunal’s damages calculation, the Respondent submits that it seriously
departed from fundamental rules of procedure by: (i) departing from the undisputed FMV

standard and (ii) discharging the Claimant of his burden of proof.*!

According to the Respondent, the application of the FMV standard to determine the
Claimant’s damages was undisputed, as clearly shown by the Parties’ written submissions.*!”

However, the Tribunal departed from this standard and adopted a novel theory based on

310 Reply, 4159.

311 Memorial, 4194; Reply, 160.

52 Reply, 4160, citing Exhibit R-111, Expert Report of Max-Peter Ratzel, pp. 7-8 and Exhibit R-44, Claimant’s Letter
to the Tribunal dated 16 September 2011

313 Reply, (161.

314 Reply, (161.

315 Memorial, (211.

316 Reply, 4182.

317 Memorial, 4199; Reply, (182-190.

61

186.

187.

188.

unfounded assumptions favouring the Claimant, which “went beyond the legal framework
established by the Parties”.*'® Notably, the Tribunal chose not to apply a discount rate,
contrary to the submissions of both Parties and their experts, yet never raised the point at the

hearing.*!

In this way, the Tribunal deprived the Respondent of the right to be heard, as it never had a
full opportunity to present its case on the Tribunal’s valuation method.*?° The Claimant’s
attempt to rebut this by arguing that his position on damages was based on “full reparation”
has no merit; the Claimant expressly stated that FMV was the “only means of compensation

which would ‘wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act””.*?!

The Respondent also argues that the Tribunal discharged the Claimant of his burden of
establishing his damages.*”? The Claimant’s failure to meet this burden is clear from a

reading of the Award. For example, he provided no:*77

- books or records of the Turkmen Companies showing the extent of his alleged interest;
- evidence of profit distributions;

- contemporaneous documents providing actual production data;

- evidence of technical results to assess productivity;

- historical data or business plans to support his price and cost estimates; or

- business plans or standard procedures.

According to the Respondent, it was therefore impossible for the Tribunal to estimate the
Farm’s production and profitability based on the record.**4 Indeed, the Tribunal

characterized the evidence as “patchy and scant”.**> Yet it proceeded to calculate and award

318 Reply, 191. See Memorial, $199.

39 Memorial, 190, citing Award, 4178.

320 Memorial, 4199.

321 Reply, 1183, citing Exhibit R-121, Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits dated 29 June 2012, 47216.
32 Memorial, 4419-193, 199; Reply, 4192-197.

33 Reply, 4193.

324 Reply, 197.

5 Reply, 1194, quoting Award, {f]172, 182.

62

189.

190.

191.

damages by seriously departing from the fundamental principle actori probatio incumbit,

warranting annulment of the Award.

2. The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s submissions relating to its request for annulment
under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, arguing that the Respondent has
“misconceived” the legal standard and failed to show any serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.*”°

Regarding the legal standard, the Claimant submits that the test for annulment under Article
52(1)(d) is a very high threshold with three elements: (i) the rule must be fundamental, (ii)
there must be a departure from that rule, and (iii) the departure must be serious.*?’ In the
Claimant’s view, the Respondent has attempted to improperly broaden the first requirement
to include a “misallocation” of the burden of proof (as opposed to its improper reversal), yet
the legal authorities which it cites offer no support for its position.*** In reality, the
Respondent’s argument in this regard is just a complaint about the Tribunal’s assessment of

evidence.*”?

With respect to the principle of equal treatment, the Claimant asserts that this standard is
very high, and that allegations of unequal treatment may be “negatived by, among other
things, the fact that the Tribunal did exclude significant sums”, as happened in the present
case.**° The Respondent’s allegations do not meet this standard and, again, are essentially

evidentiary complaints. The Respondent’s reference to the Tribunal’s purported ex aequo et

326 Counter-Memorial, 4210-292; Rejoinder, Section II; Tr. 103:21-106:1.

27 Counter-Memorial, 210, citing Exhibit CL-189, Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, Decision
on Annulment, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1, 7 January 2015, 260; Rejoinder, 41225; Tr. 103:23-104:5.

28 Rejoinder, {]227-228, discussing Exhibit CL-189, Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, Decision
on Annulment, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I, 7 January 2015, 4189 and Exhibit RL-195, Victor Pey Casado and
Foundation “President Allende” v. Republic of Chile, Decision on the Application for Annulment, ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/2, 18 December 2012, $221 et seq. See Rejoinder, fn. 456.

9 Counter-Memorial, 4215.

33 Counter-Memorial, 242, quoting Exhibit RL-152, Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/81/I, Decision on Annulment, 16 May 1986, 192.

63

bono approach as unequal treatment is equally unfounded; even if the Tribunal had assumed

such powers, that “would not per se constitute an unfair treatment of the Parties”.>*!

192. The Claimant also argues that the Respondent has attempted to limit the seriousness

requirement.?*

However, the test for a departure to be considered “serious” is twofold: first,
it “deprives a party of the benefit or protection” of a fundamental rule, and second, it leads
to “a result substantially different from what it would have awarded had said rule been
observed”.*?? The Respondent has failed to show that the Tribunal made any such serious

departure with respect to its findings on jurisdiction, liability or damages.

 

193. The Claimant contends that none of the Respondent’s arguments relating to the Decision on
Jurisdiction is persuasive.*** In fact: (i) the Tribunal applied the principle actori probatio
incumbit, (ii) there was no violation of the Respondent’s right to be heard; and (iii) the

Respondent has failed to show any unequal treatment of the Parties.**>

194. With regard to the Tribunal’s alleged failure to apply the burden of proof, the Claimant
submits that the Respondent’s allegations concerning the Participation Agreement reveal that
the Tribunal did apply the actori probatio incumbit principle.*° The Tribunal evaluated this

piece of evidence and relied on it in part for its finding of an investment, which falls well

within tribunals’ “considerable discretion” in judging the probative value of evidence.**’

195. In addition, the Claimant considers the Respondent’s allegation that the Tribunal excused

his burden of proving a contribution to the Farm “obviously wrong”.*** In fact, the Tribunal

331 Counter-Memorial, 4245.

32 Counter-Memorial, 254-261; Rejoinder, 491235-236.
333 Rejoinder, 4235.

34 Rejoinder, 4238-252.

335 Rejoinder, 4238.

336 Rejoinder, 4239.

337 Rejoinder, 41240, quoting, inter alia, Exhibit CL-169, Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, Decision on
Annulment, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/13, 10 July 2014, 234.

38 Rejoinder, 266. See Counter-Memorial, 264-273; Rejoinder, 265-273.

64

referred to evidence of such contribution in the Decision on Jurisdiction, for example when

it stated:

The Claimant’s son ... submitted a witness statement giving details of the
Claimant’s cash outlays on the Turkmen venture supporting the Claimant’s
contention that he provided initial financing for the Farm in the amount of
DM 1.8m, of which DM 1.3m were returned from the earnings of the
Farm.**?

196. Further, according to the Claimant, there is no basis for the Respondent’s argument that it
was not provided the right to be heard on “the Tribunal’s novel theory of a contractual
interest”.*“° As shown by the Respondent’s references to the hearing transcript, there was
considerable discussion in the presence of the Parties about the potential qualification of the
Claimant’s investment as a contractual interest, and that was followed by post-hearing briefs,
giving both Parties ample opportunity to present their cases on the issue.*4! In the Decision
on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal even addressed—and rejected—the Respondent’s assertion that
the Claimant had not raised the issue of a contractual interest or interest based on a joint

342

venture.’ In any case, a violation of the right to be heard in this context would not warrant

annulment, because it would not be material to the outcome; had the Tribunal not found a

contractual interest, there still would be jurisdiction based on its finding of an alternative

form of investment (moveable property).*°

197. Finally, in the Claimant’s view, the Respondent has failed to meet it burden of proof in

relation to its allegations of unequal treatment in the jurisdictional phase for three reasons:*44

339 DOJ, #82. See id., 4114.

34 Counter-Memorial, 4234 and 4284-292; Rejoinder, §f/242-246 and 274-281.
341 Rejoinder, 4242.

5 Rejoinder, 278, quoting DOJ, {104 (referring to the Respondent’s statement at the hearing: “I’ve never heard any
allegation that he had an interest based upon a joint venture agreement and not through a legal entity” and the
Claimant’s response: “counsel ... immediately referred to 115 of his Counter-Memorial, submitted some eight months
earlier, which states that ‘In essence, the farm was an informal international joint venture between two entrepreneurial
friends and their families”); Tr. 104:19-105:7.

348 Rejoinder, 44245, 246, citing DOJ, 461.

4 Rejoinder, §9247-252.

65

a) the Respondent has provided no support for its allegation that the Tribunal prejudged the
merits, and any such prejudgment could in any event not have been material to the

Tribunal’s decision regarding jurisdiction;*

b

the Respondent’s complaint of a “selective consideration of the evidentiary record” is not

a basis for annulment;*“° and

c) the Respondent’s reference to “unjustified inferences” is nothing more than an
unsupported accusation;**” it fails to show how the drawing of adverse inferences, which
would form part of the Tribunal’s unreviewable assessment of the evidence, constituted

any unequal treatment of the Parties.*4*

ii. Liability
198. With respect to the Tribunal’s finding of a contractual interest for the purpose of liability,
the Claimant states that the Respondent “raises the same allegations it raised with regard to
the Tribunal’s finding of jurisdiction” .**? He therefore refers the Committee to his response
under that heading, showing that the Tribunal neither violated the actori probatio incumbit

principle nor treated the Parties unequally.?°°

199. Concerning the right to be heard, the Claimant specifically rejects the Respondent’s
argument that it was deprived of this right with respect to the alleged forgery of the
Participation Agreement.**! Although the Respondent submits that the Tribunal refused to
consider an expert report on this issue, in fact, the Respondent “decided not to submit the

full Ratzel report in the jurisdictional phase and was satisfied to only assert the report’s

+45 Rejoinder, 248. The Claimant finds it unclear how the Tribunal’s statement that “its determination of these issues

for jurisdictional purposes does not prejudge any issues on the merits” is an admission of prejudgment, as the
Respondent suggests. /d., quoting DOJ, {86 and Reply, {[1 15.

6 Rejoinder, 4250-251.

347 Rejoinder, 4252.

348 Counter-Memorial, 4251.

49 Rejoinder, 4253.

380 Rejoinder, 4254. See supra 44185 and 187.
351 Counter-Memorial, 4100

66

200.

201.

202.

conclusion, quoted from the report”.*>? The Tribunal proceeded to consider the evidence
presented, including the conclusion of the expert report, and decide the issue, dedicating an

entire section of the Decision on Jurisdiction to the allegation of forgery.**

iii. Damages
The Claimant contends that both of the Respondent’s main allegations regarding the
Tribunal’s calculation of damages are unfounded.**+ The Tribunal in no way seriously
departed from a fundamental rule of procedure in applying what it considered the most

appropriate standard; nor did it discharge the Claimant of his burden of proving damages.

As an initial matter, the Claimant states that tribunals have wide discretion in determining
the standard by which to assess damages, and this is not subject to review in annulment
proceedings. There are numerous methods of valuation to determine full reparation, and “a
tribunal is permitted—and even obliged—to find the most appropriate method”, even if it
was not advocated by the parties.*°°

In any event, according to the Claimant, the application of FMV was not “undisputed” as the

356

Respondent claims;**° rather, the Tribunal’s decision was well within the legal framework

established by the Parties. The Claimant states his position as follows:

Relying on the Chorzow Factory case, Claimant requested compensation
that would wipe out all the consequences of Turkmenistan’s illegal act. As
explicitly acknowledged by Turkmenistan, this called for the determination
of Claimant’s actual losses. This is what the Tribunal did in line with the
Chorzow Factory standard, which Claimant had advocated.**”

352 Counter-Memorial, 112.

353 Counter-Memorial, 4107, citing DOJ, 4944-51.

354 Rejoinder, 9255-263.

355 Rejoinder, 260, citing Exhibit CL-205, Khan Resources Inc., Khan Resources B.V. and CAUC Hotding Company
Ltd. v. The Government of Mongolia and MonAtom LLC, Award, PCA Case No. 2011-09, 2 March 2015, (390 (finding
none of the three damages methodologies presented by the parties to be “wholly satisfactory” and opting for an
alternative method).

356 Counter-Memorial, 4235.

357 Rejoinder, §258, citing Exhibit CL-78, The Factory at Chorzéw (Germany v. Poland) (Claim on Indemnity,
Merits), Publications of the PCIJ, Series A, No. 17, 13 September 1928, p. 47 and Exhibit R-121, Claimant’s Memorial
on the Merits, 4216.

67

203. Regarding the Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal did not require the Claimant to prove

his damages, the Claimant submits that this, “perhaps more than any other assertion ... rests
on inaccurate factual allegations”.*** In any case, according to the Claimant, it fails on the
law. In particular, the Respondent repeatedly refers to a lack of documentary evidence, but
tribunals are free to consider other types of evidence. In this case, the Claimant provided
expert testimony as well as documentary evidence, and the Tribunal provides an extensive
analysis of the available evidence in the Award.**? Where the Tribunal found the evidence

insufficient, it rejected the Claimant’s requests for compensation.*°

3. The Committee’s Analysis

204. As summarised above, according to the Respondent, the Tribunal seriously departed from

fundamental rules of procedure in three different respects, by:

a) Misallocating the burden of proof and improperly drawing adverse inferences against the

Respondent;
b) Depriving the Respondent of its right to be heard on outcome-determinative issues; and

c) Failing to treat the Parties equally in its decision making process.*”!

205. The Respondent argues that this alleged serious departure from fundamental rules of

358,

359

360

361

362

procedure is consistent with the Tribunal’s unauthorized ex aequo et bono approach to the
dispute. It contends that the Tribunal ignored the fundamental rule of evidence “actori
probatio incumbit” and deprived the Respondent of the right to be heard regarding the
Tribunal’s purported definition of the Claimant’s investment as a “contractual interest” and

its method of assessing damages.*

Rejoinder, 262. The Claimant responds to these allegations at 44201 -223 of the Rejoinder.

Counter-Memorial, 4274-283; Rejoinder, 4263.

Tr. 102:4-103:14.

Memorial, §179.

Reply, 4101. No reference to this ground for annulment is made in Turkmenistan’s Oral Argument at the Hearing.

68

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

The Committee notes initially that the Claimant appears to agree that the rules of procedure
to which the Respondent makes reference (the principle “actori probatio incumbit”, “the
right to be heard” and “the principle of equal treatment”) may be considered “fundamental”
within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.** However, the Claimant
disputes that this category includes the alleged “misallocation” of the burden of proof, as

opposed to the improper reversal of the burden of proof.**+

The Committee sees no reason to determine in the abstract whether a “misallocation” of the
burden of proof may amount to a violation of a fundamental rule of procedure. The critical

inquiry is the impact of the alleged violation on the tribunal’s decision.**

Regarding the requirement that the departure be “serious”, the Committee concurs with the
Wena decision that “[i]Jn order to be a ‘serious’ departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure, the violation of such a rule must have caused the Tribunal to reach a result
substantially different from what it would have awarded had such a rule been observed”.*°
Each of the Respondent’s allegations regarding this ground of annulment shall be examined

in turn based on this standard for annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.

i. Jurisdiction
The Respondent asserts that the Tribunal did not respect the fundamental rule “actori
probatio incumbit” because it failed to require the Claimant to discharge the burden of proof
regarding his alleged interest, and that such failure meets the “seriousness” requirement since

it affected the outcome of the case.>°”

The Committee notes that the Respondent has claimed that the Participation Agreement was

“[t]he only document on which the Tribunal relied in support of its definition of Claimant’s

363 Reply, §]158; Counter-Memorial, 4/221; Rejoinder, 238.

364 Counter-Memorial, 4212, 221.

365 See Exhibit RL-153, Kléckner v. Republic of Cameroon, Decision on the Application for Annulment, 3 May 1985,
46.80, cited by Exhibit RL-197, Caratube International Oil Company v. Republic of Kazakhstan, Decision on
Annulment, 21 February 2014, 497.

366 Exhibit CL-157, Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on
Application for Annulment, 28 January 2002, 458.

367 Memorial, 186; Reply, 159.

69

211.

212.

alleged investment”.* As made clear in the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal mainly
relied on the Participation Agreement to found its definition of the Claimant’s investment
for purposes of jurisdiction.* As correctly observed by the Claimant, having based its
decision on this piece of evidence, the Tribunal “effectively applied the actori probatio
incumbit principle”*”° The Committee agrees that the Tribunal’s reliance on the
Participation Agreement shows that it did not release the Claimant from his burden of proof

regarding jurisdiction.

Furthermore, the Participation Agreement was not the only evidence produced by the
Claimant to establish jurisdiction. As indicated by the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal
relied on a record that “leaves no room for doubt”, including the uncontested testimonial
evidence of Ambassador Mondorf, Mr. Geiselhart, the Claimant himself and the Claimant’s
son, Volkan Dogan. The Tribunal relied also on the Respondent’s express recognition that
the Claimant was an investor under the BIT, in essence accepting the Claimant’s argument
that the Respondent was accordingly estopped from denying Mr. Dogan’s investor status.>”!
The Tribunal also determined that the evidence pointed “to the Claimant as a true participant
in contributing financially and by other means to the establishment and operation of the
Farm”.>” It was in light of this evidence that the Tribunal, in the Award, confirmed
jurisdiction regarding specifically the Claimant’s acquisition of an interest in the business of

the Farm373

Both the Decision on Jurisdiction and the Award clearly indicate that the Tribunal’s decision
was founded on the evidence, even as it recognized the limitations of the record. Thus, in the

Award, the Tribunal mentioned that the record had not benefited from contributions from

368 Reply, 104.

3 DOJ, 4107.

5 Rejoinder, 4239.

311 DOJ, 4155-161.

32 DOJ, 4125. See also Award, 4181.
33 Award, 181.

70

213.

214.

215.

the Government, and stated: “we are compelled ... to weigh such limited evidence as has

been put before us”.>4

In the Committee’s view, the Respondent’s allegations that the Tribunal reversed the burden

of proof and drew adverse inferences against it*”>

are unsubstantiated. What the Respondent
characterizes as a reversal of the burden of proof is only the expression of the Tribunal’s
regret, as shown by its use in the Award of the word “unfortunately”, for not having received
from the Respondent any explanations or other contributions, even by way of rebuttal
evidence, to help it better establish the facts of the case.*”° Where the Tribunal mentions
drawing certain inferences against the Respondent, they are made not in lieu of evidence

before it but rather to corroborate the evidence on which it has relied.>””

The Committee shall not review the probative value attributed by the Tribunal to the
evidence on which it has relied to reach its Decision on Jurisdiction. This is a matter of
appreciation and evaluation of evidence. It is repetitious to observe that it is beyond the
mandate of this Committee to revisit the conclusions reached by the Tribunal in such matters,
considering that it is not acting as an appellate body. This applies in particular to the
Respondent’s reference to the Participation Agreement being “unauthentic”, “backdated”
and “recreated”,>’* and to its allegation that the Tribunal refused to consider the evidence
regarding the forgery of the Participation Agreement.*” It equally applies to the allegation
that the Tribunal ignored evidence establishing that the Claimant was a seller of poultry
equipment to Séhrat-Anna and Samsyt, not an investor (including the Claimant’s own

testimony before the Turkmen courts stating that he was a seller of equipment).>*°

Without going into the details of the Tribunal’s assessment of the evidence, the Committee

is of the view that the Tribunal duly considered the above issues in the light of the available

4 Award, {182.

55 Memorial, 132; Reply, 4157.

5% DOJ, 4450, 83, 126; Award, 4181-182.
377 DOJ, 484; Award, 4481, 194.

58 Reply, 4160.

59 Reply, 160.

380 Reply, 89.

71

216.

217.

218.

evidence. The Tribunal identified the evidence it considered relevant to reject the allegation
of forgery of the Participation Agreement,**! found that the Claimant had financed the
equipment for the Farm and was not a seller of the same,*** and examined the different

position that the Claimant had taken before the Turkmen courts.***

The Respondent also argued that it was deprived of its right to be heard because the Tribunal
failed to give the Respondent an opportunity to present its case with respect to the “novel”
theory of the Claimant’s investment as a contractual interest.**+ This argument has no basis
in view of the fact that, as stated in the Decision on Jurisdiction, this issue was the subject

385 and was also addressed in the

of debate “as late as the hearing [on jurisdiction]
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief.**° Therefore, the Respondent cannot complain that it was
given no opportunity to address this issue or that its right to be heard in that regard was

violated.

The Respondent’s allegations of “unequal treatment” of the Parties and prejudgment of the
merits are unsubstantiated. These again appear to be based on the Tribunal’s appreciation
and evaluation of the evidence. Likewise, the drawing of adverse inferences from the conduct
of the Respondent and its failure to produce relevant evidence in its possession formed a part
of the Tribunal’s appreciation and evaluation of evidence and is outside the Committee’s

power of review.

ii. Liability
The Respondent’s grievances regarding the finding of jurisdiction extend to the Tribunal’s
finding of liability at the merits stage. They appear to repeat arguments raised in connection
with the Tribunal’s finding of jurisdiction. Therefore, the Committee considers to have

already expressed its position regarding the various issues raised by the Respondent.**”

381 DOJ, 4444-51; Award, 115.

382 DOJ, 4460, 76, 82-83.

383 DOJ, 497.

384 Memorial, 4195.

385 DOJ, 4104-105.

386 Counter-Memorial, {| 286- 289; supra, 196.
387 See supra, Section IV.B.3.i.

72

219.

220.

388 See supra, Section IV.A.3.iii

Accordingly, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not seriously depart from a

fundamental rule of procedure in reaching its decision on liability.

iii. Damages
With regard to the finding of damages, the Respondent repeats arguments raised with regard
to its contention that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in awarding damages. The
Committee has already expressed its position in this regard.*** In respect of the Respondent’s
contention that it was deprived of the right to be heard regarding the Tribunal’s alleged
departure from FMV and adoption of a “novel” valuation method, the Committee notes that,
as may be gathered from the file of these proceedings, the Respondent was aware of the
Claimant’s position and had the opportunity to argue against it. In any case, the Tribunal was
not bound, either by the terms of the BIT or any agreement between the Parties, to apply a
specific method of valuation. The Tribunal was entitled to apply the most appropriate method
of valuation in the given facts and circumstances. Regarding the Respondent’s specific
allegation that the Tribunal did not apply a discount rate contrary to the Parties’ and their

experts’ submissions, **?

the Committee notes the clear reasoning in the Award regarding this
issue: “there is no issue of determining an appropriate discount rate for purposes of
establishing the present value of future profits; all profits that were lost are in the past”.*°° A
discount rate is usually applied to future streams of income. In this case, as the Tribunal
rightly noted, all profits that were lost were in the past, i.e., up to 2011. Not applying a
discount rate in this case, therefore, made good sense. Further, even if this were not the case,
the failure to apply a discount rate does not amount to serious departure from a fundamental

tule of procedure.

In conclusion, the Respondent’s request for annulment of the Award on the ground of a

serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure is rejected.

 

38 Reply, 190.
3 Award, 4178.

73

221.

C. FAILURE TO STATE REASONS

1. The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent seeks annulment of the Award in its entirety on the basis of Article 52(1)(e)
of the ICSID Convention (“that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is
based”), arguing that the Tribunal’s use of unauthorized ex aequo et bono powers resulted
in the Tribunal manifestly failing to state reasons, or providing insufficient or contradictory

reasons for a number of its findings on outcome-determinative issues.*?!

222. The Respondent states in the Reply that “the Parties appear to generally agree” on the legal

standard under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.*” In particular, both Parties have
endorsed the statement of the ad hoc Committee in MINE v. Guinea that “the requirement
to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal
proceeded from Point A to Point B, and eventually to its conclusion”.* According to the
Respondent, this obligation to state reasons flows from Article 48(3) of the ICSID
Convention,** and an award will fall short if there is: an absence of reasons on an issue,
insufficient or inadequate reasons on an issue, contradictory reasons, or a failure to deal with

a question.*?>

223. The Respondent accepts the Claimant’s view that tribunals are not bound to respond to each

391

392

393

and every argument put forth by the parties, but they must address “issues that are material
to the Tribunal’s reasoning”, and “a failure to deal with a question or an issue which affects
the Tribunal’s conclusions is a ground for annulment.”**° According to the Respondent, it
has identified specific points material to the Tribunal’s decisions on jurisdiction, liability and

quantum, for which the Tribunal has failed to state reasons.

Memorial, Section IV; Reply, Sections IV.A.3, B.3 and C.3; Tr. 56:9-65:6.

Reply, 4[120. See Tr. 56:11-17.
Reply, 4120, quoting Exhibit RL-154, Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea,

ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment, 14 December 1989, 45.09.

5% Article 48(3) states: “The award shall deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the reasons
upon which it is based”.

395

396

Memorial, 4214-222; Reply, 431; Tr. 56:18-21.
Reply, 4433, 120.

74

224.

225.

226.

i. Jurisdiction

With respect to the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal failed
to state reasons, or provided contradictory reasons, on five main issues, and that the Claimant
has not been able to point to any sentence in the Decision on Jurisdiction providing these

missing reasons.°”

First, the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its finding of an investment in the form of
movable property, as it did not identify the movable property or how it was allegedly

contributed.>°

While the Tribunal implies that it was poultry equipment, it never points to
such equipment or references any specific piece of evidence, which makes it impossible for
the reader to understand how the Tribunal reached the conclusion that the Claimant
contributed movable property.*”? In addition, the Tribunal contradicted its finding on
jurisdiction in the Award when it determined that the equipment was owned by the Turkmen

companies, not the Claimant.*°

Second, the Tribunal failed to explain how it was able to find an investment in the form of a
“contractual interest in the Turkmen entities” without being able to identify the payment of
any contribution from the Claimant to those companies.**! In particular, the Tribunal
expressly relied primarily on the Participation Agreement as a basis for its finding, but it
never identified any evidence of the contribution of DM 500,000 that the Participation
Agreement required the Claimant to make or explained how it found that the Claimant had
made this contribution in the absence of such evidence.*”* The Claimant’s arguments on this
point are misplaced and in any event “would not cure a posteriori the Tribunal’s failure to

state reasons in its Decision on Jurisdiction”.4

397 Reply, 4121.

38 Memorial, 225; Reply, 4123.

3° Memorial, 225; Reply, 4123.

40 Reply, 4163, citing Award, 44109, 167.
401 Memorial, 4226; Reply, 4124.

402 Memorial, 4226; Reply, 4124.

463 Reply, 4124.

75

227.

228.

229.

230.

Third, the Tribunal stated no reasons for “entirely disregarding the sales agreements and the
747 account statement showing that Dogan was not an investor but a mere seller of
equipment to the Turkmen entities”.* This issue is material to the outcome of the Decision
on Jurisdiction, as a sales transaction cannot be a basis of ICSID jurisdiction, yet the Decision

contains no reference to any sales agreement in the record.*°°

Fourth, the Tribunal did not state reasons for its statement that “[i]t is not apparent that [the
Participation Agreement] was designed to assist in a fraudulent manner in bolstering ICSID
jurisdiction,” and that “nothing ... seems to turn on the date of the signature of the
Participation Agreement.”*°° Even if one can consider the Tribunal’s “vague observations”
in this regard as reasons, they contradict other findings by the Tribunal, such as its statement
that the Participation Agreement “is important to the issue of jurisdiction, since the Claimant

relies upon it as evidence of the reality, nature and extent of his investment”.*””

Finally, the Tribunal failed to state reasons for finding that it was irrelevant to determine
whether the structure of the Claimant’s alleged investment in the form of a “contractual
interest” was in conformity with Turkmen law, in light of Articles 2 and 9 of the BIT, and

2(a) of the Protocol.*°*

ii. Liability
The Respondent argues that “the Tribunal’s failure to state reasons for its finding of an
investment at the jurisdictional stage manifestly extended to the merits”.*” According to the
Respondent, the Tribunal’s reasons for finding a “contractual interest” as the basis for

liability are “simply impossible to follow’.*!® Similar to its submissions regarding

404 Memorial, 227; Reply, 4125.
405 Memorial, 227; Reply, 4125.
406 Memorial, 4228; Reply, $16, quoting DOJ, 449-50.

407 Reply, $126, quoting Award, 90. The Respondent also argues that the Tribunal contradicted i

 

elf by finding it

“difficult to imagine” that the Claimant could have foreseen ICSID arbitration at the time the Participation Agreement
was recreated while also finding, inter alia, that the Respondent was on notice that the Claimant was a foreign investor
for the purposes of the BIT: Reply, 4126.

408 Memorial, 229; Reply, 4127, citing DOJ, 41118.
409 Reply, 4162.
410 Memorial, 4237.

76

231.

232.

233.

234.

235.

jurisdiction, the Respondent points to five issues on which the Tribunal allegedly failed to

state reasons in the Award.4!!

First, in the Award, the Tribunal failed to state reasons for apparently having abandoned the
conclusion reached in the Decision on Jurisdiction that the Claimant made an investment in

the form of “movable property”.4!”

Second, the Tribunal provided no reasons for adding in the Award another alternative basis
for the Claimant’s investment under Article 1(c) of the BIT (“claims to money which has
been used to create an economic value”).*!? The Tribunal never addressed the issue or

explained this broadening of potential bases of jurisdiction.

Third, the Award contains no reasons for the Tribunal’s conclusion that the backdating and
“recreation” from an “old notebook” of the main document submitted by the Claimant in
support of his alleged interest in the Farm was “incidental” and “immaterial to [its]
decision.”*!4 Further, as discussed above, the Tribunal provided contradictory reasons on

this point.

Fourth, the Tribunal continued to ignore evidence showing that the Claimant was a seller of
equipment.*"* Indeed, it is impossible to understand the Tribunal’s handling of the evidence;
“a startling feature of the Award [is that it] contains no citations to the record”.*!°

Fifth, the Tribunal never addressed the conformity of the Claimant’s alleged interest with

Turkmen law, despite indicating in the Decision on Jurisdiction the relevance of this issue

to liability.4!”

411 Memorial, 4231-237; Reply, 4162-169.

412 Memorial, 4232; Reply, 4163.

413 Memorial, 233; Reply, 4164.

414 Memorial, 4234; Reply, 4165, quoting Award, 49.
415 Memorial, 235; Reply, 4168.

416 Memorial, 4236.

417 Memorial, 4236, citing DOS, 118.

77

236.

237.

238.

More generally, the Respondent takes the position, set forth in particular at the Hearing, that
the Tribunal’s whole finding that the Claimant made a protected investment is impossible to
follow from point A to point B, and that this deficiency is evident from reading paragraphs
105 to 129 of the Award.*!® There, the Tribunal concludes that “the Claimant’s investment
is covered under any of the first three broad definitions of the term ‘investment””.*!?
However, the Tribunal does not in fact apply any of those definitions. In particular, the
Tribunal: (i) never attempts to show how the Claimant’s “contractual interest” could fall
under the first definition (moveable property); (ii) expressly recognizes that the Claimant
has no “formal entitlements in any legal entity, such as shareholding”, meaning that he could
not have an investment under the second definition (shares of companies or other kinds of
company interests); and (iii) never even discusses the application of the third definition
(claims to money which has been used to create economic value).*”°
iii. Damages

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal’s calculation of damages is opaque and
contradictory, amounting to a failure to state reasons under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID

Convention.*?! The Respondent advances a number of related criticisms in this regard.

First, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal contradicted itself by acknowledging “the
manifest insufficiency of the Claimant’s documentary record and the limited evidence he

has seemingly been able to cobble together”

and then proceeding to award the Claimant
damages for what the Farm “would have been worth [to him] in the absence of any breach

of the Treaty”.*?? The Tribunal also provided contradictory reasons by repeatedly stating that

418 Tr, 57:6-62:1 and Tr. 119:19-121:6.

419 Tr, 59:18-22,

20 Tr, 58:16-59:22.

421 Memorial, 4238-244; Reply, 9198-204; Tr. 62:2-64:23.
22 Award, 179.

23 Reply, 199, quoting Award, 181.

78

239.

240.

241.

242.

it was reducing the Claimant’s recovery for a lack of evidence, but then calculating damages

based on an artificial, idealistic scenario.*”*

According to the Respondent, the Tribunal constructs this scenario without explanation.*”>

In particular, it did not explain how it could award damages while recognizing that the
Claimant’s “entitlement would depend to a significant degree on the good will of the

Gurbannazarovs”.*”°

In addition, the Respondent asserts that the Tribunal “fails to state adequate reasons for
departing from the application of the fair market value standard”, upon which the Parties and
their respective damage experts had agreed.*”’ Indeed, the Tribunal offered contradictory
reasons when it rejected the FMV standard for lack of sufficient evidence to assign value to
the Claimant’s investment, and then applied its own artificial valuation method not supported
by evidence.*** In a similar situation, the ad hoc Committee in MINE v. Guinea found the
tribunal’s decision on quantum “inconsistent and in contradiction with its analysis of

damages theories” and annulled the award.*??

In the Respondent’s view, the Tribunal also contradicted itself by criticising and disregarding
the approach of the Claimant’s expert for relying on production assumptions in management

guides, while adopting at the same time exactly the same approach.*°

Finally, the Respondent asserts that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its improper

allocation of the burden of proof of damages.**!

4 Reply, 4202.

25 Memorial, 239; Reply, 4200.

426 Memorial, (239; Reply, 200, quoting Award, $183.

27 Memorial, 4240.

28 Reply, 4200.

29 Reply, 200, quoting Exhibit RL-154, Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea,
ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment, 14 December 1989, {6.107 (“Having concluded that theories
“y” and “Z” were unusable because of their speculative character, the Tribunal could not, without contradicting itself,
adopt a “damages theory” which disregarded the real situation and relied on hypotheses which the Tribunal itself had
rejected as a basis for the calculation of damages”).

430 Memorial, (241; Reply, 4201.

431 Memorial, 4242.

79

243.

244.

245.

2. The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant contends that the Respondent has failed to establish any basis for annulment
of the Award pursuant to Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.*? The Tribunal
understood and expressly acknowledged its obligation to state reasons, and it did in fact

provide reasons for each decision that was essential to the outcome of the case.**3

Regarding the legal standard, the Claimant submits that the threshold for finding a failure to
state reasons is “very high”, as confirmed by other ad hoc committees, and that such a failure
must relate to a point essential to the outcome of the case.*** Furthermore, an ad hoc
committee should not annul an award if it “can ‘explain’ the Award by clarifying reasons
that seemed absent because they were only implicit”.*** In the Rejoinder, the Claimant notes
that that the Respondent did “not contest much of Claimant’s assessment of the legal
standard”.4°°

However, according to the Claimant, the Respondent made certain additional, misleading
submissions concerning the applicable standard. In particular, there is no support for the
Respondent’s assertion that insufficient or inadequate reasons can warrant annulment; it is
widely accepted that ad hoc committees are barred from reviewing the sufficiency,
adequacy, quality or persuasiveness of arbitral tribunals’ reasoning.**” In addition, contrary

to the Respondent’s submission, a tribunal is not required to deal with every “issue which

+82 Counter-Memorial, 4293-358; Rejoinder, Section III; Tr. 106:2-111:1.

+33 Counter-Memorial, 4296, citing Award, 49.

434 Counter-Memorial, 293-300; Rejoinder, 289, quoting Exhibit CL-169, Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of
Turkey, Decision on Annulment, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/13, July 10, 2014, 4202.

435 Rejoinder, 4290, quoting Exhibit RL-155, Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, (CSID Case No.
ARB/02/7, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, June 5, 2007, 424.

436 Rejoinder, 289.

437 Counter-Memorial, ]323-334; Rejoinder, 292, citing Exhibit RL-154, Maritime International Nominees
Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, \CSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment, 14 December 1989, $5.08
(“The adequacy of the reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review under paragraph (1)(e), because it almost
inevitably draws an ad hoc Committee into an examination of the substance of the tribunal’s decision...).

80

246.

247.

248.

affects the Tribunal’s conclusions”.*** Rather, Article 52(1)(e) applies only to “crucial or

decisive” issues.*?

In any event, the Claimant contends that the Respondent has not established that the
Tribunal’s reasoning falls below the minimum standard of a failure to state reasons.” In its
submissions, the Respondent ignores the Tribunal’s evidentiary discretion and seeks to
reopen the merits of the arbitration, which is entirely inappropriate for an annulment
proceeding.*#! According to the Claimant, the Tribunal has incorrectly applied the standard
for a failure to state reasons with regard to its submission on jurisdiction, liability and

quantum.*4?

i. Jurisdiction

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s claim that the Tribunal failed to state reasons with
respect to five issues in the Decision on Jurisdiction. According to the Claimant, the
Respondent’s criticisms actually underscore that the Tribunal dealt with all of the questions
submitted—just not in the way the Respondent would have preferred.*#* In any case, the
Respondent fails to show why any of the issues it raises would qualify as a “question” within
the meaning of Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention, let alone as a decisive argument
altering the Tribunal’s conclusions.*#* Thus, the Claimant asserts that each of the

Respondent’s arguments has no merit.

First, with regard to the finding of an investment in the form of movable property, the
Respondent undermines its own allegation that the Tribunal failed to identify the moveable
property by stating that “it is implied in the Decision on Jurisdiction that the ‘moveable

property’ was poultry equipment.”##5 The Respondent then impermissibly attempts to

+38 Rejoinder, 297, quoting Reply, 33.

+89 Rejoinder, 297.

+40 Counter-Memorial, 4304.

44 Counter-Memorial, 9305-322.

482 Rejoinder, 4299-339.

48 Rejoinder, $304; Tr. 106:16-22.

+ Counter-Memorial, §301-303.

+45 Rejoinder, 304, quoting Reply, 4123; Tr. 106:16-22.

81

249.

250.

251.

replace the standard for a “failure to state reasons” with a failure to point to “any specific
piece of evidence”.**° In fact, the Tribunal “virtually takes the reader by the hand”,
explaining that the existence of Western poultry equipment had been established and that the
Claimant financed and procured this equipment for the Farm.*#’ Thus, contrary to the
Respondent’s assertion, the Tribunal’s statement in the Award that the equipment was owned

by the Turkmen companies is a confirmation, not a contradiction, of this finding.**

Second, the Respondent’s allegation that the Tribunal failed to identify any contribution
from the Claimant to the business is unfounded because, in fact, “the Tribunal explained step
by step how and from which facts it concluded that Claimant had contributed to the Farm
and had thus made an investment”.**? Even if the Tribunal somehow erred in its reasoning,

there would be no ground for annulment.

Third, regarding the evidence purportedly showing that the Claimant was a seller, the
Respondent’s argument is “misleading and irrelevant”.**° The Tribunal determined on the
basis of the record that Claimant was an investor on various alternative bases, and the
Respondent has not shown how a finding that the Claimant was a salesman would have
changed that conclusion.**! Notably, the Respondent did not submit the 747 account
statements during the jurisdictional phase and thus cannot criticise the Tribunal for ignoring

them.

Fourth, the Respondent’s arguments concerning the Participation Agreement are

contradicted by the clear wording of the Decision on Jurisdiction, in which the Tribunal set

446 Rejoinder, 305, quoting Reply, 4123.
447 Rejoinder, 4307. See Tr. 107:6-24.

+48 Rejoinder, $]309-312, citing DOJ, 101. According to the Claimant, the Tribunal clearly determined that $ohrat-
Anna was the formal buyer and owner of the equipment which the Claimant supplied and financed.

49 Rejoinder, 4315.
450 Rejoinder, 4316-317. See Tr. 108:7-20.
451 Rejoinder, 4317.

82

252.

253.

254.

255.

out “a number of reasons” for determining that it was not “designed to assist in a fraudulent

manner in bolstering ICSID jurisdiction”.4>

Finally and similarly, the Tribunal did not fail to address Turkmen law in the Decision on

Jurisdiction; indeed, it provided clear reasoning.***

ii. Liability
The Claimant contends that the Respondent has shown no failure by the Tribunal to state
reasons for any of its findings on liability.#** He considers the Respondent’s arguments a
“repetition” of those relating to jurisdiction and refers the Committee to his response under
that heading.**> With each issue, the Respondent’s allegation of a failure to state reasons

amounts to nothing more than a criticism of the Tribunal’s evaluation of the evidence.

The Claimant specifically rejects the Respondent’s assertion that the Tribunal failed to state
reasons when it added a third basis of jurisdiction in the Award. According to the Claimant,
this decision was “clearly based ... on the extensive discussion [at the Hearing on
Jurisdiction] of Claimant’s investment and in particular on Claimant’s investment as a
possible ‘claim to money””.**° In any event, the Respondent has not demonstrated how the
Tribunal’s conclusion would have been different had it not included this third basis of

jurisdiction.*57

The Claimant further submits that in the Award the Tribunal offered a step-by-step

assessment of the evidence in finding that the Claimant had a contractual interest in the

452 Rejoinder, 4431 8-321, quoting DOJ, 449; Tr. 108:21-109:4. The Claimant also argues that there is no contradiction
between the Tribunal considering it “difficult to imagine” that the Claimant could have foreseen ICSID arbitration at
the time the Participation Agreement was recreated and its findings on other matters. In the Award, the Tribunal
explained that if the Claimant was trying to bolster ICSID jurisdiction “it would have been more plausible for [him]
to have done so many years earlier; the Treaty was on the table and referred to explicitly by German officials from
2002 onwards”. Rejoinder, 282-287, quoting Award, 4116.

453 Rejoinder, 4322, citing DOJ, 4118; Tr. 109:5-21.

454 Rejoinder, §9323-332.

455 Rejoinder, 4324.

456 Rejoinder, 4325, citing Exhibit C-221, Transcript of Hearing on Jurisdiction, 28 July 2011, 74:21-23.

457 Rejoinder, 9325.

83

25

25

258.

6.

7.

oo

income stream of the Farm, leaving no room to argue that the Tribunal failed to state reasons
in this regard.*°*

iii. Damages
The Claimant contends that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons for the damages
awarded. The Respondent’s arguments relate to its view of the sufficiency and adequacy of
the reasoning, which is not subject to review in annulment proceedings.**? Further, the
Respondent repeatedly refers to “contradictory reasons” without indicating how the
purported contradictions make it impossible to follow the Award’s reasoning or how they
would have altered the outcome, as required for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the
Convention.*” In any case, the Respondent “fails to distinguish between genuine
contradictions in the Tribunal’s reasoning and mere reflections on conflicting

considerations”.*°!

In particular, the Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal’s reference to “the manifest
insufficiency of the Claimant’s documentary record” is somehow contradictory to its
decision is wrong. In fact, “the Tribunal proceeded to determine Claimant’s damages in a
well-reasoned manner, enabling the reader to follow its reasoning step by step”.* In any
case, this argument is irrelevant for the purpose of annulment, and reflects nothing more than

the Respondent’s dissatisfaction with the damages awarded.*°

Similarly, the Claimant asserts that the Tribunal did not contradict itself when it decided not
to base its valuation on what a third party would pay for the Claimant’s interest. The
Respondent’s argument in this regard is based on the false premise that the Tribunal decided

that there was insufficient evidence to determine FMV. In fact, the Tribunal found that FMV

458 Rejoinder, 4326, citing Award, 4109 et seq.

459 Rejoinder, 4331-332. See Counter-Memorial, 9323-334.
460 Reply, $9]200-202.

461 Counter-Memorial, 4340.

462 Rejoinder, 4333.

463 Rejoinder, 4333.

84

259.

260.

261.

was not the applicable standard and adopted one that was more appropriate for calculating

the Claimant’s actual losses.*™

The Claimant submits that there is also no merit to the Respondent’s assertion that the
Tribunal contradicted itself by criticising an expert’s reliance on the management guides and
then adopting that same approach.**> At most, this could be an example of conflicting
considerations, as a “tribunal might well find objectionable details in a certain approach but
nonetheless follow it, especially if it is left with no other or better approach”.*” In any case,
the Tribunal did not in fact follow the exact same approach because it relied primarily on the

testimony of the Claimant’s expert Mr. Geiselhart regarding the production figures.”

According to the Claimant, the Respondent similarly attempts to “fabricate a contradiction
that is simply non-existent” regarding the Tribunal’s statements explaining that it was
reducing the Claimant’s recovery for lack of evidence.*°* The Respondent considers this
contradictory to the Tribunal’s own calculation based on “idealistic assumptions and optimal
production figures”, but this characterisation of the Tribunal’s methodology has been shown
to be false.*” The Tribunal did in fact deny the Claimant’s recovery where it considered the
available evidence to be insufficient. It also clearly applied the actori probatio incumbit

principle in determining damages, contrary to the Respondent's false allegations.*”

3. The Committee’s Analysis

The Parties are generally in agreement on the legal standard applicable to this ground for
annulment contained in Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. Both refer to the standard
laid down by the ad hoc Committee in MINE v. Guinea pursuant to which “the requirement

to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal

464 Rejoinder, 334.

465 Counter-Memorial, 4340; Rejoinder, 4335-336; Tr. 109:25-110:12.
466 Counter-Memorial, 4340.

467 Rejoinder, 4335.

468 Rejoinder, 4338.

469 Rejoinder, 4337.

470 Rejoinder, 4339.

85

proceeded from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion”.47! The Alapli
Committee referring to the criteria in MINE observed: “In other words, what a committee is
authorized to verify under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention is whether the sequence
of arguments within an award evidences a logical chain of reasoning that is apt to lead to a

conclusion that was reached by the tribunal”.4””

262. The Parties appear also to agree that a tribunal is not bound to give reasons for every single
argument put forward by the parties. According to the Respondent, reasons are to be
provided “for decisions on issues that are material to the Tribunal’s reasoning, without which
the reader would not be in a position to follow the tribunal’s reasoning from A to B”.47? The
Claimant relies on the decision of the ad hoc Committee in Alapli v. Turkey, which, after
stating that the threshold for this ground of annulment is very high, held that “the Applicant
bears the burden of proving that the Tribunal’s reasoning on a point which is essential to the

outcome of the case was either unintelligible or contradictory or frivolous or absent”.44

263. The Committee concurs with the above description of the requirement to state reasons. It
shares the view that the need to give reasons applies only to issues essential to the outcome
of the case. It further considers that the “sufficiency and adequacy” of reasons is not what is
required under Article 52(1)(e); as held by another ad hoc committee, the ground “is the
failure to state reasons, not if these were inadequate or insufficient”.*’> Finally, the
Committee adopts the statement of the ad hoc Committee in Wena that “[t]he Tribunal’s
reasons may be implicit in the considerations and conclusions contained in the award,

provided they can be reasonably inferred from the terms used in the decision”.*”° This,

47 Counter-Memorial, §294; Reply, §]120, quoting Exhibit RL-154, Maritime International Nominees Establishment
v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment, 14 December 1989, 5.09.

4 Exhibit CL-169, Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/13, Decision on Annulment,
10 July 2014, 4199.

473 Reply, 120.

44 Counter-Memorial, $295, quoting Exhibit CL-169, Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/13, Decision on Annulment, 10 July 2014, 4202.

475 Exhibit CL-171, El Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine Republic, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the Application for Annulment, 22 September 2014, 1235.

476 Exhibit CL-157, Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on
Application for Annulment, 28 January 2002, 481.

86

264.

265.

266.

however, is subject to the caveat that “if non-stated reasons do not necessarily follow or flow
from the award’s reasoning, an ad hoc committee should not construct reasons in order to

justify the decision of the tribunal”.*””

As explained below, the Committee is of the view that the Respondent has not proven that
the Tribunal failed to state reasons essential to the outcome of the case regarding its decisions
on jurisdiction, liability or damages according to the requirements of this ground for

annulment outlined above.

i. Jurisdiction

The Committee has already found that the Tribunal’s reasoning related to its finding of an
investment in the form of a contractual interest under Article 1(1)(b) was developed in light
of both the available evidence and the applicable law, including Turkmen law. In particular,
the Tribunal properly stated the reasons for each important step in its decision making
process based on its interpretation of the Participation Agreement,*’* the testimonial
evidence of Ambassador Mondorf and Mr. Geiselhart and, more generally, “[aJll the
evidence, such as it is, [that] points to the Claimant as true participant in contributing
financially and by other means to the establishment and operation of the Farm’”.*” It also
offered extensive reasoning regarding the conformity of the investment with Turkmen

law.480

The Tribunal stated reasons regarding the Claimant’s financial contribution to the Farm,
most notably by explaining that the Claimant and Mr. Gurbannazarov negotiated for the
purchase of some DM 1.8 million worth of equipment from Big Dutchman in early 1999.
Although he acted on behalf of $éhrat-Anna as the buyer, the Claimant was paying the

purchase price, as confirmed by a letter from Big Dutchman.**!

477 Exhibit CL-172, Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of
Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee, 25 March 2010, 483.

478 DOJ, 9 92-94.
4 DOS, 4125.

480 DOJ, Section 7.3.
481 DOJ, F101.

87

267.

268.

269.

The Committee does not accept the Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal failed to
consider how the Claimant satisfied the condition in the Participation Agreement that he
make a DM 500,000 contribution.**? According to the Tribunal, the first capital contribution
was to be in the amount of DM 500,000, giving a right of priority over the first DM 500,000
of income. The Tribunal found that this right was counterbalanced by a reduction to a 30%
participation, which at an earlier stage had been envisaged as based on a 50:50 split.4*? In
the underlying arbitration, the Respondent complained that the Claimant had not produced
adequate documentary evidence of contributions to $dhrat-Anna, and the Tribunal dealt with
this contention directly, listing the evidence produced and finding that it was sufficient to

found jurisdiction.**+

The Tribunal confirmed in the Award that S$éhrat-Anna was the owner of the equipment.**>

Contrary to the Respondent’s argument, there was no contradiction in the Tribunal’s
reasoning: that $éhrat-Anna owned the equipment follows from the Tribunal’s finding in the
Decision on Jurisdiction that the Claimant was not a seller of the equipment, but procured

and financed it for the Farm.**°

As to the Respondent’s arguments that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for finding an
investment under Article 1(1)(a) and for adding the alternative basis for the Claimant’s
investment under Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT, the Committee is of the view that even if the
Tribunal failed to state the reasons for the application of these subparagraphs, the outcome
of the case would not be altered in light of the Tribunal’s appropriate reliance also on Article
1(1)(b) to found jurisdiction in the Decision on Jurisdiction.4*’ As noted above, the
Committee has concluded that the finding of the Tribunal that the Claimant made an

investment under Article 1(1)(b) cannot be annulled. A discussion on whether the Claimant

482 Similarly, and for the same reasons, the Committee rejects the Respondent’s arguments that the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers and departed from a fundamental rule of procedure by not requiring the Claimant to prove that
he had made this DM 500,000 contribution.

483 DOJ, 493. The Participation Agreement refers to DM 500,000 as “The Claimant's ‘first’ capital contribution”.
484 DOJ, 114.

485 Award, 167.

486 DOJ, 4960, 76, 82, 125.

487 Supra, 49123, 265.

88

270.

271.

had also made an investment under Article 1(1)(c) and whether the finding of the Tribunal
in that regard was based on reasons would, therefore, be superfluous. It would not affect the
outcome of this decision. Therefore, applying the principle that the duty to give reasons

488

applies only to issues essential to the outcome of the case,*** the Committee must dismiss

the Respondent’s arguments.

ii. Liability
Regarding the Respondent’s allegation that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for certain of
its conclusions on liability, the Committee refers to its analysis concerning similar
allegations made with regard to the Tribunal’s finding of jurisdiction. As just explained, the
Decision on Jurisdiction and the Award express the Tribunal’s reasons for finding that the
Claimant had a qualifying investment and was not a seller of equipment.**? The Tribunal
also set forth reasons for its decision that the Respondent breached the BIT’s provisions
regarding expropriation?” and fair and equitable treatment*?! based on the testimony of
Ambassador Mondorf and other witnesses, additional documentary evidence and the
evaluation of the facts. On the essential points, the Tribunal’s reasons were clearly developed

on the basis of a critical review of the evidence and factual circumstances.

Based on the conclusion that the Claimant had a contractual entitlement to a portion of the
profits of Séhrat-Anna as counterpart of his contribution to the Farm’s business, the Tribunal
stated that this entitlement “was susceptible to diminution in value as direct result of the acts
of the Government”.* Having found liability, the Tribunal pointed to the existence of the
causal link with the damage resulting from the diminution in value of the Claimant’s
investment. The Committee is of the view that no further explanation had to be given by the
Tribunal for awarding damages for “an entitlement [that] would depend to a significant

degree on the good will of the Gurbannozarovs”, as contended by the Respondent,*”? once

488 Supra 4§262-263.
489 Supra, 9265-268.
490 Award, §§130-136.
1 Award, (9137-161.
2 Award, 9129.

3 Supra, 4239.

89

zB

both the entitlement and the economic prejudice due to the Respondent’s breaches of the

BIT had been found.

iii. Damages
. There is no contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning for the finding of damages. Having
determined that the Claimant’s investment was in the form of a contractual interest in the
Farm’s profits, the Tribunal proceeded to assess the compensation owed to the Claimant for
the deprivation of that interest by expropriation and for the Respondent’s violation of its

obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimant’s investment.

. The reasons leading the Tribunal to apply the Chorzéw Factory standard for damage
assessment were clearly explained by the Tribunal, as already analysed by the Committee
regarding the ground of manifest excess of powers.** The process followed for such
assessment is set forth in over 50 pages of the Award in a reasoned manner, based primarily
on experts’ testimony; testimony which is critically reviewed.*”> The reader is able to follow

the path of the Tribunal’s reasoning from Point A to Point B and eventually to its conclusion.

. Similarly, the Committee has already analysed the Tribunal’s evaluation of the evidence and
found that there was sufficient evidence justifying the quantification of damages.*”° There is
no contradiction in the Tribunal’s evaluation of the evidence and its assessment of damages.
The Tribunal has clearly stated its reasons in this regard. The Committee therefore rejects

the Respondent’s request for annulment for failure to state reasons.

Vv. COSTS

275. In light of the provisions of Article 61(2) of the Convention and Arbitration Rule 47(1),

which are applicable to this proceeding pursuant to Article 52(4) of the Convention and

Arbitration Rule 53, the Committee has discretion with regard to the allocation of costs.

44 Supra, 164.
+5 Supra, 165.
46 Supra, 158.

90

276. Each Party filed its Statement of Costs on 21 September 2015 and its Observations on the
other Party’s Statement of Costs on 12 October 2015.

277. The Claimant seeks to recover his legal costs and expenses incurred in connection with this

Pt all amounts in EUR being converted to USD

at the currency exchange rate as of 20 September 2015.

278. The Respondent seeks to recover its legal costs and expenses in the total amount of

Po In accordance with Regulation 14(3)(e) of the ICSID

Administrative and Financial Regulations, the Respondent has been solely responsible for
the advance payments to cover the fees and expenses of the Committee and ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses. From the advanced payments, the following

497

disbursements have been made (in USD):

 

279. In deciding how to allocate the costs of this proceeding, the Committee has been guided by

©

the principle that “costs follow the event”, unless a different approach is called for. The
Committee has found no such indication in this case. The Claimant has prevailed in totality

and should not be burdened by having to pay for his defence in this annulment proceeding.

 

47 The ICSID Secretariat will provide the parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account as soon as
all invoices are received and the account is final. Any remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Respondent.

48 The amount includes estimated charges (courier, printing and copying) relating to the dispatch of this Decision.

91

280.

28

VI.

282.

In its Observations of 12 October 2015 the Respondent contended that the Claimant’s legal
fees are unreasonable, being twice as high as the Respondent’s legal fees, representing more
than | of the total amount of the Award. It is accepted that a party’s cost should be
reasonable. However, reasonableness should not be assessed based on a comparison with the
other party’s cost and/or comparison to the amount of damages awarded, but rather by
considering the amount of work required by the party to properly defend its case. On that
basis, in view of the number of issues submitted and questions raised by the Respondent and
the Claimant’s articulated replies, the Committee does not find the Claimant’s legal fees to

be unreasonable.

. The Committee therefore concludes that Respondent is to bear all ICSID costs, i.e. the fee

to lodge the Application, the fees and expenses of the Members of the Committee, the
administrative fees of the ICSID Secretariat and other direct expenses, amounting to
a. as well as the Claimant’s legal costs and expenses amounting to ||
DECISION

For the foregoing reasons, the ad hoc Committee decides unanimously that:

(1) The Respondent’s claims for annulment of the Award rendered on 12 August 2014 are

dismissed;

(2) The Respondent shall bear the full costs and expenses incurred by ICSID in these

annulment proceedings, including the fees and expenses of the Members of the Committee;

(3) The Respondent shall reimburse the Claimant for the legal costs and expenses he has
incurred, amounting o i. within sixty (60) days from the date of dispatch

of this Decision, increased by interest until full payment at the rate provided in paragraph

316(iii) of the Award;
(4) All other claims by either Party are dismissed; and

(5) Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(3), the

stay of enforcement of the Award is terminated.

92

  
   

Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan Dr. Jacomijn Haersolte-van Hof
Member fember

Date: 1 January 2016 Date: 5 January 2016

(te ON

‘Professor Piero Bernardini
President
Date: 8 January 2016

93

