INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
(ICSID)

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF THE
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
Between
ADF GROUP INC.
and

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1

 

AWARD

Date of dispatch to the Parties: January 9, 2003

195

196 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

President:

Members of the Tribunal:

Secretary of the Tribunal:

In Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1

Between:

Judge Florentino P. FELICIANO

Professor Armand deMESTRAL
Ms. Carolyn B. LAMM

Mr. Alejandro Escobar (until August 2,
2001)

Mr. Ucheora O. Onwuamaegbu (from
August 3, 2001)

ADF GROUP INC.
Represented by:

Fasken Martineau DuMoulin LLP
Mr. Peter E. Kirby
Mr. René Cadieux
Ms. Stacey Pinchuk
Ms. Diane Bertrand
Mr. Pierre Labelle

CLAIMANT
and

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Represented by:

Office of the Legal Adviser of the
United States Department of State

Mr. James H. Thessin

Mr. Ronald J. Bettauer

Mr. Mark A. Clodfelter

Mr. Barton Legum

Ms. Andrea J. Menaker

Ms. Laura A. Svat

Mr. David Pawlak

Ms. Jennifer Toole

RESPONDENT

CASES.

Il.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Procedural History
Notice of Intent and Notice of Arbitration
Registration of the Notice of Arbitration
Appointment of Arbitrators
First Session of the Tribunal with the Parties:
Procedural Order No. 1
Place of Arbitration: Procedural Order No. 2
Motion for Production of Documents: Procedural Order No. 3
Interpretation of 31 July 2001 by the Fair Trade Commission
Exchange of Pleadings on Competence and Liability
Hearing on Competence and Liability
Exchange of Post-Hearing Submissions

Background of the Dispute: Basic Facts

III. The United States Measures at Stake

IV. The Principal Claims and Submissions of the Parties

1. The Investor’s Principal Claims and Submissions.

(a) Article 1102: The National Treatment Obligation.

(b) Article 1105: The Minimum Standard of Treatment
Obligation

(c) Article 1103: Most-Favored-Nation Treatment
Obligation

(d) Article 1106: The Obligation Not to Impose
or Enforce Performance Requirements

(ec) Non-applicability of Exceptions to Articles 1102,
1103 and 1106: Effect of Article 1108(7) and (8)—
Procurement by a Party

(f) Claims Concerning Projects Other than the Springfield
Interchange Project

2. The Respondent’s Principal Defenses and Submissions

(a) Concerning Article 1102: The National Treatment
Obligation, and Article 1106: The Obligation Not
to Impose or Enforce Performance Requirements

(b) Concerning Article 1105(1): Minimum Standard of
Treatment of Foreign Investors and Their Investments
and the FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001

197

199
199
199
199

200
201
207
213
213
213
214
214
220
225
225
225
228

231

236

238

238

238

243

198 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(c) Concerning Article 1103: Most-Favored-Nation
Treatment

(d) Concerning Investor's Claims Relating to Projects
Other Than the Springfield Interchange Project

3. The Post-Hearing Submissions of the Parties and the Other

NAFTA Parties on Article 1105(1)

(a) The Disputing Parties’ Post-Hearing Submissions
on Article 1105(1)

(b) The Submissions of the Other NAFTA Parties
Pursuant to Article 1128 of NAFTA

V. Findings and Conclusions

1. Jurisdiction to consider the Investor’s claim concerning
NAFTA Article 1103.

2. Jurisdiction to Consider the Investor's Claims Concerning
Certain Federal-aid Construction Projects Other than the
Springfield Interchange Project

3. Articles 1102, 1106 and 1108: National Treatment
Obligation and Prohibition of Local Content and
Performance Requirements in the Context of
Governmental Procurement
(a) Preliminary interpretive considerations
(b) Appraising the Investor's Articles 1102 and

1106 Claims and the Exception in
Article 1108(7)(a) and (8)(b).

4. Article 1105(1): Minimum Standard of Treatment
under Customary International Law
(a) General Considerations
(b) Appraising the Investor’s claim based on

Article 1105(1) as Interpreted by the
FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001

5. Article 1103: Most-Favored-Nation Treatment
and the U.S.-Albania and U.S.-Estonia Bilateral
Investment Treaties.

VI. Award

244

245
246
250
253

253

258

260
260

262

275

275

281

285

288

CASES. 199

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Notice of Intent and Notice of Arbitration

1. On 1 March 2000, ADF Group Inc. (ADF or the Claimant or the
Investor), a company established under the laws of Canada, delivered to the
Government of the United States of America (U.S. or the Respondent), a
Notice of Intention to Submit a Claim to Arbitration pursuant to Articles
1116, 1117, 1120(1)(b) and 1137(1)(b) of the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA). On 21 July 2000, the Centre (ICSID) received a
Notice of Arbitration dated 19 July 2000 from the Claimant against the
Respondent with application for approval by the Secretary-General of access
to the Additional Facility under Article 4 of the ICSID Arbitration (Addi-
tional Facility) Rules. The Notice was supplemented by a letter of 1 August
2000.

Registration of the Notice of Arbitration

2. On 25 August 2000, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID, pursuant
to Article 4(5) of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules, notified
the parties that the Claimant’s application for access to the Additional Facility
was approved. The Acting Secretary-General, on the same day, issued and dis-
patched to the parties, a Certificate of Registration of the Notice of Arbitra-
tion, as amended.

Appointment of Arbitrators

3. Article 1123 of the NAFTA provides that, unless otherwise agreed by
the disputing parties, the Arbitral Tribunal shall be composed of three arbi-
trators, one appointed by each party, and the third, who shall be the presiding
arbitrator, appointed by agreement of the parties.

4. There was no agreement by the parties to depart from the provisions
of Article 1123 of the NAFTA. The Notice of Arbitration contained a notifi-
cation of the Claimant’s appointment of Professor Armand deMestral, a
national of Canada, as arbitrator. The Respondent appointed Ms. Carolyn B.
Lamm, a national of the US, as arbitrator and the parties, by agreement,
appointed Judge Florentino P. Feliciano, a national of the Philippines, as the
third arbitrator to serve as the President of the Tribunal.

200 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

5. By letter of 11 January 2001, the Secretary-General of ICSID notified
the parties that all the arbitrators had accepted their appointment and the
Arbitral Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been constituted, and the pro-
ceeding deemed to have begun, on that date.

First Session of the Tribunal with the Parties: Procedural Order No. 1

6. On 29 January 2001, the Tribunal held its first session with the Par-
ties, by video conference, which was devoted to preliminary procedural mat-
ters. In respect of the place of arbitration, the parties had not been able to
reach agreement. Nevertheless, they agreed that they would make written
submissions to the Tribunal in accordance with an agreed schedule, that no
hearing would be necessary with respect to this issue, and that the Tribunal
should render its decision on the place of arbitration on the basis of their writ-
ten submissions. Following a request by the parties for guidance on the issue
of the schedule for the production of documents, the Tribunal on 7 March
2001 invited the parties to seek agreement on a schedule on the basis that pro-
duction of documents by the parties would proceed concurrently with the
time periods for filing of the parties’ written pleadings.

7. By a joint letter of 4 April 2001, the parties communicated to the Tri-
bunal, their agreement on the schedule of proceedings, the production of doc-
uments, treatment of trade secrets and confidential information and the sub-
mission of evidence. The Tribunal on 3 May 2001 issued Procedural Order
No. 1 adopting the agreement of the parties in their joint letter of 4 April
2001, and instructing the ICSID Secretariat to inform the Governments of
Canada and the United Mexican States (Mexico) that any submission they
may wish to make pursuant to NAFTA Article 1128, should be filed within
forty days after the service upon the Claimant of the Respondent’s Counter-
Memorial.

Place of Arbitration: Procedural Order No. 2

8. On 26 February 2001, the Claimant filed written submissions on the
issue of the place of arbitration, requesting the Tribunal to designate Mon-
treal, in the province of Quebec, Canada, as the place of arbitration. On 19
March 2001, the Respondent filed a submission on place of arbitration, asking
the Tribunal to designate Washington, D.C., USA, as the place of arbitration.
The Claimant on 2 April 2001, filed a reply to the submission of the Respon-

CASES. 201

dent on the place of arbitration and on 16 April 2001, the Respondent filed
its final observations on this matter.

The Tribunal considered the submissions of the parties including specifically
their reference to:

(a) Article 1130(a) of NAFTA that requires the arbitration to be held in
the territory of a Party to the New York Convention.

(b) Articles 20 and 21 of ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules
that require, inter alia: the arbitration to be held in a State Party to the New
York Convention; and the Tribunal to determine the place of arbitration after
consultation “with the Secretariat and parties.”

(c) Article 16 of the UNCITRAL Rules including paragraph 22 of the
related UNCITRAL Notes on Organizing Arbitral Proceedings (“UNCI-
TRAL Notes”) that enumerate factual and legal factors which “influence the
choice of the place of arbitration” although the importance of each “varies
from case to case.” These factors are (1) suitability of the law on arbitral pro-
cedure of the place of arbitration; (2) whether there is a multilateral or bilat-
eral treaty on enforcement of arbitral awards between the State where the arbi-
tration takes place and the State or States where the award may have to be
enforced; (3) convenience of the parties and the arbitrators, including the
travel distances; (4) availability and cost of support services needed; and (5)
location of the subject-matter in dispute and proximity to evidence.

10. The Tribunal considered each of the above factors. On the suitability
of the law on arbitral procedure of (a proposed) place of arbitration, the
Claimant argued that an appropriate place of arbitration must provide a legal
environment that sets out “clear, predictable and limited procedures for chal-
lenging an award along with an effective mechanism for recognition and
enforcement of an award.”! The United States argued that its commitment to
facilitating international arbitration and favoring arbitral dispute resolution

makes it the more appropriate place for the arbitration.

1 Claimant's Memorial, paras. 49-50.
2 Respondent's Submiss

 

202 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

11. The Tribunal observed in its Procedural Order No. 2 that suitability
of the law on arbitral procedure of a suggested place of arbitration has multi-
ple dimensions, including the extent to which that law:

“(i)_ protects the integrity of, and gives effect to, the parties’
arbitration agreement;

(ii) accords broad discretion to the parties and to the arbitra-
tors to determine and control the conduct of arbitration pro-
ceedings;

(iii) provides for the availability of interim measures of pro-
tection and of means of compelling the production of docu-
ments and other evidence and the attendance of reluctant wit-
nesses;

(iv) consistently recognizes and enforces international arbitral
awards, in accordance with the terms of widely accepted con-
ventions concerning the enforcement of such awards; and

(v) insists on principled restraint in establishing grounds for
reviewing and setting aside international arbitral awards.”

12. The Claimant also argued the distinction between two aspects of ex
arbitri: (a) recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards and (b) review by
courts of the locus arbitri of such awards in actions to modify or set aside and
vacate those awards. According to the Claimant, Article 1136(7) of NAFTA
that deems Chapter 11 arbitration as “commercial” for purposes of Article 1
of the New York Convention, might not reach actions to set aside Chapter 11
awards where the domestic review remedies were limited to awards in com-
mercial arbitration.> While the Canadian Federal Commercial Arbitration Act
was specifically amended to provide for such, the U.S. had not made any sim-
ilar amendment to its own statute. Accordingly, the Claimant characterized
the U.S. law in the matter as unclear and uncertain with respect to post-award
litigation rendering U.S. arbitration laws unsuitable.

> See Claimant's Reply at para. 17.

CASES. 203

13. The United States responded that it was impossible at this stage of
Chapter Eleven’s evolution for any party to have absolute “certainty as to the
legal regime governing review of a Chapter Eleven award” whether such review
takes place in Canada or the U.S.4 Moreover, the U.S. noted that the Attor-
ney General of Canada had gone on record in United Mexican States v. Met-
alclad contending that “in interpreting NAFTA Chapter Eleven Tribunals
should not attract extensive judicial deference and should not be protected by
a higher standard of judicial review.”

14. The Tribunal noted that both Canada and the United States, in their
respective reservations to the New York Convention, determined that they
would apply the convention only to arbitral proceedings arising out of dis-
putes considered “commercial” under their respective national laws. Accord-
ingly, both parties agreed that the laws of both the U.S. and Canada are
equally suitable as far as recognition and enforcement of awards are concerned.

15. The Tribunal noted that, after the parties’ submissions, the case of
United Mexican States v. Metalclad was decided on 2 May 2001 by the
Supreme Court of British Columbia. That Court held that the applicable stan-
dard of review was that obtaining under the British Columbia International
Commercial Arbitration Act (“ICAA”) which closely follows the UNCITRAL
model law. In considering that standard, the Supreme Court of British
Columbia referred to Quintette Coal Ltd. v. Nippon Steel Corp. {1991} 1
W.W.R. 219 (BCCA). In that case, decided under the ICAA Section 34, the
majority of the court commented on the standard of review in the following
terms:

“Tt is important to parties to future such arbitrations and
to the integrity of the process itself that the court express its
views on the degree of deference to be accorded the decision of
the arbitrators. The reasons advanced in the case discussed
above for restraint in the exercise of judicial review are highly
persuasive. The ‘concerns of international comity, respect for
the capacities of foreign and international Tribunals, and sen-
sitivity to the need of the international commercial system for
predictability in the resolution of disputes’ spoken of by Black-

4 See Respondent's Final Observations, p. 3.
5 Citing Outline of Argument of Intervenor Attorney General of Canada in Metalelad, para. 30,
Tab. 17 of Claimants Memorial, p. 12.

204 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

man J. [in Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth
Inc., 473 U.S. 614 (1985)] are as compelling in this jurisdic-
tion as they are in the United States or elsewhere. It is needed
therefore, as a matter of policy, to adopt a standard which
seeks to preserve the autonomy of the forum selected by the
parties and to minimize judicial intervention when reviewing
international commercial arbitral awards in British Columbia
(p. 229).”

The U.S. stressed that suitable procedures for review of Chapter 11 awards are
available under both U.S. federal and District of Columbia laws regardless of
whether or not the award is deemed commercial. The U.S. specifically stated
that Section 10 of the U.S. Federal Arbitration Act (9 U.S.C. 208, Chapter 1
of the FAA) governing vacature of awards, would apply to Chapter 11 awards
made in the United States.®

16. | The Tribunal observed that in the United States, in case of enforce-
ment of an arbitral award against a foreign state (e.g, if Mexico or Canada
were involved) under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act, 28 U.S.C. §
1605 (a-6), the foreign state would not have immunity from suit and the FSIA
favors enforcement of the award. The standard applicable to enforcement of
NAFTA arbitral awards against the United States is similar as the U.S. has
waived its sovereign immunity with respect to the enforcement of NAFTA
arbitral awards under the Tucker Act, 28 U.S.C. 1491 (a) in conjunction with
NAFTA 19 U.S.C. 3311 (a).

17. After extensive consideration of the submissions of both parties, the
Tribunal was not persuaded that it must characterize the U.S. Federal Arbi-
tration Act as an unsuitable /ex arbitri or as a less suitable lex arbitri than Cana-
dian or Quebec law on international arbitration. In the absence of U.S. case
law directly addressing the specific issue raised here by the Claimant, the Tri-
bunal did not consider that the Claimant had adequately demonstrated that
the relevant U.S. law was infected by a “lack of clarity” which undermines the
authority of the Tribunal and its eventual award and promises to multiply post
award litigation.””

© Respondent's Final Observations, p. 4 and footnote 2.
7 Claimant's Response, para. 13.

CASES. 205

18. The Tribunal also noted that the distinction heavily stressed by the
Claimant between an action to review and set aside a Chapter 11 award and
an action for recognition and enforcement of such an award may not, in cer-
tain situations, be as important as might be supposed. The grounds for vacat-
ing an arbitral award under 9 U.S.C. chapter 1, Section 10 and those for set-
ting aside an award under Article 34 of the UNCITRAL model law on one
hand, and the grounds specified in the New York Convention for resisting an
action for recognition and enforcement of an award on the other hand, exhibit
overlapping to a significant degree. An action for recognition and enforcement
may frequently be expected to be resisted by pleading the existence of grounds
similar to those for vacating the award. The Tribunal did not believe that the
Claimant had provided it with a sufficient basis for refusing to join the Tri-
bunals in the Methanex and the Ethyl cases in holding that Canadian law and
U.S. law relating to international arbitration are equally “suitable” for pur-
poses of determining an appropriate place of arbitration.®

19. In respect of the factor of existence of a multilateral or bilateral treaty
on enforcement of arbitral awards, the Tribunal observed that both the United
States and Canada are parties to the New York Convention.

20. The factor of convenience or relative inconvenience of the arbitrators
offered no real guidance in this case. Two of the three arbitrators reside out-
side the United States and similarly two of the three arbitrators reside outside
of Canada. Thus, whether the place of arbitration be in Canada or the United
States, two arbitrators would have to travel to one or the other state.

21. The parties’ relative inconvenience of traveling to Montreal or to
Washington, D.C., may not be as finely balanced. The Tribunal was uncer-
tain as to how many officials, counsel, representatives and witnesses of one
party would have to travel to Montreal or Washington, D.C. The U.S. con-
tended that, given the numerous agencies involved (7.e., at least 7) all of which
are based in Washington, D.C., and therefore would have to travel to Mon-
treal, the balance of inconvenience favored Washington, D.C. The Claimant
was concerned that some of its officials and representatives are based in Vir-
ginia and others may be located in Quebec or elsewhere in Canada and they
would have to travel. The Tribunal noted that it could meet at the parties’

8 Ethyl Corp. v. Government of Canada, decision regarding the place of arbitration of 28 Novem-
ber 1997, 38 ILM 700 (1999); Tab. 23 of Claimants Memorial; and Methanex Corp. v. The United States
of America, written reasons for Tribunal’s decision of 7 September on place of arbitration, 21 Decem-

ber 2000, U.S. Appendix, Exhibit 1.

206 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

request in Montreal or any other place to hear particular witnesses and facili-
tate the presentation of evidence upon prior notice to and agreement of both
parties. On balance, in the circumstances of this case, the Tribunal believed
that the submission of the United States on this point was not unreasonable
even though the relative inconvenience of a state as a party, is not necessarily
compelling.

22. In principle, the Tribunal found that there was not any significant dif
ference between Montreal and Washington, D.C., in respect to the availabil-
ity of arbitration support services. The Tribunal, however, solicited the opin-
ion of ICSID which noted that overall costs of providing arbitration support
are likely to be substantially less in Washington, D.C., than in Montreal
because ICSID headquarters (including excellent facilities to accommodate
the hearing) and staff are in Washington, D.C.

23. The subject matter of the dispute, when examined in terms of ordinary
meaning, refers to “the issue presented for consideration; the thing in which
or in respect of which a right or duty has been asserted; the thing in dispute.”
(Black’s Law Dictionary, Seventh Edition, 1999, page 1439). The Tribunal
regarded the Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration by Claimant
as presenting the “subject matter” of the present dispute consisting of its
claims concerning the consi y or lack of consi y of certain measur

(or applications thereof) taken by the United States with certain provisions of

Chapter 11 of NAFTA.

24. To the extent the claims have a “location,” the Tribunal considered
that, for purposes of determining an appropriate place of arbitration, they may
be deemed to be located in the place where the U.S. authority to which they
were addressed are based, such location being a sufficient, real and substantial
basis. The physical construction project in respect of which the claims are
made is in relative geographic proximity to Washington, D.C.

25. The Tribunal found that Washington, D.C., is properly regarded as a
neutral place of arbitration notwithstanding that it is the capital of the
Respondent party. ICSID is, and is widely perceived to be, a neutral forum
and institution. The policy imperatives which drives parties proceeding to
international arbitration to seek a neutral forum are, in the Tribunal’s opin-
ion, satisfied by choosing the city in which ICSID is located.

26. On 11 July 2001, the Tribunal, for the foregoing reasons, issued Pro-
cedural Order No. 2 Concerning the Place of Arbitration, designating Wash-

CASES. 207

ington, D.C., as the place of arbitration in this case, without prejudice to the
Tribunal being able to meet in Montreal or any other place, when necessary
or appropriate, to hear particular witnesses and facilitate the presentation of
evidence, upon the request of either party and with notice to and agreement
of both parties.

Motion for Production of Documents: Procedural Order No. 3

27. On 6 August 2001, the Claimant filed a Motion for Production of
Documents and on 17 August 2001, the Respondent filed Objections to the
Claimant's Request for Documents. The Claimant’s Response to the Objec-
tions Raised by the Respondent was filed on 27 August 2001, while the
Respondent's Final Observations was filed on 4 September 2001.

28. The Claimant asked the Tribunal to require the Respondent to pro-
duce and communicate certain documents grouped under nine categories best
presented in the Claimant’s own words:

“(A) The administrative file held by the United States and
those held by Virginia relating to the supply of steel to the
Springfield Interchange Project by ADF Group Inc. and ADF
International Inc. (‘Investment’), including, but without lim-
iting the generality of the foregoing:

1) All records relating to the ‘Main Contract’, and the
‘Shirley/ADF Sub-Contract,’ as those terms are defined
in the Notice of Arbitration filed by the Investor
(‘Notice’);

2) All records prepared by or on behalf of the United
States or by or on behalf of Virginia relating to the scope
and meaning of the Buy America provisions found at Sec-
tion 165 of the STAA (1982), Pub. L. 97-424, 23 CFR
635.410 and to the scope and meaning of Special Provi-
sion 102.5 of the Main Contract;

3) All records (including correspondence between the
United States and the State of Virginia) relating in whole
or in part to the supply of steel to the Springfield Inter-
change Project;

208

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

4) All correspondence between the United States and
Virginia relating in whole or in part to the Special Provi-
sion 102.5 of the Main Contract.

(B) The administrative files held by the U.S. Department of
Transport or the Federal Highway Administration relating to
the consideration, development, drafting, approval and adop-
tion of the Final Rule of the Federal Highway Administration
concerning Buy America Requirements (23 CFR Part 635)
which was published in Volume 48, No. 228 of the Federal
Register dated November 25, 1983.

(C) All records prepared by or on behalf of the Office of the
United States Trade Representative, the Department of State
or the Department of Transport, or any agencies thereof relat-
ing in whole or in part to the impact of the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA’) on Buy America require-
ments, including, but without limiting the generality of the
foregoing.

1) All records relating to the Buy America and Buy
American requirements and policies and laws as those
requirements and policies and laws relate or are affected

by NAFTA;

2) All records relating to the impact of the implemen-
tation of NAFTA on Tea-21, Pub. L. 105-178, Section
165 of the STAA (1982), Pub. L. 97-424 and 23 CFR
635.410.

(D) The administrative file in the following cases, including
all the administration records in all appeals taken from these
cases and all pleadings submitted by the parties:

1) S.J. Amoroso Construction Co., Inc. v. The United
States, 26 Cl. Ct. 759 (1992), aff. 12 F. 3d 1072 (United
States Court of Appeals);

2) Wright Contracting, Inc., ASBCA Nos. 39120,
39121, 91-1 B.C.A. P23, 649 (1990); and

CASES.

29.

3) Decision of the Comptroller General, B-167635
(1969) U.S. Comp. Gen. Lexis 2267;

(E) All records relating to every instance within the last ten
years wherein federal funding for a highway project (including
bridges and tunnels) has been withheld from or denied to a
Department of Transport of any State of the United States
(‘State’) or any agency thereof as a result of the application of
any Buy America provisions.

(F) All documents used to report to or inform members of
Congress, the President of the United States on the application
of Buy America provisions to federally funded highway con-
tracts and the impact of NAFTA on those provisions.

(G) A complete list of highway contracts and/or highway
projects, listed by State, which have been approved for fund-
ing under Tea-21, Pub. L. 105-178 or which are currently
under consideration to receive funding under Tea-21, Pub. L.
105-178, along with a list of the amount of the funding for
each such contract or project.

(H) A list of all national and regional waivers of the provisions
of Buy America requirements which have been granted within
the last ten years under 23 CFR 635.410(c), along with the
record which provides the administrative rationale for granting
such a waiver and the reports to Congress made during the last
ten years in compliance with Section 165(e) of the Surface
Transportation Assistance Act of 1982.

(I) All pleadings filed by the United States in NAFTA Chap-
ter 11 proceedings to date.” (Motion, pp. 9-10)

209

The Tribunal set out the general considerations of principle which, in
its view, underlie the appropriate resolution of the Motion for production of
document. The fundamental principle is embodied in Article 41(2) of the
ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules which authorizes a Tribunal, “if
it deems it necessary, at any stage of the proceeding, [to] call upon the parties
to produce documents, witnesses and experts.” (Emphasis added) The Tri-
bunal considered that there are at least two main aspects of “necessity” in the
context of a request for document production:

210 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

“The first aspect relates to a substantive inquiry into whether
the documents requested are relevant to, and in that sense nec-
essary for, the purposes of the proceedings where the docu-
ments are expected to be used. Inquiry into the relevancy of
the documents requested needs to be done on a category by
category basis.

“The second aspect concerns a procedural inquiry into the
effective and equal availability of the documents requested to
both the requesting party and the party requested. Where only
one party has access to requested documents relevant to the
proceeding at hand, we consider that the party with access
should be required to make the documents available to the
other party. Where, however, the documents requested are in
the public domain and equally and effectively available to both
parties, we believe that there would be no necessity for requir-
ing the other party physically to produce and deliver the doc-
uments to the former for inspection and copying. Where,
however, the requesting party shows it would sustain undue
burden or expense in accessing the publicly available material,
the other party should be required to produce and deliver the
documents.”

30. The Tribunal then sketched out the application of the above princi-
ples to the Claimant’s motion:

“In the present case, where the Respondent identifies the par-
ticular government office at which the documents are in fact
available to the Claimant or its representatives, as members of
the general public, the Respondent will, in principle, have pro-
duced the documents requested within the meaning of Article
41(2) of the ICSID [Arbitration (Additional Facility)] Rules.
The Respondent should also provide the document reference
numbers, and any other data, necessary to enable the official
custodians of the documents to identify and locate them phys-
ically or in electronic data bases, with reasonable dispatch.
There may be other administrative details that may need to be
attended to by the Respondent (e.g., phone calls to the docu-
ment custodians) to ensure the Claimant’s effective and
prompt access to the documents. The Respondent would be

CASES. 211

reasonably expected to provide such necessary and appropriate
assistance, without having to deliver the documents physically
to the Claimant. The appropriate assumption in every case is
that, both parties having proceeded to international arbitration
in good faith, neither would withhold documents for its own
benefit and that good faith will render any practical problems
of document production susceptible of prompt resolution
without undue hardship or expense on either party.”

31. The principles which the Tribunal outlined are in line with the proce-
dure and practice in the District of Columbia and the caselaw under the U.S.
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP), both of which form part of the lex
arbitri in the present case:

“Under Rule 34(b) of the FRCP, the requirement to produce
a document is a requirement to make the requested document
available for inspection and copying at a reasonable time and
place. Federal courts in the United States have held that a
court may refuse to order production of documents of public
record that are equally accessible to all parties (See Moore’s
Federal Practice (Third Edition) at 34-46; e.g., Dushkin Pub-
lishing Group, Inc. v. Kinko's Service Corporation, 134 FRD
334, 335 (DDC); SEC v. Samuel H. Sloan & Co., 369 Fed.
Supp. 994, 995-6 (SDNY 1973); Hoffinan v. Charnita, 17
Federal Rules Service 2D 1215, 1217 (W.D. Penn. 1973). It
has also been held that production from the adverse party may
be ordered if the requesting party could demonstrate that it
would be ‘excessively burdensome for financial and other rea-
sons’ for the requesting party to obtain documents from a
public source other than from the opposing party who has
them in their files (e.g., Snowden v. Connaught Laboratory,
Inc., 137 FRD 325, 333 (D. Kan., 1991).”

32. The Tribunal found that the request for Category A documents did refer
with sufficient specificity to the subject of the files sought: “relating to the
supply of steel to the Springfield Interchange Project by the ADF Group, Inc.
and ADF International Inc.” The four subcategories under Category A added
further clarity by specifying records relating to the “Main Contract” and the
Shirley/ADF Sub-Contract” and to “Special Provision 102.5 of the Main
Contract.” The relevancy of these documents to the subject matter of the pres-

212 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

ent case was not disputed by the Respondent. Accordingly, the Tribunal held
that the Respondent should produce those documents by making them avail-
able in the manner indicated above.

33. While the Claimant had not shown how the Category B documents bear
upon the subject matter, i.e., the issues raised or likely to be raised, in the pres-
ent case, the Respondent stated that those documents are “publicly available”
and that the U.S. was willing to make them available to the Claimant under
the same conditions as they are available to the general public. Hence, the Tri-
bunal held that the Respondent should make those documents available to the
Claimant in the manner indicated above.

34. The Category C documents and Category F documents were held to be
described in “overly broad terms” which makes their identification very prob-
lematical. Further, the Claimant had not shown how those kinds of documents
relate to the subject matter of the present case. The Tribunal denied the request
for Category C documents. It also held that Category F documents need not
be made available to the Claimant “save publicly available statutorily mandated
agency reports to the U.S. Congress or the U.S. President.”

35. As to Category D documents, the Claimant failed to show how “admin-
istrative files” and “administration records” of judicial cases and administrative
adjudications would shed additional light on the manner in which “buy
national” policies have been addressed by such agencies. The Tribunal held
that such documents need not be made available by the Respondent to the
Claimant, save to the extent they are publicly available in the U.S.

36. The Tribunal found that the request for Category E documents was ren-
dered moot, the Claimant having in effect accepted the Respondent's declara-
tion that no such documents existed. Similarly, the Tribunal held that the
request for Category G documents, relating to the issue of damages, was deemed
withdrawn, without prejudice to re-submission, the Claimant having
expressed willingness to defer its request to a subsequent phase of these pro-
ceedings. As to the request for Category H documents, the parties reached agree-
ment on which documents would be produced and made available to the
claimant by the Respondent.

37. In respect of Category I documents, the Claimant did not show what
pleadings filed by the U.S. in which Chapter 11 proceedings were pertinent to
the issues raised, or expected to be raised, in this case. The Tribunal held that

CASES. 213

such documents need not be made available by the Respondent to the
Claimant, except to the extent they are publicly available in the U.S.

38. Finally, the Tribunal noted the general objection entered by the
Respondent to the extent the documents are “protected from disclosure by
applicable law, including without limitation, documents protected by the
attorney-client and government deliberative and pre-decisional privileges.”
The Tribunal ruled that for it to be able to determine the applicability of the
privileges adverted to, the Respondent will have to specify the documents in
respect of which one or more privilege is claimed and the nature and scope of
the particular privilege claimed, and show the applicability of the latter to the
former. This was a matter for future determination, should the Respondent
decide actually to withhold, under claim of privilege, particular documents it
should otherwise make available to the Claimant.

Interpretation of 31 July 2001 by the Fair Trade Commission

39. On 31 July 2001, the Tribunal received from the Respondent a copy
of an Interpretation issued on the same day by the Free Trade Commission
established under Article 2001 of NAFTA, concerning certain provisions of
Chapter 11 of the NAFTA, including in particular Article 1105, entitled
“Minimum Standard of Treatment.”

Exchange of Pleadings on Competence and Liability

40. In compliance with the agreed schedule, on 1 August 2001, the
Claimant filed its Memorial on competence and liability; the Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial was filed on 29 November 2001. The Claimant's Reply to
the Counter-Memorial was submitted on 29 January 2002; and the Rejoinder
of the Respondent on 29 March 2002.

Hearing on Competence and Liability

41. The hearing on competence and liability took place in Washington,
D.C., from 15 to 18 April 2002. The Claimant was represented by Mtre.
Peter E. Kirby, Mtre. René Cadieux and Mtre. Jean-Francois Hebért of
Fasken Martineau Du Moulin LLP. Mr. Pierre Paschini, President and Chief
Operating Officer, and Mtre. Caroline Vendette, General Counsel, respec-
tively, of ADF Group were also present. The Respondent was represented by
Mr. Mark A. Clodfelter, Mr. Barton Legum, Ms. Andrea J. Menaker, Mr.

214 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

David Pawlak and Ms. Jennifer Toole, all of the Office of the Legal Adviser to
the United States Department of State.

42. Representatives of the Governments of Canada and Mexico were also
in attendance: Ms. Sylvie Tabet for Canada; Mr. Maximo Romero, Mr. Sal-
vador Bejar and Mr. Sanjay Mullick for Mexico. During the hearing, repre-
sentatives of Canada and Mexico reserved the rights of their respective Gov-
ernments to file post hearing submissions. After the hearing, however, they
informed the Tribunal by letters of 24 April 2002 and 25 April 2002, respec-
tively, that they would not be filing any such submissions.

Exchange of Post-Hearing Submissions

43. By a letter dated 4 June 2002, the Claimant forwarded to the Tribunal
a copy of the Award in respect of Damages issued on 31 May 2002 by the Tri-
bunal in the NAFTA Chapter 11 case of Pope and Talbot v. Government of
Canada (Pope and Talbot Damages Award). The Claimant stated that the
Award “speaks for itself’ on the matter of Article 1105(1). The Respondent
considered that the Claimant had thereby made an “unauthorized” submission
and asked for an opportunity to make its own submission with respect to Arti-
cle 1105(1) and the Pope and Talbot Damages Award. The Tribunal gave the
parties the opportunity to make final submissions on Article 1105(1). The
other NAFTA Parties requested the Tribunal to give them the opportunity to
comment, under Article 1128, on the parties’ submissions on Article 1105(1).
In the event, the Respondent filed its Post-Hearing Submission on 27 June
2002 while the Claimant filed its Post-Hearing Submission on 11 July 2002.
Canada and Mexico filed their submissions, pursuant to Article 1128, on 19
July 2002 and 23 July 2002, respectively. Thereafter, the Claimant and the
Respondent simultaneously filed their second and final Post-Hearing Submis-
sions on Article 1105(1) on 1 August 2002. These Post-Hearing Submissions
are summarized in a later part of this Award.

II. BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE: BASIC FACTS

44, The underlying facts of the dispute in this case relate to the construc-
tion of the Springfield Interchange Project (Springfield Project or Project).
The Springfield Interchange is a heavily-used and accident-prone highway
junction, located in Northern Virginia approximately 20 kilometers south of
Washington, D.C. The junction brings together three inter-state highways
and a Virginia state highway (including I-95, the principal north-south high-

CASES. 215

way on the east coast of the United States) and an important Virginia state
highway, in the immediate vicinity of which are located a large shopping mall
and extensive office and other development. The result is the mixture of inter-
state, state and local traffic. The original design of the Springfield Interchange
dated from the 1960's. As traffic volumes increased during subsequent
decades, the original design generated conditions which gave rise to increased
incidence of accidents and traffic bottlenecks.”

45. Starting in the early 1990's, Virginia state officials and U.S. federal
officials held a series of meetings and hearings relating to changing the origi-
nal design of the Interchange. In 1998, the Commonwealth of Virginia
applied to and received approval from, the Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA) of the U.S. Department of Transportation for federal funding assis-
tance for the construction of a multi-phased project designed to improve the
safety and efficiency of the Interchange. Phases II and III of the Project, which
are the phases involved in the present case, entailed the addition of a series of
new lanes, ramps (long bridges curving above the highways below) and lane
dividers to the section of the Springfield Interchange where the Virginia high-
way 644 intersects I-95. These bridges required long steel girders, “custom-
built to exacting specifications,” to support them. In addition, Phases II and
III involved the construction of a number of conventional bridges which too
necessitated support by structural steel girders. In short, the Springfield Inter-
change Project involved major changes to the original design of the structures
and highways comprising the Interchange and the construction of new and
additional structures, approaches and highways on several levels, all intended
to increase the carrying capacity, safety, efficiency and convenience of the
Interchange.

46. In September 1998, the Department of Transportation of the Com-
monwealth of Virginia (VDOT) issued an invitation for bids to construct and
deliver Phases II and III of the Project. Shirley Contracting Corporation
(Shirley) submitted the lowest bid and was awarded the contract for the Pro-
ject (Main Contract).!° Shirley’s bid included an estimated USD 16.8 million
for the structural steel requirements of the Project.!!

9 See Counter-Memorial of Respondent United States of America on Competence and Liability,
dated 29 November 2001 (Respondent's Counter-Memorial), pp. 4
10 Order No. D30; Contract ID No. C0000054C02, Vol. I, Materials and Cases, A and B, Tab
B-1, appended to Claimant's Memorial
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, p. 8

216 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

47. Shirley, as main contractor, in turn issued a request for bids covering
certain parts of the Project Phases awarded to Shirley, including the supply of
the structural steel requirements of those parts of the Project. ADF Interna-
tional Inc. (ADF International) submitted the lowest bid and Shirley and ADF
International, on 19 March 1999, signed a Sub-Contract for the supply and
delivery by the latter of “all structural steel components for nine (9) bridges”
(Sub-Contract). “Structural steel components” are described in this Sub-Con-
tract as “includ[ing] but—not limited to continuous plate girders, cross
frames, diaphragms, splice plates, loose angles and plates, connection angles
and plates, galvanized bolts for field erection, galvanized bolts for steel to steel
connections required for completing the work.”!* The Sub-Contract provided
inter alia that:

“All materials supplied by ADF International Inc. to be in
accordance with the Plans, Specifications, Contract Docu-
ments and Supplemental Specifications. Subcontractor specif
ically acknowledges Section 102c of the Special Provisions
regarding the Use of Domestic Material.”!5

The Subcontract also referred to the materials to be supplied by ADF Inter-
national as “fabricated structural steel and accessories” !4 which had to include
a shop primer coat of paint at each bearing location.!> The Sub-Contract fur-
ther required that, before payments are made therefore, “the structural steel
materials and fabricated units” shall have been tested or certified and found
acceptable.!¢

48. The process of fabricating structural steel has been described by the
Respondent in terms the accuracy of which has not been disputed by the
Claimant:

“Structural steel fabrication for bridges principally involves the
production of custom steel girders. Fabrication transforms
functionally unusable flat plate shapes into load-carrying struc-
tural plate girders. The fabricator begins with long, flexible

12 Para. 2 of Exhibit B of Sub-Contract, Vol. I, Materials and Cases, A and B, Tab. B- 3,
appended to Claimant’s Memorial.

Bid. para. 4.

44 1d, para. 5, and Unit Price Schedule.

16 Id. para. 10.

CASES.

49.

Grou

50.

A3, p.

sheets of steel produced by a steel mill. Using special equip-
ment, the fabricator cuts the steel into plates of the specified
length. It then welds the plates into the familiar “I” shape,
which transforms the wobbly plates into a rigid girder capable
of carrying massive loads. Virginia, like many other places,
approves only flawlessly welded girders for use in highway
projects. The fabricator then custom-fits the girder for its
intended use, bolting or welding elements to hold it securely
in place atop piers or abutments at the bridge site. The girders
to be painted are then blast-cleaned to remove rust and dirt,
inspected and coated to protect the structural steel from

weather and other conditions.”!7

217

On 19 April 1999, Shirley informed VDOT that ADF International
was proposing to perform its obligations under the Sub-Contract by using
U.S.-produced steel and by subsequently carrying out certain fabrication work
on that U.S.-produced steel in Canada, in facilities owned by the parent ADF

p- Shirley stated that:

“ADF [International] proposes to perform in Canada cutting,
welding, punching/reaming holes, and milling on steel prod-
uct produced in the United States. The fabricated U.S.-origin
steel product which has been subjected to these processes will
then be shipped to the construction site and will be used in
construction of the I-95 Springfield Interchange.”!8

On 28 April 1999, VDOT advised Shirley that the proposed opera-
tions of ADF International were not in compliance with the provisions of the
Special Provision for Section 102.05 and 23 CFR 635.410 which formed part
of the VDOT-Shirley Main Contract and which were incorporated by refer-
ence into the Shirley-ADF International Sub-Contract:

“Based on the Department’s, the Attorney General’s, and the
Federal Highway Administration’s interpretation, Special Pro-
vision for Section 102.05 and 23 CFR 635.410 refers to all
manufacturing processes involved in the production of steel or

17 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, p.

18 Letter of Shirley to VDOT, dated To pail 1999, Materials and Cases Vol. I—A and B, Tab.

1, appended to Claimant’s Memorial.

218 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

iron manufactured products. This means smelting or any sub-
sequent process that alters the materials physical form, shape
or chemical composition. These processes include rolling,
extruding, machining, bending, grinding, drilling, and the
application of various types of coating.

The manufacturing process is not considered complete until
all grinding, drilling and finishing of steel or iron material has
been accomplished. As proposed, the additional processes that
are to be performed in Canada are necessary to turn steel into
a product suitable to be installed in the project. As such, they
fall under the aforementioned provision and are not allowable
under this contract.”!9

51. | On3 June 1999, representatives of Shirley and ADF International met
with representatives of VDOT and the Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA) in Richmond, Virginia. The former explained their reading of Spe-
cial Provision for Section 102c “Use of Domestic Material”, and the bases of
such reading, to the latter. The representatives of VDOT stated that the inter-
pretation given by the FHWA to the contractual provisions involved was the
controlling interpretation that VDOT could not change. The representatives
of the FHWA confirmed that the interpretation given to the provisions
involved and conveyed by VDOT to Shirley, was the governing interpretation
rendered by the FHWA which had exclusive authority to interpret the con-
tract provisions at stake.?°

52. On 14 June 1999, Shirley and ADF International officials met with
FHWA officials. The latter officials explained that the Springfield Interchange
Project was a Federal-aid highway construction project operated as a cost
reimbursement program. It was stated that the Buy America clause in the
Main Contract (Special Provision 102.05) and the incorporation thereof in
the Sub-Contract were necessary to comply with 23 CFR 635.410, the Fed-
eral Highway Administration Regulations. It was also made clear to the Shirley
and ADF International officials that the U.S. Federal Government would not
reimburse VDOT’s project costs unless the Buy America clause was applied
and complied with, in accord with the FHWA interpretation of that clause
already conveyed to VDOT, Shirley and ADF International. The FHWA offi-

Letter of C.F. Gee of VDOT, dated 28 April 1999, to M.E. Post of Shirley, id., Tab. A-4,
pp. 1-2.

2 Investor's Memorial, paras. 13-17.

CASES. 219

cials advised that the fabrication in Canada of U.S.-produced steel would be
allowed only if the Commonwealth of Virginia sought and received a waiver
of the Buy America requirements under 23 CFR 635.410(c) on the basis that
application of those requirements would be inconsistent with the “public
interest.”?!

53. On 25 June 1999, ADF International requested Shirley to seek a
waiver from VDOT of the Buy America requirements. ADF International
wrote that

“ADF cannot perform the fabrication work at its facility in
Florida. While the Florida facility is large, it does not have
heavy lifting capacity to handle the steel for this job. In addi-
tion, as is the case with all U.S. fabricators, the ADF facility is
fully loaded.

We are unable to locate a steel fabricator who is capable of per-
forming the work in the U.S. within the required time frame.
We understand that all fabricators capable of performing the
work are fully loaded.”

ADF International also stressed the public interest in completing the Project
on time, urging that the interstate highway system—of which the Springfield
Interchange was an important part—served “local needs, interstate commerce
and national and civil defense.” These interests, in the view of ADF Interna-
tional, “will be promoted by permitting the timely completion of the [P]roject
through the grant of a waiver” and “prejudiced by any delay in the [P]roject
caused by a refusal to grant a waiver.”?>

54. Shirley complied with ADF International’s request and wrote to
VDOT seeking a waiver.” By a letter dated 26 July 1999, VDOT informed
Shirley that the application for a waiver had been denied, there being “no
basis” for granting a waiver.” In that same letter, VDOT also advised Shirley

2! Tnvestor’s Memorial, paras. 18-21
22 Letter of Mr. P. Paschini, ADF International, to Mr. M. E. Post, Shirley, dated 25 June 1999,
pp. 3-45 Investor's Materials and Cases, Vol. I—A and B, Tab. A-7.
3 Id. pp. 4-

24 Letter of Mr. M. E. Post, Shirley, to Mr. F. Gee, VDOT, dated 29 June 1999; Investor's Mate-
rials and Cases, Vol. I—A and B, Tab. A-8.
5 Letter of Mr. C. F. Fee, VDOT, to Mr. M. E. Post, Shirley, dated 26 July 1999; Investor's
Materials and Cases, Vol. I—A and B, Tab. A-12.

220 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

that the National Steel Bridge Alliance (NSBA) “is available to assist in locat-
ing domestic sources for your consideration.” In a letter of 8 July 1999 to the
FHWA, the NSBA had written that there was “ample steel bridge fabrication
capacity available in the United States” and attached a list of nearly 50 certi-
fied major steel bridge fabricating firms “...a large number [of which] can
effectively meet the needs of the Springfield interchange bypass project.”?°
Shirley conveyed that information to ADF International a few days later.

55. ADF International then proceeded to attempt fulfilling its obligations
under the Sub-Contract partially by using its own facilities located in the State
of Florida, but mostly by sub-contracting the fabricating work to structural
steel fabricators in the U.S. According to ADF’s president, Pierre Paschini,
ADF had to fabricate its steel at five different subcontracting facilities with the
result of “massively increasing” the cost of the project.” According to Mr. Pas-
chini the costs increased due to: (1) hiring the five U.S. fabricators; (2) test-
ing, equipment rental, transport and demurrage; (3) significant additional
time in project management, engineering work, transport and demurrage shop
to field were required; (4) separate systems of control, coordination and logis-
tics to ensure steel was properly delivered to five fabricators, fabricated in
accordance with the contract and quality requirements and delivered to the
site in accordance with the delivery schedule.” Shirley in turn completed its
work on the Project in a timely manner and VDOT, it appears, offered Shirley
its USD 10 million incentive bonus.

III. THE UNITED STATES MEASURES AT STAKE

56. The United States measures about which the Claimant complains in
the present case comprise three tiers of legal provisions: (a) legislative statutory
provisions promulgated in 1982; (b) implementing administrative regulations
promulgated in 1983; and (c) contractual provisions embodying the adminis-
trative regulations and applying them in a particular highway construction or
improvement project, e.g., the Springfield Project. The first tier consists of
Section 165(a) to (d) of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982
(Section 165, STAA of 1982) as it stood on the filing of the Notice of Inten-

26 Investor's Memorial, para. 27; Respondent's Counter-Memorial, p. 13.
27 Exhibit 2 of the Investor's Memorial, the witness statement of Pierre Paschini at paras. 51-53.

28 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, p. 13.

CASES. 221

tion to Submit a Claim to Arbitration dated 29 February 2000. Section 165
provides in pertinent part:

“(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secre-
tary of Transportation shall not obligate any funds
authorized to be appropriated by this Act, or by any Act
amended by this Act or, after the date of enactment of
this Act, any funds authorized to be appropriated to carry
out this Act, Title 23, United States Code, Federal Tran-
sit Act, or the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of
1978 and administered by the Department of Trans-
portation, unless steel, iron, and manufactured products
used in such project are produced in the United States.

(b) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not
apply where the Secretary finds—

(1) that their application would be inconsistent with
the public interest;

(2) that such materials and products are not produced
in the United States in sufficient and reasonably available
quantities and of a satisfactory quality; or

(3) [repealed];

(4) that inclusion of domestic material will increase the
cost of the overall project contract by more than 10 per-
centum in the case of projects for the acquisition of
rolling stock, and 25 percentum in the case of all other
projects; ...”2? (Emphases added)

29 23 USCA sec. 101; Vol. II—Investor’s Materials and Cases, A.1, Tab. A-4. The full text of
Section 165 of the STAA of 1982, as currently amended, is also quoted in the Investor's Memorial,
para. 47.

222 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

57. The second tier of provisions consists primarily of 23 CFR Section
635.410, entitled “Buy America requirements,” the regulations issued by the
FHWA, Department of Transportation, for the implementation of Section
165, the first tier statutory provisions. The portions of 23 CFR 635.410 per-
tinent for present purposes are the following:

“Sec. 635.410 Buy America requirements.

(b) No federal-aid highway construction project is to be
authorized for advertisement or otherwise authorized to pro-
ceed unless at least one of the following requirements is met:

(1) The project either: (i) includes no permanently
incorporated steel or iron materials, or (ii) if steel or iron
materials are to be used, all manufacturing processes,
including application of a coating, for these materials must
occur in the United States. Coating includes all processes
which protect or enhance the value of the material to
which the coating is applied.

(2) The State has standard contract provisions that
require the use of domestic materials and products, includ-
ing steel and iron materials, to the same or greater extent as
the provisions set forth in this section.

(4) When steel and iron materials are used in a project,
the requirements of this section do not prevent a minimal
use of foreign steel and iron materials, if the cost of such
materials used does not exceed one-tenth of one percent
(0.1 percent) of the total contract cost or $2500,
whichever is greater. For purposes of this paragraph, the
cost is that shown to be the value of the iron and steel
products as they are delivered to the project.

(c) (1) A State may request a waiver of the provisions of
this section if:

CASES. 223

(i) The application of those provisions would be
inconsistent with the public interest; or

(ii) Steel and iron materials/products are not pro-
duced in the United States in sufficient and reason-
ably available quantities which are of a satisfactory
quality....”° (Emphases added)

58. The third tier of provisions consists of “Special Provision for 102C—
Use of Domestic Material” (Section 102.05) which is a contractual provision,
being (as noted earlier) built into the Main Contract between VDOT and
Shirley and incorporated by reference into the Sub-Contract between Shirley
and ADF International. The pertinent part of Section 102.05 is quoted below:

“Section 102.05.

... Except as otherwise specified, all iron and steel products
(including miscellaneous steel items such as fasteners, nuts,
bolts and washers) incorporated for use on this project shall be
produced in the United States of America; unless the use of any
such items will increase the cost of the overall project by more
than 25%. ‘Produced in the United States of America’ means all
manufacturing processes whereby a raw material or a reduced
iron ore material is changed, altered or transformed into an item
or product which, because of the process, is different from the orig-
inal material, must occur in one of the 50 States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico or in the territories and possessions of
the United States. Raw materials such as iron ore, pig iron,
processed, pelletized and reduced iron ore and other raw mate-
rials used in steel products may, however, be imported. All
iron and steel items will be classified hereinafter as ‘domestic’
or ‘foreign’, identified by and subject to the provisions herein.
In the event use of the aforementioned ‘domestic’ iron and
steel will increase the cost of the overall project by more than

30 23 CFR 635.410; id. Tab. A-7. The fall text of 23 CFR 635.410, as currently amended, is also
quoted in the Investor's Memorial, para. 53.

224 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

25%, the Contractor may furnish either ‘domestic’ or ‘foreign’
items....”3! (Emphases added)

The Investor explicitly stated, and the Respondent has not disputed, that Sec-
tion 102.05 formed part of the Main Contract and the Sub-Contract because
of the force and effect of 23 CFR 635.410, the FHWA regulation imple-
menting Section 165 of the 1982 STAA of the U.S. Congress.°2 VDOT
included special provision 102C in VDOT’s “Road and Bridge Specifications”
as of 3 May 1995; and those “Road and Bridge Specifications” as of 1 January
1997 also required, under paragraph 107.01, that all federal and state laws be
observed. Further, the Shirley/ADF Sub-Contract provides that the subcon-
tractor “specifically acknowledges Section 102C of the special provisions
regarding the use of domestic material.”3> The Commonwealth of Virginia
has no statute or regulation of its own prescribing any preference for domes-
tic (U.S. or Virginia) steel materials and products in Virginia highway con-
struction projects.

59. It will be seen below that the Claimant in fact complains about a
fourth tier measure of the Respondent—the interpretation and application by
the FHWA and VDOT of Section 102.05 as well as the pertinent statutory
and administrative provisions (the first two tiers of legal provisions) to the
facts of this case in such a manner as to include within the scope of the term
“all manufacturing processes” required to take place in the United States of
America the operations which ADF Group designates as “post-production
fabrication of structural steel products” out of steel materials which had been
previously manufactured in the United States of America.*4 The Claimant
argues below that such interpretation and application are inconsistent with the
obligations of the Respondent set out in NAFTA Articles 1102(1) and (2) and
1105(1) to accord “National Treatment” and “fair and equitable treatment

31 Text quoted in extenso in Investor's Memorial, p. 4; Material and Cases Appended to Investor's
Memorial, Vol.—A and B, Tab-B(1) excerpts from main contract containing VDOT Section 102.5;
Tab B(3) Shirley/ADF subcontract, paragraph 12, incorporating Exhibit B, paragraph 4 providing that
contractor acknowledges domestic content requirements of Section 102.

Investor's Memorial, para. 6; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Competence and Liability,

pp. 14-18.

33 In Tab B@3), Exhibit B, para. 4; supra note 31.

4 Investor's Memorial, pp. 11-14. The Investor points to the definition of “measure” in Article
201(1), NAFTA, as including “any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice.” It may also be
noted that the Investor refers to the interpretation and application of the measures in question “in the
Springfield Interchange Project in particular, or in any Federal-aid Highway Project in general.” Id.
14,
pees Legal Opinion dated 22 March 1999, from Emalfarb, Swan and Bain; Materials and Cases,
Vol. 1-A and B, Tab 2, Annexed to Investor's Memorial. The opinion seems to have been post-dated.

CASES. 225

[and] full protection and security,” respectively. On 19 March 1999, at or
shortly before signing its Sub-Contract with Shirley, the Claimant had
received a legal opinion from its U.S. lawyers? to the effect that its proposed
fabrication operations in Canada were consistent with the Buy America clause
in its Sub-Contract.

IV. THE PRINCIPAL CLAIMS AND
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES

60. It is useful at this stage to summarize, in broad strokes, the principal
claims and submissions of the Investor on the one hand, and of the Respon-
dent on the other hand. These claims and submissions are examined in detail
at a later portion of this Award in the light of the facts of this case and of the
requirements of the applicable law.

1. The Investor’s Principal Claims and Submissions
(a) Article 1102: The National Treatment Obligation

61. The Investor claims, firstly, that the Buy America provisions here in
question, coupled with the U.S. requirement that those measures be applied
by State governments, are “designed” to favor U.S. domestic steel, U.S. steel
manufacturers and U.S. steel fabricators over non-U.S. steel, steel manufac-
turers and steel fabricators. The Investor submits that “by definition,” the U.S.
measures “treat national investments more favorably than non-national invest-
ments,” and as such are inconsistent with the requirements of Article 1102 of
the NAFTA.2°

62. Article 1102 states in relevant part:
“Article 1102: National Treatment

Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment
no less favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisi-
tion, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or
other disposition of investments.

36 Investor's Memorial, para. 120.

226 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another
Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in like
circumstances, to investments of its own investors with respect
to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of invest-
ments...”

63. It is claimed by the Investor that ADF Group is an “investor of a
Party,” Canada, within the meaning of Article 1102(1), being an “enterprise”
organized under the laws of a Party. The Investor also states that ADF Inter-
national is an “enterprise” and an “investment of an investor of a Party” for
purposes of Article 1102(2) since ADF International is owned by an investor
(ADF Group) of a Party. Accordingly, the Investor argues, the United States
of America is obliged to accord “national treatment” to ADF Group under
Article 1102(1), and to ADF International under Article 1102(2), with respect
to the sale of steel and the expansion, management, conduct and operation of
ADF International. The “investments” of ADF Group are identified as includ-
ing (a) the fabricated steel acquired by ADF Group or ADF International, and
(b) the “interests” [of ADF Group or ADF International] arising from the
commitment of capital or other resources in or under the Sub-Contract.>”

64. It is further claimed by the Investor that ADF Group and ADF Inter-
national are “in like circumstances,” but are discriminated against, as com-
pared with U.S. steel manufacturers and fabricators. U.S. steel fabricators
operate in the same sector, sell the same product and compete for the same
customers as ADF Group. They buy the same input (U.S. steel), treat that
input the same way and deliver the same fabricated steel to the same clients.
The “only difference,” in the Investor’s view, between ADF Group and U.S.
steel fabricators is “the physical location of their facilities.”>* But Article
1102(1) assumes that “an investor will be located outside the territory of the
Party” which is bound to provide national treatment.>? The Investor was pro-
hibited from fabricating the steel (part of its investment) in Canada and sell-

37 Id. paras. 127-128.
38 Id. para. 155
3° Id. para. 157.
40 Td, para. 160.
41 Id. para. 135,

CASES. 227

ing to ADF International, “because its facilities in Canada were treated less
favorably than any like facilities in the United States.”4°

65. Article 1102, the Investor argues, “has extended the principle against
discrimination in trade in goods to cover investors and their investments.”4!
Article 1102 must be viewed in its context which consists of a free trade agree-
ment designed to encourage the free flow of goods, services and investments
within the NAFTA area.‘* Upon the other hand, the Congressional intent
underlying the U.S. measures in question is “unequivocal: it is to favor the
output of U.S. enterprises over [that of] non-U.S. enterprises and thereby to
favor U.S. enterprises over non-U.S. enterprises.” (Emphasis and brackets
added)*3 The U.S. measures are, in the Investor’s submission, “de jure (on
their face’) discriminatory,” and “protectionist,” treating non-U.S. investors
and their investments less favorably than U.S. investors and their invest-
ments,”44

66. The Investor elaborates by arguing that the U.S. measures, by requir-
ing investors of another NAFTA Party to use domestically produced goods
only and effectively prohibiting the use of imported goods in certain contracts,
adversely affect the “management, conduct and operation” of the invest-
ment.*> The measures here in question restrict the “ability to freely transfer
goods and services between a parent corporation and its subsidiary,” and
diminishes the investment’s capacity “to integrate its operations with those of
the investor.”4° Thus, in the view of the Investor, the U.S. measures place
ADF International at a competitive disadvantage vis-’-vis domestic fabrica-
tors.47 For steel fabricators in the U.S., the ability to fabricate in Canada is
“irrelevant.” Upon the other hand, ADF International alone is confronted
with the necessity of choosing from three options: expanding its U.S. facility;

42 Id. para. 138. Article 102(1) of NAFTA sets out the objectives of NAFTA which are, inter
alia, to:

“(a) eliminate barriers to trade in, and facilitate the cross-border movement of goods and services

between the territories of the Parties;

(b) promote conditions of fair competition in the free trade area; [and]

(0) increase substantially investment opportunities in the territories of the parties; ...”

‘3 Investor's Memorial, para. 147.

“4 Td. paras. 146, 208.

45 Id. para. 162.

46 Td. para. 165.

47 Id. para. 171.

48 Id. paras. 173, 175.

49 Id. paras. 181-190.

228 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

or subcontracting work to its U.S. competitors; or abandoning significant
business opportunities.**

67. Finally, the application of the U.S. measures to the Sub-Contract
between Shirley and ADF International constituted a refusal of U.S. authori-
ties to follow their own consistent caselaw to the effect that “post-production
fabrication” of steel products does not change the origin of that steel for pur-
poses of “buy national” requirements.? The rule applied to the Investor was
that fabrication in Canada of U.S.-origin steel constituted manufacturing or
production that does change the country of origin of the steel from U.S. to
Canada. Such refusal to follow the applicable caselaw was “in itself'a violation
of [the] national treatment {obligation].”°°

(b) Article 1105: The Minimum Standard of Treatment Obligation
68. Article 1105, in its pertinent portion, provides:
“Article 1105: Minimum Standard of Treatment.

1. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of
another Party treatment in accordance with international law,
including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and
security. ...”

69. The Claimant begins by recalling the provisions of Article 102(2)
which direct Parties to interpret and apply NAFTA provisions “in the light of
[NAFTA] objectives set out in Article 102(1) and in accordance with applica-
ble rules of international law.” Thus, the Claimant submits that Article
1105(1) is to be interpreted “in a manner which eliminates barriers to trade in
goods and services in order to attain the—objectives [of NAFTA]” and read
“purposefully and in a large and liberal manner so as to defeat the barriers [to
trade] that the objectives of NAFTA are designed to overcome.”>!

70. The Claimant goes on to make a textual argument: “full protection
and security,” the words actually used in Article 1105(1), should not be recast
as “protection and security from the most egregious of government action,” or as
“full protection and security from actions that would shock the international

50 Id. para. 189
51 Id. para. 235

CASES. 229

community.” (Emphasis added)°* Neither may “international law” as used in
Article 1105(1) be read as “customary international law,” since “customary
international law does not provide fair and equitable [treatment] and full pro-
tection and security” to investors.(Emphasis added) If it did so provide, the
Investor argues, there would have been no need for the multitude of bilateral
investment treaties (BITs) which are now in force.”>?

71. To the Claimant, Article 1105(1) does not simply prohibit treatment
of investments of another Party’s investors which constitutes “egregious con-
duct,” but rather prohibits “any treatment that is not in itself ‘fair’ and ‘equi-
table’ or which does not provide ‘full protection and security’.”*4 The inter-
national law referred to in Article 1105(1) establishes and projects “fair and
equitable treatment” and the providing of “full protection and security” as
positive legal requirements, against which the treatment accorded by the
United States to the Investor and its investments may be evaluated by the

Tribunal.

72. The Investor contends that the U.S. measures here in question fail to
come up to those legal requirements in a variety of ways. First, the Buy Amer-
ica provision in Section 165 of the STAA of 1982 as amended is “per se unfair
and inequitable within the context of NAFTA.”®> Second, the Buy America
provision fails adequately to control the discretionary authority of the FHWA,
which agency “applies the law as it sees fit, irrespective of the text of Section
165.” Section 165 hence does not accord “full protection and security” to
investors of another Party.°° Third, the application of the Buy America provi-
sion to the Investor arbitrarily dissolves the “legitimate expectations” created
by previous decisions of U.S. courts and administrative agencies “with respect
to ‘buy national’ policies.”°” The Investor also complains about “the proce-
dures used by the U.S. to adopt the [administrative] regulations in question”
as violative of the requirements of Article 1105(1) and the Albanian and
Estonian BITs with the U.S.°° It is less than clear, however, whether this com-
plaint is not already covered by the second or the third specification of the
Investor. Finally, after having undertaken to exclude the Buy America provi-

32 Id, para. 238.

53 Id. para. 239.

%4 Td. para. 243.

58 Id. para. 249.

56 Id.

97 Id. para. 251.

58 Investor's Reply to the Counter-Memorial of the United States on Competence and Liability

(Investor's Reply), para. 283.

230 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

sion from Federal Government procurement under Chapter 10 of NAFTA,
the U.S. should not “indirectly force states to apply [that provision].” Allow-
ing states to pursue Buy America policies is one thing; it is quite another thing
actively to “forc[e] them to do so.”*?

73. On 31 July 2001, a day before the submission by the Claimant of its
Memorial dated 1 August 2001, the NAFTA Free Trade Commission (FTC)
issued its “Notes of Interpretation of Certain Chapter XI Provisions” (FTC
Interpretation), signed for their respective Governments by the United States
Trade Representative, the Mexican Secretary of Economy and the Canadian
Minister for International Trade. The FTC Interpretation, which was also on
31 July 2001, forwarded to the Tribunal by the Respondent,“ addressed cer-
tain articles of the NAFTA, including Article 1105(1):

“B. Minimum Standard of Treatment in Accordance with
International Law

1. Article 1105(1) prescribes the customary interna-
tional law minimum standard of treatment of aliens as
the minimum standard of treatment to be afforded to
investors of another Party.

2. The concepts of ‘fair and equitable treatment’ and
‘full protection and security’ do not require treatment in
addition to or beyond that which is required by the cus-
tomary international law minimum standard of treat-
ment of aliens.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of
another provision of the NAFTA, or of a separate inter-
national agreement, does not establish that there has been
a breach of Article 1105(1).”

74, The Investor’s response to the issuance of the FTC Interpretation, set
out in its Reply to the Counter-Memorial of the Respondent, was two fold:
firstly, the Investor reiterated the several arguments made in its Memorial that

59 Investor's Memorial., para. 255
6 Letter, dated August 3, 2001, of the Secretary of the Tribunal to the Members of the Tribunal.

CASES. 231

we have already noted;®! secondly, it brought within the focus of its submis-
sions the provisions of Article 1103.

(c) Article 1103: Most-Favored-Nation Treatment Obligation
75. Article 1103 reads as follows:
“Article 1103: Most-Favored-Nation Treatment.

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party
treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in like cir-
cumstances, to investors of any other Party or of a non-Party
with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition
of investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of
another Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords,
in like circumstances, to investments of investors of any other
Party or of a non-Party with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and
sale or other disposition of investments.”

76. The Investor submits that one effect of Article 1103 is that investors
of a Party to NAFTA are entitled to benefit from the better of the treatment
afforded to (i) NAFTA investors under Article 1105, or (ii) the treatment
afforded to investors of a non-NAFTA Party under Article 1103.% If a bilat-
eral investment treaty (BIT or treaty) entered into by the United States of
America with any non-NAFTA Party offered treatment to investors more
favorable than the treatment provided for by “customary international law,” a
NAFTA investor is, in the view of the Investor, entitled to the treatment
required under that treaty.

77. The Investor goes on to adduce Article II(3)(a) and (b) of the BIT
between the Respondent and the Republic of Albania which went into effect
on 4 January 1998 and which provides:

51 Investor's Reply, paras. 248-264.
82 Investor's Reply, para. 221 and footnote 53 thereof.

232 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

“Article II

3. (a) Each Party shall at all times accord to covered
investments fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security and shall in no case accord
treatment less favorable than that required by inter-
national law.

(b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by unreason-
able and discriminatory measures the conduct, oper-
ation and sale or other disposition of covered invest-

ments.”6

78. To the Investor, the text of Article II(3)(a) of the U.S.-Albania BIT

contemplates “separate obligations of ‘fair and equitable treatment’ and ‘full

protection and security” and establishes a “floor, ‘treatment required by inter-
national law,’ below which the first two elements cannot fall.”°4 Article

II(3)(a) requires, in other words, “fair and equitable treatment” and “full pro-

tection and security” to be accorded to covered investments, a standard of

treatment “separate” or “distinct” from, and more favorable than, the treat-
ment required by customary international law minimum standard of treat-
ment incorporated in Article 1105(1) of NAFTA as interpreted by the FTC

Interpretation.©>

79. The Investor also submits that Article II(3)(b) of another treaty—the
U.S.-Estonia BIT which entered into force on 16 February 1997—estab-
lishes—via Article 1103 of NAFTA—another “self-contained” standard of
treatment of investors and investments of a NAFTA Party:

“Article II

3. (b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary
or discriminatory measures the management, operation,

 

maintenance, use or enjoyment, acquisition, expansion,

63 The U.S.-Albania BIT was signed on 11 January 1995 and went into effect on 4 January 1998;
text in Materials and Cases, appended to the Investor's Memorial, Vol. I—A.2; Tab. A-17.

4 Investor's Reply, paras. 223, 231.

5 The Investor also describes the “fair and equitable treatment” and “fall protection and secu-
rity” standards set out in Article I1(3)(1) of the U.S.-Albania BIT as “self-contained”; Investor's Reply,
paras, 231 and 236, citing R. Dolzer and M. Stevens, Bilateral Investment Treaties, p. 60 (1995).

CASES. 233

or disposal of investment. For purpose of dispute resolu-
tion under Articles VI and VII [the arbitration provi-
sions], a measure may be arbitrary or discriminatory
notwithstanding the fact that a Party has had or has exer-
cised the opportunity to review such measure in the
courts or administrative tribunals of a Party.” (Empha-

sis added)

80. A final contention of the Investor is that the “separate,” “distinct” and
“self-contained” standards of treatment projected by the U.S.-Albania and
U.S.-Estonia BITS, considered by the Investor to be more favorable than the
minimum standard of treatment associated with the customary international
law by the FTC, are in any case available to the Investor under the “national
treatment” provisions in Article 1102 of the NAFTA. Invoking certain state-
ments made by the Arbitral Tribunal in the Maffézini case,°’ the Investor
urges that “national treatment” covers not just the treatment of foreign
investors in the territory of a NAFTA Party, but also the treatment demanded
by that NAFTA Party for its own investors outside its own territory. Under
this view, the Investor is entitled by virtue of NAFTA Article 1102 to the
treatment accorded to U.S. investors by Albania and Estonia in their respec-
tive territories under the U.S.-Albania and U.S.-Estonia treaties.

(d) Article 1106: The Obligation Not to Impose or Enforce
Performance Requirements

81. The next principal claim of the Investor is that the United States
measures here at stake are inconsistent with the requirements of NAFTA Arti-
cle 1106. The Investor cites the following portions of Article 1106:

“Article 1106: Performance Requirements

1. No Party may impose or enforce any of the following
requirements, or enforce any commitment or undertak-
ing, in connection with the establishment, acquisition,

66 As quoted in Investor's Reply, 238; see id. para 240. It is worth noting that Article I1(3)(2) of
the U.S.-Albania BIT, substantially reproducing the first sentence of Article I1(3)(b) of the U.S.-Estonia
BIT, prohibits “unreasonable and discriminatory measures.”

© Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/ 97/ 7; 40 ILM 1129 (2001); Decision
of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 25 January 2000.

“8 Investor's Reply, paras. 242-247. The Maffézini case referred to the “national-treatment” not
to the “most-favored nation-treatment” obligation.

234 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

expansion, management, conduct or operation of an
investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in
its territory:

(b) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic
content;

(c) to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods pro-
duced or services provided in its territory, or to pur-
chase goods or services from persons in its territory;

...” (Emphases added)

82. | The Buy America measures of the Respondent, the Investor argues,
violate Article 1106(1)(b) by imposing a 100% domestic (United States) con-
tent requirement, and Article 1106(1)(c) by requiring preference to be given
to United States-produced steel materials and products, if the Investor is to
provide fabricated steel products to Federal-aid highway projects. In the
present case, ADF International is obliged to purchase only U.S. steel and
either to fabricate that steel in the U.S. itself, or to subcontract the fabrication
to U.S. steel fabricators rather than to its Canadian parent.’? The Respon-
dent’s measures impose performance requirements relating to or connected
with the “management, conduct or operation” of ADF International within
the meaning of the chapeau of Article 1106 since those measures “directly
impact the daily activities, operations and sales” of ADF International.”!

83. To document the non-conforming nature of the Buy America meas-
ures, the Investor adverts to the part of Article 1108(1) of NAFTA which
provides:

“Article 1108: Reservations and Exceptions

1. Articles 1102, 1103, 7/06 and 1107 do not apply to:

(a) any existing non-conforming measure that is main-

tained by

© Investor's Memorial, para. 257 et seq.
7 Id. para. 259.

7 Investor's Memorial, para. 274.

CASES.

(i) a Party at the federal level, as set out in its Sched-
ule to Annex I or III,

(b) continuation or prompt renewal of any non-con-
forming measure referred to in subparagraph (a);

...” (Emphasis added)

235

84. — The Investor further points to the United States Schedule to Annex I,
entitled “Reservations for Existing Measures and Liberalization Commit-
ments,” which Schedule includes the following item:

“Sector:
Type of Reservation:
Level of Government:

Measures:

Description:

‘Waste Management

Performance Requirements (Article
1106)

Federal
Clean Water Act, 33 USC
secs. 1251 et seq.

The Clean Water Act authorizes grants
for the construction of treatment
plants for municipal sewage or indus-
trial waste. Grant recipients may be
privately owned enterprises. The Act
provides that grants shall be made for
treatment works only if such articles,
materials and supplies as have been
manufactured, mined or produced in
the U.S. will be used in the treatment
works. The Administrator of the Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency has
authority not to apply this provision
for example, if the cost of the articles in

236 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

question is unreasonable (33 U.S.C.
sec. 1295).”72

85. The Investor believes that the United States has admitted that the
“Buy America” provisions of the Clean Water Act are inconsistent with the
requirements of Article 1106 and hence needed to be saved under Article
1108(1) and the U.S. Schedule to Annex I. The “Buy America” provisions of
Section 165 of the STAA Act of 1982 as amended are more stringent than the
comparable provisions of the Clean Water Act, since the former (as inter-
preted by the FHWA) requires that the steel products used in a Federal-aid
highway project be wholly manufactured and fabricated in the United States,
while the latter is satisfied if the products involved had been manufactured in
the United States “substantially all” from articles manufactured in the United
States. Since the U.S. measures here in question have not been saved under
Article 1108(1), it follows, the Investor submits, that those measures are a for-
tiori inconsistent with Article 1106(1)(b) and (c) and may no longer be
applied in respect of investments of investors of a NAFTA Party.”

(e) Non-applicability of Exceptions to Articles 1102, 1103 and 1106:
Effect of Article 1108(7) and (8)—Procurement by a Party

86. The Investor turns to Article 1108(7) and (8) of NAFTA which the
Respondent in its Counter-Memorial invokes as a principal defense against the
principal claims of the Investor. The pertinent portions of Article 1108 follow:

“Article 1108: Reservations and Exceptions

7. Articles 1102, 1103 and 1107 do not apply to:

(a) procurement by a Party or a state enterprise; or

72 The Clean Water Act provides:
“Section 1295. Requirements for American Materials. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, no grant—shall be made under this subchapter for any treatment works wnless only such
manufactured articles, materials and supplies as have been mined or produced in the United
States, and only such manufactured articles, materials and supplies as have been manufactured in
the United States substantially all from articles, materials and supplies mined, produced or man-
ufactured, as the case may be, in the United States will be used in such treatment works. ...”
(Emphases provided) Full text in Materials and Cases, vol. IIA.1, Tab. A-8, appended to
Investor's Reply.

73 Investor's Memorial, paras. 264-267.

CASES. 237

(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a state
enterprise, including government-supported loans,
guarantees and insurance.

8. The provisions of:

(b) Article 1106(1)(b), (c), (f) and (g), and (3)(a) and
(b) do not apply to procurement by a Party or a state
enterprise; ...” (Emphases added)

87. The Investor seeks to avoid the thrust of Article 1108(8)(b) by stating
that the present case is mot a procurement case and that the Investor is not
complaining about the conduct of any Federal procurement. The Investor
complains, rather, about the Respondent’s measures imposed and enforced by
the Federal Government upon the purchase of goods and services by the
VDOT in connection with the Springfield Interchange Project. Had the Fed-
eral Government not imposed its measures on VDOT, the Claimant would
have been able to supply to VDOT steel products fabricated in Claimant's
facilities in Canada. The activities and operations of VDOT, the Investor con-
cedes, did constitute procurement by the Commonwealth of Virginia. The
Federal Government did not purchase or otherwise acquire any goods and
services for the Springfield Interchange Project; the VDOT did, for the Com-
monwealth of Virginia. However, unlike the U.S. Federal Government, the
Commonwealth of Virginia is not subject to the disciplines of Chapter 10 and
has not voluntarily assumed any obligations in respect of procurement under
Chapter 10. Thus, in the view of the Investor, if the Respondent’s measures
here in question do constitute procurement, they would constitute violation
by the United States Government of the prohibitions of Chapter 10, includ-
ing in particular Article 1006. If, on the other hand, the Respondent's meas-
ures do not constitute procurement by the Federal Government, then they are
not saved by Article 1108(8)(b).”4

88. The Investor concedes that Article 1108(7)(b) permits a Party to dero-
gate from the national treatment obligation when making grants and subsi-
dies. Article 1108(7)(b), however, does not “permit a Party to continue ad
infinitum to require that grant recipients in turn violate the national treatment

74 Td. paras. 292-294.

238 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

obligation when they spend [the grant or subsidy] funds...””> The Respon-
dent may, in other words, discriminate between nationals and non-nationals
in selecting the grantee of a “subsidy or grant,” but may not impose on the
grantee “an obligation to continue discriminating.””°

(6) Claims Concerning Projects Other than the Springfield
Interchange Project

89. In its Notice of Arbitration,, paragraph 76, the Investor stated that the
“[clontinued application of the [United States measures] will cause additional
damage to ADF International, limiting its ability to fully participate in all
future Federal-aid highway construction projects.” In its Memorial, the
Investor builds upon the above sentence and alleges that it has participated in
certain other Federal-aid highway projects, namely: (a) the Lorten Bridge Pro-
ject in Virginia; (b) the Brooklyn Queens Expressway Bridge Project in the
State of New York; and (c) the Queens Bridge Project also in the State of New
York.””

90. In the above-mentioned projects, the Investor claims, the United
States measures here in question were applied, with the result that ADF Inter-
national or ADF Group was unable to use in those projects U.S.-origin steel
that was fabricated in Canada. The Investor alleges it sustained damages, the

extent of which it proposes to address at the second phase of this arbitration.’8
2. The Respondent’s Principal Defenses and Submissions
(a) Concerning Article 1102: The National Treatment Obligation,
and Article 1106: The Obligation Not to Impose or Enforce
Performance Requirements
91. A basic defense of the Respondent is that the Investor’s claims based

on Articles 1102 and 1106 are foreclosed by the exceptions set out in Article
1108(7)(a) and (8)(b) for “procurement by a Party.””?

75 Td. para. 305.

76 Id. para. 308.

77 Investor's Memorial, para. 31. These “other Projects” are also listed in the Witness Statement
of Mr. Pierre Paschini, para. 54; Appendix 1 to Investor's Memorial. In para. 55 of this same Statement,
it is said that “ADF has incurred significant additional costs on those [other] Projects because of the
imposition of the Buy America Measures.” Id.

78 Investor's Memorial, para. 32.

79 Respondent's Counter-Memorial on Competence and Liability (Counter- Memorial), p. 20.

  

CASES. 239

92. It is stated, firstly, by the Respondent that, as the Investor has con-
ceded, the Commonwealth of Virginia, in purchasing steel and services from
Shirley (which in turn contracted with the Investor), was engaged in “pro-
curement.”®° Virginia being one of the States of the United States, there was,
in the present case, procurement by a “governmental unit of the United
States.” The purchase of steel and services by a governmental unit of the
United States is “plainly ‘procurement by a Party’” within the meaning of
Article 1108.5!

93. The second argument of the Respondent relates to the coverage or
scope of application of NAFTA Chapter 10, entitled “Government Procure-
ment.” Notwithstanding the comprehensiveness of the title of Chapter 10, not
all government procurement, in fact, was intended to be subjected directly to
the disciplines of Chapter 10. At present, Chapter 10 applies only to measures
“relating to procurement”®? by specified U.S. Federal Government entities listed
in Annex 1001.1a-1 under the rubric “Schedule of the United States” which
lists 56 United States Government agencies or entities (including, it may be
noted, the Department of Transportation). Thus, while Article 1108 excludes
from the provisions of Chapter 11 “any and all government procurement”
(whether by the Federal Government or by sub-federal governmental agen-
cies), Chapter 10 in fact reaches only procurement by certain listed Federal
Government agencies. More specifically, in the view of the Respondent, state
and provincial government procurement is not subjected to any national-treat-
ment and performance-requirement obligations whether under Chapter 11 or
under Chapter 10.85

94. To document the limited scope of application of Chapter 10, the
Respondent cites the United States’ Statement of Administrative Action®4 and
Canada’s Statement of Implementation.*> In addition, it is contended by the
Respondent that all three NAFTA Parties, after the NAFTA had gone into
effect, continue to maintain federal assistance programs for state and provin-

80 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, p. 23.

81 Id. p. 20.

82 Article 1001(1). The NAFTA Parties have, in Article 1024, recorded their intent to enter into
‘future negotiations for expansion of the coverage of Chapter X to include procurement by state and
provincial government agencies and enterprises. See further, infra, paras. 163-167.

83 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, pp. 25-26.

84 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, p. 28; see North American Free Trade Agreement,—State-
ment of Administrative Action, p. 135, Appendix vol. I; appended to Respondent's Counter-Memor-
ial, Tab.-32.

85 Id. p. 27; see Dept. of External Affairs, North American Free Trade Agreement, Canadian
Statement on Implementation, Canada Gazette,1 January 1994, p. 47, id. Tab.-24.

240 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

cial government procurement.8¢ The Federal Government of Canada, for
instance, provides heavy financial assistance to the provinces for highway con-
struction and many of the provinces receiving this assistance enforce domestic
preference regulations in their procurement. In Mexico, too, federal law pre-
scribes preferences for Mexican goods and services in procurement by states
wholly or partially funded by the federal Mexican government.*” Finally, it is
submitted by the Respondent that, in point of fact, domestic requirements for
government procurement are in place “in most, if not all, countries.” Even
where countries have accepted limited obligations not to impose domestic
content or preference requirements for domestic goods and services, they have

commonly exempted local government procurement from such obligations.*®

95. The third argument of the Respondent is that the Investor’s assertions
concerning Article 1108(7) and (8) lead to a conclusion that makes “no
sense.”®? Procurement by a state or provincial government is exempt from the
national-treatment and performance-requirement obligations imposed by
Chapter 10 which expressly addresses government procurement. Nevertheless,
according to the Respondent, the Investor claims that state-level procurement
is subject to the disciplines of Chapter 11 because domestic-content require-
ments and preferences for domestic products are in themselves “protectionist,”
“discriminatory” and “unfair.” The NAFTA Parties simply have not agreed to
subject state-level procurement to the requirements and prohibitions of either
Chapter 10 or Chapter 11. Only federal-level procurement by certain identi-
fied federal government agencies and entities have been brought by the
NAFTA Parties under the coverage of Chapter 10 and disputes arising with
respect to such procurement fall within the ambit of the State-to-State dispute
resolution procedures of Chapter 20,” that is, outside the Investor-to-State
dispute settlement framework set up in Chapter 11.

96. The next principal defense of the Respondent against the Investor’s
claims of violation of Articles 1102 and 1106 presents multiple layers of argu-
ment. The Respondent submits, firstly, that Article 1102 requires national
treatment in respect of investors and investments of one Party, located in the

86 Stobo Declaration, Appendix of Evidentiary Materials, co Respondent's Counter-Memorial,

Tab-3 at pp. 36-47; Von Wobeser Declaration, id. Tab-4.

87 Id. pp. 28-29; see Expert Report of Gerald H. Stobo, Appendix of Evidentiary Materials,
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, Tab.-3, paras. 9-10, 25-26, 31 et seq. See further Expert Report of
Claus von Wobeser, id., Tab.-4, paras. 12, 17 et seq.

88 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, pp. 30-31.

89 Id. pp. 21, 35.

Id. p. 36.

 

CASES. 241

territory of another Party, not in respect of trade in goods and services originat-
ing from the territory of a Party. The latter is regulated, not by Chapter 11
and its Investor-State dispute resolution system, but rather by other Chapters
of NAFTA and other dispute resolution procedures.?!

97. Secondly, the Respondent stresses that, by virtue of the Buy America
provision in the VDOT-Shirley Main Contract, every steel fabricator in the
United States—whether of U.S. or Canadian or Mexican or other national-
ity—faces precisely the same constraints that ADF International faced. None
may subcontract work to fabricators outside the United States and use the
resulting steel products in a federal-aid highway project like the Springfield
Interchange Project. In other words, ADF International was not, with respect
to its “facilities in Canada” or the sale of its investment consisting of U.S.-
origin steel or otherwise, accorded treatment less favorable than the treatment
that would have been given to any steel fabricator of U.S. nationality.?? More
fundamentally, ADF’s facilities in Canada were neither “an investor” nor an
“investment” within the meaning of Chapter 11 and therefore, in the view of
the Respondent, they cannot be subject of an Article 1102 national treatment
violation.”°3

98. The Respondent argues, thirdly, that Article 1102 does not guarantee
a parent and its subsidiary corporation an “ability to freely transfer goods and
services between [them inter se].” Neither does Article 1102 restrain a Party
from limiting an investor's management, conduct or operation of its invest-
ment, so long as its own investors and their investments in like circumstances
are not given treatment, in respect of the same matters, more favorable than
that accorded to the investors of another Party and their investments.°4

99. To the Respondent, the judicial and administrative caselaw cited by
the Claimant is simply not on point. That caselaw deals with the interpreta-
tion of the 1933 Buy American Act which is concerned only with direct fed-
eral procurement, while the Buy America provisions of the 1982 STAA Act
relates only to federally-funded state procurement for highway projects. The
U.S. statutory provisions applicable to direct federal procurement are different
from those bearing upon federally-funded state highway procurement. The
former require only the use of “articles, ... manufactured in the United States

9°" Yd. pp. 37-39.
°2 Id. pp. 39-40.
93 Id. pp. 43-44.
%4 Id. p. 43.

242 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

substantially all from articles, ... manufactured, ... in the United States.” In con-
trast, the latter (1982) provisions require the use of “stee/, iron and manufac-
tured products ... produced in the United States,” a requirement read by the
FHWA as meaning “wholly produced in the United States.”°> The difference
in statutory language is reflected in differences in the implementing regula-
tions. The regulations implementing the 1933 direct federal procurement law
provide that “materials shall be considered to be of foreign origin if the cost of
the foreign products used in such materials constitutes 50 percentum or more of the
cost of all the products used in such materials.” In contrast, the regulations
implementing the 1982 statute dealing with federally-funded state highway
projects require that “if steel or iron materials are to be used, all manufactur-
ing processes, including application of a coating, for those materials must occur
in the United States.”°®

100. It is, further, submitted by the Respondent that the interpretation
given by the FHWA to the Buy America provision of the 1982 STAA has been
consistently maintained.?” The Investor has not shown that a different con-
struction of the same Buy America provision has been rendered by the FHWA
in respect of an investor of the United States and its investment, situated in
like circumstances as the ADF Group.°®

101. In respect of the Investor's Clean Water Act argument, the Respon-
dent explains” that, as the reservation made by the U.S. in its Schedule to
Annex 1 of the NAFTA expressly states, that Act authorizes grants for the con-
struction of treatment plants for municipal sewage and industrial waste, and
that “[g]rant recipients may be privately owned enterprises.” The procurement
involved would not therefore be regarded as “governmental procurement” or
“procurement by a Party” saved by the exception provided in Article
1108(7)(a) and (8)(b). Accordingly, the U.S. negotiators found it necessary, or
at least desirable, to save such federal-aid construction under another para-
graph of Article 1108, that is, under Article 1108(1)(a)(i), which saves certain
existing non-conforming measures listed in a NAFTA Party’s Schedule to
Annex 1.

95 Respondent's Counter- Memorial, pp. 44-45.
96 Td. pp. 45-46.

% Id. p. 46.

°8 Id. p. 46.

°9 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, pp. 34-35.

CASES. 243

(b) Concerning Article 1105(1): Minimum Standard of Treatment
of Foreign Investors and Their Investments and the FTC
Interpretation of 31 July 2001

102. To the Respondent, the Investor’s claim that the measures here in
question are inconsistent with the requirements of Article 1105(1) rests on the
supposition that Article 1105(1) projects “a subjective and intuitive standard
{of treatment of foreign investors and their investments] unknown to custom-
ary international law.”!°0 The Respondent relies upon the FTC Interpreta-
tion!®! to the effect that “Article 1105(1) prescribes the customary interna-
tional law minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum standard
of treatment to be afforded to investments of investors of another Party.” The
Respondent stresses that under Article 1131(2) of NAFTA, the FTC inter-
pretation is binding on this Tribunal, as on other NAFTA Chapter 11 tri-
bunals.

103. Building on the FTC Interpretation, the principal submission of the
Respondent is that the Investor, if it is to sustain its claim of violation of Arti-
cle 1105(1), must demonstrate that the measures here in question are incom-
patible with “a specific rule of customary international law.”!°? The Respon-
dent contends that the Investor has not identified, and cannot identify any,
“rule of customary international law” forbidding the United States from
imposing domestic content requirements in respect of government procure-
ment.!% Similarly, the Investor has not adduced any “rule of customary inter-
national law” violated by the administrative process by which the FHWA
promulgated its Buy America clause interpretation requiring that all manufac-
turing processes used in the production of steel products, including “post-pro-
duction” fabrication, occur in the United States. The Respondent concludes
that the Investor has not shown any breach of “customary international law
obligations incorporated into Article 1105(1).”104

100 14. p, 49.

101 See supra, para. 39.

102 Respondent's Counter-Memorial, p. 51.
103

104 7d. pp. 52-54; Respondent's Rejoinder, pp. 31-33

244 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

(c) Concerning Article 1103: Most-Favored-Nation Treatment

104. As earlier noted, it was in its Reply to the Counter-Memorial that the
Investor for the first time made a specific claim based on Article 1103, the
FTC Interpretation having been issued shortly before the Investor's Memorial
was filed. Thus, the Respondent's first opportunity to traverse the Investor's
Article 1103 claim was in the Rejoinder. The United States’ response to the
Article 1103 claim has three parts.

105. The Respondent contends, in the first part, that this Tribunal has no
jurisdiction to deal with the Article 1103 claim. Article 1119(b) of NAFTA
states that the notice of intention to submit a claim to arbitration shall spec-
ify, inter alia, “the provisions of [NAFTA] alleged to have been breached and
any other relevant provisions.” But ADF International’s notice of intent did
not allege breach of Article 1103 and in fact did not mention that Article. By
virtue of the provisions of Article 1122, the United States’ consent to the sub-
mission to arbitration did not encompass the Investor’s Article 1103 claim.
Accordingly, the arbitration agreement of the parties to this case does not
include an agreement to refer to arbitration the Article 1103 claim.!°° This
flaw is not cured by the omnibus relief clause (the Investor’s “basket clause”)
in the notice of intention in which the Investor “reserv[ed] its right to request
‘such further relief that counsel [for the Investor] may advise and the Arbitral
Tribunal may permit.”!°°

106. The Respondent argues, in the second part, that the Article 1108
exception for “procurement by a Party” includes the Article 1103 claim—
along with the Articles 1102 and 1106 claims—of the Investor. Accordingly,
all three claims should be dismissed under Article 1108(7)(a) and
1108(8) (b).!°7

107. In the third place, and in any event, the Respondent submits that the
U.S.-Albania and the U.S.-Estonia treaties, invoked by the Investor as pro-
jecting more favorable standards of treatment than that set out in Article
1105(1) as interpreted by the FTC, do not in fact do so. To the contrary, in
the view of the United States, the relevant provisions of the two treaties “set[-]

105 Respondent's Rejoinder, p. 38.
106 74. p, 39.
107 1d. p. 40.

CASES. 245

out a minimum standard of treatment based on standards found in customary
international law,” or “based on customary international law” simply.!°8 At no
time since the NAFTA came into force has the United States considered that
the treatment to be accorded to foreign investors by virtue of the “fair and
equitable treatment” clauses of treaties of the United States is more favorable
to investors than the treatment required under Article 1105(1) of NAFTA.
Still further, according to the Respondent, state practice “has consistently
viewed ‘fair and equitable treatment’ as referring to the customary interna-

tional law minimum standard of treatment of aliens.”!?

(d) Concerning Investor’s Claims Relating to Projects Other Than the
Springfield Interchange Project

108. The Respondent rejects the Investor’s claims concerning “other proj-
ects,” that is, projects other than the Springfield Interchange Project. The
Respondent questions the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to consider those claims
upon the ground that the United States has not given its consent to submis-
sion of those other claims to arbitration. Under Article 1122(1), the United
States maintains that its consent is limited “to the submission of a claim to
arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in [the NAFTA].” The
Investor’s Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration made no men-
tion of highway construction projects other than the Springfield Interchange
Project and the Investor is accordingly precluded from asserting claims relat-
ing to such other projects.

3. The Post-Hearing Submissions of the Parties and the Other
NAFTA Parties on Article 1105(1)

109. It was noted earlier that the issuance of the 31 May 2002 Pope and
Talbot Damages Award, and the Investor’s act of providing a copy thereof to
the Tribunal and the Respondent, occasioned the filing of a series of Post-
Hearing Submissions from the parties and from Canada and Mexico, all focus-
ing on NAFTA Article 1105 and the reading thereof by the Pope and Talbot
Tribunal. The Tribunal had asked the parties to provide it with their com-
ments on “what factors, or kinds of factors, a Chapter Eleven tribunal apply-
ing in a concrete case the ‘fair and equitable treatment and full protection and
security standard’ referred to in Article 1105(1), NAFTA, may take into

108 7. pp. 40-41
109 Jd. p. 42.

246 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

account.” We summarize below, in very condensed terms, the principal Post-
hearing submissions made by the parties and Canada and Mexico in respect of
Article 1105(1).

(a) The Disputing Parties’ Post-Hearing Submissions on Article
1105(1)

110. The Respondent in its first Post-Hearing Submission of 27 June 2002
submits that the factors that a tribunal applying the “fair and equitable treat-
ment and full protection and security” standard depend upon the rule of the
customary international law minimum standard of treatment implicated by
the claims asserted. The Claimant, however, has not identified any rule of cus-
tomary international law embodied in Article 1105(1) that has been violated
by the conduct of the Respondent about which the Claimant complains. The
“{nternational minimum standard” embraced by Article 1105(1) is, according
to the Respondent, “an umbrella concept incorporating a set of rules” which
“have crystallized into customary international law in specific concepts.”!!°
The term “fair and equitable treatment” refers to “the customary international
law minimum standard of treatment” which encompasses rules such as “those
for denial of justice, expropriation and other acts subject to an absolute, min-
imum standard of treatment under customary international law.”!!! On the
other hand, the term “full protection and security” refers to the “minimum
level of police protection against criminal conduct” required as a matter of cus-
tomary international law.!!? The pertinent rules of the customary interna-
tional law minimum standard of treatment of aliens, according to the Respon-
dent, are “specific ones that address particular contexts. There is no single
standard applicable to all contexts.”!!9

111. The Respondent goes on to stress that a Chapter 11 tribunal may not
disregard an interpretation of a NAFTA provision by the NAFTA Parties
acting through the FTC, or interpret that provision in a manner inconsistent
with an FTC interpretation, by characterizing that interpretation as an
“amendment.” The authority of a Chapter 11 tribunal with respect to the
interpretation of the NAFTA is expressly made subject to decisions taken by
the FTC. The FTC’s authority to issue binding interpretations “ensures the

10 Post-Hearing Submission of Respondent United States of America on Article 1105(1) and
Pope and Talbot, 27 June 2002 (Respondent's Post-Hearing Submission), p. 2.
Md p. 3.

127g,
113 Id. pp. 3-4

CASES. 247

consistent and uniform interpretation of the NAFTA.” A Chapter 11 tribunal
which disregards an interpretation of the FTC, exceeds thereby the scope of its
authority under the NAFTA.!!4

112. At the same time, however, the Respondent expressly reiterates that
“customary international law, including the minimum standard of treatment
of aliens, may evolve over time.”!!> The Pope and Talbot Tribunal did not
examine the mass of existing BITs to determine whether those treaties repre-
sent concordant state practice and whether they constitute evidence of the
opinio juris constituent of customary international law. Thus, in the Respon-
dent’s view, that Tribunal was not in a position to state whether any particu-
lar BIT obligation has crystallized into a rule of customary international
law.116

113. On 11 July 2002, the Jnvestor filed its first Post-Hearing Submission
and there, in response to the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submission, sets out
a series of observations. The first is that a Chapter 11 tribunal must of course
regard an interpretation by the FTC of a NAFTA provisions as binding upon
it.!!7 At the same time, a NAFTA tribunal is obliged under Article 1131(1) to
interpret NAFTA provisions in accordance with “the applicable rules of inter-
national law,” including the customary international law rules on treaty inter-
pretation. Thus, a tribunal must consider FTC interpretations “alongside the
objects and purposes of the NAFTA and the plain and ordinary meaning of
the terms in the context in which they appear.”!!® The second observation of
the Claimant relates to the evolving nature of customary international law,
including the portion thereof embodying the minimum standard of treatment
of aliens. The Investor notes that the Respondent has expressly accepted that
the customary international law standards are not “frozen in time” but instead
“do evolve,” and that the FTC when it issued its interpretation of Article
1105(1) had in mind “customary international law as it exists today.”!!? The
Investor rejects, thirdly, the basic submission of the Respondent that violation
of a specific rule of customary international law must be shown by the

14 Td. pp, 10-12.

15 Id. p. 20.

16 Td p, 21.

117 Post-Hearing Submission of Claimant ADF Group Inc. on NAFTA Article 1105(1) and the
Damages Award in Pope and Talbot and Canada, 11 July 2002 (Claimant's Post-Hearing Submission),

ara. 9.

, 18 Td. para. 11.

119 [1 paras. 33-34; 39; 62.

248 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

Investor. To the Investor, this is like suggesting that there is no law of tort, but
only “a large group of unconnected wrongs, each with its own name” into one
of which a plaintiff must fit the defendant’s acts and the resulting harm before
a remedy will be judicially granted.!?° Customary international law, in the
Claimant's view, does not establish such a requirement. The Investor goes on
to list what it calls “factors” that this Tribunal should take into account but
which, it appears to us, are in fact what the Investor believes are the differing
courses of action open to us in resolving its claim of violation of Article

1105(1).

114. The Investor, in its first Post-Hearing Submission, adduces what is
arguably a new contention to sustain its claim of violation of NAFTA Article
1105(1). The Investor contends that the Respondent violated its Article
1105(1) obligation by “failing to perform its NAFTA obligations in good
faith.”!?! The Buy America requirement is “not good faith performance of the
NAFTA obligations” of the U.S. and the interpretation submitted by the U.S.
of the relevant NAFTA terms falls short of “a good faith interpretation of the
treaty.”!?? The principle of good faith performance is part of customary inter-
national law and is “subsumed” in Article 1105(1).!23 This new emphasis on
the “principle of good faith” is in line with the Investor’s contention, asserted
in its pre-hearing pleadings, that the Respondent “abused its discretion” in
administering its Buy America program which results in “effective discrimina-
tion against foreign investors such as ADF.”!*4

115. On 1 August 2002, the Respondent filed a Final Post-Hearing Submis-
sion in which it states that all three NAFTA Parties have confirmed that “the
NAFTA does not permit a Chapter Eleven tribunal to review an interpretation
of the NAFTA Parties, sitting as members of the FTC,” and disregard it on
the basis that interpretation is in fact an “amendment.”!?° The Respondent
also notes that Canada and Mexico have joined the U.S. in its rejection of key
arguments or positions taken by the Pope and Talbot Tribunal in respect of
Article 1105(1). Thus, the NAFTA Parties are one in stating that Article

120 17. paras. 43-46.

121 17. para. 86.

122 [7., para. 96.

123 [7. para. 89.

124 Investor's Reply to Counter-Memorial, paras. 248, 260, 263.

25 Final Post-Hearing Submission of Respondent United States of American on Article 105(1)
and Pope and Talbot, 1 August 2002 (Respondent's Final Post-Hearing Submission), p 2.

CASES. 249

1105(1), read together with the FTC Interpretation, clearly prescribes the cus-
tomary international law minimum standard of treatment.

116. In its Final Post-Hearing Submission, the Respondent also confronts
the Investor’s arguments that the U.S. measures constitute arbitrary and dis-
criminatory conduct inconsistent with Article 1105(1) on the one hand, and
violative of the principle of good faith performance incorporated in customary
international law, on the other hand. The Respondent contends that the
Investor has failed to sustain “its assertion that there exists a general interna-
tional obligation to refrain from ‘arbitrary’ conduct.”!?° Similarly, the
Respondent construes the Investor’s argument about the principle of good
faith performance as an assertion that customary international law prescribes
“a general obligation of ‘good faith ... subsumed in Article 1105(1),” and
rejects the notion that such “a general obligation of ‘good faith’ exists.”!27 The
Respondent does recognize that customary international law rules, like the
rule of pacta sunt servanda, may impose obligations of good faith performance,
but points out that the Buy America provisions were not issued to implement
NAFTA obligations. The Claimant did not prove that a “specific obligation of
good faith” had been violated by the U.S.!?8 Finally, it is stressed that, in any
event, the Claimant has not presented any evidence of acts on the part of the
Respondent that constitute “arbitrary” or “bad faith” conduct.

117. On 1 August 2002, the Jnvestor filed its Second (and final) Post-Hear-
ing Submission responding to the Respondent’s first Post-Hearing Submission
and to the Article 1128 Submissions of Canada and Mexico. The Investor at
the outset reiterates that FTC interpretations issued under NAFTA Article
2001(2)(c) are indeed binding on this and other Chapter Eleven tribunals.!29
At the same time, the Investor insists that there is a threshold issue this Tri-
bunal must address: “whether the FTC statement of 31 July 2001 is an inter-
pretation by the Commission within the meaning of article 1131 such that it
is binding on this Tribunal.”!5° In addressing that issue, the Tribunal, accord-
ing to the Investor, would simply be exercising its authority, indeed, its duty
“to determine the governing law” that it must apply. Otherwise, the FTC

126 1d. p. 7.
127 Id. p. 11.
128 Td. pp. 12-14.
129 Second Post-Hearing Submission of the Investor Responding to Article 1128 Post-Hearing
Submissions of Canada and Mexico, 1 August 2002 (Investor's Second Post-Hearing Submission),
ara. 3.
Pee 0 para. 7.

250 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

“would be empowered to amend NAFTA, at least ... Chapter Eleven [there-
of],” which “result” would fly in the face of Article 2202 which prescribes the
procedure for “amendment” of NAFTA provisions.!3!

118. The Investor also suggests that Canada and Mexico do not go the full
length to which the Respondent goes. In the view of the Investor, Canada and
Mexico have not supported “the pigeonhole approach to international claims
put forward by the U.S.”!5? Canada and Mexico begin with the position that
a “wrong committed by a state in respect of an investor is actionable [pro-
vided] that wrong is of a sufficient magnitude.” Their disagreement with the
Investor concerns the “magnitude of the wrong which will trigger liability.”!95
The Investor reads Mexico’s position in its Submission to be that “the substi-
tution of arbitrary act for the rule of law” indicates the kind of action that “in
appropriate circumstances attract State responsibility.”!34 The Investor affirms
that such is precisely the kind of arbitrary action it is complaining about.

(b) The Submissions of the Other NAFTA Parties Pursuant to Article
1128 of NAFTA

(i) The Submissions of Canada

119. Canada made two submissions to the Tribunal pursuant to NAFTA
Article 1128, the first on 18 January 2002 before the oral hearing of 15-19
April 2002, and the second on 19 July 2002 after that oral hearing.

120. In its first (7.e., Pre-Hearing) Submission, the Government of Canada
affirmed that the 31 July 2001 FTC Interpretation is binding on this Tribunal
and constitutes the proper basis for interpreting NAFTA Article 1105(1). The
FTC, Canada stresses, “is the Parties to the NAFTA acting collectively under
that treaty.” Further, “in acting through the [FTC], the Parties act through a
single body with decision-making power under the NAFTA.” The FTC is
vested with “the prime and final authority as the interpreter of the NAFTA,”
and an interpretation by the FTC is “the full expression of what the NAFTA
Parties intended.”!35

131 Id, paras. 8-9.

132 Id, para. 25.

133 J. para. 26.

134 Td. paras. 30-31.

135 Submission of the Government of Canada Pursuant to NAFTA Article 1128, 18 January
2002, paras. 5-7.

CASES. 251

121. In its Second (i.e. Post-Hearing) Submission, Canada rejected the
assertion of the Pope and Talbot Damages Award that the “fair and equitable
treatment” and “full protection and security” standards in Article 1105(1)
were “additive” to the customary international law minimum standard of
treatment. Further, Canada states that the FTC interpretations are not them-
selves subject to interpretation by a Chapter Eleven tribunal since it is FTC’s
mandate to resolve interpretation disputes with finality.!5° The view expressed
by the Pope and Talbot Tribunal that the FTC 31 July 2002 Interpretation was
an “amendment” and not a true interpretation, is explicitly rejected by
Canada. The statement by the S. D. Myers Tribunal that “a breach of 1105
occurs only when it is shown that an investor has been treated in such an
unjust or arbitrary manner that the treatment rises to the level that is unac-
ceptable from the international perspective,” is, in the view of Canada, con-
sistent with the FTC Interpretation.!5” In Canada’s view, the standard set in
Article 1105(1) is a minimum standard, well captured by the Neer decision,
but by no means static or frozen in time.!98 Canada expresses skepticism that
a customary law standard can be derived from the many hundreds of BITs
existing today.!5° As to the standard for characterizing a measure as “arbi-
trary,” Canada believes that has been best expressed in the ELSI case by a
chamber of the International Court of Justice as “a willful disregard of due
process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises a sense of judicial pro-
priety.” Canada submits that the threshold for designating a measure as “arbi-

trary” “remains high.”!40

(ii) The Submissions of Mexico

122. Mexico, like Canada, made two submissions to the Tribunal: a pre-
hearing one on 18 January 2002 and a post-hearing one on 22 July 2002.

123. Mexico, in its Pre-Hearing Submission, stated that Article 1105(1)
must be read in the light of the FTC Interpretation of 13 July 2001, and not

136 Second Submission of Canada Pursuant to NAFTA Article 1128, 19 July 2002 (Second
Canada Submission), paras. 8-10.

197 Jd. para. 24.

138 Jd, para. 33 “Obviously, what is shocking or egregious in the year 2002 may differ from that
which was considered shocking or egregious in 1926. Canada’s position has always been that customary
international law can evolve over time, »...”

139 Jd, paras. 36-38.

140 Jd, para. 41.

252 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

expansively as urged by the Claimant.!4! The U.S. measures in question
should be construed as applying to goods in a procurement context and not to
investment; in other words, the Investor's claims do not properly fall within
the scope of Chapter 11 Article 1105 must be interpreted in the light of inter-
national customary law and thereunder, there has been no state practice to
accord national treatment to foreign goods in governmental procurement
transactions.!4? Finally, it is stressed by Mexico that the Tribunal, while called
upon to interpret NAFTA, is not called upon to sit as a “court of appeal” in
respect of national law.'43

124. In its Post-Hearing Submission, Mexico stresses that the three
NAFTA Parties are one on two key interpretative issues: (a) they agree that fair
and equitable treatment was to be found “within international law;” and (b)
they agree that the reference to international law was a reference to “the inter-
national minimum standard at customary international law.”!44 Mexico also
noted that it had earlier expressly adopted a central point of the U.S. that the
plain language of Article 1105(1) describes fair and equitable treatment “as
part of customary international law,” not as a “additive requirement that
might be derived from other BITs.”!45 Mexico goes to substantial lengths to
demonstrate that, in its Article 1128 submission in the Pope and Talbot case,
it had clearly stated that “the threshold to establish a breach of customary
international law continues to be high; one which requires conduct of a very
serious nature, amounting to a significant departure from internationally
accepted legal norms.” It had there concurred in Canada’s statement that
“only egregious conduct should be seen to offend Article 1105.”!4° In the
ELSI case, the key point, according to Mexico, was that the Chamber accorded
deference to the respondent’s (Italy’s) legal system in applying the standard in
the relevant (U.S.-Italy Friendship, Commerce and Navigation) Treaty, find-
ing that though the mayor’s requisition of the factory was unlawful under Ital-
ian law as an excess of power, “mere domestic illegality did not equate to arbi-
trariness at international law.”!47

141 Letter signed by Mr. Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Consultor Juridico de Negociaciones, dated 18 Jan-

uary 2002, “Article 1128 Submission of the United Mexican States,” p. 1
12 Td p. 3.

143 7g,

4 Letter signed by Mr. Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Consultor Juridico de Negociaciones, dated 27 July
2002, “Second Article 1128 Submission of the United Mexican States in the matter of ADF Group Inc.
v. United States of America,” p. 3.

45 Id. p.9.

146 Id. p. 15.

7 Id. p. 18.

CASES. 253

125. Mexico also records its agreement with the U.S. submission in Pope
and Talbot that the Tribunal had no authority to “second-guess the FTC.”
The jurisdiction of a Chapter 11 tribunal is confined to the subject matter set
out in Articles 1116 and 1117: it is authorized “to determine whether a
NAFTA Party (in the singular) violated one of the NAFTA obligations listed
in those two articles.” That jurisdiction does not include “look[ing] behind the
governing law which, under Article 1131(2), ... include[s] [an] [FTC] inter-
pretation ... ‘binding upon a Tribunal’.”!48 Mexico goes on to note that given
the absence of “a careful analysis of state practice and opinio juris,” the sheer
number of extant BITs today does not suffice to show that conventional inter-
national law has become customary international law. Similarly, the simple
antiquity of the Neer decision does not show that it is no longer “a leading case
on the customary international law standard.”!4? Finally, Mexico observes
that, save for the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures
(TRIMs) and the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), WTO
law does not address foreign investment disciplines,!°° and that work on the
relationship of trade and investment is at an early stage.

V. FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

126. Canvassing the issues raised in this case, we note that there are two
issues which relate to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal or the admissibility of
certain claims submitted by the Claimant, while the rest of the issues are con-
cerned with the merits of the Claimant’s claims about the consistency or
inconsistency of the U.S. measures with certain NAFTA provisions. We
address first the issues relating to jurisdiction or admissibility.

1. Jurisdiction to Consider the Investor’s Claim Concerning NAFTA
Article 1103.

127. The first jurisdictional or admissibility issue raised by the Respondent
concerns the Investor’s claim that the U.S. measures here in question are
inconsistent with the Respondent’s obligations under NAFTA Article 1103.
The Respondent submits that this Tribunal is bereft of jurisdiction to consider
and pass upon the Investor’s claim brought under Article 1103. The Respon-

148 Td. pp. 18-19
149 Td. pp. 19-20.
150 dp. 21.

254 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

dent points to the fact that the Investor's Notice of Intention to Submit a
Claim to Arbitration, dated 29 February 2000, did not allege any breach of
Article 1103 on the part of the Respondent. We note that the Investor’s
Notice of Intention does not mention Article 1103; neither does the Investor's
Notice of Arbitration dated 19 July 2000.

128. NAFTA Article 1119 provides that the disputing Investor’s written
notice of its intention to submit a claim to arbitration shall specify, inter alia,
“the provisions of [the NAFTA] alleged to have been breached and any other
relevant provisions.” At the same time, Article 1122(1) states that “each party
[to NAFTA] consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration in accor-
dance with the procedures set out in this Agreement.”

129. The basic submission of the Respondent is that since the Investor
failed to comply with the requirements of Article 1119, the United States’
consent to the Investor’s submission to arbitration did not include consent to
the bringing of the Investor’s claim based on Article 1103. In the absence of
such consent, the Respondent denies that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to con-
sider the Article 1103 claim of the Investor.

130. We begin by examining the meaning of Article 1122(1) and inquire
whether the phrase “in accordance with the procedures set out in this Agree-
ment” was intended to condition the effectivity or validity of the consent of a
NAFTA Party to the submission of claims to arbitration, and the jurisdiction
ratione materiae of a Chapter 11 tribunal, upon the strict and literal compli-
ance of a disputing Investor with every single procedure set out in Section B

of Chapter 11 of the NAFTA.

131. In this connection, it should be noted that Article 1122 goes on to say
that

“2. The consent given by paragraph I and the submission by a
disputing investor of a claim to arbitration shall satisfy the
requirement of:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of
the Centre) and the Additional Facility Rules for written consent
of the parties;

CASES. 255

(b) Article IT of the New York Convention for an agree-
ment in writing; and

(c) Article I of the Inter-American Convention for an
agreement.” (Emphases added)

132. It should further be noted that Article 1121(1) and (2) use exactly the
same phrase “in accordance with the procedures set out in this Agreement” in
respect of the consent of the investor and of the enterprise owned or controlled
by the investor:

“1. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article
1116 to arbitration only if:

(a) the investor consents to arbitration in accordance
with the procedures set out in this Agreement; and

2. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article
1117 to arbitration only if both the investor and the enter-
prise:

(a) consent to arbitration in accordance with the proce-
dures set out in this Agreement; and ....” (Emphases added)

133. When Articles 1122 and 1121 are read together, they appear to us to
be saying essentially that the standing consent of a NAFTA Party constituted
by Article 1122(1), when conjoined with the consent of a disputing investor
given in a particular case, generate the agreement to arbitrate required under
the ICSID Convention and the Additional Facility Rules, the New York Con-
vention and the Inter-American Convention. We see no logical necessity for
interpreting the “procedures set out in the [NAFTA]” as delimiting the
detailed boundaries of the consent given by either the disputing Party or the
disputing investor.

134. Turning back to Article 1119(b), we observe that the notice of inten-
tion to submit to arbitration should specify not only “the provisions of
[NAFTA] alleged to have been breached” but also “any other relevant provisions
[of NAFTA].” Which provisions of NAFTA may be regarded as also “relevant”
would depend on, among other things, what arguments are subsequently devel-
oped to sustain the legal claims made. We find it difficult to conclude that fail-

256 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ure on the part of the investor to set out an exhaustive list of “other relevant
provisions” in its Notice of Jntention to Submit a Claim to Arbitration must
result in the loss of jurisdiction to consider and rely upon any unlisted but per-
tinent NAFTA provision in the process of resolving the dispute.

135. It is also instructive to note that the notice to be given by a claimant
“wishing to institute arbitration proceedings” under the ICSID Arbitration
(Additional Facility) Rules is required merely to “contain information concern-
ing the issues in dispute and an indication of the amount involved, if any.”
(Article 3[1][d], ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules) The general-
ity and flexibility of this requirement do not suggest that failure to be
absolutely precise and complete in setting out that “information” must neces-
sarily result in diminution of jurisdiction on the part of the Tribunal. While
the ICSID Convention is not applicable to Additional Facility cases (like the
instant case), it is useful to observe that a similar negative inference may be
seen to arise from the specification of the contents of the Request for Arbitra-
tion required under Article 36(2) of the ICSID Convention to be filed by a
Contracting State or a national of a Contracting State with the ICSID Secre-
tary-General who must send a copy to the other party:

“(2) The request shall contain information concerning the issues
in dispute, the identity of the parties and their consent to arbi-
tration in accordance with the rules of procedure for the institu-
tion of...arbitration proceedings.” (Emphases added)

136. We turn to certain circumstances specific to the present case which
bear upon the Article 1103 claim of the Investor. The Investor made its Arti-
cle 1103 claim not in its Memorial but rather in its Reply to the Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial. We consider that this circumstance was principally the
result of the issuance of the FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001 relating to,
inter alia, Article 1105(1) a day before the filing of the Investor's Memorial.
The Investor, in making its Article 1103 claim and adducing certain provi-
sions of certain bilateral investment treaties of the Respondent—the U.S.-
Albania and the U.S.-Estonia treaties—, was responding to and seeking to
mitigate what it perceived to be the impact of the FTC Interpretation upon
the Investor’s Article 1105 claim. In other words, we do not believe that in
failing to mention Article 1103 in its Notice of Intention to Submit a Claim
to Arbitration and failing to discuss it in its Memorial, the Investor was seek-
ing unfairly to inflict tactical surprise upon the Respondent. There was no
reason for the Investor, at the time of its Notice, to regard Article 1103 as a

CASES. 257

“relevant provision” given that the substance of its later Article 1103 claim, in
fact, was already asserted under its Article 1105 claim.

137. There is another aspect of this Article 1103 issue which the Tribunal
needs to consider: the pertinence of Article 1104 which provides as follows:

“Article 1104: Standard of Treatment.

Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party and to
investments of investors of another Party the better of the treat-
ment required by Articles 1102 and 1103.” (Emphasis added)

As we read it, an investor of another NAFTA Party is entitled to claim the ben-
efit of the best standard of treatment which the NAFTA party affords to its
own nationals under Article 1102 and even to a non-party under Article 1103
(2). Moreover, the investor is entitled to the benefit of the “better treatment”
by virtue of Article 1104 without having to allege and prove breach by the
respondent Party of its obligations under both Articles 1102 and 1103. It is
sufficient for the investor to allege and seek to prove breach of Article 1102 in
order to be entitled to claim the benefit of Article 1104 by seeking to show
that more favorable treatment is accorded to investors of another Party, or
even investors of a non-Party (such as Albania and Estonia). In our view, that
is precisely what the Investor here was trying to show.

138. Finally, we observe that the Respondent has not shown that it has sus-
tained any prejudice by virtue of the non-specification of Article 1103 as one
of the provisions allegedly breached by the Respondent. Although the Investor
first specified its claim concerning Article 1103 in its Reply to the Respon-
dent’s Counter-Memorial, the Respondent had ample opportunity to address
and meet, and did address and meet, that claim and the Investor’s supporting
arguments, in its Rejoinder.

139. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal believes and so holds that it
has jurisdiction to pass upon the Article 1103 claim of the Investor.

258 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

2. Jurisdiction to Consider the Investor’s Claims Concerning Certain
Federal-aid Construction Projects Other than the Springfield
Interchange Project

140. A second jurisdictional or admissibility objection was raised by the
Respondent in respect of claims made by the Investor concerning certain Fed-
eral-aid construction projects other than the Springfield Interchange Project.
In its Notice of Intention to Submit a Claim to Arbitration, the Investor
referred only to the application of the U.S. measures here at stake to the
Springfield Interchange Project. At the same time, the Investor did allege in its
Notice that the “continued application” of the U.S. measures “will cause addi-
tional damage” to ADF International, limiting its ability to participate fully
“in future Federal-aid highway construction projects.”

141. In its Memorial, the Investor stated “since the Springfield Interchange
Project,” the ADF Group or ADF International has participated in three
named projects said to be also Federal-aid highway projects: another bridge
project in the Commonwealth of Virginia and two other bridge projects in the
State of New York. The Investor alleged that the U.S. measures applied in the
Springfield Interchange Project were also applied in all of the three “other
projects,” resulting in inability to supply and use U.S.-origin steel fabricated
in Canada and the incurring of damages by the Investor. The extent of those
damages the Investor proposed to address in the second phase of these pro-
ceedings.

142. The Tribunal is bound to observe that no evidence of any kind was
submitted at any time by the Investor in respect of these “other projects” to
support its exceedingly general statements in its Memorial. In the present pro-
ceedings which have related solely to the Springfield Project, the Investor
made no visible effort to show the factual bases of its claims about those “other
projects,” something which, under NAFTA Article 1119(c), should have been
set out as early as in its Notice of Intention to Submit a Claim to Arbitration.
Neither did the Investor try to show the legal regime governing its asserted
participation therein. No contract documents and no correspondence with
anyone relating to the Investor’s involvement in those “other projects” have
been submitted to the Tribunal. The Investor offered no demonstration at all
that the U.S. measures have in fact been applied or enforced in respect of the
“other projects.”

CASES. 259

143. Under the above circumstances, the failure of evidence on the part of
the Investor relates not simply to the quantum of damages said to have been
sustained by reason of breaches of NAFTA Chapter 11 provisions by the
Respondent. The failure of proof relates to both the factual basis of the
Investor’s claims about the “other projects” and the fundamental aspect of
liability of the Respondent, that is, whether the Respondent had breached
any of its NAFTA obligations in connection with any of the “other projects.”
This kind of failure of proof of liability cannot be sought to be remedied at
any subsequent phase of these proceedings as the Respondent would have
been denied the opportunity to present its case against liability—if any—that
is, to controvert the Claimant’s proof. This could amount to a denial of due
process.

144, The Investor’s claims concerning “other projects” are not properly
regarded as “incidental or additional” claims within the meaning of Article
48(1) of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules. This Article does
not define or elaborate on “incidental or additional” claims. Article 46 of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 40(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules do pro-
vide some elaboration on “incidental or additional” claims, and while these
two instruments are not applicable to Additional Facility cases, like the
instant case, they often do supply, in our opinion, relevant, and even close,
analogues for terms used in the Additional Facility Rules. Rule 40 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, entitled “Ancillary Claims” essentially tracks the
language of Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and requires, inter alia, that
ancillary claims, that is—incidental claims and additional claims—“aris[e]
directly out of the subject matter of the dispute.” It is not necessary to dis-
tinguish between “incidental claims” and “additional claims;” both must sat-
isfy the requirement of a close relationship with or connection to the original
or primary claim. We consider that an incidental or additional claim in the
instant case must arise directly out of the Investor’s claims about the Spring-
field Interchange Project. But the Investor’s claims about its “other projects”
clearly do not arise directly out of the Springfield Interchange Project. They
are specifically alleged to be claims arising out of construction projects “other
than” the Springfield Project. Thus, there was no allegation or proof that the
“other project” said to be also located in the Commonwealth of Virginia, and
the Springfield Project are, for instance and as a matter of fact, integral parts
of one, larger, project. So far as the record of the present case shows, the other

260 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

Virginia project (and a fortiori the two New York projects) is physically dis-
tinct from and totally unrelated to the Springfield Interchange Project.!>!

145. Putting the matter in slightly different terms, the Investor has pre-
sented to the Tribunal no bases, factual or legal, for passing upon the Respon-
dent’s liability for breaches of any provision of NAFTA Chapter 11, Section
A in the “other projects.” There has been, therefore, nothing for the Respon-
dent to controvert and disprove or rebut. There was, moreover, no dispute or
controversy to consult and negotiate about, during the 90-day “cooling-off” or
waiting period prescribed in Article 1119. Finally, to permit, under these cir-
cumstances, the claims relating to the “other projects” to stand in the present
proceedings could impose material prejudice upon the Respondent.

146. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal believes and so holds that all
claims of the Investor relating to any construction project other than the
Springfield Interchange Project must, accordingly, be dismissed as inad-
missible.

3. Articles 1102, 1106 and 1108: National Treatment Obligation and
Prohibition of Local Content and Performance Requirements in the
Context of Governmental Procurement

(a) Preliminary interpretive considerations

147. Before commencing detailed consideration of the Investor's claims
under particular NAFTA provisions and the Respondent's defense against
those claims, it appears appropriate to note certain aspects of the task of inter-
preting provisions of NAFTA. The Investor has urged the Tribunal to bear in
mind the directive of Article 102(2) that the Parties shall interpret and apply

151 Note B to Article 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules suggests that “the test to satisfy this con-
dition is whether the factual connection between the original and the ancillary [i.e., incidental] claim|s] is so
close as to require the adjudication of the latter in order to achieve the final settlement of the dispute, the
object being to dispose of all grounds of dispute arising out of the same subject matter.” JCSID Regula-
tions and Rules With Explanatory Notes Prepared by the Secretariat of ICSID; (1975) p. 105. (Emphases
added) Article 48 of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules reproduces paragraphs 1 and 2
of Article 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. C.H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary
(2001) p. 738, referring to Article 46 of the Convention, writes: “This close connection is not a matter
of jurisdiction. The wording of Article 46 makes it clear that the ‘arising directly’ requirement is in addi-
tion to jurisdiction. A claim may well be within the Centre's jurisdiction but not arise directly from the sub-
ject matter of a particular dispute before the tribunal. An obvious example would be a claim arising from a
different investment operation between the same investor and the same host state also covered by an ICSID
arbitration clause...” (para. 49). (Emphasis added) See further, id. p. 742, para. 62.

CASES. 261

NAFTA provisions “in the light of [NAFTA’s] objectives set out in [Article
201(1)] and in accordance with applicable rules of international law.”
NAFTA’s objectives, together with the statements set out in the Preamble of
NAFTA, are necessarily cast in terms of a high level of generality and abstrac-
tion. In contrast, interpretive issues commonly arise in respect of detailed pro-
visions embedded in the extraordinarily complex architecture of the treaty. We
understand the rules of interpretation found in customary international law to
enjoin us to focus first on the actual language of the provision being construed.
The object and purpose of the parties to a treaty in agreeing upon any partic-
ular paragraph of that treaty are to be found, in the first instance, in the words
in fact used by the parties in that paragraph.!%* This is in line with Article
102(1) which states that NAFTA’ objectives are “elaborated more specifically
through its principles and rules” such as “national treatment, most-favored-
nation treatment and transparency.” The provision under examination must
of course be scrutinized in context; but that context is constituted chiefly by
the other relevant provisions of NAFTA. We do not suggest that the general
objectives of NAFTA are not useful or relevant. Far from it. Those general
objectives may be conceived of as partaking of the nature of lex generalis while
a particular detailed provision set in a particular context in the rest of a Chap-
ter or Part of NAFTA functions as /ex specialis. The former may frequently cast
light on a specific interpretive issue; but it is not to be regarded as overriding
and superseding the latter.

148. Clearly, NAFTA is a complex document, arguably the most complex
free trade agreement currently in existence. Virtually every Chapter contains
its own articles on definitions. Annexes, beginning with Annex 201.1 attached
to Chapter 2, are used to create further definitions, or may contain their own
definitions applicable to those annexes alone. Some Chapters, such as Chap-
ter 15 on Competition, stand virtually alone, while others, such as Chapter 3
on Goods, contain general rules and principles which run through much of
the treaty text. There is a separate Chapter 21 dealing in a general way with
exceptions, such as in Article 2101 which relates to the incorporation, to a cer-
tain extent, of provisions of Article XX of the GATT, in respect of most of
NAFTA, and Article 2106 excepting cultural industries for Canada alone.
Additional exceptions are to be found throughout the NAFTA. Five major
Schedules list different types of non-conforming measures maintained by each

152 See, e,g., United States—Import Prohibition of Certain Shrimp and Shrimp Products, Report
of the Appellate Body (AB-1998-4) (WT/DS58/AB/R) adopted 12 October 1998, para. 114; EC-Mea-
sures Concerning Meat and Meat Products (Hormones), Report of Appellate Body (AB-1997-4)
(WT/DS26/AB/R; WT/DS48/AB/R) adopted 16 January 1998, paras. 181, 165.

262 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

of the Parties. State, provincial and local government measures, in several
important areas, have not as yet actually been subjected to the disciplines of
NAFTA, due to failure to agree within two years from entry into force of
NAFTA as originally contemplated.

149. Thus, the specific provisions of a particular Chapter need to be read,
not just in relation to each other, but also in the context of the entire structure
of NAFTA if a treaty interpreter is to ascertain and understand the real shape
and content of the bargain actually struck by the three sovereign Parties.!53

(b) Appraising the Investor’s Articles 1102 and 1106 Claims and the
Exception in Article 1108(7)(a) and (8)(b)

150. We turn to consideration of the Investor’s claims based on NAFTA
Articles 1102 and 1106. These two claims are most conveniently examined
together if only because the Respondent's defense based on Article 1108 is
directed against, and seeks to repel, both claims.

151. Article 1102 needs to be quoted again in its pertinent parts:
“Article 1102: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treat-
ment no less favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances,
to its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisi-
tion, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or
other disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of
another Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in
like circumstances, to investments of its own investors with
respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, manage-
ment, conduct, operation and sale or other disposition of
investments. ...” (Emphases added)

152. The beneficiaries of Article 1102(1) and (2) are both investors and
their investments. The broad scope of application of Article 1102 is indicated

153 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, May 23, 1969 (UN Doc A/Conf. 39/27), Articles
31, 32. See also, in this connection, J. R. Johnson, The North American Free Trade Agreement: A Com-
prehensive Guide (Toronto, 1994).

CASES. 263

by the breadth of the definitional scope of the critical term “investment.” Arti-
cle 1139 defines “investment” as embracing not just the more familiar “enter-
prise,” and the traditional “equity security” or “debt security” of an “enter-
prise,” but also the following:

“(g) real estate or other property, tangible or intangible
acquired in the expectation or used for the purpose of economic
benefit or other business purposes;

(h) interest arising from the commitment of capital or other
resources in the territory of a Party to economic activity in such
territory, such as under

(i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's prop-
erty in the territory of the Party, including turnkey or con-
struction contracts, or concessions, or

(ii) contracts where the remuneration depends substan-
tially on the production, revenues or profits of an enter-

prise; ...” (Emphases added)

153. “Enterprise” itself is given an equally capacious meaning by NAFTA
Article 201(1) in relation to Article 1139: “any entity constituted...under appli-
cable law whether or not for profit, and whether or not privately-owned or gov-
ernmentally owned...” (Emphases added) Another indicator of the extensive
reach of Article 1102 is the range of the “treatment” which must be accorded
to the beneficiary “investor” and “investment”: that is, “treatment” “with
respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation and sale or other disposition of investments.” Thus, it appears to us
that a NAFTA Party must accord to the investors of another Party and their
investments treatment no less favorable than that it accords to its domestic
investors and their investments in like circumstances not only with respect to
the “establishment” of investments, but also with respect to the “acquisition” of
additional investments, the “expansion” of already established investments, the
“management,” “conduct” and “operation” of investments once established or
acquired and the “sale or other disposition” of investments, e.g., liquidation of
assets and repatriation of net proceeds. In slightly different terms, Article 1102
entitles an investor of another Party and its investment to equal (in the sense
of “no less favorable”) treatment, in like circumstances, with a Party’s domes-
tic investors and their investments, from the time of entry and “establishment”

264 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

or “acquisition” of the investment in the territory of that Party, through the
“management,” “conduct” and “operation” and “expansion” of that invest-
ment, and up to the final “sale or other disposition” of the same investment.

154. We agree with the Investor that ADF Group is an investor of another
Party while ADF International is both an “enterprise” and an “investment” of
an investor of another Party, within the meaning of Article 1102, Article 1139
and Article 201(1). This has not been controverted by the Respondent. We
also agree that the U.S.-origin steel materials purchased by the Investor in the
U.S., which the Investor sought unsuccessfully to bring to Canada to ADF
Group’s steel facilities for the carrying out of fabrication operations thereon
prior to incorporation into the Springfield Interchange Project, also consti-
tuted an investment of the Investor for purposes of Article 1102.

155. As noted earlier, the U.S. measures here in question essentially require
that steel materials be 100% produced and fabricated in the U.S., if such
materials are to be used in the construction of the Springfield Interchange Pro-
ject. The Investor’s Article 1102 claim is that the U.S. measures are incom-
patible with the requirements of Article 1102. The Respondent, in approach-
ing this issue, suggests somewhat obliquely, that the Investor is in effect
claiming that Canadian-produced and Canadian-fabricated steel is being dis-
criminated against in the U.S., so far as concerns Federal-aid construction
projects and that that claim is properly brought under another portion of
NAFTA, Chapter 3 and not Chapter 11, and is not properly cognizable in the
Investor-State dispute settlement process established by Chapter 11. In other
words, the Respondent suggests that the Investor's claim is effectively a claim
relating to the national treatment of “goods” and not of “investments,” a sug-
gestion that Mexico apparently agrees with.!°4 The correctness of this
approach is not self-evident to us, in view of the many and comprehensive
areas with respect to which the investment of a Canadian investor may claim
national treatment under Article 1102. Those areas include the “management,
conduct and operation” of a Canadian “enterprise” in the U.S. and the goods
produced by such enterprise in the territory of the U.S. can be regarded as
investments of the Canadian investor and are closely related to, and are the
results of, the “management, conduct and operation” of the enterprise. Thus,
it may be recalled that the Investor stressed the “impact” of the U.S. measures
on the operations of ADF International. Fortunately, as the Respondent itself
recognized, it is not absolutely necessary to try to resolve this question. What

154 See Rejoinder of the U.S., p. 27.

CASES. 265

Article 1102 requires is that we assess whether these investments of the
Investor (¢.g., its steel in the U.S.) are treated differently than the U.S.-origin
steel of U.S. investors is treated—in like circumstances.

156. It was vigorously argued by the Respondent that, even upon the
assumption that the Investor’s claim was properly brought under Article 1102,
the Investor in any event failed to prove that the U.S. measures constitute a
violation of Article 1102. For the same U.S. measures, the Respondent explic-
itly stated, were applied to U.S. steel manufacturers and U.S. steel fabricators
bidding for the Springfield Interchange Project and other Federal-aid highway
construction projects. Both steel of the Canadian Investor and of a U.S.
investor must be fabricated in the United States. Moreover, steel fabricated in
the United States is nor treated differently, depending on the nationality of the
investor owning such steel. Indeed, the Canadian investor’s steel and a U.S.
investor's steel, if fabricated in Canada, are treated in the same manner and
both are excluded from use in the Springfield Interchange Project. U.S. steel
manufacturers and fabricators are confronted with the same constraints or lim-
itations of options that the Investor had to address: (a) expand their fabricat-
ing facilities in the U.S., if they wanted to carry out the fabrication operations
themselves; or (b) sub-contract out the fabricating operations to other U.S.
steel fabricators; or (c) forgo bidding on Federal-aid highway construction
projects. The Tribunal is bound to note that the Investor presented no evi-
dence at all to overcome the Respondent's defense. The Investor did not iden-
tify a U.S. steel manufacturer or fabricator which, by virtue of its nationality,
had been exempted from the requirements of the “Buy America” provisions
and allowed to supply to the Springfield Interchange Project, or some other
Federal-aid state construction project, structural steel materials that had been
manufactured or fabricated in Canada or elsewhere outside the U.S. In other
words, the Investor did not try to show that some U.S. construction and fab-
rication company, similarly situated as the Investor, had been accorded treat-
ment different from and more favorable than that given to the Investor, in
respect of the provision and use of structural steel products in Federal-aid
highway construction projects.!5>

157. The question may be raised whether the equality of treatment
accorded by the Respondent to the Investor and to U.S. steel manufacturers
and steel fabricators was more apparent than real, and whether less favorable
treatment was de facto (though not de jure) being meted out to ADF Interna-

155 Rejoinder of the U.S., pp. 25-27.

266 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

tional. Can a U.S. steel manufacturer or fabricator be expected to want to
source its structural steel requirements in Canada, or China, or Korea? Would
it not be “natural” for a U.S. steel manufacturer or fabricator to carry out the
fabricating operations in the U.S., in its own plant if possible? It appears to us
that the Investor was trying to raise these questions, albeit obliquely or indi-
rectly, when it argued, as was noted earlier, that the only difference between
the ADF Group and U.S. steel fabricators is “the physical location of their
facilities.” The Investor also submitted that Article 1102 assumes that an
investor of another NAFTA Party entitled to invoke Article 1102 will have its
facilities “located” outside the territory of the host Party and that for a U.S.
steel fabricator, the ability to fabricate structural steel in Canada was “irrele-
vant.” Evidence of discrimination, however, is required. For instance, it
appears to the Tribunal that specific evidence concerning the comparative eco-
nomics of the situation would be relevant, including: whether the cost of fab-
rication was significantly lower in Canada; whether fabrication capacity was
unavailable at that time in the United States and whether transportation costs
to Canada were sufficiently low to make up the differential. We note the U.S.
did submit evidence of available capacity!®® and Mr. Paschini referred to mas-
sive increases in costs due to fabrication in the U.S.!57 This scant evidence is,
however, not sufficient to show what the relevant competitive situation of
Canadian fabricators and U.S. fabricators was in general, nor was it evidence
of the comparative costs of steel fabrication in the U.S. and Canadian facili-
ties, in particular. The Investor did not sustain its burden of proving that the
U.S. measures imposed (de jure or de facto) upon ADF International, or the
steel to be supplied by it in the U.S., less favorable treatment vis-a-vis similarly
situated domestic (U.S.) fabricators or the steel to be supplied by them in the
US.

 

158. The Tribunal finds that the Investor has failed to show that the U.S.
measures are inconsistent with the requirements of NAFTA Article 1102.

159. Turning to the NAFTA Article 1106 claim of the Investor, the U.S.
measures here at stake appear, by their own terms, to be requirements of local
content and other performance requirements. The Respondent did not dis-
pute that the U.S. measures constitute a requirement of domestic content
within the sense of Article 1106(1)(b), and a requirement to accord preference

156 See letter of 8 July 1999 from the National Steel Bridge Alliance to the FHWA referred to in
para. 54, supra

57 See statement of Mr. Paschini referred to in para. 55, supra

CASES. 267

to goods produced or services provided in the U.S. for purposes of Article
1106(1)(a). The Respondent instead focused on the applicability to the pres-
ent case of certain provisions of Article 1108 which exclude the operation of,
inter alia, Article 1106 in cases of “procurement by a Party.”

160. We therefore turn again to NAFTA Article 1108 which reads in per-
tinent part as follows:

“Article 1108: Reservations and Exceptions

7. Article 1/02, 1103 and 1107 do not apply to:
(a) procurement by a Party or a state enterprise; or

(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a state
enterprise, including government-supported loans, guar-
antees and insurance.

8. The provisions of:

(b) Article 1106(1)(b), (c), (£) and (g), and (3)(a) and
(b) do not apply to procurement by a Party or a state
enterprise; ...” (Emphases added)

The pertinent issue is whether or not the Springfield Interchange Project con-
stituted or involved “procurement by a Party.” We approach this issue by
inquiring, first, into the meaning of “procurement,” and second into the
appropriate reference of the term “Party,” both as used in Article 1108.

161. “Procurement” is not defined in NAFTA Chapter 11; but it is defined
in NAFTA Chapter 10. Chapter 10 is entitled “Government Procurement”
simply, and deals only with procurement by governmental entities or offices. It
does not purport at all to address procurement by private sector companies.
Article 1001(5) provides a description in the following terms:

“(5) Procurement includes procurement by such methods as
purchase, \ease or rental, with or without an option to buy.
Procurement does vot include:

268 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

(a) non-contractual agreements or any form of government
assistance, including cooperative agreements, grants, loans,
equity infusions, guarantees, fiscal incentives, and govern-
ment provision of goods and services to persons or state,
provincial and regional governments; and ...” (Emphases

added)

In its ordinary or dictionary connotation, “procurement” refers to the act of
obtaining, “as by effort, labor or purchase.” To procure means “to get; to gain;
to come into possession of.”!°8 In the world of commerce and industry, “pro-
curement” may be seen to refer ordinarily to the activity of obtaining by pur-
chase goods, supplies, services and so forth.!°? Thus, governmental procure-
ment refers to the obtaining by purchase by a governmental agency or entity
of title to or possession of, for instance, goods, supplies, materials and machin-
ery. What is excluded from the scope of procurement is the governmental assis-
tance to the public entity or agency engaged in procurement, especially assis-
tance in the form of financing or funding of the procurement activity by
providing “grants, loans, equity infusions, guarantees, fiscal incentives.” In
other words, the government entity or agency providing or arranging for funds
for the purchase of goods, supplies, materials, etc. used or to be used in the
construction of a government project, is not itself thereby engaged in pro-
curement.

162. Applying the above reading of Article 1001(5) to the facts of the pres-
ent dispute, it is clear to the Tribunal that the construction of the Springfield
Interchange Project constituted or involved governmental procurement for
purposes of Article 1001(5) and of Chapter 10 as a whole. It is equally clear
to us that the government entity which carried out the procurement of goods
or services for the Project was the Commonwealth of Virginia. The Virginia
Department of Transportation (VDOT) is designated as “Owner” of the
Springfield Interchange Project, both in the Main Contract between Shirley
Contracting Corporation (Shirley) and VDOT, and in the Sub-Contract
between Shirley and ADF International.!©° The U.S. Federal Government did
provide federal funds for the construction of the Project, but that did not

158 Webster's New Twentieth Century Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged (2d Edi-
tion, 1976) p. 1435.

159 The French text of NAFTA Article 1108(7) uses the term “achats effectués par une Partie.”
The French text is included in Materials and Cases, Annexed to the Memorial of the Investor, Vol. II-
ALL, Tab 1, p. 11-5. The Spanish text refers to “las compras realizadas por una Parte;” available at
<htep://www.nafta-sec- alena.org/spanish/nafta/chap-111 htm.

160 Investor's Memorial, Materials and Cases Vol. I, Exhibit B(3) introductory paragraph.

CASES. 269

result in the U.S. Federal Government, or any agency thereof, being itself
engaged in procurement. It may be observed in this connection that the
Investor did not deny that the procurement activity in respect of the Project
had been carried out by the VDOT. Neither did the Investor claim that the
U.S. Federal Government had, by its funding activity, itself engaged in pro-
curement.

163. We consider next whether, in the present case, there was “procure-
ment by a Party” in the sense of Article 1108(7)(a) and (8)(b). “Party,” in the
first instance, refers to a sovereign state which has adhered to and become
bound by the NAFTA. Where a Party is a federal state (and all three Parties
are federal states), the question arises whether “Party” encompasses both the
federal government and the several state or provincial governments, or only
the former.

164. Article 1001(1), describing the scope and coverage of the NAFTA
Chapter on “Government Procurement,” states that Chapter 10 applies to
measures adopted or maintained “by a Party relating to procurement: (a) by a
federal government entity set out in Annex 1001.1a-1, ... or a state or provin-
cial government entity set out in Annex 1001.1a-3 in accordance with Article
1024, ....” This Article thus provides clear textual basis for holding that “gov-
ernment procurement” embraces both procurement by a federal government
entity and procurement by a state or provincial government entity, so long as
such agency is listed by a Party in its Schedule attached to the appropriate Annex
to Article 1001(1). Further, we consider that “government procurement” is
appropriately read as having the same scope and coverage as “procurement by
a Party.” While “procurement by a Party,” the term on which we presently
focus, is found in Article 1108(7) and (8), and “government procurement” is
the term used in Article 1001(1), in our opinion, and in present context, no
sensible distinction can be drawn between the two terms. We note that nei-
ther party has suggested that such a distinction was intended to be projected
by the NAFTA Parties.

165. Article 1108 itself supplies support for the above reading. Article
1108(1) states that Articles 1102, 1103, 1106 and 1107 do not apply to any
“existing non-conforming measure” maintained “by (i) a Party at the federal
level, as set out in its Schedule to Annex I or III, [or] (ii) @ state or province, for
two years after the date of entry into force of [NAFTA] ..., or (iii) a local gov-
ernment; ....” Thus, an “existing non-conforming measure” of a “Party” saved
by Article 1108(1) may not only be a federal government measure but also a

270 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

state or provincial government measure and even a measure of a local govern-
ment.

166. The view taken above by the Tribunal is in line with the established
rule of customary international law that acts of all its governmental organs and
entities and territorial units are attributable to the State and that that State as
a subject of international law is, accordingly, responsible for the acts of all its
organs and territorial units. This rule is now formulated in Article 4 of the
Articles on State Responsibility of the International Law Commission, in the
following terms:

“Article 4
Conduct of Organs of a State

1. The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an
act of that State under international law, whether the
organ exercises legislative, executive, judicial or any other
functions, whatever position it holds in the organization
of the State, and whatever its character as an organ of the
central government or of a territorial unit of the State.

2. An organ includes any person or entity which has
that status in accordance with the internal law of the State.”

(Emphases added)! 61

167. It is important to stress, firstly, that although both “procurement by a
Party” and “government procurement” embrace, in principle, procurement
measures by a federal government entity as well as procurement measures by a
state or provincial government, federal procurement measures are actually, at
this time, subjected to the disciplines of NAFTA Chapter 10 only ifand to the
extent that such measures are issued by a federal government entity listed in the

161 Text in J. Crawford, The International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility: Intro-
duction, Text and Commentaries (2002) p. 94. The international customary law status of the rule is rec-
ognized in, inter alia, Differences Relating to Immunity from Legal Process of a Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights, I.C.J. Reports 1999, p. 62 at p. 87, para. 62. See also paras. 8, 9
stressing that “the principle in Article 4 applies equally to
organs of the central government and to those of regional or local units” (para. 8; p. 97), and that “[iJe
does not matter for this purpose whether the territorial unit in question is a component unit of a federal
State or a specific autonomous area, and it is equally irrelevant whether the internal law of the State in
question gives the federal parliament power to compel the component unit to abide by the State’s inter-
national obligations.” (para. 9; p. 97).

 

CASES. 271

negotiated Schedule of a NAFTA Party attached to Annex 1001.1a-1. The U.S.
Schedule lists 56 Federal Government entities, including the U.S. Department
of Transportation, while the Canadian Schedule enumerates 100 federal enti-
ties and the Mexican Schedule lists the entities forming part of 22 Federal
Government Ministries. A procurement measure issued by an unlisted U.S.
Federal Government entity would not be subject to the Chapter 10 disciplines
and detailed procedures.

168. It is equally important to note that under Article 1001, state or provin-
cial government entities of a NAFTA Party are in fact subjected to Chapter 10
disciplines only if and to the extent that such entities are listed in a Party’s Sched-
ule attached to Annex 1001.1a-3 “in accordance with Article 1024.” Annex
1001.1a-3 states, tersely:

“State and Provincial Government Entities

Coverage under this Annex will be the subject of consultations
with State and provincial governments in accordance with Arti-
cle 1024.” (Emphases added)

Article 1024, entitled “Further Negotiations,” contemplates that the Parties
“shall commence further negotiations no later than 31 December 1998, with
a view to the further liberalization of their respective government procurement
markets ...” So far as the Tribunal has been able to determine, the negotia-
tions envisaged have not to date been commenced, or if commenced, have not
been completed. In the event, no Schedules have to date been attached by any
of the Parties to Annex 1001.1a-3. It is also instructive to note Article 1024(3)
which speaks of the Parties “endeavor[ing] to consult with their state and
provincial governments” on obtaining commitments “on a voluntary and
reciprocal basis” to include within Chapter 10 procurement by state and
provincial government entities and enterprises. If any such voluntary commit-
ment has been obtained by the U.S. from the Commonwealth of Virginia, nei-
ther the Investor nor the Respondent has brought such a critical fact to the
attention of the Tribunal. Finally, so far as the Tribunal has been able to deter-
mine, there has been no voluntary assumption of the procurement disciplines
of Chapter 10 by any sub-federal governmental entity of any of the NAFTA
Parties.

169. We consider, lastly, the Investor’s argument that the U.S. measures
here involved set out performance requirements similar to those found in the

272 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

U.S. Clean Water Act with respect to federal-aid construction of municipal
sewage and industrial waste treatment plants. Such construction is saved in the
U.S. Schedule to Annex 1 of NAFTA. Since the U.S. measures have not been
similarly saved in that Schedule, the Investor urges us to infer that they are
non-conforming and violative of Article 1106.!°? We have already noted the
Respondent's response that the pertinent reservation in the U.S. Schedule
states that “grant recipients may be privately owned enterprises,” and that
therefore the U.S. negotiators thought it necessary or advisable to protect such
federal-aid construction by an express reservation.!°> The Investor controverts
the U.S. response as “inaccurate” and quotes detailed provisions of the Clean
Water Act seeking to show that grants under this Act are made to a “public
body.”!64 We have examined with care the statutory provisions adduced by
the Investor and we are satisfied that there are important differences between

 

the federal-aid state highway construction projects contemplated in the U.S.
measures and the federal-aid construction of municipal sewage and industrial
waste treatment plants envisaged in the Clean Water Act. The “public body”
referred to by the Investor makes an application for a federal grant under the
Act “on behalf of the private owners of “principal residences” and “commercial
establishments” that would benefit from the existence of the treatment facil-
ity.1© More importantly, such application is allowed only when that “public
body” certifies that “public ownership of such works is not feasible.” In other
words, the treatment plant constructed with federal funds is or becomes, in the
words of the Act, “privately owned.” The flow of federal funds may be coursed
through a “public body” but brings about a “privately owned” facility. The
operation and maintenance of the facility upon construction become the
responsibility of its private owner(s). We consider that the propriety of char-
acterizing such a fact situation as “governmental procurement” or “procure-
ment by a Party” is at least open to serious doubt. We decline, therefore to

162 Supra, paras. 84-85.
163 Supra, para. 101.
164 Investor's Reply to the U.S. Counter-Memorial on Competence and Liability, paras.
140-159.
165 The provisions of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. sec. 1281{h] [1]—[3]) relied upon by the
Investor reads in part as follows:
“(h) A grant may be made under this section to construct a privately owned treatment plant serv-
ing one or more principal residences or small commercial establishments constructed prior to, and
inhabited in December 27, 1977, where the Administrator finds that
(1) a public body otherwise eligible for a grant under subsection (g) of this sections has
applied on behalf of a number of such units and certified that public ownership of such
works is not feasible; ...”
166 J,

CASES. 273

draw the inference of NAFTA-inconsistency of the Buy America requirement
of the U.S. measures that the Investor requests.

170. Our findings set out in the preceding paragraphs may be economically
summed up in the context of this case in the following propositions. Firstly,
by virtue of Article 1108(7)(a) and (8)(b), the provisions of Articles 1102,
1103, 1106 and 1107 are not applicable in respect of procurement by a Party,
whether the procurement is carried out by an office or entity of the U.S. Fed-
eral Government or by an office or entity of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
In other words, the exclusionary effect of Article 1108(7)(a) and (8)(b) oper-
ates on both federal and state governmental procurement. Secondly, by grant-
ing Federal-aid funds to the VDOT to enable the latter to construct the
Springfield Interchange Project, the FHWA of the U.S. Department of Trans-
portation did not constitute itself as the procuring entity in that Project, and
did not itself engage in procurement. Thirdly, the procurement carried out by
the Commonwealth of Virginia through its VDOT in the Springfield Inter-
change Project was not subject to the restraints imposed in NAFTA Chapter
10 because the Commonwealth of Virginia is not listed in a U.S. Schedule
which has yet to be negotiated and attached to Annex 1001.1a-3; nor has
VDOT voluntarily subjected itself to the restraints of Chapter 10.

171. It may be recalled that the Investor recognized that the Common-
wealth of Virginia was, in the Springfield Interchange Project, engaged in gov-
ernmental procurement. The Investor in fact explicitly stated that it was not
complaining about the procurement by the VDOT. It appears to the Tribunal
that the Investor was aware that the Commonwealth of Virginia was not sub-
ject to the disciplines of Chapter 10—including the national-treatment and
non-discrimination obligations (Article 1003) and the prohibition of national
content and other performance requirements (Article 1006)—and that Vir-
ginia could have enacted its own statute imposing domestic content and per-
formance requirements in respect of steel materials or products for use in state
construction projects without colliding with either NAFTA Chapter 10 or
Chapter 11. The Tribunal also observes that the Investor acknowledges that
the U.S. Federal Government itself had not undertaken procurement in con-
nection with the Springfield Interchange Project.

172. Given the above circumstances, the real gravamen of the Investor’s
claim that the U.S. measures here at stake are in breach of Article 1106 appears
to be that the Respondent had “forced” the Commonwealth of Virginia to
impose and enforce the Buy America measures upon Main Contractor Shirley

274 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

and Sub-Contractor ADF International. The Investor concedes that the U.S.
could, without breaching NAFTA Chapters 10 and 11, restrict the grant of
Federal-aid funding to entities like the VDOT. The Investor, however, insists
that the U.S. could not require VDOT to enforce those measures down-
stream, in the course of spending the federal funds. The Investor appears, in
effect, to be contending that the Respondent was doing indirectly what it
could not, consistently with Article 1106, do directly. If the Respondent, in
other words, had engaged in direct federal procurement in respect of the
Springfield Interchange Project, through the U.S. Department of Transporta-
tion, it could not have enforced the U.S. measures here in question without
breaching Articles 1003 and 1006 of Chapter 10. What the Respondent did
was to impose upon the VDOT the task of enforcing the Buy America provi-
sions as a condition for the grant of Federal-aid funding to VDOT for the
Springfield Project.

173. We do not find the Investor’s argument persuasive. The Investor has
not shown that the Commonwealth of Virginia was “forced” to adopt the Buy
America measure. In the first place, so far as the evidence of record shows, Vir-
ginia chose on its own to undertake and implement the Springfield Inter-
change Project in view of its obvious importance for both inter-state and intra-
state traffic. Thereupon, Virginia approached the FHWA for funding and
assistance in designing the complex Project. In the second place, Virginia
could have, as already noted, enacted its own Buy America statute and regula-
tions identical in terms with Section 165 of the 1982 STAA and with 23 CFR
635.410, the FHWA Regulations, without violating either Chapter 10 or 11
of NAFTA. In the present case, the Commonwealth of Virginia in effect
adopted and applied the U.S. measures as its own, for purposes of the Spring-
field Interchange Project. In fact, as noted earlier, VDOT incorporated special
provision 102C into its “Road and Bridge Specifications”. Thirdly, we con-
sider that the U.S. measures are not reasonably regarded as amounting to cir-
cumvention of the Respondent’s obligations under NAFTA Chapter 10; the
U.S. measures were enacted in 1982 and were in effect long before the
NAFTA came into force in 1994. To the contrary, Article 1001(5)(a) appears
expressly designed to separate the financing or funding of construction or
other projects from the procurement operations necessarily entailed by such
projects, and thus precisely to make possible the continuation of federal gov-
ernment funding of state or provincial government procurement. Finally, with
the deferment of negotiations between the Parties on the Schedules to be
attached to Annex 1001.1a-3, state and provincial governments have simply
not been brought under the procurement disciplines of Chapter 10.

CASES. 275

174. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal believes, and so holds, that the
Investor has not shown that the U.S. measures here in question are inconsis-
tent with the requirements of NAFTA Article 1106.

4. Article 1105(1): Minimum Standard of Treatment under
Customary International Law

(a) General Considerations

175. Before addressing the Investor’s claims relating to the consistency of
the U.S. measures with the requirements of NAFTA Article 1105(1), certain
general aspects of those requirements and of the FTC Interpretation of 31 July
2001 may usefully be considered.

176. We begin by noting that the Free Trade Commission (FTC) created
under Article 2001 consists of cabinet-level representatives of the NAFTA Par-
ties and its mandate includes the “[resolution of] disputes that may arise
regarding [the] interpretation or application of [NAFTA].” An interpretation
of a NAFTA provision rendered by the FTC is under Article 1132(2) binding
on this and any other Chapter 11 Tribunal.

177. We have noted that the Investor does not dispute the binding charac-
ter of the FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001. At the same time, however, the
Investor urges that the Tribunal, in the course of determining the governing
law of a particular dispute, is authorized to determine whether an FTC inter-
pretation is a “true interpretation” or an “amendment.” We observe in this
connection that the FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001 expressly purports to
be an interpretation of several NAFTA provisions, including Article 1105(1),
and not an “amendment,” or anything else. No document purporting to be an
amendment has been submitted by either the Respondent or the other
NAFTA Parties. There is, therefore, no need to embark upon an inquiry into
the distinction between an “interpretation” and an “amendment” of Article
1105(1). But whether a document submitted to a Chapter 11 tribunal pur-
ports to be an amendatory agreement in respect of which the Parties’ respec-
tive internal constitutional procedures necessary for the entry into force of the
amending agreement have been taken, or an interpretation rendered by the
FTC under Article 1131(2), we have the Parties themselves—all the Parties—
speaking to the Tribunal. No more authentic and authoritative source of
instruction on what the Parties intended to convey in a particular provision of
NAFTA, is possible. Nothing in NAFTA suggests that a Chapter 11 tribunal

276 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

may determine for itself whether a document submitted to it as an interpreta
tion by the Parties acting through the FTC is in fact an “amendment” which
presumably may be disregarded until ratified by all the Parties under their
respective internal law. We do not find persuasive the Investor’s submission
that a tribunal is impliedly authorized to do that as part of its duty to deter-
mine the governing law of a dispute. A principal difficulty with the Investor’s
submission is that such a theory of implied or incidental authority, fairly
promptly, will tend to degrade and set at naught the binding and overriding
character of FTC interpretations. Such a theory also overlooks the systemic
need not only for a mechanism for correcting what the Parties themselves
become convinced are interpretative errors but also for consistency and conti-
nuity of interpretation, which multiple ad hoc arbitral tribunals are not well
suited to achieve and maintain.

178. The FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001 specifies that the “treatment
in accordance with international law” referred to in Article 1105(1) is the min-
imum standard of treatment of aliens prescribed in customary international
law. Thus, it clarifies that so far as the three NAFTA Parties are concerned, the
long-standing debate as to whether there exists such a thing as a minimum
standard of treatment of non-nationals and their property prescribed in cus-
tomary international law, is closed.!® It also makes clear that the grant of
equality of treatment between nationals and non-nationals, or between
nationals of third states, does not necessarily exhaust the international law
obligations of the host state vis-a-vis the home states of non-nationals. Where
the treatment accorded by a State under its domestic law to its own nationals
falls below the minimum standard of treatment required under customary
international law, non-nationals become entitled to better treatment than that
which the State accords under its domestic law.

179. In considering the meaning and implications of the 31 July 2001 FTC
Interpretation, it is important to bear in mind that the Respondent United
States accepts that the customary international law referred to in Article
1105(1) is not “frozen in time” and that the minimum standard of treatment
does evolve.'68 The FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001, in the view of the

167 J. C, Thomas, Reflections on Article 1105 of NAFTA: History, State Practice and the Influence
of Commentators, 17 ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal 21 at 22-39 (2002) provides a
recent survey of this debate. See alo, e.g, G. Schwarzenberger, International Law, vol. 1 (3d edition,
1957) 200 et. seq. and A.V. Freeman, The International Responsibility of States for Denial of Justice, chaps.
17-18 (1938).

168 Transcript of the Oral Hearing, Vol.II, 16 April 2002, pp. 492-493. Also Post-Hearing Sub-
mission of the United States, 27 June 2002, p. 20.

CASES. 277

United States, refers to customary international law “as it exists today.”! It

is equally important to note that Canada!”° and Mexico!”! accept the view of
the United States on this point even as they stress that “the threshold [for vio-
lation of that standard] remains high.” Put in slightly different terms, what
customary international law projects is not a static photograph of the mini-
mum standard of treatment of aliens as it stood in 1927 when the Award in
the Neer case was rendered. For both customary international law and the
minimum standard of treatment of aliens it incorporates, are constantly in a
process of development.

180. In the very recent Award rendered 11 October 2002 in Mondev Inter-
national Ltd. v. United States of America,'”* a copy of which was forwarded to
the Tribunal by the Respondent on 17 October 2002, the Tribunal made cer-
tain observations which appear to us to be both important and @ propos:

“Tt has been suggested, particularly by Canada, that the mean-
ing of those provisions in customary international law is that
laid down by the Claims Commission of the inter-war years,
notably that of the Mexican Claims Commission in the Neer
case. That Commission laid down a requirement that, for
there to be a breach of international law, ‘the treatment of an
alien ... should amount to an outrage, to bad faith, to willful
neglect of duty, or to an insufficiency of government action so
far short of international standards that every reasonable and
impartial man would readily recognize its insufficiency.’

The Tribunal would observe, however that the Neer case, and
other similar cases which were cited, concerned not the treatment
of foreign investment as such but the physical security of the alien.

169 Transcript of the Oral Hearing, Vol. II, 16 April 2002, p. 501.

170 See Canada’s Second Submission Pursuant to NAFTA Article 1128, 19 July 2002, para. 33:
“Canada’s position has never been that the customary international law regarding the treatment of aliens
was ‘frozen in amber at the time of the Neer decision’. Obviously, what is shocking or egregious in the
year 2002 may differ from that which was considered shocking or egregious in 1926. Canada’s position
has always been that customary international law can evolve over time, but that the threshold for find-
ing violation of the minimum standard of treatment is still high.”

171 See the Second Submission of the United Mexican States in the Matter of ADF Group Inc. v.
United States of America, 22 July 2002, p. 11. In the Pope and Talbot case, Mexico submitted that “[it)
also agrees that the standard is relative and that conduct which may not have violated international law
[in] the 1920's might very well be seen to offend internationally accepted principles today.” As quoted
in the Pope and Talbot Award on Damages, para. 8.

172 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2.

278 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Moreover the specific issue in Neer was that of Mexico’s respon-
sibility for failure to carry out an effective police investigation into
the killing of a United States citizen by a number of armed men
who were not even alleged to be acting under the control or at the
instigation of Mexico. In general, the State is not responsible for
the acts of private parties, and only in special circumstances
will it become internationally responsible for a failure in the
conduct of the subsequent investigation. Thus there is insuffi-
cient cause for assuming that provisions of bilateral investment
treaties, and of NAFTA, while incorporating the Neer principle
in respect of the duty of protection against acts of private parties
affecting the physical security of aliens present on the territory of
the State, are confined to the Neer standard of outrageous treat-
ment where the issue is the treatment of foreign investment by the
State itself,

Secondly, Neer and like arbitral awards were decided in the
1920s, when the status of the individual in international law,
and the international protection of foreign investments, were
far less developed than they have since come to be. In particu-
lar, both the substantive and procedural rights of the individual
in international law have

In the light of these developments it is unconvincing to confine the
meaning of fair and equitable treatment’ and full protection and
security’ of foreign investments to what those terms—had they
been current at the time—might have meant in the 1920s when
applied to the physical security of an alien. To the modern eye,
what is unfair or inequitable need not equate with the outra-
geous or the egregious. In particular, a State may treat foreign
investment unfairly and inequitably without necessarily acting in

bad faith.” 75 (Emphases added)

181. It may be added that the Claims Commission in the Neer case did not
'y

purport to pronounce a general standard applicable not only with respect to

protection against acts of private parties directed against the physical safety of

foreigners while in the territory of a host State, but also in any and all con-

ceivable contexts. There appears no logical necessity and no concordant state

practice to support the view that the Neer formulation is automatically

13 Td. paras. 114, 115 and 116.

CASES. 279

extendible to the contemporary context of treatment of foreign investors and
their investments by a host or recipient State.

182. In the present case, the issue may be seen to relate to the normative
structure and content of the customary international law minimum standard
of treatment, pertinent to foreign investors and their investments. The
Investor claims that the customary international law minimum standard of
treatment includes a general obligation to accord “fair and equitable treatment”
and “full protection and security” to investors and their investments. The
Respondent appears to reject the notion that the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment prescribes such a comprehensive duty upon
a territorial sovereign to give “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protec-
tion and security” to aliens and their property, including in principle investors
and their investments. The Respondent insists that the Investor, if it is to suc-
ceed in its claim based on NAFTA Article 1105(1), must show a violation of
a specific rule of customary international law relating to foreign investors and their
investments.

183. The Tribunal considers that the issue relating to the structure and con-
tent of the customary international law minimum standard of treatment has
not been adequately litigated, and that neither the Investor nor the Respon-
dent has been able persuasively to demonstrate the correctness of their respec-
tive contentions. We are not convinced that the Investor has shown the exis-
tence, in current customary international law, of a general and autonomous
requirement (autonomous, that is, from specific rules addressing particular,
limited, contexts) to accord fair and equitable treatment and full protection
and security to foreign investments. The Investor, for instance, has not shown
that such a requirement has been brought into the corpus of present day cus-
tomary international law by the many hundreds of bilateral investment treaties
now extant. It may be that, in their current state, neither concordant state
practice nor judicial or arbitral caselaw provides convincing substantiation (or,
for that matter, refutation) of the Investor’s position. It may also be observed
in this connection that the Tribunal in Mondev did not reach the position of
the Investor, while implying that the process of change is in motion:

“Thirdly, the vast number of bilateral and regional investment
treaties (more than 2000) almost uniformly provide for fair
and equitable treatment of foreign investments, and largely
provide for full security and protection of investments. Invest-
ment treaties run between North and South, and East and

280 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

‘West, and between States in these spheres inter se. On a
remarkably widespread basis, States have repeatedly obliged
themselves to accord foreign investment such treatment. In the
Tribunal’s view, such a body of concordant practice will nec-
essarily have influenced the content of rules governing the
treatment of foreign investment in current international law.
It would be surprising if this practice and the vast number of pro-
visions it reflects were to be interpreted as meaning no more than
the Neer Tribunal (in a very different context) meant in
1927, "174 (Emphases added)

184. At the same time, Mondev went on to say that:

“... At the same time, Article 1105(1) did not give a NAFTA tri-
bunal an unfettered discretion to decide for itself, on a subjective
basis, what was fair’ or ‘equitable’ in the circumstances of each
particular case. While possessing a power of appreciation, the
United States stressed, the Tribunal is bound by the minimum
standard as established in State practice and in the jurispru-
dence of arbitral tribunals. It may not simply adopt its own
idiosyncratic standard of what is ‘fair’ or ‘equitable’ without
reference to established sources of law.”!7> (Emphasis added)

We understand Mondev to be saying—and we would respectfully agree with
it—that any general requirement to accord “fair and equitable treatment” and
“full protection and security” must be disciplined by being based upon State
practice and judicial or arbitral caselaw or other sources of customary or gen-
eral international law.

185. The Investor, of course, in the end has the burden of sustaining its
charge of inconsistency with Article 1105(1). That burden has not been dis-
charged here and hence, as a strict technical matter, the Respondent does not

174 Jd, para. 117. See, in this connection: e,g., S. Vasciannie, The Fair and Equitable Treatment
Standard International Investment Law and Practice, 70 Brit. Yb. Int L. 99 (1999); and Fair and Equi-
table Treatment, UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements (1999) (based on
manuscript prepared by S. Vasciannie); and R. Dolzer and M. Stevens, Bilateral Investment Treaties,
chap. 3 (1995); and J. C. Thomas, supra, note 167, pp. 39-51. Note may also be taken of the continu-
ing efforts of a number of countries to achieve, during the ongoing Doha Round of trade negotiations,
a general multilateral convention on the promotion and protection of foreign investment within the
framework of the World Trade Organization.

175 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)99/2, para. 119.

 

CASES. 281

have to prove that current customary international law concerning standards
of treatment consists only of discrete, specific rules applicable to limited con-
texts. It does not appear inappropriate, however, to note that it is not neces-
sary to assume that the customary international law on the treatment of aliens
and their property, including investments, is bereft of more general principles
or requirements, with normative consequences, in respect of investments,
derived from—in the language of Mondev—‘established sources of [interna-
tional] law.”!76

186. We adopt the prudential approach of Mondev that, for purposes of
resolving the dispute before this Tribunal, there is no need to resolve all issues
raised, directly or impliedly, by one or the other party either in oral argument
or in written pleadings, concerning the allegation of violation of Article
1105(1). Without expressing a view on the Investor’s thesis, we ask: are the
U.S. measures here involved inconsistent with a general customary interna-
tional law standard of treatment requiring a host State to accord “fair and
equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” to foreign investments
in its territory?

(b) Appraising the Investor’s claim based on Article 1105(1) as
Interpreted by the FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001

187. We recall that the Investor submitted a series of arguments to sustain
its claim that the U.S. measures are inconsistent with the requirements of Arti-
cle 1105(1). The arguments have tended to vary in some measure as this case
proceeded on its course. We examine the principal arguments seriatim.

188. The first submission of the Investor is that the U.S. measures are in
themselves “unfair and inequitable within the context of NAFTA.” We find
this per se argument unconvincing. It was observed by the Respondent, and
not controverted by the Investor, that domestic content and performance
requirements in governmental procurement by both federal and sub-federal
(state or provincial) entities are common to all three NAFTA Parties.!77 It was
also noted that although governmental procurement by the federal agencies or

176 Id. Schwarzenberger, supra, note 167 at p. 231 makes the comment that “[iJt is arguable that

the law-creating process on which [the minimum] standard [of treatment of aliens] now rests is either
international customary law or the general principles of law recognized by civilized nations.” (Emphasis
added); Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law (1953) stresses the organic nature of general principles of
law as one of the sources of international law.

177 See supra, para. 94.

282 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

entities specifically identified and listed by the NAFTA Parties in their respec-
tive Annexes to NAFTA Chapter 10 have been subjected to the disciplines
(including prohibition of domestic content and performance requirements) of
Chapter 10, governmental procurement by state or provincial entities (like the
Commonwealth of Virginia in the Springfield Interchange Project) has yet to
be brought under those disciplines.!7° Finally, domestic content and per-
formance requirements in governmental procurement are by no means limited
to the NAFTA Parties. To the contrary, they are to be found in the internal
legal systems or in the administrative practice of many States.!7? Thus, the
U.S. measures cannot be characterized as idiosyncratic or aberrant and arbi-
trary.

189. The second submission of the Investor is that the FHWA of the U.S.
Department of Transportation refused to follow and apply pre-existing
caselaw in respect of ADF International in the Springfield Interchange Project,
thus ignoring the Investor’s legitimate expectations generated by that caselaw.
We do not believe that the refusal of the FHWA to follow prior rulings, judi-
cial or administrative is, in itself, in the circumstances of this case, grossly
unfair or unreasonable. We have already noted the Respondent's explanation
that the caselaw relied upon by the Investor does vot relate to the Buy Amer-
ica provisions of the 1982 STAA dealing with Federal-aid construction proj-
ects of state governments (like the Springfield Interchange Project of the Com-
monwealth of Virginia), but rather to the Buy American provisions of the
1933 statute on direct procurement by the Federal Government, and the sub-
stantial textual differences between those two statutes.'®° The Investor has
not, in our view, successfully rebutted that explanation; it has not explained
why caselaw under the 1933 statute should be applicable in respect of the
1982 statute notwithstanding the differences between the two laws. Moreover,
any expectations that the Investor had with respect to the relevancy or appli-
cability of the caselaw it cited were not created by any misleading representa-
tions made by authorized officials of the U.S. Federal Government but rather,
it appears probable, by legal advice received by the Investor from private U.S.
counsel.

190. The Investor submitted, thirdly, that the FHWA acted ultra vires and
in disregard of the terms of the 1982 STAA. Here, the Tribunal is bound to

178 See supra, para. 168.
179 See the materials referred to in the Respondent's Counter-Memorial, pp. 30-31.
180 See supra, para. 99.

 

CASES. 283

observe that the Investor has not established a prima facie case for holding that,
as a matter of U.S. administrative law, the FHWA had acted without or in
excess of its authority under the 1982 STAA.'8! More important for present
purposes, however, is that even had the Investor made out a prima facie basis
for its claim, the Tribunal has no authority to review the legal validity and
standing of the U.S. measures here in question under U.S. internal adminis-
trative law. We do not sit as a court with appellate jurisdiction with respect to
the U.S. measures.'®? Our jurisdiction is confined by NAFTA Article 1131(1)
to assaying the consistency of the U.S. measures with relevant provisions of
NAFTA Chapter 11 and applicable rules of international law. The Tribunal
would emphasize, too, that even if the U.S. measures were somehow shown or
admitted to be ultra vires under the internal law of the United States, that by
itself does not necessarily render the measures grossly unfair or inequitable
under the customary international law standard of treatment embodied in
Article 1105(1).!83 An unauthorized or wltra vires act of a governmental entity
of course remains, in international law, the act of the State of which the acting
entity is part, if that entity acted in its official capacity.!*4 But something more
than simple illegality or lack of authority under the domestic law of a State is

181 The very general assertions adduced by the Investor are summarized supra, para. 72. The
Investor appears to argue principally that the FHWA disregarded the language of Sec. 165 of the 1982
STAA in issuing the implementing regulations. It appears to the Tribunal that the Investor believes that
the FHWA fell into legal error in its interpretation of Sec. 165. It seems unnecessary to add that, in any
event, such error, if error there was, does not automatically translate into lack or excess of authority on
the part of FHWA.

In Mondeo, the tribunal commented that “[oln the approach adopted by Mondev, NAFTA
tribunals would turn into courts of appeal, which is not their role.” Mondev International Ltd. v. United
States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, 11 October 2002, para. 136. We agree also with the
statement of Mexico in its Pre-Hearing Submission under Article 1128, that the Tribunal is not called
upon to sit as a “court of appeals” in respect of national law; supra, para. 124. The same view was ear-
lier set out in Robert Azinian and others v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, para.
99:

“The possibility of holding a State internationally liable for judicial decisions does not, however, enti-
tle a claimant to seek international review of the national court decisions as though the international juris-
diction seized has plenary appellate jurisdiction. This is not true generally and it is not true for NAFTA.
What must be shown is that the court decision itself constitutes a violation of the tteaty....” (Emphasis partly
in original and partly added) Cf. The statement in S. D. Myers, Inc. v. Canada th

“[wJhen interpreting and applying the ‘minimum standard,’ a Chapter 11 tribunal does not have
an open-ended mandate to second-guess government decision-making...” (para. 261 of the Myers
Award rendered under the UNCITRAL Rules)

Cf. also the statement in Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB[AF]/99/1), Interim Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 December 2000, para. 61: “[T]he Tribunal does
not have, in principle, jurisdiction to decide upon claims arising because of an alleged violation of general
international law oF domestic Mesican law...” Emphases added

83 Cf, the statements of a Chamber of the International Court of Justice in the Case Concerning
Eleranes Sicula, S.p.A. (ELSI) (U.S. v. Italy) (1989) LLC.J. Rep. 4, para. 124.
184 See Article 7 of the International Law Commission’s Articles on Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts; text in J. Crawford, supra note 161, p. 106.

  

 

284 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

necessary to render an act or measure inconsistent with the customary inter-
national law requirements of Article 1105(1), even under the Investor’s view
of that Article. That “something more” has not been shown by the Investor.

191. The fourth submission of the Investor is that the United States failed
to comply with obligations under Article 1105(1) in good faith, and breached
its duty under customary international law to perform its obligations in good
faith. As noted earlier, the Respondent construes this submission as an asser-
tion that customary international law prescribes “a general obligation of ‘good
faith’ subsumed in Article 1105(1)” and denies that such a general obligation
exists. We do not consider it essential to address in any detail this issue cast in
terms just as abstract as the issue posed in respect of the content of “fair and
equitable treatment” and “full protection and security.” An assertion of breach
of a customary law duty of good faith adds only negligible assistance in the
task of determining or giving content to a standard of fair and equitable treat-
ment. At the same time, without meaning to intimate any view on the
Respondent’s defense of denial, we observe that the Investor did not try to
prove, for instance, that the rejection of its request for waiver of the Buy Amer-
ica requirements by the FHWA was flawed by arbitrariness. The Investor did
not suggest that other companies, situated in like circumstances as the
Investor, had been granted waivers of the same requirements by the FHWA.
The Investor, again, did not allege that the specifications of the structural steel
products required under its Sub-Contract with Shirley had been so finely “tai-
lored” that only a particular U.S. steel fabrication company could comply with
such specifications. Neither did the Investor allege that application of the U.S.
measures had imposed extraordinary costs or other burdens on the Investor
not also imposed on successful bidders for the other portions of the Spring-
field Interchange Project. More generally, the Investor did not establish a seri-
ous basis for contending that some specific treatment received by ADF Inter-
national from either the FHWA or the VDOT constituted a denial of the fair
and equitable treatment and full protection and security included in the cus-
tomary international law minimum standard embodied in Article 1105(1).

192. Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that the Investor did not sustain
its claim that the U.S. measures are inconsistent with the requirements of Arti-
cle 1105(1).

CASES. 285

5. Article 1103: Most-Favored-Nation Treatment and the
U.S.-Albania and U.S.-Estonia Bilateral Investment Treaties

193. We have earlier noted that the Investor has invoked Article 1103
which requires each Party to accord to the investors of another Party and their
investments treatment no less favorable than that it accords in like circum-
stances, to investors of any other Party or non-Party, and their investments,
with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, con-
duct, operation and sale or other disposition of investments. Through the
medium of Article 1103, the Investor also invokes certain provisions of the
U.S.-Albania and U.S.-Estonia treaties relating to “fair and equitable treat-
ment” and “full protection and security.”!8> The Investor’s theory appears to
be two-fold. Firstly, the relevant provisions of the U.S.-Albania and U.S.-Esto-
nia treaties provide for treatment to Albanian and Estonian investors and their
investments in the United States that is more favorable than the treatment
given to U.S. investors and their investments and (through the medium of
Article 1103) to Canadian investors and their investments, in the United
States. The treatment referred to by the Investor here consists of the U.S.
measures involved in the present case, which measures, according to the
Investor, would be inconsistent with the “fair and equitable treatment” and
“full protection and security” clauses of the two treaties. Secondly, the perti-
nent provisions of the two treaties provide for more favorable treatment than
the treatment available to the Claimant under the provisions of Article
1105(1) as interpreted in the FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001.

194. The Investor’s theory assumes the validity of its own reading of the rel-
evant clauses of the treaties with Albania and Estonia. That reading, as
observed in some detail earlier, is that the “fair and equitable treatment” and
“full protection and security” clauses of the two treaties establish broad, nor-
mative standards of treatment distinct and separate from the specific require-
ments of the customary international law minimum standard of treatment.
We have, however, already concluded that the Investor has not been able per-
suasively to document the existence of such autonomous standards, and that
even if the Tribunal assumes hypothetically the existence thereof, the Investor
has not shown that the U.S. measures are reasonably characterized as in breach
of such standards.'86 The Investor also contends that Article II(3)(b) of the

185 Supra, para. 7 et seg. The pertinent portions of the U.S.-Albania and U.S.-Estonia treaties
are quoted, supra, paras. 77 and 79.
186 Supra, para. 187 et seq.

286 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

U.S.-Estonia treaty establishes, through the operation of Article 1103, another
“self-contained” standard of treatment prohibiting “arbitrary or discrimina-
tory measures” impairing the operation, use and disposal of investment.
Assuming, once again, the existence of this “self-contained” standard of treat-
ment, the Tribunal does not believe that the U.S. measures here in question,
in the circumstances of this case, are reasonably regarded as merely “arbitrary
and discriminatory.”!87

195. The Respondent rejects the Investor's reading of the “fair and equi-
table treatment” language in the U.S.-Albania and U.S.-Estonia treaties.
Although there are textual differences between NAFTA Article 1105(1) on the
one hand, and Article II(3)(a) and (b) of the U.S.-Albania and the U.S.-Esto-
nia treaties on the other hand, the Respondent argues vigorously that the two
treaties have much the same effect as Article 1105(1) of NAFTA as construed
in the FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001. The two bilateral treaties project,
according to the U.S. Department of State letters transmitting them to the
U.S. Senate, a “minimum standard of treatment” that is “based on customary
international law (in the case of the U.S.-Estonia treaty)” or “based on stan-
dards found in customary international law (in the case of the U.S.-Albania
treaty).”!88 The intent of one of the two State Parties to the two treaties is
clearly relevant, and it does not appear necessary to engage in rigorous inter-
pretative analysis.

196. Assuming, once more, for purposes of argument merely, that the U.S.-
Albania and U.S.-Estonia treaties do provide for better treatment for Albanian
and Estonian investors and their investments in the United States, than the
treatment to which the Investor is entitled in the United States under NAFTA
Article 1105(1), the Investor still has not thereby shown violation of Article
1103 by the Respondent. For in any event, the Respondent is entitled to the
defense provided by NAFTA Article 1108(7)(a) which, as noted earlier in
some detail, excludes the application of Article 1103 in a case (like the instant
one) involving governmental procurement by a Party.!8?

187 Supra, id.

188 Supra, para. 107. See, in this connection, J. C. Thomas, Reflections on Article 1105 of
NAFTA:—supra note 167 at p. 51 where he concludes, after a quick but comprehensive survey of treaty
practice (pp. 39-51), that “[w]hile the precise wording varied, it is evidence that states propounding the
negotiation of investment protection treaties saw a clear and intended link between constant (or full)
protection and security and fair and equitable treatment and the international minimum standard at
general international law. The former were considered to be expressions of the latter.”

Supra, paras. 160 et seq.

CASES. 287

197. The Investor invokes a ruling in the Decision on Objections to Juris-
diction in Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain.'°° The Maffezini Tribunal had
before it a Spain-Argentina bilateral investment treaty which includes a “fair
and equitable treatment clause that establishes national-treatment as the
“floor” below which the treatment accorded by a State Party to investors of the
other State Party shall not be allowed to fall. The Maffezini Tribunal held that
the national-treatment clause may be understood to embrace the treatment a
Government required for its investors abroad, when more favorable than the
treatment granted to foreign investors in its own territory.!?! We understand
the Investor to be saying that the more favorable treatment accorded to U.S.
investors in Albania and Estonia under the “fair and equitable treatment”
clauses in their bilateral investment treaties, and to Albanian and Estonian
investors in the U.S., becomes available to the Investor not only by reason of
NAFTA Article 1103 (most-favored-nation clause) but also by virtue of
NAFTA Article 1102 (national-treatment clause). We observe that Maffezini
does not set out in any detail the basis for the above ruling and hence does not
provide much guidance. We note also that NAFTA Article 1105(1) sets the
customary international law minimum standard of treatment, and not the
national treatment clause (NAFTA Article 1102) as the “floor.” But even if we
were hypothetically to put aside the textual differences between NAFTA Arti-
cle 1105(1) and the Spain-Argentina treaty, and arguendo to assume that the
Investor has demonstrated the “more favorable” nature of the Albanian and
Estonian treaty provisions, ultimately Maffezini does not advance the cause of
the Investor in any appreciable way. As pointed out already, Article 1108(7)(a)
renders inapplicable both Articles 1102 and 1103 in cases of “procurement by
a Party.” And the instant case does involve “procurement by a Party.”

198. Accordingly, the Tribunal believes and so holds that the Investor's
claim that the U.S. measures in question are inconsistent with the require-
ments of NAFTA Article 1103 must be denied.

199 TCSID Case No. ARB/97/7, 25 January 2000; 40 ILM 1129 (2001).

191 40 ILM at p. 1139:
“While this clause applies to national treatment of foreign investors, it may also be understood to
embrace the treatment required by a Government for its investors abroad, as evidenced by the treaties
made to ensure their protection. Hence, if a Government seeks to obtain a dispute settlement method
for its investors abroad, which is more favorable than that granted under the basic treaty to foreign
investors in its territory, the clause may be construed so as to require a similar treatment of the latter.”

288

199.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

VI. AWARD

The conclusions the Tribunal has reached may be summed up in the

following terms:

(1) The Tribunal has jurisdiction to pass upon the Investor’s claim
that the U.S. measures in question are inconsistent with NAFTA Arti-
cle 1103.

(2) The Investor’s claims concerning construction projects other
than the Springfield Interchange Project have not been considered in
this proceeding because they are inadmissible and are, accordingly, dis-
missed without prejudice.

(3) The Tribunal does not find that the U.S. measures in question
are inconsistent with NAFTA Article 1102. Assuming, however,
arguendo, that the U.S. measures are inconsistent with the provisions
of Article 1102, the Respondent is, in any event, entitled to the bene-
fic of NAFTA Article 1108(7)(a) which renders inapplicable the pro-
visions of, inter alia, Article 1102 in case of procurement by a Party.
Procurement by the Commonwealth of Virginia for, or in connection
with, the Springfield Interchange Project, constitutes procurement by
a Party within the meaning of Article 1108(7)(a). The Investor’s claim
concerning Article 1102 is, accordingly, denied.

(4) The Investor has shown prima facie that the U.S. measures in
question are inconsistent with the requirements of NAFTA Article
1106(1)(b) and (c). The Respondent is, however, entitled to the ben-
efit of NAFTA Article 1108(8)(b) which renders inapplicable the pro-
visions of Article 1106(1)(b) and (c) in case of procurement by a Party.
The Springfield Interchange Project involves procurement by the
Commonwealth of Virginia, which constitutes procurement by a
Party in the sense of Articles 1106(1)(b) and (c) and 1108(8)(b). The
Investor's claim concerning Article 1106 is, accordingly, denied.

(5) The Tribunal does not find it necessary to resolve the issue of
whether the U.S.-Albania and the U.S.-Estonia bilateral investment
treaties accord treatment more favorable than the treatment available
under NAFTA Article 1105(1). The Investor is not entitled to the
benefits claimed under NAFTA Article 1103, which Article is inappli-

CASES. 289

cable by virtue of NAFTA Article 1108(7)(a) in case of procurement
by a Party. The Investor’s claim concerning Article 1103 is, accord-

ingly, denied.

(6) The Tribunal does not find that the U.S. measures in question
are inconsistent with the requirements of NAFTA Article 1105(1) as
construed in the FTC Interpretation of 31 July 2001, which Interpre-
tation is binding upon the Tribunal.

200. In its Counter-Memorial, the Respondent asked the Tribunal for an
order requiring the Investor to bear the costs of this proceeding, including the
fees and expenses of the Members of the Tribunal, the expenses and charges
of the Secretariat and the expenses incurred by the United States by reason of
this proceeding. Having regard to the circumstances of this case, including the
nature and complexity of the questions raised by the disputing parties, the Tri-
bunal believes that the costs of this proceeding should be shared on a fifty-fifty
basis by the disputing parties, including the fees and expenses of the Members
of the Tribunal and the expenses and charges of the Secretariat. Each party
shall bear its own expenses incurred in connection with this proceeding.

Done at Washington, D.C., in English language.

FLORENTINO P. FELICIANO
President of the Tribunal
Date: 4 January 2003

ARMAND DEMESTRAL CAROLYN B. LAMM
Member Member
Date: 6 January 2003 Date: 6 January 2003

