INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

ICSID CASE No. ARB(AF)/00/1

BETWEEN:

ADF GROUP INC.

CLAIMANT/INVESTOR

AND

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA

RESPONDENT/PARTY

 

Post-Hearing Submission
of the Claimant ADF Group Inc. on NAFTA Article 1105(1)
and the Damages Award in Pope & Talbot and Canada

 

In accordance with the Tribunal’s Orders of June 17, 2002 and July 1, 2002, the Investor
respectfully submits these further observations on the applicability of NAFTA Article
1105(1) and the Damages Award rendered in the claim of Pope & Talbot Inc. and
Canada on 31 May 2002 (hereinafter: the “Pope Damages Award”).

The Tribunal has invited the parties to make a final written submission examining and
commenting on the Pope Damages Award and, at the same time, to address what factors,
or kinds of factors, a Chapter Eleven tribunal may take into account in applying in a
concrete case the “fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security” standard
referred to in NAFTA Article 1105(1).

Counsel for the United States (“the US”) has answered the Tribunal by indicating that
there are no factors that it may take into account in interpreting and applying Article
1105(1) because the US has constructed an unnecessarily elaborate test for the provision
under which the Investor’s arguments — unsurprisingly — do not fit!. It does so without
even addressing the alternative that its view may be wrong. It then attempts to take the
Pope Tribunal to task, separately, for what is clearly an important, and thoughtful, set of
reasons for decision.

With its observations, the Investor aims to be of greater assistance to the Tribunal. These
observations contain three interrelated sections. First, the Investor will describe the Pope
Damages Award within its proper context. Second, it will address the criticisms of the
Award leveled by the US. Finally, the Investor will outline the kinds of factors that
should be considered by this Tribunal as it makes its decision.

What the Pope Tribunal Said
The issue before the Pope Tribunal

On April 10, 2001, the Pope Tribunal issued its Award on the Merits of Phase 2 in which
it found that Canada had breached its obligations to the Investor under Article 1105 of the
NAFTA in respect of what was referred to as the Verification Review Episode. The
tribunal then began the procedures which led eventually to its award on damages.”

While those procedures were in progress, and before any decision on damages was made,
the FTC issued its interpretation in relation to Article 1105.

The Pope Tribunal was therefore forced with accessing the effect of the FTC
Interpretation on its earlier Merits Award and, in particular, determining whether the FTC
Interpretation could have retroactive effect and, if so, whether the original Merits Award
should stand. A close examination of the nature, content and impact of the FTC
Interpretation was, therefore, central to the Pope Damages Award.

' post Hearing Submission of Respondent United States of America on Article 1105(1) (US Post Hearing
Submission), pg 2 et. s.
? Pope & Talbot Inc. and Canada, Merits Award on Phase 2, April 10, 2001.

The Mandate of a Chapter Eleven Tribunal

8. The Pope Tribunal was confronted with similar issues to those which confront this
Tribunal. Both tribunals have been presented with claims under NAFTA Article 1105(1).
As stated in NAFTA Article 1115, both have been established to provide “equal
treatment” to the investors in accordance with “the principle of international reciprocity”
and both must ensure that the investors receive “due process before an impartial
tribunal.” Under NAFTA Article 1131(1), both tribunals must “decide the issues in
dispute in accordance with this Agreement and applicable rules of international law.”

9. Both tribunals must also regard an FTC Interpretation as “binding.” That is, when the
FTC has taken the time and effort to set out a particular interpretation, that interpretation
cannot be disregarded by a tribunal. A tribunal cannot disregard an FTC Interpretation
any more than it can disregard the applicable rules of international law mandated in
Article 1131(1). Rather, a Chapter Eleven tribunal must treat an FTC Interpretation with
care and attention ensuring, at the same time, that it does not shirk its responsibility under
NAFTA Articles 1115 and 1131(1) by merely deferring to whatever words might be
contained within such an interpretation.

10. A NAFTA tribunal is obliged to interpret NAFTA provisions in accordance with “the
applicable rules of international law” and virtually every single Chapter Eleven and
Chapter Twenty tribunal which has issued a determinative award thus far has confirmed
that the relevant rules are the customary international law rules of treaty interpretation
that have been encapsulated in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties*. As such, tribunals must identify the plain and ordinary meaning of the terms
contained within a provision, in the context in which they appear and in light of the
object and purpose of the treaty.

11. The second paragraph of Article 1131 does not override the first paragraph. It does not
say “notwithstanding paragraph 1... FTC interpretations shall be binding on Chapter
Eleven tribunals.” Accordingly, Chapter Eleven Tribunals are obliged to observe the
applicable rules of international law and interpretations issued by the FTC. Thus,
tribunals must consider interpretations provided by the FTC alongside the objects and
purposes of the NAFTA and the plain and ordinary meaning of the terms in the context in
which they appear.

12. A number of Chapter Eleven tribunals have now been presented with an almost
inconceivable conundrum: what if, on its face, an FTC Interpretation is clearly not
reconcilable with the applicable rules of international law? The Pope Tribunal was the
first to grapple with this question, and noted the facial differences between the text of
Article 1105(1) (‘international law”) and the FTC Interpretation (“customary
international law’) stating that: “[iJt is well accepted that the content of “international
law” is a good deal broader than “customary international law”.

* See, e.g.: Re: S.D. Myers, Inc.and Canada, Final Merits Award, at paras. 196-204.
4+ Pope Damages Award, at para 20.

13. The Pope Tribunal therefore found it necessary to examine “‘whether the Commission’s
action can properly be qualified as an “interpretation” and the answer to that question
obviously depended “on what a proper interpretation of Article 1105 might be”. > To aid
it in resolving that question, the Tribunal sought to determine whether there was a body
of negotiating history relating to Article 1105. In its award, the Pope Tribunal recounts at
length the difficulty it encountered in obtaining documents respecting the negotiating
history of Article 1105.

14. The Pope Tribunal was not overwhelmed by assistance from representatives of the
NAFTA Parties in this task. In fact, even a cursory reading of the Award reveals the
enormous frustration felt by the Tribunal in the face of the foot-dragging by the relevant
government officials. That frustration must have been the more keenly felt by the
Tribunal laboring to reconcile apparently irreconcilable texts.

15. That the FTC would apparently choose to ignore the applicable rules of international law
in the interpretation of a NAFTA provision — and then permit counsel for the three
NAFTA governments to refuse to provide tribunals with access to negotiating materials
that would support its seemingly incomprehensible “‘interpretation” -— is almost
inconceivable. Yet, that is what continued to occur as the NAFTA governments
continued to argue that “international law” in Article 1105 means “customary
international law” °, yet declined to produce any “travaux préparatoires” which might
assist the Tribunal.

16. Placed in this most unenviable of positions, the Pope Tribunal navigated its way through
the conundrum, with little assistance from the NAFTA Parties.

The Absence of Travaux Préparatoires

17. The Pope Tribunal addressed what appeared to be one of the most vexing problems that it
faced during the arbitration: the inability to review any available negotiating materials
(travaux préparatoires) in order to shed light on the actual intentions of the NAFTA’s
drafters in agreeing upon Article 1105(1). All three NAFTA Parties made arguments
about what the drafters intended, but none would provide any proof to support them.
Supported, at least in silence, by the US and Mexico, Counsel for Canada even went so
far as to actually claim that no travaux existed. As it turned out, a wealth of negotiating
documents did exist. Unfortunately, Canada only managed to provide a selection of forty
drafts of Article 1105(1) — remarkably without any accompanying documents that would
explain the Parties’ positions on the various versions which existed within those forty
drafts or why those versions changed or were eventually agreed upon. 1

18. In Methanex Corp. v. United States, the US and Mexico have apparently refused to
provide any access to their cache of negotiating materials. A former senior Mexican
Chapter Eleven negotiator filed an affidavit in that case indicating that the Parties had

* [bid at para 24.
© See: Pope Damages Award, at footnote 37.
7 Ibid, at para. 28-38, in particular footnote 23.

20.

discussed using the phrase “customary international law” in Article 1105 but had rejected
the idea. The United States, while acknowledging that a history of negotiating drafts
exists "steadfastly refuse[d]” to produce those drafts.*

The Pope Tribunal appeared genuinely frustrated by the actions of the NAFTA Parties:

Canada has not told the Tribunal where the documents resided, or how a
diligent search would have failed to find over forty iterations of Chapter 11.
The documents themselves show that Canada possessed them at one time. It
is not credible that the negotiators would have forgotten their existence.
Surely the other NAFTA Parties would have been willing to refresh
recollections and provide copies. If Canada did not want to release them, it
surely knew how not to do so, as the very letter transmitting the documents to
the Tribunal included a refusal to provide other documents. Finally, it is
almost certain that the documents provided, which included nothing in
explication of the various drafts, are not all that exists, yet no effort was
made by Canada to let the Tribunal know what, if anything, has been
withheld.°

Similarly, the Pope Tribunal stated:

In this sense, the failure of Canada to provide the documents when
requested in November 2000 was unfortunate. Forcing the Tribunal to
chose after the documents as it did is not acceptable !

and later:

This incident’s injury to the Tribunal’s work can now be remedied. But

the injury to the Chapter Eleven process will surely linger.!!

 

While the actions of Canada were the primary focus of the Pope Tribunal’s frustration, it
is clear that counsel for the other NAFTA parties were active participants in the
arbitration and did nothing to shed light on the question of the existence of negotiation
text, all the while knowing of the Tribunal’s interest in those texts and of Canada’s denial
of the existence of such texts.

As a result, this Tribunal should be skeptical about the pretensions of any of the NAFTA
Parties respecting the intent of the drafters — unless those Parties are now willing to
provide the Investor and the Tribunal with access to the complete catalogue of
negotiating materials that would shed light on the subject. If the U.S. fails to provide all
available negotiating materials concerning Article 1105(1) to this Tribunal, it would only
be appropriate to draw an adverse inference against arguments made by the U.S. in
respect of Article 1105. While it did not feel the need to be explicit in this regard, it is

5 Pope Damages Award, at para’s. 28-38.
° Ibid, at para. 41.
!°Tbid, at para 39.
' Tid, at para 42.

21.

22.

23.

24.

clear that the Pope Tribunal drew an adverse inference against the NAFTA Parties in
explaining why it was prepared to conclude that the FTC’s purported “interpretation” was
actually an amendment that should have been made under NAFTA Article 2202.

In light of the serious controversy generated by the FTC Interpretation, a controversy
confirmed by the Pope Damages Award, the U.S. cannot at the same time argue in
support of a particular interpretation of the treaty and withhold from this Tribunal the
documents which would support or undermine its arguments. This Tribunal should draw
an adverse inference from the failure of the U.S. to provide it with any negotiating
history. While there may be no general obligation on the U.S. to cooperate with this
Tribunal and assist it in its work, this Tribunal has the legal authority to draw adverse
inferences in appropriate circumstances. 2

The Iran-US Claims Tribunal has drawn adverse inferences from the failure of a party to
submit evidence. Judge Charles Brower has acknowledged that the drawing of an adverse
inference from the failure of a party to submit evidence was a commonly applied
principle for Iran-US Claims Tribunal, stating:

When it reasonably should be expected that certain evidence exists and
that it is in the control of a party, the failure of that party to produce such
evidence gives rise to a justifiable inference that such evidence, if
produced, would be adverse to that party. 8

To better assist it in its work, the Tribunal should also ask the US and the other NAFTA
Parties to produce any documents which were used to brief the FTC prior to the issuance
of the FTC Interpretation. As the Pope Tribunal concluded, given the fact that the FTC
was compelled to issue its interpretation, it was “beyond argument” that this provision
must be sufficiently ambiguous so as to require recourse to travaux under Article 32 of
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.'* If the applicable rules of international
law (as found in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention) and the objectives and
goals of the NAFTA (as found in Article 201(1)) have lead three NAFTA Chapter Eleven
tribunals in one direction, and the FTC interpretation in another, a review of all available
negotiating materials surely would be in order. !°

Amendment or Interpretation

In a nutshell, the Pope Tribunal concluded that, because it had a duty under Article 1115,
and international law, to provide the Investor with a fair and impartial hearing, it was
required to interpret Article 1105(1) in accordance with the applicable rules of
international law. In attempting to reconcile the FTC’s Interpretation with those rules, it

"? Canada-Measures Affecting the Export of Civilian Aircraft, AB-1992-2, WT/DS70/ABIR(99-3221), at para 202.
See, in particular, the authorities cited in footnote 128.

'3 Brower, “The Anatomy of Fact-Finding Before International Tribunals: An Analysis and A Proposal Concerning
The Evaluation of Evidence” in Fact-Finding by International Tribunals at 151.

"Pope Damages Award, at para. 26.

'5 Thid, para 25 and footnote 8.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

concluded that if it were “required to make a determination whether the Commission’s

action is an interpretation or an amendment, it would choose the latter”!®,

The Pope Tribunal noted that the draft texts provided to it by Canada never mentioned
the term “customary” in modification of the term “international law.” None of the drafts
contained the expression “customary international law minimum standard of treatment of
aliens” — an ancient term used to describe the kinds of protections that a foreigner should
have enjoyed while abroad in the earliest decades of the previous century. The Tribunal
did note that Canada’s present negotiation proposals for the Free Trade Agreement of the
Americas explicitly endorses the ancient standard in the form of language taken from
Neer award.'’

The Tribunal also noted that “of all the problems of interpretation of Article 1105, the
scope of the term “international law” should have been the least troubling, since the term
is plain on its face and is defined in the Statute of the International Court of Justice”!® and
that the actual negotiators and drafters of the NAFTA surely would have been
sophisticated enough to know the significance of using a term such as “international
law”? recognized universally by internationalists.

Next, the Pope Tribunal determined that while the issue of whether the FTC
Interpretation could have retroactive effect was “a difficult question”, the better view of
the expression “shall be binding” in Article 1131(2) was that it was “mandatory rather
than prospective”.”° The Tribunal noted that viewing the FTC’s Interpretation as binding
did not necessitate a finding that it overturn its previous Award under Article 1105. That
Award “could remain either because the Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 1105 is
compatible with the Commission’s, or, if it is not, because the application of the
Interpretation to the facts found by the Tribunal leads to the same conclusion that there
was a breach by Canada of its obligations under Article 1105”.7!

The Tribunal then moved to the question of whether (a) its original interpretation of
Article 1105(1) was consistent with the FTC’s Interpretation; or (b) whether on the facts
of the case Article 1105 was nonetheless breached, even under the FTC’s Interpretation
of Article 1105(1).

The Appropriate Customary International Standard Eight Decades after the Neer Claim

Working from the proposition that Article 1105 prescribed the customary international
law minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the standard of treatment to be afforded
to investments of investors of other Parties, the issue to be decided was the content of that
minimum standard.

'6 Thid, para 47.

"" Ibid, at footnote 36.
'8 Tid, at footnote 9.

'° Tid, at para. 46.

20 Thid, at para’s. 48-51.
2! Ibid, at para 52.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

It is important to note that the FTC’s Interpretation did not provide any insight or
direction concerning the content of the minimum standard or the actual threshold to be
met in establishing liability under Article 1105. It only purported to establish the
standard which was the one that the NAFTA’s drafters always intended for Article 1105.
The Tribunal noted that the FTC’s Interpretation does not require that the concepts of
“fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” be ignored, but rather
that they be considered included as part of the minimum standard of treatment prescribed
by Article 1105. Indeed, any construction of the FTC Interpretation whereby the fairness
elements were treated as having no effect, would be to suggest that the FTC
Interpretation required the word “including” in Article 1105(1) to be read as “excluding”,
an approach which clearly had to be rejected. Therefore, the Interpretation required each
Party to accord to investments of investors of the other Parties the fairness elements as
subsumed in customary international law.”

Put another way, the Tribunal concluded that the concepts of “fair and equitable
treatment” and “full protection and security” still had to have some meaning.

Canada argued that the content for the minimum standard of treatment could be found in
a passage from the 1926 Neer decision:

[T]he treatment of an alien, in order to constitute an international
delinquency, should amount to an outrage, to bad faith, to willful neglect of
duty, or to an insufficiency of governmental action so far short of
international standards that every reasonable and impartial man would
readily recognise its insuf: iciency.”?

The Tribunal rejected that approach that sees customary international law as “frozen in
amber at the time of the Neer decision””*, and gave three reasons for doing so. First,
customary international law is not static but evolves through state practice, including
international agreements. Second, the range of actions subject to international concern
has broadened beyond the international delinquencies considered in Neer decision to
include the concept of fair and equitable treatment, as evidenced by the work of the
OECD on its Draft Convention on the Protection of Foreign Property. Third, the standard
of fair and equitable treatment is central to many recent BITs which require fair and
equitable treatment, but are not limited to protection against international delinquencies
(which in Neer involved the allegation of “denial of justice” rather than the breach of any
international law standard by an executive or administrative official).

The Pope Tribunal recognized that customary international law is to be divined from state
practice, which demonstrates a willingness to be bound by international norms.”° It also
implicitly noted that international custom can be evidenced in secondary sources such as
the writing of distinguished commentators and by international tribunals.

22 Pope Damages Award, at para 53.

23 Re: Neer and Mexico (US-Mexico General Claims Commission) (1926) IV RIAA 60..
*4 Pope Damages Award, para 57.

°5 Ibid, para. 59.

35. It noted the work of the International Court of Justice in considering a “full protection
and security” clause in a US BIT in the ELSI case — which provided insight on the type of
arbitrariness one should not encounter in operating a foreign investment. 6

36. In the ELSI case, the Court stated:

Arbitrariness is not so much something opposed to a rule of law, as
something opposed to the rule of law ... It is a willful disregard of due
process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises a sense of
judicial propriety.”

 

37. It even noted that Sir Robert Jennings considered the standards of “fairness” contained
within international investment protection agreements to be aimed at preventing much
more than the most serious “international delinquencies.””*

38. The Tribunal referred to the vast array of international investment protection agreements
which — as is generally acknowledged by the academic community — all contain some
form of “minimum standard of treatment” requirement that includes “fair and equitable”
and “full protection and security”.”° It acknowledged the seminal work of the OECD — of
which all three NAFTA Parties are members — and it implicitly acknowledged that the
world has changed incredibly since the 1920’s, when the Neer was issued.

39. Since the award in Re: Neer and Mexico was issued, the world encountered a great
depression and a terrible global war. In order to forestall future calamities, the world
community established the massive institutional superstructures that remain the
constitution of international economic law today, including the United Nations and the
Bretton Woods system. Numerous GATT rounds led to the founding of the WTO, and
enshrinement of more and more detailed rules governing the treatment of foreign
economic actors. Human rights protocols were established that recognized the right to
hold and enjoy property, and over 1800 bilateral and multilateral investment treaties were
established to provide investors with the most direct of remedies to address breaches of
international standards.

40. It also is interesting to note that the Neer decision was only followed in three other cases
encountered by the US-Mexican Claims Tribunal, each of which involved denial of
justice claims against the administration of justice by Mexico.*” It is even more
interesting to note that the American judge sitting on the Neer Claim dissented from the
majority on the high threshold that it eventually employed and that there were many

 

26 Thid, para’s. 63-63.
2? Case concerning Electtronica Sicula S.P.A.(ELSI), 1989 1CJ 15 at 76.

28 Pope Damages Award, footnote 49.

?° Pope Damages Award, para’s. 61-62.

*° Walter Faulkner v. Mexico (1928) IV RIAA 67 at 71 (regarding arrest and imprisonment); B.E. Chattin v. Mexico
(1927) IV RIAA 282 (regarding an illegal arrest); and Gertrude Massey v. Mexico (1927) IV RIAA 155 at 160
(which explicitly explains the narrow application appropriate in applying the high threshold found in the Neer
claim).

Al.

42.

43.

10

other examples of awards against Mexico (not involving the administration of justice) to
which the Neer test was never applied.*!

For all these reasons, the Pope Tribunal concluded that — even if the text of Article
1105(1) actually meant “treatment in accordance with the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens” rather than “treatment in accordance with
international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security”
— Canada’s singular reliance on the Neer case to explain the content of the customary
international law standard in 2001 could not be countenanced.*? The weight of decades
of development in international economic law could not be ignored in favour of a
singularly high threshold mentioned in a solitary, 80-year-old case involving the
administration of justice in a Mexico of the 1920s. To accept such a proposition would
freeze the kinds of factors to be used in determining an Article 1105(1) breach “in
amber” and thus contradict what must be admitted by any sensible observer — that
customary international law is not, and cannot be seen as being — static.

Why the US’ Criticisms Are Unfounded
General Misconceptions of the Law of State Responsibility

As mentioned above, the US has not provided any helpful, response to this Tribunal’s
request for a consideration of possible factors to be used in interpreting and applying
Article 1105(1) in the wake of the FTC Interpretation and the Pope Damages Award.
Instead, it has clung to a simplistic, and entirely rigid, explanation of how the “customary
international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens” should be interpreted.
Contrary to the writings of the vast majority of classical international law scholars, such
as Vitoria or Grotious, or more recently Lauterpacht, Cheng and Schwarzenberger, the
USS. claims that unless an Investor can fit its claim within the bounds of specific, rigid
“tort” compartments (apparently all established by the end of the 19" century), it cannot
succeed.*> This unsupported, and unsupportable, position defies all credulity when
applied in an international law — and, even in the common law tort context, is not highly
regarded by tort scholars today.

The analogy drawn by the U.S. between the customary international law minimum
standard and what it refers to as “the common-law approach of distinguishing among a
number of different torts potentially applicable to particular conduct” is patently wrong.

5! American Journal of International Law 555 (1927) at 556. See, e.g.: Samuel Davies v. Mexico (1929) IV RIAA
517 (where damages were awarded for damges to his cords of wood which had been seized by a low-ranking
official); Okie v. Mexico (1926) IV RIAA 55 (in which the claimant was found to be entitled to a customs duty
refund, contrary to that which was mandated under a Mexican law of general application); and G.W. MacNear, Inc.
v. Mexico (1928) IV RIAA 373 (in which a tribunal concluded that the improper detention, and eventual sale, of the
claimant’s wheat at the border constituted a violation of the standards of treatment required under customary
international law).

*? Pope Damages Award, para 57-58.

53 US Submission, pp. 3-4.

4 U.S. Post Hearing Submission, at p. 4.

11

44. In The Law of Torts, Professor Fleming rejects the notion that there are watertight
compartments in torts on both legal and factual grounds in the following terms:

Some writers, notably Sir John Salmond, have taken the view that there is no
such thing as a law of tort, but merely a large group of unconnected wrongs, each
with its own name, and that a plaintiff seeking recovery must find a pigeonhole
in which to fit the defendant’s conduct and the harm he has suffered before the
courts will afford a remedy:

Just as the criminal law consists of a body of rules establishing
specific offences, so the law of torts consists of a body of rules
establishing specific injuries. Neither in the one case nor in the
other is there any general principle of liability. Whether I am
prosecuted for an alleged offence, or sued for an alleged tort, it is
for my adversary to prove that the case falls within some specific
and established rule of liability, and not for me to defend myself
by proving that it is within some specific and established rule of
justification or excuse.

    

This approach is open to at least two objections. First, in so far as it suggests that
the burden of proof is on the plaintiff to establish that the facts proved by him
will, as a matter of law, result in liability, it is plainly wrong because there is no
onus of proof in matters of law. In other words, there is no presumption that the
law is in anybody’s favour, whether he be defendant or plaintiff. Secondly,
tortious liability is constantly expanding and there is ample evidence that a
plaintiff's claim is not necessarily prejudiced because he is unable to find a
specific label for the wrong of which he complains. New and innominate torts
have been constantly emerging in the long course of our history and the courts
have shown no inclination at any stage to disclaim their creative functions, if
considerations of policy pointed to the need for recognising a new cause of
action. ** [footnotes omitted]

45. The US is attempting to apply what is at best a questionable domestic law approach of
“watertight compartments” to the principles of state responsibility in order to whittle
down the obligations that its executive and legislative institutions are bound to observe.

46. The analogy to a discredited domestic law concept of pigeonholing causes of action is
clearly wrong. However, the basic premise, that such a requirement exists in customary
international law is just as wrong. The U.S. tries to support its premise by focusing on
the ancient law of “denials of justice” which predominantly (although certainly not
exclusively) involve breaches of international law by domestic courts or judicial
proceedings. As Professor Hyde wrote in his treatise on international law in 1922:

A denial of justice, ina broad sense, occurs whenever a State, through any
department or agency, fails to observe with respect to an alien, any duty
imposed_by international _law or by treaty with his country. Such
delinquency may, for example, be manifest in arbitrary or capricious action
on the part of the courts, or in legislative enactments destroying the exercise

 

%5 Fleming, John G. The Law of Torts, 9” Ed, at p. 7.

47.

48.

12

of _a_privilege conferred by treaty, or in the action of the executive

department in ordering the seizure of property without due process of law.
in part in original] 36

 

 

[emphi

From its assertion that denial of justice cases are an example of this watertight
compartments (“distinct torts”) approach, the US makes the unfathomable leap to a
blanket assertion that, absent a watertight compartment of an international wrong, all
State acts are protected from international review. >” This naked assertion of immunity
for the discretionary acts of government flies in the face of the well-established rules of
state responsibility, as described by Professor Cheng below:

In complexities of human society, either individuals or of nations, law cannot
precisely delimit every right in advance. Certain rights may indeed be rigidly
circumscribed, as, for instance, the right of self-defence in the territory of a
friendly state...

But whatever the law leaves a matter to the judgement of the person
exercising the right, this discretion must be exercised in good faith, and the
law will intervene in all cases where this discretion is abused...
Wherever, therefore, the owner of a right enjoys a certain
power, this right must be exercised in good faith, which means that it must
be exercised reasonably, honestly, in conformity with the it of the law
and with due regard to the interests of others. But since discretion implies
subjective judgement, it is often difficult to determine categorically that the
discretion has been abused. Each case _must_be judged according to its
particular circumstances by looking either at the intention or motive of the
doer or the objective result of the act, in light of international practice and
human experience. When either an unlawful intention or design can be
established, or the act is clearly unreasonable, there is an abuse prohibited
by law.[emphasis is ours]**

   

 

iscretionary

 

 

 

 

     

 

 

The Flaws in Specific Criticisms

The US commences its critique labouring under the misconception that the Pope Tribunal
concluded that “it need not abide by an FTC interpretation.” The Tribunal said no such
thing. It considered the FTC Interpretation to be binding, specifically recognizing the
mandatory nature of Article 1131(2).° It properly concluded that the Commission’s
Interpretation itself required interpretation. The Pope Tribunal simply considered FTC’s
Interpretation of Article 1105(1) in light of the goals and objectives of the NAFTA and
the applicable rules of international law. In so doing, the Pope Tribunal was simply
applying the FTC Interpretation in accordance with its duties under the NAFTA.

*° International Law Chiefly as Interpreted and Applied by the United States, (1922), Vol. I at 491-492.
57 US Submission, p. 6.

*8 Cheng, General Principles of Law (Grotius Press: 1987, Cambridge UK), pp. 132-134.

*° U.S. Post Hearing Submission, pg 8.

4° Pope Damages Award, para. 51.

49.

50.

51.

52.

13

The US argues that the Pope Tribunal’s interpretation of the Commission’s Interpretation
was wrong, but in truth, the Tribunal did what it was required to do. That it interpreted
the FTC’s Interpretation in a manner that the US did not like is not the same thing as
disregarding it. It is particularly ironic that the US assails the Pope Tribunal for violating
the principle of effectiveness in respect of the NAFTA‘! — because it was the three
NAFTA Parties who attempted to take the far easier road of issuing a so-called
“interpretation” under Article 1131(2) that most commentators have suggested is nothing
short of an amendment — for which there is clearly another NAFTA provision: Article
2202. The NAFTA Parties’ attempt to use the wrong provision to water down the
protections afforded in Article 1105(1) is the only act in question that plainly violates the
principle of effectiveness.

The US claims that the Pope Tribunal’s award is not authoritative because it is mostly
obiter dicta.” Since there is no formal system of precedent in Chapter Eleven claims, or
in international arbitration generally, it is not relevant whether the Pope Tribunal
dispensed its wisdom by way of obiter or through ratio. International tribunals decide to
accord weight to another award based upon the quality of the reasoning and the
reputation of the Tribunal’s members. This is partially why the Pope Tribunal indicated
that the decision of Mr. Jutice Tysoe, who sat in judicial review of the Metalclad case,
was not to be accorded much weight over that of a tribunal chaired by none other than Sir
Eli Lauterpacht.

The US also claims that the Pope Tribunal’s award is not authoritative because the
Tribunal admitted that it was not interpreting Article 1105(1) based on the plain meaning
of the text.*?_ In doing so, the US fails to apply the golden rule of treaty interpretation by
adopting a literalist approach, rather than the customary approach of interpreting a
provision based on the plain meaning of its text within the context of their place in the
treaty and its goals and objectives. While the US would like this Tribunal to conclude
that the US view of the FTC Interpretation, and of Article 1105(1), is both correct and
clear, the past year of controversy prevents anyone other than NAFTA government
lawyers from coming to the same conclusion.

The US takes the Pope Tribunal to task for concluding that the content of other US
bilateral investment treaties (BIT) are relevant in the interpretation of Article 1105(1)**.
It does so even though all three NAFTA Parties have cited BIT practices when it suited
them to explain the original intent of the drafters (instead of providing access to the
actual negotiating materials). The US argues that no matter what various commentators
and former employees of the Office of the Legal Advisor say, it has consistently believed
that all of the “minimum standard” provisions contained within its BITs stand for the
same standard: the customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens.
In doing so, the US essentially argues that all of the differences (highlighted by counsel
for ADF during the oral hearing) can be ignored. It comes to this conclusion

41 Us Post Hearing Submission, footnote 25.
* Thid, at pg 8..

+3 Us Post Hearing Submission, pg. 13.

44 Thid, at p. 21-22.

53.

54.

55.

56.

14

notwithstanding the fact that it simultaneously distinguishes the ICJ ELS award as
irrelevant because it referred to a different formulation of the minimum standard clause
requiring “full protection and security.“>

The US cannot have it both ways. Either all of the differences contained with these
treaties are not comparable because of their minor or inconsequential different language,
or they can be compared one with the other precisely because the language in each
provides for the same standard. The Investor submits that the difficulty that the US is
experiencing in trying to argue consistently is a function of its rigid adherence to the hope
that some day a tribunal somewhere will cite the Neer claim as establishing the
appropriate test for the minimum fairness provisions against which it must now defend
claims.

The US cannot see its way out of the intellectual thicket it has created by basing its
defence on a wholly discredited and inappropriate “watertight compartments” approach
to state responsibility, bolstered with reference to inapplicable case law from a bygone
era*®, The US has accepted the simple proposition that international custom is a
constantly-evolving phenomenon. In oral arguments, Mr. Legum recognised that the
tules of customary international law did evolve over time, stating that “it is not the United
States’ position that those standards are frozen in time. The standards do evolve”.*” He
later confirmed the U.S. position that “‘one can only draw the inference that the free trade
commission had in mind customary international law as it exists today”. 48

It is obvious that whether one speaks of full protection and security, prohibitions against
discrimination, arbitrariness or unreasonableness, or fair and equitable treatment, one is
speaking about an evolving minimum standard of treatment. A standard that requires
much more of the US today than it did a century ago.

The Kinds of Factors Which Should be Considered by this Tribunal

Based upon the findings of the Pope Tribunal, there are four ways in which a tribunal can
address the text of Article 1105(1) and the FTC Interpretation: (1) one can adopt both the
standard set out in the FTC Interpretation and the “egregious” threshold test advanced by
the NAFTA Parties to explain its content; (2) one can conclude that the FTC
Interpretation is invalid because it cannot be reconciled with the applicable rules of
international law and the structure of the NAFTA (which provides a different provision
for changes to the treaty text; (3) one can conclude that the FTC Interpretation is valid,
and then proceed to determine the content of the customary international law minimum
standard of treatment of foreigners today; or (4) one can accept both the FTC
Interpretation and the “egregious” test proffered by the NAFTA Parties, but accord a

45 U.S. Post Hearing Submission, pg 21-22.

46 The Pope Tribunal noted that Sir Robert Jennings stated that the Neer Tribunal was not answering the question of
whether a state act was “fair and equitable” but rather whether the act constituted an “international delinquency.”
Pope Damages Award, at footnote 49.

47 Transcript Vol II pgs 492-493.

48 Transcript Vol II pg 501.

15

higher standard of treatment based upon the MEN rule and other comparable investment
obligations owed by the United States.*”

57. If one chooses the “egregious” test, and — by extension — the “watertight compartments”
approach argued by the US, there may not be any factors that would be relevant in this
case — because these standards will have been “frozen in amber” as of the state of the law
at around the turn of the 19" century. If one chooses the second or third approach, the
same factors will generally apply in determining whether state action was “fair and
equitable” and accorded “full protection and security.”°° If one adopts the fourth
approach, the result would be largely identical to the second approach, because one
would seek out a comparable BIT provision under MEN treatment to replace the now-
weakened Article 1105(1) obligation.

58. Accordingly, for this Tribunal, it does not matter whether it determines the FTC
Interpretation to be invalid because it is not an “interpretation” within the scope of Article
1131(2), or whether it considers the current status of customary international law
concerning the treatment of foreigners, or whether it concludes that, while Article
1105(1) provides a very low level of protection, higher levels to be found in other BITs.
The result will be the same in all three cases. The clear text of Article 1105, the text of
other applicable US BITs and the findings of international tribunals can all be used to
determine the kinds of factors which cause a regulatory regime or regulatory treatment to
fall below the minimum standard in 2002.

59. As the Investor indicated in its Reply Memorial, BITs signed between the United States
and countries such as Estonia or Albania provide evidence of the kind of treatment that
falls below applicable standards.°! This Tribunal will also recall that the NAFTA Parties
explicitly reserved the application of MFN treatment under Article 1103 to BITs signed
after 1994.°? Thus, if this Tribunal concludes that the FTC-modified Article 1105(1) text
applies in this case — subject to the requirement of Article 1103 MEN treatment, it should
refer to minimum standard provisions such as those contained within the Albania and
Estonia BITs. In addition, if the Tribunal decides that minimum standard provisions set
out in various BITs are evidence of evolving custom, it may refer to these two recent BIT
provisions as examples of the current minimum standard of treatment required.

4° The Investor set out its MFN arguments at para’s. 219-221 of its Reply Memorial. The Pope & Talbot Tribunal
mentioned the availability of an MFN claim for a higher level of treatment at footnote 54 of its Damages Award.

> Although in other cases where the breach of a specific non-NAFTA treaty norm is used as the basis for a claim,
the two approaches would differ, as concluding the FTC Interpretation was of no practical effect would permit
claims based on relevant investment protection clauses in other treaties, as opposed to just custom (which would
require more evidence than one treaty provision to be proved as binding customary law).

5! Investor’s Reply Memorial, at para 222 et. s..

> Of course, the fact that the United States has taken a reservation, in Annex IV of the NAFTA, from providing
MEN treatment under Article 1103 “for treatment accorded under all bilateral or multilateral international
agreements in force or signed prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement” is demonstrative of its clear
intention to be bound to offer NAFTA investors any more favourable treatment that it agreed to provide to other
investors from other countries under any BITs signed after the NAFTA came into force.

 

60.

61.

62.

63.

16

Article II(3)(a) of the Albania-US BIT requires “fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security,” in addition to whatever obligations the U.S. would owe under
“international law” generally. Article II(3) provides as follows:

(a) Each Party shall at all times accord to covered investments fair and
equitable treatment and full protection and security, and shall in no case
accord treatment less favorable than that required by international law.

(b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by unreasonable and discriminatory
measures the management, conduct, operation and sale or other disposition
of covered investments.

Whereas Article II(2)(b) of the Estonia-US BIT similarly — but perhaps slightly more
expansively — states:

(b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory

the operation, i use, enjoyment,
acquisition, expansion, or disposal of investments. For purpose of dispute
resolution under Articles VI and VII, a measure may be arbitrary or
discriminatory notwithstanding the fact that a Party has had or has exercised
the opportunity to review such measure in the courts or administrative
tribunals of a Party.

As noted by renown internationalist commentators such as Sir Robert Jennings and
former senior officials of the U.S. State Department such as Professor Vandevelde, the
intended effect of such language, as argued by counsel for ADF and un-contradicted by
US counsel during the oral hearing, was to “ratchet up” the minimum standard owed by
states through continued practice and through the evolving jurisprudence of mixed
international claims.*?

This Tribunal can conclude that these BITs, along with numerous other BITs, along with
free trade agreements and international economic cooperation agreements entered into by
the NAFTA Parties provide evidence that the customary international law standard of
treatment has evolved from protection against the most outrageous or egregious
international delinquencies to require that states act fairly and equitably; provide full
protection and security; avoid acting in an unreasonable, arbitrary or discriminatory
manner; and at all times to act in perfect good faith. Or this Tribunal can conclude, based
upon the approach adopted in the Maffezini case, and approved by the Pope Tribunal’s
with its Merits and Damages Awards, that these factors are required under the MFN
principle under Article 1103. It does not matter. The results are the same.

As demonstrated by the Pope Tribunal, if this Tribunal adopts the customary international
law approach to Article 1105(1), as modified by the FTC Interpretation, a critical factor
in accessing the context of the contemporary customary international law standard is the
vast array of BITs. Of particular importance, are the numerous BITs and free trade
agreements negotiated by the NAFTA Parties and, in particular, the BITs and free trade

*3 Investor’s Reply Memorial, at para’s 216 and 25-226.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

17

agreement negotiated by the United States. These BITs are clear evidence of state
practice favoring transnational investment flows by creating a stable, predictable, fair,
non-discriminatory and non-arbitrary investment environment.

In addition, if this Tribunal adopts the FTC’s customary international law standard, it can
have recourse to various international tribunals to understand what kinds of factors can be
relevant within the context of various fact based scenarios (in contrast to the more
abstract language of other BITs). Treatment in accordance with the rule of law, as
opposed to treatment in accordance with the arbitrary whim of an unrestrained bureaucrat
is one such factor.

As the International Court of Justice stated in the ELSI case:

Arbitrariness is not so much something that is opposed to a rule of law, as
something opposed to the rule of law... It is a willful disregard of due process of
law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises a sense of judicial propriety.” 4

The Pope Tribunal noted that in ELS/, the ICJ “has moved away from the Neer
formulation”.

The WTO Appellate Body has also considered the question of what constitutes “arbitrary
or unjustified discrimination” in application of a measure under GATT Article XX. The
Appellate Body found that a regulatory certification scheme was not transparent, did not
provide for sufficient notice or comment by affected states or their citizens, and lacked a
formal legal procedure for review or appeal. The Appellate Body concluded that these
procedural flaws were inconsistent with the spirit, if not the letter, of GATT Article X:3.
It further determined that if a regulatory measure is applied too rigidly or inflexibly, it
may constitute "arbitrary discrimination".°> The Appellate Body has also concluded that
where alternative means for a state to exercise its sovereign regulatory discretion exists
that does not have a discriminatory result, it is obligated to choose such means in order to
act consistently with its GATT obligations.*°

In the Behring Fur Seal Arbitration?" a tribunal was asked to determine whether the US
had a right to complain about the state-sanctioned hunting of pelagic seals by British
fishermen in the waters off the American Pribilof Islands. The Tribunal held that it is a
violation of customary international law for a state to act in a discriminatory manner
against a foreign national with intent to injure or harm the national or his/her business
interests and concluded that the U.S. therefore had a right of complaint against the United
Kingdom’®.

54 Case Concerning Elettroncia Sicula S.p.A (ELS1)[1989] 1.C.J. Rep.15.

55 US - Import Prohibition of Certain Shrimp and Shrimp Products, WT/DS58/AB/R, October 12, 1998 at para's.
177-183.

°° United States — Standards for Reformulated and Conventional Gasoline, WT/DS2/9, 20 May 1996, at pp. 22-25.
57 Behring Fur Seal Arbitration, G.BJU.S., (1893) 1 Int.Arb. 755.

58 Along with the Permanent Court of Arbitration's decision in North Atlantic Coast Fisheries Case (1910), the
Behring Fur Seal Arbitration represents the bedrock of the principle of good faith for state responsibility in
international law. See:.North Atlantic Coast Fisheries Case (1910), 1 H.C.R., 141 at 169.

18

69. In a communication issued by the UN Human Rights Commission in 1995, it was
determined that a membership allocation scheme for seats in the legislative press gallery
impinged upon the claimant’s right to have access to information because the
Commission determined that the “operation and application” of the scheme “must be
shown as necessary and proportionate to the [legislative] goal in question and not
arbitrary.”?

70. In a very recent bilateral investment case, a Dutch investor was coerced into complying
with a discriminatory direction from a Czech regulatory body which ultimately
precipitated a loss of control of its investment. The actions of the Czech Republic were
found to violate the standards of “fair and equitable treatment” by the majority of a
tribunal that included former Chief Justice of the ICJ, Stephen Schwebel.© The Majority
commented as follows:

The Media Council breached its obligation of fair and equitable treatment by
evisceration of the arrangements in reliance upon with the foreign investor
was induced to invest... [para. 611]

On the face of it, the Media Council’s actions and inactions in 1996 and 1999
(...) were unreasonable as the clear intention of the 1996 actions was to de-
prive the foreign investor of the exclusive use of the Licence under the MOA
and the clear intention of the 1999 actions and inactions was collude with the
foreign investor’s Czech business partner to deprive the foreign investor of
its investment. The behaviour of the Media Council also smacks of
discrimination against the foreign investor. para. 612

The Media Council’s actions in 1996 and its actions and inactions in 1999
were targeted to remove the security and legal protection of the Claimant’s
investment in the Czech Republic. The Media Council’s (possible)
motivation to regain control of the operation of the broadcasting after the
Media Law had been amended as of January 1, 1996 is irrelevant. The host
State is obligated to ensure that neither by amendment of its laws nor by
actions of its administrative bodies is the agreed and approved security and
protection of the foreign investor’s investment withdrawn or devalued.

(...)_[para. 613]

 

 

71. Finally, and most importantly, the Majority concluded the following about how these
various standards together breached the exact formulation which has been proffered by
the FTC for interpretation of the text of Article 1105(1):
°° United Nations, Human Rights Committee, Communication No. 633/1995: Canada 05/05/99,
CCPR/C/65/D/633/1995 at para. 13.6.
°° Re: CME Czech Republic B.V. (The Netherlands) and the Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Tribunal, 13 December
2001, at para’s. 504-516. It should also be noted that another tribunal, operating under a US/Czech BIT and
reviewing the mostly the same facts, came to a different conclusion than the majority in the CME case. This other
tribunal did not deny that questions of arbitrariness and effective discrimination lay behind the BIT’s “minimum
standard” provision, only that there was not enough to establish a breach in that particular case. The Investor
respectfully submits that after reviewing both awards, this Tribunal will find the reasoning of the Tribunal which
included Judge Schwebel far more persuasive. See: Lauder and the Czech Republic, UNCTRIAL Arbitration,
Spetember 2001. Both awards can be found at the following URL: http://www.mfcr.cz/scripts/hpe/default.asp.

The Media Council’s actions as described above are not compatible with the
principles of international law, which the Arbitral Tribunal is charged with
applying. On the contrary, the intentional undermining of the Claimant’s
investment’s protection, the expropriation of the value of that investment, its
unfair and inequitable treatment, the Media Council’s unreasonable actions,
the destruction of the Claimant’s investment security and protection, are
together a violation of the principles of international law assuring the alien
and his investment treatment that does not fall below the standards of
customary international law. [para. 614]

 

72. In the Metalclad Award, a tribunal chaired by Sir Eli Lauterpacht, accorded a meaning to
the “fair and equitable” standard of treatment that also went far beyond the approach
advocated by the U.S.. The tribunal made a number of findings that Mexico breached the
fair and equitable treatment standard, starting with the simple fact that there appeared to
be “no clear rule” as to whether a municipal permit was ever required under Mexican
law. It further determined that there was no established practice or procedure governing
permit applications at any rate. The Metalclad Tribunal concluded that these omissions
amounted “to a failure on the part of Mexico to ensure the transparency required by
NAFTA.”*!

73. The Metalclad Tribunal also set out a series of examples of government conduct that
breached the customary international law standard of “fair and equitable treatment”. First,
it concluded that Metalclad was led by federal officials to believe that it did not require
the municipal construction permit first required, and later refused, by local officials. It
further concluded that Metalclad relied upon the advice it received from federal officials,
to its detriment. Regardless of whether the advice that Metalclad received was correct,
the tribunal appears to have concluded that a failure to address such detrimental reliance
constituted a breach of fair and equitable treatment under international law.°? The
tribunal further appeared to conclude that the near total lack of transparency that
characterised the long, confusing and painful process that Metalclad was forced to endure
in order to run its business made Metalclad’s detrimental reliance particularly critical and
damaging. The tribunal further concluded that the municipality’s decision to deny
Metalclad’s permit was based upon irrelevant and/or improper considerations, and that it
was denied without the provision of satisfactory reasons for decision. °

°! Metalclad Award, at para. 88. In making these findings, however, the tribunal did not repeat the interpretative
analysis it employed earlier in its award -- that because “transparency” is a fundamental principle of the NAFTA,
which must inform the objectives that must be employed in interpreting its provisions, gross failures to regulate in a
transparent manner could be seen as failure to accord “fair and equitable treatment” in accordance with “international
law,” as required under NAFTA art. 1105(1). In fact, the tribunal never fully explained whether it saw the “fair and
equitable treatment” standard as: (1) being additional to whatever treatment is required under “international law”, (2)
being an example of the kind of standard that must be followed in international law, or (3) whether the words “fair
and equitable treatment” are essentially superfluous terms that recall no more than the customary international law
governing the treatment of aliens. Given the wording of the tribunal’s primary finding, however, it would appear that
it chose the second of these formulations: that fair and equitable treatment is one of the international law standards
that must be respected under NAFTA art. 1105. See Metalclad Award, ibid., at para. 74.

© Metalclad Award, at para’s. 88-89.

°° Metalclad Award, at para’s. 92-93. The tribunal noted that “the construction permit was denied without any
consideration of, or specific reference to, construction aspects or flaws of the physical facility.”

 

74.

75.

20

And finally, in an award involving a BIT between the United Kingdom and Egypt, a
tribunal has recently concluded that the standards of “fair and equitable treatment” and
“full protection and security” were breached when a regulator failed to act in a manner
that would prevent the arbitrary seizure of its property by a local third party. ©

This growing body of case law and BITs clearly demonstrate that no international
tribunal has adopted the “egregious” or “outrageous” test found in the Neer case, or the
“watertight compartments” approach provisions now advocated by the US. The US has
cited no authority for its position — other than an FTC Interpretation which is open not
only to attack for being an improper exercise of the FTC’s authority under the NAFTA,
but also open to multiple interpretations itself and of marginal effect given the existence
of the MEN obligation.

Application to the Facts of this Case

76.

77.

78.

As indicated in paragraphs 249 to 250 of the Investor’s Memorial and paragraphs 248 to
264 of the Investor’s Reply, the Investor asserts that the US has abused its discretion to
administer the Buy America program and that this practice results in effective
discrimination against foreign investors such as ADF. The U.S. action is not consistent
with the customary international law principles of state responsibility and it is neither
reserved nor exempted under the NAFTA.

The Investor alleges that the U.S. has violated its Article 1105 obligations by failing to
provide a transparent legal environment which operated fairly and equitably and which
guaranteed full protection and security. Not only does the legislative scheme fail to
provide the necessary Article 1105 protection, it creates an environment where absolute
administrative discretion and the arbitrary and capricious exercise of power replaces the
tule of law. The U.S. has indeed exercised such discretion to the considerable detriment
of the investor and its investment.

The legislative scheme created to apply the Buy America measures is not an exercise in
law making, where legislators make rules to be applied by administrative officials and
where discretionary power is given only in measured doses. Rather, the legislative
scheme is an elaborate camouflage to allow for the unchecked exercise of arbitrary
administrative power to impose unforeseen or unreasonable conditions that target foreign
competitors, at the cost of foreigners in general and foreign investors in particular.

© Wena Hotels Lid. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Arbitration, Final Award, Case No. ARB/98/4, 8 December
2000. Request for Annulment denied: Case No. ARB/98/4, 5 February 2002.

©5 This is so because with the FTC statement, the three NAFTA Parties appear to have manifestly ignored their
collective obligation to interpret the provisions of the NAFTA in accordance with its objectives and the applicable
rules of international law under Article 101(2) and their obligation to “ensure that all necessary measures are taken
in order to give effect to the provisions of the Agreement”.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

21

Recall that the original rule enacted by Congress called for U.S. preferences on “steel,
iron and manufactured products”, distinguishing between “steel and iron” on the one had
as “materials” and “ manufactured products” on the other hand 66.

Recall also that when regulations implementing the law were drafted, the drafters
dropped all references to “manufactured products” and enacted the regulations which, on
their face, only applied to “steel and iron”. However, by administrative feat, the
bureaucrats broadened the meaning of steel — the output of steel mills — to cover steel
manufactured articles.°’ Thus, not content with ignoring the statute’s reference to “all
manufactured articles” the administrative officials ignored the plain meaning of “steel” to
interpret it as meaning “steel and steel manufactured products”.

The foregoing is arbitrary in the extreme, with the “law” as applied being a bureaucratic
concoction that bears little resemblance to the supposedly governing terms of the statute.
This Tribunal should also recall that operating in this fashion was the only way that the
administrative officials could effectively impose a 100% origin rule on a manufactured
product. Had the officials respected Congressional intent, they would likely have chosen
an origin rule that would allow some foreign contact rather than a 100% rule.

 

The regulations were enacted in a way that ignored congressional intent (as set out in the
law) and customary international law, in order to facilitate the targeted application of a
protectionist measure.

Further evidence of the arbitrary nature of the application of the powers of the Federal
Highway officials is seen in their ability to simply ignore relevant case law. U.S. courts
have held that if foreign steel is fabricated in the U.S. it remains U.S.-origin steel, and if
USS. steel is fabricated in a foreign country it remains foreign origin steel. Despite the
strength of those cases, and the similarity of legislation being applied, the officials of the
FHWA felt sufficiently free of constraints to simply ignore them.

In the application of Buy America, the FHWA has been allowed to act outside the
boundaries of the normal restraints on administrative action. This arbitrator and non-
transparent state of affairs has been permitted because, in applying Buy America, the
FHWA hurts only the interests of foreigners and foreign investors.

The continued application by FHWA of Buy America policies in an arbitrary, unchecked
manner with the express goal of discriminating against foreigners and foreign investors is
a violation of the minimum standard of treatment under Article 1105(1). While FHWA
may have achieved effective immunity from the application of the rule of law in the
United States, the U.S. State has no such immunity from its obligations under
international law (customary or otherwise).

The U.S. has also violated its Article 1105(1) obligation by failing to perform its NAFTA
obligations in good faith. This Tribunal will recall that on several occasions, the U.S.
admitted that had the Springfield Interchange Project been a federal procurement, it

°6 Tnvestor’s Memorial, paras 47 to 51.
°7 Tnvestor’s Memorial, paras 52 to 86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

22

would not have applied the Buy America provisions in question. That is because under
Chapter Ten of NAFTA, the U.S. government has promised its NAFTA partners that
(with certain specific exceptions) it would not apply domestic preference requirements®*.

It has also been demonstrated, and not denied by the U.S. that the State of Virginia does
not have its own domestic preference requirements and that the Buy America
requirements were applied in Springfield as a condition imposed on the receipt of Federal
funds.

The international law principle of good faith is enshrined in the pacta sunt servanda rule
which can be found in Article 26 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. It
requires that any right enjoyed by, or obligation owed by, a state must be executed in
perfect good faith. It is a violation of the good faith requirement for the Federal
government to do indirectly, through the Virginia government, what it has promised not
to do directly.

The principle of good faith performance has clearly attained the status of customary
international law and is subsumed in the Article 1105(1) obligations undertaken by the
USS. in respect of investors and their investments. The proposition that good faith in the
performance of treaty obligations is customary international law is axiomatic. In United
States: Standards for Reformulated and Conventional Gasoline, the Appellate Board held
that Article 31 of the Vienna Convention, which contains an obligation to interpret a
treaty in good faith, “has attained the status of a rule of customary or general international
law”.©? If the obligation to interpret a treaty in good faith has attained the status of
customary international law, how much more so is the obligation to perform treaty
obligations in good faith.

The International Court of Justice has put it this way:

One of the basic obligations governing the creation and performance of legal
obligation, whatever their source, is the principle of good faith. Trust and
confidence are inherent in international co-operation, in particular in an age
when this co-operation in many fields is becoming increasingly essential.
Just as the very rule of pacta sunt servanda in the law of treaties is based on
good faith, so also is the binding character of an international obligation
assumed by unilateral declaration.

 

In its Merits Award, the ICSID Tribunal in AMCO Asia v. Indonesia determined that the
obligation of good faith, as expressed in the pacta sunt servanda rule was a principle of
international law upon which an investor could found its claim. It therefore concluded
that, as a matter of good faith in respect of treaty obligations, the investor was entitled:
“to realize the investment, to operate it with a reasonable expectation to make profit and

to have the benefit of the incentives provided by law”.”!

°8 Transcript, Apr. 16, 2002 at p. 387 (Statement of Ms Menaker).

°° United States — Standards for Reformulated and Conventional Gasoline, AB-1996-1, WT/DS2/AB/R, 21 April,
1996 at p. 17.

” Nuclear Test Case (Australia v. France) (1974) ICJ Rep. 253 at 268.

7! AMCO Asia v. Indonesia, 1 ICSID Reports 377 at p. 493.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

23

In the Anglo-Norwegian Fisheries Case, the ICJ has gone so far as to state:

The principle of good faith requires that every right be exercised
honestly and loyally. Any fictitious exercise of a right for the purpose of
evading either a rule of law or a contractual obligation will not be
tolerated. Such an exercise constitutes an abuse of the right, prohibited
by law.

The conundrum faced by the United States was put into stark relief by the gymnastics of
logic that its argument required in order to justify the Federal action. The crux of the
USS. presentation in respect of this issue was that the grant of funds to Virginia was not a
Federal procurement and therefore not subject to the promise to refrain from the
imposition of domestic preference requirements. However, according to the U.S.,
conditions attached to that funding constituted procurement.

The difficulty could not be clearer because procurement is defined in NAFTA Article
1001(5) to specifically exclude “any form of government assistance, including grants”.
However, if the Federal grant to the State of Virginia did not constitute procurement,
which is admitted by the U.S.”, those grants would be subject to Chapter Eleven
provisions and, in particular, to the prohibition in Article 1106 on attaching performance
requirements in connection with the “establishment, acquisition, expansion, management,
conduct or operation of an investment”.

Hence, the U.S. position that, while the grant is not procurement, the conditions imposed
within the grant are procurement. But, not all conditions within the grant constitute
procurement, some are not procurement. ”* The U.S. then argues that, even though the
grant is not procurement, some (but not all) conditions imposed on the grant are
procurement. Those “procurement” conditions are Federal conditions (and presumably
Federal procurement conditions) but somehow the U.S. is still performing its obligation

not to impose domestic preferences in Federal procurement.

The U.S. arguments in this respect are disingenuous: While funding state procurement, it
escapes its treaty obligations but the conditions attached to the funding — Federal
conditions — escape Chapter Eleven discipline because those federal conditions are
procurement — but not federal procurement. Simply put, the Buy America program is not
good faith performance of the NAFTA obligations undertaken by the U.S. and, in
asserting its convoluted argument respecting its interpretation of the relevant terms in
NAFTA, the U.S. is putting forward an interpretation which falls far short of a good faith
interpretation of the treaty.

” See Transcript, Apr. 16, 2002, at 390 (Statement of Ms. Menaker) (“That funding changed hands between the
Federal and State governments does nothing to change this result. That funding was not procurement”).

™ The U.S. has admitted that at least some of the conditions placed on the receipt of funding are not procurement.
See Transcript Apr. 16, 2002 (Statement of Mr. Legum discussing conditions imposing State law requirements for
purchasing alcoholic beverages) (“Is that measure procurement? No. We would not suggest that it is”).

97.

98.

99.

24

Conclusion

The Pope Tribunal’s Damages Award is useful in demonstrating to this Tribunal that the
claims of the US regarding the interpretation and application of Article 1105(1) are
completely unfounded. This Tribunal can accept the FTC Interpretation of Article 1105
and conclude that the “fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security”
standard refers to the customary international law minimum standard of treatment and
easily conclude that the US has committed an abuse of discretion under that standard. It
could also conclude that the FTC Interpretation is not valid,

The Tribunal could also conclude that the FTC Interpretation freezes the minimum
standard owed to investors “in amber” based solely upon the test adopted by a majority of
the Neer tribunal, and then conclude that the Investor is nonetheless owed a far better
level of treatment by virtue of Article 1103 and the protection offered to investors under
BITs concluded between the US and countries such as Albania and Estonia. The bottom
line is that the manner in which federal US officials acted — in order to harm the business
of the Investor and other foreigners in a similar position — was not in conformity with the
US’ obligations under Article 1105(1). The work of the Pope Tribunal merely brings this
fact into sharper focus.

 

Relief Sought

The Investor maintains its plea for all of the relief sought in its memorial and reply
memorial.

The whole of which is respectfully submitted
Montreal, July 11, 2002

Peter E. Kirby

Fasken Martineau DuMoulin LLP
Stock Exchange Tower

800 Place Victoria, Suite 3400
Montreal, Quebec

H4Z 1E9

25

T:\Soco\KIRBYP\_CLIENTS\ADF Group Inc\Nafta 115963.3\Pope and Talbot
Submissions\ADF Draft Submission on 1105 006 CLEAN July11 2002.doc

