International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.

In the proceedings between
AES Corporation
(Claimant)

and

The Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/17

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Pierre-Marie Dupuy, President
Professor Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel, Arbitrator
Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent

Messrs. David M. Lindsey and Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
James M. Hosking Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino

Clifford Chance U.S. LLP Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
New York, NY Buenos Aires

Republica Argentina

Date of Decision: April 26, 2005

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 2
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

L Procedure

1. On November 5, 2002, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) received a Request for Arbitration against the
Argentine Republic (“the Respondent” or “Argentina’”) from the AES Corporation (“the
Claimant” or “AES”), a company incorporated in the State of Delaware, with
headquarters in Arlington, Virginia, United States of America. The Request concerns
AES’ investment in eight electricity generation companies and three major electricity
distribution companies in Argentina, and Argentina’s alleged refusal to apply previously

agreed tariff calculation and adjustment mechanisms.

2. In its request, AES invoked the provisions of the 1991 Treaty between the United
States of America and the Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement
and Protection of Investment (the “Argentina—US Bilateral Investment Treaty” or the

“BIT”).!

3. On November 6, 2002, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules
of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution
Rules), acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the request to the Argentine

Republic and to the Argentine Embassy in Washington D.C.

4. On December 19, 2002, the Secretary-General of the Centre registered the
request, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the “ICSID Convention” or “the
Convention”). On the same date, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution
Rule 7, notified the parties of the registration of the request and invited them to proceed,

as soon as possible, to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal.

Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic Concerning the

Ei and Protection of s , done in Washi D.C. on 14,

 

1991, in force since October 20, 1994.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 3
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

5. Pursuant to the parties’ agreement, the Tribunal in this case would comprise one
arbitrator appointed by the Claimant, one arbitrator appointed by the Respondent, and a

third, presiding, arbitrator, to be appointed by the Secretary-General of ICSID.

6. On February 18, 2003, the Claimant appointed Professor Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel,
a German national, as an arbitrator. On April 3, 2003, Argentina appointed Professor

Domingo Bello Janeiro, a national of the Kingdom of Spain, as an arbitrator.

7. With the agreement of both parties, the Secretary-General of ICSID appointed
Professor Pierre-Marie Dupuy, a French national, as the President of the Arbitral
Tribunal. On June 3, 2003, the Acting Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1)
of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), notified the
parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was
therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. On the same date, pursuant to
ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the parties were informed that Mr.
Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral

Tribunal.

8. The first session of the Tribunal with the parties was held on July 8, 2003, at the
seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. During the session the parties expressed their
agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules and that they did

not have any objections in this respect.

9. During the first session the parties agreed on a number of procedural matters
reflected in written minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal.
The Tribunal, after consultation with the parties, fixed the following schedule for the
written phase of the proceedings: The Claimant would file a memorial on the merits
within forty five (45) to ninety (90) days from the date of the first session; the
Respondent would file a counter memorial on the merits within ninety (90) days from its

receipt of the Claimant’s memorial; the Claimant would file a reply within sixty (60) days

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 4
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

from its receipt of the counter memorial; and the Respondent would file a rejoinder

within sixty (60)days from its receipt of the Claimant’s reply.

10. During the first session it was noted that consideration of eventual objections to
jurisdiction from the Argentine Republic would be premature. It was thus agreed to leave

the matter open for further discussion in due course.

11. On October 7, 2003, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits with
accompanying documentation. On December 31, 2003 Argentina filed a Memorial with

objections to jurisdiction.

12. By letter of January 12, 2004, the Tribunal confirmed the suspension of the
proceedings on the merits in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3), and invited
the parties to file their views on a schedule for their presentations on jurisdiction. Both
parties submitted their views on January 16, 2004, with the Claimant also requesting the
Tribunal to join the questions of jurisdiction raised by Argentina to the merits of the
dispute. Argentina, upon invitation of the Tribunal, filed a response to the Claimant’s

request on January 27, 2004.

13. On February 18, 2004, the Tribunal, having carefully considered the positions of
the parties, confirmed the suspension of the proceedings on the merits and fixed the
following timetable for the filing of the parties’ submissions on the question of
jurisdiction: the Claimant would file a counter memorial on jurisdiction within thirty (30)
days from the date of the Tribunal’s decision; the Respondent would file a reply on
jurisdiction within thirty (30) days from its receipt of the Claimant’s counter memorial;
and the Claimant would file a rejoinder on jurisdiction within thirty (30) days from its
receipt of the Respondent’s reply. The Tribunal would thereafter, decide, whether oral
arguments on the question of jurisdiction would be necessary, and, if so, fix a date for a

hearing on jurisdiction.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 5
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

14. In accordance with the timetable fixed by the Tribunal, the Claimant filed its
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on February 20, 2004. Argentina filed its Reply on
Jurisdiction on March 26, 2004 and the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction on

April 26, 2004.

15. By letter of May 13, 2004, the Tribunal informed the parties its desire to hold a
hearing on jurisdiction and proposed dates for such hearing. The hearing was held, with
the agreement of the parties, on October 23 and 24, 2004 in Paris, France. Messrs. David
M. Lindsay, James H. Hosking and Stephen Kantor and Ms. Andrea Goldbarg, from the
law firm of Clifford Chance US LLP and Mr. Mark Sandy, from the AES Corporation,
attended the hearing on behalf of the Claimant. Ms. Luz Moglia, Ms. Maria Soledad
Vallejos Meana and Mr. Ignacio Torterola, from the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina, attended the hearing on behalf of the Respondent. During the hearing Messrs.
Lindsay and Hosking and Ms. Goldbarg addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the AES
Corporation. Mr. Torterola, Ms. Moglia and Ms. Vallejos Meana addressed the Tribunal
on behalf of the Argentine Republic. The Tribunal posed questions to the parties, as
provided in Rule 32(3) of the Arbitration Rules.

16. The Tribunal has deliberated and considered thoroughly the parties’ written
submissions on the question of jurisdiction and the oral arguments delivered in the course
of the October 23, 24, 2004 hearing. As indicated in paragraphs 12 and 13 above, the
consideration of the merits has been suspended until the issue of the Centre’s jurisdiction
and the Tribunal’s competence has been decided by the Tribunal. Having considered the
basic facts of the dispute, the ICSID Convention and the 1991 Argentina—US BIT, as well
as the written and oral arguments of the parties’ representatives, the Tribunal has reached

the following decision on the question of jurisdiction.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 6
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

IL. Opening Considerations
A. Relevance of other ICSID Arbitral Tribunal’s Decisions on Jurisdiction

17. Prior to establishing its position with regard to the five objections made by the
Argentine Republic to its jurisdiction, the Tribunal shall address some preliminary
considerations made by both parties in their respective argumentations. All of them were
raised in relation with an opinion expressed by the Claimant in its Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction.” In reaction to the objections filed by Argentina to the jurisdiction of this

Tribunal, AES argued that:

“Each of Argentina’s five objections are based on similar or identical
arguments presented by it in other factually similar arbitrations in which
Argentina is the respondent. In every instance, the same arguments have either
been rejected or the corresponding ICSID tribunal has decided to join this

objection to the merits.”

18. In its Counter-Memorial, AES further referred to several ICSID tribunal decisions
on jurisdiction, including the Vivendi decisions P and II’, together with the CMS > and
the Azurix decisions on jurisdiction’. Later, and in particular during the hearing, AES

further referred to other decisions which, in the meantime, had become available, such as

2 See The AES Corporation Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, February 20, 2004 at 8-12, §§ 18-
; Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Compagnie Générale des Eaux v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case N° ARB/97/3, Award, November 21, 2000, 40 LL.M. 426 (2001). Also available at
http://www. worldbank.org/icsid/cases/ada_AwardoftheTribunal pdf

4 Ibid., Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, 41 LL.M. 1135 (2002). Also available at
http://www. worldbank.org/icsid/cases/vivendi_annul.pdf

5 CMS Gas Transmission Company. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case N° ARB/O1/8, Decision on
Jurisdiction, July 17, 2003, 42 LL.M. 788 (2003).

° Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case N° ARB/Q1/12, Decision on Jurisdiction,

December 8, 2003, 43 ILL.M. 262 (2004)

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 7
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

the LG&E v. Argentina’, the ENRON v. Argentina® and the SIEMENS A.G. v. Argentina?
decisions on jurisdiction. The argument made by the Claimant on the basis of these
decisions, treated more or less as if they were precedents, tends to say that Argentina’s
objections to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal are moot if not even useless since these
tribunals have already determined the answer to be given to identical or similar

objections to jurisdiction.

19. In response, Argentina raises a series of issues. They deal respectively with the
legal basis for the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and with the way in which, according to the
Respondent, the Tribunal should interpret them for determining whether it has or has not
jurisdiction on this case. These arguments must indeed be considered in relation with the

delimitation of the task of the Tribunal at this stage of the proceedings.

20. After having recalled that the jurisdiction of ICSID arbitral tribunals is based
upon the ICSID Convention (Art. 25), in conjunction with the bilateral treaty for the
protection of investments in force between Argentina and the national State of the foreign
investor, Respondent insists upon the specificity of each bilateral agreement as compared

to others. Argentina says in particular that:

“Each bilateral Treaty for the protection of investments has a different and

defined scope of application. It is not a uniform text?!”

21. Argentina further contends that:

7 LG&E Energy Corp..LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International, Inc v. Argentine Republic,

ICSID Case N° ARB/02/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, April 30, 2004.

8 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case N° ARB/O1/3,
Decision of Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim), August 2, 2004.

° Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case N° ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction of
August 3, 2004.

0 See Argentine Republic’s Reply on Jurisdiction, April 2, 2004 at 2-3, § 9.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 8
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

“The consent granted by signatory States of bilateral treaties shall not be
extended by means of presumptions and analogies, or by attempting to turn the

lex specialis into lex general (sic).” "

22. In addition, Argentina states that:

“The reading of some awards may lead to believe that the tribunal has
forgotten that it is acting in a sphere ruled by a lex specialis where
generalizations are not usually wrong, but, what is worst, are illegitimate.
Repeating decisions taken in other cases, without making the factual and legal
distinctions, may constitute an excess of power and may affect the integrity of
the international system for the protection of investments”. R

23. For this Tribunal, Argentina is right to insist on the limits imposed on it as on any
other arbitral ICSID tribunal. The provisions of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
together with fundamental principles of public international law dictate, among others,

that the Tribunal respects:

a) the autonomy of the will of the Parties to the ICSID Convention as well as
that of the Parties to the pertinent bilateral treaty on the protection of
investments;

b) _ the rule according to which “‘specialia generalibus derogant’, from which it
derives that treaty obligations prevail over rules of customary international
law under the condition that the latter are not of a peremptory character;

c) the fact that the extent of the jurisdiction of each tribunal is determined by
the combination of the pertinent provisions of two “/eges specialia”: on the
one hand, the ICSID Convention and, on the other hand, the BIT in force

between the two concerned States; as the case may be, the arbitration clause

" Ibid. at 8, § 27
p Ibid.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 9
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

in contracts between the private investor and the State or its emanation may
also interfere with the two previous ones for determination of the scope of
the tribunal’s jurisdiction.

d) the rule according to which each decision or award delivered by an ICSID
Tribunal is only binding on the parties to the dispute settled by this decision
or award.'* There is so far no rule of precedent in general international law;
nor is there any within the specific ICSID system for the settlement of
disputes between one State party to the Convention and the National of
another State Party. This was in particular illustrated by diverging positions
respectively taken by two ICSID tribunals on issues dealing with the
interpretation of arguably similar language in two different BITs.'*. As

rightly stated by the Tribunal in SGS v. Philippines:

“...although different tribunals constituted under the ICSID system
should in general seek to act consistently with each other, in the end it
must be for each tribunal to exercise its competence in accordance
with the applicable law, which will by definition be different for each

BIT and each Respondent State.” Ss

The same position was echoed by the ENRON Tribunal on jurisdiction:

“The Tribunal agrees with the view expressed by the Argentine
Republic in the hearing on jurisdiction held in respect of this dispute,

to the effect that the decisions of ICSID tribunals are not binding

Article 53 of the ICSID Convention

SGS Société Genérale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case N°

ARB/O1/13 and SGS Société Genérale de Surveillance S.A v. Republic of the Philippines, (CSID Case N°
ARB/02/6.

1s SGS Société Genérale de Surveillance S.A v. Republic of the Philippines, \CSID Case N°
ARB/02/6, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, January 29, 2004, available at

http://www. worldbank.org/icsid/cases/SGSvPhil-final.pdf

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 10
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

precedents and that every case must be examined in the light of its

own circumstances.”'°

24. The present Tribunal indeed agrees with Argentina that each BIT has its own
identity; its very terms should consequently be carefully analyzed for determining the

exact scope of consent expressed by its two Parties.

25. This is in particular the case if one considers that striking similarities in the
wording of many BITs often dissimulate real differences in the definition of some key
concepts, as it may be the case, in particular, for the determination of “investments” or

for the precise definition of rights and obligations for each party.

26. From the above derive at least two consequences: the first is that the findings of
law made by one ICSID tribunal in one case in consideration, among others, of the terms
of a determined BIT, are not necessarily relevant for other ICSID tribunals, which were
constituted for other cases; the second is that, although Argentina had already submitted
similar objections to the jurisdiction of other tribunals prior to those raised in the present
case before this Tribunal, Argentina has a valid and legitimate right to raise the
objections it has chosen for opposing the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. According to

Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention:

“Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the competence of
the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal which shall determine
whether to deal with it as a preliminary question or to join it to the merits of

the dispute.”

27. Under the benefit of the foregoing observations, the Tribunal would nevertheless

reject the excessive assertion which would consist in pretending that, due to the

ENRON v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim), August 2, 2004, at 8, § 25.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic ll
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

specificity of each case and the identity of each decision on jurisdiction or award,
absolutely no consideration might be given to other decisions on jurisdiction or awards

delivered by other tribunals in similar cases.

28. In particular, if the basis of jurisdiction for these other tribunals and/or the
underlying legal dispute in analysis present either a high level of similarity or, even more,
an identity with those met in the present case, this Tribunal does not consider that it is
barred, as a matter of principle, from considering the position taken or the opinion

expressed by these other tribunals.

29. In that respect, it should be noted that the US-Argentina BIT, in conjunction with
the ICSID Convention, provides the very same basis for the jurisdiction in this case and
in some previous ones, as, in particular, those in which Argentina faced or is still facing a
dispute with ENRON Corp., CMS, AZURIX Corp, or LG&E and others; in each and
every of these cases the tribunals respectively constituted have already delivered their

decisions on jurisdiction.

30. An identity of the basis of jurisdiction of these tribunals, even when it meets with
very similar if not even identical facts at the origin of the disputes, does not suffice to
apply systematically to the present case positions or solutions already adopted in these
cases. Each tribunal remains sovereign and may retain, as it is confirmed by ICSID
practice, a different solution for resolving the same problem; but decisions on jurisdiction
dealing with the same or very similar issues may at least indicate some lines of reasoning
of real interest; this Tribunal may consider them in order to compare its own position
with those already adopted by its predecessors and, if it shares the views already
expressed by one or more of these tribunals on a specific point of law, it is free to adopt

the same solution.

31. One may even find situations in which, although seized on the basis of another
BIT as combined with the pertinent provisions of the ICSID Convention, a tribunal has

set a point of law which, in essence, is or will be met in other cases whatever the

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 12
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

specificities of each dispute may be. Such precedents may also be rightly considered, at

least as a matter of comparison and, if so considered by the Tribunal, of inspiration.

32. The same may be said for the interpretation given by a precedent decision or
award to some relevant facts which are basically at the origin of two or several different
disputes, keeping carefully in mind the actual specificities still featuring each case. If the
present Tribunal concurs with the analysis and interpretation of these facts as they
generated certain special consequences for the parties to this case as well as for those of

another case, it may consider this earlier interpretation as relevant.

33. From a more general point of view, one can hardly deny that the institutional
dimension of the control mechanisms provided for under the ICSID Convention might
well be a factor, in the longer term, for contributing to the development of a common
legal opinion or jurisprudence constante, to resolve some difficult legal issues discussed

in many cases, inasmuch as these issues share the same substantial features.

B. The Law Applicable for this Tribunal’s Jurisdiction.

34. There seems to be a substantial agreement among the parties as to the
identification of the law applicable by this Tribunal to assess whether it has jurisdiction in

the present case.

35. The requirements for ICSID jurisdiction are set forth in Article 25 of the ICSID

Convention, which provides as follows:

“(1) | The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment between a Contracting State (or any constituent
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that
State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have

given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 13
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

36.

(2)

‘National of another Contracting State’ means : (...)

b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any
juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to
the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign control, the parties
have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for

the purposes of this Convention.”

In addition to the jurisdictional requirements under the ICSID Convention, Article

VII of the US-Argentina BIT requires the following before an arbitration may be brought:

“1. For the purpose of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute
between a Party and a national or company of the other Party arising out of
or relating to (a) an investment agreement between that Party and such
national or company; (b) an investment authorization granted by the
Party’s foreign investment authority (if any such authorization exists) to
such national or company; or (c) an alleged breach of any right conferred

or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.

2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should
initially seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation. If the
dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company concerned may

choose to submit the dispute for resolution (...)

c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

3. a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not submitted

the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) and (b) and that six months

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 14
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

have elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose, the national or
company concerned may choose to consent in writing to the submission of

the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration :

i.) to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“Centre”) established by the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, done
at Washington, March 16, 1965 (‘ICSID Convention’), provided that

the Party is a party to such convention.”

37. It is in the light of these provisions that the objections raised to the jurisdiction of

this Tribunal by Argentina will be hereafter considered.

38. As rightly asserted by Argentina, the BIT establishes in which conditions and
events Respondent consented to the ICSID jurisdiction. Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention, in turn, provides the requirements for jurisdiction. 7

39. Although some of the views expressed by the parties concern aspects relating to
the merits of the dispute, the Tribunal, at this stage, has only to decide on the issue of
jurisdiction.

Ill. Objections to Jurisdiction.

A. First objection: absence of a legal dispute.

40. Argentina’s first objection to jurisdiction is based on the purported absence of a

legal dispute. This objection deals basically with the definition of what is to be

understood under “legal dispute” in the sense in which it is used by Article 25 (1) of the

See Argentina’s Reply on Jurisdiction, April 2", 2004, at 17, § 61.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 15
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

ICSID Convention. This is an issue that has been abundantly considered by a number of

commentators. '*

Al. AES for its part answers by asserting first, that it is “the proper claimant”? and
second, that there is a legal dispute”’. From this second point of view, AES rebuffs in
particular the way in which Respondent tends to interpret and use in its own

argumentation the Methanex decision.”!

42. The Tribunal considers that only the second out of the two points made by
Claimant in response to Argentina’s arguments is at this stage appropriate. The issue of
whether a parent company can bring claims for the losses it has suffered as a result of its
investment in a host State whether or not that investment is made in or through a
subsidiary, discussed by AES in its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,” shall be
considered later in this decision, in relation with the fourth objection to jurisdiction

articulated by Argentina.

43. The Tribunal wants to stress that in the present case there are, in substance, two
elements to be met for a dispute to be considered as a /egal one in conformity with the

8 See for instance Amerasinghe, CF, The Jurisdiction of the International Centre for the Settlement

of Investment Disputes, p. 170-172; R. Kovar, La compétence du Centre International pour le réglement
des différends relatifs aux investissements, in Investissements Etrangers et Arbitrage entre Etats et
Personnes Privées, La Convention B.I.R.D. du 18 mars 1965 (Centre de Recherche sur le Droit des
Marchés et des Investissements Internationaux de la Faculté de Droit et des Sciences Economiques de
Dijon, ed. 25 (1969), p. 29; G.R. Delaume, La Convention pour le réglement des différends relatifs aux
investissements entre Etats et ressortissants d’ autres Etats, 93 Journal du droit international, 26, 35 (1966);
Ch. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001, 103-106.

See AES Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction at 13, §§ 33-40.

” Ibid. at 16, $§ 41-47.

at Methanex Corporation v. United States of America, NAFTA/UNCITRAL Arbitration
Proceedings, Preliminary Award on Jurisdiction of August 7, 2002. Respondent’s Memorial on
Jurisdiction, Exhibit ALRA2.

” At 13, §§ 33-40.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 16
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

requirement set forth in Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention. The first deals with the
intrinsic definition of what is a legal dispute; the second deals with the inherent logic

which presided over the creation of ICSID.

a. In general terms, as it is also more generally the case in international law,
and according to the definition recalled by the International Court of

Justice in the Case concerning East Timor, a dispute in the legal sense is:

“a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views

or interests between parties”*

b. Within the specific context of the ICSID Convention, as_ rightly

commented by Professor Ch. Schreuer with regard to Article 25 (1):

“Tt is submitted that the disagreement between the parties must also
have some practical relevance to their relationship and must not be
purely theoretical. It is not the task of the Centre to clarify legal

questions in abstracto.”**

44. The Tribunal consequently considers that the true test of jurisdiction consists in

determining

(a) whether, in its claim, AES raises some /egal issues in relation with

a concrete situation, and
(b) if the Tribunal’s determination of the answer to be given to these

issues would have some practical and concrete consequences.

* 1995 ICJ Reports 89, § 99 with reference to earlier cases.
Ch. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, op.cit. at 102, § 36.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 17
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

It is enough, here, to state that, considering the very features of AES’ claims the
Tribunal be also prima facie convinced that AES’ interest may have not only been

“merely affected” but hurt.

45. Yet, on the basis of the elements already brought by the Memorial filed by AES
together with a number of supporting evidence, AES’ claim seems prima facie a
substantial one. It deals with a series of legal issues which manifest an evident

disagreement among the parties.

46. AES declares to have invested 1 billion US dollars in the sector of electricity in
Argentina; AES alleges to be in control of 6 generators and 3 distributors of electricity in
Argentina; AES invokes the breach by Argentina of articles II(2)(a), II(2)(b), II(2)(c) and
IV(1) of the Treaty binding upon Argentina and the United States of America on the
protection of investments.”> It is precisely the substantial interest constituted by the
importance of AES investment that the Claimant argues to have been affected by a
determined Argentine legislation. AES depicts in particular some Argentine legislation
including the Executive Decree N° 570/01, the National Emergency Law N° 25.561 and
posterior decrees of application as being at the origin of the breach by Argentina of its
international obligations. AES further provided the Tribunal with a detailed estimation of
the cost of damages produced to its investment in Argentina by the enforcement of this

legislation. Claimant has also articulated a documented claim for compensation.
47. All these elements are prima facie convincing evidence for considering that the

AES’ claims involve a legal dispute in the terms of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention,

therefore falling within the ICSID jurisdiction.

8 See The AES Corporation Memorial on the Merits, October 6, 2003, at 84, §§ 218-376.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 18
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

B. Second Objection: the legal dispute does not arise directly out of an

investment.

48. Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention not only retains that the jurisdiction of the
Centre shall extend to any legal dispute. It also says that such a legal dispute must arise
“directly out of an investment”. On the basis of this supplementary condition, a second
objection to jurisdiction was raised by Argentina. This objection is that the measures
alleged by AES are not specifically related to AES investments. They were measures of
general bearing, which aimed at restoring the economy of the country at the national

level; they did not target AES in particular.

49. According to Argentina, AES must “demonstrate a direct, proximate and

immediate causation between the measure and its alleged investment. 6

50. AES response to this is that “it is sufficient that AES has made a prima facie
showing that the measures instituted by Argentina directly affected its investments.”?” In
relation with this point, AES further refutes the interpretation and use made by Argentina

of the Methanex decision.**

51. In connection with these allegations, the Tribunal notes that the factual and legal
elements at the origin of the present dispute are basically the same as those considered by
other tribunals which, at the same time, share the same sources of jurisdiction (ICSID
Convention and US-Argentina BIT). So was it, among others, in the CMS, the Azurix
and the ENRON cases.

52. It is then of real interest to look at the way in which these tribunals considered the
measures reputed by claimants to be at the origin of the damage directly produced on
their respective investments.

26 Argentina’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, at 16, § 43.
. AES’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, at 18, §§ 50-53.
8 Ibid., $§ 54-58.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 19
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

53. In particular, the Argentinean legislation which brought to an end the regime of
convertibility and parity of the Argentine peso with the United States dollar” is, due to
its concrete consequences on the interests of claimants invested in Argentina prior to
December 2001, at the source of the respective claims filed before ICSID in the cases

already mentioned above.

54. In the decision on jurisdiction issued by the ICSID Tribunal in the CMS case, in
particular, the Tribunal referred to the legislation referred to above in paragraph 53 and

said pertinently that it should make:

“a clear distinction between measures of a general economic nature,
particularly in the context of the economic and financial emergency discussed

above, and measures specifically directed to the investment’s operation.”*°

55. The same tribunal further observed:

“What is brought under the jurisdiction of the Centre is not the general
measures in themselves but the extent to which they may violate those specific

. 3
commitments.”*!

56. In the present case, the situation seems prima facie to be the same. At this stage,
the Tribunal notes that AES’ claims are not broadly based on Argentina’s general
economic policies. Their ground is provided by the fact that the regulatory and legal
framework AES relied upon in making its investments was dismantled by the
Argentinean legislative measures here at stake. It is, in particular, Argentina’s alleged
refusal to apply a previously agreed tariff calculation and adjustment regime which is at

the core of AES’ claims. It is also the impact of the legislative and regulatory measures

National Emergency Act N°25.561 in particular
30 CMS , Decision on Jurisdiction, at § 25

* Ibid. at § 27

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 20
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

taken by Argentina which is reputed by the Claimant to have breached the commitment

made to it by the host State through the US-Argentina BIT.

57. This Tribunal shares consequently the views earlier expressed by the Tribunal in
the CMS decision on jurisdiction. What is at stake in the present case, as it was in the
CMS one, are not the measures of a general economic nature taken by Argentina in 2001
and 2002 but their specific negative impact on the investments made by AES. As a
sovereign State, the Argentine Republic had a right to adopt its economic policies; but
this does not mean that the foreign investors under a system of guarantee and protection
could be deprived of their respective rights under the instruments providing them with
these guarantees and protection. Without anticipating, at this stage, on the consideration
of the issue, whether this delicate balance between the respective rights of the host State
and those of the investor were respected in substance, the present Tribunal states that it

has jurisdiction for considering this issue.

58. It should be further noted that reliance by Respondent on the Methanex case is
inaccurate. As stated above, and in conformity with what has been strongly asserted from
the outset by Argentina itself, one should take each agreement on its term and avoid
drawing out of other treaties which are not applicable to this case, any conclusion
neglecting the substantial difference of terminology, scope and meaning existing between

these instruments.

59. Now, it is well known that Methanex relied on the NAFTA. In that multilateral
treaty, only binding upon the United States, Canada and Mexico, the definition of
“investors” and of “investments” used in Chapter 11 (Investment) is quite specific in
terms and substance. This definition is all the way narrower than the definition of
“investment” provided by Article VII(1) of the US-Argentina BIT. The latter states that
“an investment dispute is a dispute...arising out of or relating to (a) an investment
agreement between the Party and such national or company;...or (c) an alleged breach of
any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment”. This

definition is much larger than the one at stake in Methanex, since NAFTA Article

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 21
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

1101(1) provides that Chapter 11 “applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party
to: a) investors of another Party [or] b) investments of investors of another Party in the
territory of a Party.” It should be stressed that the element of “directness” under NAFTA
Chapter 11 deals with the way in which the measures at stake affect the investor or the
investment. The measure must directly affect the investment. “Directness” in ICSID

Convention (Art. 25) is something different.

60. As to the interpretation of the terms “any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment” used in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, it is well established by
commentators relying on constant practice that it should not be given a restrictive
interpretation.” Under this provision, directness has to do with the relationship between

the dispute and the investment rather than between the measure and the investment.

6l. As a result, in the light both of Article VII of the US-Argentina BIT and of the
interpretation to be given to Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention this Tribunal rejects

the second objection to its jurisdiction raised by Argentina.

Cc. Third objection : AES’ Claim is not Ripe.

62. Argentina contends that, due to ongoing negotiations still taking place between
AES’ local subsidiaries and Argentine authorities, either at the national or at the local
level, AES has prematurely brought its claim before ICSID. In relation with this
assertion, Respondent further argues that the damages claimed in the electricity

generation companies are not quantifiable.

63. AES reacts by asserting first that “‘any ‘negotiations’ by distribution companies do

9933

not strip ICSID of jurisdiction” and that, in fact, no real progress has been made with

2 See in particular Ch. Schreuer, op.cit.supra at 116, § 71, quoting Holiday Inns v. Morocco, ICSID

Case N° ARB/72/. See also the Amco and Kaiser Bauxite v. Jamaica case:
at 119-120, § 76.
8 AES’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, at 23 §§ 60-67.

referred to by Ch. Schreuer

 

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 22
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

the renegotiation process in Argentina (sic at the October 23-24, 2004 hearing). AES

also argues that electricity generation damages are quantifiable and recoverable™*.

64. In respect to the first aspect of Argentina’s objection, according to which ongoing
negotiations would prevent the claim from being legitimately filed, the Tribunal recalls
what it has already said with regard to the basis and scope of its jurisdiction. This basis,
as insisted upon by Argentina itself in its Memorial on Jurisdiction, is predominantly
defined by the specific instruments binding upon the Argentine Republic i.e. the BIT and
the ICSID Convention. This does not mean that the Tribunal could not apply, as the case
may be, any customary rule of international law which it would consider compatible with

the pertinent provisions of these two “leges specialia.”

65. The Tribunal recognizes that a negotiation process, being a diplomatic or political
means of settlement of disputes and not a judicial one, presents some specific features.
Consequently, negotiation should not be assimilated to judicial remedies. Still, there is
no rule relevant in this procedure, either in the ICSID Convention or in the US-Argentina
BIT, which would subordinate recourse to the ICSID system of settlement to any “prior

exhaustion of local negotiations.”

66. In its Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Argentine Republic did not rely on any
specific or general source of international law for supporting its argument. Argentina
only referred to the case law of the US Supreme Court,*° which, as such, is irrelevant for
the present case. There is no need here for having recourse to any “general principle of
law” as mentioned in Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice. It is
enough to concentrate on the two treaties mentioned above, the US-Argentina BIT and

the ICSID Convention.

67. In the US-Argentina BIT, Article VII (2) provides:

M Ibid. §§ 68-69.
35 Argentina’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, op.cit.supra, at § 48. Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner, 387

US 136 (1967).

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 23
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

“In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should initially
seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation. If the dispute cannot be
settled amicably, the national or company concerned may choose to submit the

dispute for resolution (...).

68. In the present case, the Tribunal notes that it is only following the established fact
that the parties had been unable to resolve the dispute within six month that AES filed its
Request for Arbitration with ICSID; and it did so pursuant to Article VII(3) of the US-
Argentina BIT.**

69. As for Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal reiterates that there is no
tule according to which a “legal dispute” should only be brought to ICSID subject to
prior exhaustion of local remedies, including negotiations between the investor and the
authorities of the host State. On the contrary, the ICSID system has been established on
the basis of a reversed rule of exhaustion of local remedies. Under Article 26 of the
Convention, for entering into play, exhaustion of local remedies shall be expressly
required as a condition of the consent of one party to arbitration under the Convention.
Absent this requirement, exhaustion of local remedies cannot be a precondition for an
ICSID Tribunal to have jurisdiction. What is only needed is that the claimant prima facie
demonstrates that there is a “legal dispute arising directly out of an investment between a
Contracting State (...) and a national of another Contracting State” and that both
disputing parties have consented in writing to dispute settlement through ICSID
arbitration. The conditions set forth in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention are

cumulative but do not give room for further conditions.
70. International practice confirms the interpretation given above. Without even
considering here the numerous decisions that rejected recourse to local judicial remedies

as a condition for jurisdiction, no ICSID Tribunal so far has subordinated its jurisdiction

See Request for Arbitration dated November 5, 2002.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 24
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

to the demonstration of prior ending of negotiations between the parties to the dispute.
On the contrary, confronted with a very similar argument by Argentina, the Tribunal in
CMS declared that:

“... it is not for the Tribunal to rule on the perspectives of the negotiation
process or on what TGN might do in respect of its shareholders, as these are

matters between Argentina and TGN or between TGN and its shareholders.”*”

71. In the present case, equally, negotiations are reputed to go on in particular
between two distributors, EDELAP and EDEN on the one side, the Argentinean
authorities, respectively at the federal and at the local level, on the other side. But, even
if the taking into account of such negotiations were relevant, it is impossible for this
Tribunal to assess whether there is any reasonable prospect for any settlement to be

reached at one stage or the other throughout negotiations.

72. With respect to the second aspect of the objection raised by Respondent, which
consists in saying that the damages claimed by AES in relation with electricity generation
are not quantifiable, the Tribunal recalls that AES has provided the Tribunal on
December 2003 with an expert report on damages. This document sets out in detail the

quantification of AES’ claim as it relates to electricity generation.**
73. Furthermore, as rightly stated by the Azurix tribunal:

“the question before the Tribunal at this stage is whether it has jurisdiction;
whether the Claimant can prove loss is a matter to be considered as part of the

merits.”

CMS, Decision on Jurisdiction at § 86.
8 See AES’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction at § 67, referring to LECG Report at 91-92

» Azurix Decision on Jurisdiction, at § 101

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 25
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

74. This Tribunal shares this view and finds accordingly no ground for accepting the

third objection raised by Argentina to its jurisdiction.

D. Fourth Objection: AES is not the investor.

75. The Argentine Republic argues that AES has failed to prove its status as an

investor for the purposes of the US-Argentina BIT. According to Argentina:

“a) in view that the BIT with USA includes no specific provision on the
applicable law, pursuant to article 42 of the ICSID Convention the law of the
State that is a party to the dispute should apply, including its international private
law rules and those international law rules that may be applicable, b) therefore,
the determination of the rules applicable to the nationality of the parties under the
BIT with USA shall be judged by the Argentine international private law, c)
consequently, AES should have proven its lawful creation. This is so pursuant to

Argentine international private law."

76. AES answers by saying that it has efficiently proven to be a US corporate

citizen*' as well as it has demonstrated that it owns and controls the AES’ entities by
providing the Tribunal with sworn witness statements by top managers from AES and its

subsidiaries.”

77. For the Tribunal, the Respondent’s position does not start from the right
assumption as to the law applicable to the determination of the nationality of the private
investor. First, as rightly contended by Claimant, the clear terms of the US-Argentina
BIT, which define a company, should be taken into account. Pursuant to Article I(1)(b)

of this treaty:

40 See the Argentine Republic Reply on Jurisdiction § 88

“a AES’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 71-76
* Ibid. §§ 77-80.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 26
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

“Company” of a Party means any kind of corporation, company, association,
state enterprise, or other organization, legally constituted under the laws and
regulations of a Party or political subdivision thereof whether or not organized

for pecuniary gain, and whether privately or governmentally owned.”

78. Second, Argentina wrongly considers that Article 42 of the ICSID Convention is
applicable to this issue of nationality. This is not correct. As rightly pointed out by

Professor Ch. Schreuer:

“TAn] issue that is not governed by the rule of Art. 42 is the nationality of the
investor. The nationality of a natural person is determined primarily by the law of the
State whose nationality is claimed (...). The nationality of a juridical person is
determined by the criteria of incorporation or seat of the company in question subject

to pertinent agreements, treaties and legislation.”

79. The same author indicates also that:

“During the Convention’s preparatory work, it was generally acknowledged
that nationality would be determined by reference to the law of the State whose
nationality is claimed subject, where appropriate, to the applicable rules of

international law (History, Vol. II, pp. 67, 286, 321, 448, 580, 705, 839)"

80. In the present case, the Tribunal is satisfied that AES, already at the stage of its
Request for Arbitration, has indicated, and convincingly proved, to be incorporated in the
State of Delaware with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia (USA). This was in particular
evidenced by the production of a certificate signed by Mr. Leith Mann, AES’ Assistant
Secretary, attaching a true copy of AES’ Certificate of Incorporation authenticated by
Delaware’s Secretary of State, in conformity with Delaware legislation. Mr. Mann also

8 Ch. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, p.cit.supra, at 554-555, § 5.

“ Ibid. at 267, § 430.

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 27
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

confirmed that at the time the Request for Arbitration was submitted the Certificate had

not subsequently been modified and remained in force.*°,

81. Still under the same fourth objection, Argentina contends that AES has not
“proven to have acquired the shares that allegedly give it a majority interest in the
[operation] companies” because the evidence “appear[s] exclusively on information
issued by claimant” rather than being “proven in a certifying way”. Respondent further

stated that:

“Ownership of or control over national are merely claimed and appear
exclusively on information issued by claimant. For the purpose of determining
the jurisdiction, AES should have proven in a certifying way the above

. : 946
mentioned requirements.

82. The Tribunal takes note of the fact that the Argentine Republic does not really
seem to substantially challenge that AES actually became the majority shareholder of the
operating companies. Neither does Argentina raise some doubts as to the true ownership
or control by AES of the companies concerned. Argentina’s argument remains basically
of a formal or procedural nature. What is questioned by Respondent is “the probative
value” of the material submitted by Claimant for evidencing its control as a majority
shareholder of the said companies.*” This material consists of a sworn witness statement
by Mr. Robert Venerus (Vice-President, AES Business Development Group) together
with other witness statements by other managers in particular of EDELAP, EDEN and
EDES, or AES Andes Generation Assets.*® These witness statements refer to corporate
charts showing in detail the ownership structure of each of the AES’ operating

companies.” In addition, AES provides a summary of the percentage it owns in each of

AES’ Request for Arbitration at § 2 and Exhibit B
Argentina’s Reply on Jurisdiction, at 22-23, § 90
Argentina's Reply on Jurisdiction, at § 94

See AES’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, at 30, § 78-80

See witness statements of Messrs. Banderet, Pujals, Giorgio, Dutrey

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 28
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

the subsidiaries.*° In its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, AES recognized that there had been a
minor miscalculation in percentage ownership and further filed an erratum, which
substantially did not alter the fact that AES is the majority shareholder in each and every

one of the companies concerned.*!

83. It is consequently for the Tribunal to appreciate whether it is satisfied at this stage
that the material and information provided by AES is accurate for evidencing its
ownership and control of all the companies concerned. In this respect, the Tribunal notes
that production of expert and witnesses reports is common practice in international
arbitration. In consideration of this practice, the Tribunal itself, at its first session, had
specifically requested that Claimant file such documentary evidence.” This is in
conformity with Arbitration Rule 34, which states that the Tribunal shall be the judge of

the “admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its probative value.”*?

84. Without excluding the possibility of requiring Claimant, later in the course of
proceedings, to produce further evidence of ownership and control of its subsidiaries in
Argentina, pursuant to Rule 34 mentioned above as well as to Article 1 of the Protocol of
the US-Argentina BIT, the Tribunal considers that it was so far sufficiently informed and
has no reason to consider in essence the kind of material produced by AES in this respect

to be inaccurate.

85. As a further related issue, the Tribunal wants to raise briefly the question of the

actual protection of shareholders and that of their jus standi before an ICSID Tribunal.

86. Without any need to look at the actual evolution of general international law on

this matter, which, as such, was convincingly analyzed by the Tribunal in cCMs,** it

0 AES’ Memorial on the Merits, Exhibit 52

sl AES’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction of, April 26, 2004 at § 55

Summary Minutes of the First Session of the Tribunal, Washington D.C, July 8, 2003
See ICSID Basic Documents, ICSID/15, January 1985 at 77.

See CMS Decision on jurisdiction, at §§ 43-48, 49-56, 57-65

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 29
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

suffice here to recall that the very terms in which the US-Argentina BIT defines an
“investment” provide a solid ground for recognizing AES’ legal interest as a claimant for

alleged losses suffered as a result of its investment in Argentina.

87. As stated in Article I(1)(a) of the BIT, a claim may be filed in relation to an

“investment” as it consists in:

“...every kind of investment in the territory of one Party owned or controlled

directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party.

 

88. This definition is a very wide one and it makes no doubt that AES’ economic
involvement in the concerned companies generating and distributing electricity in
Argentina falls under the definition provided by this provision of the BIT. This
involvement equally satisfies the requirements for recognizing an international
investment. They realize contribution in capital over a reasonably lengthy period of time
for the economic development of the host State, an operation AES has accepted to share

the inherent risks which it presents.

89. The Tribunal meets the views expressed on the same basis by other ICSID
tribunals dealing with the same BIT; in particular tribunals’ decisions on jurisdiction,
respectively, in the Lanco™, the CMS *° and the Azurix cases™’. AES’ jus standi in the
present case is not subject to doubt, not only, as seen earlier, because AES has a legal

dispute with the Argentine Republic but also because AES is the proper claimant.

3 Lanco International, Inc.v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case N° ARB/97/6, Preliminary Decision

Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal, December 18, 1998, printed at 40 LL.M. 457 at §10 (2001)
“6 CMS Decision on Jurisdiction at § 68
s Azurix Decision on Jurisdiction at § 74

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 30
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

E. Fifth Objection: Forum Selection Clause Precludes ICSID Arbitration

90. According to Argentina, the “Argentine Companies AES claims to control have
executed national forum selection clauses, with express waiver of all other authority and

jurisdiction. That circumstance prevents this arbitration from proceeding.”**

91. Claimant first observes that Argentina makes reference only to the concession
contracts and related documents pertaining to some entities (EDES, EDELAP, Alicura
and Hidroeléctrica San Juan) but to none of the other AES Entities. AES also relies on
the case law of recent ICSID tribunals which rejected the same argument in several other
ICSID arbitrations in which Argentina is the respondent as well as in some other cases
involving other countries, AES contends that, as a national of the US, it is entitled to
have Argentina’s breach of international law determined by this Tribunal, as is expressly

contemplated by the US-Argentina BIT.”

92. As a matter of fact, Argentina’s argumentation is inaccurate inasmuch as it
establishes confusion between two distinct legal orders: the international and the national
one. What is at stake is an alleged breach of Argentina’s obligations in international law
as set out in the US-Argentina BIT, of which AES, as a national company of the United
States, may seek immediate reparation through the special ICSID system of settlement of
disputes; this is in exception to the classical and ordinary means provided under general
international law by the display of diplomatic protection exercise by the national State of

the company alleging to have suffered damage.

93. As for them, the Entities concerned have consented to a forum selection clause
electing Administrative Argentine law and exclusive jurisdiction of Argentine

administrative tribunals in the concession contracts and related documents. But this

Argentina’ Memorial on Jurisdiction at § 65
AES’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction at § 82
o Ibid. § 83ff
“ Ibid. at § 90

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 31
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

exclusivity only plays within the Argentinean legal order, for matters in relation with the
execution of these concession contracts. They do not preclude AES from exercising its
rights as resulting, within the international legal order from two international treaties,

namely the US-Argentina BIT and the ICSID Convention.

94. In other terms, the present Tribunal has jurisdiction over any alleged breach by
Argentina of its obligations under the US-Argentina BIT. As such, it has no jurisdiction
over any breach of the concession contracts binding upon the companies controlled by
AES and the Argentine public authorities under administrative Argentine law, unless
such breach would at the same time result in a violation by the host State of its

obligations towards the US private investors under the BIT.

95. The Tribunal concurs with a position already adopted by previous tribunals
confronted with the same argument raised by Argentina. In CMS, the Tribunal took note
of the decisions already rendered in Lanco, Vivendi I and Vivendi II, which had rejected

the very same argument. It said:

“The Tribunal shares the views expressed in those precedents. It therefore
holds that the clauses in the License or its Terms referring certain kinds of
disputes to the local courts of the Argentine Republic are not a bar to the
assertion of jurisdiction by an ICSID tribunal under the [US-Argentina BIT],

as the functions of these various instruments are different.”

96. Further to this decision, the Azurix Tribunal maintained the same analysis. It also

rejected the Argentinean argument in the following terms:

“The tribunals in the cases cited concluded that such forum selection clauses
did not exclude their jurisdiction because the subject-matter of any proceeding
before the domestic courts under the contractual agreements in question and

° CMS Decision on Jurisdiction at § 76

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic 32
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

the dispute before the ICSID tribunal was different and therefore the forum
selection clauses did not apply. This reasoning applies equally to the waiver of

jurisdiction clause in this case.”

97. The present Tribunal cannot but share the views already expressed by these
tribunals, dealing with the same argument, repeated again and again by Argentina. In
particular, this Tribunal wants to stress that the comparison raised by Respondent in its
Reply on Jurisdiction™ between the waiver of jurisdiction met in this case and the

famous “Calvo Clause” is inaccurate.

98. This is so simply because this very clause only made sense by reference to the
general international law rule of diplomatic protection; the “Calvo Clause” was in
essence a clause by which private persons mistakenly pretended to renounce to a right
which in law did not belong to them but to their national State: the right for this State to

exercise in favor of its nationals its diplomatic protection.

99. Since under the ICSID system of settlement of disputes, exercise of diplomatic
protection is per definition put aside, it is irrelevant to compare it with a clause the
rationale of which is inseparable from diplomatic protection. As a consequence, the

Tribunal cannot but reject Argentina’s fifth objection.

IV. Conclusion.

100. For the reasons stated above the Tribunal decides that the present dispute is within
the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal. The Tribunal has,
accordingly, made the necessary Order for the continuation of the procedure pursuant to

Arbitration Rule 41(4).

% Azurix Decision on Jurisdiction at § 79

ot Argentina’s Reply on Jurisdiction at § 144-155

AES Corp. v. Argentine Republic
ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/17
Decision on Jurisdiction

Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel
Arbitrator

[signature]

Prof. Pierre-Marie Dupuy
President

[signature]

Prof. Domingo Bello-Janeiro
Arbitrador

[signature]

33

