INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
AES CORPORATION

Claimant

and

THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/17

 

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY
ALL MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL

 

Chair of the ICSID Administrative Council
Mr. David Malpass

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Date: April 6, 2022

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing AES Corporation:

James Hosking
Anibal Sabater
Caline Mouawad
Matilde Flores
May Khoury
Silvia Marroquin
Chaffetz Lindsey LLP
1700 Broadway, 33rd Floor
New York, New York 10019
United States of America
and
Ignacio Minorini Lima
Martin Beretervide
Maria Laura Rozan
Bruchou, Fernandez, Madero & Lombardi
Ing. Enrique Butty 275, 12th Floor
C1001 CABA, Argentina
and
Nigel Blackaby
Juan Pedro Pomés
Ezequiel Vetulli
Joseph Spadafore
Virginie Lassez
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
700 13th Street, NW, 10th floor
Washington, DC 20005-3960
United States of America

Representing the Argentine Republic:

Sebastian Antonio Soler
Subprocurador del Tesoro de la Nacion
Mariana Lozza
Directora Nacional de Asuntos y
Controversias Internacionales
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacion
Calle Posadas 1641
C1112ADC
Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires
Republica Argentina

and
Eduardo Silva Romero
José Manuel Garcia Represa
Javier Echeverri
Ruxandra Esanu
Ana Cuartero de Vidiella
Dechert (Paris) LLP
32 rue de Monceau
75008 Paris
France

I.
IL.

Il.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 1
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS 2
A. Respondent’s Position 2
(1) Applicable Standard for Disqualification 2
(2) The factual circumstances of the case........... wd
a. Decision to hold the hearing remotely against procedural agreements in place
and without considering the adverse effect on Argentina’s due process right.......4
b. Decision not to postpone the hearing
c. Procedural uncertainty in preparation for the hearing ............... cece 8
(3) Recommendation from a Third Party.........cceececeeseseseseseseseseseseseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 9
B. Claimant’s Position 10
(1) Applicable Standard for Disqualification............ccceesseseseseeeseeeeeeeeensenreeseees 10
(2) The factual circumstances of the CaSC.........cceeeeceseeeeeeeteeeeeneeeeeeseeseetseesseaes ll
Argentina failed to satisfy the standard under Art. 57 of the ICSID
Convention since there was no denial of Argentina’s due process rights ........... ll
b. The grounds advanced by Argentina have already been rejected by the Chair
in recent case: 13
c. Adverse procedural decisions cannot serve as the basis for a disqualification
proposal. 14
(3) Recommendation from a Third Party.........ccececeseseesseseeesseeneeeseeseessesesseaes 14
THE TRIBUNAL MEMBERS’ EXPLANATIONS. ........0cccccseessseeseseeeesesseeesceeseseeeeeenees 15
ANALYSIS 17
A. Timeli 17
B. Recommendation from a Third Party... eeeeeeeeeeeesseeseeeeeeeseseesreeseeasseess 17
C. The Legal Standard 18

 

DECISION 21

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

This decision concerns the Argentine Republic’s proposal to disqualify all members of the
Tribunal in AES Corporation v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/17) pursuant
to Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.

On November 3, 2021, Argentina submitted its disqualification proposal (Proposal).

On November 5, 2021, the Secretary of the Tribunal: (i) confirmed receipt of the Proposal;
(ii) conveyed to the parties and to members of the Tribunal a schedule for the parties’
further submissions on the Proposal and arbitrators’ explanations (if any); and
(iii) confirmed that in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6), the proceeding would

be suspended until a decision on the Proposal had been taken.

On November 17, 2021, in accordance with the schedule, counsel for the AES Corporation

submitted a Reply to the Respondent’s Proposal (Reply).

On November 19, 2021the Secretary of the Tribunal circulated copies of three
communications received on that same date from Prof. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez,
Mr. Stephen Drymer and Prof. Domingo Bello Janeiro, respectively, in accordance with

the schedule and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3) (Arbitrators’ explanations).

On November 29, 2021, the Argentine Republic submitted its Comentarios Finales de la
Republica Argentina sobre la Propuesta de Recusacion (Final Comments). Argentina

submitted an English version of its Final Comments on December 2, 2021.

. Also, on November 29, 2021, the Claimant communicated via email that it had “no further
submissions to make beyond those contained in its Reply dated November 17, 2021, except

to reiterate its respectful request that the Proposal be promptly denied.”

Il. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

A. RESPONDENT’S POSITION
qd) Applicable Standard for Disqualification

8. The Argentine Republic recalls that under Art. 14 (1) of the ICSID Convention, arbitrators

must inspire full confidence in their impartiality and independence of judgment!

9. Argentina submits that: (a) under Art. 57 of the ICSID Convention a party may challenge
any of the members of the tribunal on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the

qualities required in Art. 14(1) of the Convention; (b) “‘manifest’ means ‘evident’ or
‘obvious’, [relating] to the ‘ease with which the lacked of the required qualities is
perceived”*; and (c) “[i]mpartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards

a party.”?

o

. Additionally, Argentina asserts that, to succeed on a disqualification proposal, a party must
establish an appearance of bias of the challenged arbitrator[s], from a reasonable and

informed third person’s point of view, on an objective evaluation of all the facts.+

11. Finally, Argentina claims that the lack of confidence in the impartiality and independence

of the arbitrators can be grounded on a multitude of factors which, taken together, evidence

' Proposal, | 95; Final Comments, { 53.

> Proposal 4 97, referring to Kiser Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar Luxembourg $.d.r.1. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/36) (“Eiser”), Decision on the Kingdom of Spain’s Application for Annulment, June 11,
2020, | 206; Caratube International Oil Company LLP & Devincci Salah Hourani v. Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/13/13) (“Caratube”), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Bruno Boesch, March 20 2014, 4] 55;
Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5) (“Burlington”), Decision on the
Proposal for Disqualification of Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, December 13, 2013, | 68; and Blue Bank
International & Trust (Barbados) Lid. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20) (“Blue
Bank”), Decision on the Parties’ Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, November 12, 2013, 61; Final
Comments 4 57 citing Caratube § 64.

> Proposal, 496 referring to Eiser, | 162; Caratube, 4 52; Burlington, § 65; and Blue Bank, 4 58.

+ Proposal {ff 99-101 referring to Blue Bank, §¥] 59-60; Burlington, § 66-67; Caratube, § 64 and Eiser, § 206; Final
Comments, § 53 referring to Landesbank Baden-Wiirttemberg and others y. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No.
ARB/15/45) (“Landesbank”), Decision on the Second Proposal to Disqualify the Members of the Arbitral Tribunal,
December 15, 2020, § 131.

that decisions made by an arbitral tribunal are based on

‘factors other than those related

to the merits of the case.

(2) The factual circumstances of the case

. The Respondent submits that the Tribunal members in this case shall be disqualified

because of a series of procedural decisions, which - taken as a whole - have undermined

Argentina’s confidence in their independence and impartiality.°

. Argentina asserts that, although a tribunal has discretion to conduct the proceedings, it may

not curtail a party’s due process rights.’ The Tribunal allegedly did so, with decisions that
displayed an “erratic” and “contradictory” behavior, destroying Argentina’s confidence on

its members.*

. Argentina’s Proposal is primarily founded on the Tribunal’s decision of September 2, 2021,

confirmed on October 20, 2021, to: (a) reject the Respondent’s request for a postponement
of the hearing in this case; and (b) hold the hearing remotely. The Respondent elaborates
extensively on its submissions on the Proposal on the factual and legal arguments that it
presented before the Tribunal with regard to these points and on the procedure that led to

the Tribunal’s decisions.

. In its Final Comments, counsel for the Argentine Republic states that its Proposal has been

raised as a consequence of the Tribunal having “forced —without expressing any
substantive reason— the Argentine Republic to appear at the only Hearing scheduled in this
case [...] knowing that the State would not be able to exercise its right of defence at that
Hearing” and that “... the Tribunal's passive attitude toward this situation (and not a

procedural decision) [...] constitutes a serious breach of a fundamental rule of procedure

5 Proposal {102 referring to VM Solar Jerez GmbH and others v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/19/30),
Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil, July 24, 2020, | 92; see also Proposal {ff 11 1-

© Proposal, § 1.

7 Final Comments, {fj 2-4 citing Vattenfall AB and others v, Federal Republic of Germany (ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/12) (“Vattenfall IT”), Recommendation on the Second Proposal to Disqualify the Tribunal, July 6, 2020,
4139.
§ Proposal, {ff 1, 9, 94 and 112; Final Comments, {9 2, 4-5 and 7.

3

that has destroyed the State's confidence in the independence and impartiality of the

Members of the Tribunal.” °

a. Decision to hold the hearing remotely against procedural agreements in place and
without considering the adverse effect on Argentina’s due process right

a

. Argentina states that its Proposal is based “on the effect of certain decisions made by the
Tribunal [...] against the Parties’ agreement and the applicable procedural rules, that the

Hearing would be held remotely.”!°

x

. Argentina claims that the Tribunal decided to hold a remote hearing, despite the parties’

agreement and Argentina’s due process concerns.!!

18. According to Argentina, the hearing in this case shall be held in-person at the seat of the

Centre in Washington DC:!”

i. in accordance with the parties’ agreement, memorialized in Procedural Order
No. 2 of February 19, 2020, Articles 62 and 63 of the ICSID Convention, ICSID

Administrative and Financial Regulation 26 and Arbitration Rule 26;

ii, in view of the complexity of the case, which involves events spanning over two
decades, compounded by the Claimant’s late decision to introduce new factual

and expert evidence and arguments with its Reply in March 2021;

iii. in consideration to the inherent complexities of a remote hearing with multiple
witnesses and experts, which would have required holding, at least, three weeks
in reserve; complexities that have been heightened by the COVID-19
conditions, general travel and gathering restrictions, and fundamental

procedural issues that were not decided on time by the Tribunal.

° Final Comments, {ff 1-2.

'” Proposal, | 6.

1! Proposal, {f] 4-10 and 104-105; Final Comments, § 16.
"2 Proposal, {fj 10-41, Final Comments, §ff 11-18.

  

20.

22.

23.

21.

Argentina submits that “[a]t no time did the Parties agree on the possibility that the Hearing

might be held remotely”!?

and the fact that it had agreed to participate in remote hearings
in other ICSID proceedings, should not be considered as a general consent to this modality

of hearings. '*

Argentina recalls that on September 2, 2021, the Tribunal rejected its request.!° Argentina
claims that in its decision the Tribunal failed to make any reference to the procedural
agreements in Procedural Order No. 2, merely stating that remote hearings were now

“standard practice” and that “counsel for both parties have ample experience in the issue.”

Argentina claims that the Tribunal, in adopting this decision: (i) failed to take into account
the multiple difficulties - raised in due course by Argentina - that had arisen since the
parties confirmed their availability for an in-person hearing on the scheduled dates; and (ii)
did not explain how it expected to be able to examine the large number of witnesses and

experts in this case in the reduced time of work effectively available in a remote hearing.

b. Decision not to postpone the hearing
Argentina recalls that, as early as July 29, 2021, it raised with Claimant’s counsel the need

to reschedule the hearing (scheduled in October 2020 for November 8 through 19, 2021)

in view of the restrictions imposed by the COVID pandemic. '®

Having failed to agree on the matter with the Claimant, Argentina requested the Tribunal

to reschedule the hearing, for a series of reasons including:

e Aside from all of the work needed to appropriately prepare a remote hearing with
multiple witnesses and experts, a remote hearing would require holding, at least, three

weeks in reserve (as opposed to the two weeks reserved by the Tribunal);

'3 Proposal, § 10

 
 

16

49 31-33, Final Comments 419-21.
49 19-20.

Proposal, {| 12.

e The COVID-19 conditions (compounded at the time by the Delta variant) and the
resulting constraints had rendered it impossible to hold the Hearing in November 2021

as scheduled;

e The impact of the pandemic in the procedural calendars in other cases involving
Argentina’s Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacion, which resulted in a significant

increase in Argentina’s defence workload during 2021;

e The postponement of the date of the national elections in Argentina to November 14,
2021 (halfway through the hearing scheduled dates), which would have hindered the
work of the defence team during the conduct of the Hearing (as voting is compulsory

in Argentina); and

e The fact that the Claimant submitted a Reply almost twice as long as its New Memorial,
which largely exceeded the function of a reply, incorporating a witness not proffered

before and a new expert report.

24. In addition, the Argentine Republic explained that, even if the possibility was considered
of holding a remote hearing in this case, the Argentine Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion
could not ensure the participation of its team, witnesses and experts in safe conditions on

the originally scheduled dates. !’

25. The Respondent recalls that on September 2, 2021, the Tribunal rejected its request for

postponement, despite Argentina’s due process concerns. !*
26. Argentina claims that, in adopting this decision, the Tribunal:

i. failed to take into account the multiple difficulties - raised in due course by
Argentina - that had arisen since the parties confirmed their availability for an in-

person hearing on the scheduled dates;

 

iii.

did not explain how it expected to be able to examine the large number of witnesses
and experts in this case in the reduced time of work effectively available in a remote

hearing; and

appeared to sympathize with the Claimant when stating that rescheduling the
hearing in 2022 would have “a profound dilatory effect in a case that has been

pending for almost two decades.”'?

27. On September 24, 2021, Argentina requested the Tribunal to reconsider its September 2

decision. In doing so, Argentina elaborated further on some of its prior arguments and

raised others:

The evolution of the proceeding, from the Original Memorial to the New Memorial
and the Reply, evidenced a gross disproportion between AES’ original claim and
its present claim, leading Argentina to seek additional legal counsel to assist in the
preparation of its defense. Postponing the Hearing would be necessary to allow the

new law firm to become acquainted with the case; 7°

In September 2021, Argentina’s only expert scheduled to appear at the hearing
(Dr. Daniel Flores) was informed that a hearing in another ICSID case would be
held during the third week of November, interfering with his participation in this

hearing.”!

28. Argentina notes further that it was open to consider alternatives proposing rescheduling the

hearing in a hybrid form, holding the hearing in Buenos Aires or dividing the hearing in

parts.

29. On October 4, 20221, Argentina informed the Tribunal that Dechert (Paris) LLP would act

as co-counsel for the Respondent in this proceeding. On October 5, 2021, Dechert joined

 

2! Proposal, 38.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Argentina’s request for postponement of the hearing, to have sufficient time to become

acquainted with the voluminous case record and adequately prepare for the hearing.

On October 13, 2021, the Tribunal wrote to the parties indicating that it would be inclined
to bifurcate the hearing in two sections: a first session of seven days to be held in November
2021, to address issues of liability; and a second session of three days, to address issues of

damages, to be held in February 2022.

On October 18, 2021, the Tribunal held a Pre-Hearing Conference with the parties. During
the hearing, the parties reiterated their arguments on Argentina’s request for postponement
and modality of the hearing. During the conference, the parties also addressed pending

procedural matters concerning the examination of witnesses and experts during the hearing.

On October 20, 2021, the Tribunal rejected Argentina’s request for reconsideration,
deciding to hold a 10-day hearing - remotely - from November 9 to 19, 2021 and asking

the parties to hold March 16-18, 2022, in reserve, for a second hearing.

In Argentina’s submission, this decision was “striking” as: (i) it “envisaged working days
of seven and a half hours in remote mode (from 3pm to 10.30 pm Central European Time),”
and “[a] ny reasonable person knows that such long days would only undermine the ability
of the participants and of the Tribunal itself to profit from the Hearing; ” and (ii) rested on
the assumption that a rescheduling of the Hearing would cause a “prejudice that Claimant

had failed to prove.

c. Procedural uncertainty in preparation for the hearing

In addition to the Tribunal’s decision to — twice — reject Argentina’ request for
postponement of the hearing in this case, Argentina claims that the Tribunal failed to timely
and properly decide key issues for the preparation for the hearing, leaving the parties in

uncertainty.

Argentina takes issue in particular with the Tribunal’s decisions on the examination of
Claimant’s witness Eduardo Dutrey, Fernando Pujals and Vicente J. Giorgio and

Argentina’s guantum expert, Daniel Flores.

36. Argentina recalls that following its October 20 decision to hold the hearing remotely, the
Tribunal issued on October 21, 2021, Procedural Order No. 3 with arrangements for the
forthcoming hearing. On October 28, following a further request from Argentina that the
quantum experts be examined in a separate session in March 2022, the Tribunal determined
that Dr. Daniel Flores (Argentina’s quantum expert) “shall appear before the Tribunal

during the November dates scheduled for this hearing, on a day other than Friday 19, 2021.”

3

x

.In Argentina’s submission, the Tribunal’s decision was “inconsistent with its prior
decisions and closed the door on any effort or arrangement that Argentina could make to

attempt to attend the Hearing under the conditions being imposed on it.”

3

oo

. In Respondent’s view, the Tribunal’s decision of October 28, 2021: (i) failed to consider
the serious prejudice caused to Argentina by denying its right of defence and its due process
right; (ii) undermined the principle of equality between the parties, by directing Argentina’s
quantum expert to appear in less than 48 hours in two simultaneous hearings; (iii) implied
an unexplained change of criterion by the Tribunal, from its October 13 indication the it
would be inclined to divide the haring in two sessions; (iv) forced Argentina to negotiate
with Claimant its right of defence or its due process right; and (v) still failed to address the
fact that several of Claimant’s witnesses were unavailable in November 2021, depriving
Argentina of critical opportunities to make its case and violating its right of defence,

making it necessary to seek alternatives date for their examination.

39. . For Argentina, the “Tribunal’s obstinate attitude to adamantly maintain the Hearing dates
became by then devoid of any logic” and “the uncertainty about the unavailability of

Claimant’s witnesses” violated its right of defence.

(3) Recommendation from a Third Party

4

So

. The Respondent requests that the Chair of the Administrative Council seek a

recommendation from a third party on the Proposal before rendering a decision.””

? Proposal, 113; Final Comments, { 63.

41. Argentina bases this request on: (a) the fact that the President of the Tribunal was appointed
by the Chair;?? (b) the “seriousness of the reasons underlying the Disqualification

Proposal;” (c) to “ensure full transparency of this proceeding”.

B. CLAIMANT’S POSITION

42. Claimant alleges that the Proposal: (a) is merely a tactic to postpone the finding of
liability;?5 (b) does not meet the test of manifest lack of impartiality required by the ICSID
Convention; and (c) is solely based on Argentina’s disagreement with the Tribunal’s
procedural decisions.”° Accordingly, the Proposal should be promptly rejected, so that the

hearing on the merits can take place.”

qd) Applicable Standard for Disqualification

43. AES agrees that: (i) Art.14(1) of the ICSID Convention requires arbitrators to be impartial
and independent;?* (ii) where independence requires the absence of external influence or
control, impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a party;?
(iii) this is an objective standard and must be assessed from a third party’s point of view;*°
and (iv) the term “manifest” in Art. 57 of the Convention is to mean “evident” or

“obvious.”3!

44. Claimant adds that Argentina, as the party proposing the disqualification of the Tribunal

members, bears the burden of proof and further submits that the lack of independence or

 

23 Proposal, § 113; Final Comments, { 65.

?4 Proposal, | 113; Final Comments, 63-65.

25 Reply, {ff 1 and 83.

26 Reply, 1.

27 Reply, ff 3, 85 and 90.

°8 Reply, 61.

29 Reply, 962, citing Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/2) (“Pey”), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Mr. V.V. Veeder QC and Sir Franklin Berman QC,

April 13, 2017, 4144.

>° Reply, 4 61-62.

3 Proposal’s Reply, § 63 citing Landesbank, 4 126; Blue Bank, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Alvaro
Castellanos Howell, March 2, 2018, 78 (“Blue Bank IT”); Repsol, S.A. and Repsol Butano, S.A. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/12/38) (“Repsol”), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of the Majority of the
Tribunal, December 13, 2013, § 73, fin. 58.

10

impartiality has to be “manifest” or “highly probable, not just possible” to meet the high
standard set forth in Art. 57 of the ICSID Convention.*”

(2) The factual circumstances of the case

45. The Claimant submits that, with the Proposal, Argentina intends to relitigate the Tribunal’s
reasoned decisions with which it disagrees and ultimately avoid a hearing in November.**
Argentina’s Proposal is meritless and marks the culmination of Argentina’s tactics to delay
the hearing.*4 Argentina has accomplished its goal, since the Proposal automatically

suspended the proceedings; the hearing did not take place as scheduled.*

46. After recalling the facts that led to the Respondent’s proposal for the disqualification of the

members of the Tribunal, the Claimant submits that the Proposal shall be rejected because:

a. Argentina failed to meet the standard under Art. 57 of the ICSID Convention*®
since there was no denial of Argentina’s due process rights *”

47. The Claimant submits that the Proposal is “based solely on its disagreement and

dissatisfaction with the Tribunal’s adverse procedural decisions which, in and of

themselves, cannot serve as the basis to disqualify a tribunal.”**

48. Claimants submit that the parties never agreed to hold an in-person hearing.*® Instead, the

parties agreed to the hearing dates in October 2020, when it was impossible to guarantee

40

an in-person hearing.*” Accordingly, the format of the hearing was left open to

» Reply, {63 citing, Vattenfall Il, 4 93.
33 Reply, 83

+4 Reply, 4 83.

55 Reply, 4] 84.

5 Reply, {] 66, 76 and 81.

57 Reply, 3.

> Reply, §] 69.

» Reply, fj 15 and 26.

4 Reply, 4 13-14.

discussion,*! Argentina never ruled out the possibility of having a virtual hearing.”
Further, ICSID tribunals have consistently decided to hold virtual hearings over a party’s
objection, with the Chair of the Administrative Council rejecting proposals for the

disqualification of tribunals on that basis.**

49. Claimant also disputes that the complexity and factual background of the case have
changed since the hearing dates were initially set. The Claimant’s Reply did not introduce
new claims or experts but merely added one witness and one expert report.*> Neither these
additions nor the increase in Argentina’s workload justified a hearing reschedule or
extension.*° In the Claimant’s view, prioritizing Argentina’s workload would be unfair to
AES since Argentina either took on additional commitments or failed to address its

conflicts in a timely fashion.*”

50. Claimants further submit that the alleged “new circumstances” upon which Argentina
based its request for reconsideration were existing circumstances that Argentina chose not
to disclose earlier:** As to the issue of witness examination, Claimants submit that since
AES withdrew the witness statements of Messrs. Dutrey and Pujal and the related claims,*”
their cross-examination would serve no purpose”? and that Argentina knew that Dr. Flores

would have to attend another hearing since at least February 2021.

51. Claimants notes that the Tribunal indeed bifurcated the hearing — extending the hearing

days to a total of 13, as requested by Argentina®! — but reserved the second session to

4! Reply, ff 14-15.

# Reply, ff 14, 16.

4 Reply, {| 26 referring to Landesbank, | 137.
#4 Reply, 20.

4 Reply, § 20.

46 Reply, 20.

47 Reply, ff 22, 24 and 45.
48 Reply, 28.

4 Reply, J 11.

5 Reply, 41.

5! Reply, § 48.

address damages,* thus rejecting to use of the additional dates to examine experts.*? The
Claimant submits that the Tribunal’s decision was neither striking nor implied a change of

criterion.**

5

N

. For the Claimant, there “was nothing improper about the manner in which the Tribunal
reached the procedural decisions of which Argentina complains.”*> The Tribunal gave
ample opportunity to the parties to present their respective positions, made it clear that it
had taken note of Argentina’s views before rejecting them, and gave reasons for its

decisions.

5

Oo

. In sum, AES argues that Argentina failed to establish the Tribunal’s manifest lack of
impartiality.°° While it rejected Argentina’s request to postpone the hearing, recognizing
the prejudice that the Claimant would suffer in case of a delay,*’ the Tribunal granted some

of Argentina’s requests. **

b. The grounds advanced by Argentina have already been rejected by the Chair in
recent cases*?

54. The Claimant refers to Vattenfall I1,°° where the Secretary-General of the PCA, in a
recommendation requested by the Chair, opined that an adverse procedural decision®! or
even an erroneous interpretation of the rules would not, per se, suggest a lack of
independence or impartiality. The Chair agreeing with the third-party recommendation,

rejected the disqualification proposal.

®2 Reply, 4] 38, 40 and 48.

53 Reply, {50 and 53.

54 Reply, {] 50 and 56.

55 Reply, 176.

56 Reply, {| 58, 76-77 and 82.

57 Compare Reply, § 40 with 4 47.

58 Reply, {| 27, 48-49 and 78.

°° Reply, 66.

© Reply, | 72~74 citing Vattenfall II, 4¥ 138 and 147.
°! Reply, {73 citing Vatenfall II, 147.
© Reply, § 72 citing Vatenfall II, § 138.

c. Adverse procedural decisions cannot serve as the basis for a disqualification
proposal.®

55. Claimant argues that disagreement with a procedural decision is no measure of the
Tribunal’s lack of impartiality.“* Argentina had ample time and multiple opportunities to
present its position and be heard.® In Claimant’s view, the Tribunal considered
Argentina’s concerns and issued reasoned decisions, balancing both parties’ concerns.
According to Claimant no objective party would infer a (manifest) lack of impartiality from

the Tribunal in this case.°”

(3) Recommendation from a Third Party

56. Claimant opposes Argentina’s request for a third-party recommendation on the Proposal®*
as: (i) Argentina provided no evidence in support of its suggestion that it would be improper
for the Chair to decide on the Proposal; (ii) the Chair routinely decides on disqualification
proposals concerning arbitrators appointed by the Chair without obtaining

recommendations from third parties; and (iii) recommendations from third parties have

> 70

only been obtained by ICSID on “rare occasions” under “exceptional circumstances

which have not been identified in this case. 7!

Reply, 4 66.

4 Reply, {{{ 1, 68-70 and 75 relying on Landesbank, {f] 140 and 142-44; and Abaclat and others (formerly Giovanna
A. Beccara and others) v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5) (“Abaclat IT”), Decision on the Proposal
to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, February 4, 2014, 4 80.

6 Reply, 4 77, 81.

© Reply, §{] 77-82.

© Reply, 481.

© Reply, {ff 86-87.

© Reply, { 88 referring to AES Annex 52, Landesbank, {§ 112-15; AES Annex 51, Eugene Kazmin v. Republic of
Latvia (ICSID Case No. ARB/17/5), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify All Members of the Tribunal, 14 October
2020, 44 3 and 85; Repsol, 44 16 and 87.

7 Reply, {| 89 relying on Abaclat, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, 21 December
2011 (“Abaclat I”) , 44; Landesbank, § 113.

7! Reply, 4 89.

il.

57.

58.

59.

THE TRIBUNAL M

 

BERS’ EXPLANATIONS

In accordance with the schedule and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3), Prof. Ricardo Ramirez
Hernandez, Mr. Stephen Drymer and Prof. Domingo Bello Janeiro furnished their

explanations on November 19, 2022, as follows:
Prof. Ramirez Hernandez:

“Dear Mr. Flores,

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3), I hereby furnish my explanations to the Proposal for
Disqualification submitted on November 3, 2021.

I will start with two preliminary remarks. First, I have always considered it my duty as an
arbitrator/adjudicator to be impartial and exercise independent judgment, I comply with such duty in this
case as I have done in all others in which I serve and have served. Second, I believe that the duty of a
challenged adjudicator should be limited to clarifying the facts and avoid passing judgment or opining on

the merits or substance of the challenge.

Afier carefully reviewing the submissions from both parties, I don’t identify any fact which requires any

clarification or further elaboration.”
Mr. Stephen Drymer:
“Mr. Flores,

I refer to your 5 November 2021 email, and to the invitation to furnish explanations in relation to the

Disqualification Proposal filed by Respondent and the response thereto submitted by Claimant.

With respect, I do not believe that I can provide any helpful explanation or comment regarding the
circumstances discussed by the parties in their respective submissions. In particular, I consider that the
Tribunal’s various procedural rulings speak for themselves, and I have nothing to add to the reasons

furnished by the Tribunal with those rulings.

For the sake of certainty, I wish to state that I consider that I have been and remain both impartial and
independent, and able to exercise my obligations as an ICSID arbitrator in full accordance with the

Convention and Rules.

I would be gratefull if you would kindly forward this email to all concerned.”

15

60. Prof. Domingo Bello Janeiro:

61.

“De acuerdo y en aplicacion de la Regla de Arbitraje 9(3) del CIADI, por medio de la presente comunicacién
doy cumplida respuesta a la Propuesta de Recusacién presentada el 3 de noviembre de 2021 por la Reptiblica

Argentina en el arbitraje AES CORPORATION VS REPUBLICA ARGENTINA (ARB/02/17).

A tal efecto, tanto en este caso como en cuantos he tenido la oportunidad de participar en mi condicion de
Grbitro, he cumplido escrupulosamente con mi obligacién de imparcialidad y total independencia en mi

actuacion y proceder.

Sobre el particular en concreto de la presente recusacién, cumpliré igualmente con mi obligacién y deber
de analizar con detalle y contribuir a aclarar los hechos sin proceder a debatir 0 cuestionar el fondo de la

impugnacion en cuestion.

En una vez iadas de manera iosa todas las } de las partes, no tengo
nada mds que anadir que no tengo constancia alguna de ningun tipo o categoria que exija por mi parte
atiadir en este momento procesal nada en particular, ni aclarar adicionalmente ningun aspecto ni tampoco

elaborar ningtin informe 0 documento afiadido a lo que se ha expuesto.

Para coneluir, afiado que, en definitiva, me considero ahora, al igual que siempre a lo largo de todo el
procedimiento, desde su inicio, totalmente idoneo para ejercer mi deber y obligacién como arbitro con total
independencia e imparcialidad, todo ello de absoluta conformidad con el Convenio y el Reglamento del

CIADI.”

On November 29, 2021, the Argentine Republic commented, in connection with the
Tribunal members explanations, that these “only ratify Argentina's loss of confidence in
their independence and impartiality” and that “the Members of the Tribunal have, by their
silence, ignored the factual circumstances put forward by Argentina.” The Claimant did

not provide comments in this regard.

IV. ANALYSIS

A. TIMELINESS

62. Arbitration Rule 9(1) requires a proposal for disqualification to be filed “promptly.””*

63. As the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules do not specify a number of days within
which a disqualification proposal must be filed, the timeliness of a disqualification proposal

must be determined on a case-by-case basis.”°

64. The Proposal was filed by the Respondent on November 3, 2021, i.e. 14 days after the
Tribunal’s decision of October 20 , 2021, rejecting Argentina’s request for reconsideration
and confirming the dates and modality of the hearing, and six days after the Tribunal’s
decision on the appearance of witnesses of October 28, 2021, which are at the core of

Argentina’s Proposal.

6:

an

. The promptness of the Proposal has not been contended by the parties, and neither
addressed timeliness in their submissions. On the basis of the information reviewed, the
Chair is satisfied that the Proposal was submitted in a timely manner as required by ICSID

Arbitration Rule 9(1).

B. RECOMMENDATION FROM A THIRD PARTY

66. It is uncontested that under Article 58 of the ICSID Convention, the decision on a proposal
to disqualify all the members of a tribunal shall be taken by the Chair of the Administrative
Council. ICSID has requested external recommendations on rare occasions, in
consideration to the specific circumstances of each case. In each of those occasions it was
expressly stated that the request was exceptional, that it should not be construed as the basis
for future requests, and that the ultimate decision on the disqualification proposal would

been taken by the Chair, as envisaged in Article 58.

7 ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1): “A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article 57 of the
Convention shall promptly, and in any event before the proceeding is declared closed, file its proposal with the
Secretary-General, stating its reasons therefor.”

® See, e.g. Abaclat II 4468; Burlington, § 73.

67. The circumstances in this case do not justify requesting an external recommendation.
Argentina relies on: (a) the seriousness of the reasons underlying the Proposal; and (b) the
need to “ensure full transparency of this proceeding.” Argentina has not substantiated why
the alleged seriousness of its reasons distinguishes this case from other ones in which the
Chair has decided disqualification proposals. It is also unclear how a request for a
recommendation from a third-party would enhance the transparency of the decision-

making process, as suggested by the Respondent.

68. Argentina’s suggestion that a recommendation from a third-party is warranted because the
President of the Tribunal in this case was appointed by the Chair disregards the fact that
these functions have been vested on the Chair by the ICSID Convention, with due
consideration of this apparent overlap. Upholding Argentina’s proposition would unduly
curb the Chair’s deciding function under Article 58 in every case in which an appointment

of an arbitrator or annulment committee members falls upon him.

69. Argentina’s proposition also disregards the fact that the President of the Tribunal in this
case was appointed by the Chair: (a) from the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators — which
comprises appointees selected by the ICSID Contracting States —; (b) in consultation with
the parties; and (c) in accordance with the parties’ agreed method of selection. Argentina
does not explain either how this circumstance could have an effect on the challenge to the

two co- arbitrators not appointed by the Chair.

7

S

. Accordingly, the Chair will not seek an external recommendation and will proceed to
decide the Proposal on the basis of the parties’ submissions and the arbitrators’
explanations, in accordance with Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9.

C. THE LEGAL STANDARD
71. The Proposal seeks to disqualify the three members of the Tribunal pursuant to Art. 57 of

the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.

72. Article 57 of the ICSID Convention allows a party to propose the disqualification of any

member of a tribunal. It provides that:

73.

74.

75.

76.

“A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the disqualification of any
of its members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the qualities
required by paragraph (1) of Article 14. A party to arbitration proceedings
may, in addition, propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground
that he was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of

Chapter IV.”

The parties are in agreement that Article 14 of the ICSID Convention requires arbitrators

1,74

to be both independent and impartial.’ The parties also agree on: (i) the meaning of

impartiality; (ii) that a lack of impartiality must be “manifest” in order to give rise to a

»75

challenge; and (iii) that “manifest” means “evident” or “obvious.

It is also common ground between the parties that the legal standard applied to a proposal
to disqualify an arbitrator is an “objective standard based on a reasonable evaluation of the
evidence by a third party.” Accordingly, the subjective belief of the party requesting the

disqualification is not enough to satisfy the requirements of the Convention.

The Respondent’s disqualification proposal in this case has been triggered by its
dissatisfaction with the Tribunal’s decisions on the dates and modality of the hearing and
on procedural arrangements for the appearance of witnesses and experts. The Tribunal’s
tulings and surrounding facts do not evidence a manifest unreliability to exercise
independent and impartial judgement on the arbitrators who rendered it, as required under

Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention.

As has been decided before by the Chair: “[t]he mere existence of an adverse ruling is

insufficient to prove a manifest lack of impartiality or independence, as required by

74 See supra $9 8 and 43.

75 See supra 449 and 43. Also, as noted in the Decision on the Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the
Arbitral Tribunal of October 22, 2007, in Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi Universal
S.A. v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19), 29 “The concepts of independence and impartiality, though related,
are often seen as distinct, although the precise nature of the distinction is not always easy to grasp [...] Generally
speaking independence relates to the lack of relations with a party that might influence an arbitrator's decision.
Impartiality, on the other hand, concerns the absence of a bias or predisposition toward one of the parties”
(emphasis added).

19

Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention. If it were otherwise, proceedings could

continuously be interrupted by the unsuccessful party, prolonging the arbitral process.” ”°

77. In recent past decisions, the Chair has also noted that “[n]Neither the ICSID Convention,
nor the ICSID Arbitration Rules contemplate a disqualification proceeding as a mechanism
to overturn procedural decisions that dissatisfy one of the Parties. Nor is a Party’s
dissatisfaction with a procedural ruling the threshold to measure whether there is a manifest

lack of impartiality or independence on the Tribunal.””7

78. As concluded before by the Chair, the purpose of Art. 57 of the ICSID Convention is “to
ensure that arbitrators possess the qualities required by Art. 14(1) of the ICSID
Convention,” and Art. 57 is “not the appropriate mechanism to address alleged failures in

the Tribunal’s reasoning.”

7

oS

. In the present case, the Tribunal exercised its powers under the ICSID Convention and
Rules, issuing the necessary decisions for the conduct of the proceedings. It did so, after
giving the parties the opportunity to be heard and taking into consideration their respective
concerns. As noted in previous decisions, a procedural disagreement—or the fact that the
tribunal’s decision was supported by the claimants and opposed by the respondent—cannot

reasonably provide a basis for an inference of bias.

8

S

. In the circumstances on this case, a third party undertaking a reasonable evaluation of the
Tribunal’s procedural determinations of September and October 2021, and surrounding
facts, would not conclude that they evidence a manifest lack of the qualities required under
Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention. Accordingly, the disqualification proposal must be

rejected.

7 See Abaclat II, 480.
7 Landesbank 4 143

78 4S PNB Banka and others v. Republic of Latvia (ICSID Case No. ARB/17/47), Decision on the Proposals to
Disqualify Messrs. James Spigelman, Peter Tomka and John M. Townsend, June 16, 2020, $1164.

 

20

Vv.

DECISION

83. Having considered all of the facts alleged and the arguments submitted by the parties, and
for the reasons stated above, the Chair rejects the Argentine Republic’s Proposal to Disqualify

all Members of the Tribunal.

[signed]

David Malpass
Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council

21

