International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Washington, D.C.

(dd) AES SUMMIT GENERATION LIMITED

(2) AES-TISZA EROMU KFT.
Applicants

HUNGARY
Respondent
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22)

(Annulment Proceeding)

 

DECISION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE
APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT

 

Members of the Committee
Professor Bernard Hanotiau, President
Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper, Co-Member

Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, Co-Member

Secretary to the Committee
Ms. Frauke Nitschke/Ms. Eloise Obadia

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 29 June 2012

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

Representing Applicants: Representing Respondent:
Mr. Stephen Jagusch Ms. Jean E. Kalicki

Mr. Anthony Sinclair Mr. Dmitri Evseev

Mr. Jeffrey Sullivan Ms. Mallory B. Silberman
Ms. Orsolya Toth Arnold & Porter LLP

Mr. Timothy Foden

Allen & Overy LLP and

Dr. Janos Katona
Law Office of Janos Katona

VI.

VII.

Vill.

IX.
Xx.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

Table of Contents

 

INTRODUCTION AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
PRELIMINARY REMARKS ............00000+
THE RELEVANT LEGAL STANDARDS...
Article 52(1)(b): Manifest Excess of Powers ......

 

 

 

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions...
(b) The ad hoc C ittee’s Analysi

 

 

Article 52(1)(e): Failure to State Reasons...
(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions...
(b) The ad hoc C ittee’s Analysi
THE RELEVANCE OF AES’S PROFITABILITY............-.+.

 

 

  

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions...
(b) The ad hoc C ittee’s Analysi
AES’S LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONG........

 

 

   

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions...

 

 

 

(b) The ad hoc C ittee’s Analysi
DUE PROCESS

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions...
(b) The ad hoc C ittee’s Analysi
STABLE CONDITIONS

 

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions...
(b) The ad hoc C ittee’s Analysi
LEGALITY UNDER HUNGARIAN AND EU LAW............

 

 

 

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions....
(b) The ad hoc C ittee’s Analysi

COSTS
DECISIONS

   

 

 

 

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

INTRODUCTION AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 19 January 2011, AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii Kft.
(together, the “Applicants” or “AES”) filed a timely application for annulment,
pursuant to Article 52 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention” or
“Convention”), of the Award which was rendered on 23 September 2010 (the
“Award”) in favour of Hungary (“Hungary” or “Respondent”) by an Arbitral
Tribunal composed of Mr. Claus von Wobeser (President), Professor Brigitte Stern

and J. William Rowley QC (the “Tribunal’”).

The Award determined that the dispute between Applicants and Respondent (the
“Parties”) related to an alleged violation by Respondent of its obligations under the
Energy Charter Treaty (the “ECT”). Applicants’ original claim arose out of
Hungary’s enactment of the 2006 Electricity Act Amendment, which provided for
the re-introduction of regulated prices for electricity generators pursuant to two
price decrees in December 2006 and February 2007 respectively. Administrative
prices had been abolished as from 01 January 2004, pursuant to the Electricity Act
2001, prior to Hungary’s accession to the European Union. Specifically, Applicants
alleged that Hungary violated its obligations under the ECT in the following
respects: (i) breach of its obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment; (ii)
impairment of AES’s investment by unreasonable and discriminatory measures;
(iii) breach of its obligation to provide national treatment; (iv) breach of its
obligation to provide most-favoured nation treatment; (v) breach of its obligation to

provide constant protection and security; and (vi) expropriation.

Hungary did not question Applicants’ right to bring its claim to ICSID arbitration.
In any case, the Tribunal found that it had jurisdiction over all the ECT claims
brought in that arbitration, in accordance with the conditions contained in Article
25 of the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal found that Hungary had not breached
Articles 10(1), 10(7) and 13 of the ECT, and dismissed all other claims. The
Tribunal ordered the Parties to bear in equal shares the costs of the arbitration as

well as their own costs and legal fees.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

On 19 January 2011, Applicants filed the present Application for Annulment (the
“Application” or “A-A”). The Application requests annulment of the Award in its
entirety, under the grounds contained in Article 52(1)(b) (manifest excess of

powers) and Article 52(1)(e) (failure to state reasons) of the ICSID Convention.

On 21 January 2011, the ICSID Secretariat confirmed receipt of electronic and
hard copies of the Application on 19 January 2011 and 20 January 2011

respectively.

On 28 January 2011, the ICSID Secretariat registered the Application pursuant to
Rule 50(2)(b) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the
“ICSID Arbitration Rules”), and informed the Parties accordingly.

On 21 March 2011, the ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties of the constitution
of the ad hoc Committee comprising Professor Bernard Hanotiau (President),
Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper and Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf (the “ad hoc
Committee” or “Committee”). On 22 March 2011, the ICSID Secretariat
transmitted copies of the Committee Members’ signed declarations in accordance

with Rules 53 and 6(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On 11 May 2011, the First Session of the ad hoc Committee was held at the World
Bank offices in Paris. During the First Session, various procedural matters were
agreed between the Parties and the ad hoc Committee. The Parties agreed, inter
alia, that the present proceedings would be governed by the 2006 ICSID
Arbitration Rules and that they had no objection to the constitution of the ad hoc
Committee as described above.' They also agreed on a provisional timetable.
Applicants assured that their Application was to be considered as their Memorial
on Annulment. Summary Minutes of the First Session were dispatched to the

Parties by the ICSID Secretariat on 01 June 2011.

See 47.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

On 10 August 2011, Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on Annulment
(“Counter-Memorial on Annulment” or “A-CM”), together with accompanying

exhibits and authorities.

On 19 October 2011, Applicants filed their Reply to Hungary’s Counter-Memorial
on Annulment (“Reply on Annulment” or “A-Ry”), together with accompanying

exhibits and authorities.

On 30 December 2011, Respondent filed its Rejoinder on Annulment (“Rejoinder
on Annulment” or “A-Rj”), together with a single accompanying exhibit and a

single accompanying authority.

By letter of 10 January 2012, the ICSID Secretariat invited the Parties to inform the
ad hoc Committee of any joint proposal they would like to make with regard to the

hearing’s agenda and related questions of procedure.

On 17 January 2012, the Parties submitted an agreed draft agenda for the hearing
on annulment. The Parties also agreed that two days would be sufficient for the

hearing, rather than three days, as previously proposed.

On 13 February 2012 and 14 February 2012, a hearing was held at the ICC Hearing
Centre in Paris. The proceeding was closed on 14 June 2012 in accordance with

ICSID Arbitration Rules 53 and 38(1).

PRELIMINARY REMARKS

As a preliminary matter, the Committee notes that the scope of its present task is
limited to determining whether to annul either all or part of the Award, or to let the
Award stand. As unambiguously expressed in Article 53 of the Convention, an
award is not subject to an appeal. Annulment must therefore be different from
appeal. It is well settled in international investment arbitration that an ad hoc
committee may not substitute its own judgment on the merits for that of a tribunal.
As such, the Committee has no competence to express any view on the substantive

correctness of the Tribunal’s reasoning.

16.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

The grounds upon which annulment may be based are listed exhaustively in Article
52(1) of the ICSID Convention. In the present case, Applicants invoke two of these

grounds, namely:

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;
and

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

The Committee is bound to interpret these terms of the Convention “in good faith
in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms ...in their context
and in the light of its object and purpose”, as required by Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969. The text of the ICSID Convention is
the result of long and profound debates. With respect to Articles 52 and 53 the
drafters have taken great care to use terms which clearly express that annulment is
an exhaustive, exceptional and narrowly circumscribed remedy and not an appeal.
The interpretation of the terms must take this object and purpose into consideration
and avoid an approach which would result in the qualification of a tribunal’s
reasoning as deficient, superficial, sub-standard, wrong, bad or otherwise faulty, in
other words, a re-assessment of the merits which is typical for an appeal. In this
perspective, the ordinary meaning of a manifest excess of power is either an
obvious transgression of a tribunal’s mandate or its obvious non-execution; and the
ordinary meaning of a failure to state the reasons on which the decision is based is
the absence of reasons or a presentation which is unintelligible in relation to the

decision thus equating a lack of reasons.

In the analysis below, the Committee has not only considered the positions of the
Parties as summarised in this Decision, but also the numerous detailed arguments
made in their written submissions and at the hearing. To the extent that these
arguments are not referred to expressly, they must be deemed to be subsumed in

the Committee’s analysis.

Ill.

20.

21.

22.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

THE RELEVANT LEGAL STANDARDS

A. Article 52(1)(b): Manifest Excess of Powers

Whilst the Parties do not disagree to a great extent regarding the applicable legal
standard for annulment under Article 52(1)(b), nevertheless their submissions

contain divergent emphases in various respects.

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions

First, Applicants submit that the grounds for annulment under Article 52(1)(b)
extend to instances where a tribunal has exceeded its jurisdiction both by
exercising a power it does not have, and also by failing to decide claims that are

properly before it.”

In support of this proposition, they cite passages from various annulment decisions.
They refer, for instance, to the decision of the ad hoc committee in Soufraki: which

states that:

The manifest and consequential non-exercise of one’s full powers

conferred or recognized in a tribunal’s constituent instrument such as

the ICSID Convention and the relevant BIT, is as much a disregard of

the power as the overstepping of the limits of that power.
Hungary, for its part, submits that very few cases have explored the
“counterintuitive notion” that a tribunal may exceed its powers through a shortfall
in the exercise of its jurisdiction, and that even if it is accepted in principle, its
application should be narrowly circumscribed. * Moreover, an award may only be
annulled on these grounds where a tribunal has failed to decide a claim in its

entirety, as opposed to mere “questions” or “arguments” in support of a claim.

2 A-A, 495.
5 A-A, 197, referring to Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. U.A.E., Decision on Annulment,

5 June 2007, {43 (“Soufraki”) (emphasis in original).
4 A-CM, { 248.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

23. Second, concerning the requirement that an excess of power be “manifest”,
Applicants submit that the relevant criteria are that the excess of power be textually

obvious and substantively serious. Again, they cite Soufraki:°

The Committee believes that a strict opposition between two different
meanings of “manifest” — either obvious or serious — is an
unnecessary debate. It seems to this Committee that a manifest excess
of power implies that the excess of power should at once be textually
obvious and substantively serious.

24. Whilst Hungary does not dispute this definition, it nevertheless emphasises the
limited scope of Article 52(1)(b) by citing the following passage from the

a ae 6
annulment committee’s decision in CDC:

As interpreted by various ad hoc Committees, the term “manifest”
means clear or “self-evident”. Thus, even if a Tribunal exceeds its
powers, the excess must be plain on its face for annulment to be an
available remedy. Any excess apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct, if
susceptible of argument “one way or the other,” is not manifest. As
one commentator has put it, “If the issue is debatable or requires
examination of the materials on which the tribunal’s decision is based,
the tribunal’s determination is conclusive”.

25. Further, relying on the Repsol annulment decision, Hungary argues that an error is
only manifest where the mistake is serious enough to “cast doubt on the legitimacy

of proceedings”:”

Under Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, the Committee is
empowered to annul awards containing manifest errors only when
they are serious enough to cast doubt on the legitimacy of the
proceedings.

5

A-A, 1.99, referring to Soufraki, J 40.

8 CDC Group ple. v. Republic of Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, 29 June 2005, 4

41 (“CDC”), referring to Wena Hotels v. Arab Republic of Egypt, Decision on Annulment,
5 February 2002, | 25 (“Wena”), and M.B. Feldman, The Annulment Proceedings and the
Finality of ICSID Arbitration Awards, 2 ICSID Rev. 85 (1987), p. 101.

7 Repsol YPF Ecuador SA v. Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador),

Decision on Annulment, 8 January 2007, 75 (“Repsol”).

26.

27.

28.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

Third, AES argues that grounds for annulment may exist under Article 52(1)(b)
where a tribunal has disregarded the applicable law. However, it notes the decision

of the Enron annulment committee, which states that:*

There is a distinction between non-application of the applicable law
(which is a ground for annulment), and an incorrect application of the
applicable law (which is not), although this is a distinction that may
not always be easy to draw.

Hungary does not in principle contest AES’s argument that grounds for annulment
may exist where a tribunal has disregarded the applicable law. Hungary submits,
however, that this can only be the case where a tribunal has disregarded the law
agreed upon by the parties in its entirety. An award may not be annulled due to an
incorrect application or interpretation of a body of law or a specific provision. In
support of this, Hungary cites the recent decision of the Duke Energy annulment

committee:”

When a tribunal engages in interpretation of a written instrument of
consent in light of the surrounding circumstances or in the context of
other documents, its final construction of the meaning of the
document in light of all the evidence and submissions of the parties is
unlikely to amount to a manifest excess of powers. Interpretation,
which leaves room for discussion [...], is not likely to give rise to a
manifest excess of powers.

Finally, Applicants qualify their stated standard by citing the first annulment
decision in Vivendi v. Argentina, where it was found that a failure to exercise

jurisdiction must be outcome-determinative. In other words, the manifest non-

8 A-A, {| 105, referring to Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (Formerly Enron

Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, Decision on Annulment,
30 July 2010, | 68 (“Enron”).

° A-CM, {{ 262, referring to Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1 Ltd. v.

Republic of Peru, Decision on Annulment, 11 March 2011, 160 (“Duke Energy”).

-10-

29.

30.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Eréma Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

exercise of jurisdiction must affect the outcome of the tribunal’s inquiry in order to

justify annulment.'°

Hungary, meanwhile, argues that an award cannot be annulled for having failed to
decide such claims correctly. According to Hungary, a tribunal does not exceed its

powers where its interpretation and conclusion are “tenable”, “adequately founded”

or merely “the result of careful consideration”.'!

(b) The ad hoc Committee’s Analysis

The Committee shares the view put forward by Applicants in these proceedings,
and noted by Professor Schreuer, that a tribunal may exceed its power by failing to
exercise the jurisdiction which it possesses.'> As also noted by Hungary and
Professor Schreuer, however, this notion “relates to a deviation from the arbitration

agreement and not to a quantitative concept of jurisdiction”."*

Whilst the precise
boundaries of such a distinction may be difficult to discern, it is uncontroversial
that such a non-exercise must be “manifest” in the sense of being somehow
significant or consequential. Indeed, the Parties in the present case are in agreement
that such a non-exercise must be “result-determinative”. This approach was
confirmed, inter alia, by the Soufraki annulment committee in the passage cited by

Applicants.

10 A-A, 195, referring to Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal

SA v. Argentine Republic, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, { 86 (“Vivendi I”).
u

 

A-CM, {{ 250, referring inter alia to: Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others
v. United Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des Engrais, Decision on
Annulment, 3 May 1985, | 52(b) (“Kléckner I”); Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services
Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, Decision on Annulment, 23 December 2010, 4
112 (“Fraport’); Duke Energy, | 99; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine
Republic, Decision on Annulment, 25 September 2007, 4 85 (“CMS”); Vivendi I, 89.

2 C.H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, (2"! Edition, 2009,
Cambridge), p. 938 (“Schreuer”).

8 Schreuer, p. 947.

a See 21.

-ll-

31.

32.

33.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment
Concerning the meaning of “manifest”, the Committee shares Professor Schreuer’s
view that the term relates to the ease with which an excess of powers is perceived,
rather than its gravity, and that such an excess must be able to “be discerned with
little effort and without deeper analysis”.'° Such an approach is consistent with a
manifest excess being one which is at once “textually obvious and substantively
serious”.'°
The Committee notes, however, that the practice of ad hoc committees is mixed as
regards how to apply such a test. On the one hand, some committees have adopted
a two-step approach: determining first whether there has been an excess of powers
before going on to determine whether such excess was manifest. Others, on the
other hand, have adopted a prima facie approach under which a summary
examination is undertaken in order to ascertain if any alleged excess of powers was
so egregious as to be manifest. To the extent these tests are not explicitly referred
to, the Committee’s findings below should be understood in light of the application
of both tests. As will be shown below, the Committee’s conclusions are in any case

not dependent on such a distinction.

Further, the Committee notes that there is “widespread agreement that a failure to
apply the proper law may amount to an excess of powers by the tribunal”,'” the
underlying basis being that the issues put to a tribunal are circumscribed by the
parties’ consent.'* The Committee takes note of the sparse yet well-known

jurisprudence confirming  this.'”

However, the Committee again notes the
importance of the distinction between non-application and mere misapplication of

the applicable law. Whilst the precise boundaries of these concepts can be difficult

Schreuer, p. 938.

16 Soufraki, 4 40.

Schreuer, p. 955.

Schreuer, p. 958, referring to Soufraki J 37.

For instance, Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea,
Decision on Annulment, 14 December 1989 (“MINE”); Kléckner I.

-12-

34.

35.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

to gauge, the Committee is mindful of the criticism that has been levelled against
certain ad hoc committees for overstepping the line between annulment and

appeal.”” The prevailing, and correct, view in modern investment jurisprudence
must be understood as setting a very high threshold. As put by the Soufraki

annulment committee:”

Misinterpretation or misapplication of the proper law may, in
particular cases, be so gross or egregious as substantially to amount to
failure to apply the proper law. Such gross and consequential
misinterpretation or misapplication of the proper law which no
reasonable person (“bon pére de famille”) could accept needs to be
distinguished from a simple error — or even a serious error — in the
interpretation of the law which in many national jurisdictions may be
the subject of ordinary appeal as distinguished from, e.g., an
extraordinary writ of certiorari.
The Committee therefore notes that in order to annul the Award under Article
52(1)(b) for a manifest excess of the Tribunal’s powers consisting of a failure to
apply the applicable law, at the very least something more than a “serious error” is

required.

Finally, the Committee considers that annulment for non-application of the
applicable law is only sustainable where there has been a failure to apply the proper
law in toto. As Professor Schreuer notes, this is because a finding of partial non-
application of the applicable law (i.e. relating to a specific provision) is
indistinguishable from a finding of erroneous application, the latter constituting

appellate review for which the Committee has no competence.”

0 Schreuer, p. 960.
2 Soufraki, 1 86.
2 Schreuer, p. 964.

-13-

36.

37.

38.

39.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

B. Article 52(1)(e): Failure to State Reasons
(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions

Applicants submit that under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, a tribunal’s
failure to state reasons will justify annulment if its reasoning is “impossible to
follow, essentially missing in a key respect, or if it contains Jacunae which render
the analysis unintelligible”.”*

Applicants elaborate on the requisite standard of reasoning for annulment of ICSID
awards with reference to various decisions of previous ad hoc committees. For

instance, in MINE, the ad hoc committee stated that an award:**

Must enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the Tribunal on
points of fact and law...the requirement to state reasons is satisfied as
long as the award enables one to follow how the Tribunal proceeded
from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it
made an error of fact or law. This minimum requirement is in
particular not satisfied by either contradictory or frivolous reasons.

In this connection, in their written submissions Applicants rely on the decision in

MINE in arguing that an award may be annulled if it contains “frivolous” reasoning

even if it is not contradictory.

Applicants also cite Vivendi I, where the ad hoc committee stated that:

Annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only occur in a clear case.
This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state reasons must
leave the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any
expressed rationale; and the second, that point must itself be necessary
to the tribunal’s decision.

> A-A, G51.
MINE, { 5.09.
25 Vivendi I, {| 64-65.

-14-

40.

41.

42.

43.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

Applicants submit that sufficient /acunae in reasoning to warrant annulment may
be found to exist where a tribunal has: (i) given genuinely contradictory reasons on
a material point; or (ii) failed to deal with a necessary question and thus rendered

its award unintelligible. *°

Hungary makes four main arguments regarding the applicable legal standards

under Article 52(1)(e).

First, Hungary submits that an award may be annulled for a “complete absence of
reasons”, although this is extremely unlikely since applicants face a very heavy
burden of proof in this respect and ad hoc committees may not be drawn into
reviewing the merits of a tribunal’s decision. Furthermore, a tribunal is not required
to substantiate every legal principle relied upon in its award and its reasoning need
not be explicit. It is sufficient that a careful reader can follow an award’s implicit

reasoning.”

Second, Hungary does not contest that the ad hoc committee in Kléckner v.
Cameroon held that an award may be annulled if it gives genuinely contradictory
reasons on a material point. However, it also notes that subsequent ad hoc
committees have found the scope of this principle to be limited to where such
contradictory reasons “cancel each other out”. Again, this ground requires a high

threshold and must be carefully distinguished from review of the merits.”*

Third, Hungary argues that an award may be annulled where there is a failure to
answer an outcome-determinative question which leads to a failure of intelligibility
of a tribunal’s reasoning. In this context, Respondent distinguishes between
“questions” and “arguments” — arguing that whilst the former requires an explicit

or implicit response from a tribunal, the latter does not. According to Respondent,

26

A-A, (54.
2 A-CM, {{ 228, referring to Duke Energy, J 162.

8 A-CM, {ff 233-234, referring, inter alia, to the ad hoc committees’ decisions in

Vivendi I and Duke Energy.

-15-

45.

46.

47.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

such “questions” must have been squarely presented to the tribunal during the
underlying proceedings, and must be objectively understood as crucial or decisive
issues, the acceptance of which would have altered the tribunal’s conclusions.
Hungary submits that even if AES succeeds in presenting such a question, it still
faces a heavy burden in proving that the Tribunal failed to deal with it since it may

have been dealt with implicitly.

Finally, Hungary refutes AES’s submissions concerning “frivolous” reasons.
Primarily, this is because to allow such grounds would constitute an impermissible

assessment of the quality of the Tribunal’s reasoning.”

(b) The ad hoc Committee’s Analysis

As a preliminary remark, the Committee notes that arbitral tribunals are under a
fundamental obligation to provide a reasoned award. As stated by the ad hoc

committee in Wena:*”

This requirement is based on the Tribunal’s duty to identify, and to let

the parties know, the factual and legal premises leading the Tribunal

to its decision.
Of all the grounds of annulment listed in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, it
is the failure to state reasons that holds the greatest danger of overlapping with an

inadmissible review of the merits. As Professor Schreuer notes:

It is difficult to determine with any degree of objectivity what
standard of reasoning should be held sufficient by an ad hoc
committee. Of all the grounds for annulment, an evaluation of the
tribunal’s reasoning is most likely to blend into an examination of the
award’s substantive correctness and hence to cross the border between
annulment and appeal."

29 A-CM, {if 240 — 244.
Wena, 179.
Schreuer, pp. 997-998.

-16-

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

In light of the above, the Committee recognises that application of this ground of
annulment must be made within parameters which characterise a failure to state
reasons as opposed to a failure to state convincing or good reasons. Indeed, as

submitted by Hungary and explained by Professor Schreuer:*”

The duty to state reasons refers only to a minimum requirement. It

does not call for tribunals to strain every sinew in an attempt to

convince the losing party that the decision was the right one.
Nevertheless, there are certain circumstances in which annulment on these grounds
will be permissible. The clearest example is where there is a total absence of
reasons for the award. This, however, is “extremely unlikely”. As put by the
Soufraki annulment committee, “there will probably never be a case where there is

a total absence of reasons for the award”.**

In Kléckner I, the ad hoc committee found the tribunal’s reasoning to be
sufficiently defective to warrant annulment of the award, stating that:*°

. [t]he Award in no way allows the ad hoc Committee or for that
matter the parties to reconstitute the arbitrators’ reasoning in reaching
a conclusion that is perhaps ultimately perfectly justified and equitable
(and the Committee has no opinion on this point) but is simply
asserted or postulated instead of being reasoned.

The complaint must therefore be regarded as well founded, to the
extent that it is based on Article 52(1)(e).”
The Committee is mindful that even in Kléckner I, the threshold for annulment was

set very high since there had to be “no way” that the committee could reconstitute

Schreuer, p. 997; A-CM {{ 225.
Schreuer, p. 998.

Soufraki, | 122.

Klockner 1,4 144.

-17-

52.

53.

54.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

the tribunal’s reasoning. Moreover, this decision has consistently come in for

we 3
strong criticism. As Professor Schreuer notes:*°

Ad hoc committees have consistently confirmed that Art. 52(1)(e)
does not permit any enquiry into the quality or persuasiveness of
reasons. Ad hoc committees may be dissatisfied with the adequacy of
reasons, but provided they meet the conditions set out in MINE, and
confirmed in Vivendi I, there will not be grounds for annulment.
In view of the settled doctrine on this issue, the Committee again emphasises that it
will not enter into an assessment of the merits of the dispute, either directly or

indirectly.

However, as the Parties agree, annulment may be permitted in the exceptional
circumstance that a tribunal’s reasons are so contradictory that they effectively

amount to no reasons at all. As stated by the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi I:*’

It is frequently said that contradictory reasons cancel each other out,
and indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might.
However, tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting
considerations, and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to
discern contradiction when what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s
reasons could be more truly said to be but a reflection of such
conflicting considerations.

Finally, for the reasons discussed above, the Committee also takes the view that the
giving of frivolous reasons will almost never amount to a failure to state reasons
within the meaning of Article 52(1)(e), since this would impermissibly encroach
into appellate territory. The better approach is to recognise that reasons which are

sufficiently frivolous or absurd in nature would in effect amount to no reasons at

all.

36 Schreuer, p. 1011.

Vivendi I, 4 64.

37

8 Schreuer, p. 997.

- 18 -

55.

56.

57.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

THE RELEVANCE OF AES’S PROFITABILITY

Applicants argue that the Award should be annulled under Articles 52(1)(b) and
52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention since the Tribunal failed to address the question
of whether AES’s historic profits were sufficiently excessive to justify Hungary’s
reintroduction of regulated pricing. They argue that the Tribunal failed to exercise
its jurisdiction, meriting annulment under Article 52(1)(b), and failed to state

reasons in support of its conclusions, meriting annulment under Article 52(1)(e).

Concerning AES’s fair and equitable treatment and non-impairment claims in the
original arbitration, Applicants note the adoption by the Tribunal of the two-
pronged test enunciated in Saluka v. Czech Republic.” The first prong of this test
requires the identification of a rational policy goal aimed at addressing a matter of
public interest. The second requires an assessment of the reasonableness of the
measure adopted to implement the policy, including, as the Tribunal noted, the
finding of a reasonable correlation between the policy objective and the impugned

measure.

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions

Applicants’ primary argument under this heading relates to the Tribunal’s
application of the second prong of the Saluka test. They submit that having
(incorrectly) found the regulation of luxury profits to be a rational policy, the
Tribunal was obliged, yet failed, to make an assessment of AES’s historic
profitability and to determine whether or not it was in fact excessive.*” In this
connection, they also argue that the Tribunal failed to determine the appropriate
methodology and threshold for determining whether AES’s profits were in fact

excessive.

9 Award, {| 10.3.7.

40 A-A, 99 56-57; A-Ry, 117-8.

-19-

58.

59.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

AES also submits that the Tribunal was obliged to fulfil these steps since it found
that Hungary’s only rational policy goal was to address historically excessive
profits, having previously considered and rejected various alternatives. They argue
that the Tribunal therefore effectively rendered an award in the abstract without
reference to the specific facts of the case, contrary to the requirements outlined by
the tribunal in Mondev.*' They further argue that it is impossible to tell how the
Tribunal arrived at its conclusion that the implementation of the Price Decrees was
“reasonable, proportionate and consistent with the public policy” without
examining whether and to what extent Applicants in fact earned “luxury profits”,
and whether and to what extent the Price Decrees regulated those profits in a
reasonable manner.” As such, they submit that the Tribunal did not try to find a
reasonable correlation between Hungary’s policy objective and the adopted

43
measures.

Applicants further submit that the issue of historic profitability was placed squarely
before the Tribunal since the Parties submitted substantial arguments and (expert)
evidence on the matter.“ They argue that the Tribunal nevertheless reached a
summary conclusion without adequately assessing the evidence and behaved
unreasonably in relying on the figures provided by Hungary which had been

included in its draft pricing act.*°

a Hearing on Annulment Transcripts (“Tr.”), Tr. p. 83:16-19; Tr. p. 138:19-21,

referring to Mondev International Ltd. v. U.S.A., Award, 11 October 2002, {118
(“Mondev”).

2 A-A, I] 56-62.

8 Tr. p. 66:10-13, referring to Award, {| 10.3.9.

44

 

A-Ry {{] 10, 49-92, referring inter alia to the Parties’ written submissions, Witness
Statements of Mr. Horrocks (Applicants’ Application for Annulment Exhibit AC-34 at J
21) and Mr. Lithgow (Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment Exhibit ARE-08 at
4 37, 55), Respondent’s expert reports by Navigant Consulting (AC-25, AC-26), First
Expert Report of LECG (AC-20, submitted by Applicants).

Tr. p, 68:7-9, referring to Award  10.3.36; A-Ry, 1947, 108-116.

- 20 -

60.

6l.

62.

63.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

Finally, Applicants submit that the Award must also be annulled under Article
52(1)(e) since the Tribunal’s reasoning is contradictory as regards its identification
of a rational policy objective under the first prong of the Saluka test. They submit
that at one stage the Award states that forcing the power purchase agreement’s
(“PPA”) renegotiations with the perspective to reduce capacities was not a rational
policy objective, yet the Award later states that Hungary exercised lawful
government authority to specifically deprive AES of its contractual rights with
respect to the pricing mechanism. Applicants argue that these are genuinely
contradictory reasons which cancel each other out in accordance with the
prevailing legal standards and the decision of the ad hoc Committee in Kléckner

1

Applicants also argue that the Tribunal gave “frivolous” reasons in respect of this
issue by dismissing Applicants’ claims due to “the absence of a specific
commitment to the Claimants that administrative pricing was never going to be

reintroduced”.*”

Hungary refutes all of Applicants’ claims and submits that the Tribunal was not
required to express an independent view as to Applicants’ actual historic profits in

order to avoid an annullable error."*

The relevant legal question before the Tribunal, it claims, was whether the
government acted reasonably based on the information available to it at the time, or

whether its actions were based on prejudice, abuse, or discrimination.” It argues

4 A-A, 1.63; A-Ry, (47, 117-124, referring to Award, {{] 10.3.12-10.3.14, 10.3.35.
A-A, J 64, referring to Award, J 10.3.35.

A-CM, 332-338; A-Rj, {1 26-29.

° A-CM, 331.

-21-

65.

66.

67.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

that the Tribunal adequately examined these requirements before finding that

Hungary had met its obligations.”

Indeed, Hungary submits that it was this aspect of reasonableness, rather than
historic profitability, which was the focus of AES’s arguments in the original
proceedings. Hungary therefore submits that AES has mischaracterised the issues
before the Tribunal since the issue of historic profitability was not placed squarely

before it.

Further, Hungary submits that tribunals in international arbitration are not obliged
to address every single point argued before them.*! As stated by the Enron
annulment committee, the Tribunal was only obliged to state “its pertinent findings
of fact, its pertinent findings as to the applicable legal principles and its
conclusions in respect of the application of the law to the facts”.**

Alternatively, Hungary submits that the Tribunal made ample findings on
profitability to resolve the dispute in sections 9 and 10 of the Award in respect of
both the nature of the measures and their reasonableness. Its reasoning was relevant

and could be easily followed “from Point A to Point B”. **

As regards both prongs of the Saluka test, Hungary argues that the Tribunal’s
reasoning was neither contradictory nor frivolous. It acted appropriately in
referencing the stated purpose of the legislation as provided by Hungary.™ The
Tribunal’s interpretation of these issues could not satisfy the extremely high

threshold of being so untenable that it cannot possibly be supported by reasonable

A-CM, 9313.

A-Rj, (131; Tr. pp.149:24-150:3; Tr. p. 157:9-11.

Enron, J 222.

A-CM, {ff 344-347, referring to Award, {{f 9.3.42-9.3.73, 10.3.37-10.3.44.
4 A-CM, 9322.

-22-

68.

69.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

arguments.” Hungary argues that AES uses the term “frivolous” as a synonym for
“deficient” and thus is attempting to challenge the quality of the Tribunal’s

reasoning and reargue the merits of the case.°°

(b) The ad hoc Committee’s Analysis

The Committee has reached the conclusion that Applicants’ claim is unfounded for

the following reasons.

Concerning the first prong of the Saluka test, the Tribunal set forth the standard
that “a rational policy is taken by a State following a logical (good sense)
explanation and with the aim of addressing a public interest matter”.°’ Having
considered the various arguments presented to it, the Tribunal identified Hungary’s
aim in implementing regulated pricing as addressing the concern that “profits
enjoyed by the PPAs, in the absence of either competition or regulation, exceeded
reasonable rates of return for public utility sales”.°* The Tribunal noted that
Hungary “was motivated principally by widespread concerns relating to [...]
excessive profits earned by generators and the burden on consumers”. As such,
the Tribunal concluded that “it was a perfectly valid and rational policy objective
for a government to address luxury profits”. The Committee is therefore unable to
find, as argued by AES, that Hungary’s sole objective was to address historic

luxury profits.

5s A-CM, {[ 362.

56 A-CM, 1355.
Award, { 10.3.8.
Award, { 10.3.20.
Award, { 10.3.31.
%® Award, { 10.3.34.

-23-

70.

71.

72.

73.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

The Committee is unable to accept Applicants’ contention that the Tribunal

employed contradictory or frivolous reasoning in coming to this conclusion.

Concerning the second prong of the Saluka test, in determining whether the
impugned measures taken by Hungary were reasonable, the Tribunal enunciated
that there needs to be an appropriate correlation between the State’s public policy
objective and the measure adopted to achieve it, and that this had to do with the

nature of the measure and the way it is implemented”.*!

The following paragraphs outline the Tribunal’s approach in determining whether
the measures taken by Hungary were reasonable, whereby it analysed the

methodology followed by Hungary in adopting the price regulation measures.

The Tribunal first noted that the Hungarian Energy Office (“HEO”) determined
that a 7.1% return on assets constituted the relevant reasonable profit benchmark
for generators in the non-competitive “public utility” sector of the electricity
market.” The Award notes that in 2006 Hungary reviewed all electricity
generators’ financial statements for the last available reporting period and set price
caps in a manner that would cover each generator’s actual costs and still produce a
7.1% return on assets.® The Tribunal went on to note that having initially focused
on profit capping, the Hungarian Ministry jettisoned a post hoc profit-sharing
provision contained in the draft 2006 Price Decree, opting instead for a price-
capping model.™ In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal concluded that Hungary

had not behaved in an arbitrary manner.®*

Award, { 10.3.9.
Award, { 9.3.47.
Award, { 9.3.48.
Award, {ff 9.3.53-9.3.55.
Award, { 9.3.70.

-24-

74.

75.

76.

77.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

Further, the Tribunal noted that following introduction of the price-capping regime,
generators were still able to attempt to achieve a return on assets higher than 7.1%
during the course of the relevant cycle, until prices were realigned with costs at the

beginning of the next cycle.

The Tribunal noted that only generators whose prior-year profits were already
below a 7.1% return on assets were unaffected by the reintroduction of price
regulation. As such, the pricing regime was not discriminatory since the effect on
AES was the logical result of a uniform methodology that was applied equally to
all generators, based on their differing assets and operating cost structures. AES
had not received different treatment in comparison with other generators.” Further,
the Tribunal concluded that whilst regulated prices unquestionably reduced
generator prices, they still permitted generators (including AES) to receive a

reasonable return.”*

The Committee considers that the methodology followed by the Tribunal on this
question was within the bounds of its discretion. A determination as to the alleged
excessiveness of AES’s profits was not required. The reintroduction of regulated
pricing was prospective and based on sector-wide concerns. It did not single out

AES. It applied to all generators with a return on assets of higher than 7.1%.”

Further, having been presented at the hearing with expert evidence confirming the
HEO’s conclusions, the Tribunal opted to rely on the HEO’s calculations instead of
attempting to evaluate their substantive accuracy de novo. This was fully within the

limit of the Tribunal’s discretionary power.

66 Award, { 9.3.57.

Award, J 10.3.50.

Award, {ff 10.3.4, 10.3.37, 10.3.44.
Award, J 9.3.48.

-25-

78.

79.

80.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

For the same reasons as listed above, the Committee is also unable to find that the
Tribunal’s reasoning was either contradictory or frivolous. The Tribunal observed
that it cannot be a reasonable measure for a state to force a private party to change
or give up its contractual rights with respect to its production capacities. It found,
however, that a state can exercise its legislative powers with respect to consumer
protection against overly burdensome prices even if this has the consequence that
private interests such as an investor’s contractual rights are affected, as long as that
effect is the consequence of a measure based on public policy that was not aimed

”° The Tribunal found that this was the

solely at affecting those contractual rights.
case here. Hungary acted in furtherance of a distinct, legitimate objective.”' Indeed,
the Tribunal explicitly stated that “the decision was not made with the intention of
affecting Claimants’ contractual rights”.”” It is not the Committee’s task to appraise
the quality of the Tribunal’s distinction and reasoning. It finds, however, that the

distinction is understandable and thus neither contradictory nor frivolous.

For the above reasons, the ad hoc Committee finds that Applicants’ claims as to the
alleged need for the Tribunal to make a finding as to AES’s profitability, as well as
its claims that the Tribunal did not find a rational policy goal on Hungary’s part,

must fail.

AES’s LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONS

During proceedings before the Tribunal, in connection with the reintroduction of
administrative pricing in 2006 and 2007, AES alleged a breach of the basic and
legitimate expectations upon which they relied when making their investment, and
consequently a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standards under the

ECT. The Tribunal considered, however, that AES “cannot legitimately have been

Award, J 10.3.13.
7 Award, $f 10.3.20, 10.3.31.
Award, J 10.3.30.

- 26 -

81.

82.

83.

84.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

led by Hungary to expect that a regime of administrative pricing would not be

reintroduced under any circumstances during the term of the 2001 Tisza IT PPA”.”*

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions

AES claims annullable error under both Articles 52(1)(b) and 52(1)(e) of the
ICSID Convention.

Applicants’ main argument is that the Award must be annulled since the Tribunal
failed to apply the applicable law regarding legitimate expectations by applying a
non-existent “absolute certainty” standard.” The impugned section of the Award

states that:”°

In 2001, there was a great probability that there would be no
administrative pricing after 2004, but this does not equate to absolute
certainty giving rise to internationally protected legitimate
expectations.

AES contrasts this alleged standard with the following test which, in its view, the

Tribunal had earlier purported, yet ultimately failed, to apply:”*

The enquiry therefore turns to whether: (a) there were government
representations and assurances made or given to Claimants at that
time, and upon which they relied, of the sort alleged; and (b) Hungary
acted in a manner contrary to such representations and assurances.
As well as constituting a failure to apply the law since the “absolute certainty”
standard simply does not exist in international law, AES submits that employing

this standard constituted such an egregious error of law as to warrant annulment for

Award, { 9.3.26.
A-Ry, 135; Tr. p. 9:9-17.

Award, 9.3.25.

Award, 9.3.17; Tr. pp. 33:5-14, 118:2-18.

-27-

85.

86.

87.

88.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Eréma Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

failure to apply the proper law, and is so inherently contradictory and frivolous as

to constitute a failure to state reasons.”

AES further argues that the Tribunal failed to state reasons since, inter alia, it
incorrectly cited the 1996 Information Memorandum despite its irrelevance in the
context of the existence of expectations in 2001, and erroneously interpreted a

letter from the Ministry of Economic Affairs, dated 21 October 1999.”

Further, according to AES, the Tribunal was presented with ample alternative
authority which it could follow, or at least discuss, in its reasoning on legitimate
expectations, yet failed to fulfil its obligation to give reasons for rejecting it. In
particular, AES points to the general standards for legitimate expectations
enunciated by the Thunderbird Gaming tribunal, and the three-stage test envisaged

by the Parkerings-Compagniet tribunal.”

Lastly, AES argues that the Award must be annulled since the Tribunal failed to
state reasons for its finding that the absence of a “Stabilization Clause” and the
presence of a “Change of Law” clause in the PPA and Settlement Agreement were

legally significant.*°

Hungary refutes all of Applicants’ claims and argues that the Tribunal acted

entirely within its discretion.

7 Tr. p. 129:24-25.

* A-A, 181, referring to Award {J 9.3.19-9.3.20.

9 A-Ry, {9 139-143; International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v. The United
Mexican States, Award, 26 January 2006 (“Thunderbird”); Parkerings-Compagniet AS v.
Republic of Lithuania, Award, 11 September 2007 (‘“Parkerings-Compagniet” or
“Parkerings”).

80 A-A, fff 81-82, A-Ry 49 171-177.

- 28 -

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

Hungary submits that the reference to “absolute certainty” in the Award was not

intended to be a self-contained legal standard. It argues that it was:*!

A non-essential sentence added after the Tribunal’s clear explanation

of the relevant standard, representations and assurances, and after its

clear factual finding that the standard had not been met.
Moreover, since the Tribunal’s reasoning would still stand even if the sentence on
“absolute certainty” were stricken from the Award, it cannot constitute grounds for
annulment. Nor is the reference to “absolute certainty” contradictory, since it was
merely shorthand for the Tribunal’s conclusion that an investor’s subjective
expectations do not give rise to legally-protected rights with regard to future

government action.

Hungary further argues that Applicants’ arguments pertain not so much to the
absence of (sufficient) reasons, but to the substantive merits of the Tribunal’s
reasoning itself. In any case, argues Hungary, the Tribunal conducted a
comprehensive analysis of the issue of legitimate expectations by examining
whether any representations had been made in either 1996, 1999, or 2001.*°

Hungary submits that the Tribunal was not obliged to state reasons to substantiate
every principle relied upon for its reasons. It notes that whilst the Tribunal was
presented with multiple legal authorities on the relevant standards, it was not
obliged to choose one over the other. The Tribunal was simply obliged to fulfil the

test in Enron, as discussed above.**

Finally, Hungary notes that the Committee in any case may not evaluate the
substantive correctness of the Tribunal’s decision. Therefore, even if the Tribunal

had articulated a novel “absolute certainty” standard, it is outside of the

Tr. pp. 224:22-225:2.

8 A-CM, {{ 278.

Tr. p. 217:13-19, referring to Award, ff 9.3.15, 9.3.20, 9.3.24-9.3.25, 9.3.31, 13.3.4.
See | 65.

-29 -

94.

95.

96.

97.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

Committee’s jurisdiction to evaluate its correctness since this would constitute

appellate review.

(b) The ad hoc Committee’s Analysis

The Committee has determined that Applicants’ arguments are unfounded for the

following reasons.

Regarding the “absolute certainty” issue, the Committee is unable to find that the
Tribunal has introduced a distinct legal standard which is invented, illogical or
otherwise incorrect. As noted by Hungary, the reference only appears in the Award
after the Tribunal found that, as a matter of law, in order to be legitimate and bind
government conduct, an expectation has to be based on express governmental
assurances and representations. ** The Tribunal then found, as a matter of fact, that

AES failed to produce evidence of those assurances or representations.*°

Contrary to AES’s submissions, the relevant section of the Award does not
enunciate a self-contained standard.” Its effect is to distinguish between
probabilities which may be the basis for subjective expectations of an investor and
binding obligations on a state under international law. Although AES may have
subjectively believed that it was probable there would be no reintroduction of
administrative pricing after 2004, absent any specific governmental assurance,
there was no absolute legal certainty in this respect. The only assurance for the

investor was that there would be a reasonable rate of return.**

In any case, determination of the legal test for legitimate expectations was within
the Tribunal’s discretion. Having determined that the reference to “absolute

certainty” was not the creation of a new legal standard, the Committee does not, in

Award, 9.3.17.
86 Award, {ff 9.3.15, 9.3.20, 9.3.24-9.3.25.
Award, 9.3.25.
Award, 9.3.15.

-30-

98.

99.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

principle, have to address AES’s claim that the Tribunal did not apply the proper
law. In this connection, the Committee notes the determination of the Duke Energy

annulment committee that:

The obligation upon a tribunal ... to apply [the applicable law] is a

reference to the whole of that law, such as the tribunal may determine

to be relevant and applicable to the issue before it, and not to any

portion of it. [A party] may well disagree with the view that the

tribunal formed as to the correct solution of the issue before it under

[the applicable body of law] but an ad hoc committee may not enter

upon an assessment of whether a tribunal made a correct assessment

of the content of the applicable law.
Whilst the Committee is mindful that in exceptional circumstances an error of law
may be so egregious as to merit annulment, it does not consider this to be the case
with respect to the Tribunal’s reference to an “absolute certainty standard”. The
Committee does not therefore find it necessary to engage in an analysis of whether
the Tribunal adopted the preferable legal test for legitimate expectations, be it
under Parkerings or otherwise. This is all the more so, since the tribunal in

Parkerings convincingly stated:

It is evident that not every hope amounts to an expectation under

international law...contracts involve intrinsic expectations from each

party that do not amount to expectations as understood in international

law.
Moreover, the mere fact that a Tribunal does not follow the prevailing
jurisprudence on a given issue is not an error of law per se. There is no system of
binding precedent in ICSID jurisprudence. If one were to follow AES’s theory,
ICSID jurisprudence would be condemned to remain static and immutable, without

the possibility of any evolution or innovative decisions.

89 Parkerings, | 344.

-31-

100.

101.

102.

103.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

The Committee also finds that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons. For the
sake of completeness, the Committee now summarises the reasoning employed by

the Tribunal.

In its application of the legal standards to the facts, the Tribunal determined that

legitimate expectations can only be created at the moment of investment.”

It then proceeded to consider whether AES had made investments in 1996 when
AES Summit purchased the outstanding shares of Tisza, and in 2001 at the time
AES Tisza actually began to invest in the Retrofit of the Tisza IT Plant.°! It
concluded that AES had made investments in both 1996 and 2001.””

With respect to 1996, the Tribunal concluded that:

AES Summit can have had no legitimate expectation at that time
regarding the conduct of Hungary about which it now complains (i.e.,
the fact of, motivation for and methodology relating to the
reintroduction of administrative pricing in 2006/2007). Both the
privatization materials and the relevant investment agreements (the
original Tisza II PPA and the 1996 PSA [Purchase and Sale
Agreement]) were explicit that Hungary would continue to set
maximum administrative prices for electricity sales indefinitely into
the future. This was subject only to the principle that such pricing
would provide a “reasonable return” on investment, which would
“target” returns in the general range of 8% on equity for the first
regulatory period beginning in 1997.

The Tribunal reached the same conclusion with respect to 2001. Asking itself
whether “there were government representations and assurances made or given to
Claimants at that time,” it concluded that “Hungary made no representations/gave

no assurances of a nature that go to the heart of Claimants’ complaint — i.e., that

Award, ff 9.3.8-9.3.12.
Award, { 9.3.13.
Award, (9.3.14, 9.3.16.
Award, 9.3.15.

-32-

105.

106.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

following the termination of price administration on 31 December 2003, regulated

pricing would not again be introduced”.**

Having considered this issue, the Tribunal ultimately did not accept Claimants’
reliance, in trying to establish the existence of legitimate expectations, on two
statements found in the 1996 Industry Information Memorandum. The first
statement concerned an 8% return on shareholder funds. The Tribunal found that
this was simply a target rate of reasonable return for the first regulatory period. The
second related to an alleged requirement for another overall price and costs review
prior to the introduction of any new pricing mechanism. The Tribunal observed
that this was made in the context of the HEO not expecting radical changes in
Hungary’s administrative pricing system. It further found that the statements did
not relate in a sufficiently material way to Claimants’ central complaint (the
reintroduction of administrative pricing in 2006-2007). Therefore it could not find
that Hungary’s conduct in 2006-2007 was contrary to representations and

assurances said to have been made to AES Summit in 1996.”°

The Tribunal then considered Claimants’ reliance on Hungary’s letter of 21
October 1999 from Mr. Pal Ligati (Head of Department, Ministry of Economic
Affairs) which, AES argued, constituted an express promise not to interfere with
the PPA, as well as a promise that the contractual pricing formula set out in the

PPA would not be altered by political considerations. The Tribunal found that:”°

[The letter] does not say what Claimants said it does. Moreover, it
predated the 2001 Tisza II PPA by approximately two years and no
evidence was led to suggest that such a new PPA was then
contemplated. The letter was written immediately before Claimants
commenced the PSA and treaty arbitrations in 2000. Accordingly, the
Tribunal does not consider it plausible that Claimants can be said to

Award, {ff 9.3.17-9.3.18.
Award, J 9.3.19.
%6 Award, { 9.3.20.

- 33 -

107.

108.

109.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

have relied on this assurance when, two years later, they entered into

the 2001 Settlement Agreement and the 2001 Amendment Agreement.
The Tribunal further considered that “the language of the 2001 Settlement
Agreement does not, as alleged, constitute a specific promise by Hungary not to
frustrate the purpose and intent of the 2001 Settlement Agreement by the

reintroduction of administrative pricing”,””

and that “no specific commitments
were made by Hungary that could limit its sovereign right to change its law (such
as a “Stability Clause”) or that could legitimately have made the investor believe

that no change in the law would occur”.”*

Further, the Tribunal found that “the 2001 Settlement Agreement introduced a
‘Change of Law’ provision ... into the Original Tisza II PPA” which allocated the
risks among AES and MVM (Maggar Villamos Miivek Zartkérifen Muk6d6é
Részvénytarsasdg) of “a change in law ... during the now extended term of the
PPA”. Later in the Award, it noted that “neither the 2001 Settlement Agreement,
nor the 2001 PPA, contemplated that pricing regulation could not be reintroduced.
The PPA only stipulated that if the administrative pricing disappeared specific

formulas would be applied”.'”

In light of these considerations, the Tribunal concluded that “Claimants cannot
legitimately have been led by Hungary to expect that the regime of administrative
pricing would not be reintroduced under any circumstances during the term of the

2001 Tisza Il PPA”.'”!

Award, 9.3.24.
Award, 9.3.31.
Award, 9.3.25.
Award, { 13.3.4.
Award, { 9.3.26.

-34-

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

The Committee cannot accept Applicants’ argument that the Tribunal failed to state
reasons either for rejecting AES’s preferred Parkerings-Compagniet test, or more

generally, for finding an absence of legitimate expectations.

In accordance with several previous awards, the Tribunal decided that the correct
test was whether there were government representations and assurances made or
given to Claimants at the time of the investment and upon which they relied, of the
sort alleged and whether Hungary acted in a manner contrary to such
representations and assurances. There was no requirement that the Tribunal, in
adopting this standard, should explain why it preferred such a test over any other.
Moreover, the Tribunal’s reasoning can be easily followed “from Point A to Point

B”, in accordance with the MINE standards.

The Committee also rejects Applicants’ argument that the Tribunal’s reference to
the “Change of Law” clause in the 2001 Settlement Agreement was frivolous, in
effect being treated as a waiver of AES’s rights to fair and equitable treatment

under the ECT."

As explained above, an Award may only be annulled for giving “frivolous” reasons
1,193

in the exceptional event that they amount to no reasons at all
Since the Tribunal had already found that no legitimate expectations existed, there
could not be any waiver. It was only after it had made this finding that the Tribunal
pointed out that the “Change in Law” provision had been introduced into the
original Tisza IT PPA by the 2001 Settlement Agreement.'™

For the Tribunal, the “Change in Law” provision was further evidence that the
Parties were aware that future legal changes could affect the PPA. This was already

clear in the PPA which defined law as including “all acts of the Hungarian

102

A-Ry, 171.
See J 54.
Award, 9.3.25.

03

04

-35-

116.

117.

 

119.

from time to time”.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

parliament, as well as other governmental or ministerial decrees as might be issued

105

The Committee therefore rejects AES’s claim that the Tribunal failed to state
reasons for finding the absence of a stabilization clause or the presence of a change

of law clause to be legally significant.

In summary, therefore, the Committee finds that all of AES’s arguments on

legitimate expectations must fail.

DUE PROCESS

In claiming unfair and inequitable treatment by Hungary before the Tribunal, AES

 

relied both on the irrational and unreasonable character of Hungary’s decision to
reintroduce administrative pricing as well as the arbitrary and unfair manner in
which it was implemented.'”° The Tribunal found that since it had concluded that
there was nothing so irrational or unreasonable in Hungary’s reintroduction of
administrative prices as would constitute unfair and inequitable treatment, and
AES’s investment had not been impaired by unreasonable or discriminatory
measures, it would limit its analysis of AES’s due process claims to the manner
and methodology by which the Price Decrees were brought into force. It would do
so with a view to assessing whether “process” failures existed that constituted a
failure to provide fair and equitable treatment. '°”

The Tribunal referred to the decision of the Tecmed tribunal in enunciating the

applicable legal standard:'°*

Award, {9.3.25 (emphas
Award, { 9.3.36.
‘07 Award, {ff 9.3.37-9.3.38.

Award, {| 9.3.40, referring to Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v. The United
Mexican States, Award, 29 May 2003, 4 154 (“Tecmed’).

added).

 

- 36 -

120.

121.

122.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

It is not every process failing or imperfection that will amount to a
failure to provide fair and equitable treatment. The standard is not one
of perfection. It is only when a State’s acts or procedural omissions
are, on the facts and in the context before the adjudicator, manifestly
unfair or unreasonable such as would shock, or at least surprise a
sense of juridical propriety ... that the standard can be said to have
been infringed.

 

The Tribunal ultimately concluded that it did not believe that the process of
implementing the Price Decrees was so flawed as to amount to a breach of the fair

and equitable standards of the ECT.'”

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions

Applicants submit that in making the above determinations, the Tribunal failed to
adequately assess Hungary’s conduct in determining that the Price Decrees had
been issued in accordance with due process and procedural propriety. AES submits
that these are errors which warrant annulment of the Award under Article 52(1)(e)

in their own right.

First, AES alleges that the Tribunal failed to provide reasons for its finding that
Hungary’s arbitrarily short timeframe for implementation of the Price Decrees did
not constitute a due process violation.''” AES submits that a gap in the Tribunal’s
logic exists since it failed to step back from its analysis of the HEO’s individual
actions in implementing the Price Decrees and take account of the fact that the
deadlines were imposed on the HEO by the Ministry of Economy.''' The Tribunal
therefore examined the conduct of the HEO to the exclusion of the Ministry of

Economy or indeed Hungary as a whole."

Award, 9.3.41.
A-Ry, fff 181-185.
Nl A-Ry, (183.
2 A-Ry, { 182.

-37-

123.

124.

125.

126.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

Second, AES alleges that “the Tribunal’s finding on Hungary’s failure to fully

review AES’s costs and assets before establishing prices under the Price Decrees is
a 113

contradictory and frivolous”.’~ The alleged contradiction is based, according to

AES, on the fact that:''*

The Tribunal ... concedes that even though no costs and assets review
took place in the third cycle, the HEO accepted AES’s costs as
reflected in its own financial statements “precisely as it had done for
the second price cycle with which the Claimants have no complaint.”
AES had no complaint about the second price cycle because it
included the very feature it complained was missing from the third: a
full costs and assets review. Obviously, if the third cycle did not
include a costs and assets review, as the Tribunal conceded, then it
cannot be said that Hungary carries out the third cycle regulatory
process “precisely as it had done for the second cycle”.
Regarding “frivolity”, AES submits, inter alia, that the Tribunal’s reasoning was
frivolous because it accepted without any explanation that the non-performance of
a costs review was justified by the short time frame that the Hungarian Ministry

had in mind to enact the Price Decrees.
Hungary refutes Applicants’ claims.

It argues that the alleged shortcomings in the Tribunal’s reasoning only pertain to
one facet of Hungary’s conduct in relation to the procedure for the enactment of the
Price Decrees. In order to establish grounds for annulment, AES would need to
prove that the Award is silent on the claim as a whole, rather than simply one given
aspect of it.'!* In its written submissions, Hungary cites the following passage from

the decision of the Helnan annulment committee: ''°

"3 A-Ry, (186.
A-Ry, { 190, referring to Award, { 9.3.72 (emphasis in original).
"5 A-CM, {1 366; A-Rj, 1 99.

A-Rj, | 99, referring to Helnan International Hotels AS v. Arab Republic of Egypt,
Decision on Annulment, 14 June 2010, {[ 36 (“Helnan”).

- 38 -

127.

128.

129.

130.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

[Article 52(1)(e)] permits annulment on the ground “that the award
has failed to state the reasons on which it is based. Thus, the object of
this ground is the reasoning which leads to the Tribunal’s Award. It
does not permit annulment simply because the tribunal has not
determined it necessary to discuss every argument raised by one of the
parties.
Alternatively, Hungary argues that, in order to merit annulment the issue in
question would in any case need to have been an “essential question” that could

have changed the outcome of the case.''” This, Hungary submits, was not the case.

(b) The ad hoc Committee’s Analysis

The Committee considers that Applicants’ claims are unfounded.

With respect to Applicants’ first claim, the Tribunal found that on 11 May 2006,
the HEO sent each generator a draft text of the 2006 Price Decree, soliciting
comments on its proposed approach by 18 May 2006.''* AES submitted its
comments on this date in accordance with the HEO’s (admittedly short) deadline.
AES then amended its comments, four days later, on 22 May 2006. The Tribunal
found that these amended comments were substantive, detailed and led to changes

to the draft 2006 Price Decree.'"

The Tribunal went on to note that the HEO next met with AES on 31 May 2006 to
discuss possible changes to the draft.'*? The HEO subsequently presented the draft
to the Ministry on 2 June 2006, including a summary table of the principal

comments that had been received from the generators (including AES).'"'

17 A-CM, 368.

Award, J 9.3.49.
Award, J 9.3.50.
Award, { 9.3.51.
Award, J 9.3.52.

- 39 -

131.

132.

133.

134.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

Several changes were thereafter made to the draft, including elimination of the
original post hoc profit sharing provision as requested by a number of generators,

including AES.'”

The Arbitral Tribunal concluded that although there were several procedural
shortcomings in Hungary’s implementation of the Price Decrees (the most obvious
being the short deadline to submit comments) none was sufficient to constitute
unfair and inequitable treatment.'** The Tribunal considered that having been
informed by the HEO no later than November 2005 that the HEO considered a
7.1% return on assets to be an appropriate rate of return, AES had been sufficiently
forewarned to enable it to respond to the HEO’s letter of 11 May 2006 within this
timeframe. AES had not found it necessary to seek an extension. It further took the
opportunity to supplement and amend its comments four days later. These late
amendments were accepted as timely by the HEO, and were ultimately acted upon

through Hungary’s elimination of the proposed post hoc profit-sharing provision.'*

In light of the Tribunal’s analysis, as described above, the Committee is unable to
find that Applicants’ claim that the Tribunal failed to specifically address the role
of the Ministry of Economy in setting the time frame is well-founded. Moreover,
the Committee does not see in what way such an omission would have been result-

determinative.

Applicants’ claim in the original proceedings was based on one single sentence in
their post-hearing brief to the effect that “Hungary has never explained its self-
imposed May deadline that appears arbitrary considering that the 2006 Price

Decree was not issued until 24 November”.'”°

122 Award, [ff 9.3.53-9.3.55.

Award, | 9.3.66.

Award, {{] 9.3.67-9.3.70.

AES’s Post-Hearing Submission, 78.

- 40 -

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

In the Committee’s view, this argument barely required a response by the Tribunal
given the limited degree of prominence with which it was advanced by AES in the

original proceedings.'*° Much less can it be regarded as “outcome-determinative”.

With respect to Applicants’ second complaint, AES submits that the Tribunal did
not make any independent findings on the issue of Hungary’s alleged failure to
perform a full costs and assets review during the implementation of pricing-
regulation. Instead, AES argues, the Tribunal merely “recited Hungary’s unhelpful
explanation that it was ‘impractical’ to perform a full costs review in the timeframe

that the Ministry ‘had in mind’”.'?”

In dealing with this question, the Tribunal was, by its own admission, greatly
assisted by the testimony of Mr. Békés, head of the Electricity Office Preparation
Department of the HEO at the time. The Tribunal found that his evidence described
“a not culpably unreasonable implementation process in relation to the Price
Decrees”.'** Mr. Békés was not cross-examined. His testimony on the relevant
process was contradicted neither by competing testimony, nor by contrary

documentation.

Specifically, Mr. Békés testified that for a number of reasons, it was impractical for
the HEO to perform a detailed bottom up cost review for the generators in early

2006.

There was therefore no reason for the Tribunal to make any other independent
findings on the issue that Hungary had failed to perform a full costs and assets

review during implementation of the pricing regulation.

6 See Continental Casualty Company v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, 16

September 2011, | 129 (“Continental Casualty”).
27 A-Ry, 186.

28 Award, { 9.3.42.

-41-

140.

141.

142.

143.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

The Committee is also unable to find that the Tribunal’s reasoning is contradictory.
As discussed above, such a contradiction must amount to the Tribunal having
effectively given no reasons at all. '” In light of the Tribunal’s reasoning described
above, the Committee is unable to contemplate annulment of the Award on this

basis. To do so would impermissibly cross the line into appellate review.

In any event, the Tribunal properly found that AES had not been denied due
process with respect to a costs review, a determination of assets review, or a further

opportunity for a price review.

Concerning the costs review, the Tribunal acknowledged that no such audit took
place during the third pricing cycle. It concluded, however, that “HEO’s decision
not to follow this practice at this time was not unfair to AES ... because HEO
accepted AES’s costs as reflected in AES’s 2004 and 2005 own financial

statements as supplied to HEO”.'*°

With respect to the asset review, the Tribunal noted that the HEO’s return-on-
assets calculations were based on the book value of assets as reported in AES’s
financial statements. This methodology was identical to that employed in the
second pricing cycle (with which Claimants had no complaint).'*! The Tribunal
also found that “because Claimants do not fault the first two cycles, it is relevant to
their allegation of procedural failings that each and every of the three cycles were

oy 132

somewhat similar”.

See | 53.

Award, {ff 9.3.71-9.3.72.
Award, { 9.3.72.

2 Award, 9.3.44.

-42-

144.

145.

VIL

146.

147.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

If Claimants considered that costs were not included that should have been, they
could have asked for a price review. However, they did not. The Tribunal stated as

follows:'*

The March 2006 amendments to the 2001 Electricity Act (that
provided for the reintroduction of administrative prices) did not affect
its existing provisions which allow generators to petition for
individual price review. Mr. Békés testified that AES Tisza did not
submit a request for price review during the relevant review period
applicable to the Price Decrees.
On the basis of the Tribunal’s reasoning as described above, under the prevailing
legal standards the Committee considers it impossible to conclude that Claimants’
complaint that the Tribunal’s reasoning on due process was frivolous or

contradictory is well founded.

STABLE CONDITIONS

In the original proceedings, the Tribunal found that Hungary had not violated its
obligation under Article 10(1) of the ECT to “encourage and create stable,

equitable, favourable and transparent conditions for Investors”.

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions

AES requests annulment of the Award since, it alleges, the Tribunal failed to give
positive content to the applicable legal standards under Article 10(1) of the ECT. It
argues that “by characterizing the legal standard only by what it is not, the Tribunal
gave frivolous reasons for its decision on this issue which requires annulment
under Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention”. It argues further that “this error

constitutes a manifest excess of power under Article 52(1)(b) in that the Tribunal

83° Award, J 9.3.64.

A-Ry, 1195.

134

-43-

148.

149.

150.

151.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

failed to exercise its jurisdiction by not making any findings on the abundant

record on profitability”.'*°

Applicants also argue that whilst the Tribunal purported to deal with the scope of
this obligation by reference to the factual circumstances in the case, the Award is in
fact concerned exclusively with Hungary’s sovereign right to change its law in the
abstract, without specific consideration of the reintroduction of regulated prices in

the relevant context.'*°

Further, AES submits that since the Tribunal made no affirmative findings as to the
legal test that it should apply to the facts of the case before it, it has disregarded the
applicable law. This disregard of the applicable law, AES argues, is manifest

insofar as it is both serious and obvious.

Hungary, for its part, submits that throughout the original proceedings, Applicants

used the phrase “stable legal and business framework” as shorthand for all of
Hungary’s obligations under Article 10(1) — that is, including the obligation to
provide both stable conditions and fair and equitable treatment. Hungary submits
that in the Award, the Tribunal responded to the question that had been presented
to it, and found that the ECT’s “stable conditions” provision is not a stability clause
preventing a sovereign entity from changing its laws. This approach, Hungary

argues, is consistent with the findings of previous tribunals.'”

Hungary further submits that the Tribunal could not find a specific commitment by
Hungary that could mandate obedience to a given framework. Rather, the Tribunal
held that the business framework (the 2001 Electricity Act, 2001 Settlement
A and PPA A d ) in itself d changes. Moreover,

Hungary submits that the Tribunal made specific findings about the extent and

13s

A-Ry, 131.
A-A, 91.
87 A-CM, J 295-297, 304.

136

-44-

152.

153.

154.

155.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

nature of the changes that occurred in this case, which were directly relevant to its

finding that Hungary did not violate the ECT.'*

In any event, as discussed above with reference to the applicable legal standards,’
it is Hungary’s position that whilst the Tribunal’s interpretation of the ECT’s
“stable conditions” provisions may not have been definitive or exhaustive, Article
52(1)(b) only requires that the Tribunal interpret the correct “body of law” and

respond to the claims before it.'“°

(b) The ad hoc Committee’s Analysis

The Committee considers that Applicants’ claims are unfounded.

In the Committee’s view, the Tribunal did, in fact, give positive content to the

standard. It stated that:'‘!

To determine the scope of the stable conditions that a State has to
encourage and create is a complex task given that it will always
depend on the specific circumstances that surrounds [sic] the
investor’s decision to invest and the measures taken by the State in the
public interest.

Furthermore, the Tribunal applied the law to the facts in stating that: !*°

In this case however, the Tribunal observes that no specific
commitments were made by Hungary that could limit its sovereign
right to change its law (such as a stability clause) or that could
legitimately have made investors believe that no change in the law
would occur.

A-CM, {ff 298-302.
See | 29.

40 A-CM, (312.
Award, | 9.3.30.
Award, J 9.3.31.

-45-

156.

157.

158.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

The Tribunal then went on to state that: “Specifically, the 2001 Settlement
Agreement and the 2001 PPA did not [contemplate] that after 2004 no
reintroduction of regulated pricing could take place”.'"* The Tribunal noted that
“Moreover, it is clear from clause 3.7 of the 2001 PPA that the parties to the
agreement were aware that a change in the law could occur that could make the
obligations under the agreement become illegal, unenforceable or impossible to
perform”. '“*

The Tribunal also carefully examined the specific circumstances surrounding the
measures taken by the State in the public interest and noted that a pricing regime in
the third period did not significantly differ from those in the earlier cycles.' The
fact that these findings are contained in various other sections of the Award is
irrelevant. Under the prevailing legal standards recently enunciated by the

Continental Casualty annulment committee: '“°

In determining whether the reasons given for a conclusion on a

particular question are sufficient, is it [sic] necessary not to look in

isolation at the particular paragraphs of the award dealing specifically

with that question. Those paragraphs must always be read together

with the award as a whole.
It was therefore entirely rational for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide that in these
circumstances, “absent a specific commitment from Hungary that it would not
reintroduce administrative pricing during the term of the 2001 PPA, Claimants
cannot properly rely on an alleged breach of Hungary’s Treaty obligations to

provide a stable legal environment”. '“’

Award, note 39.

Award, { 9.3.32.

Award, {{ 9.3.44, 9.3.56, 9.3.72, 10.3.44.
Continental Casualty, { 261.

Award, { 9.3.34.

- 46 -

159.

Vill.

160.

161.

162.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

Applicants’ contentions under this heading therefore fall short of proving a

manifest excess of the Tribunal’s powers, and must accordingly be rejected.

LEGALITY UNDER HUNGARIAN AND EU LAW

In its Award the Tribunal had summarized Claimants’ position as to applicable law
to the effect that “the parties to this arbitration made a clear choice as to the
applicable law and that choice does not include Community competition law or
Hungarian law”.'“’ It had concluded, based on Article 41(2) of the ICSID
Convention and Article 26(6) of the ECT that, as agreed by the parties, “the
applicable law to this proceeding is the ECT, together with the applicable rules and

principles of international law”.'”

(a) Summary of the Parties’ Positions

Applicants claim annulment of the Award under both Articles 52(1)(b) and
52(1)(e) because, they submit, the Tribunal failed entirely to address its claim that

Hungary’s measures were in breach of both Hungarian law and EU law.

They argue that this presents a significant /acuna in the Tribunal’s reasoning,
constituting a failure to address an essential question and warranting annulment
under Article 52(1)(e).'” They stress the importance of such a determination since
the evidential weight of such a determination was “crucial to a fulsome
determination of whether [Hungary’s] policy goal was rational”.!*! They submit

that:'?

Award, 7.3.1.
Award, | 7.6.4.

A-Ry, { 208.

A-Ry, 206; A-A, Mf 75-77.

A-Ry, 206 (emphasis in original).

-47-

163.

165.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

The policy’s compliance with the law is a factor in determining its
rationality. Were the Tribunal to have determined that Hungary’s
actions were illegal under one or both legal regimes, that
determination would have had substantial weight in adjudicating the
rationality of Hungary’s proffered policy goal.
Applicants further contend that the Tribunal’s finding that Hungary pursued a
legitimate policy objective cannot amount to an implicit rejection of its claim

concerning the illegality of the Price Decrees.'**

They submit that the question of legality under Hungarian and EU law was a
significant issue in the original proceedings, having been raised at the hearing and

. . . . a wc 15d
having received substantial attention in their written submissions.

According to
AES, the evidential weight that such a finding would have had renders the issue

outcome-determinative.

Hungary argues that contrary to Applicants’ submission that a rational or legitimate
policy goal can only be found where a State’s actions fully comply with national
law and EC secondary legislation (in the case of EU Member States), neither of
these issues was essential to the proper resolution of the claim before the
Tribunal.'* Respondent does not dispute that the Award does not discuss issues of
Hungarian law or EC Liberalization Directives, which were “the only components
of EC law Claimants alleged had been violated”.'*° In any case, it submits that
AES’s argument mischaracterises the way in which the issue was presented to the

Tribunal.'”

A-A, 76.

A-Ry, | 202, referring to AES’s Post-Hearing Brief, 33.
A-CM, 1375.

A-CM, 1377.

A-CM, {| 379, referring to Tr. p. 76:22-77:9.

- 48 -

166.

167.

168.

169.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)

Decision on Annulment

Hungary submits that AES’s argument must fail since: (i) the legal standard
adopted by the Tribunal did not contain the “local law” legality element that
Applicants argue was essential;'* (ii) confirmation of the legality of a state’s
actions under domestic law cannot be understood empirically as a prerequisite to
finding that a state acted pursuant to a rational or legitimate policy goal under

international law;'°

and (iii) Applicants’ complaint that the Tribunal failed to
accord determinative weight to Applicants’ evidence on this issue does not provide
a valid basis for annulment, since tribunals are free to address only those arguments

which they regard as particularly pertinent.

(b) The ad hoc Committee’s Analysis

The Committee considers that Applicants’ claims are unfounded.

In its written submissions on the merits, AES itself argued that the only applicable
law was the ECT and the applicable rules and principles of international law under
Article 26(6) of the ECT.’ Indeed, the Tribunal found that AES said that
“Community law is irrelevant to the interpretation of the ECT, and that assertions

to the contrary ignore the basic principles of treaty interpretation”.'*'

The Tribunal further found that:'°*

This is ... said to be so given that Community law, including
Community competition law, is considered the equivalent of internal
or municipal law for the purposes of this proceeding. Community law
is thus merely a fact to be considered by the Tribunal when
determining the applicable law.

58 A-CM, {{ 389, referring to Award ff 9.3.40, 10.1.1, 10.3.8, 10.3.13, 10.3.23.
159 A-CM, 393-395.

160 Award, 17.3.1.

tol Award, J 7.3.2.

162 Award, 7.3.4.

-49-

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

Having considered the Parties’ arguments on this point, the Tribunal concluded, as
already stated, that “the applicable law to this proceeding is the ECT, together with
the applicable rules and principles of international law” (i.e. excluding domestic
Hungarian law). 165

As mentioned above, the Tribunal adopted the standard that a “rational policy is
taken by a State following a logical (good sense) explanation and with the aim of
addressing a public interest matter”.' The key point, as submitted by Hungary, is
that a tribunal has a wide discretion to formulate and apply the relevant enquiry

under the treaty standard.'® Such a determination is not open to appeal.

The Committee notes that the majority of the Tribunal found that Hungary’s
decision to reintroduce administrative pricing was not motivated by pressure from
the EC Commission. However, the majority found that “had Hungary been
motivated to reintroduce price regulation with a view to addressing the EC’s state
aid concerns, there is no doubt that this would have constituted a rational public

policy measure”.'

As discussed above, the Tribunal arrived at the conclusion that “it is a perfectly

valid and rational policy objective for a government to address luxury profits”.'°”
The Tribunal therefore was not required to evaluate the legality of Hungary’s
reintroduction of regulated pricing under Hungarian or EU law, since this was not

part of its adopted standard.

163 Award, (7.6.4.

See { 69, referring to Award, { 10.3.8.
15 A-Rj, J 128.

166 Award, J 10.3.16.

‘7 Award, { 10.3.34.

-50-

175.

176.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

In any case, as discussed at length above, an error of law is not a valid basis for
annulment. It is not open to AES or the ad hoc Committee to challenge the
correctness of the standards applied by the Tribunal. Further, a tribunal is not
required to address every argument invoked by a party if it considers that this

argument is not essential in deciding the issue before it.

Applicants’ claim for annulment of the Award on the above grounds must therefore

also fail.

-51-

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erému Kft. v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/22)
Decision on Annulment

Costs

Under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 47(1) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, read in conjunction with Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention
and Rule 53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the ad hoc Committee has discretion
to determine how and by whom the costs and expenses of ICSID, the Committee

and the Parties should be borne.
The Parties submitted their respective submissions on costs on 17 March 2012.

Applicants seek to recover their legal costs and expenses incurred in connection
with this annulment proceeding, amounting to GBP 474,156.54. Hungary requests
that the Committee issue an “appropriate” award of costs and fees in light of its
decision. Hungary’s legal costs and expenses amount to USD 920,427.04. The
Committee finds both parties’ cost submissions reasonable within the meaning of

Rule 28(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

In accordance with Regulation 14(3)(e) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulations, Applicants have been “solely responsible for making the advance
payments requested by the Secretary-General to cover expenses following the
constitution of the Committee”. This is without prejudice to the Committee’s final

decision on cost allocation.

In its decision on the allocation of costs the Committee has been guided, as other
committees and tribunals before it, that “costs follow the event” if no specific
circumstances impose a different approach. Such circumstances do not exist here.
Not only has Hungary prevailed in totality but the application for annulment was
clearly without merit. Hungary was forced to go through the process and should not
be burdened further by having to pay for its defence. This notwithstanding, the
Committee recognises that both parties and their counsel have conducted the

proceedings diligently and efficiently.

-52-

182.

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémi Kft. v. Hungary

(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22)

Decision on Annulment

In weighing these criteria, the Committee concludes that the Applicants are to bear

all ICSID costs, i.e. the fees and expenses of the members of the ad hoc Committee

and of the ICSID Secretariat, amounting to USD 350,000.00'* as well as
Hungary’s legal costs and expenses amounting to USD 920,427.04.

‘65 The amount includes estimated charges (courier, printing, and copying) in respect of

the dispatch of this Decision. The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed
financial statement of the case account as soon as all of the invoices are received and the
account is final.

-53-

AES Summit Generation Ltd. and AES Tisza Erémt v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22)
Decision on Annulment

x. DECISIONS

1. For the foregoing reasons, the ad hoc Committee decides unanimously that:

(1) Applicants’ claims for annulment under Article 52(1)(b) and Article 52(1)(e)

of the ICSID Convention are dismissed in their entirety;

(2) Applicants shall bear the full costs and expenses incurred by ICSID in these

annulment proceedings, including fees and expenses of the arbitrators.

(3) Applicants shall bear Hungary’s legal expenses and costs.

THE AD Hoc COMMITTEE:

 

  

         

Prof.Dr. Rolf Knie|

Judge Abdulqawi Aimed Yusuf
Co-Member Co-Member
Date: 14 C 2012 Date: €. G6. det

-54-

