The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

 

Aguas del Tunari, S.A.,
Claimant/Investor
v.

Republic of Bolivia,

Respondent/Contracting Party

ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/3

 

 

Decision on Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

Members of the Tribunal

David D. Caron, President
José Luis Alberro-Semerena

Representing Aguas del Tunari, S.A
Michael E. Curtin
Aguas del Tunari, S.A.

Robert G. Volterra (until February 11, 2005)

Matthew Weiniger
Herbert Smith

Ramiro Guevara
Enrique Barrios
Servicios Legales S.C.

 

Washington, D.C., October 21, 2005

Representing the Republic of Bolivia
Mario Moreno Viruez
Minister of Services and Public Works

Dana Contratto
Crowell & Moring

Jose Antonio Criales
Criales, Ureullo, Freire & Villegas

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Introduction and S$ 'y 1
Procedural History. 1
The Request for A 1
Notice of R 2
The Appointment of Arbitrators 2
Petition of Non Governmental Organization to Intervene and for Other Forms of Involvement of
Non-Disputing Parties soccseccreereecsreeserseecssesessessesssussssnseessusesuessssssssuesssucessesssueeenesssesssnessisssiie saussennees 3

 

First Se
Procedural Order No. 1

 

 

 

The Postponement of the Hearing on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction...

 

Motions as to the Presentation of Witnesses at the Hearing .....

The Hearing on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction & Post Hearing Correspondence from
the Parties

 

 

The Tribunal’s Post Hearing Inquiry to the Netherlands, the Non-Disputing State Party to the

 

 

 

 

 

BIT. severe 10
Factual Bach d 10
Aguas del Tunari, SA. 10
The Conclusion of the Water and Sewage Concession for Cochabamba in September of 1999. 1
The Terms of the Concession 12
The Upstream Ownership of AdT in September 1999... 12

 

The Events in the Pall of 1999 Following the Award of the Concession

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The December 1999 Ownership Structure of AdT... 16
The Challenges to the C and Its Te i 16
The Issues Pr d 17
General Consit ions Regarding Jurisdicti 17
Claimant's Assertions as to the Basis of Jurisdi 18
Respondent's Olyections. 18
The Applicable Law 19

 

‘PF

The First Objection 21

The First Aspect of Respondent’s First Objection which asserts that the
Concession Agreement precludes ICSID jurisdiction

 

 

 

 

Respondent's Objection 21
Claimant's Reply 24
The Decision of the Tribunal. 25

The Second Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that Bolivia is not a

 

 

 

 

proper party 30
Respondent's Objection 30
Claimant's Reply 31
The Decision of the Tribunal. 31

The Third Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that Article 2 of the
BIT recognizes the exclusive jurisdiction of Bolivian law over this dispute

 

 

 

 

Respondent's Objection 32
Claimant's Reply 33
The Decision of the Tribunal. 33

The Fourth Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that the transfer of
AdT’s stock bars the jurisdiction of the Tribunal ....

 

 

 

Respondent's Objection 36
Claimant's Reply 36
The Decision of the Tribunal. 37

 

The Fifth Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that misrepresentations
by representatives of Claimant bar the jurisdiction of this Tribunal ..

 

 

 

Respondent's Objection 41
Claimant's Reply 42
The Decision of the Tribunal. 42

 

The Sixth Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that Claimant’s
invocation of the Netherlands-Bolivia BIT is an assertion of jurisdiction not
within the scope of Bolivia’s consent to arbitration....

 

 

 

Respondent's Objection 43
Claimant's Reply 45
The Decision of the Tribunal. 45

 

The Second Objection 46

Respondent’s Second Objection which asserts that the Claimant is not a
Bolivian entity “controlled directly or indirectly” by nationals of the
Netherlands as required by the Netherlands-Bolivia BIT

Respondent's Objection

 

Claimant's Reply 47

The Decision of the Tribunal.
ions Presented
aning of the Phrase: “controlled directly or indirectly”.
The Ordinary Meaning of the Phrase: “controlled directly or indire
The Phrase in Its Contest and in Light of the Object and Purpose of the BIT
Article 31(3) of the Vienna Convention and the Significance to be Accorded to Statements
of the Dutch G
Conclusion as to the Meaning of “controlled directly or indirectly”.
confirming the Interpretation of “controlled directly or indirectly”...

The Negotiating History of the BIT. 3

The Jurisprudence Regarding Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention.

The Holdings of Other Arbitral Awards Concerning “Control” ...

The BIT Practice Generally of Both Nations
Neth ds Practice 7
Bolivian Practice 70

Applying the Interpretation: Is AdT “controlled directly or indirectly” by IWH B.V. or WT BWV? ssssss00e73

 

   

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

Respondent’s Motion for Production of Evidence

 

 

 

 

 

 

Concluding Observation 76
Decisi 79
Declaration of José Luis Alberro-S 80
Appendix I 1-1
Appendix II -1
Appendix III Ill -1
A dix IV Iv-1

 

‘PP

iii

Introduction and Summary

1, ‘The Claimant in this proceeding is Aguas del Tunari, S.A. (“AdT”), a company
organized under the laws of Bolivia.

2. AdT, under the “Contract for Concession of Use of Water and for the Public
Potable Water and Sewer Service for the City of Cochabamba” (the “Concession”)
concluded in September 1999 and by other contracts related to this Concession, received the
tight to provide water and sewage services for the city of Cochabamba, Bolivia. By early
April 2000, the Concession had ceased to be effective.

3. AdT claims the Republic of Bolivia (“Bolivia”) through various acts and omissions
leading up to, and including, the rescission of the Concession in April 2000, breached
various provisions of a bilateral investment treaty, namely the Agreement on Encouragement
and Reciprocal Protection of Investments Between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Republic of Bolivia (the “Netherlands-Bolivia BIT” or “BIT”).'

4. AdT initiated this proceeding against Bolivia before the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) invoking the Netherlands-Bolivia BIT as the
basis of jurisdiction.

5. Bolivia has raised a number of objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
including arguments that Bolivia did not consent to ICSID jurisdiction and that AdT is not a
Dutch national as defined by the BIT.

6. The Parties agreed that these objections should be considered as a preliminary
matter.
7. In this Decision, the Tribunal concludes that the present dispute is within the

jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

Procedural History
The Request for Arbitration

8. AdT initiated this proceeding on November 12, 2001, when it filed a Request for
Arbitration with ICSID. In the Request for Arbitration, AdT alleged that various actions
attributable to Bolivia constituted an expropriation of its investment in Bolivia and were in
breach of Bolivia’s obligations under the Netherlands-Bolivia BIT.

' The Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Republic of Bolivia, entered into fore November 1, 1994, The text is available online at
http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/netherlands_boliviapdf. As to the national
implementation of this treaty, see for Bolivia, Law No. 1586 of August 12, 1994, and for the Netherlands,
Tractatenblad 1994, Nr. 239.

9. On December 5, 2001, Bolivia filed a document entitled “Memorial on ICSID
Jurisdiction in the Aguas del Tunari S.A. Matter.” In this document, Bolivia objected to
ICSID jurisdiction on several bases and argued that the requested arbitration was “manifestly
outside the jurisdiction” of ICSID.”

Notice of Registration

10. On February 25, 2002, the Secretary-General of ICSID provided both AdT and
Bolivia with a “Notice of Registration” in the Arbitration Register of AdT’s Request for
Arbitration in accordance with Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention” or
“Convention”).’

11. In issuing the Notice, the Secretary-General acknowledged Bolivia’s opposition to
the registration of the Request for Arbitration.' He also noted that the Secretariat’s
administrative task of registering the dispute was required under Article 36(3) of the ICSID
Convention unless the dispute described in the Request for Arbitration was manifestly
outside the jurisdiction of ICSID. Upon careful review of the information contained within
the Request for Arbitration and supplemental correspondence made by the parties, the
Secretary-General did not find the dispute to be “manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the
Centre.” The registration of the Request for Arbitration was made without prejudice to the
tights of both parties to fully present their respective cases concerning jurisdiction to the
Arbitral Tribunal that was to be convened under Articles 41 and 42 of the ICSID
Convention.

The Appointment of Arbitrators

12. On April 19, 2002, after an exchange of correspondence, the parties agreed to use
Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention to determine the number and method of the
appointment of arbitrators. This Article provides for each party to appoint one arbitrator
and the two patties to agree on a third arbitrator to serve as President of the Tribunal. On
April 25, 2002, AdT appointed Henri Alvarez, a national of Canada, as a member of the
Arbitration Tribunal. On April 29, 2002, Bolivia appointed Dr. José Luis Alberro-Semerena,
a national of Mexico, as a member of the Tribunal. No objections were raised to either
appointment.

13. On May 30, 2002, having failed to reach a consensus by a May 29 deadline set by the
Secretary-General for the appointment of the President of the Tribunal, AdT requested that
the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council designate an arbitrator to serve as

2 Memorial of the Republic of Bolivia, p. 1, § 1.1. (hereinafter “Resp. Mem.” See Appendix I for a complete list
of abbreviations used in this Decision).

3 “Notice of Registration,” February 25, 2002 to AdT and Bolivia, The Secretary-General took note of AdT’s
supplemental letters to the Centre of January 4, January 21, February 5, and February 14, 2002 as
supplementing AdT’s original Request for Arbitration.

+ Letter of Ko-Yung ‘Tang, Secretary-General, ICSID, February 25, 2002 to AdT and Bolivia. The Secretary-
General took note of Bolivia’s supplemental letters to the Centre on December 5, 2001, and January 7, January
29, February 8, and February 15, 2002.

President of the Tribunal as provided by Article 38 of the Convention and Rule 4 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules (“Arbitration Rules”).

14. On June 26, 2002, absent any objection on the part of the parties, the President of
the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Professor David D. Caron, a national of the
United States, as President of the Tribunal. The Tribunal was officially constituted on July 5,
2002, in accordance with the Convention and the Arbitration Rules. Ms. Margrete Stevens
has served as Secretary of the Tribunal.

Petition of Non Governmental Organization to Intervene and for Other Forms of Involvement of Non-
Disputing Parties

15. On August 28, 2002, an environmental non-governmental organization filed a
Petition dated August 29, 2002, with the Tribunal on behalf of “La Coordinadora para la
Defensa del Agua y Vida, La Federacion Departamental Cochabambina de Organizaciones
Regantes, SEMAPA Sur, Friends of the Earth-Netherlands, Oscar Olivera, Omar
Fernandez, Father Luis Sanchez, and Congressman Jorge Alvarado,” requesting permission
to intervene in the arbitration, or for other forms of involvement in these proceedings.

16. ‘The petitioners through their counsel, Earthjustice, requested that the Tribunal grant
them standing to participate as parties in any proceedings convened to determine AdT’s
claim, and to afford the petitioners all rights of participation accorded to other parties.
Alternatively, should party status be denied to one or more of the petitioners, the petitioners
sought the right to participate in proceedings as amici curiae, meaning they would be allowed:
(1) to make submissions concerning: the procedural aspects of the Tribunal, the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal, the arbitrability of the claims raised by AdT and the merits of AdT’s claims;
(2) to attend all hearings of the Tribunal; (3) to make oral presentations during hearings of
the Tribunal; and, (4) to have immediate access to all submissions made to the Tribunal.’ In
addition, petitioners requested that the Tribunal: (1) publicly disclose all statements,
including written submissions, concerning the claims and defenses of both parties; (2) open
all hearings to the public; and, (3) visit the area of Cochabamba.” Petitioners argued that they
had standing since each petitioner had a direct interest in the subject matter of AdT’s claim.
Petitioners believed that their involvement would increase transparency in the international
arbitral process and that they would provide “unique expertise and knowledge” during the
‘Tribunal’s proceedings and deliberations.*

17. On January 29, 2003, the President of the Tribunal wrote a letter to the petitioners
acknowledging the petitioners’ stated concerns over the resolution of this dispute. Based on

5 Ms. Fratos-Peterson was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. However, Ms. Frutos-Peterson
subsequently became unavailable and Ms. Margrete Stevens was designated to serve as Secretary of the
Tribunal on August 29, 2002.

6 Petition of La Coordinadora para la Defensa del Agua y Vida, La Federacién Departamental Cochabambina
de Organizaciones Regantes, SEMAPA Sur, Friends of the Earth-Netherlands, Oscar Olivera, Omar
Fernandez, Father Luis Sanchez, and Congressman Jorge Alvarado, dated August 29, 2002, p. 19, 4 63.

7 Id, p. 6,417.

8 Id, p.2,42.

its consideration of the petitioners’ requests and the views of the parties to the dispute, the
President wrote on behalf of the Tribunal that:

[T]he Tribunal’s unanimous opinion [is] that your core requests are beyond the power or the
authority of the Tribunal to grant. The interplay of the two treaties involved (the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes and the 1992 Bilateral Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and Bolivia) and the consensual nature of arbitration places the control of the
issues you raise with the parties, not the Tribunal. In particular, it is manifestly clear to the
Tribunal that it does not, absent the agreement of the Parties, have the power to join a non-
party to the proceedings; to provide access to hearings to non parties and, a fortiori, to the
public generally; or to make the documents of the proceedings public.

‘The Tribunal’s letter goes on to observe that “the consent required of the Parties to grant
the requests is not present,” and that “[ajlthough the Tribunal did not receive any indication
that such consent may be forthcoming, the Tribunal remains open to any initiative from the
parties in this regard.”

18. Finally, the Tribunal wrote that it “is of the view that there is not at present a need to
call witnesses or seek supplementary non-party submissions at the jurisdictional phase of its
work.” It also emphasized that as far as future stages of proceedings, the Tribunal holds
“this view without in any way prejudging the question of the extent of the Tribunal’s
authority to call witnesses or receive information from non-parties on its own initiative.”

First Session

19. The First Session of this Tribunal was held in Washington, D.C., on December 9,
2002."

20. At the First Session, Bolivia reiterated its earlier objections and indicated that it
would request the Tribunal to order the production of evidence by AdT in order for Bolivia
to develop and support its objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

21. ‘The Parties agreed, and the Tribunal concurred, that the question of the jurisdiction
of this Tribunal would be decided as a preliminary matter.

22. ‘The Tribunal indicated that although Bolivia had raised jurisdictional objections to
the registration of the claim at the time of the claim’s submission to the Centre, the rules and
practice of the Centre called for the subsequent filing of “Objections to Jurisdiction” by
Bolivia to put both AdT and the Tribunal on notice of Bolivia’s objections. With this
observation in mind and given Bolivia’s stated intent to file a request for production of

 

° "The Tribunal notes that the Petition and the letter of the Tribunal responding to it are not a formal part of
the record of this proceeding. The Tribunal observes that the Petition has been electronically published by the
peti at herp://ww justice.org/news/d boliviapetition.pdf. Given the unusual character
of the letter of the Tribunal, it is reprinted as Appendix III to this Decision.

The December 9% date for the First Session was agreed upon following notice from the parties on August
29, 2002, of their agreement to postpone the otiginally scheduled date of September 9, 2002. The agenda for
the First Session was based in part on a “Joint Submission to the Tribunal Regarding Preliminary Procedural
Matters,” filed by the parties on November 15, 2002.

evidence by AdT, the Tribunal made the following procedural decisions and memorialized
these decisions in the minutes and transcript of the First Session. Specifically, the Tribunal
ordered Bolivia to file its “Objections to Jurisdiction” and any request for the production of
evidence by January 17, 2003; AdT was ordered to file its response to the request for
production of evidence within two weeks of Bolivia’s filing or by January 31, 2003,
whichever was earlier; Bolivia was ordered to file any reply to AdT’s response within one
week of that reply or by February 7, 2003, whichever was earlier; and AdT was ordered to
file any rejoinder to Bolivia’s reply within one week of that reply or by February 14, 2003,
whichever was earlier.

Procedural Order No. 1

23. In accordance with the Tribunal’s orders, Bolivia timely filed a document entitled
“Republic of Bolivia’s Objection to Jurisdiction and Requests for the Production of
Evidence and for Clarification of Procedures.” AdT timely filed its “Response to Bolivia’s
Objection to Jurisdiction and Requests for the Production of Evidence and for Clarification
of Procedures.” Bolivia filed its “Reply” to AdT’s Response on February 5, 2003; and AdT
filed its “Rejoinder” to Bolivia’s Reply on February 13, 2003.

 

24. On April 8, 2003, the Tribunal issued “Procedural Order No. 1” on Bolivia’s
requests for the production of evidence and Bolivia’s motion for the immediate dismissal of
the claims against it.

25. A\s to the request for production of evidence, the Tribunal determined that Article
43 of the Convention and Arbitration Rule 34(2) granted the Tribunal a substantial measure
of discretion regarding the production of documentary evidence or witnesses from the
parties although such discretion was guided by several considerations:

13. The Tribunal interprets Article 43 as granting the Tribunal a substantial measure
of discretion in the ordering of the parties to produce documentary evidence or witnesses. See
CuristorH H. SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY 647 (Cambridge
Univ. Press, 2001) (stating that the “tribunal has complete discretion in . . . exercising the
power to summon further evidence”). The Tribunal finds that its exercise of this discretion is
not without limits, however, and that Article 43 provides some guidance as to the exercise of
its discretion. In general, the Tribunal’s discretion to order the production of evidence is
informed by concepts of materiality, relevance and specificity present in the laws of evidence
generally and by the customs of evidentiary production in international arbitration generally.
Mote particularly, Article 43 provides that the Tribunal may order the production of evidence
at any stage of the proceedings when in the Tribunal’s judgment such an order is “necessary.”

 

14. ‘As a consequence, the Tribunal bears in mind a number of considerations in
evaluating whether or not to order the production of evidence. These considerations include:
the necessity of the requests made to the point the requesting party wishes to support, the
relevance and likely merit of the point the requesting party seeks to support, the cost and
burden of the request on the Claimant and the question of how the request may be specified
so as to both fulfill legitimate requests by a party while not allowing inquires that are an abuse
of process.

15. At the close of the First Session, the Tribunal encouraged the Respondent in
making its request for documents to provide “specificity in [its] identification of documents.”
Transcript of First Session at p. 58. The Tribunal notes that the requests for documents by

the Respondent in the main do not specifically identify documents but are instead general.
The Tribunal acknowledges that it would be difficult for the Respondent to be more specific
given the broad factual context that it asserts must be examined in order to develop its
second objection to jurisdiction. The Tribunal also notes that it is within its power under
Article 43 of the ICSID Convention to employ its discretion to tailor and narrow
Respondent's general requests, taking into account the considerations outlined in paragraph
14,

26. After considering AdT’s asserted basis for, and Bolivia’s objections to, jurisdiction,
the Tribunal determined that neither party’s arguments as to the necessity of the various
requests for the production of evidence were sufficiently developed or clear so that the
‘Tribunal could grant or deny these requests. The Tribunal wrote:

 

30. It is the view of the Tribunal that neither party’s arguments as to the necessity
of the various requests for production of evidence are sufficiently developed or clear that the
Tribunal may order or deny such production at this time. The argument advanced by
Respondent to support its requests for the production of documents requires the Tribunal to
undertake consideration of the merits of Respondent's second jurisdictional objection
without the benefit of full briefing by the parties or the opportunity of the Tribunal to put
questions to the parties during a hearing. A review of Respondent’s second jurisdictional
objection is required (1) to decide the likely merit of that objection even if the objection were
factually supported, and therefore the necessity of ordering of documents in support of the
development of that objection, and (2) to ascertain the exact scope of that objection so that
appropriate limits might be placed on the requests for documents made by Respondent.
Without such an estimation of the likely legal merit of Respondent’s objection and without
criteria for the narrowing of Respondent's requests for production of evidence, the Tribunal
is faced with a factually intense, and consequently expensive and lengthy, factual inquiry that
ultimately may not be necessary to the resolution of this case. Therefore, although the
Tribunal concludes that it is within its power to undertake such an incidental preliminary
review of the merits of the second jurisdictional objection in order to decide upon a request
for production of evidence, the Tribunal concludes in its discretion that such a decision by
the Tribunal at this point would be premature and that the Tribunal’s capacity to decide upon
this important request would be enhanced greatly by both briefing and oral argument before
the Tribunal.

 

27. Bolivia, along with its request for production of evidence, filed a motion to dismiss
premised on the basis that AdT had “tested its case” on jurisdiction. The Tribunal found
that AdT had not in any previous submission to ICSID waived its right to present its
jurisdictional arguments, but had instead, at various points, offered to expand and elaborate
its case. As a result, Bolivia’s motion for an immediate dismissal was denied.

28. ‘The Tribunal created a schedule for submissions from the parties on the subject of
Bolivia’s two main objections to jurisdiction. The written submissions pertaining to the
“Objections to Jurisdiction” ordered by the Tribunal in Order No. 1 were subsequently filed
in timely fashion: Claimant filed its “Memorial on Jurisdiction” on June 4, 2003; Respondent
filed its “Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction” on August 4, 2003; Claimant filed its “Reply”
on September 4, 2003; and Respondent filed its “Rejoinder” on October 6, 2003.

 

 

 

6

The Postponement of the Hearing on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction

29. In Procedural Order No. 1, the Tribunal requested the ICSID Secretariat to work
with the Tribunal and the Parties to decide a mutually convenient time and place for a three-
day hearing on Bolivia’s “Objections to Jurisdiction” in either November or December 2003.
An agreement was reached and a hearing was scheduled in Washington, D.C., for November
17-19, 2003.

30. In a letter dated October 22, 2003, Respondent noted that “certain events in Bolivia
ovet the past several weeks have required the priority attention of the Bolivian
Government,” and requested that the “hearing scheduled for 17, 18, and 19 November be
postponed.”"' Bolivia argued that these events had diverted the focus and attention of the
Bolivian government and would continue to do so for some time. AdT in a letter dated
October 23, 2003, objected to any postponement stating that: Bolivia’s request was
“unnecessary and unreasonable”, Bolivia’s counsel would have had standing instructions to
proceed, there would be no material changes to previously submitted arguments, and the
events in Bolivia would have no impact on Bolivia’s presentation of its legal case on
jurisdiction.’*

31. On November 5, 2003, the Tribunal issued “Procedural Order No. 2” (“Order No.
2”) on Bolivia’s motion for postponement of the hearings scheduled to begin on November
17, 2003. The Tribunal took notice of the severity and seriousness of the disruptions in La
Paz and in other parts of Bolivia during September and October 2003. The Tribunal noted
that, as a general matter, a request for postponement of a hearing by only one of the parties
is not to be granted without sufficient cause especially where a request for postponement is
made on short notice. Hearings are scheduled months in advance with attention paid to the
schedules of the parties, their counsel, and the Members of the Tribunal. The Tribunal noted
that the requirement of “sufficient cause” is particularly strict when a request for
postponement is made shortly before the scheduled date.

32. In issuing Order No. 2, the Tribunal emphasized that Counsel for Bolivia did not
assert that the seriousness of the events in September and October 2003 directly necessitated
the postponement of the hearing. Rather, the possibility that Bolivia’s counsel did not have
adequate opportunity for final consultations with necessary Bolivian officials constituted
sufficient cause to postpone the hearing.

33. The Tribunal, invoking its general authority over arbitral procedure, in cases where
the Arbitration Rules do not provide specific direction and the parties are not in agreement,
decided that the severity of events in Bolivia and the closeness in time of those events to the
scheduled hearing might prevent Counsel for Bolivia from consulting with the responsible
Bolivian officials whose attention would be justifiably diverted by domestic matters.

34. The Tribunal disagreed with AdT’s argument that there would be no prejudice in
denying Bolivia’s motion since the jurisdictional issues to be addressed at the hearing were
primarily legal issues. Although the scope of the hearing was to be limited to already

4 Letter of Dana Contratto, counsel to Bolivia, October 22, 2003, to ICSID.
2 Letter of Matthew Weiniger, counsel to AdT, October 23, 2003, to ICSID.

submitted written arguments, it was not unusual, in the Tribunal’s view, in arbitration for
subtle aspects of a party’s oral presentation and emphasis of its arguments to be altered in
final consultations between a party and its counsel. Moreover, the Tribunal cautioned that
the attorney-client relationship could be adversely affected if counsel was compelled to
present an oral argument without having the opportunity for final consultation.

35. ‘The Tribunal emphasized that its “conclusion that a lack of opportunity for counsel
to consult with its client could be prejudicial does not, however, necessarily indicate that a
postponement is justified.” The Tribunal wrote:

13. * * *, The inability of counsel to consult with its client is not in and of itself sufficient
cause to postpone a hearing because that circumstance ordinarily is within the control of the
party. Both states and private parties encounter demands to which they may prefer to give a
priority over the demand of counsel to confer on a matter subject to arbitration. The
inability of counsel to consult with its client therefore can be a sufficient cause to postpone a
hearing only in extraordinary circumstances.

 

In reviewing the particular facts of this case, the Tribunal found the circumstances cited by
Counsel for Respondent to be extraordinary. The Tribunal wrote that

14, * * *, [Ij is not unreasonable that the severity of events in Bolivia over these recent
weeks required the focus of the Government of Bolivia and diverted such focus from the
present arbitration, The combination of this diverted focus and the closeness of the events
in Bolivia to the scheduled Hearing may effectively prevent Counsel for Bolivia from
consulting with the relevant Bolivian officials, Simultaneously, the Tribunal also observes
that its recognition of Bolivia’s special duty to public order will diminish quickly as the
events of the past several weeks recede into the past.

36. ‘The Tribunal thus concluded that the severity and extraordinary nature of the events
in Bolivia constituted sufficient cause to postpone the hearing.

37. In making this determination, the Tribunal noted that up to that point, each party
had fully met all the requests of the Tribunal including those for written submissions. The
‘Tribunal noted that requests for extensions and postponements may be employed as dilatory
tactics. Noting that these types of tactics could threaten the integrity of the entire arbitral
process, the Tribunal acknowledged its duty to guard against them. However, there was no
indication whatsoever that Bolivia’s request for postponement was an example of such a
dilatory tactic.

 

 

38. Order No. 2 recommended that the hearing on Bolivia’s Objections to Jurisdiction
be scheduled for January 12-14, 2004 subject to consultation by the Secretariat with the
Parties. Subsequently, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 13(2), the Tribunal Secretary
conferred with each party, and, noting various scheduling conflicts, February 9, 10, and 11,
2004, were set as the dates for the hearing.

Motions as to the Presentation of Witnesses at the Hearing

39. The Tribunal, in Order No. 2, advised each Party to notify each other and the
‘Tribunal by December 15, 2003, if they wished to present witnesses at the February 9-11
hearing.

40. On December 15, 2003, Bolivia filed its Response to Order No. 2 and indicated that
it intended to present two expert witnesses at the hearing - Professor Rudolf Dolzer and
Professor Merritt B. Fox. Bolivia also requested that all witnesses relied upon by AdT be
made available for cross-examination. AdT also filed a response on December 15, 2003,
indicating that it did not intend to present at the hearing any expert witnesses and objecting
to Bolivia’s request that all witnesses be made available for examination since cross-
examination is expensive and unnecessary for expert witnesses offered to explain a point of
law rather than a matter of fact.

41. On December 31, 2003, the Tribunal issued “Procedural Order No. 3” (“Order No.
3”). The Tribunal observed that it is, in its view, customary in international arbitration that
such witnesses, whether they are experts in law or witnesses of fact, be made available for
examination if so requested. The Tribunal also noted that, if need be, it may be acceptable to
examine witnesses via videoconference or other such means. However, the Tribunal found it
presumptively preferable that witnesses appear in person. The Tribunal thus granted
Bolivia’s motion that witnesses relied upon be made available for examination at the hearing.

42. Order No. 3 also set forth the order of presentations for the hearing and the
maximum allowable time for each respective presentation. Order No. 3 provided that,
absent agreement of the parties to the contrary, a witness with evidence to be offered on a
particular issue should be presented and cross-examined during that party’s “first round
presentation.” Any time taken by direct examination or cross-examination of a witness
would be counted against the overall time allotted to the examining Party. The Tribunal
advised each Party that they could each decide to devote the time allocated to their oral
proceedings to the presentation of a witness whose statement was already a part of the
written record. If a witness was presented, the other Party could decide whether to examine
the witness noting that such cross-examination would count against their own time.

The Hearing on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction € Post Hearing Correspondence from the
Parties

43. The Hearing on Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction was held in Washington,
D.C., on February 9, 10 and 11, 2004.

44, ‘The Tribunal notes that the Parties jointly requested on a monthly basis from March
2004 through June 2004 that the Tribunal not render a decision.

The Tribunal’s Post Hearing Inquiry to the Netherlands, the Non-Disputing State Party to the BIT

45. At various stages of these proceedings the parties presented evidence and made
arguments addressing several public statements made by the Government of the
Netherlands regarding various provisions of its BIT with Bolivia.’

6. siven that i Government o! ie Netherlands is not a party to, or otherwise
46 Cc that the C it of the Netherland: t ty to, th
present in this arbitration, the presentation of its statements was left to the Parties.

47. The Tribunal concluded that specific information from the Government of the
Netherlands would assist the work of the Tribunal. Acting under Rule 34 of the Arbitration
Rules, the Tribunal on October 1, 2004, wrote to Johannes G. Lammers, Legal Advisor to
the Foreign Ministry of the Netherlands, posing specific questions.

48. ‘The Tribunal advised the Parties of this inquiry in a letter dated October 4, 2004, to
which the Tribunal’s letter of October 1“ was attached. The October 4" letter advised the
Parties that they would be provided, as appropriate, an opportunity to comment on any reply
from Mr. Lammers.

49. On December 14, 2004, the Tribunal received a reply letter from Mr. Lammers dated
October 29, 2004, to which there was attached a document entitled “Interpretation of the
Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments between the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Bolivia, signed on 19 March 1992 and
entered into force on first November 1994.” This letter and its attachment were transmitted
via “Procedural Order No. 4” (“Order No. 4”) to the Parties with the request that they
provide by January 5, 2005, any comments they might have on those aspects of Mr.
Lammers’ letter which were responsive to the Tribunal’s limited inquiry. Both Parties
submitted timely comments.

Factual Background

50. The following section summarizes the factual background regarding the parties and
transactions that led to this proceeding. The particular factual circumstances summarized are
those that surface as aspects of the arguments Bolivia advances in its jurisdictional
objections.

Aguas del Tunari, S.A.

51. AdT, the Claimant in these proceedings, is a legal person constituted in accordance
with the laws of Bolivia."

8 See infra at 44 259-260.

44 AdT has submitted to the Tribunal (1) The Act constituting AdT (Escritura Publica de Constitucién de una
Sociedad) dated August 23, 1999, (Ex. 1 to the Request for Arbitration), (2) The Modification of the statutes of
AdT (Modificacion de Estatutos) dated September 2, 1999, (Ex. 2 to the Request for Arbitration), and (3)
Registration of AdT at the Commercial Registry (Matricula de Inscripcién) (Ex. 3 to the Request for
Arbitration), Bolivia does not question that AdTT is a Bolivian legal entity.

10

The Conclusion of the Water and Sewage Concession for Cochabamba in September of 1999

52. In 1998, Bolivia opened an international tender process to privatize water and
sewage services as well as an electricity generation license for its third largest city,
Cochabamba. By April 1999, only one bid was made by a consortium called “Aguas del
Tunari”’ and led by International Water Ltd.'° That one bid did not comply with the
requirements of the tender process and that process ended without success. The consortium
approached Bolivia to open negotiations concerning the concession’ and by April 19, 1999,
a negotiation committee was formed by decree.'* By Supreme Decree dated June 11, 1999,

the Bolivian Water and Electricity Superintendencies were given authority to negotiate the
19

3915

water concession and an electric generation license.

53. On September 2, 1999, AdT, the locally incorporated vehicle for the consortium’s
foreign investment, was formally registered as a Bolivian company, thereby completing a
formation process begun in July 1999.”

54. On September 2, 1999, the Bolivian government approved the text of the
Concession clearing the way for its conclusion.” And on September 3, 1999, the Concession
was concluded and signed by Mr. Luis Guillermo Uzin Fernandez, Superintendent of Water,
and Mr. Geoffrey Richard Thorpe of AdT, and formally ratified by an Administrative
Resolution.” AdT notes that several related contracts were also concluded at approximately
the same time.”

55. The Concession took effect on November 1, 1999.4

56. ‘The public’s response to the Concession is described below.”

'5 Request for Arbitration, November 12, 2001, 44 8-9.

' Resp. Counter Mem., p. 8, 415.

"Id, 16.

'S Supreme Decree No. 25351, April 19, 1999,(Ex. 17 to the Request for Arbitration).

' Supreme Decree No. 25413, June 11, 1999,(Ex. 18 to the Request for Arbitration).

20 Registration of AdT at the Commercial Registry (Matricula de Inscripcién) (Ex. 3 to the Request for
Arbitration).

2! Resp. Counter Mem., p. 15, §]27.

2 Concession Contract between the Superintendence of Water and the Consortium, Aguas del Tunari, (Ex. 20
to Request for Arbitration); Administrative Resolution SA No. 24/99, (Ex. 21 to Request for Arbitration).

2 Request for Arbitration, p. 6, note 15. Claimant lists the other contracts as: The “SEMAPA Property System
Contract” entered between AdT and the Municipal Potable Water and Sewer Service of Cochabamba
(SEMAPA) (the commercial leasing and transfer of SEMAPA’s property to Ad), the “Misicuni Property
System Contract” entered between AdT and the Misicuni Company (the commercial leasing of the main tunnel
of the Multipurpose Misicuni Project), and the “Contract for Transfer of Facilities for the Titiri Pumping
Station” entered between AdT and the Misicuni Company (the sale of the Titiri Pumping Station to AdT).
Also, there are two contracts for licenses as granted by “Joint Resolution” by the Superintendencies of Water
and Electricity: “License to Generate Electricity and the Concession for Use of Water from the Misicuni,
Visacha, and Putucuni Rivers and from their tributaries,” and “License Contract for Generation of Electricity
with the Superintendencies of Water and Electricity.”

24 Administrative Resolution SA No. 39/99 (Ex. 24 to Request for Arbitration)

2 See IG] 62 to 70.

 

The Terms of the Concession

57. ‘The Concession provided for a 40-year relationship between AdT and the Bolivian
Water and Electricity Superintendencies. AdT agreed to provide a regular volume of
drinkable water of a certain quality for the city of Cochabamba in exchange for a negotiated
return on its investment. The Concession contemplated the possibility of AdT expanding
operations to meet the needs of a larger population.” The contracts related to the
Concession and referred to in paragraph 56, among other things, involved AdT in water
projects with electricity generation components.

58. The Concession provided for dispute settlement in its Article 41 entitled,
“Resolution of Controversies.” In relevant part, Concession Article 41 provides:

Article 41.2 [Ad] recognizes the jurisdiction and competence of the authorities that make
up the System of Sectoral Regulation (SIRESE) and of the courts of the Republic of Bolivia,
in accordance with the SIRESE law and other applicable Bolivian laws.

Article 41.3 ‘The provisions of the present Contract are not to be interpreted as a
renunciation on the part of the Shareholders, the Founding Shareholders, including the
Ultimate Shareholders, of methods of dispute resolution established in International ‘Treaties
recognized by the Republic of Bolivia

Article 41.4 [...]

Article 41.5 The Parties [the Superintendency of Water and AdT| recognize that the
Shareholders and Ultimate Shareholders including the Founding Shareholders are free to
have recourse to those methods of dispute resolution which are legally available to them in
accordance with Bolivian Law (such as, for example, arbitration under the rules of the ICC,
ICSID or UNCITRAL or other similar international organizations). The Parties agree to
cooperate in the above-mentioned process, to the extent permitted by Law2”

‘This article is a basis for part of Bolivia’s objections to jurisdiction.

59. ‘The Concession also has several provisions addressing the ownership structure of
AdT. Article 37.1 reads in relevant part:

[E]very Founding Stockholder has to keep more than 50% of the original equity percentage in voting
shares of the Concessionaire at least over the first seven (7) years of the Concessions.”

The Upstream Ownership of AdT in September 1999

60. At the time the Concession was concluded in September 1999, the ‘upstream’

ownership of AdT was as follows:

1. Twenty percent of the shares in AdT were divided between four Bolivian
companies;”

26 Concession at Annex 6.
2 Concession (Ex. 20 to Request for Arbitration). The passages of the Concession relevant to this Decision are

reproduced in the original Spanish at Appendix II.
28

2. Riverstar International, S.A. of Uruguay owned twenty five percent of the shares;
30
and

w

. The remaining fifty five percent of the shares were owned by International Water
(Tunari) Ltd (“IW Ltd”) of the Cayman Islands. The shares of IW Ltd were 100
percent owned by Bechtel Enterprise Holding, Inc., a company organized under
the laws of the United States of America.

61. This upstream ownership structure is depicted by the following chart:

 

 

Figure 1
AdT’s ownership structure in
September, 1999.
Republic of Bolivia's Reply to Claimant's
Re ise.

lesponse.
Febnuary 5, 2003, p. 8, paragraph 34

 

 

 

   

 

International

Water (Aguas
al Tunari) Lid.
(Cayman
lslands)

il E

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Events in the Fall of 1999 Following the Award of the Concession

62. ‘Two lines of events in the Fall of 1999 are relevant to this proceeding. First, there is
the reaction of the public to the awarding of the Concession and the responses of both
Bolivia and AdT to that reaction. Second, there is planning for, and the eventual effectuation
of, a corporate reorganization of the upstream ownership of AdT. The Parties disagree about
the details or significance of each of these lines of events and whether there is a connection
between the two.

  

As to the first line of events, it appears from the record before the Tribunal that
citizen groups were aware generally of the negotiation of a concession but sought more
specific information concerning that process. Thus on September 3, 1999 (the day the
Concession was concluded), a news article reported that the Defense of Water Committee

 

 

2 Those companies are comprised of Constructora Petricevic, S.A.; Compafifa Boliviana de Ingenieria, S.R.Ls
ICE Agua y Energia, S.A. and, Sociedad Boliviana de Cemento, S.A., each at 5 percent.
% Riverstar is 100 percent owned by Abengoa of Spain.

 

13

criticized the negotiations as lacking transparency and requested that the Bolivian
government publicize the true rates that would govern before it concluded the Concession.”

64. Respondent writes: “In fairness, no one negotiating the Concession agreement could
have anticipated the intensely hostile reaction that greeted AdT immediately upon the
Agreement’s signing.” On September 14, 1999, a news article reported the statements of
the government and the concerns of citizen groups as to what the new rates would be. The
government indicated they would take effect on December 1, 1999.” In October, an article
discussed both company, governmental and private views on how the Concession would
possibly affect private water wells in the Concession area, noting citizen concerns.”

65. The record before the Tribunal suggests that the level of criticism of the Concession
by citizen groups became greater after the Concession came into effect in November 1999.
In an article dated November 17, 1999, the rate increases and their Possible impacts are
discussed. The article notes calls for the annulment of the Concession.”

66. Respondent writes that “representatives of the Waters Superintendency held
meetings and discussions with Cochabamba community groups in an attempt to clarify the
scope of Ad‘I’s authority within the concession area.” On November 28, 1999, AdT
attempted to respond to public criticism by publishing an “Open Letter” in several Bolivian
newspapers, including the Cochabamba press, seeking to provide clearly its view on seven
points.” A news article dated November 29, 1999 describes how various labor organizations
from Cochabamba were expected to present claims of unconstitutionality against the Potable
Water and Sewage Service Law and to demand rescission of the Concession.” As the new
rates took effect on December 1, 1999, a news story emphasized how politicians, unionists,
and neighborhood leaders of Cochabamba raised their voices against the rate increases.” A
further newspaper story dated December 5, 1999 reported that the Superintendent of Waters
had indicated that the new rates would remain in force unless a new Administrative
Resolution was adopted.”

   

67. As to the second line of events, on November 9, 1999, Bechtel announced that it
had reached an agreement with Edison, S.p.A. of Italy whereby Edison and Bechtel would
join their respective water management projects, including IW Ltd, together in a single joint
venture. As a consequence, Edison would assume a 50 percent interest in IW Ltd.

 

68. On November 24, 1999, Bechtel wrote to Waters and Electricity Superintendencies
informing them of proposed changes in AdT’s ownership as a consequence of Edison’s

3! Resp. Counter Mem, Ex. 5.
% Resp. Counter Mem., p. 16, {| 30.
3 Resp. Counter Mem., Ex. 7.
Resp. Counter Mem., Ex. 8.
55 Resp. Counter Mem,, Ex. 10.

56 Resp. Counter Mem., p. 18, | 35.
57 Resp. Counter Mem,, Ex. 28.

5 Resp. C
3 Resp. C .
# Resp. Counter Mem., Ex. 18.

 

 

involyement."' In that letter, Bechtel wrote that “[f]rom our review of the contracts in
connection with the Project, in order to complete the Transaction, your acceptance of the
transfer of the Shares appears to be necessary.” On December 3, 1999, local Bolivian
counsel for Bechtel wrote to the Waters Superintendency stating that “given that such
change has to do with tax requirements outside of Bolivia,” it was his opinion that the
transfer would leave AdT “under the same control,” have “no adverse impact” for Bolivia,
and that he saw “no reason why approval should not be granted.” The Waters
Superintendency gave its approval to the proposed transfer of IW Ltd’s shares in AdT to a
Dutch company on December 3, 1999, although Bolivia disputes the content and legal effect
of that act.”

69. Claimant states that it discontinued its effort to transfer the shares from IW Ltd, a
Cayman Islands corporation, to a new Dutch corporation as described in the previous
paragraph. Claimant states it instead decided to migrate the company from the Cayman
Islands to Luxembourg. Respondent disagrees with the distinction made between transfer
and migration. (The Tribunal addresses this difference between the Parties as the fourth
aspect of the First Objection beginning at paragraph 156.)

70. In anticipation of the corporate reorganization anticipated as a part of the joint
venture with Edison, Baywater Holdings, B.V., (“Baywater”) was incorporated under Dutch
law on November 25, 1999. On December 8, 1999, International Water Holdings B.V.
(“IWH B.V.”) and International Water (Tunari) B.V. (“IWT B.V.”) were incorporated under
Dutch law by Baywater and IWH B.V., respectively. On December 21, 1999, IW Ltd of the
Cayman Islands “migrated” to Luxembourg where it became known as International Water
(Tunari) S.ar.l. (W S.a.r1.”). Finally, on December 22, 1999, IWT B.V. became the 100
percent shareholder of IW S.a.r.l.

 

4 Resp. Counter Mem.,
# Resp. Counter Mem., Ex. 2.
+ Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 26 and 43. Respondent states that “Based on Mr, Guevara’s representations, the
Water Superintendent gave his approval for Bechtel to proceed with the transfer of ownership shares.” See
Resp. Counter Mem. pp. 25-26, {| 47-48. Respondent also states the Water Superintendency did not possess
the authority to approve the proposed transfer of shares. Id. , p. 26, 4] 48.

 

15

The December 1999 Ownership Structure of AdT

71. AdT claims the resulting structure after the December 1999 reorganization was as
depicted in the following chart:

 

 

 

Figure 2
AdT’s ownership structure after December 22,
1999.

Request for Arbiteation, Exhibic 15, November 12, 2001

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

100%
Constructors ina | | 1CEAgusy Eneria, | [ Sociedad Botvana International Riverstar
Pericene SA | | deingeniera, SRL SA e Cement, SA. Wiatee (Turan) Internationa S.A.
(Beta oe) (Catiah oo) SARL (uguay)
{Luxemeeur)
%
72. Although Respondent does not question this chart, it also is not clear that

Respondent accepts the accuracy of this chart. For the purposes of the jurisdictional
objections raised at this stage of the proceedings, the Parties agree that these changes meant
that as of December 1999 AdT was no longer held by a Cayman Islands corporation. Finally,
although the Parties also appear to accept that 55 percent of AdT’s upstream ownership
passed through Dutch companies after December 22, 1999, Bolivia disputes the substance
of these Dutch entities, describing them as mere shells.

The Challenges to the Concession and Its Termination

73. The Parties agree that there was significant opposition to the Concession after
January 1, 2000 in various parts of Bolivia, and particularly in Cochabamba. The Parties
disagree as to the reasons for this opposition. The Parties also disagree as to whether either
party violated its obligations under the Concession in responding to opposition groups. The
Parties agree that the opposition movement grew in intensity in the early months of 2000
after AdT began operations in January 2000 and that the Concession was terminated in early
April 2000 after major violent protests.

16

The Issues Presented
General Considerations Regarding Jurisdiction

74. This Tribunal is constituted under the ICSID Convention to which both Bolivia and
the Netherlands are State Parties.“ Jurisdiction in ICSID arbitration requires the consent of
both the Claimant and the Respondent. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

‘The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting
State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the patties have
given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally. (Emphasis added)

75. ‘The consent of the parties required in Article 25(1) can be expressed in a variety of
written instruments. Moreover, the offer to arbitrate may be contained in one type of written
instrument, the acceptance in another. It is for the Claimant to establish the bases of
jurisdiction of an ICSID Tribunal.

76. AdT bases the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the Agreement on Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Republic of Bolivia.” In such bilateral investment treaties, the two State parties provide their
consent to arbitration. This consent is contained in the form of an offer to arbitrate claims
of investors based in a contracting State who allege breaches of the treaty by agents of the
other contracting State.

77. Under Rule 41(1) of the Arbitration Rules, objections to jurisdiction “shall be made
as early as possible.” Bolivia raised a series of objections when AdT filed its Request for
Arbitration and continued to object in subsequent filings. Bolivia’s objections to jurisdiction
are timely.

78. The Tribunal notes that Arbitration Rule 41(2) provides that: “[t]he Tribunal may on
its own initiative consider, at any stage of the proceeding, whether the dispute or any
ancillary claim before it is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and within its own
competence.” The Tribunal views this authority as necessarily including the power to
consider ways in which an ambiguous or unclear objection may bear on jurisdiction and to
restate such objections, as appropriate, so as to allow a full examination of jurisdiction.

+ Bolivia signed the Convention on May 3, 1991; ratification took place on June 23, 1995; and the Convention
entered into force for Bolivia on July 23, 1995. The Netherlands signed the Convention on May 25, 1966;
ratification took place on Sep. 14, 1966; and the Convention entered into force for the Netherlands on October
14, 1966 (see http:/ /www.worldbank.org/icsid /constate/c-states-en.htm).

4 See supra note 1, the Treaty will hereinafter be referred to as the “BIT” or Netherlands-Bolivia BIT.”

4 See ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, Chapter 5, available at::
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/basicdoc/partF-chap05.htm#r4 1.

 

17

Claimant's Assertions as to the Basis of Jurisdiction

79. Claimant seeks arbitration before ICSID on the basis of the Netherlands-Bolivia
BIT.” Specifically, Article 9(6) of the BIT states:

If both Contracting Parties have acceded to the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States of 18 March 1965 [ICSID
Convention], any disputes that may arise from investment between one of the Contracting
Parties and a national of the other Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions
of that Convention, be submitted for conciliation or arbitration to the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes.

80. AdT asserts that it is a “national” of the Netherlands as defined by the BIT. Articles
1(b) (ii) and (iii) of the BIT define “nationals” as:

(without prejudice to the provisions of (iii) hereafter, legal persons constituted in
accordance with the law of that Contracting Party;

(iiijlegal persons controlled directly or indirectly, by nationals of that Contracting Party, but
constituted in accordance with the law of the other Contracting Party.

81. AdT identifies itself as a legal person constituted in accordance with the laws of
Bolivia which is “controlled directly or indirectly” by nationals of the Netherlands, that is,
IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. of the Netherlands.

82. AdT contends that given that both Bolivia and the Netherlands are parties to the
ICSID Convention and that AdT is a national of the Netherlands as defined by the BIT,
ICSID is an available forum for AdT in its investment dispute with Bolivia.

Respondent's Objections
83. Respondent presents two objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

84. Respondent’s First Objection is that Bolivia did not consent to the jurisdiction of
ICSID. Respondent’s First Objection has numerous aspects that are argued both separately
and in their totality. Even though Respondent’s First Objection is not presented clearly, the
‘Tribunal has gone to great effort to consider the various possible aspects of Respondent’s
First Objection. The Tribunal has identified six aspects to the First Objection:

1. First, that the circumstances surrounding the negotiation of the
Concession and the dispute settlement clause contained in the
Concession preclude ICSID jurisdiction,

2. Second, that Bolivia is not the proper party to be named in this
proceeding,

3. Third, that the BIT, through Article 2, refers the Tribunal to limits
existing in Bolivian law and regulations and those limits preclude ICSID
jurisdiction in this case,

# Request for Arbitration, p. 2, 43.
48 Request for Arbitration, pp. 3-4, 96.

4. Fourth, that the Concession fixed AdT’s ownership structure and that
AdT’s reorganization in December 1999 breached the Concession and
bars the jurisdiction of this Tribunal,

5. Fifth, certain representations as to the legal implications of a proposed
transfer of AdT’s ownership were breached and that these breaches
preclude ICSID jurisdiction, and

6. Sixth, Bolivia’s consent to the BIT did not encompass the situation
presented in this proceeding.

85. Respondent’s Second Objection is more specific. In this Objection, Respondent
argues that AdT is not a “national” of the Netherlands as defined by Articles 1(b)(ii) and (ii)
of the BIT in that AdT is not “controlled directly or indirectly” by nationals of the
Netherlands.

The Applicable Law

86. The applicable substantive law is to be found in the BIT between Bolivia and the
Netherlands, in particular Articles 1(b)(iii), 2 and 9(6). The BIT entered into force between
Bolivia and the Netherlands on November 1, 1994.

 

87. Inasmuch as Article 9(6) of the BIT involves consent to arbitration before ICSID,
jurisdiction under the BIT is limited by the jurisdictional provisions of the ICSID
Convention.

88. The applicable law for interpretation of the BIT is that to be found in customary
international law. The Netherlands, but not Bolivia, is a party to the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties (“Vienna Convention”). The parties, however, agree that the provisions
of the Vienna Convention relating to the interpretation of treaties reflect customary
international law. The Tribunal agrees with this view and applies the Vienna Convention on
this basis. »”

89. ‘The Tribunal notes that the BIT was done in three languages: Spanish, Dutch and
English. The Treaty in its closing clause states the three texts are equally authentic, but that
in case of a difference of interpretation, “the English text will prevail.” Therefore the
‘Tribunal should interpret all three texts with special reference to the English text in the case
of difference. Both Bolivia and AdT, apparently seeing little benefit in doing otherwise,
present their arguments as to the meaning of the BIT on the basis of the English text. The
Tribunal does likewise.

 

90. Article 31 of the Vienna Convention provides the “general rule of interpretation.”

“The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, adopted and opened for signature on 23 May 1969, entered into force
27 January 1980 (1155 United Nations Treaty Series 331) was signed by Bolivia on May 23, 1969 but has not
been yet ratified. The Vienna Convention was acceded to by the Netherlands on April 9, 1985. As to the status

 

http:/ /untreaty.un.org/ ENGLISH /bible partl /chapterXXIII/treatylasp#N8.
50 Seeveg, Cl Mem., pp. 51-53, {| 142-146; Resp. Counter Mem., p. 71, § 149; Resp. Rej., p.48, § 91.

19

Article 31, General rule of interpretation
1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be
given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.
2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to
the text, including its preamble and annexes:
(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties in
connexion with the conclusion of the treaty;
(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connexion with the
conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument related
to the treaty.
3. There shalll be taken into account, together with the context:
(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of
the treaty or the application of its provisions;
(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the
agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

 

 

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the
parties.
4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended.

91. Interpretation under Article 31 of the Vienna Convention is a process of progressive
encirclement where the interpreter starts under the general rule with (1) the ordinary
meaning of the terms of the treaty, (2) in their context and (3) in light of the treaty’s object
and purpose, and by cycling through this three step inquiry iteratively closes in upon the
proper interpretation. In approaching this task, it is critical to observe two things about the
general rule of interpretation found in the Vienna Convention. First, the Vienna Convention
does not privilege any one of these three aspects of the interpretation method. The meaning
of a word or phrase is not solely a matter of dictionaries and linguistics. As Schwarzenberger
observed, the word “meaning” itself has at least sixteen dictionary meanings.*! Rather, the
interpretation of a word or phrase involves a complex task of considering the ordinary
meaning of a word or phrase in the context in which that word or phrase is found and in
light of the object and purpose of the document. Second, the Vienna Convention represents
a move away from the canons of interpretation previously common in treaty interpretation
and which erroneously persist in various international decisions today. For example, the
Vienna Convention does not mention the canon that treaties are to be construed narrowly, a
canon that presumes States can not have intended to restrict their range of action.” Rather
than cataloging such canons (which at best may be said to reflect a general pattern), the Vienna
Convention directs the interpreter to focus upon the specific case which may, or may not, be
representative of such general pattern. To say a canon reflects a widespread practice does not
mean it reflects a universal one. The Vienna Convention’s directive to look to the ordinary
meaning of a word in its context and in light of the object and purpose of the treaty is
intended to (1) to find the intent of the parties in the specific instrument, (2) to respect the
possibility that the parties have used the instrument to address
innovative ways, and (3) to not forcibly conform the specific aims of a treaty to general

sues of mutual concern in

   

51 Georg Schwarzenberger, Myths and Realities of Treaty Interpretation: Articles 27-29 of the Vienna Draft Convention on
the Law of Treaties, 22 CURRENT LEGAL PROBLEMS 205, 219 (1969). Barak writes: “From the standpoint of
language, one meaning does not have preference over another. Any meaning which is possible in a semantic
sense is also permissible semantically. It would be a mistake to base a doctrine of legal interpretation on
dictates, as it were, of linguistics.” AHARON BARAK, JUDICIAL DISCRETION 341-342 (1987).

52 Both parties at various points in their submissions refer to canons of interpretation.

 

   

20

assumptions about the intent of states, assumptions which necessarily are based on
assessments of past practice.”

92. Article 32 of the Vienna Convention addresses “supplementary means of
interpretation.” That article provides:

Recourse may be had to y means of ion, including the y
work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning
resulting from the application of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the
interpretation according to article 31:

i, leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; o

ii, leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

‘The ILC Commentary on its earlier draft of this article notes that the “supplemental” role of
Article 32 serves to emphasize the centrality of Article 31: “that the text of the treaty must
be presumed to be the authentic expression of the intentions of the parties, and that the
elucidation of the meaning of the text rather than an investigation ab initio of the supposed
intentions of the parties constitutes the object of interpretation.”

  

93. ‘The Tribunal in applying the Vienna Convention, particularly as to the interpretation
of “controlled directly or indirectly,” therefore:

First, considers the meaning of a word of a text in accordance with Article 31 of the
‘Vienna Convention,

Second, confirms the resulting interpretation in accordance with Article 32 of the
Vienna Convention, and,

Third, applies that interpretation to the case at hand.

The First Objection

The First Aspect of Respondent’s First Objection which asserts that the Concession
Agreement precludes ICSID jurisdiction

Respondent's Objection

94. Respondent argues that the text and negotiating history of the Concession as well as
the laws of Bolivia all indicate that disputes concerning the Concession were to be resolved
in Bolivian courts in accordance with Bolivian laws.

5° Lauterpacht amidst the situation prevailing before the Vienna Convention observed: “The view which is
gaining increasing acceptance seems to be that some of the current rules of construction of treaties * * * instead
of aiding what has been regarded as the principal aim of interpretation, namely, the discovery of the intention
of the parties, they end up by impeding that purpose.” Hersch Lauterpacht, Restrictive Interpretation and the
Principle of Exffectiveness in the Interpretation of Treaties, 26 BRITISH YEARBOOK OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, 48, 52
49).

3 LL.C. Report on the Work of Its 8" Session, 1966 LL.
para. 18.

YEARBOOK (II) 223, Commentary to Article 28,

 

21

95. Respondent first argues that the text of the Concession requires that this dispute be
resolved in Bolivian courts in accordance with Bolivian laws.”

96. Respondent points generally to Concession Article 41 (entitled “Resolution of
Controversies”) and, in particular, argues that Article 41.2 constitutes an exclusive
jurisdiction clause selecting Bolivian courts that bars AdT from pursuing arbitration before
ICSID.” Article 41(2) provides:

[The Concessionaire] recognizes the jurisdiction and competence of the authorities that
make up the System of Sectoral Regulation (SIRESE) and of the courts of the Republic of
Bolivia, in accordance with the SIRESE. law and other applicable Bolivian laws.”

According to Bolivia, Article 41 contains “very carefully constructed dispute resolution
mechanics”* which should govern dispute resolution relating to the Concession. Bolivia
asserts that the Concession “explicitly limits’ AdT to the jurisdiction of the regulatory
authorities and courts of Bolivia” and by signing the Concession, AdT “committed” itself to
the “jurisdiction and competence of the regulatory authorities and courts of Bolivia.””

97. Respondent argues that its interpretation of Article 41.2 is supported by the
provisions of Article 41 taken as a whole. Bolivia notes the use of the term “Concessionaire”
in Article 41.2 and the term “shareholders” in Article 41.3 was intentional.” Bolivia also
notes that Articles 41.3 and 41.5 explicitly recognize that the shareholders of AdT may
invoke the jurisdiction of ICSID. In contrast, Article 41.2, addressing the resolution of
disputes by the Concessionaire, does not mention ICSID. Bolivia argues that the difference
between Articles 41.2 on the one hand, and Articles 41.3 and 41.5 on the other hand, implies
that AdT, as a “Concessionaire,” is precluded from invoking the jurisdiction of ICSID.

98. Second, the Respondent contends that the negotiating history of the Concession
supports this argument. Referencing the Bolivian Constitution, Bolivia argues that it was
made clear to all parties that “...it was inconceivable, and equally unacceptable, that this
company [the Concessionaire] could bring any dispute it had with the Bolivian government
outside of Bolivia, or be subject to any law other than the law of Bolivia, consistent with
Section 24 of the Bolivian Constitution.’ Respondent emphasizes that it would only have

55 Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 10-11, 18-19.

561d, p. 14, $f] 25-26.

57 "The original text is in Spanish and is reproduced in Appendix II.

58 Bolivia’s Obj. p. 3.

Id

& Id, In its oral submissions, Bolivia extends its interpretation of the Concession explaining that AdT, as the
concessionaire, is subject exclusively to the System of Sectoral Regulation [“SIRESE.”] and subject to the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Bolivia See infra at paragraphs 96 and 100. The SIRESE system is a
regulatory system complete with its own administrative adjudication process. Oral Statement of Bolivia’s
Counsel, Jose Antonio Criales, (February 11, 2004), pp. 574-577.

1 Bolivia’s Obj., p. 3. The relevant Spanish text is reproduced at Appendix II.

© Resp. Counter Mem., p. 11, §] 19, (emphasis in original). The English translation of Article 24 of the Bolivian
Constitution provides:

 

 

  

  

Foreign subjects and enterprises are subject to Bolivian laws, and in no case may they invoke
exceptional position or have recourse to diplomatic claims.

22

considered Bolivian corporations in awarding any concession concerning Cochabamba’s
water services.” Since AdT was a Bolivian Corporation operating within the laws and
regulations of Bolivia, AdT should not have expected to be within the ambit of any bilateral
investment treaty that gave it access to ICSID.

99. Respondent supports its position by citing an internal Bolivian negotiation report
dated June 8, 1999. Respondent points in particular to the report’s description of the efforts
of AdT’s consortium to incorporate a general referral to ICSID of disputes arising out of the
Concession.” Respondent notes that the June 1999 report records Bolivia’s view that
“arbitration is not permitted under the norms of the [SIRESE] regulatory system and the
laws covering the subject matter.”

100. Third, Respondent argues that its interpretation of the Concession as giving
exclusive jurisdiction to Bolivia is necessitated by Bolivian law. Respondent directs the
‘Tribunal’s attention to: (1) Article 136 of the Bolivian Constitution, which places Bolivia’s
natural resources (including water) within the “original dominion” of the State, and, (2) the
statutory SIRESE system which implements Article 136. Because AdT voluntarily complied
with the requirements of the SIRESE system in order to be considered for the Cochabamba
concession, Bolivia argues that AdT also agreed to be bound exclusively to the dispute
resolution process of the SIRESE system.”

6 Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 10-11, 4]19.
6 In particular, Respondent points to paragraph 27 of the “Report from the Negotiating Committee formed to
Negotiate with the Aguas del Tunari Consortium” (Ex. 38 to Resp. Rej.) as stating:

On May 31, 1999, AGUAS DEL TUNARI raised for consideration by the Negotiating
COMMISSION certain matters it wished to incorporate into the contracts in order to obtain
the financing required for the SEMAPA concession and the performance of the MISICUNI
project, which are summarized below... (a) Arbitration before international entities, such as
ICSID, for the resolution of any dispute over revisions of tariffs, payments for termination
of the contract, compliance with quality standards and similar matters... (unofficial
translation from the Spanish).

6 Oral Statement of Bolivia’s Counsel, Alexandre de Gramont, (February 9, 2004), pp. 137-41. “And the
[negotiating] committee reported its response to AdT specifically. After analyzing these proposals, the
Committee communicated to the consortium that arbitration is not permitted under the norms of the
[SIRESE] regulatory system and the laws covering the subject matter. And that position is reflected in the
Concession Agreement...”, p.138, Lines 6-12.

6 Article 136 of the Bolivian Constitution reads:

  

 

Within the regional original domain of the State, in addition to property to which the law
gives that character, are the soil and the subsoil with all their natural resources: lake, river
and thermal waters; and all physical elements and forces susceptible of utilization, Laws shall
establish the conditions of such ownership, and those for their concession and allotment to
private individuals.

‘The Spanish text may be found at Appendix II.
© Oral Statement of Bolivia’s Counsel, Jose Antonio Criales, (February 9, 2004), pp. 176-87.
«,..Concessionaires will be Bolivian entities subject only to SIRESE and the Supreme Court of Bolivia, while
foreign shareholders to such Concessionaires in some appropriate cases may pursue international arbitration
under BITs,” Id, p. 186, Lines 6-10.

 

23

101. Bolivia argues that the language of Article 41.2 of the Concession in relation to the
other sections of Article 41, the negotiating history of the Concession and the legal context
in which those negotiations took place — namely Articles 24 and 136 of the Bolivian
Constitution, all indicate that the Concession required that AdT be a Bolivian national
subject exclusively to Bolivian laws and tribunals “that would sof fall within the foreign
‘control’ terms of the Bolivian-Netherlands Bilateral Investment Treaty (or other BIT’ like
in

Claimant's Reply

102. AdT argues that this aspect of Respondent’s First Objection is misplaced. Claimant
emphasizes that the claims it raises in its Request for Arbitration are brought under the BIT
and not under the Concession.” Even assuming arguendo that Article 41.2 of the Concession
was an exclusive forum selection clause, it would not be relevant to the Tribunal’s
consideration of its jurisdiction under the BIT.”

103. In particular, Claimant argues that its action against Bolivia is an “entirely separate
cause of action” distinct from claims brought under the Concession.” As such, Claimant
states: “[a]n exclusive jurisdiction clause under a concession contract will thus have no effect
on any action brought under a bilateral investment treaty.”””

104. AdT’ refers the Tribunal to previous ICSID Awards that it argues support this
proposition.” First, Claimant cites to Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal
v. Argentine Republic (“Vivendi”)"* in support of its argument that, even where an explicit and
affirmative exclusive jurisdiction clause exists within a concession contract, such a clause
does not affect the jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal in respect to a claim made under a
BIT.” Second, Claimant likewise refers the Tribunal to Lanco International, Inc. v. The Argentine
Republic (“Lanco”).”° AdT analogizes its case to that of Lanco where the tribunal found that a
forum selection clause in the concession contract did not exclude the jurisdiction of ICSID
based upon a BIT between the United States and Argentina.” Relying on Lanco, AdT asserts
that its claim against Bolivia is based upon the “breach of the Respondent’s International
Law obligations under the terms of the BIT [and] not on breaches of the Concession
Contract.”

6 Resp. Counter Mem., p. 33, 63.

© Request for Arbitration, pp. 2-4, 3-7.
7 Cl. Mem., p. 29, 31-35 44 90, 94-101.
nu, p. 34,498,

3 i 31,494.
3 de Aguas del Aconqnija S.A. & Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, Award of November 21, 2000,
reprinted at 40 ILM 426 (2001) , 5 ICSID Rep. 299 (2002); Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, reprinted at 41
ILM 933 (2002), 5 ICSID Rep. 240 (2002).

*5 Cl. Mem., p. 31, 4] 94.

% Lanco International, Inc. v. The Argentine Republic, “Preliminary Decision: Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal”
dated December 8, 1998, reprinted at 40 ILM 457 (2001), 5 ICSID REP. 370 (2002).

7 Cl. Mem., p. 34, $99.

*8 Id, p. 35,4 101.

24

105. Respondent does not address the Claimant’s view of these two cases as they bear on
this aspect of Respondent’s objections.”

106. Claimant further argues that if the Tribunal were to consider the Concession
relevant, Bolivia’s characterization of Concession Article 41 is an attempt to “convert” a
clause that “recognizes the rights of the Respondent, on a non-exclusive basis, to regulate
water affairs in its territory into an exclusive jurisdiction clause.”*” AdT argues that the text
of Concession Article 41 should be read instead as a clause where the parties “...expressly
preserved any rights to resort to international arbitration legally available.”*"

107. AdT argues that the language of Concession Article 41 is not a waiver or limitation
of ICSID jurisdiction.” Rather than reading Concession Article 41.2 as an exclusive forum
selection clause, AdT argues that Article 41.2 serves only to recognize the regulatory rights
that Bolivia possessed over domestic water matters under the SIRESE regulation system.”

108. Claimant argues that the negotiations between AdT and the Government of Bolivia
resulted in an “arms-length” agreement over the terms of the Concession. AdT states that
its negotiation team was unaware from the June 1999 round of negotiations of Bolivia’s
alleged position that the “awardee of the Concession Agreement not be controlled by any
foreign entity whose BIT would allow the Bolivian company access to ICISD.”** Moreover,
AdT objects to the use of “subjective statements of original intent” saying they should have
“no part” in interpreting the Concession.”

The Decision of the Tribunal

109. This objection involves the legal interplay of forum selection clauses in contractual
relationships and the availability of arbitration under a bilateral investment treaty. The
‘Tribunal notes that several other tribunals have addressed these questions in the past few
years. The Tribunal, as discussed below, in general, agrees with the direction taken by
previous tribunals, although the reasoning employed here differs in several respects.

110. Claimant refers to the BIT between Bolivia and the Netherlands as the basis for
bringing this case before this Tribunal. Respondent objects to jurisdiction before this
‘Tribunal on the basis that the Concession places all disputes raised by AdT within the
exclusive jurisdiction of appropriate Bolivian courts and thereby precludes AdT from
invoking the jurisdiction of ICSID.

~ However, Bolivia responds to Vivendi and LANCO in terms of the question of majority shareholding and
control, calling AdT’s reliance on these cases as “misplaced.” Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 65-66, §| 137.

8 AdT’s Response, p. 4, 7.

8! Id, and Cl. Mem., p. 30, 92.

8 AdT’s Response, p. 4, ff] 7-8.

8 Id; Cl. Mem., p. 30,491.

5! Cl. Mem, p. 5, 14.

85 Cl. Reply, p. 10, | 26 quoting Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 34-35, 166.

86 Td, at § 27.

 

111. Two questions are presented. First, as a threshold matter, the Tribunal observes that
in order for the separate document raised by the Respondent to be in conflict with this
‘Tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction, that document must both deal with the same matters and
parties and contain mandatory conflicting obligations. Second, if a true conflict exists, there
then arises the question of what effect such a document has on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

112. As to the requirement that the separate document contain mandatory conflicting
obligations, the Tribunal concludes that Article 41.2 of the Concession does not place all
disputes concerning the Concession within the exclusive jurisdiction of Bolivian courts.
Article 41.2 provides:

 

[The C ionaire] izes the jurisdiction and competence of the authorities that
make up the System of Sectoral Regulation (SIRESE) and of the courts of the Republic of
Bolivia, in accordance with the SIRESE law and other applicable Bolivian laws.

‘This clause differs in wording and structure from other forum selection clauses encountered
by the members of the Tribunal and those present in other ICSID proceedings where the
issue of the effect of a contractual forum selection clause on ICSID jurisdiction has been
considered. For example, in Vivendi the forum selection clause at issue provided:

For purposes of interpretation and application of this Contract, the patties submit
themselves to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Contentious Administrative Tribunals of
Tucuman’”

‘Two phrasings discussed in the Vivendi clause are frequently seen and noteworthy for this
proceeding. First, the selection of a particular court is explicitly “exclusive.” Second, the
parties, in exclusively choosing a court, delineate explicitly the matters given to that court —
in this instance “interpretation and application of this Contract.” Article 41.2 of the
Concession in the current case lacks the explicitness of both of these aspects. This Tribunal
need not decide whether the Claimant is correct that Article 41.2 only serves to recognize
the regulatory rights that Bolivia possessed over domestic water matters under the SIRESE
regulation system. It is sufficient that the Tribunal concludes that Article 41.2 of the
Concession does not constitute an exclusive reference to the Bolivian legal system of all
disputes arising under, not to mention those related to, the Concession.

113. Similarly to this case, the Lanco tribunal appears to have viewed the relevant clause in
that case as not creating a mandatory conflicting obligation. The forum selection clause at
issue in Lanco provided:

For all purposes derived from the agreement and the BID CONDITIONS, the parties agree
to the jurisdiction of the Federal Contentious-Administrative Tribunals of the Federal
Capital of the ARGENTINE REPUBLIC.

‘The Lanco tribunal held that this clause was not a “previously agreed dispute settlement

provision” within the meaning of the applicable BIT inasmuch as “the contentious —
administrative jurisdiction cannot be selected or waived [...].””

® Vivendi Award of November 21, 2000, § 27.
88 Lanco Award, 4 6.

26

114. As to the requirement that the separate document deal with the same matters and
parties, the Tribunal finds that the jurisdiction of the Bolivian courts recognized under
Article 41.2 of the Concession, even if it were found to be exclusive, does not extend to the
same obligations or parties raised by the Claimant under the BIT. Claimant in the instant
proceeding does not raise a claim against the Water Superintendency, as a party to the
cession, but rather raises a claim against the Republic of Bolivia itself as party to the
BIT. Likewise, assuming that Article 41.2 was an exclusive forum selection clause for
disputes arising under the Concession, the Claimant in the instant case does not allege a
breach of an obligation under the Concession but rather alleges a breach of an obligation
isting under the BIT.”’ The circumstance that a claim under the Concession against the
Water Superintendency and a claim under the BIT against Bolivia could both point to the
same set of facts should not blur the legal distinction between the two types of claims. It is
often the case that one set of facts may give rise to disputes under different laws in different
fora. The Tribunal notes that its conclusion accords with the reasoning of the tribunal in
Compattia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, Award of
November 21, 2000,” and the subsequent decision of the Ad Hoc Committee appointed for
the Annulment Proceeding in the same matter which in denying annulment of this aspect of
the award indicated its agreement with the reasoning of the award.”

   

 

 

 

ex

 

115. As to the second question posed in paragraph 111 above, the Tribunal holds that the
question of whether a conflicting mandatory obligation in a separate document can affect the
jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal is a question of the intent of the Parties in concluding the
separate document. As an inquiry into the intent of the parties, the Tribunal observes that
this inquiry turns on the facts of the specific case. Nonetheless, the Tribunal finds it
particularly helpful in such an inquiry to distinguish between: (1) a separate document that
waives the right to invoke, or modifies the extent of, ICSID jurisdiction (where the intent of
the parties to alter the possibility of ICSID jurisdiction is direct); and, (2) a separate
document that contains an exclusive forum selection clause designating a forum other than
ICSID (where the intent of the parties to alter the possibility of ICSID jurisdiction must be
implied).

 

116. As to the former case of a separate document that waives the right to invoke, or
modifies the extent of ICSID jurisdiction, the Tribunal notes that Claimant at the Hearing in
this case stated as a general matter that “scholarly opinion is divided” on the issue of

 

 

% Id, J 26. As one commentator wrote recently “t]he most attractive and not least plausible explanation why
the reasoning turned on Article 26 is that the forum clause was being seen as non-exclusive and so did not
imply a waiver of the right to international arbitration in the first place.” Ole Spiermann, State Interests and the
Power to Waive ICSID Jurisdiction under Bilateral Investment Treaties, 20 ARBITRATION INTERNATIONAL 179, 191
(2004).

° An exclusive forum selection clause in a contact is generally regarded as severable from the contract of which
it is a part. And although it is usually the case that such a clause only refers to disputes arising under the
contract, it can be broader in scope. For example, some clauses refer not only to disputes “arising under” the
contract but also disputes “related to” the contract.

°l Vivendi, Award, 4 53.

2 Vivendi, Decision on Annulment Proceedings, | 73, 76, 80, and 95 to 97. “In accordance with this general
ptinciple (which is undoubtedly declaratory of general international law), whether there has been a breach of
the BIT and whether there has been a breach of a contract are different question.” Id., at 4 96.

27

whether such a waiver is possible,” and directed the Tribunal’s attention more specifically to
the Decision on Jurisdiction in Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic“ Azurix’).

117. The Agurix Award, however, does not address the question of whether an investor
may waive its right to arbitration before ICSID, but rather holds that jurisdictional clauses
contained within a set of Bidding Terms, a Concession Agreement, and Commitment Letters
did not constitute such a waiver.” The several clauses in question in Azurix were similar to
one another and are exemplified by clause 1.5.5. of the Bidding Terms and Conditions which
provided for the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts for contentious-administrative matters
of the city of La Plata “for all disputes that may arise out of the Bidding, waiving any other
forum, jurisdiction or immunity that may correspond.” The Azurix tribunal held that this
clause was not a waiver of a claimant’s right to arbitration before ICSID for two reasons.
First, the waiver clause was a part of a contract to which the respondent was not a party and,
consequently, claimant’s contractual obligation to waive access to certain other fora was not
made “in favor of Argentina.””” Second, the analysis of the waiver clause was held to be
analogous to that made with regard to forum selection clauses in that the waiver of other
fora was limited to claims under the contract just as the selection of an exclusive forum was
limited to claims under the contract.” The Axwrix tribunal therefore concluded that the
waiver clause did not present a conflicting mandatory obligation. Both of the conclusions of
the Agwrix tribunal turned upon the particular facts of that case. Both conclusions are the
consequence of an inquity into the intent of the parties and an inclination to require specific
language of a waiver of the right to invoke the jurisdiction of ICSID for claims of treaty
rights under a BIT, an inclination with which this Tribunal agrees.”

   

°8 Oral Statement of AdT’s Counsel, Matthew Weiniger, (February 9, 2004), p. 38, Lines 13-14.

° Azurix: Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, “Decision on Jurisdiction” dated December 8, 2003, available at
http://www.asil.org/ilib/azurix.pdf.

°8 “Since the Tribunal has found that the waiver does not cover the claim of Azurix in the dispute before it, the
Tribunal does not need to comment further on the issue of renunciation by individuals of rights conferred
upon them by treaty.” Id, | 85.

%6 Td, 4 26.

Td, 485.

°8 Td, 4] 80-81.

In Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines (January 29, 2004) (available at
www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/SGSvPhil-final.pdf) (“SGS”), the tribunal gave effect to a forum selection
clause, The Tribunal emphasizes that the facts of the SGS case are distinct from the present proceeding,

First, the contractual forum clause at issue in SGS was found to contain mandatory conflicting
obligations. The clause provided that “actions concerning disputes in connection with obligations of either
party to this Agreement shall be filed at the Regional Trial Courts of Makati or Manila.” ‘The SGS tribunal
found the clause to be a “binding exclusive jurisdiction clause” for “all actions concerning disputes in
connection” with contractual obligations. (Of note, SGS did not object to this clause being effective and
binding upon both parties.) ‘The present proceeding does not involve a forum selection clause of this character.

Second, the applicable law was different. SGS presented its claim under the Swiss-Philippine BIT. The
SGS tribunal gave effect to the forum selection clause. The tribunal did so — even though it recognized that
SGS"s claims were claims of a breach of the treaty obligations contained in Article X(2) (the “umbrella clause”)
of the Swiss-Philippine BIT’ -- because it viewed SGS’s claims as being essentially contractual in nature. The
present proceeding does not involve an umbrella clause.

Despite these differences, the Tribunal also recognizes that its reasoning differs from that of the SGS
tribunal. The Tribunal observes that its view is closer to that of paragraph 11 of the dissenting Declaration of
Arbitrator Antonio Crivellaro in Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines.

28

118. Assuming that parties agreed to a clear waiver of ICSID jurisdiction, the Tribunal is
of the view that such a waiver would be effective. Given that it appears clear that the parties
to an ICSID arbitration could jointly agree to a different mechanism for the resolution of
their disputes other than that of ICSID, it would appear that an investor could also waive its
rights to invoke the jurisdiction of ICSID.'” However, the Tribunal need not decide this
question in this case.

119. As to the latter case of a separate document containing an exclusive forum selection
clause that designates a forum other than ICSID, the Tribunal notes that the specific intent
of the parties to preclude ICSID jurisdiction will be more difficult to ascertain than in the
case of explicit waiver. The Tribunal is of the view that it is not the existence of the exclusive
forum selection clause that would be given effect by an ICSID tribunal, but rather that the
tribunal could, at most, give effect to a waiver implied from the existence of an exclusive
forum selection clause. The Tribunal does not find the authority under the ICSID
Convention for it to abstain from exercising its jurisdiction simply because a conflicting
forum selection clause exists. To the contrary, it is the Tribunal’s view that an ICSID
tribunal has a duty to exercise its jurisdiction in such instances absent any indication that the
parties specifically intended that the conflicting clause act as a waiver or modification of an
otherwise existing grant of jurisdiction to ICSID. A separate conflicting document should be
held to affect the jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal only if it clearly is intended to modify the
jurisdiction otherwise granted to ICSID. As stated above, an explicit waiver by an investor of
its rights to invoke the jurisdiction of ICSID pursuant to a BIT could affect the jurisdiction
of an ICSID tribunal. However, the Tribunal will not imply a waiver or modification of
ICSID jurisdiction without specific indications of the common intention of the Parties.

 

120. Relying on Article 41 as a whole, the negotiating history of the Concession, and the
requirements of Bolivian law, Respondent argues that AdT in agreeing to the Concession
also agreed not to invoke the jurisdiction of ICSID. The Tribunal does not find the evidence
submitted sufficient to prove this assertion.

121. First, the Tribunal notes that Respondent does not argue that there exists an explicit
waiver of ICSID jurisdiction by AdT. Even assuming Concession Article 41 were an
exclusive jurisdictional grant, the Article does not constitute an explicit waiver of ICSID
jurisdiction.

122. Second, the Tribunal finds that there is not a sufficient basis in the written and oral
submissions presented to the Tribunal as to the text of the Concession and Bolivia’s record
of its negotiating position to imply such a waiver. Both parties have presented conflicting
arguments over what was and was not concluded during the Concession negotiations. Article
41 is silent as to the issue of the availability to AdT of ICSID and arbitration generally.
Respondent asks that the Tribunal imply from this silence, the structure of Article 41
generally, and the laws of Bolivia including its Constitution, a waiver by AdT of any right it
may have to invoke the jurisdiction of ICSID. Having considered the language of Article 41
and the disputed nature of the negotiating history, the silence of Article 41 as to the right of
AdT to invoke arbitration before ICSID reflects just as likely an impasse in the negotiations
between the parties on this point. Consequently, the Tribunal finds neither common

100 See Spiermann, supra note 89.

29

intention of the Parties to exclude ICSID jurisdiction in the case of a claim by AdT nor any
clear waiver on the part of AdT in Article 41 or the Concession generally of its rights to
pursue its claims before ICSID. The Tribunal will not read an ambiguous clause as an
implicit waiver of ICSID jurisdiction; silence as to the question is not sufficient.

123. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal denies the first aspect of Respondent’s First
Objection.

The Second Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that Bolivia is not a proper
party

Respondent's Objection
124. Respondent argues it is not the proper party to this dispute.

125. Referring to ICSID Convention Article 25(1) and 25(3), Bolivia argues that the
Waters Superintendency should have been specifically designated by the Government of
Bolivia as a “constituent agency or sub-division” in order for ICSID jurisdiction to apply.
Bolivia did not at any time designate the Water Superintendency as a “constituent agency or

subdivision” or consent to ICSID jurisdiction for actions by the Water Superintendency."""

126. Bolivia asserts that the Water Superintendency is a “separate and autonomous legal
entity,” that exists apart from the Republic of Bolivia." All actions and interactions upon
which AdT bases its claims were actions of the Water Superintendency, including the
rescission of the Concession."

127. In support of this objection, Bolivia relies upon the ICSID award in Cable Television of
Nevis, Ltd. and Cable Television of Nevis Holdings, Ltd. v. Federation of St Kitts and Nevis (“Cable
TV).

128. Bolivia reads the Cable TV award as a refusal on the part of an ICSID tribunal to
find ICSID jurisdiction over a party who was not designated as a “constituent subdivision or
agency” by a Contracting State under Article 25(1). Respondent suggests that the Tribunal
should find that the relationship between the Water Superintendency and Bolivia parallels in
important aspects the relationship between the Nevis Island Administration and the
Federation of St. Kitts and Nevis.

129. Thus, Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal on the ground that the
Republic of Bolivia was not a patty to the Concession Agreement and the Water
Superintendency was never designated as a “constituent subdivision or agency of Bolivia for
the purposes of ICSID jurisdiction.”

10 Resp. Counter Mem., p. 46, 4 91- 92.

"2 Td, p. 47,494.

8 Td, p. 48, 4 96.

4 Td, p. 47, 95; Cable Television of Nevis Ltd. and Cable Television of Nevis Holdings Lid. v. Federation of St Kitts
and Nevis, Award of January 13, 1997, reprinted at 5 ICSID REP. 106 (2002).

105 Resp. Counter Mem., p. 51, 4103.

30

Claimant's Reply

130.  AdT affirms that its claim is brought against Bolivia, not the Water
Superintendency.'” AdT also contends that the legal status of the Water Superintendency
and Respondent’s references to ICSID Convention Article 25(1) and 25(3) are irrelevant to
the jurisdictional basis of this proceeding.

131. Claimant disagrees with the conclusions Respondent draws from Cable TV. Claimant
emphasizes that, unlike in the current proceeding, the case in Cable TV was brought under a
concession agreement agreed to by the parties and not under a bilateral investment treaty as
is the case in these proceedings." AdT asserts that Bolivia consented to ICSID jurisdiction
by its ratification of the BIT. In emphasizing that its claim is against Bolivia for actions in
violation of Bolivia’s obligations under the BIT, AdT argues it does not seek, nor is there
any need to look into, substituting Bolivia for the Water Superintendency as a party to the
Concession.

132. AdT acknowledges that it will be its task at the proceedings on the merits to establish
the State responsibility of Bolivia under the BIT for its alleged expropriation of AdT’s
investments." AdT also acknowledges that it will be its task, where necessary, to establish
the basis for attribution of the actions of the Water Superintendency to Bolivia.” AdT
observed in this regard that: (1) the Concession was negotiated under the supervision of
Bolivian officials with authority independent of the Water Superintendent,'" (2) the
Concession was only one of six contracts concluded between AdT and various agencies of
Bolivia,''' (3) the breadth of its investment can only mean there was coordination by the
Bolivian government itself,"'* and, (4) it was deprived of its investment not only by the acts
of the Water Superintendency, but also through Bolivia’s failure to provide security for
AdT’s property and staff during the disturbances in Cochabamba and the transfer of AdT’s
property to a publicly owned company.'”

The Decision of the Tribunal

133. Respondent objects to ICSID jurisdiction on the ground that the Water
Superintendency, not the Republic of Bolivia, is the proper party to this arbitration. The
Tribunal notes that this aspect of the Respondent’s First Objection is related to the first
aspect in that it is premised on the view that this dispute arises out of the Concession (to
which the Water Superintendency was a party) rather than the BIT (to which Bolivia is a
party).

106 Cl. Reply, p. 26, ] 72.
07 Td, p. 27,474.

68 Td, p, 26, | 720).

9 Td, p. 28,477.

10 Td, p, 33, 490, citing Request for Arbitration, Ex. 16 to 19.
M1 Td, p. 28,477.

12 Id

43 Td, p, 29, | 78 citing Request for Arbitration, $f] 33-35.

31

134. Bolivia relies on the ICSID award in Cable TV. The jurisdictional basis of that case,
however, is distinct from that presented in this proceeding.

 

135. In Cable TV, the Claimant cable corporation invested more than a million U.S.
dollars on the Island of Nevis as part of a contract with the Government of Nevis. The
dispute clause in the Agreement indicated that disputes relating to the contract would be
referred to arbitration under the rules and procedures of the ICSID Convention. The
tribunal in Cable TV held that it had no jurisdiction over the case because (1) the Federation
of St. Kitts and Nevis was incorrectly named as a party in a dispute arising out of a contract
involving only the Nevis Island Administration and (2) there was no other basis to find the
consent of the Federation to arbitration either as a party itself or on behalf of the Nevis
Island Administration.'

136. The Tribunal acknowledges Bolivia’s argument that the Water Superintendency is
similar to the Nevis Island Administration as a somewhat autonomous unit within a larger
State. More critically, however, the jurisdictional basis asserted in Cable TV was a clause in a
concession contract and not, as in this proceeding, a bilateral investment treaty. The dispute
brought by AdT before this Tribunal is based on alleged acts by Bolivia in violation of the
BIT between the Netherlands and Bolivia. Unlike the situation in Cab TV, AdT has not
named as a Respondent an entity which is not a party to the document containing the
jurisdictional clause. The holdings in Cable TV do not bear on the situation presented in this
proceeding.

 

137. The Parties raise a number of issues which require more extensive findings based on
additional evidence. At this jurisdictional phase of the proceedings, the Tribunal need not
determine the questions of (1) attribution and State responsibility under the BIT, or (2) the
precise relationship between the Republic of Bolivia and the Water Superintendency. These
questions will be determined later, as needed, at the merits phase of the Tribunal’s
proceedings.

138. The Tribunal denies the second aspect of Respondent’s First Objection.

The Third Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that Article 2 of the BIT
recognizes the exclusive jurisdiction of Bolivian law over this dispute

Respondent's Objection

139. In the third aspect of its First Objection, Bolivia argues that Article 2 of the BIT
contains references to Bolivian law which in this case preclude ICSID jurisdiction.
Respondent observes that Article 2 explicitly acknowledges that in protecting and admitting
investments, Bolivia does so “within the framework of its law and regulations” and “subject
to its laws and regulations.”'”° Bolivia thus argues:

Article 2 of the BIT refers to the Bolivian law as the framework under which these powers
and regulations will be in effect over the investment and over the private investor invited to

"4 Cable TV at Section 8.01.
45 Oral Statement of Bolivia’s Counsel, Alexandre de Gramont, (February 9, 2004), p. 142, Lines 9-11.

32

come to Bolivia. So there is AdT’s obligation to be subject to Bolivian laws, SIRESE, and
the Supreme Court of Bolivia....!"6

140. Respondent thus objects to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal on the ground that
Article 2 of the BIT incorporates a reference to Bolivian law and the application of that law
to this case requires AdT to submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the applicable Bolivian
courts and tribunals.

Claimant's Reply

141. Claimant disagrees with Respondent’s interpretation of Article 2 of the BIT. AdT
asserts that Article 2 of the BIT is a standard “admission clause.” AdT argues that the
reference in Article 2 to the laws and regulations of Bolivia does not have bearing on any
matters other than the admittance of an investment into the Bolivian market. Claimant
maintains that Article 2 is meant only to shepherd foreign investment into Bolivia.
Respondent’s interpretation, in Claimant’s view, goes beyond the original purpose of Article
2 and cannot be supported by relevant comparative practice. AdT claims that if
Respondent’s interpretation of Article 2 were to be followed to its logical end, then there

”"'7 AdT goes on to assert that such an interpretation
118

would “never be an ICSID arbitration.
would also permit an indirect resurrection of the Calvo Doctrine.

The Decision of the Tribunal

142. The first aspect of the First Objection argues that the terms of, and the
circumstances surrounding, the Concession indicate that AdT agreed to be bound to dispute
resolution governed by domestic Bolivian law within Bolivia.'” In contrast, this aspect of the
First Objection asserts that Article 2 of the BIT contains a reference to Bolivian law which
places the claim raised by AdT within the exclusive jurisdiction of Bolivia’s courts and
tribunals. Respondent in its First Objection often passes back and forth between these two
aspects of objection. The Tribunal recalls that in its consideration of the Concession-based
first aspect of the First Objection, it denied Respondent’s arguments that the circumstances
surrounding the tender offer, the negotiation of the Concession or the actual language of the
Concession placed the current dispute within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Bolivian courts
and tribunals. Separating the strands of Respondent’s arguments, the Tribunal thus focuses
in this aspect solely on the argument concerning Article 2 of the BIT.

 

'6 Oral Submission of Bolivia’s Counsel, José Antonio Criales, (February 9, 2004), pp. 177-78, Lines 19-21 and
"7 Oral Submission of Claimant’s Counsel, Matthew Weiniger, (February 9, 2004), p. 247, Lines 8-12.

"8 The Tribunal need not address the Calvo Doctrine except to note that Bolivia has concluded various BITs
and is a Contracting State of ICSID. For more on the doctrine, see generally, D. SHEA, THE CALVO CL
PROBLEM OF INTER-AMERI AND INTERNATIONAL LAW AND DIPLOMACY (1955) and INTERNATIONAL,
ARBITRATION IN LATIN AMERICA (Nigel Blackaby, David Lindsey & Allessandro Spinillo, eds., 2002).

49 Resp. Rej., p- 22, 4 10.

 

   

33

143. Article 2 of the BIT provides:

Either Contracting Party shall, within the framework of its law and regulations, promote
economic cooperation through the protection in its territory of investments of nationals of
the other Contracting Party. Subject to its right to exercise powers conferred by its laws or
regulations, each Contracting Party shall admit such investments.

144. Both sentences in Article 2 of the BIT contain a reference to the laws and/or the
regulations of Bolivia. Respondent appears to refer to the language of both references,
although the first mention appears to predominate in Respondent’s arguments.

145
Bolivian law, the first sentence states that both Boli

A\s to the first sentence, the Tribunal observes that if one omits the reference to
and the Netherlands “shall

promote” economic cooperation by protecting in its territory the investments of nationals of
the other contracting State. This sentence thus contains the obligation to “promote

 

 

economic cooperation” as a fundamental goal of the BIT” through the protection of
investments. The BIT in its other provisions provides a forum and applicable substantive
law for claims that an investment was not so protected. Article 2, in this sense, importantly
requires that the host State take efforts to protect investments in its territory before such a
dispute arises.

146. Given this interpretation of the first sentence, what meaning is to be given to the
subordinate phrase “within the framework of its law and regulations?” The BIT not only
provides a remedy for breaches, but also attempts to facilitate the creation of a climate in
which economic cooperation can flourish. Thus, the Tribunal reads the reference to “the

 

framework of its laws and regulations” as a reference limited to the details of how each
contracting patty undertakes in its national laws and regulations to promote economic
cooperation through the protection of investments.

147. As to the second sentence, the Tribunal observes that if it omits the reference to
Bolivian law, the second sentence states that both Bolivia and the Netherlands “shall admit”
the investments of nationals of the other Contracting Party. This obligation to allow the
entry of foreign investment is a common provision in bilateral investment treaties, and is
often termed an “admission clause.” The obligation to admit is “subject to” the decision of
Bolivia (“its right”) to “exercise powers conferred by its laws or regulations.” The Tribunal
concludes that the inclusion of the term “subject to” indicates that the duty to admit
investments is limited by “the right to exercise powers conferred by its laws or regulations.”
The Tribunal notes that the reference specifically subjects the State’s duty to admit
investments not to the laws and regulations of Bolivia, but rather to the “right to exercise
powers” conferred by such laws or regulations. The Tribunal finds this language significant

   

as it implies an act at the time of admittance in accordance with the laws or regulations in
force at that time.

120 Specifically the Preamble to the BIT notes that the two governments enter into the agreement “[dJesiring. ..
to extend and intensify the economic relations between them particularly with respect to investments by the
nationals of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party” and “[rlecognizing that
agreement upon the treatment to be accorded to such investments will stimulate the flow of capital and
technology and the economic development of the Contracting Parties [...].”

 

34

148. The Tribunal thus concludes that (1) there is an effective reference to Bolivian law in
both the first and second sentences of Article 2 of the BIT, but (2) that both references are
of limited scope. The Tribunal now turns to the more ambiguous question of the precise
scope of these limited references to Bolivian law.

149. Bolivia argues for a broad interpretation of the role to be given the references to
Bolivian law in Article 2. It argues that these references allow it to condition the basis on
which a foreign investment enters its market. For example, Bolivia argues that Article 2
authorizes a local incorporation requirement. More broadly, Bolivia contends that the
references to Bolivian law can setve to place an investment within the exclusive jurisdiction
of Bolivian courts and tribunals.

150.  Bolivia’s expert witness, Professor Rudolph Dolzer, spoke in support of Bolivia’s
interpretation.’’ He asserted that the question of admission of an investment into a
destination country cannot be separated from the question of jurisdiction.’” Professor
Dolzer argued that the Bolivian practice of requiring investors to incorporate locally and be
subject to the Bolivian legal system is a respected and established practice. Moreover,
Professor Dolzer points to the “specific reference” to the Bolivian legal framework
contained within Article 2 of the BIT.'”

  

151. The Tribunal disagrees with the breadth of Bolivia’s interpretation of Article 2.

152. The Tribunal notes that it need not decide whether the Bolivian requirement to
locally incorporate the vehicle of foreign investment is authorized by Article 2 of the BIT.
First, it is clear that there is no question that AdT, the vehicle for foreign investment in the
Concession, was locally incorporated. Second, as discussed in the first aspect of this
Objection, the Tribunal does not accept Bolivia’s argument that local incorporation of an
investor in and of itself establishes the exclusive jurisdiction of Bolivian courts and

tribunals.'*

153. As to the more pertinent question of whether the references to Bolivian law in
Article 2 reach so far as to encompass the conclusion that Bolivian courts and tribunals
possess exclusive jurisdiction, the scope of the two references in Article 2 must be
understood in terms of their context and purpose. In this regard, it need be recalled that a
primary objective of the BIT, measured both in terms of the motivation for its conclusion
and in terms of its substantive provisions, is agreement upon ICSID as an independent and
neutral forum for the resolution of investment disputes in accordance with a substantive
applicable law specified in the BIT. In this light, the Tribunal concludes that the State Parties

21 Oral Statement of Bolivia’s Expert, Professor Rudolph Dolzer, (February 9, 2004), pp. 188-211.

12 Td, p. 197, Lines 13-15.

123 Td, p. 198, Lines 6-14.

124 See supra 4 109-123. The Tribunal observes that it is common practice as an investment pre-condition that
the vehicle for foreign investment be locally incorporated. The Tribunal also observes that such local
incorporation is not in practice a bar to ICSID jurisdiction. Indeed the ICSID Convention specifically
contemplates the possibility of claims being brought by a locally incorporated investor, see Article 25(2)(b) of
the Convention. See, eg, Nigel Blackaby, Arbitration Under Bilateral Investment Treaties in Latin America, in
INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION IN LATIN AMERICA 379, 388-89 (Nigel Blackaby, David Lindsey & Allessandro
Spinillo eds., 2002).

cannot have intended the references to national law in Article 2 to be so encompassing as to
defeat the object and purpose of the Treaty. Respondent’s interpretation would permit a
host State to take its affirmative responsibility to “promote economic cooperation through
the protection in its territory of investments of nationals of the other Contracting Party” and
transform it into an opportunity to introduce exclusive local jurisdiction for investment
disputes.

154. The Tribunal therefore concludes that the references to Bolivian law in Article 2 of
the BIT do not extend, at a minimum, to aspects of Bolivian law that in turn would assert
exclusive jurisdiction over disputes under the BIT.

155. The Tribunal denies the third aspect of Respondent’s First Objection.

The Fourth Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that the transfer of AdT’s
stock bars the jurisdiction of the Tribunal

Respondent's Objection

156. Respondent argues that the Concession was carefully structured to preclude changes
in the foreign ownership of AdT that might bring it within the coverage of a BIT.
Respondent observes that in December 1999 IW Ltd, an immediate foreign owner of 55%
of the shares of AdT, moved its place of incorporation from the Cayman Islands to
Luxembourg and changed its name to International Water (Tunari) S.a.r.l. (“IW S.arl”).'%
Bolivia also notes that there simultaneously were further changes in the upstream ownership
with IW S.a.r.l. in turn being owned by a Dutch corporation, IWT B.V., which is itself a
subsidiary of IWH B.V., a second Dutch corporation. Bolivia argues each entity was a new
legal entity and a new undefined shareholder of AdT. The resulting ownership structure was
not the same as the one provided for by the Concession. Respondent characterizes these
actions as a series of “unilateral private share transactions” that were unauthorized by
Bolivia.’

157. Respondent argues that the transfer of AdT’s stock from the Caymanian holding
company was a breach of the Concession. On the basis of this alleged breach of the
Concession, Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.

Claimant's Reply

158. Claimant argues that the actions taken in December 1999 did not breach the
Concession’s restrictions on change in ownership of AdT. Claimant concedes that a change
in ownership by a Founding Shareholder would have required the permission of Bolivia.
However, Claimant argues that the December 1999 transaction did not involve a sale of
shares and change of ownership, but rather the “migration” of a corporation from the
Cayman Islands to Luxembourg.

125 Resp. Rej., pp. 18-20, ff] 34-36.
126 Bolivia’s Obj., p. 3.

36

159. As for the changes in corporate structure that occurred upstream of IW S.a.r.l.,
Claimant argues that the Concession does not address ownership changes above the first tier
of owners of AdT, the Founding Shareholders.'” Moreover, AdT argues that the Concession
“placed no restriction on the transfer of shares by ‘Final Shareholders,” that held shares in
the “Founding Shareholders.”’* Thus, the Concession did not touch or concern these
Ultimate Shareholders.'”

The Decision of the Tribunal

160. Article 37.1 of the Concession requires “[e]very Founding Stockholder keep more
than 50% of the original equity percentage in voting shares of the Concessionaire at least
over the first seven (7) years of the Concessions.”

161. Annex 13 of the Concession lists IW Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of Bechtel
Enterprises Holdings, Inc. (which owned 55 percent of AdT), as one of the “Founding
Stockholders.”

162. In December 1999, IW Ltd of the Cayman Islands changed its place of incorporation
to Luxembourg. This was accomplished without the permission of Bolivia.

163. Bolivia argues that this change of place of incorporation is a breach of Article 37.1 of
the Concession. AdT argues that it is not a breach because IW Ltd of the Cayman Islands
and IW S.a.r.. of Luxembourg are the same entity. It argues that it is not the case that one
entity went out of existence to be replaced by another, but rather that the same entity
“migrated” from one jurisdiction to another.

164. We first must ask precisely what Article 37.1 of the Concession required of the
Founding Shareholders. The text of Article 37.1 requires each Founding Shareholder to
“keep more than 50% of the original equity percentage in voting shares of the
Concessionaire.” The Tribunal understands Bolivia to argue that the intent of Article 37.1
was to ensure that AdT would remain, for the first seven years of the Concession, under the
same structure of corporate control as when the Concession was signed.'” Under this line of
argument, any transfer of control over AdT during this period “would plainly be a violation”
of Concession Article 37.1."

165. The Tribunal disagrees with the breadth of Bolivia’s interpretation. In the Tribunal’s
view, the Concession allows for some change in the organizational chart depicting upstream
ownership without the consent of Bolivia. The restrictions of Article 37.1 apply to the
Founding Shareholders, but not to the Ultimate Shareholders. Given this distinction
between Article 37.1’s application to the first-tier level ownership of AdT (the Founding
Shareholders) and its inapplicability to the final tier of ownership (the Ultimate

27 Cl. Reply, pp.21-22, 4] 59.
128 Td

29 ‘The Tribunal notes that Claimant uses the term “Final Shareholders” while the Concession uses the Spanish
term “Ultimate Shareholders.” The Tribunal shall use the term “Ultimate Shareholders.”

130 Resp. Rej., pp. 8-9, | 19.

ISI Resp, Counter Mem., p. 23, 446.

37

Shareholders), it follows that Article 37.1 did not restrict Ultimate Shareholders in their
organization of the various tiers of ownership. The Tribunal thus concludes that Article 37.1
was not a guarantee that the organizational chart of corporate ownership would not change
in any respect. Rather, the Tribunal interprets the provision to require that, among the
Founding Shareholders (the first tier of upstream ownership of AdT), the same entities
“keep more than 50% of” their original interest. The issue therefore is whether IW Ltd, as a
Founding Shareholder, kept more than 50% of its original interest.

166. It is not disputed that if IW Ltd of the Cayman Islands had transferred all of its
tights and obligations to a new corporation in Luxembourg, then the Luxembourg
corporation would not be the same entity for the purposes of Article 37.1. The Parties
disagree, however, whether the asserted “corporate migration” in this instance yields the
same or a different entity.

167. Bolivia argues that for a corporation to be the same entity, it must remain
incorporated in the same jurisdiction. Bolivia asserts that new rights and obligations
accompanied the “migration” from the Cayman Islands to Luxembourg. A “new” company
emerged and IW Ltd, a “Founding Shareholder,” ceased to be the same legal person. AdT
argues that Caymanian and Luxembourg law both recognize IW Ltd and IW S.a.r.l. as the
same legal entity.’ Respondent characterizes AdI”s claim that IW S.a.t.l. of Luxembourg
and the IW Ltd of the Cayman Islands are the same legal entity as “patently absurd.”'””

168. Claimant’s argument is that just as a natural person may migrate from one
jurisdiction to another, changing his or her nationality, so too is it possible for a legal person
to migrate.

 

169. Claimant provided to the Tribunal expert opinions as to the laws of the Cayman
Islands and Luxembourg and the application of those laws to the instant case.

170. First, the Caymanian law firm of Maples and Calder examined the Caymanian
Companies Law and concluded that IW Ltd was an exempted limited liability company
under Section 183 of the Cayman Islands Companies Law. Sections 226 and 227 further
allow an exempted company to deregister and continue as the same corporate body in
another jurisdiction so long as the receiving jurisdiction permits it.'*

'32 Cl, Mem., pp. 43-44, §] 126; Maples and Calder Letter, August 28, 2003 in Cl. Reply, Ex. 48, at Section 3.

'33 Resp. Counter Mem., p. 27, 50.

54 Cl, Reply, Ex. 48, Opinion Letter, Maples and Calder, August 28, 2003, at Section 3. Maples and Calder
assert the Cayman Islands Companies Law (2003 Revision) was in effect at the time of deregistration. ‘The
Companies Law reads in part: Section 226, (1) An exempted company incorporated and registered with limited
liability and a share capital under this Law, including a company registered by way of continuation under this
Part, which proposes to be registered by way of continuation as a body corporate limited by shares under the
laws of any jurisdiction outside the Islands (hereinafter called an “applicant”) may apply to the Registrar to be
de-registered in the Islands. (2) The Registrar shall so de-register an applicant if: (a) the applicant proposes to
be registered by way of continuation in a jurisdiction which permits or does not prohibit the transfer of the
applicant in the manner provided in this part [...}.”

38

171. Second, the Luxembourg office of the firm of Allen and Overy’® indicated that
Luxembourg law does not “oppose” the transfer of the registered office and place of
effective management of a company to Luxembourg “in continuation of its legal
personality” so long as the laws of the transferring country state that continuation of legal
personality is possible. Thus, IW Ltd “adopted” Luxembourg nationality on the day of the
transfer.

172. On the issue of corporate migration, Bolivia provided the Tribunal with the expert
opinion of Professor Merritt B. Fox.’ Professor Fox is of the opinion that IW S.a.tl. of
Luxembourg is a “different corporation” from IW Ltd. Every corporation, Professor Fox
asserts, is “unique” and “distinct” from another corporation because of two factors — a
corporation’s name and its incorporating jurisdiction. Each corporation has “property and
contractual rights and duties [that] belong distinctly to it and no one else.”'” Since IW S.a.t.l.
did not exist before December 1999, it cannot be deemed a “Founding Stockholder” and
could not and did not hold AdT stock. Moreover, inasmuch as IW S.a.r.l. acquired AdT’s
stocks from IW Ltd after the execution of the Concession, Professor Fox reasons that there
were two entities: one that previously held AdT stocks (IW Ltd) and one that came into
possession of those stocks (IW S.a.r.l). Professor Fox thus concludes that IW S.a.rl. is a
“different corporation... and hence a different legal person.”'*

173. The Parties questioned the weight to be given to the other Party’s expert opinions.
Bolivia stated that the two law firms used by Claimant are not experts and are Bechtel’s
“corporate attorneys who have every interest in defending the transactions they carried out
at Bechtel’s behest.”’” Claimant questions the relevance of Professor Fox’s opinion noting
that he is an American lawyer with no expertise in Bolivian, Caymanian or Luxembourg law.
AdT argues Professor Fox can only have “a general comparative law view.”'“’ Consequently,
AdT maintains Professor Fox’s conclusions are not reliable since he does not specify which
set of laws he is comparing when he made his assessment.'' In addition, the Maples and
Calder opinion asserts that Professor Fox’s statements are “incorrect as a matter of Cayman
Islands law.”"? The Allen and Overy opinion likewise disagrees with Professor Fox’s
opinion as to the content of Luxembourg law.

 

174. The Tribunal finds that although Professor Fox’s opinion may be accurate as a
general matter, it does not bear on the particular situation presented by this case. The
possibility of corporate migration between two jurisdictions appears to be relatively rare. It
requires that the jurisdiction being left behind and the jurisdiction being entered both accept
the possibility of migration in their legal systems. Not many national legal systems provide
for corporate migration. The Tribunal concludes that, although unusual, a corporate

35 'The ‘Tribunal notes that Allen and Overy represented IW S.a.r. in connection with its “transfer of the
registered office and place of effective management” and change of the company’s name from IW Ltd. to IW
Svat. See Cl. Reply, Ex. 50, Opinion Letter, Allen & Overy Luxembourg, August 28, 2003, at Section 1.

'36 Resp. Counter Mem., Ex. B, pp. 14-15.

37 Td, p. 15.

138 Td

139 Resp. Rej., p- 20, 37.

140 Oral Statement of AdT’s Counsel, Matthew Weiniger, (February 9, 2004), p. 67, Lines 7-20.

M41 Td, p. 68, Lines 5-10.

42 Maples & Calder, supra at note 134, at Section 3.5.

39

migration is permitted by the laws of the Cayman Islands and its continuation as a legal
entity is permitted by Luxembourg law.

175. Bolivia further argues that the question of whether IW Ltd and IW S.a.r1. are the
same entity is to be decided with reference to Bolivian law, not Caymanian or Luxembourg
law. Bolivia argues that its law controls corporate registration, deregistration and subsequent
legal status of AdT’s shareholders and that, under Bolivian law, corporate migration is not
possible.'* In Bolivia’s view, “Founding Shareholder” must be understood in accordance
with Bolivian law and that law does not recognize IW S.a.r.l. as being the same company as
IW Ltd.'* AdT argues that Caymanian and Luxembourg law are the only relevant laws that
govern the change of IW Ltd’s domicile and name-change. '”

 

176. The Tribunal disagrees with Bolivia. The status of IW S.a.r.l. is first a question
governed by the law of Luxembourg. It is true that each country has the choice to recognize
or not recognize the corporations of other States. As a question of private international law,
States in examining the status of a foreign corporation generally defer either to the law of the
seat of the company or the law at the place of incorporation.'’ Whichever of these
approaches is adopted in this case, the Tribunal concludes on the bases of the arguments
made and evidence submitted that the law that determines the status of IW S.a.r.1. would not
be the substantive corporate law of Bolivia.

177. Finally, Bolivia points to correspondence from Claimant’s parent company to the
Water Superintendency seeking “approval” for a particular series of stock transfers from IW
Ltd as an admission by AdT that this type of transaction would have been an otherwise
unauthorized action.” This correspondence is discussed by the Tribunal as the fifth aspect
of the First Objection. Suffice it to say for this aspect of the First Objection that (1) the
correspondence involved not a corporate migration but rather a direct transfer of AdT stock;
(2) the transaction described in the correspondence was never executed; and (3) the Claimant
concedes that such a transfer would have required the approval of the appropriate Bolivian
authorities.

178. The Tribunal therefore concludes that the migration of IW Ltd from the Cayman
Islands to Luxembourg with its change of name to IW S.a.r.1. did not constitute a breach of
Article 37.1 of the Concession.

179. The Tribunal notes that, given its holding, it need not reach a further issue not
argued by the Parties; namely, whether a breach of the Concession would bar the jurisdiction
of this Tribunal. Respondent appears to assume that the appropriate remedy for a breach of
certain provisions of the Concession is that this Tribunal refrain from exercising jurisdiction
overt a matter otherwise properly placed before it.

43 Resp. Rej., p- 22, 38.
M4 Td

45 Cl. Reply, pp. 23-24, {f] 61-66.
46 U, Drobnig, Private International Law, in TILT ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW 1116 (R.
Bernhardt ed.1992).

“7 Letter of Michael C. Bailey, Vice President & Managing Director, Bechtel, November 24, 1999, Ex. 1 to
Resp. C. Mem.

40

180. The Tribunal denies the fourth aspect of Respondent’s First Objection.

The Fifth Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that misrepresentations by
representatives of Claimant bar the jurisdiction of this Tribunal

Respondent's Objection

181. Bolivia received two letters from representatives of Bechtel Enterprises Holdings,
Inc. in November and December 1999 discussing a proposed change of ownership of AdT

and making representations as to the legal effect and impact of that proposed transaction.'*

182. Respondent claims the first of these two letters contained representations concerning
a direct transfer of AdT’s stocks from IW Ltd in the Cayman Islands to a different company
to be based in the Netherlands.” Respondent notes that the letter provided that “as a result
of the Transaction the shareholder shall no longer be a company established in the Cayman
Islands controlled 100% by IWL, but another company established in the Netherlands and
controlled by New IWL.”!*” Bolivia asserts that the second of these letters, signed by
Bechtel’s Bolivian counsel, stated that “transferring the Founding Shareholder status” from
the Cayman Islands to a “Dutch firm” would result in “no adverse effect or impact for the
Bolivian Government, for Bolivian entities or the town of Cochabambal...]”.""

 

183. Respondent claims that Claimant breached the representations it made in these two
letters. Under this objection, Respondent does not dispute the legality of the transfer that
took place as it does in the fourth aspect of the First Objection, but instead claims that it
received assurances that AdT would remain under the “same control” with no “adverse
effect or impact” after the proposed transfer. Respondent claims that, in fact, a different
company endowed with new rights and obligations emerged as a result of the transfer.
Bolivia argues that one of the new rights possessed by the new company was the protection
and availability of a BIT between the Netherlands and Bolivia.'”

184. Respondent claims AdT subsequently breached its representations by the very act of
filing a Request for Arbitration against Bolivia. Respondent argues that this breach of the
representations made regarding the legal effects of the proposed stock transfer should deny
AdT the benefit of ICSID jurisdiction.’

48 Letter of Michael C. Bailey, Vice President & Managing Director, Bechtel, to the Superintendencies of
Water and Electricity, November 24, 1999, and Letter of Dr. Ramiro Guevara, Servicios Legates $.C., to Luis
Uzin, Water Superintendent, December 3, 1999. First submitted to the Tribunal with Bolivia’s Reply and found
at Resp. Counter Mem., Ex. 1 and 2.

49 Td.

'50 Letter of Michael C. Bailey, Resp. Counter Mem., Ex. 1.

'5! Letter of Dr. Ramiro Guevara, Resp. Counter Mem., Ex. 2 and pp. 41-42, § 81.

'52 Resp. Rej., pp. 19-22, {| 35-38. As in the fourth aspect of the First Objection, Respondent has also asserted
that Concession Article 37.1 barred such reorganizations and that any such reorganization would have
constituted a breach of the Concession, which would thus preclude Claimant from ICSID relief, see supra 9
156-157.

'53 Resp. Rej., pp. 19-20, 4] 36.

 

41

Claimant's Reply

185. Claimant emphasizes that the transaction proposed within the two letters did not
actually take place.'* The proposed change of ownership discussed within these letters,
Claimant argues, was abandoned and a different series of transactions took place in
December of 1999.'”

186. AdT concedes that Bolivia’s approval was indeed required for the specific
transaction detailed by the November and December 1999 letters since that plan would have
“envisaged International Water (Aguas del Tunari) Ltd.(IWL) selling its share to a new
company to be formed in the Netherlands.”’® Since IW Ltd was a “Founding Shareholder,”
AdT acknowledges that without the consent of Bolivia, Concession Article 37.1 would have
barred this sale. Claimant argues that consent was not required for the corporate migration
that actually took place as the property rights of AdT’s holding company were not “altered
and no transfer [took] place.”’””

187. | AdT argues there were no similar consent requirements for change of ownership by
“Final Shareholders.”'* Thus, “[...]when the structure of the transaction changed in that it
was decided that the shares of IW S.a.r.l. would be held by a Dutch company rather than the
Dutch company holding IW S.a.r.l’s stake in AdT directly, the need to obtain permission was
removed.” AdT concludes that the letters relied upon by Bolivia are therefore “irrelevant”
since the actual accomplished transaction differed significantly from the proposed course of
action outlined in that correspondence.’

The Decision of the Tribunal

188. Bolivia argues that representations made in two letters to the Water Superintendent
from representatives of Bechtel concerning the legal effect of a change in ownership of AdT
were breached and that this breach bars the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. However, receipt of
the letters did not mean necessarily that the proposed course of action was the one that
actually took place. Rather, the evidence before the Tribunal indicates that the proposed
transaction was never executed.

189. It will be recalled from the Tribunal’s discussion of the fourth aspect of
Respondent’s First Objection that the transaction that actually occurred involved the
migration of IW Ltd of the Cayman Islands to Luxembourg as IW S.a.t.1. This transaction is
not the transaction proposed in the November and December letters. In those letters, there
is no mention of Luxembourg. Rather the proposed transaction involved a transfer of
ownership to a Dutch company. Thus, the Tribunal need not determine the precise content

'54 Cl. Reply, p. 11, 4] 30.
'55 Id. AdT points to Ex. 8 to 14, documents related to the corporate migration of AdT’s holding company, in
the Request for Arbitration as evidence to support this claim.

156 Id, pp. 11-12, 4 31-32.

'57 See supra at §§] 158-159; Oral Statement of AdT’s Counsel, Matthew Weiniger, (February 9, 2004), p. 93,
Line 17.

'58 Cl. Reply, pp. 11-12, 4 32.

159 Id

42

of representations contained within the correspondence as the proposal was never executed
and such representations cannot have legal effect.

 

190.  Parenthetically, Respondent accuses AdT of fraud.’ Again, since the transaction
outlined by the alleged misrepresentations never took place the Tribunal need not reach a
conclusion regarding Respondent’s accusation of fraud.

191. The Tribunal notes that, given its holding, it need not reach Respondent’s
argument that if the Tribunal found a misrepresentation of the type asserted by Respondent,
then Claimant would be estopped from invoking the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.'*'

192. The Tribunal thus concludes that the fifth aspect of Respondent’s First Objection
fails inasmuch as the transaction proposed in the two letters was not executed.

The Sixth Aspect of the First Objection which asserts that Claimant’s invocation of
the Netherlands-Bolivia BIT is an assertion of jurisdiction not within the scope of
Bolivia’s consent to arbitration

Respondent's Objection

193. Under this aspect of the First Objection, Respondent draws upon all of the
previous aspects of this objection and asserts that these aspects in their totality evidence a
qualification of Bolivia’s consent to ICSID arbitration.

194. In Bolivia’s view, the possibility of ICSID jurisdiction must fall within the
“reasonable contemplation” of the parties involved.'® Reiterating that “consent” is the
cornerstone of the ICSID system, Bolivia argues that consent should be limited to
circumstances a Contracting State can reasonably contemplate:

[NJotwithstanding the general proviso for jurisdiction contained in a BIT, the host state may
invite an investment and such invitation may limit the host State’s consent to ICSID
jurisdiction. If the investor accepts the invitation to invest on those terms, then ‘the
investor’s acceptance may not validly go beyond the limits of the host’s offer.’!6

‘60 Bolivia has further asserted that the Water Superintendent’s approval was “obtained solely on the basis of a

misrepresentation (ie, was procured by fraud),” Resp. Counter Mem., p. 43, 4] 84.

‘61 Bolivia argues Claimant is estopped from invoking the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. See eg. Resp. Rej., p- 23,
4 42; Oral Statement, Bolivia’s Expert, Professor Rudolf Dolzer, (February 9, 2004), p. 201, Lines 13-17.
However, since the alleged representations discussed in the Fifth Aspect of the First Objection never occurred,
such alleged representations can not serve as a basis for estoppel The Tribunal further recalls the statement of
the International Court of Justice in the Temple of Preah Vihear case that the representation relied upon
should be “clear and unequivocal.” IC] REPORTS (1962) pp. 143-144. See generally J.P. Miiller & T. Cottier,
Estoppel, in IL ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW, 116 (R. Bernhardt ed., 1992) (defining
estoppel restrictively).

162 Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 36-37, {71 (Quoting SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY,

239 (2001) and Rand, Hornick and Friedland, ICSID's Emerging Jurisprudence, 19 N.Y.U. INTL L. & POL. 33, 57

(1986). (Internal citations omitted).

168 Id, p. 37, § 72, (Internal citations omitted).

43

195. In terms of this case, Respondent argues that:

Indeed, Bolivia specifically conditioned the award of the Cochabamba water services
concession to a Bolivian company that would not fall under the Bilateral Investment Treaty
(or other BITs like it) That is, Bolivia specifically required that the awardee of the
Concession Agreement not be controlled by any foreign entity whose BIT would allow the
Bolivian company access to ICSID.!

In particular, Bolivia argues that (1) the circumstances surrounding the tender offer, (2) the
terms of the Concession particularly as it limited change in the ownership of AdT, and (3)
the content of Bolivian law particularly as it is relevant in light of Article 2 of the BIT all
validly define the “reasonable contemplation” of the parties regarding the availability of
ICSID jurisdiction in the proceedings. Respondent emphasizes that:

To Bolivia’s knowledge, the facts of this case are unique in the jurisprudence of ICSID.
Bolivia is unaware of any other case in which a host country authorized the award of an
investment contract on the express condition that the awardee not be subject to such foreign
control as would allow the awardee to invoke ICSID jurisdiction; where the awardee
specifically agreed and represented in the investment contract that it would not be subject to
such control; where the awardee’s controlling shareholder, in making certain post-contract
changes to the awardee’s upstream ownership, specifically represented that control would
not change; and where the awardee, based on those post-contract changes in the upstream
ownership, secks nonetheless to invoke the Centre’s jurisdiction.!°

196. Bolivia maintains that in ratifying the ICSID treaty, it never consented to the
availability of ICSID jurisdiction for an entity such as AdT with migratory ownership
interests. Bolivia asserts that consent to ICSID arbitration should be measured on a case-by-
case basis taking into consideration the conduct of parties to an investment agreement, the
language of the investment agreement, the internal legislation of a host state, and
international treaties.’

197. Bolivia argues that AdT’s contention that Bolivia granted its consent when the
ICSID Convention came into force for Bolivia in 1995 is too “simple” and ignored the
“conduct” of the parties prior to and during the investment.’ Bolivia characterizes Ad'T’s
approach to the consent issue as “simple and formulaic.”'®* Bolivia submits AdT’s
understanding runs counter to a “basic principle” of ICSID jurisprudence, namely “[t]he
inclination of ICSID to extend jurisdiction with the reasonable contemplation of the parties

Lp

198. Bolivia thus argues the Tribunal should reject AdT’s “rigid” formula for
determining consent solely on the Treaty, the Convention and the Request for Arbitration.
Rather, Bolivia argues that: “there is no support for Claimant’s argument that only the
‘Treaty, the Convention, and the Request for Arbitration are relevant for the purpose of

164 Td, p. 35, § 66, (Emphasis in original).

165 Td, p. 36, | 70.

166 Td., p. 37-39, §{§| 73-75. (Citing for authority MOSHE HIRSCH, THE ARBITRATION MECHANISM OF THE,
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES, 48 (1994))

167 Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 37-38, | 73.

168 Resp. Rej., p31, 59.

9 Td, p. 32,4 61.

     

44

determining consent in this case. The facts and circumstances surrounding the Concession
Agreement, and the Agreement itself, are relevant.”"”

199. Last, Bolivia offers the opinion of its expert witness Professor Rudolf Dolzer that
the “circles of beneficiaries” of the BIT was “carefully” described and negotiated. Thus, any
shift in this circle of beneficiaries would be seen as a “very serious matter” by the
governments involved. Professor Dolzer urges these basic considerations deserve special
consideration within a realistic assessment of the situation that goes beyond textual
formalities.'"' Professor Dolzer stresses the point that Article 2 of the BIT makes each party
aware of the fact they are operating within a “specific setting” that has a “distinct legal
relevance”-namely, the framework of the Bolivian legal system.’ Professor Dolzer
concludes that each party was aware of this “specific reference” and that “the investor has
chosen to accept the setting of the investment within the framework of Bolivia’s laws and
regulations to which the BIT between Bolivia and the Netherlands makes specific
reference.”"”

 

 

Claimant's Reply

200. | AdT does not directly address each point of this aspect. Rather, AdT maintains that
“[t]here is no requirement in either the BIT or the ICSID Convention, on which the
‘Tribunal’s jurisdiction is based, that Bolivia must consent to the Dutch control of a Bolivian
national for an ICSID tribunal to have jurisdiction over disputes between that Dutch-
controlled Bolivian national and Bolivia.”"”*

201. Thus AdT notes that Bolivia has consented to submitting a dispute to ICSID under
the BIT between Bolivia and a Bolivian company under the direct or indirect control of a
Dutch national.'” AdT reasserts its claim is based on the BIT that “constitutes a general,
written consent by the Respondent, and the Request for Arbitration a general written
consent by the Cl

 

‘laimant.”"”’ Importantly, AdT' states “[nJeither party sought to limit its

olT7

written consent in any way.

The Decision of the Tribunal

202. Bolivia argues that its consent to ICSID jurisdiction under the BIT is qualified by the
particular circumstances of the case: the negotiation and terms of the Concession, and
Article 2 of the BIT read in conjunction with the laws of Bolivia. Bolivia presents this
objection as an extension of all its objections that speaks to the entire situation with which it
is confronted.

0 Td, p. 38,471.

"t Oral Testimony of Respondent's Expert, Professor Rudolph Dolzer, (February 9, 2004), pp. 193-196.
2 Td, p. 197, Lines 17-18.

"3 Td, p, 198, Lines 8-14.

Cl. Rep,, p. 13, 49.

"5 Id

203. The Tribunal by majority finds that Bolivia’s objection that it limited the scope of its
consent to ICSID jurisdiction by way of Article 2 of the BIT plus the structuring of the
Concession, in particular requirements as to AdT’s corporate structure, has already been
dispensed with by way of the Tribunal’s decisions regarding the first, second, third and
fourth Aspects of the First Objection.'*

204. In his Declaration, Arbitrator Alberro-Semerena dissents from the Tribunal's
decision on the sixth aspect of the First Objection. The Tribunal observes that it is
unanimous on the other aspects of its decision on the First Objection and that many of the
points determined therein bear on the sixth aspect of the First Objection.'” In Procedural
Order No.1, the Tribunal determined that its discretion to order the production of evidence
was informed by concepts of materiality, relevance and specificity. Given the Tribunal's
findings on the other aspects of the First Objection, a majority of the Tribunal does not find
there to be present an undecided issue that would justify the ordering of the production of
documents suggested.

205. The Tribunal denies the sixth aspect of Respondent’s First Objection.

The Second Objection

Respondent’s Second Objection which asserts that the Claimant is not a Bolivian
entity “controlled directly or indirectly” by nationals of the Netherlands as required
by the Netherlands-Bolivia BIT

Respondent's Objection

206. Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the ground that AdT is
not a “national” of the Netherlands as defined by Articles 1(b)(ii) and (ii) of the BIT.

Respondent, in particular, argues that AdT is not “controlled by Dutch nationals”.'*’

207. Respondent argues that AdT is not an entity controlled by nationals of the
Netherlands in two principal respects. First, Respondent argues that “control” refers to the
ultimate controller, who in this instance is Bechtel, a U.S. company.'*' Second, Respondent

8 See infra, 109-123, 133-138, 142-155, 160-184.

"9 "These are, primarily: (1) “the Tribunal finds neither common intention of the Parties to exclude ICSID
jurisdiction in the case of a claim by AdT nor any clear waiver on the part of AdT in Article 41 or the
Concession generally of its rights to pursue its claims before ICSID” (Paragraph 122, supra), (2) [the Tribunal .
.. concludes that Article 37.1 was not a guarantee that the organizational chart of corporate ownership would
not change in any respect” (Paragraph 165, spra), (3) [t]he Tribunal ... concludes that the migration of IW Ltd
from the Cayman Islands to Luxembourg with its change of name to IW S.a.rl. did not constitute a breach of
Article 37.1 of the Concession” (Paragraph 178, supra) and (4) “the Tribunal need not determine the precise
content of representations contained within the [November 24, 1999] correspondence as the proposal was
never executed and such representations cannot have legal effect” (Paragraph 189, supra).

'80 See, eg, Resp. Counter Mem., p. 51 § 104.

IS See, e.g, Resp. Counter Mem., p. 72 § 149-150, where Bolivia argues: “AdT’s argument that the ‘ordinary
meaning’ of ‘directly or indirectly’ modify ‘control’ in the Bilateral Investment ‘Treaty so that a company can
have multiple controllers is fanciful at best. * * *, Rather the issue is who ultimately controls and that is why the
term ‘indirect’ is even used, to denote that control can be through another corporate entity just as Bechtel’s

 

 

46

argues that the question of whether an entity is “controlled, directly or indirectly,” is a
question of fact which is not necessarily satisfied by 100 percent ownership.

208. Respondent argues that IWT B.V. and IWH B.V., the Dutch companies that
Claimant alleges control it, are mere shells that do not “control” the Claimant." It is on the
basis of the factual exercise of control that Respondent moves for the production of
documents discussed supra in paragraphs 26-27.

209. Respondent thus argues that “[t]he issue of control in this case is whether the
Netherlands entities as a matter of fact have the power, without the permission of others, to
control their own corporate destinies and, accordingly, that of the Claimant, AdT.”'® In
Respondent’s view, Bechtel remains in control and the Dutch companies entities are
corporate “shells.” '**

 

Claimant's Reply

210. Claimant argues that where there is 100 percent ownership, then there necessarily
exists control. Claimant asserts that the term “control” was introduced into the ICSID
Convention and international investment law generally not to take away from those
situations where there is majority shareholder ownership but rather to extend investment
protection to situations where there is a minority shareholder interest which by virtue of
voting rights or other legal factors also possesses legal control."

211. Claimant asserts that AdT qualifies as a Dutch national under the BIT since it is
incorporated in Bolivia but is controlled, directly or indirectly, by Dutch nationals.
Specifically, Claimant states that while AdT is incorporated in Bolivia, 55 percent of AdT’s
shares are held by IW S.a.r.l. In turn, 100 percent of IW S.a.r.l’s shares (and voting rights) are
held by IWT B.V., which is a Dutch national. Moreover, 100 percent of IWT B.V.’s shares
(and voting rights) are held by yet another Dutch corporation, IWH B.V."**

212. Claimant also strongly disputes Respondent’s suggestions that IWT B.V. and IWH
B.V. are mere “shells” created solely for the purpose of gaining ICSID jurisdiction. In
particular, Claimant argues that the change in ownership structure of AdT was only one
element of a much wider joint venture between Bechtel Enterprises Holdings, Inc. and
Edison S.p.A., that that joint venture and change in structure occurred before the events that

 

control of AdT in his case is through Netherlands and Luxembourg entities.” See also id, at p. 52, f] 106-107.
At other points, Bolivia also argues that an entity must “have the power, without the permission of others, to
control their own corporate destinies.” See, ¢.g, Bolivia’s Reply at para 1.2, Together these propositions suggest
that Bolivia argue there is only one controlling entity and that entity would be the ultimate parent corporation.
'82 See, ag, Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 56-59, f] 115-122, Resp. Rej., pp. 62-75, 4f] 116-134 where Bolivia
argues: “[Mlajority shareholding or even majority voting rights do not per se constitute control. ... T]he choice
of a ‘control’ test by the parties, as opposed to a more conventional and objective test, such as place of
incorporation or seat of the company, indicates an intent by the parties to look beyond formalistic
determinations of corporate nationality to consider the reality of the company.”

'83 Bolivia’s Reply, 1.2

It Td, 43.10.

'85 Cl, Mem,, pp. 46-50, §{] 133-138.

'86 Id, p. 15,449.

47

would so severely affect the Concession were foreseeable, and that there is no question, that
as far as Respondent’s Second Objection, that both IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. could bring the
claims directly under the BIT.

213. Claimant concludes that it is controlled indirectly by Dutch nationals, IWT B.V.
and IWH B.V., as required by the BIT."

The Decision of the Tribunal
The Questions Presented

214. Claimant seeks arbitration before the ICSID on the basis of Article 9(6) of the
Netherlands-Bolivia BIT."*

215. The Parties do not dispute that the Claimant, AdT, is a national of Bolivia. The
issue before the Tribunal is whether AdT is — for the purposes of the BIT and in accordance
with the terms of the BIT — to be regarded also as a “national” of the Netherlands.

216. The Netherlands-Bolivia BIT, like the ICSID Convention and the majority of
BITs, recognizes that the investor of one of the State Parties may incorporate an entity in the
other State Party as a vehicle for its investment activity. Indeed, it is by no means
uncommon practice that foreign investors may be required to incorporate locally by the host
state.

217. To address this possible local incorporation of the investor, the Netherlands-
Bolivia BIT follows the pattern of many BITs and provides that a “national” of the
Netherlands as defined by Articles 1(b) includes not only:

@ natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party in accordance with its law;
Gi) without prejudice to the provisions of (iii) hereafter, legal persons constituted in
accordance with the law of that Contracting Party;

 

but also:

ii) legal persons controlled directly or indirectly, by nationals of that Contracting Party, but
constituted in accordance with the law of the other Contracting Party.

187 Td
'88 Article 9(6) of the BIT provides:

“If both Contracting Parties have acceded to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States of 18 March 1965 [ICSID Convention], any disputes that may
arise from investment between one of the Contracting Parties and a national of the other Contracting Party
shall, in accordance with the provisions of that Convention, be submitted for conciliation or arbitration to the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes.”

48

218. — It will be recalled that AdT’s ownership since December 22, 1999, as depicted in
Figure 2, is as follows:

 

 

Figure 2: Ad's ownership structure after
December 22, 1999.

 

Request for Arbitration, Exhibit 15, November 12, 2001

 

 

 

ICE ingenieros,
SA.

 

100%
Constructora, ‘Compania Bolviana ICE Aguay Energia,
Petricevic SA. de Ingenieria, SRL. SA
(Bola) (Goiva) (Boing

 

 

 

 

 

219. With this ownership structure in mind, it is helpful to recognize what this objection
is not about.

First, there does not appear to be any argument that AdT is foreign

controlled, rather the disagreement is as to the location of that foreign
189

control.

Second, there does not appear to be any argument that the Dutch upstream
ownership (namely IWT B.V., IWH B.V., and Baywater) are all “legal
persons constituted in accordance with the law of’ the Netherlands as
required by Article 1(b)(ii). Respondent’s first objection argued that the act of
bringing the Dutch entities into the chain of AdT ownership was a violation
of the Concession or representations made to the Respondent.” Respondent
does not argue, however, that the Dutch corporations are not properly
constituted in accordance with Dutch law. Although the requirement of
control raised by the second objection is not relevant to these Dutch entities,

'89 Oral Statement of AdT’s Counsel, Robert Volterra, (February 10, 2004), p. 407.
1% The Tribunal concluded in the Fourth and Fifth Aspects of First Objection that these actions resulted in
neither a breach of the Concession nor of a representation.

49

these entities were not named as claimants in this proceeding."”' Rather, in

this proceeding, it is the Bolivian entity, AdT, that is named as claimant and it
is that choice that makes Article 1(b) (iii) the basis for this objection.

220. Moreover, it is noteworthy that no suggestion is made that there is yet some other
entity, beyond all those mentioned in Figure 2, which controls AdT. Whatever entity (or
entities) controls AdT, it (or they) is (or are) depicted in Figure 2. Claimant asserts that both
IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. qualify as Dutch entities controlling AdT for the purposes of the
BIT. Respondent argues that the true controller of AdT at all times was Bechtel, a U.S.
corporation.

221. Recognizing what this objection does not concern, the Tribunal identifies two
questions raised by the application of Article 1(b)(ii) to this case.

First, Article 1(b)(iii) requires that AdT, the Claimant and a Bolivian corporation, be
“controlled directly or indirectly” by either IWT B.V. or IWH B.Y. This question has
been argued extensively by the Parties and is primarily a question as to the
interpretation and application of the phrase “controlled directly or indirectly” found
in Article 1 of the BIT.

Second, as can be seen in Figure 2, between AdT and the various Dutch companies
is IW S.ar.l, a Luxembourg corporation. IW S.a.r1. is 100 percent owned by the
various Dutch entities. It, however, owns only 55 percent of AdT. For AdT to be
“controlled directly or indirectly”, it must be the case that IW S.a.r.l. controls AdT.
This question was not argued by the Parties in their written filings, but was raised as
a part of the Hearing.

 

222. The Parties disagree on the legal test governing the question of whether AdT is
“controlled directly or indirectly” by either IWT B.V. or IWH B.V. For the Claimant, 100
percent ownership necessarily equals control and majority shareholding itself is sufficiently
determinative of control.'” For the Respondent, the word “control” means there must be
more than “ownership.” For the Respondent, control means the exercise of powers or
direction, not merely the legal potential to do so." Thus Respondent uses terms as “real

control” in its submissions to ask for “something more’”’”” to determine the “reality of the

'9t ‘The Tribunal notes that Respondent’s First Objection would apply equally if the Dutch entities had been
named as claimants. Respondent’s Second Objection turns particularly, however, on the naming of AdT as
Claimant. It may be that there are yet unexpressed reasons why AdT, rather that none of the Dutch entities,
was named as Claimant, The Tribunal will consider the relevance of such reasons, if any, if and when they are
expressed.

12 AdT argues, for example, that: “In a situation where share ownership is clearly at a level that gives control,
share ownership is the only relevant factor.” Cl. Mem., p. 46, 134.

'83 ‘Thus Bolivia replies, for example, that “AdT’s claim that majority sharcholding constitutes per se control for
purposes of the Bilateral Investment Treaty is exactly the sort of formalistic result that the ‘control’ test is
intended to avoid... Control does not in fact reside in AdT’s up-the-corporate-chain Netherlands
shareholders, It resides elsewhere, at a locus that would not permit ICSID jurisdiction to obtain.”, Resp.
Counter Mem., p. 59, 9122.

194 Resp. Counter Mem., p. 67, 4 140.

'85 In oral submissions made to the Tribunal, Counsel for Bolivia stated that “we believe that the answer to the
question of who controls AdT requires something more than a mete showing of majority ownership of voting

50

corporate personality.”’"* Claimant argues that 100 percent ownership entails the legal
potential to control and that Respondent’s use of modifiers for “control,” such as effective
or actual, is unwarranted.’ Respondent contends that control is a factual question
particularly relevant to situations where the company alleged to control another company in
fact has little, if any, capacity to exercise such control.’

 

223. Thus the crucial point of disagreement is that Claimant, on the one hand, interprets
the phrase “controlled directly or indirectly” as requiring only the legal potential to control
the Claimant and that the phrase thus potentially encompasses not only the ultimate parent
of AdT, but also the subsidiaries of the parent above the Claimant. The Respondent, on the
other hand, interprets the phrase “controlled directly or indirectly” as requiring “ultimate”
control of AdT or, if the phrase is not limited to the ultimate controller, then “effective”,
“actual” control of AdT. Thus the difference in view between the Parties is not between
“control” and “ownership,” but rather between “control” as requiring the legal potential to
control and “control” as requiring the actual exercise of control.

224. Finally, it is important to observe that the framing of the issue before the Tribunal
is rendered necessary by Claimant’s reliance on its documentary evidence of WT B.V.’s and
IWH B.V.’s legal ownership interest in, and resultant potential to control of, AdT as
sufficient proof to establish jurisdiction under the BIT. As noted above, Respondent has
requested the production of documents from Claimant bearing on the control in fact of AdT
by IWT B.V. or IWH B.V. Claimant opposes such a production request arguing that such
documents legally are immaterial and that such a broad discovery order as a practical matter
would be burdensome. In addition, as discussed in paragraph 246, infra, Respondent does
not make clear what evidence would be sufficient to establish the exercise of control argued
by Respondent to be required by the BIT. The issue as framed by Claimant might be mooted
if the Tribunal ordered the production of documents and such documents established not
only the legal potential to control, but also the exercise of control. But, given that
Respondent has not indicated what evidence would establish effective control, there is not a
basis to make an appropriately tailored order for production of documents. Moreover, it is
Claimant’s prerogative to structure its claim and in doing so it runs the risk of the Tribunal
denying jurisdiction in this matter.

 

 

shares, particularly because of the unique facts and circumstances of this particular case.” Oral Statement of
Bolivia’s Counsel, Dana Contratto, (February 10, 2004), p. 425, Lines 1-5.

196 Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 66-67, § 139.

'97 In oral submissions to the Tribunal, Counsel for AdT' stated:, “In the claimant’s pleading, the word
“control” is put simply as control. But the respondent, when it discusses control, in the manner that the
respondent wishes to convince the Tribunal should be, in fact, the standard of control in the BIT, they always
have to modify the word “control.” They use words such as “effective control, ultimate control, actual control,
real control.” But these words do not exist in the Bilateral Investment Treaty [...]-” Oral Statement of AdT’s
Counsel, Robert Volterra, (February 10, 2004), p. 287, Lines 4-14.

188 Resp. Counter Mem., p. 67, 4 140.

 

 

51

The Meaning of the Phrase: “controlled directly or indirectly”
The Ordinary Meaning of the Phrase: “controlled directly or indirectly”

225. Article 1(b)(iii) provides that a national of a Contracting Party includes “legal
persons controlled directly or indirectly, by nationals of that Contracting Party, but
constituted in accordance with the law of the other Contracting Party.”

226. Article 31(2) of the Vienna Convention requires that the interpreter as one part of
his task look to the “ordinary meaning” of a word or phrase unless a “special meaning” was
intended by the parties. The phrase requiring interpretation is “controlled directly or
indirectly” where “controlled” is the past participle of the transitive verb “control.” As
anticipated by the Vienna Convention itself in requiring the interpreter to look not only to
the ordinary meaning of a phrase, but also to the context in which it is found and in light of
the object and purpose of the document, the ordinary meaning of “controlled directly or
indirectly,” although clearly an essential element of the task of interpretation, is not
determinative in this instance.

227. To find the “ordinary meaning” of the word “controlled”, the Tribunal sought
guidance from standard desk dictionaries. One standard American English dictionary
defined the transitive verb “control” as “to exercise restraining or directing influence over...
to have power over.”'” According to another desk dictionary, the verb control can be
defined as to “manage: to exercise power or authority over something such as a business or a
nation.”””” Similarly, a standard British English dictionary defines “control” as both “the fact
of controlling” and “the function or power of directing and regulating; domination,
command, sway.””' On the one hand, the use of the word “manage” in the second
quotation seems to conform to the Respondent’s view that control involves actual exercise
of powers or direction. On the other hand, the words “power” and “authority” point in the
opposite direction. “Authority” is defined simply as “the right or power to enforce rules or
give orders””” and “power” as either “the ability, skill, or capacity to do something” or “the
authority to act or do something according to a law or rule.”*” Thus while some definitions
suggest the actual exercise of influence, others emphasize the possession of power over an
object. Thus, the ordinary meaning of “control” would seemingly encompass both actual
exercise of powers or direction and the rights arising from the ownership of shares.

228. The Tribunal notes that Respondent argues, among other things, that the use of
the word “controlled,” rather than “control,” is significant.“ Like the Tribunal, the

19 Webster’s On-Line Dictionary, www.m-w.com (2005); I WEBSTER’s THIRD NEW INTERNATIONAL
DICTIONARY, 496 (1971) (“to exercise restraining or directing influence over ... [and] [to] have power over
200 ENCARTA WORLD ENGLISH DICTIONARY, 1999, p. 395.

20 OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY III 851-52, 853 (2nd ed. 1989).

202 ENCARTA WORLD ENGLISH DICTIONARY, 1999, p. 113

703 Td. p. 411.

4 The Tribunal notes that the R
rather “control.” Respondent, for example, primarily argues that the phrase “controlled directly or indirectly” in
the BIT is coextensive with the phrase “foreign control” in the ICSID Convention. See, e.g, Resp. Counter
Mem., at $113.

 

itself is i i on the signi of the use of “ ed,”

52

Respondent starts with the definitional meaning of “control,” but from that definition then
argues that:

The word used in the Treaty, "controlled," is a participle ie, a verb used in adjective form.
To say that an object is "controlled" is different from saying that an object is capable of
being controlled; an object that is "controlled" is actually controlled. "Controlled" is not a
complex or unusual word. To apply the word in this case means that AdT must have been
controlled, ie, commanded, regulated, restrained, or directed, by a Dutch company or
companies.2"8

Respondent thus argues that the use of the past participle ‘controlled’ in Article 1(b)(iii) of
the BIT implies the requirement of the exercise of actual or effective control.

229. Indeed, the general definition of “controlled” rather than “control” is supportive
of Respondent’s argument. The word “controlled” in some instances is defined simply as the
past participle of “control” and the reader is referred to the definition of control. But in
other instances, “controlled” is defined more specifically as “[rJestrained, managed or kept
within bounds,” and “held in check, restrained, dominated.”*” Thus the past participle in
some instances carries with it a reference to the actual exercise of restraint.

230. The Tribunal notes that Article 31(4) of the Vienna Convention indicates that a
special meaning shall be given to a term if the parties so intended the special meaning. There
is no indication in the record that any special meaning for the word “controlled” was
intended by these contracting parties. The Tribunal observes, however, that the negotiators
of the Netherlands — Bolivia BIT likely possessed a sophisticated knowledge of business and
law. For such persons, the ordinary meaning of a word or phrase also includes the legal
meanings given to such words or phrases. The Tribunal thus turns to consider the legal
meaning of “control” and controlled.”

231. The legal definition for the verb “control” provides several meanings for control.”
The first definition for “control” is “to exercise power or influence over <the judge
controlled the proceedings>.” The second definition is “to regulate or govern <by law, the
budget officer controls expenditures>.” The final definition is “to have a controlling interest
in <the five shareholders controlled the company>.” The first definition of control suggests
the actual exercise of control with emphasis on the right to exercise control over an object
but does not suggest ownership of the object. The second definition similarly points to a
right to control but not ownership of that which is controlled. The third definition of
control ties control to ownership interest providing that a “controlling interest” is
understood as a “legal share in something ... sufficient ownership of stock in a company to
control policy and management; especially a greater-than-50% ownership interest in an
enterprise.”

205 Resp. Rej., at §] 92. The only other reference to the significance of adjectival past participle use of “control”
was made during the hearing, see Transcript (February 10, 2004), p. 422-423.

206 MERRIAM WEBSTER’S INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY 497 (1993).

27 Oxford English Dictionary III 853 (2nd ed. 1989).

208 BLACK’s LAW DICTIONARY, 353 (8 Ed., 2004).

209 Td., at 828.

53

232. The legal definitions of “controlled” are particularly instructive as they cut directly
against the significance to the adjectival past participle usage suggested by Respondent. The
phrase “controlled group (controlled corporate groups)” is defined as “
corporations whose stock is substantially held by five or fewer persons.” “Controlled
corporation (controlled company)" is defined as a “corporation in which the majority of the
stock is held by one individual or firm'?"' And “controlled foreign corporation” is defined as
“a foreign corporation in which more than 50% of the stock is owned by U.S. citizens who
each own 10% or more of the voting stock." All three of these definitions refer solely to the
power to control and not its actual exercise.

two or more

 

 

 

 

233. The Tribunal thus concludes that the word “controlled,” like the word “control,” is
not determinative. The adjective “controlled” may indicate that “control” was actually
exercised at some point in the past or it may mean that another possessed the capacity to
control that company in the past (or indeed at the present moment). On the one hand,
“controlled” may mean that an entity was subject to the actual control of another. On the
other, “controlled” may mean that an entity was subject to the controlling capacity of
another.

234. The Tribunal observes that there is no indication from any of the dictionaries
consulted that “control” necessarily entails a degree of active exercise of powers or direction.
If the parties had intended this result, a better choice of word for the BIT would have been
“managed” rather than “controlled.” In addition, although the contracting states would have
eliminated uncertainty by utilizing phrasing such as “under direct or indirect control of” or
“subject to the direct or indirect control of,” rather than “controlled directly or indirectly” by
another company, the ambiguous meaning of “controlled” leads the Tribunal to find the
difference in phrasing to be not determinative.

 

22 Respondent argues that in light of the lack of a specific definition for “control” in
the BIT, the Tribunal should look to the concept of “control” as it has been used in defining
corporate nationality under international law. Bolivia states that there are four traditional
tests for determining corporate nationality of an entity. Both the corporate seat test and the
incorporating jurisdiction test “focus on objective factors for the purposes of simplicity, and
ignore the possibility that the assigned nationality may not reflect the reality of the
company’s activities.””'” The other two tests focus respectively on control and on
predominant interest in the company and, Bolivia argues, states select the “control” test
because it is “designed to focus on the reality behind the corporate personality ... [and is]
often used ‘to avoid inequitable results.’ ””’ There is, however, no indication in the record
that the contracting parties had such a particular special meaning for control in mind. Nor
should such intent be assumed since the Tribunal finds the contexts of foreign investment
protection and the regulation of corporate activity to be sufficiently distinct.”

 

 

210 BLACK’s LAW DICTIONARY, 353 (8 Ed., 2004).

2 Td., at 365.

212 Resp. Counter Mem., p. 57, | 116.

23 Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 57-58, 4 118 (citations omitted).

244 Tt is perilous to transfer meaning from one regulatory framework to another where the motivations
underlying the choice of terminology often will be determinative. For example in the taxation area, the Tribunal
found the legal definitions which emphasize the capacity to control (see para. 230 of the Decision) to be
utilized in the definition of “controlled” corporations in the several taxation statutes. According to the U.S.

54

236. The word “controlled” is modified by the phrase “directly or indirectly.” This
phrase clearly indicates that one entity may control another entity in one of two ways. An
entity that is directly controlled implies that there is no intermediary between the two entities,
while an entity that is ézdirectly controlled implies that there is one or more intermediary entities
between the two.

237. As stated above, one prong of Respondent’s interpretation is that the phrase
“controlled directly or indirectly” points to the “ultimate controller.” In juxtaposition to
Respondent’s interpretation, Claimant argues that “[p]ursuant to the BIT test, it is possible
for more than one entity to be a controlling entity for the purposes of the BIT.” The
Tribunal agrees with the Claimant’s view. The phrase, “directly or indirectly,” in modifying
the term “controlled” creates the possibility of there simultaneously being a direct controller
and one or more indirect controllers. The BIT does not limit the scope of eligible claimants
to only the “ultimate controller.”

238. This conclusion, however, does not necessarily exclude the second prong of
Respondent’s interpretation, namely that any controller, whether it be a direct or indirect
controller, must exercise actual control. Claimant in applying this phrase does so with an
emphasis on the legal capacity to control that flows from ownership. Thus IW Sa.t.l. is the
direct controller of AdT as it is the first entity in the chain of controlling ownership above
AdT, IWT B.V. and IWH B.V., as entities above IW S.a.r.1., would both be indirect
controllers. Respondent, in contrast, in applying this phrase emphasizes actual control and
argues that Bechtel actually controls AdT, and that the legal intermediate entities are not
relevant in that they exercise no control over AdT.

239. The Tribunal continues the task of interpretation by considering the other two
core elements of the method of interpretation contained in the Vienna Convention: the
context in which the phrase “controlled directly or indirectly” is found and the object and
purpose of the BIT.

 

Internal Revenue Service, a “controlled foreign corporation” is “any foreign corporation in which more than 50
percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote is owned directly, indirectly,
or constructively by U.S. shareholders on any day during the taxable year of such foreign corporation or mote
than 50% of the total value of the stock is owned directly, indirectly or constructively by U.S. shareholders on
any day during the taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation” Internal Revenue Manual, Section
4.61.7.3, at http://www.irs.gov/irm/part4/ch46s07.html. Likewise, Canada in its Corporation Capital Tax Act
defines a “subsidiary controlled corporation” as “a corporation of which more than fifty per cent of the issued
share capital, with full voting rights under all circumstances, is owned, directly or indirectly, by another
corporation.” An Act Respecting A Tax on the Capital of Certain Financial Corporations, Revised Statutes
1989, amended 1990, c. 10, s. 2; 1992, c. 15, s. 2; 1993, c. 17; 2004, c 3, s. 3, available at
:/ /www.gov.ns.ca/legi/lege/statutes/corpet.htm Section 2(z). The motivations in taxation that might
suggest such a definition are unknown to the Tribunal, however, and the Tribunal, as stated in the text, declines
to drawn inferences in such cases. The Tribunal similarly declines to draw inferences from other definitions of
“control” in the U.S. regulatory contexts of its Securities Exchange Act or the American Law Institute
Principles of Corporate Governance, as cited by Respondent's Expert Professor Fox.
215 Cl, Mem., p. 53, 9 148.

 

 

 

The Phrase in Its Context and in Light of the Object and Purpose of the BIT

240. It is in the consideration of the context in which the phrase “controlled directly or
indirectly” is found, and in light of the object and purpose of the BIT, that the Tribunal
finds the basis for the interpretation of the phrase.

241. As to the object and purpose of the BIT, the Tribunal notes that the Preamble to
the BIT provides:

The Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and The Government of the Republic
of Bolivia,

Desiring to strengthen the traditional ties of friendship between their countries, to extend
and intensify the economic relations between them particularly with respect to investments
by the nationals of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

Recognizing that agreement upon the treatment to be accorded to such investments will
stimulate the flow of capital and technology and the economic development of the
Contracting Parties and that fair and equitable treatment of investment is desirable[...]2'°

‘Thus the object and purpose of the treaty is to “stimulate the flow of capital and
technology” and the Contracting Parties explicitly recognize that such stimulation will result
from “agreement upon the treatment to be accorded to ... investments” by “the national of
one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party.”

242. As to the context in which the phrase “controlled directly or indirectly” is found,
the Tribunal notes that Article 1 in defining the concept of “national” not only defines the
scope of persons and entities that are to be regarded as the beneficiaries of the substantive
tights of the BIT but also defines those persons and entities to whom the offer of arbitration
is directed and who thus are potential claimants. Given the context of defining the scope of
eligible claimants, the word “controlled” is not intended as an alternative to ownership since
control without an ownership interest would define a group of entities not necessarily
possessing an interest which could be the subject of a claim. In this sense, “controlled”
indicates a quality of the ownership interest.

243. The question therefore is how the term “controlled” in Article 1(b)(iii) is meant to
qualify “ownership.” Claimant argues that “control” is a capacity that the ownership interest
possesses. If one entity owns 100% of another entity, then the first entity, in Claimant’s
view, possesses the capacity to control the other entity and that entity is a “controlled” entity.
For the Claimant, the word “control,” rather than simply “ownership,” is employed in the
BIT to address the situation where a minority shareholder through, for example, voting
rights possesses the capacity to control the other entity. Respondent argues that “control” is
a capacity that the ownership interest must exercise. Moreover, Respondent appears to argue
that that exercise of control must be done by the owning entity itself.”

216 It is widely accepted that the preamble language of a treaty can be particularly helpful in ascertaining the
motive, object and circumstances of a treaty. Dolzer and Stevens note in their book on BITs that even though
preambles rarely contain binding obligations, they may serve as “useful aids to interpretation of the treaty.”
RUDOLF DOLZER AND MARGRETE STEVENS, BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATIES, 20 (1995).

217 See e.g. Oral Statement Counsel for Bolivia, Dana Contratto, (February 9, 2004), pp. 422-423, Lines 17-21.

        

56

244. The Tribunal does not find Respondent’s view to be persuasive for three reasons.

245. First, Claimant’s view that “control” is a quality that accompanies ownership finds
support generally in the law. An entity that owns 100% of the shares of another entity
necessarily possesses the power to control the second entity. The first entity may decline to
exercise its control, but that is its choice. Moreover, the first entity may be held responsible
under various corporate law doctrines for the actions of its subsidiary, whether or not it
actually exercised control over that subsidiary’s actions. Respondent contends that IWT B.V.
and IWH B.V. are mere “shells” which cannot even decline to exercise its possible control.
Holding companies (if that is all IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. are in this case) owning
substantial assets (here the rights under the Concession) are, however, both a common and
legal device for corporate organization and face the same legal obligations of corporations
generally.”'* The Tribunal acknowledges that the corporate form may be abused and that
form may be set aside for fraud or on other grounds. As outlined in paragraph 331, infra, the
‘Tribunal finds no such extraordinary grounds to be present on the evidence.

246. Second, Respondent’s argument that “control” can be satisfied by only a certain
level of actual control has not been defined by the Respondent with sufficient particularity.
Rather, the concept is sufficiently vague as to be unmanageable. Respondent asserts that the
phrase “controlled directly or indirectly” referred to the “ultimate controller” provides a
defined standard, but as stated in paragraph 237, the Tribunal rejects this interpretation as
inconsistent with the language “directly or indirectly.” Once one admits of the possibility of
several controllers, then the definition of what constitutes sufficient “actual” control for any
particular controller, particularly when an entity may delegate such actual control, becomes
problematic. This becomes apparent with Respondent’s difficulty in offering the Tribunal
the details of its “actual” control test. In response to a question of the Tribunal as to the
details of an actual control test, counsel for Respondent stated that “[cJontrol is not a — a
objective — there is not an objective bright —line test for control in a corporate organization
control sense. You have to know details.””"” Indeed, Respondent’s argument that “control”
can be satisfied by only a certain level of actual control by one entity over another entity
ignores the reality that such exercise of control may be delegated to a subsidiary or even to
an independent subcontractor.” Moreover, the many dimensions of actual control of a

 

218 The Tribunal agrees with the Ancoven tribunal which, although working in the different context of Article 25
of the ICSDI Convention, when faced with a similar argument concerning the substance of the entity said to
“control” the claimant in that dispute, wrote: “Although [respondent] views [the corporation said to control the
claimant] as a mere formality, this formality is the fundamental building block of the global economy. Antopista
Concesionada de Venezuela CA v, Bolivarian Republic of Venexnela (hereinafter referred to as “Aucoven”), in its
Decision on Jurisdiction of September 27, 2001 at | 67, reprinted at 16 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 469 (2001), 6 ICSID
419 (2004).

219 Oral Statement by Respondent’s Counsel, Dana Contratto, (February 11, 2004), p.595, Lines 9-12;
Reasoning similar to that of Tribunal can be found in Aucoven, supra note 217, where the tribunal stated:

69. The thicket into which Venezuela would lead the Arbitral Tribunal is precisely what the
drafters of the ICSID Convention decided to avoid. Finding the “ultimate”, or “effective”,
or “true” controller would often involve difficult and protracted factual investigations,
without any assurance as to the result.

220 ‘The Tribunal is aware that the Respondent in particular asserts that IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. are in its view
mere shells that do not oversee the operations of Claimant at all. For that limiting case, there could be an
administrable factual test of managerial control. However, the vagueness of Respondent's factual inquiry would

57

corporate entity range from day to day operations up to strategic decision-making. Would
the minutes of one Board of Directors meeting delegating to a consulting firm the
management of a majority owned company be evidence of actual control of that company?
Would the minutes of one Board of Directors meeting delegating to a parent or subsidiary
company management of a majority owned company be evidence of actual control of the
company? Would the day to day direction by one company of the operations of a majority
owned company not be sufficient evidence of actual control if a parent company dictated
which business opportunities would be taken up by the majority owned company and which
would not? The difficulty in articulating a test in the Tribunal’s view reflects not only the fact
that the Respondent did not provide such a test, but also the possibility that it is not
practicable to do so and that, as discussed in the next paragraph, the resultant uncertainty
would directly frustrate the object and purpose of the BIT.

247. Third, the uncertainty inherent in Respondent’s call for a test based on an uncertain
level of actual control would not be consistent with the object and purpose of the BIT. The
BIT is intended to stimulate investment by the provision of an agreement on how
investments will be treated, that treatment including the possibility of arbitration before
ICSID. If an investor can not ascertain whether their ownership of a locally incorporated
vehicle for the investment will qualify for protection, then the effort of the BIT to stimulate
investment will be frustrated.

248. Before reaching a conclusion as to the interpretation of the phrase “controlled
directly or indirectly” under Article 31 of the Vienna Convention, the Tribunal turns to a
unique aspect of this proceeding, namely its consideration of the relevance of several
statements of the Netherlands, the non-disputing State party to the BIT.

Article 31(3) of the Vienna Convention and the Significance to be Accorded to
Statements of the Dutch Government

249. Respondent places great emphasis upon various statements of the Government of
the Netherlands made in 2002. Respondent argues these statements support Respondent’s
interpretation of the BIT. Moreover, Respondent argues that the statements of the Dutch
Government result in the unprecedented situation where both State Parties to the BIT agree
that the Tribunal does not possess jurisdiction over the dispute before it: “This is the only
ICSID case that we know of in which both state parties to the Treaty that’s being invoked by
the Claimant are on record as saying that that Treaty does not apply to this case.”

250. The Tribunal observes that Article 31(3) of the Vienna Convention provides that
“[t}here shall be taken into account, together with the context: (a) any subsequent agreement
between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its

 

apply to all assertions that one entity controls another entity. The BIT does not suggest that there be one test
for “shells” and another for all situations other than shells. More importantly, the pejorative use of the poorly
defined word “shell” points to hypothetical situations more appropriately addressed by doctrines created to
address the fraudulent or abusive use of corporate form, and, as found by the Tribunal at paragraph 331, infra,
neither of these situations is apparent in this case.

221 Oral statement of Bolivia’s Counsel, Alexandre de Gramont, (February 9, 2004), p.121, Lines 16-20.

58

provisions; (b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the
agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation [...].”

251. The position taken by Bolivia in this proceeding and the statements made by
Ministries of the Government of the Netherlands to the Parliament of the Netherlands,
despite the fact that they both relate to the present dispute, are not a “subsequent agreement
between the parties.” The coincidence of several statements does not make them a joint
statement. And, it is clear that in the present case, there was no intent that these statements
be regarded as an agreement. The Tribunal therefore examines whether the Bolivian position
in these proceedings and the internal statements of Ministries of the government of the
Netherlands constitute “subsequent practice ... which establishes the agreement of the
parties” regarding the interpretation of the BIT.

252. The Dutch statements were made a part of these proceedings via the expert
opinion of Professor Nico Schrijver, submitted by Claimant. According to Professor
Schrijver, it is the custom in the Netherlands that a Member of Parliament may submit a
question in writing to a Ministry of the Government of the Netherlands. That Ministry will
take the lead in preparing a written reply, and that process may involve consultation by that
Ministry with other Ministries. Professor Schrijver’s opinion drew the attention of
Respondent and the Tribunal to three parliamentary questions and replies made between
February 21, 2002 and June 5, 2002. It is the third question and reply that is argued by the
Respondent to be potentially relevant.” The last exchange must be approached, however, in
light of the first two exchanges.

253. The first exchange was initiated on February 21, 2002, when Dutch MP Van
Bommel posed several written questions to the State Secretary for Economic Affairs and the
Minister for Development Cooperation concerning, inter alia, whether certain corporations
could invoke the Dutch-Bolivian BIT in the specific dispute addressed by this Tribunal.”
On behalf of the Minister for Development Cooperation and his Ministry, the State
Secretary for Economic Affairs (Minister Ybema) replied on March 6, 2002. He declined to
state whether the current dispute fell under the BIT, stating instead, inter alia, that the answer
is up to the “discretion of the arbitration tribunal to which a dispute has been submitted.”

254. The second exchange was initiated on March 25, 2002, when MP Van Bommel
submitted further written questions, requesting that the State Secretary and Minister “state
clearly and unambiguously whether these multinationals can invoke the Dutch-Bolivian
investment treaty in this case.” The State Secretary replied on April 6, 2002, and referred
the MP to his March 6, 2002 reply to the earlier questions from MP Van Bommel, and
otherwise only making comments of a general nature.

255. The third and final exchange was initiated on April 18, 2002, when a five member
group of Dutch MPs, including MP Van Bommel, submitted further questions to the

22 Resp. Counter Mem., pp. 27-28, 4 49-51.
23 Parliamentary questions (“Kamervragen”), Parliamentary year 2001-2002, no. 765.

 

25 Parliamentary questions (“Kamervragen”), Parliamentary year 2001-2002, no. 959.

59

Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment, the Minister for Development
Cooperation and the State Secretary for Economic Affairs.”° The MPs asked:

Are you familiar with the publication ‘Water, Human Right or Merchandise’ of the
association Milicudefensie (‘Friends of the Earth’)? What is your general opinion on this
publication?”

On behalf of himself and the State Secretary, the Minister for Housing, Spatial Planning
and Environment (Minister Pronk) replied on June 5, 2002:

Yes, Access to safe and clean water is important. The publication brings a number of aspects
of the complicated water issue to the attention of a larger public. The topic deserves this
attention. However, the formulation in this pamphlet is sometimes factually incorrect or
suggestive. One particular point I would like to mention with emphasis. On p. 16 (Water war
in Bolivia) it is stated that Aguas del Tunari can resort to the dispute settlement commission
of the World Bank under the Dutch-Bolivian Investment Treaty. This is incorrect. As
recently stated in response to questions of MP Van Bommel [citing to the previous replies to
Van Bommel], the Government is of the view that the investment treaty is not applicable to
this particular case.228

256. Claimant, through Professor Schrijver’s testimony, states that there “appears to be
”° Professor Schtijver’s view is that the third reply applies
“the incorrect facts to the correct legal assessment given in the Government’s earlier
replies.”””

some confusion as to the facts.

257. The third reply from The Netherlands government is inconsistent with the first
two replies and appears to refer incorrectly to the latter. As a result, little can be concluded
from the three written replies of The Netherlands government. Nonetheless, noting, the
great weight placed on these replies by the Respondent, the Tribunal decided that further
limited information as to the basis for the written replies of The Netherlands could assist the
Tribunal in its work.

258. As noted in paragraph 47, the Tribunal in a letter dated October 1, 2004, wrote to
the Legal Advisor of the Foreign Ministry of the Netherlands posing several specific
questions. Given that this letter is the first inquiry of a non-disputing state party to a BIT,
the entire text of the letter is attached to this decision as Appendix II. The Tribunal
emphasizes three aspects of this letter of inquiry, however. First, the Tribunal wrote that:

The Tribunal recognizes the obligation of the Netherlands under [Article 27 of | the ICSID
Convention to not provide diplomatic protection to its nationals in the case of investment disputes
covered by the Convention, In this sense, the Tribunal wishes to emphasize that it does not seek the
view of the Netherlands as to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in this matter, rather it seeks only to secure
the comments of the Netherlands as to specific documentary bases for written responses which the
Dutch government provided to parliamentary questions.

26 Parliamentary questions (“Kamervragen”), Parliamentary year 2001-2002, no. 1229.
27 Id, question 1.

28 Td, answer 1.

29 Cl, Mem., Ex. 46, Expert Opinion of Professor Schrijver, p. 18, | 40.

2 Id

60

Second, the Tribunal stated:

‘The ICSID Convention entrusts the Tribunal with deciding upon its jurisdiction in this matter. ‘The
parties to this arbitration have put in issue provisions of the BIT between the Netherlands and
Bolivia. Given that the Government of the Netherlands is not a party or otherwise present in this
arbitration, the Tribunal concludes that information from the Government of the Netherlands would
assist the work of the Tribunal. Given further the above quoted Article 27 of the ICSID Convention
and the fact that the Netherlands is not a party to this arbitration, the Tribunal is also of the view that
such questions must be specific and narrowly tailored, aimed at obtaining information supporting
interpretative positions of general application rather than ones related to a specific case. It is the
opinion of the Tribunal that it possesses the authority to seek this information under Rule 34 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Third, the Tribunal asked:

With all of these considerations in mind, the Tribunal notes that the written responses to
parliamentary questions, summarized [in the letter] and attached in full, do not in and of themselves
provide reasons of general application. If the Government's statement replying to the Parliamentary
questions of 18 April 2002 reflects an interpretative position of general application held by the
Government of the Netherlands, the Tribunal requests that the Government provide the ‘Tribunal
with information (of the type suggested by Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties as being possibly relevant) upon which that general interpretative position is based.

259. As stated in paragraph 49, the Tribunal received on December 14, 2004, a reply
letter from Mr. Lammers dated October 29, 2004, to which there was attached a document
entitled “Interpretation of the Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal protection of
investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Bolivia, signed
on 19 March 1992 and entered into force on first November 1994.”

260. The Tribunal first observes that the document attached to Mr. Lammers’ letter
contained only comments of a general nature that possibly may be relevant to the task of
confirming an interpretation under Article 32 (“supplementary means of interpretation”) of
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. It does not provide the Tribunal, however,
with any information of the type suggested by Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties as being possibly relevant and upon which a general interpretative position
may be based. The Tribunal has made no use of this document in arriving at its decision.

261. Second, the Tribunal observes that Mr. Lammers in his reply cover letter states that
the answers given by the Dutch government to this series of parliamentary questions were
based on information from the press which at the time that the answers were given “may not
necessarily have been correct.””"

262. Given these first two observations, the Tribunal can find no “subsequent practice

. which establishes an agreement of the parties” regarding the interpretation of the BIT. In
addition, the response from the Netherlands provides no additional information of the type
suggested by Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties as being possibly
relevant and upon which a general interpretative position might be based.

isterie van Buietenlanse Zaken to

 

3! See October 29, 2004 Letter from Johan Lammers, Legal Adviser, Mini:
David Caron, President of Tribunal.

263. The Tribunal’s third final observation is that it clearly is not presented with, and
therefore need not consider, the situation where the two state parties to a BIT both express
the position that a tribunal lacks jurisdiction over a particular dispute before a tribunal. The
inconsistency between the first and second replies of The Netherlands government, on the
one hand, and its third reply, on the other hand, and the apparent incorrect reference in the
latter to the first two replies does not, in the Tribunal’s view, express with any clarity the
position that the BIT does not apply in this case. *” Further, and in any event, the Tribunal
emphasizes, however, its firm view that it is the Tribunal, and not the contracting patties,
that is the arbiter of its jurisdiction.

Conclusion as to the Meaning of “controlled directly or indirectly”

264. The Tribunal, by majority, concludes that the phrase “controlled directly or
indirectly” means that one entity may be said to control another entity (either directly, that is
without an intermediary entity, or indirectly) if that entity possesses the legal capacity to
control the other entity. Subject to evidence of particular restrictions on the exercise of
voting rights, such legal capacity is to be ascertained with reference to the percentage of
shares held. In the case of a minority shareholder, the legal capacity to control an entity may
exist by reason of the percentage of shares held, legal rights conveyed in instruments or
agreements such as the articles of incorporation or shareholders’ agreements, or a
combination of these. In the Tribunal’s view, the BIT does not require actual day-to-day or
ultimate control as part of the “controlled directly or indirectly” requirement contained in
Article 1(b)(ii). The Tribunal observes that it is not charged with determining all forms
which control might take. It is the Tribunal’s conclusion, by majority, that, in the
circumstances of this case, where an entity has both majority shareholdings and ownership
of a majority of the voting rights, control as embodied in the operative phrase “controlled
directly or indirectly” exists.

   

265. The Declaration of José Luis Alberro-Semerena dissents to the Tribunal’s decision
as to the interpretation given to the phrase “controlled directly or indirectly.” The difference
between the majority and the dissent as to Respondent’s request for production for
documents follows directly from their difference in the interpretation of that phrase.

Confirming the Interpretation of “controlled directly or indirectly”

 

266. The Tribunal turns to an Article 32 analysis to confirm its interpretation of the
phrase “controlled directly or indirectly.” In doing so, the Tribunal looks to:

 

a. The Negotiating History of the BIT

b. The Jurisprudence regarding Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention
c. The Holdings of Other Arbitral Awards Concerning “Control”

d. The BIT Practice Generally of Both Nations

282 ‘The majority of the Tribunal accepts that the first two replies by the Dutch government properly reflect its
view or intention which is consistent with our view that the Tribunal must be the arbiter of its jurisdiction, It is
for an arbitral tribunal to determine in specific factual circumstances whether an investor falls within the scope
of a bilateral investment treaty.

62

267. The Tribunal is aware that the Respondent raises many of these same sources
either to confirm its interpretation of the phrase “controlled directly or indirectly” or
because it views the interpretation offered by the Claimant to be “manifestly absurd or
unreasonable.”

The Negotiating History of the BIT

268. In Order No. 1, the Tribunal requested “that both Parties submit such evidence as
is available as to the interpretation and practice that the Kingdom of The Netherlands and
the Republic of Bolivia have placed on the relevant portions of the Bilateral Investment
Treaty.”

269. The Claimant presented evidence in the form of an expert report and expert
testimony from Dr. Nico Shrijver, Professor of Public International Law at the Free
University in Amsterdam and a member of the Netherland’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Advisory Committee on International Law Affairs. The Respondent presented evidence in
the form of oral argument. Despite such efforts, the Tribunal has before it little evidence of
the negotiating history of the BIT.

270. The BIT was signed by the Netherlands and Bolivia on March 10, 1992 and went
into force on November 1, 1994.”

271. The Dutch government submitted an Explanatory Note to its Parliament after the
BIT was negotiated indicating that the agreement provides for:

[Gluarantees...with respect to expropriation of an investment and possible disputes can be
submitted to neutral international arbitration. 2

272. The Dutch government in its Explanatory Note makes only brief comments
focusing particularly on two of the differences in the text from the Model Netherlands BIT.
First, Article 1 changed the expression “win natural resources” to “exploit natural
resources.” Second, Article 9 noted that Bolivia was not yet a party to ICSID so that
references were added in Article 9 providing for ad hoc arbitration.

273. In oral argument, the Respondent summarized its understanding of the treaty as
permitting “Bolivian entities controlled by Dutch nationals to seek the jurisdiction of
IcsID.”"”

274. This sparse negotiating history thus offers little additional insight into the meaning
of the aspects of the BIT at issue, neither particularly confirming nor contradicting the
‘Tribunal’s interpretation.

 

23 List of relating to the ion and reciprocal of of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands in Expert Opinion-Dutch Practice, Professor. Nico J. Schtijver, p. 22. (Ex. B to Cl. Mem.)

24 Id, at § 24, footnote 18.

285 Oral Statement by Respondent’s Counsel, Alexandre de Gramont, (February 10, 2004), p. 124, Lines 15-17.

63

The Jurisprudence Regarding Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention

275. The jurisdictional aspect of the ICSID Convention relevant to the present
proceeding is Article 25(2)(b). It provides in relevant part:

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(b) any juridical person ... which, becanse of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be
treated as a national of another Contracting State for purposes of this Convention, (Emphasis

added.)

276. The parties both make reference to various tribunal awards, scholarly commentary,
and the drafting history regarding the use of the word “foreign control” in the ICSID
Convention at Article 25(2)(b) in order to illuminate the meaning of “controlled directly or
indirectly” in the BIT.

277. Understanding how the ICSID Convention is relevant to an arbitration initiated
under a BIT, illuminates why the interpretation of the term control in Article 25(2)(b) may or
may not bear on the interpretation of the term “controlled” in the BIT.

278. The Netherlands-Bolivia BIT contains an offer by Bolivia and by the Netherlands
to defined nationals of the other party to arbitrate specified disputes before ICSID. A
claimant accepts this offer through its filing of a request for arbitration. This Tribunal is
established pursuant to the ICSID Convention and its jurisdiction is limited by the ICSID
Convention, as defined in Article 25. This Tribunal must therefore evaluate whether the
dispute presented to it under the BIT passes through the jurisdictional keyhole defined by
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.” The state parties to the BIT can seek to encompass
all manner of disputes. But in attempting to place disputes under their BIT before ICSID, an
institution regulated by a separate instrument, the scope of the disputes which may be
submitted is necessarily limited to those disputes that pass through the jurisdictional keyhole
defined by Article 25.”

279. The image of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention as a jurisdictional keyhole makes
clear that the jurisprudence concerning the phrase “foreign control” in Article 25(2)(b) is of
quite limited relevance to the interpretation of the BIT.

280. Article 1(b)(iii) is an agreement of Bolivia and the Netherlands to treat a judicial
person of one of them as a national of the other if that judicial person is “controlled directly

56 Report of the Executive Directors on the ICSID Convention, March 18, 1965. Paragraph 25 states:

While consent of the parties is an essential prerequisite for the jurisdiction of the Centre,

consent alone will not suffice to bring a dispute within its jurisdiction. In keeping with the purpose of

the Convention, the jurisdiction of the Centre is further limited by reference to the nature of

the dispute and the parties thereto. (Emphasis added).
27 In Vacuum Salt Products Ltd. v. Republic of Ghana, Award of February 16, 1994, 9 ICSID REV. - FIL] (1994), 4
ICSID REP. 329 (1997), the tribunal noted that “[t]he reference in Article 25(2)(b) to ‘foreign control’
necessarily sets an objective Convention limit beyond which ICSID jurisdiction cannot exist and parties therefore
lack power to invoke same no matter how devoutly they may have desired to do so.” Id, at | 36 (emphasis
added). Yet, although there is an objective limit, a Tribunal must also remain flexible so as to accommodate the
agreement of the patties as to the definition of “foreign control.”

64

or indirectly” by nationals of the other. The question is whether this definition of control in
the BIT is such that disputes under the BIT pass through the jurisdictional keyhole of Article
25. In this light, it is not at all surprising that the drafting history, commentary and arbitral
awards concerning that phrase “foreign control” in Article 25 all point to “foreign control”
being “flexible” so that reasonable definitions in referring instruments may pass through the
jurisdictional keyhole.

281. Thus Professor Schreuer notes that national and treaty-based definitions should be
deferred to, so long as they are reasonable:

Definitions of corporate nationality in national legislation or in treaties providing for
ICSID’s jurisd will be ling for the determination of whether the lity
requirements of Art. 25(2)(b) have been met. They ate part of the legal framework for the
host State’s submission to the Centre. Upon acceptance in writing by the investor, they
become part of the agreement on consent between the parties. Therefore, any reasonable
determination of the nationality of juridical persons contained in national legislation ot in a
treaty should be accepted by an ICSID commission or tribunal.258

282. Respondent appears to argue that “the definition of ‘control’ under the Bilateral
Investment Treaty would be coextensive with the definition under the ICSID Convention
with an emphasis on control as an “objective element that must be determined by the
Tribunal.”*” Claimant argues that Article 25(2)(b) and the definition of control in the BIT
are not co-extensive and that parties had the flexibility and “latitude to define ‘control’ in the
BIT for the purpose of Article 25(2(b) of the ICSID Convention” as long as the agreement
was reasonable.”

283. The drafting history of Article 25 as well as arbitral awards and_ scholarly
commentary indicate, however, that the drafters intended a flexible definition of control in
Article 25 not because they regarded “control” as requiring a wide ranging inquiry, but rather
— recognizing the keyhole function that would be played by Article 25 -- to accommodate a
wide range of agreements between patties as to the meaning of “foreign control.”

284. Aron Broches, chairman of the consultative meetings for the negotiation of the
ICSID Convention and General Counsel of the World Bank and subsequently ICSID’s first
Secretary-General, writes that during the drafting the attempt to provide an exacting
definition of foreign control was “abandoned” and that instead it was decided that “an
attempt should be made ... to give the greatest possible latitude to the parties to decide
under what circumstances a company could be treated as a ‘national of another Contracting

State? 224"

238 Schreuer, para. 481, p. 286 (emphasis added) (internal citations omitted).

239 Resp Counter Mem., p. 55, ff] 113-114.

240 Cl. Mem, p. 18, §] 57. Cl. Rej., p. 37, § 105; Oral Statement of AdT’s Counsel, Robert Volterra (February

10, 2004), p. 281, Lines 13-17.

24" Aron Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States,

136 RECUEIL DES Cours 331, 360 (1972-ID).; See also Aucoven, supra note 217:

96. ... [C]onsent in and of itself is not sufficient to ensure access to the Centre.

Indeed, Article 25 of the ICSID Convention provides for additional objective
requirements which must be met in addition to consent. These objective
requirements are the following: ... In the event that the investor is a
corporation registered under the laws of the host State, the parties must agree

 

65

285. There is no issue in the Tribunal’s view that Article 1 of the BIT under either the
‘laimant’s or Respondent’s interpretation would be an agreement as to “foreign control”
that satisfies the flexible and deferential requirement of Article 25(2).

 

286. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal does not find the jurisprudence concerning
the phrase “foreign control” in Article 25(2)(b) to assist the Tribunal in interpreting Article
1(b) (iii) of the BIT.

The Holdings of Other Arbitral Awards Concerning “Control”

287. Both AdT and Bolivia direct the Tribunal’s attention to various ICSID decisions
and awards for the criteria looked to by tribunals in order to determine “control.”

288. The Tribunal finds that many of the awards cited do not bear on the issue
presented in this arbitration because the facts of those cases involved a minority shareholder
rather than a majority shareholder. In particular, although it is the case that the tribunals in
some of these cases had the issue of control before them and considered to some degree
evidence of actual control, it is unclear whether that evidence was considered because the
tribunal regarded the exercise of power or direction as the test of control or whether such
actual control was looked to as evidence of the existence of the capacity of a minority
shareholder to exercise control. The Tribunal likewise notes that it appears that the claimants
in these cases submitted such evidence of actual control; although it is again unclear whether
they did so because they believed the exercise of power or direction was the test of control
or that such exercise would evidence their capacity as a minority shareholder to control the
corporation. The Tribunal thus finds the fact that the claimants in these various awards were
minority shareholders to be a crucial difference. The tribunals in these various cases did not
need to distinguish, as this Tribunal does, between the capacity to control and the exercise of
control. Without access to the full records of these cases, the Tribunal does not believe it
possible to assess their significance for the present arbitration.

The BIT Practice Generally of Both Nations

289. In Order No. 1, the Tribunal requested “that both Parties submit such evidence as
is available as to the interpretation and practice that the Kingdom of The Netherlands and
the Republic of Bolivia have placed on the relevant portions of the Bilateral Investment
‘Treaty, on other Bilateral Investment Treaties they have concluded, and on relevant aspects
of cognate practices, such as, for example, diplomatic espousal.”

 

to treat the locally incorporated company, because of “foreign control”, as a

“national” of another Contracting State for the purpose of the Convention.
97. ‘The Convention does not contain any definition of these objective

requirements. The drafters of the Convention deliberately chose not to define
the terms ...”foreign control”. .... [T]hey preferred giving the parties the
greatest latitude to define these terms themselves, provided that the criteria
agreed upon by the parties are reasonable and not totally inconsistent with
the purposes of the Convention.

Aucoven, at 4 96-97 (citations omitted).

66

290. Both the Netherlands and Bolivia have entered into BIT with other states. The
Parties submitted many of these treaties to the Tribunal and made oral arguments as to the
possible significance of these agreements for the interpretive question posed in this case.
Among other things, the Parties submitted two volumes containing, in addition to the
Bolivia-Netherlands BIT, seven BITs concluded by Bolivia and twenty-nine BITs concluded
by the Netherlands. These BITs are not inclusive of all BITs concluded by the parties. The
‘Tribunal indicated during the February 2004 hearing that it was sufficient for the parties to
submit only “specifically referred to” BITs.”

291. The practice of a state as regards the conclusion of BITs other than the particular
BIT involved in a dispute is not of direct value to the task of interpretation under Article 31
of the Vienna Convention. The fact that a pattern might exist in the content of the BITs
entered into by a particular state does not mean that a specific BIT by that state should be
understood as necessarily conforming to that pattern rather than constituting an exception to
that pattern.

292. The practice of a state as regards the negotiation of BITs may be helpful, however,
in testing the assertions of parties as to the general policies of either Bolivia or the
Netherlands concerning BIT, and in testing assumptions a tribunal may make regarding
BITs.

293. Most relevant to an assessment of state practice possibly bearing on the 1992
Bolivia-Netherlands BIT are those BITs which were negotiated contemporaneously in the
early 1990s.

Netherlands Practice

294. According to one Dutch government source, the Netherlands pursued negotiating
BIT’ with other nations as a means:

To create a framework of rules concerning the treatment of investments which can be
invoked directly by investors. By making arrangements in the form of a treaty, investors ate
offered the security that, during the term of the treaty, investments on the territory of the
other country will be protected ... A treaty cannot be changed unilaterally by one of the
parties. By contrast, laws can be amended any moment by one of the parties.

Another Dutch governmental statement describes BITs as providing guarantees that
foreign investment disputes including “with respect to expropriation” could be “submitted
to neutral international arbitration.”

295. Between 1991 and 1994 (the period most relevant to the instant case), in addition
to the BIT concluded with Bolivia, the Netherlands entered into BITs with primarily
developing or transitional nations including Albania, Argentina, Bangladesh, Cape Verde, the

2 Statement from Arbitrator Alvarez, (February 11, 2004), p 548, Lines 14-17.

28 Im t ” (Note on I Protection / ), Netherlands
Ministry of Economic Affairs at www.minez.nl quoted and translated in Expert Opinion-Dutch Practice,
Professor Nico J. Schrijver, para. 10. (Ex. B to Cl. Mem.)

24 Dutch Explanatory Note in Expert Opinion-Dutch Practice, Professor Nico J. Schrijver, ] 24, footnote 18.

67

Czech and Slovak Federal Republics, Estonia, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Jamaica, Latvia,
Nigeria, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Romania, Ukraine, Venezuela, and Vietnam. The Tribunal
does not have copies of the Dutch BITs with Cape Verde, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Paraguay,
or Vietnam. However, the remaining thirteen BITs and the Model Netherlands BIT drafted
in 1993 provide some basis for examining the practice of the Netherlands.

296. The Tribunal observes that many, but not all, of the BITs concluded by the
Netherlands between 1991 and 1994 follow the language and structure of the Model
Netherlands BIT.“ Almost every BIT, for example, uses the title and preamble language of
the Model BIT.’ Of particular relevance to this proceeding, the Model Netherlands BIT
defines “nationals” in the following terms:

(b) the term “nationals” shall comprise with regard to either Contracting Party:
() natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party
i) legal persons constituted under the law of the Contracting Party
Gi) legal persons not constituted under the law of that Contracting Party but controlled,
directly ot indirectly, by natural persons as defined in (i) or by legal persons as defined in
ii) above,”

‘The Tribunal notes that the language of clause (b)(iii) is broader in geographic scope than
the parallel clause in the BIT between the Netherlands and Bolivia. In the Model BIT, the
definition of national includes not only entities in the host state controlled by nationals of
the other state, but entities wherever located and so controlled.

297. Five of the thirteen contemporaneous BITs reviewed by the Tribunal use the exact
language from the Model Netherlands BIT in defining “nationals.””* An additional four of
the thirteen BITs negotiated between 1991 and 1994 emphasize a broad geographic
inclusivity and application of the BIT’s.“” These BIT do not use the Model BIT’s language
but instead substitute the equally far-reaching phrase “wherever located” for “not
constituted under the law of Contracting Party.”’” A BIT concluded with the Ukraine in
1994 uses the same language as the Model BIT but drops the reference to “directly or
indirectly.” Ten of the BIT thus employ the broad Model BIT definition of “nationals.”

28 The Model BIT provides that investment interests ate to be given “fair and equitable treatment”
(Netherlands Model Agreement, Article 3) and protected from direct or indirect takings (Netherlands Model
Agreement, Article 6). In addition, “any legal dispute arising between that Contracting Party and a national of
the other Contracting Party concerning an investment of that national in the territory of the former
Contracting Party” can be submitted to ICSID for settlement by “conciliation or arbitration.” Netherlands
Model Agreement, Article 9.

24 The Model Netherlands BIT is titled an “agreement on encouragement and reciprocal investment of
investments” and includes a preamble establishing the mutual interest of the parties “to extend and intensify
the economic relations between them particularly with respect to investments by the nationals of one
Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party” and to ensure “fair and equitable treatment of
investment.” The BITs with Jamaica and Poland do not include language in the preamble on the “fair and
equitable treatment of investment.”

2” Netherlands Model Agreement, Article 1 (b)

248 Netherlands-Albania BIT (1994), Netherlands-Estonia BIT (1992), Netherlands-Latvia BIT (1994),
Netherlands-Nigeria (1992), and Netherlands-Venezuela BIT (1991).

2 Netherlands-Bangladesh BIT (1994), Netherlands-Jamaica BIT (1991), Netherlands-Peru BIT’ (1994), and
Netherlands-Poland BIT (1992).

250 Jamaica does not use the expression “legal persons” but instead refers to “corporations, firms or
associations.”

68

298. The remaining three BITs differ from the Model BIT in various respects as to the
definition of “national.” The Tribunal, as stated above, recognizes the need for care in
assessing these differences.

299. First, a BIT concluded with Romania in 1994 contains the same language as the
Model BIT except that the word “owned” is also included:

(b)(ii) legal persons owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by natural persons
as defined in (i) ot by legal persons as defined in (ii) above.25!

‘The Tribunal has no knowledge as to the reason that the State parties included the word
“owned.” Given the Tribunal’s view that the word “controlled” in the context of defining
the circle of eligible claimants necessarily is used not as an alternative to “owned” but
rather to indicate a quality of ownership, the Tribunal views this provision as meaning
“owned [established by majority ownership] or controlled [established by minority
ownership plus voting rights].” However, there was no indication of the reason for the
inclusion of the word “owned” in this provision and the Tribunal draws no inference from
the language of this BIT.

300. Second, the Netherlands-Czech and Slovak Republic BIT concluded in 1991
defines “investors,” rather than “nationals,” broadly as nationals or legal persons under the
laws of either of the Contracting parties:

(b) the term ‘investors’ shall comprise
natural persons having the nationality of one of the Contracting Parties in
accordance with the law;

ii, legal persons constituted under the law of one of the Contracting Parties.?=2

At oral argument, the Claimant referred to this BIT and agreed minutes between the Czech
Republic and the Netherlands dated October 30, 2001, to illustrate the Dutch policy that
changes in BITs, as opposed to clarifications of language in BIT’s, must be made by
amendment.” Respondent argued that this practice is not relevant to the interpretation of
the Bolivia-Netherlands BIT.” The Tribunal agrees with Respondent and does not find this
BIT of assistance in understanding the practice of the Netherlands as that practice might
bear on the Netherlands — Bolivia BIT.

301. Third, the Netherlands-Argentina BIT concluded in 1992 defines “investor” as
including with regard to either Contracting Party as:

i, natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party in accordance with its law;
ii, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph (iii) hereafter, legal persons constituted
under the law of that Contracting Party and actually doing business under the laws in force

251 Netherlands-Romania BIT (1994), Article 1.

282 Netherlands-Czech and Slovak Federal Republic BIT Article 1(b).

253 Oral Testimony of Claimant’s Expert, Professor Schrijwer, (February 10, 2004), p. 315-316, Lines 20-21, 1-
5.

254 Oral Testimony of Respondent’s Counsel Dana Contratto, (February 10, 2004), p. 424, Lines 8-13.

69

in any part of the territory of that Contracting Party in which a place of effective
management is situated. 25

iiiJlegal persons, wherever located, controlled, directly or indirectly by nationals of that
Contracting Party

Section (iii) uses the same language as the BITs concluded with Bangladesh, Jamaica, Peru,
and Poland and is, as discussed above, geographically broad in its inclusivity of investors.

302. Unlike the other BITs described above, however, the Tribunal notes that the
Netherlands and Argentina entered into an additional Protocol which indicates that the word
“control” is to be understood in light of clear objective criteria. The Protocol states:

With reference to Article 1, paragraph (b)(iii) the Contracting Party in the territory of which
the investments are undertaken may require proof of the control invoked by the investors of
the other Contracting Party. The following facts, inter alia, shall be accepted as evidence of
the control:

i, being an affiliate of a legal person of the other Contracting Party;
ii, having a direct or indirect participation in the capital of a company higher than 49% or the
direct or indirect possession of the necessary votes to obtain a predominant position in
assemblies or company organs.

303. The Claimant argues that the more restrictive language of Article 1 of the Protocol
to the Netherlands-Argentina BIT was “inserted upon the initiative of Argentina.”*’ The
Respondent argues that the definition of “controlled” included in the Protocol is intended
for the purposes of Argentinean and Dutch investors “to clarify that evidence of control or

 

majority ownership of voting shares can constitute control.””* The Tribunal observes that
the definition of “controlled” provided in the Protocol is an easily administrable one,
focusing on readily ascertainable criteria such as share participation and voting rights.

Bolivian Practice

304. Between 1991 and 1994, Bolivia entered into two BITs other than the one it
concluded with the Netherlands; one with Peru, another with Argentina.

305. The Peruvian BIT concluded in 1993 defines nationals as including companies
which are “controlled, directly or indirectly, by nationals” of a Contracting Party.” The

255 Netherlands-Argentina BIT, Article 1(b).

256 Protocol to Netherlands-Argentina BIT, Section B.

27 Expert Opinion-Dutch Practice, Professor Nico J. Schrijver, para. 18, Appendix 46 to Cl. Mem, Oral
Statement of Claimant’s Expert Professor Schrijver, February 10, 2004, p. 306, Lines 12-18 “[T]hey (restrictive
clauses) are always inserted at the insistence of the other states’ party because, as you can see, from the Dutch
model BIT and from the majority of the Bilateral Investment Treaties concluded by the Netherlands that this is
not its own policy line, but of course, also the conclusion of a BIT is a way of give and take.”

258 Oral Statement of Bolivia’s Counsel, Dana Contratto, (February 10, 2004), p. 423, Lines 4-8.

289 Bolivia-Peru BIT, Section 4(b) (unofficial translation by the Tribunal).

70

Tribunal notes that this BIT signed in 1993 is very similar in substance to the Bolivia-
Bolivia-Netherlands BIT.”

306. ‘The Bolivia-Argentina BIT signed in 1994 requires that an investor be “effectively
controlled” by investors of the other Contracting party.” The language of the text reads:

(2) The term “investor” designates:

a) any natural person who is a national of one of the Contracting Parties, in
accordance with its legislation;

b) any juridical person constituted pursuant to the laws and regulations of a
Contracting Party and which has its seat in the territory of the said Contracting
Party, whether or not its activity is for profit;

c) any juridical person, established pursuant to the laws of any country, which is
effectively controlled by investors of the other Contracting Party.22

307. The term “effectively controlled” is further defined in a Protocol and is very
similar to the language in the Netherlands-Argentina Protocol. Specifically, the Bolivia-
Argentina Protocol reads

IL Addendum, Article 1, Subsection (2), Subparagraph (c)

Juridical entities referred to in Article 1, Subsection (2), Subparagraph (©), which wish to
invoke this Treaty may be requested to present proof of the said control. The following
facts, amongst others, shall be accepted as proof:

(1) Being an affiliate of a juris
Party.

 

ical entity constituted pursuant to the laws of that Contracting

(2) Having a direct or indirect participation in the capital of a juridical entity which permits
effective control such as, in particular, participation in more than one-half of the share
capital.

(3) The direct or indirect possession of the necessary votes to obtain a predominant position
in the company organs or to influence in a decisive manner the functioning of the juridical
entity28

28 ‘The language in 4(b) Bolivia-Peru BIT presents an either/or scenario, Nationals include “Companies
constituted pursuant to the legislation of that Contracting Party or which are controlled, directly ot indirectly,
by nationals of the same.”.
261 Bolivia-Argentina BIT, Section 2(¢) (unofficial translation by the Tribunal).
22 The original Spanish text reads:
(2) El término “inversor” designa
a) toda persona fisica que sea nacional de una de las Partes Contratantes,
de conformidad con su legislatién;
b) toda persona juridica constituida de conformidad con las leyes y
reglamentaciones de una Parte Contratante y que tenga su sede en el
territorio de dicha Parte Contratante, independientemente de que su
actividad o no fines de lucro;
©) toda persona juridica establecida de conformidad con Ia legislation de
cualquier pais que esté efectivamente controlada por inversores de la otra
Parte Contratante.

283 The original Spanish text reads:
IL, Adendum Articulo I, apartado (2), inciso c).

71

308. Respondent argues that “effectively controlled” for the purposes of defining a
national is different from “controlled” because it involves a corporate “decision-making
structure.” The Tribunal does not find this distinction to be reflected in the definition of

“controlled” in either the Netherlands-Argentina or the Bolivia~-Argentina Protocols.

309. Having reviewed the practice of the Netherlands and Bolivia, the Tribunal
observes four points.

310. First, the Dutch Model BIT, although followed often, was not accepted always
without modification, as some popular images of bilateral investment treaty negotiations
might suggest.

311. Second, the Dutch Model BIT and at least ten of the thirteen Dutch BITs reviewed
contain definitions of “nationals” that seemingly are more encompassing than the one found
in the Netherlands-Bolivia BIT.

312. Third, the Tribunal observes that the term “controlled” in the Netherlands-
Argentina BIT is defined by those two States in an Additional Protocol by exclusive
reference to the word “control”:

“With reference to Article 1, paragraph (b) (ii) the Contracting Party in the territory of which
the investments ate undertaken may require proof of the conirol invoked by the investors of
the other Contracting Party, The following facts, inter alia, shall be accepted as evidence of
the contro” (Emphasis Added).

Likewise, the term “effectively controlled” in the Bolivia-Argentina BIT is defined in a
Protocol by exclusive reference to the word “control”:

“Juridical entities referred to in Article 1, Subsection (2), Subparagraph (¢), which wish to
invoke this Treaty may be requested to present proof of the said control.” (Emphasis Added).

‘The Tribunal in paragraph 233 above stated that the usage of the past participle of control
is not determinative of the meaning of the phrase “controlled, directly or indirectly.” The
Tribunal observes that both Bolivia and the Netherlands in other BITs define the proof of
an entity being “controlled” by reference to “control,” and not, for example, by reference
to “proof that the investor was controlled.” This practice is consistent with the Tribunal’s
view that there is no appreciable difference between a company that is “controlled directly

 

Se podra solicitar a las entidades juridicas mencionadas en el Articulo I, apartado
2, inciso c) que quieran prevalerse del presente Convenio que aporten la prueba
de dicho control. Se aceptarin como prueba, entre otros, los siguientes hechos:

(1) El céracter de filial de una entidad juridica constituida segtin la legislation de esa
Parte Contratante.

(2)Un porcentaje de participation directa o indirecta en el capital de una entidad
juridica que permita un control efectivo tal como, en particular, una participacién
en el capital superior a la mitad.

(3) La posesién directa o indirecta de la cantidad de votos que permita tener una
posicién determinante en los érganos societarios o de influir de manera decisiva en
el funcionamiento de la entidad juridica.

264 Oral Testimony of Respondent’s Counsel, Dana Contratto (February 10, 2004), p. 427, Lines 17-20.

72

ot indirectly” by another company and a company that is “under the direct or indirect
control of” or “subject to the direct or indirect control of’ another company.

313. Fourth, the Tribunal observes that the Protocol to the Netherlands-Argentina BIT
in defining “controlled,” and the Protocol to Bolivia-Argentina BIT in defining “effectively
controlled,” both delineate a set of objective factors for determining who is or is not a
“national” or “investor”. The Tribunal in paragraph 247 above stated that the purpose of
stimulating investment is furthered by clear definitions which thereby allow potential
investors to ascertain whether they are, or are not, covered by a particular BIT. The Tribunal
declines to speculate, as it should, as to why a Protocol was negotiated for the Netherlands-
Argentina BIT and the Bolivia-Argentina BIT, but not for the Netherlands-Bolivia BIT. It
does note, however, that the Tribunal’s assumption that the state parties would seek to set
out definitions with clear standards so as to bring about predictability as to the scope of BIT
protections does appear to be borne out by the language of the Protocols.

314. The Tribunal concludes that the BIT practice of the Netherlands and Bolivia is
necessarily of limited probative value to the task of interpreting the BIT between the
Netherlands and Bolivia.

Applying the Interpretation: Is AdT “controlled directly or indirectly” by IWH B.V. or IWT
BV?

315. It remains for the Tribunal to decide whether AdT is “controlled directly or
indirectly” by either IWT B.V. or IWH B.V., as that phrase has been interpreted by the
Tribunal.

316. The first tier of ownership above AdT is as follows:

 

 

Figure 3: The First Tier of Ownership of AdT
after December 22, 1999,

Request for Arbitration, Exhibit 15, November 12, 2001

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Constructora Compania Bolviane | | ICE Aguay Energia, ‘Sociedad Boliviana International Riverstar
Peticevie SA. Ge Ingenieria, SRL. SA te Cemonto, SA. Water Tunaet) International, SA.
(Bolvia) (Botvis) Botnis} (Boiva} SARL (Urgup)

Rusersbeurg)

 

 

 

 

73

317. IW S.ar.l. of Luxembourg owns 55% of the shares of AdT. Article 15 of AdT’s
Constitution is entitled “Shareholders’ Rights” and it provides that “the shares of the same
class or series will all be equal in rights and obligations. Each ordinary share authorizes its
owner to the right of one vote in the general meeting.” The Tribunal notes, as does
Respondent, that a 2/3 majority vote of AdT’s voting shares is required for the execution of
certain corporate acts including (1) adopting the report of the Board of the Directors, (2)
authorizing the payment of dividends or other distributions out of company funds, (3)
approving plans and budget, and (4) determining what is quorum for a meeting of the AdT’s
Board of Directors. As indicated, IW S.a.r.l. has ownership interest of 55% in AdT. The
Tribunal concludes that this level of ownership does not preclude IW S.ar.l. from
controlling AdT. For all acts other than the specific acts just mentioned, IW S.ar.1. possesses
the capacity to affirmatively control AdT. As to the specified acts mentioned, IW S.ar.l.
possesses the capacity for an effective veto. The Tribunal concludes that IW S.a.t.l. possesses
the legal capacity to control AdT.

318. The upstream ownership of AdT specifically is that set forth in Figure 4:

 

 

Figure 4: AdT’s ownership structure through
the Netherlands after December 22, 1999.

  
 

Request for Arbiration, Exhibit 15, November 12, 2001

 

 

 

 

 

319. IW S.a.rl. is 100 % owned by IWT B.V., and IWT B.V. is 100 % owned by IWH
B.V. Each of these companies held 100% of the voting rights which corresponded to the
shares which were transferred from IW S.a.r1..” Given these facts, the Tribunal finds that

265 Request for Arbitration, Ex. 1.
286 Request for Arbitration, Ex. 1, AdT Constitution, Article 40 (1)(5)(9)(10).
267 Request for Arbitration, Ex. 9, Ex. 10, Article 16(7) and Ex. 13, Article 32(2).

74

both IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. indirectly control AdT satisfying the requirements of Article
1(b) (ii).

320. Given Respondent’s allegations that IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. are mere shells, the
Tribunal observes that IWH B.V. as a joint venture occupies a special place in the corporate
structure above AdT.

321. On the basis of the evidence available, IWH B.V. is not simply a corporate shell set
up to obtain ICSID jurisdiction over the present dispute. Rather, IWH B.V. is a joint venture
50% owned by Baywater and 50% owned by Edison S.p.A., an Italian corporation. IWH
B.V. is structured so that neither Baywater nor Edison exclusively control IWH B.V., to the
exclusion of the other, but rather the two entities must work together in order to direct IWH
Bv2*

322. The Tribunal finds it noteworthy, from the oral and written submissions of the
Parties and a review of the 2000 and 2001 Annual Report for IWH B.V., that in 2000, IWH
B.V. had a “portfolio of 8 contracts plus two additions in early 2001”°”, “IWH and its
consolidated subsidiaries employed an average of 55 employees”, and “IWH generated net
turnover of €8.6 million from its principal development and operations services activities.”””

323. The Tribunal thus concludes that both IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. indirectly
controlled AdT in accordance with the Tribunal’s interpretation of the phrase “controlled
directly or indirectly” found in Article 1(b)(iii) of the BIT.

Respondent’s Motion for Production of Evidence

324. As recalled in paragraph 23 supra, Bolivia requested that the Tribunal order
Claimant to produce evidence of the control of IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. over AdT.
Bolivia’s request for the production of documents corresponds in scope with its assertion
that the requirement that AdT be “controlled directly or indirectly” requires an inquiry into
the whether of IWT B.V. and IWH B.V. effectively and actually controlled the affairs of
AdT."

325. The Tribunal in Order No. 1 declined to order the production of evidence at that
time writing:

268 ‘The articles of incorporation of IWH B.V. indicate an equal sharing of power in the company between
Bechtel Enterprises Holding, Inc. and Edison $.p.A. ‘The articles of incorporation are reprinted as Ex. 13 to the
Request for Arbitration, Bechtel Enterprises Holding, Inc. and Edison S.p.A. each hold a 50% interest in IWH
BV. Ex. 33 to Resp. Counter Mem., 2000 Annual Report of IWH B.V. at p. 1. Both Bechtel and Edison have
an equal number of Managing Directors for IWT B.V. Articles 14 and 19 of the Articles of Incorporation. The
duties, and decision making process, for the Board of Managing Directors are set forth in Article 18.

26 See e.g, Annual Report 2000 International Water Holdings B.V., p. 1, (Ex. 33 to Resp. Counter Mem,).

20 ‘The ‘Tribunal further notes that IW S.ar. and IWT BV are listed in the Annual Report as principal
subsidiaries to WH BV over which IWH “directly or indirectly, has power to exercise control.” See e.g, Annual
Report 2000 International Water Holdings B.V., pp. 6-7 (Ex. 33 to Resp Counter Mem). This particular
reference is given limited significance, however, as a statement by a party in interest during the pendency of the
dispute.

2 See, eg, Resp. Counter Mem., p. 67, 140.

It is the view of the Tribunal that neither party’s arguments as to the necessity of the various
requests for production of evidence are sufficiently developed or clear that the Tribunal may
order or deny such production at this time. The argument advanced by Respondent to
support its requests for the production of documents requires the Tribunal to undertake
consideration of the merits of Respondent’s second jurisdictional objection without the
benefit of full briefing by the parties or the opportunity of the Tribunal to put questions to
the parties during a hearing. A review of Respondent’s second jurisdictional objection is
requited (1) to decide the likely merit of that objection even if the objection were factually
supported, and therefore the necessity of ordering of documents in support of the
development of that objection, and (2) to ascertain the exact scope of that objection so that

 

 

appropriate limits might be placed on the requests for documents made by Respondent.
Without such an estimation of the likely legal merit of Respondent’s objection and without
ctiteria for the narrowing of Respondent's requests for production of evidence, the Tribunal
is faced with a factually intense, and consequently expensive and lengthy, factual inquiry that
ultimately may not be necessary to the resolution of this case. Therefore, although the
Tribunal concludes that it is within its power to undertake such an incidental preliminary
review of the merits of the second jurisdictional objection in order to decide upon a request
for production of evidence, the Tribunal concludes in its discretion that such a decision by
the Tribunal at this point would be premature and that the Tribunal’s capacity to decide
upon this important request would be enhanced greatly by both briefing and oral argument
before the Tribunal.

  

326. The Tribunal further indicated that it intended to render a decision on Bolivia’s
request for production of documents as a part of its decision on Respondent’s jurisdictional

 

objections.””

327. Given the Tribunal’s decision concerning Respondent’s second objection, the
Tribunal finds Respondent’s request for the production of evidence to be without object.
Respondent’s request is therefore denied.

Concluding Observation

328. Aware of the significance of this case for states and various non state groups, the
‘Tribunal observes that Respondent has argued imaginatively and aggressively against the
assertion of ICSID jurisdiction in this proceeding. As an unintended consequence, questions

ossibly have been raised as to the integrity of the ICSID process. At the end of the day, the
‘Tribunal wishes to emphasize that it does not find the more provocative arguments raised by

 

 

Respondent to be supported and that it is quite clear to the majority of this Tribunal that this
dispute is within the jurisdictional reach of ICSID and the BIT.

329. To the extent that Bolivia questions the timing of the transfer of ownership in
Claimant in November — December 1999 suggesting that it was done in anticipation of the
events to follow in the Spring of 2000, the Tribunal notes that:

a. the planning of a joint venture of the scale of the venture between Bechtel

Enterprises Holding Inc. and Edison S.p.A. in November-December of

22 Order No. 1, 30.
23 Id, § 32 (“[l]e is the intent of the Tribunal to render at a minimum its decision on the first jurisdictional
objection and Respondent’s request for production of evidence.”)

76

1999, of which the transfer was a part, likely predated the transfer by at least
several months,

b. the present record indicates that in November-December of 1999 that civil
society organizations expressed strong concerns about the proposed tariff
structure and, in a few instances, called for the annulment of the

 

c. the present record does not establish that the severity of the particular
events that would erupt in the Spring of 2000 were foreseeable in
November or December of 1999.

330. Respondent objects to Claimant’s assertion of jurisdiction implying that the
availability of the BIT is the result of strategic changes in the corporate structure that
somehow rise to the level of fraud or abuse of corporate form. The Tribunal observes that
to the extent that Bolivia argues that the December 1999 transfer of ownership was a
fraudulent or abusive device to assert jurisdiction under the BIT, that:

a. the joint venture between Bechtel Enterprises Holding Inc. and Edison
S.p.A. in November-December of 1999 involved significantly more
operations than AdT’s concessionary rights and duties,

b. the present record does not establish why the joint venture was
headquartered in the Netherlands as opposed to some other jurisdiction,
although Claimant indicated that the Netherlands was chosen for reasons of
taxation,

c. a decision as to where to locate a joint venture is often driven by taxation
considerations, although other factors such as the availability of BITs can
be important to such a decision, and

d. it is not uncommon in practice, and -- absent a particular limitation -- not
illegal to locate one’s operations in a jurisdiction perceived to provide a
beneficial regulatory and legal environment in terms, for examples, of
taxation or the substantive law of the jurisdiction, including the availability
ofa BIT.

331. The Tribunal does not find a sufficient basis in the present record to support an
allegation of abuse of corporate form or fraud. The Tribunal, however, notes that Article
41(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides:

 

The Tribunal may on its own initiative consider, at any stage of the
proceeding, whether the dispute or any ancillary claim before it is within the
jurisdiction of the Centre and within its own competence.

The Tribunal will bear in mind its duty to protect the integrity of ICSID jurisdiction during
the merits phase as the Parties submit their full memorials and supporting evidence.

332. This Decision reflects the growing web of treaty based referrals to arbitration of
certain investment disputes. Although titled “bilateral” investment treaties, this case makes
clear that which has been clear to negotiating states for some time, namely, that through the
definition of “national” or “investor,” such treaties serve in many cases more broadly as

 

77

portals through which investments are structured, organized, and, most importantly,
encouraged through the availability of a neutral forum.” The language of the definition of
national in many BIT’ evidences that such national routing of investment is entirely in
keeping with the purpose of the instruments and the motivations of the state parties.

333. The Tribunal by this Decision’s denial of Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction
grants Claimant a neutral forum in which the substance of the dispute between it and
Claimant may be arbitrated.

274 Indeed, the negotiating history of the ICSID Convention indicates that the “CHAIRMAN [Aron Broches]
observed that the consideration of the definition of ‘national of a Contracting State’ was related to the entire
scope of the draft Convention. II(1) DOCUMENTS CONCERNING THE ORIGIN AND THE FORMULATION OF
THE ICSID CONVENTION 395 (1968).

78

Decision
334. In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal decides:

a. Respondent’s First Objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, except as
to the sixth aspect, in each of the ways in which it asserts a lack of consent,
is denied;

b. By majority, the sixth aspect of Respondent’s First Objection is denied;

c. By majority, Respondent’s Second Objection to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal based on whether Claimant is “controlled directly or indirectly” by
nationals of the Netherlands is denied; and

d. By majority, Respondent’s request for the production of evidence is, as a
consequence of the Tribunal’s holding as to the Second Objection, without
object and is denied.

335. The Tribunal’s decision as to the awarding of costs will be addressed as a part of
the final award in this matter.

336. ‘The Tribunal will proceed to the scheduling of the merits phase of the proceeding.
337. The dissenting Declaration of José Luis Alberro-Semerena is appended to the

present Decision.

Made in equally authentic English and Spanish versions.

(signed) (signed)
Henri C. Alvarez José Luis Alberro-Semerena
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: October 6, 2005 Date: October 11, 2005
(signed)

David D. Caron
President

Date: October 3, 2005

79

' See CHRISTOPH H. SCHREUE

Declaration of José Luis Alberro-Semerena

Ido not join the Tribunal on its Decisions on jurisdiction in the cases of the sixth aspect
of the First Objection and of the Second Objection.

‘The Tribunal was established pursuant to the Netherlands-Bolivia Bilateral Investment
‘Treaty (BIT) and to the ICSID Convention. Therefore, the Tribunal must evaluate
whether the dispute passes through two different jurisdictional keyholes, defined by
Article 1(b) (iii) of the BIT and by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. The parties have
agreed that the provisions of the Vienna Convention relating to the interpretation of
treaties reflect customary international law and they consider it to be the applicable law
to interpret the BIT.

  

 

The first issue on which I differ from the majority of the Tribunal is whether the
evidence on record is adequate to ascertain Claimant’s motivations and timing for
abandoning the transaction described by Bechtel in its November 24, 1999 letter to the
Water and the Electricity Superintendencies, in favor of the one that was ultimately put
into place.

This issue is crucial because AdT did not have access to ICSID arbitration before its
restructuring in late 1999; because the restructuring project presented by Bechtel to the
Bolivian authorities in late November 1999 included the insertion of a Dutch company
in the chain of ownership and was not approved by them; because the structure that was
ultimately put into place did insert a Dutch company in the chain of ownership and
because “if deception or misrepresentation can be shown to have existed, no inferences

ol

as to an agreement on nationality can be drawn from the fact of consent”.

Claimant argues “there is nothing in the BIT that would deny coverage to an otherwise
entitled party because it acquired an investment in the context of rumors of problems on

the horizon”.

Respondent, on the contrary considers that “the straightforward question is whether
Bolivia can be deemed to have consented to a scheme in which a company registered in
Bolivia may at any time, under all circumstances reorganize, restructure itself so as to
gain the right to bring a suit before ICSID, whenever such suit appears to be convenient
and desirable from the investors perspective. We submit that the answer to this question
is no”?

The dissent with the majority of the Tribunal is not about whether a corporation may or
may not restructure itself in a legal manner that is not contractually prohibited so as to
base itself in a jurisdiction that it perceives to provide a beneficial regulatory and legal

 

, THE ICSID CONVENTION; A COMMENTARY 476 (Cambridge Univ. Press,

2001).
2 Hearing on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, February 11, 2004, Transcript, pp. 628.
3 Hearing on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, February 11, 2004, Transcript, pp. 206.

80

1

. As early as September 1999, the public had begun protesting the Conce

environment. The dissent is about whether it is in compliance with the BIT regardless of
the circumstances.

The dissent comes from the fact that if AdT can restructure itself while “the

 

Government of Bolivia engaged in a course of action outside of the Concession
Contract which breached AdT’s rights”, the balance between the benefits and obligation
of the host State is broken since the later become unpredictable. “Needless to say, such a
system would not be compatible with the basic concepts of appropriate reciprocity,
which forms the basis of all bilateral treaties. Reciprocity is generally defined as a
relationship of identical or equivalent treatment, and can only be achieved in a legal
framework in which the obligations arising out of a treaty are to a reasonable extent,
foreseeable and limited”

Claimant considers, that “the parties to the Bilateral Investment Treaty clearly included
within the terms of the Treaty scope for protection to extend to foreign-owned
subsidiaries incorporated in their territory. As I put it to the Tribunal yesterday, the
universe thereby became infinite. There is nothing in the wording of the Bilateral
Investment Treaty that narrows its scope”.’ While there are instances of infinite offers of
arbitration where states have investment statutes where they make a global offer to
arbitrate, the notion that the universe of beneficiaries of a bilateral investment treaty is
infinite has no precedent in scholarly commentary or tribunal awards, and no direct
evidence of the validity of this interpretation —for example, in terms of the drafting
history- was provided.

 

ion Agreements
and there were explicit public demands to annul them in mid November 1999. Claimant
states that “in December 1999, the Government of Bolivia (through the Superintendent

 

of Water) concluded an agreement with communities within the area of Conce:
which, é#/er alia, purported to limit the effective area of the Concession”.

. While the present record may not establish that the severity of the events of Spring 2000

was foreseeable in November or December of 1999, it is the case that the present record
does not establish that the severity of the events of Spring 2000 was not foreseeable in
November or December of 1999. The prima facie evidence of the fact that AdT was
alarmed about the severity of the public demands is the publication of an “Open Letter”
in the Cochabamba press defending its actions, in late November. Its preamble reflects
concern about: “statements and publications circulated by different citizens, Institutions
and mass media” and that “many of the pronouncements are incorrect and malicious”.

. On November 24, Bechtel wrote to Bolivia announcing “that it had signed a contract

with Edison S. p. A. of Italy, whereby Edison will become a partner of Bechtel
Enterprises Holdings, Inc. in its activities in the international water business”. The
parties intended to implement the transaction by - forming a new company in the

+ Request for Arbitration, 4 12.

5 Expert Opinion of Professor Rudolf Dolzer, page 25.

6 Hearing on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, February 11, 2004, Transcript, pp. 626.
7 Request for Arbitration, 4 12.

81

16.

Netherlands. As a result of the transaction, the shareholders of 55% of AdT’s shares and
voting rights would no longer be a company established in the Cayman Islands but a new
company established in the Netherlands. Given that a new Dutch shareholder would
own 55% of AdT’s shares, Bechtel entered a process of obtaining a waiver from the
Water and the Electricity Superintendencies, in order to carry out the transaction while
respecting the terms of the Concession.

. The proposed transfer of IW Ltd’s shares in AdT to a Dutch company was not

authorized.

. Social unrest and public opposition to the new rates continued during December.

. On December 21, 1999, IW Ltd of the Cayman Islands migrated to Luxembourg

changed its mame and the next day a Dutch company became its 100 percent
shareholder.

‘The evidence on record is inadequate to ascertain the motivations and the timing for
abandoning the transaction described by Bechtel in its November 24, 1999 letter (a new
direct Dutch ownership of AdT) in favor of the one that was ultimately put into place 27
days later (migration and indirect ownership by Dutch owners). The only difference one
can infer from the record between the two is that the first transaction had to be
authorized by the Waters and the Electricity Superintendencies while the second one was
done without their knowledge after months of social unrest. In both cases, a Dutch
company was inserted in the chain of ownership.

. The Tribunal should have requested Claimant to produce the following information for

the period November 24, 1999 —when Bechtel wrote to Bolivia informing of proposed
changes in Ad'T’s ownership- to December 21, 1999 - when IW Ltd of the Cayman
Islands migrated to Luxembourg: (1) all documents showing the dates on which the
decisions was made to migrate IW Ltd of the Cayman Islands to Luxembourg instead of
the transaction announced on November 24, 1999; as well as (II) all the documents that
examine the costs and benefits of each option and more generally that argue against and
in favor of migrating IW Ltd of the Cayman Islands and having International Water
(Tunari) B.V. acquire 100% of its shares.

. The majority of the Tribunal denied Respondent’s request for the production of

evidence because it had no object given its interpretation. Thus, I conclude that Bolivia
did not consent and decide that Claimant is not entitled to invoke ICSID jurisdiction
under the BIT between Bolivia and the Netherlands.

19. The second issue on which I differ from the majority of the Tribunal is whether the

2

evidence on record is adequate to determine whether Claimant was directly or indirectly
controlled by Dutch nationals for jurisdictional purposes.

Claimant argues that this case is “about whether IWT or IWH control directly or
indirectly AdT” and that majority shareholding with voting rights is the strictest possible

82

2

2:

2.

2.

2:

2

2

N

3.

-

a

x

7

. As for its legal definition, the majority of the Tribunal relies on three definitions:

test of control. In turn, Bolivia maintains that “controlled is unquestionably different
from capable of being controlled or could be controlled” and that the question is
whether AdT was controlled by nationals of the Netherlands, thereby meeting the
requirements of Article 1(b)(iii) of the BIT.

. The majority found that AdT was a Bolivian legal person indirectly controlled by Dutch

companies and therefore that the Tribunal has jurisdiction.

After examining the ordinary meaning of the phrase “controlled directly or indirectly”
and reading it in light of the context and purpose of the BIT, my interpretation differs
from that of the majority and I consider that the evidence submitted by Claimant is not
sufficient to prove that AdT was directly or indirectly controlled by Dutch nationals. The
majority of the Tribunal denied Respondent’s request for the production of evidence
because it had no object given its interpretation. In contrast my interpretation leads me
to grant it. Thus, I dissent from the Tribunal’s decision regarding Bolivia’s objection to
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and consider that jurisdiction should be denied.

 

‘The answer to the question is in the use of the term “controlled”.

With respect to the ordinary meaning of control, the majority of the Tribunal found that
“while some definitions suggest the actual exercise of influence, others emphasize the
possession of power over an object. Thus, the ordinary meaning of ‘control’ would
seemingly encompass both actual exercise of powers or direction and the rights arising
from the ownership of shares. (Paragraph 227).

‘to

 

exercise power or influence over; ... to regulate or govern and ...to have a controlling
interest in.” Hence, the legal meaning of control also encompasses both the actual
exercise of control and the right to control. (Paragraph 231).

 

. In Article 1(6)(iii) of the BIT, the word “controlled” is a passive participial adjective

formed from the verb “control” which modifies the noun “legal persons”. Passive
participial adjectives describe nouns that receive the effects of an action. Grammar
indicates that for “legal persons” constituted in accordance with the law of a contracting
party to be “controlled directly or indirectly” by nationals of another contracting party,
they have to receive the effects of an action by nationals of the second contracting patty.
‘Thus, while both the ordinary meaning and the legal definition of control encompass the
actual exercise of control as well as the right to control, the passive participial adjective
requires the effects of an action. For jurisdiction to exist, Claimant has to prove that
AdT received the effect of actions by Dutch companies.

Article 31(4) of the Vienna Convention indicates that a special meaning shall be given to
a term, if the parties so intended. There is no indication in the record that the
contracting parties intended any special meaning to the word “control”. I agree with the
majority of the Tribunal that the negotiators who contributed to the language of the BIT

8 Hearing on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, February 11, 2004, Transcript, pp. 620-621.
° Thidem, p. 422, lines 12-14,

83

were likely sophisticated foreign negotiators with some knowledge of business and law.
(Paragraph 230). Article 1(b)(iii) of the BIT, however, does not use “control” but
“controlled”. The parties could have used the expression “in direct or indirect control
of” or “under direct or indirect control of’ or “because of foreign control” as in the
ICSID Convention which was public knowledge before the BIT was negotiated and
would have incorporated existing case law and scholarly commentary. In
contradistinction, they chose to use the passive participial adjective “controlled”, which
requires the effects of an action.

2

al

It is in the consideration of the context in which we find the phrase “controlled directly
or indirectly,” and in the light of the object and purpose of the treaty that we find the
basis for its interpretation. (Paragraph 240).

29. The object and purpose of the BIT is to stimulate the flow of capital and technology.
Indeed, the Contracting Parties explicitly recognize that such stimulation will result from
“agreement upon the treatment to be accorded to ... investments” by “the national of
one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party.” (Paragraph 240).
Article 1 of the BIT determines the circle of beneficiaries, which is a subset of all existing
persons.

3

. Article 1(b)(i) and Article 1(b)(i) empower all natural persons having the nationality of a
Contracting Party and all legal persons constituted in accordance with the law of a
Contracting Party.

3

. Article 1(b) (ii) extends the protection of the BIT to legal persons against the actions of
their own government” but limits those benefits to legal persons having the special
attribute of being “controlled” by nationals of the other signatory. Assuming without
conceding that an entity that owns 100% of the shares and voting rights of another
entity possesses the power to control the. second entity, there is no reason to posit that it
is more reasonable to extend the privileges concomitant to Article 1(b)(iii) to companies
potentially under the control of nationals of the other signatory, as opposed to
companies actually receiving the effects of an action from nationals of the other
signatory. The opposite is sounder: the access mechanism to the privileges concomitant
to Article 1(b) (iii) should be an actual event, an action (controlled) and not a possibility.

3

N

It is incorrect to equate “controlled” and “control”. One should be “aware of the general
principle of interpretation whereby a text ought to be interpreted in the manner that
gives it effect —ut magis valeat quam pereat. However, this principle of interpretation should
not lead to confer, af posteriori, to a provision deprived of its object and purpose a result
that goes against its clear and explicit terms”."' To substitute “controlled” with the term
“control” is to go against the text’s clear and explicit terms. The fundamental issues of
foreseeability, transparency and stability accepted by parties to a BIT cannot be resolved

 

© Aron Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States,
358/359; CuRIsroPpH H. SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY. §. 496 (Cambridge
University Press, 2001).

"| Banro American Resources, Inc. and Société Aurifére du Kivu et du Maniema S.A.R.L. v. Democratic Republic of the Congo
(ICSID Case No. ARB/98/7), Award of the Tribunal of September, 2000.

  

84

3.

o

3.

z

35.

3

a

37.

38.

by limiting “control” to majority ownership and voting rights when the Treaty explicitly
uses the expression “controlled directly or indirectly”.

. Neither the jurisprudence concerning the phrase “foreign control” in Article 25(2)(b) of

the ICSID Convention, nor other Arbitral Awards concerning “control”, nor the BIT
practices of the Netherlands and Bolivia can be of assistance in interpreting Article
1(b) (iii) of the BIT.

. Since the BIT does not provide a definition of “directly or indirectly controlled” and,

unlike the case of the ICSID convention, there is little or no history or commentaty on
the BIT, it is the Tribunal’s responsibility to interpret the meaning of the expression.
Many cases underline the importance of the Tribunal’s authority to interpret access
provisions past formal interpretations to actual relationships. “ICSID Tribunals do not
accept the view that their competence is limited by formalities, and rather they rule on
their competence based on a review of the circumstances surrounding the case, and, in
particular, the actual relationships among the companies involved”.'*

This elucidation of the meaning of “controlled” is strengthened by the fact that the
identification of corporate nationality has been difficult from the point of view of
international law for almost a century, as wars have shaped the meaning assigned to it by
sovereign powers. Different criteria have been put forward but none has prevailed:
neither place of incorporation; nor seat of the company; nor ownership and voting
rights.’ To resort to a mechanistic interpretation of control would be to go against the
historical development of the concept. An interpretation that favors an action is in
keeping with the search for a functional definition.

. Claimant states that “the jurisdictional issue ...is whether share ownership and voting

rights in the Claimant by a Netherlands entity at a level greater than 50% is sufficient to
establish direct or indirect control’* and that it “rests its case on jurisdiction on the
sufficiency of the controlling interest of IWH and IWT to constitute control over the
Claimant for purposes of the BIT”.

To say that A is sufficient for B is to say that A cannot occur without B, or that
whenever A occurs, B occurs.

Commentary on the drafting of the ICSID convention makes it clear that share
ownership at a level greater than 50% might not be controlling: “Thus, where nationals
of a Contracting State hold 35 percent of the shares of a corporation and nationals of a

'2 Banro American Resources, Inc. and Société Aurifere du Kirn et du Maniema S.A.R.L. v. Demooratic Republic of the Congo
(ICSID Case No. ARB/98/7), Award of the Tribunal of September 1, 2000.
3 “The test was originally based solely on share ownership, but has been extended to cover nationality of

principal officers, the exercise of controlling influence through means other than shareholding and the presence
of substantial though not necessarily controlling interests”. A. Fatouros, “National Legal Persons in
International Law’, in ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW, R. Bernhardt, ed. Vol 3. 1997 p. 495,
cited in Professor Dolzer’s expert opinion.

4 Claimant’s Memorial on Bolivia’s Objections to Jurisdiction and Request for the Production of Evidence,
p.73 § 209.

'5 Thidem, p. 69 4 199.

 

non-Contracting State hold 55 percent of the shares, an agreement that the corporation
has the nationality of the Contracting State may well be upheld by a tribunal”."* “In the
course of the drafting of the Convention, it was said ... even that 51% of the shares
might not be controlling”."”

3

Ss

. Previous tribunal awards have established that an investor with minority share ownership
can control a company, thereby providing counterexamples to the assertion that majority
share ownership and majority voting rights are sufficient to establish control. Even in the
case of 100% ownership, Tribunals have examined “effective control”: “This control is
not only a result of the fact that LETCO’s capital stock was 100% owned by French
nationals as indicated by both LETCO and official documents of the Liberian
Government, it also results from what appears to be effective control by French
nationals; effective control in the sense that, apart from French shareholdings, French
nationals dominated the company decision-making structure.””*

40. Thus the interpretation of control advanced by Claimant is logically inconsistent.
Majority shareholding and majority voting rights do not per se constitute control.

4

. Given that “Claimant has already submitted all the documents on which it relies to show
that, through majority share ownership and voting control, SARL controls the
Claimant” and given there is no evidence in the filings that AdT received the effects of
actions of control and thus no proof that it was “controlled directly or indirectly” by
Dutch nationals, the Tribunal should have requested the production of evidence to
substantiate the claim that AdT was directly or indirectly controlled by IWH B.V. or
IWT B.V. The tribunal in Avcoven, for example, listed criteria, different from share
ownership, that could have been used to test control: nationality of the Board members,
frequency of visits of board members of the direct shareholder, frequency of
“monitoring” of Ascoven’s activities, and financial support.”

4

N

In order to specifically evaluate actions of control of AdT, the Tribunal should have
requested Claimant to produce, inter alia, the following information for the period
December 22, 1999 —when a Dutch company acquired International Water (Tunari)
S.a.t.l. that used to be called IW Ltd of the Cayman Islands- to November 12 2001-
when AdT submitted its Request for Arbitration: (1) all documents reflecting or
constituting communications between AdT and (a) International Water (Tunari) S.a.r.l,
(b) International Water (Tunari) B.V., (c) International Water Holdings B.V. and (d)
Baywater Holdings B.V.; (II) all documents reflecting or constituting communications

© CF, Ametasinghe Jurisdiction Rationae Personae under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, 47 BYUL 227, 1976. pp. 264-265

Vacuum Salt Products Ltd. v. Republic of Ghana, Award of February 16, 1994, 9 ICSID Rev.—FIL] (1994),
4 ICSID 329 (1997), § 43.

'S Liberian Eastern Timber Corp [LETCO] v Republic of Liberia, Award of March 31, 1986 and Rectification
of June 17, 1986, reprinted as 26 ILM 647 (1987), 2 ICSID Rep 346 (1994).

8 Claimant’s Memorial On Bolivia’s Objections to Jurisdiction and Request for the Production of Evidence,
p. 73 par. 210

20 Antopista Concesionada de Venezuela CA v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (hereinafter referred to as “Aucoven”),
in its Decision on Jurisdiction of September 27, 2001, reprinted at 16 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 469 (2001), 6 ICSID
419 (2004), p. 26, 4 65.

 

86

relating to AdT between or among any of the following (a) International Water (Tunari)
S.a.tl, (b) International Water (Tunari) B.V., (c) International Water Holdings B.V. and
(d) Baywater Holdings B.V.; and, finally, (III) all board of director minutes and
shareholder meeting minutes for (a) AdT, (b) International Water (Tunari) S.a.rl, (c)
International Water (Tunari) B.V., (d) International Water Holdings B.V. and (e)
Baywater Holdings B.V.. If AdT was indeed controlled directly or indirectly by
International Water (Tunari) B.V. and International Water Holdings B.V., those
documents would provide evidence of such actions of control.

43. The majority of the Tribunal denied Respondent’s request for the production of
evidence because it had no object given its interpretation.

4.

z

. By resting its case on jurisdiction on majority stock ownership with voting rights and not
offering evidence that AdT received the effects of actions of control by Dutch
companies, Claimant failed to prove that this dispute is within the jurisdictional reach of
the BIT.

It is for the above reasons that I disagree with the Majority’s decision in favor of jurisdiction
and conclude that Claimant is not entitled to invoke ICSID jurisdiction under the BIT
between Bolivia and the Netherlands. I wholeheartedly join in the Tribunal’s commitment to

its duty to protect the integrity of ICSID jurisdiction during the merits phase, as the parties
submit their full memorials and supporting evidence

(signed)

José Luis Alberro-Semerena
Arbitrator

Date: October 11, 2005

87

Appendix I

Abbreviations Used in this Award

Abbreviations used in the text

AdT (Claimant) Aguas del Tunari

Arbitration Rules Rules of Procedure for Arbitration

Baywater Baywater Holdings, B.V.

BIT The Agreement on Encouragement and _ Reciprocal

Protection of Investments Between the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Republic of Bolivia, entered into force
November 1, 1994.

Concession Contract for Concession of Use of Water and for the Public
Potable Water and Sewer Service for the City of Cochabamba

ICSID ‘The International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes
ICSID Convention Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes

Between States and Nationals of Other States, entered into force
October 14, 1966.

IWHB.V. International Water Holdings B.V.

IWT BV. International Water (Tunari) B.V.

IW Ltd International Water (Tunari) Ltd.

IW S.arl. International Water (Tunari) S.a.r.l.

Order No. 2 Procedural Order No. 2 on Respondent’s Motion for

Postponement of the November 17, 18 and 19, 2003 Hearing
on Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction, November 5,
2003

Order No. 3 Procedural Order No. 3 concerning February 9, 10 and 11,
2004 Hearing on Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction,
and Respondent’s Request of December 15, 2003 to Examine
Witnesses, December 31, 2003

Order No. 4

Respondent
SEMAPA

SIRESE

Bolivia’s Obj.

AdT’s Response

Bolivia’s Reply

AdT’s Rej.

Cl. Mem.

Resp. Counter Mem.

Cl. Reply

Resp. Rej.

Procedural Order No. 4 Inviting Comments on the Letter
dated October 29, 2004 of Mr. Lammers, Legal Advisor of
the Foreign Ministry of the Netherlands, Responding to the
Tribunal’s Letter of October 4, 2004 Posing Limited
Questions, December 14, 2004

‘The Republic of Bolivia
Municipal Potable Water and Sewer Service of Cochabamba

System of Sectoral Regulation

Abbreviations used in citations and footnotes

Republic’s of Bolivia’s Objection to Jurisdiction and Requests
for the Production of Evidence and for Clarification of
Procedures, January 17, 2003

AdT’s Response to Bolivia’s Objection to Jurisdiction and
Requests for the Production of Evidence and for Clarification
of Procedures, January 29, 2003

Reply of Republic of Bolivia to Claimant’s Response to
Bolivia’s Objection to Jurisdiction and Requests for the
Production of Evidence and for Clarification of Procedures
and Motion for Immediate Dismissal, February 5, 2003

AdT’s Rejoinder to Bolivia’s Reply, February 13, 2003.
AdT’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, June 4, 2003

‘The Republic of Bolivia’s Counter-Memorial in Opposition
to Jurisdiction and in Support of the Production of Evidence,
August 4, 2003

Claimant’s Reply to Bolivia’s_ Counter-Memorial in
Opposition to Jurisdiction and in Support of the Production
of Evidence, September 4, 2003

The Republic of Bolivia’s Rejoinder in Opposition to
Jurisdiction and in Support of the Production of Evidence,
October 6, 2003

Aucoven

Agurix

Cable TV

Lanco

Vacuum Salt

Vivendi

ICSID Cases Discussed & Cited

Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela CA [Ancoven| v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venexnela, Decision on Jurisdiction of September 27,
2001, reprinted at 16 ICSID Rev.—FIL] 469 (2001), 6 ICSID
419 (2004).

Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, “Decision on
Jurisdiction” dated December 8, 2003, available at
http://www.asil.org/ilib/azurix.pdf.

Cable Television of Nevis Ltd. and Cable Television of Nevis Holdings
Lid. v. Federation of St Kitts and Nevis, Award of January 13,
1997, reprinted at 13 ICSID Rev.—FIL]J 328 (1998), 5 ICSID
Rep. 108 (2002).

 

LANCO International, Inc. v. The Argentine Republic,
“Preliminary Decision: Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal”
dated December 8, 1998, reprinted at 40 ILM 457 (2001), 5
ICSID Rep. 367 (2002).

Vacuum Salt Products Ltd. v. Republic of Ghana, Award of February
16, 1994, 9 ICSID Rev-—FIL] (1994), 4 ICSID 329 (1997).

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija $A. & Vivendi Universal v.
Argentine Republic, Award of November 21, 2000, reprinted at
16 ICSID Rev.—FIL]J __ (2001), 5 ICSID Rep. 299 (2002),
Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, reprinted at 17 ICSID
Rev.—FIL] __ (2002), 5 ICSID Rev. 240 (2002).

Appendix IT

Text of Cited Treaty and Contract Provisions

 

The Netherlands-Bolivia BIT

Article 1(b) the term “nationals” shall comprise with regard to either Contracting Party:
i. natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party in accordance with
its law;
ii. without préjudice to the provisions of (iii) hereafter, legal persons constituted in
accordance with the law of that Contracting Party;
iii, legal persons controlled directly or indirectly, by nationals of that Contracting
Party, but constituted in accordance with the law of the other Contracting Party.

Article 9

1) For the purpose of resolving disputes that may arise from investments between
one Contracting Party and a national of the other Party to the present Agreement,
consultation will be held with a view to settling, amicably the conflict between the parties to
the dispute.

2) If a dispute cannot be settled within a period of six months from the date on
which the interested national shall have formally notified it, the dispute shall, at the request
of the interested national, be submitted to an arbitral tribunal.

3) The arbitral tribunal shall be constituted ad hoc, in such a way that each party shall
nominate an arbitrator, and the arbitrators shall agree on the choice of a national of a third
State as chairman of the tribunal. The arbitrators shall be nominated within a period of two

 

months, and the chairman within a period of three months, from the time the interested
national shall have communicated his wish to submit the dispute to an arbitral tribunal.

4) If the time limits provided for in paragraph 3 are not observed, either of the
parties to the dispute shall, if no other provisions apply between the parties to the dispute,
be empowered to request the President of the Court of Arbitration of the Paris International
Chamber of Commerce to proceed to make the necessary appointments.

5) Paragraphs 4 to 7 of article 13 of the present Agreement shall apply mutatis
mutandis.

6) If both Contracting Parties have acceded to the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States of 18 March 1965, any
disputes that may arise from investment between one of the Contracting Parties and a
national of the other Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of that
Convention, be submitted for conciliation or arbitration to the international Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes.

The Bolivian Constitution
Articulo 24 Las empresas y stibditos extranjeros estan sometidos a las leyes bolivianas, sin

que en ningtin caso puedan invocar situacién excepcional ni apelar a reclamaciones
diplomaticas.

Il-1

[Article 24 Foreign subjects and enterprises are subject to Bolivian laws, and in no
case may they invoke exceptional position or have recourse to diplomatic claims.]

Articulo 136 Son de dominio originario del Estado, ademas de los bienes a los que la Ley
les da esa calidad, el suelo y el subsuelo con todas sus riquezas naturales, las aguas lacustres,
fluviales y medicinales, asi como los elementos y fuerzas fisicas susceptibles de
aprovechamiento. La ley establecer4 las condiciones de este dominio, asi como las de su
concesi6n y adjudicacion a los particulares.

[Article 136 Within the regional original domain of the State, in addition to property
to which the law gives that character, are the soil and the subsoil with all their natural
resources: lake, river and thermal waters; and all physical elements and forces
susceptible of utilization. Laws shall establish the conditions of such ownership, and
those for their concession and allotment to private individuals.]

The Concession

Articulo 37.1 Cada Accionista Fundador deberé mantener mas del 50% de su porcentaje
original de participacién en el capital con derecho a voto del Concesionario por lo menos
durante los primeros siete (7) anos de las Concesiones. No obstante lo anterior, nada en este
Contrato impide a los Accionistas gravar sus acciones como gatantia ante las Entidades
Financieras

[Article 37.1 Every Founding Stockholder keep more than 50% of the original equity
percentage in voting shares of the Concessionaire at least over the first seven (7)
years of the Concessions.]

Articulo 41.2 El Concessionario reconoce la jurisdiccidn y competencia de las autoridades
que componen e Sistema de Regulacién Sectorial (SIRESE) y tribunales de la Republica de
Bolivia, de conformidad con la Ley SIRESE y otras leyes bolivianas aplicables.

[Article 41.2 [The Concessionaire] recognizes the jurisdiction and competence of the
authorities that make up the System of Sectoral Regulation (SIRESE) and of the
courts of the Republic of Bolivia, in accordance with the SIRESE law and other
applicable Bolivian laws.]

Articulo 41.3 Las estipulaciones del presente Contrato no podran interpretarse como
renuncia por parte de los Accionistas, los Accionistas Fundadores, incluyendo los
Accionistas Utlimos, a mecanismos de Resolucién de controversias establecidos en tratados
internacionales reconocidos por la Republica de Bolivia.

[Article 41.3 The provisions of the present Contract are not to be interpreted as a
renunciation on the part of the Shareholders, the Founding Shareholders, including
the Ultimate Shareholders, of methods of dispute resolution established in
International Treaties recognized by the Republic of Bolivia.]

Articulo 41.5 Las Partes reconocen que dichos Accionistas y Accionistas Ultimos del
Concesionario incluyendo los Accionistas Fundadores, son libres para ampatarse en aquellos

Il-2

métodos de resolucién de disputas que puedan serles legalmente disponibles de acuerdo a la
Ley Boliviana (como por ejemplo arbitraje bajo las reglas de CCI, ICSID, o UNCITRAL y
otros organismos internacionales similares). Las Partes acuerdan cooperar en el proceso
arriba mencionado, en la medida que les sea permitido por Ley.

[Article 41.5 The Parties [the Regulator of Water and AdT] recognize that the
Shareholders and Ultimate Shareholders including the Founding Shareholders are
free to have recourse to those methods of dispute resolution which are legally
available to them in accordance with Bolivian Law (such as example arbitration
under the rules of the ICC, ICSID or UNITRAL or other similar international
organizations). The Parties agree to cooperate in the above-mentioned process, to
the extent permitted by Law

 

 

The ICSID Convention

 

Article 25

 

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of
a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the
State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration as well as on the date on which the request was
registered pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 28 or paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does
not include any person who on either date also had the nationality of the Contracting
State party to the dispute; and

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other than
the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person which had the nationality
of the Contracting State party to the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign
control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting
State for the purposes of this Convention.

 

 

(3) Consent by a constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State shall require
the approval of that State unless that State notifies the Centre that no such approval is
required.

(4) Any Contracting State may, at the time of ratification, acceptance or approval of this
Convention or at any time thereafter, notify the Centre of the class or classes of disputes
which it would or would not consider submitting to the jurisdiction of the Centre. The
Secretary-General shall forthwith transmit such notification to all Contracting States.
Such notification shall not constitute the consent required by paragraph (1).

 

I-3

Article 43
Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it deems it necessary at any stage
of the proceedings,

(a) call upon the parties to produce documents or other evidence, and

(b) visit the scene connected with the dispute, and conduct such inquiries there as it
may deem appropriate.

The ICSID Arbitration Rules
Article 34 Evidence: General Principles

(1) The Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any evidence adduced and
of its probative value.

(2) The Tribunal may, if it deems it necessary at any stage of the proceeding:
(a) call upon the parties to produce documents, witnesses and experts; and
(b) visit any place connected with the dispute or conduct inquiries there.

(3) The parties shall cooperate with the Tribunal in the production of the evidence
and in the other measures provided for in paragraph (2). The Tribunal shall take
formal note of the failure of a patty to comply with its obligations under this
paragraph and of any reasons given for such failure.

(4) Expenses incurred in producing evidence and in taking other measures in
accordance with paragraph (2) shall be deemed to constitute part of the expenses
incurred by the parties within the meaning of Article 61(2) of the Convention.

Article 41 Objections to Jurisdiction

(1) Any objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the jurisdiction
of the Centre or, for other reasons, is not within the competence of the Tribunal
shall be made as early as possible. A party shall file the objection with the Secretary-
General no later than the expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of the
counter-memorial, or, if the objection relates to an ancillary claim, for the filing of
the rejoinder—aunless the facts on which the objection is based are unknown to the
party at that time.

(2) The Tribunal may on its own initiative consider, at any stage of the proceeding,
whether the dispute or any ancillary claim before it is within the jurisdiction of the
Centre and within its own competence.

(3) Upon the formal raising of an objection relating to the dispute, the proceeding on
the merits shall be suspended. The President of the Tribunal, after consultation with

its other members, shall fix a time limit within which the parties may file
observations on the objection.

(4) The Tribunal shall decide whether or not the further procedures relating to the
objection shall be oral. It may deal with the objection as a preliminary question or
join it to the merits of the dispute. If the Tribunal overrules the objection or joins it
to the merits, it shall once more fix time limits for the further procedures.

(5) If the Tribunal decides that the dispute is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre
or not within its own competence, it shall render an award to that effect.

Appendix III

Text of January 29, 2003 Letter from the Tribunal to Earthjustice, Counsel for
Petitioners

Professor David D. Caron

C/o Ms. Margrete Stevens

Senior Counsel

International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes, MC6-611
‘The World Bank Group

Washington, D.C. 20433 U.S.A.

January
29, 2003

J. Martin Wagner

Director, International Program, Earthjustice
426 17" Street, 6" Floor

Oakland, CA 94612

Dear Mr. Wagner:

I write in response to your letter of August 28" 2002 to the Secretary—General of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) requesting that he
forward to the Tribunal a petition for intervention in ICSID Case No. Arb/02/03, Aguas del
Tunari v. The Republic of Bolivia. The Secretary-General promptly forwarded your request to
me and the other members of the Tribunal, José Alberro and Henri Alvarez. You were
entirely correct in directing your request to the Tribunal, rather than ICSID itself, as ICSID
plays only an administrative and support function in any tribunal’s handling of cases.

The Tribunal has given extended consideration to your request. Moreover, the
‘Tribunal requested, and subsequently received, the views of the parties to the dispute. As
indicated on the ICSID public register for this case, the Tribunal was constituted under the
Rules, without objection from the parties, on July 5, 2002, and held the First Session in this
matter on December 9, 2002. Your letter and the request in it were discussed at that meeting
and considered by the Tribunal. I write to you and your co-petitioners on behalf of the
Tribunal with our response to the particular requests specified in your petition (copy
attached hereto).

First, it is the Tribunal’s unanimous opinion that your core requests are beyond the
power or the authority of the Tribunal to grant. The interplay of the two treaties involved
(the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes and the 1992 Bilateral
Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and Bolivia) and the consensual nature of arbitration places the
control of the issues you raise with the parties, not the Tribunal. In particular, it is manifestly
clear to the Tribunal that it does not, absent the agreement of the Parties, have the power to

I-1

join a non-party to the proceedings; to provide access to hearings to non-parties and, a
fortiori, to the public generally; or to make the documents of the proceedings public.

Second, the consent required of the Parties to grant the requests is not present.
Although the Tribunal did not receive any indication that such consent may be forthcoming,
the Tribunal remains open to any initiative from the parties in this regard.

‘Third, the Tribunal is of the view that there is not at present a need to call witnesses
or seek supplementary non-party submissions at the jurisdictional phase of its work. We hold
this view without in anyway prejudging the question of the extent of the Tribunal’s authority
to call witnesses or receive information from non-parties on its own initiative.

‘The Tribunal wishes to emphasize that it has given serious consideration to your
request. The briefness of our reply should not be taken as an indication that your request
was viewed in other than a serious manner. Rather, the Tribunal has endeavored to answer
the request in a manner that is both responsive and efficient. In addition, given your status
as a non-patty to this dispute, we necessarily have been careful in our response not to breach
the undertakings in our declarations as arbitrators, signed under Arbitration Rule 6(2), to
maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings.

‘The Tribunal appreciates that you, and the organizations and individuals with whom
you work, are concerned with the resolution of this dispute. The duties of the Tribunal,
however, derive from the treaties which govern this particular dispute. It has been reported
that the new bilateral investment treaty between Singapore and the United States contains
provisions for the amicus participation of non-governmental organizations. The duty of a
tribunal in any case that arises under that instrument will be to follow its dictates. It is no less
our duty to follow the structure and requirements of the instruments that control this case.

‘The Tribunal thanks you for your letter and the attached petition. Your letter and
petition will remain on file with the Secretariat. The ICSID Secretariat and the Parties have
been informed of our views.

On behalf of myself and the other members of the Tribunal, I am

 

  

 

Respectfully yours,

David D. Caron
President of the Tribunal in the matter of
Aguas del Tunari vs. The Republic of Bolivia

 

Il -2

Appendix IV

Text of October 1, 2004 Letter from the Tribunal to the Government of the
Netherlands

Professor David D. Caron

C/o Ms. Margrete Stevens

Senior Counsel

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes,
1818 H St, NW.
Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.

 

October 1, 2004
Mr. J.G. Lammers
Legal Adviser
Ministerie van Buitenlandse Zaken
PO Box 20061
2500 EB The Hague, The Netherlands

Dear Mr. Lammers:

I write regarding three parliamentary questions and replies made between 21
February and 5 June 2002 that have been introduced as evidence relevant to the matter of
Aguas del Tunari v. Republic of Bolivia, an arbitration before the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), Case No. Arb/02/03.

I write on behalf of the Tribunal constituted to address the above-referenced
matter, that Tribunal consisting of José Luis Alberro-Semerena, Henri Alvarez, and myself as
President. Claimant in this case bases the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the Bilateral
Investment Treaty (BIT) between the Netherlands and Bolivia, signed 10 March 1992 and
entered into force on 1 November 1994. The Tribunal has heard arguments as to its
jurisdiction and is currently deliberating on the matter. The Tribunal recognizes the
obligation of the Netherlands under the ICSID Convention to not provide diplomatic
protection to its nationals in the case of investment disputes covered by the Convention.' In
this sense, the Tribunal wishes to emphasize that it does not seek the view of the
Netherlands as to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in this matter, rather it seeks only to secure the
comments of the Netherlands as to specific documentary bases for written responses which
the Dutch government provided to parliamentary questions.

' See Articles 25-27 of the ICSID Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and
Nationals of Other States, especially Article 27:

(1) No Contracting State shall give diplomatic protection, or bring an international claim, in respect
of a dispute which one of its nationals and another Contracting State shall have consented to
submit or shall have submitted to arbitration under this Convention, unless such other
Contracting State shall have failed to abide by and comply with the award rendered in such
dispute.

(2) Diplomatic protection, for the purposes of paragraph (1), shall not include informal diplomatic
exchanges for the sole purpose of facilitating a settlement of the dispute.

Iv-1

Specifically, the parties in this case have presented evidence and made arguments
addressing the interpretation held by the Government of the Netherlands regarding
provisions of its BIT with Bolivia. The parties do so in part by referencing three sets of
responses to parliamentary questions. It is in regard of these responses to parliamentary
questions that the Tribunal writes. We attach the Dutch originals of the responses to
parliamentary questions, as well as the unofficial English translations of them, as they were
provided to the Tribunal.”

The three sets of responses to parliamentary questions in outline are as follows.

First, on 21 February 2002, MP Van Bommel submitted written questions to the
State Secretary for Economic Affairs and the Minister for Development Cooperation
concerning, infer alia, whether certain corporations could invoke the Dutch-Bolivian BIT in
the dispute addressed by this Tribunal.’ On behalf of the Minister for Development
Cooperation and his Ministry, the State Secretary for Economic Affairs (Minister Ybema)
replied on 6 March 2002. He declined to state whether the current dispute fell under the
BIT, stating instead, infer alia, that the answer is up to the “discretion of the arbitration
tribunal to which a dispute has been submitted.”*

Second, on 25 March 2002, MP Van Bommel submitted further written questions,
requesting that the State Secretary and Minister “state clearly and unambiguously whether
these multinationals can invoke the Dutch-Bolivian investment treaty in this case.”’ The
State Secretary replied on 5 April 2002, referred the MP to his 6 March 2002 reply, and made
further comments of a general nature which may be found at attachments three and four.

Third, on 18 April 2002, a five member group of MPs, including MP Van Bommel,
submitted further questions to the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment,
the Minister for Development Cooperation and the State Secretary for Economic Affairs.°
The MPs asked: “Are you familiar with the publication ‘Water, Human Right or
Merchandise’ of the association Milieudefensie (‘Friends of the Earth’)? What is your
general opinion on this publication?”’ On behalf of himself and the State Secretary, the
Minister for Housing, Spatial Planning, and Development (Minister Pronk) replied on 5 June
2002:

Yes. Access to safe and clean water is important. The publication brings a
number of aspects of the complicated water issue to the attention of a larger
public. The topic deserves this attention. However, the formulation in this
pamphlet is sometimes factually incorrect or suggestive. One particular point
I would like to mention with emphasis. On p. 16 (Water war in Bolivia) it is
stated that Aguas del Tunari can resort to the dispute settlement commi
of the World Bank under the Dutch-Bolivian Investment Treaty. Thi:
incorrect. As recently stated in response to questions of MP Van Bommel

 

 

2 See attachments 1-6.

3 See Parliamentary questions (“Kamervragen”), Parliamentary year 2001-2002, no. 765; see attachment 1,
Unofficial English translation; and attachment 2, Dutch original.

4 See Id, answer 6,

5 Parliamentary questions, no. 959; see attachment 3, unofficial English translation; and attachment 4, Dutch
original.

6 Parliamentary questions, no. 1229; see attachment 5, unofficial English Translation; and attachment 6, Dutch
original. See also attachment 7, unofficial English translation of an excerpt of the publication; and attachment
8, Dutch Original.

7 Id, question 1.

IV-2

[citing to the previous replies to Van Bommel], the Government is of the
view that the investment treaty is not applicable to this particular case.*

The ICSID Convention entrusts the Tribunal with deciding upon its jurisdiction in
this matter. The parties to this arbitration have put in issue provisions of the BIT between
the Netherlands and Bolivia. Given that the Government of the Netherlands is not a party
or otherwise present in this arbitration, the Tribunal concludes that information from the
Government of the Netherlands would assist the work of the Tribunal. Given further the
above quoted Article 27 of the ICSID Convention and the fact that the Netherlands is not a
party to this arbitration, the Tribunal is also of the view that such questions must be specific
and narrowly tailored, aimed at obtaining information supporting interpretative positions of
general application rather than ones related to a specific case. It is the opinion of the
‘Tribunal that it possesses the authority to seek this information under Rule 34 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules.

With all of these considerations in mind, the Tribunal notes that the written
responses to parliamentary questions, summarized above and attached in full, do not in and
of themselves provide reasons of general application. If the Government’s statement
replying to the Parliamentary questions of 18 April 2002 reflects an interpretative position of
general application held by the Government of the Netherlands, the Tribunal requests that
the Government provide the Tribunal with information (of the type suggested by Articles 31
and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties as being possibly relevant) upon
which that general interpretative position is based. The Tribunal advises that it already has
before it the text of the BIT and the Explanatory Note set forth at Staten-Generaal,
Parliamentary Year 1992-1993, 22870 (R 1452), nos. 37 and 1.

The Tribunal is proceeding with its deliberations on this matter. To be effective
your response will need to be received by the Tribunal before 15 November 2004.

The Tribunal thanks you for your attention to this matter. On behalf of myself and
the other members of the Tribunal, I am

Respectfully yours,

David D. Caron
President of the Tribunal in the matter of
Aguas del Tunari v. Republic of Bolivia

[List of Attachments not reprinted]

8 See Id, answer 1. See also attachment 5, Unofficial English translation; and attachment 6, Dutch original.

IV-3

