INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE MATTER

AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC

(HEREAFTER “AEL” OR “CLAIMANT’’)

AGAINST

REPUBLIC OF PERU

(HEREAFTER “PERU” OR “RESPONDENT’”’)

CASE No. ARB/06/13

AWARD

MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL Dr. ROBERT BRINER, PRESIDENT
Mr. J. WILLIAM ROWLEY QC, ARBITRATOR

Dr. CLAUS VON WOBESER, ARBITRATOR

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL Ms. NATALI SEQUEIRA

DaTE OF DISPATCH TO THE PARTIES: 11 DECEMBER 2008

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

COUNSEL

FOR THE CLAIMANT

FOR THE RESPONDENT

Mr. JAMES LoFTIS,

MR. MARK BEELEY
VINSON & ELKINS RLLP
Ciry Point 33°” FLooR
ONE ROPEMAKER STREET
LONDON EC2Y 9UE
UNITED KINGDOM

Mr. EUGENE J. SILVA II

Ms. TERESA CIGARROA KECK
VINSON & ELKINS LLP

First Ciry TOWER

1001 FANNIN STREET

SUITE 2500

Houston, TEXAS 77002
US.A.

Ms. CAROLYN B. LAMM

Ms. ABBY COHEN SMUTNY
MR. FRANCIS A. VASQUEZ, JR.
Mr. JONATHAN C. HAMILTON
WuiTE & CASE LLP

701 THIRTEENTH STREET, NW
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20005
US.A.

MR. EDUARDO FERRERO COSTA

Ms. MARIA DEL CARMEN TOVAR GIL
EsTUDIO ECHECOPAR

AV. DELA FLORESTA 497 PIso 5
Lima 41, LIMA

PERU

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 3

 

 

DEX

1. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 4

2. THE CLAIMS AND RELIEF SOUGHT

  

 

 

3. BACKGROUND 18
3.1. THE CLAIMANT. 18
3.2 THE RESPONDENT. 21

 

3.3 DEVELOPMENTS BETWEEN 1996 AND 2005

 

3.4 THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE TRANSMISSION LINES.........000005

 

3.5 THE BOOT CONCESSION 38

3.6. CLAIMANT’S CLASSIFICATION AND DISCRIMINATION DISPUTES IN PERU

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. THE DISPUTE 41
4.1. POSITION OF THE PARTIES 41
4.1.1. Position of the Claimant 41
4.1.2. Position of the Respond 44

5. DISCUSSION 44
5.1. JURISDICTION. 44
5.2. APPLICABLE LAW 46
5.3. MERITS 47
6. COSTS 54

 

AWARD 56

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 4

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

Aguaytia Energy LLC, a company incorporated in the State of Delaware (U.S.A.),
submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or
“the Centre”) a Request to Institute Arbitration Proceedings (the “Request”) dated

8 May 2006 against the Republic of Peru.

ICSID registered the Request on 17 July 2006.

The Parties having been unable to agree on the number of arbitrators and the method for
their appointment, and sixty days having elapsed since the registration of the Request,
the Claimant, by letter of 20 September 2006, invoked the formula provided for in
Article 37(2)(b) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between
States and Nationals of Other States (“the Convention”) pursuant to which:
Where the parties do not agree upon the number of arbitrators and the
method of their appointment, the Tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators,

one arbitrator appointed by each party and the third, who shall be the
president of the Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the parties.

In the same letter, the Claimant appointed as Arbitrator, Mr. J. William Rowley QC (a
national of Canada), and, by letter dated 13 October 2006, the Respondent appointed

Dr. Claus von Wobeser (a national of Mexico) as Arbitrator.

Upon the failure of the Parties to agree on a presiding arbitrator, the Claimant, by letter

of 31 January 2007, requested that the appointment be made by the Chairman of the

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 5

 

ICSID Administrative Council (“Chairman”), pursuant to Rule 4 of the ICSID Rules of

Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules” or “ICSID Rules”).

6 Following consultation with the Parties, the Chairman appointed Dr. Robert Briner (a
national of Switzerland) as the President of the Arbitral Tribunal. By letter of 27 March
2007, the Centre noted that, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules, the
Arbitral Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted and the proceedings to have
begun on 27 March 2007. Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Senior Counsel, ICSID, was

designated by ICSID as Secretary of the Tribunal.

7 By letter dated 20 April 2007, ICSID informed the Arbitral Tribunal that due to the
reorganization of the case management undertaken at the Centre, Mr. Ucheora
Onwuamaegbu had been replaced as Secretary of the Tribunal by Mr. Tomas Solis,
Counsel, ICSID. Mr. Solis was in turn formally replaced by Ms. Natali Sequeira on

3 November 2008.

8 A first session of the Arbitral Tribunal was held on 18 May 2007 at the World Bank

offices in Washington D.C. A sound recording of the session was made.

The following persons were present:

The Arbitral Tribunal Dr. Robert Briner, President

Mr. J. William Rowley QC, Arbitrator

Dr. Claus von Wobeser, Arbitrator

The Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal Mr. Tomas Solis

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

On behalf of the Claimant Mr. James L. Loftis,
VINSON & ELKINS RLLP

Mr. Gene J. Silva II,
VINSON & ELKINS LLP

Mr. Mark Beeley,
VINSON & ELKINS RLLP

Ms. Adrianne Goins,
VINSON & ELKINS LLP

Ms. Teresa Keck,
VINSON & ELKINS LLP

Ms. Miluska Cervantes,
AGUAYTIA ENERGY, LLC

Mr. Dean M. Moesser,
DUKE ENERGY CORPORATION

Mr. Eduardo Maldonado,
MALDONADO & MALDONADO, PERU

On behalf of the Respondent Mr. Eduardo Ferrero Costa,
ESTUDIO ECHECOPAR

Ms. Maria del Carmen Tovar Gil,
ESTUDIO ECHECOPAR

Mr. Renzo Villa,
EMBASSY OF PERU WASHINGTON DC

Mr. Reynaldo Portugal,
EMBASSY OF PERU WASHINGTON DC

Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny,
WHITE & CASE LLP

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 7

 

Mr. Jonathan C. Hamilton,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Ms. Mairée Uran-Bidegain,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Ms. Sabina Sacco,
WHITE & CASE LLP

9 Among other matters, it was agreed that

- the place of the proceeding would be the seat of the Centre in Washington,
D.C., but without prejudice to the Tribunal’s holding of hearings with the
Parties at any other location that the Tribunal considered appropriate after

consultation with the Parties;

- the procedural language would be English and that pleadings, including
supporting documentation as well as witness and expert statements, would be
filed with English translations if the original document was not in English. The
translations submitted would not need to be certified as set forth in
Regulation 30(3) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations,

unless such translation proved controversial;

10 The following timetable for the further written submissions was furthermore agreed

upon between the Parties and the Arbitral Tribunal :

- the Claimant would file its Opening Memorial by 9 October 2007;

- the Respondent would file its Counter-Memorial by 29 February 2008;

- the Claimant would file its Reply to Respondent’s Counter-Memorial by

15 April 2008;

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 8

 

- the Respondent would file its Rejoinder to Claimant’s Reply by 30 May 2008;
- A hearing on the merits would commence in the week starting 14 July 2008.

At the end of the First Session, the Parties and the Arbitral Tribunal stated that they had
no further issues to discuss, and the Parties confirmed that they were in agreement with

the procedure as conducted by the Arbitral Tribunal up to that time.

In accordance with the above-mentioned timetable, the Claimant submitted on
9 October 2007 its Opening Memorial together with Supporting Statements and

Reports'.
On 29 February 2008 the Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial 2

By letter dated 11 April 2008, the Claimant informed the Arbitral Tribunal that both
Parties had agreed to an extension of the deadlines for the filing of Claimant’s Reply
and Respondent’s Rejoinder. The Arbitral Tribunal was requested to confirm the new
dates through the issuing of a procedural order amending the previous time table

contained in the Minutes of the First Session.

The Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 on 16 April 2008, confirming the Parties’
agreement on the extension of the procedural timetable. Accordingly, the Claimant was
granted an extension of the time-limit until 22 April 2008 to file its Reply and the

Respondent until 16 June 2008 to file its Rejoinder, it being understood that this change

This Submission was also accompanied by Exhibits C-1 to C-43 (Volumes | and II) and Legal Authorities
CLA-1 to CLA-78 (Volumes | to IV).

This Submission was accompanied by Declarations (Volume II), Expert Reports/Opinions (Volumes III
and IV), Exhibits R-1 to R-140 (Volumes V to VIII) and Legal Authorities RLA-1 to RLA-120 (Volumes IX
to XII).

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 9

 

4

in the timetable would not have any influence on the timing of the Hearing, scheduled

to start in the week beginning 14 July 2008.

In accordance with this new timetable, the Claimant filed its Reply dated 22 April 2008
which was received by the Centre on 23 April 2008 together with Supporting
Statements and Expert Reports®. On 20 May 2008, the Claimant filed Supplemental

Legal Authorities’.

By letter of 2 June 2008, the Respondent proposed that the Parties identify by 18 June
2008 the witnesses and experts for cross-examination and that a pre-hearing telephone

conference with the Arbitral Tribunal be held on or about 20 June 2008.

By letter of 5 June 2008 the Claimant proposed that the exchange of witness lists take
place on 23 June 2008 and to hold the pre-hearing conference call on or about 26 June

2008.

By letter dated 6 June 2008, the Centre, on behalf of the President of the Arbitral
Tribunal, informed the Parties that the identification of witnesses and experts should be
made on or before 23 June 2008, thereby modifying Item 15 of the Minutes of the First
Session accordingly. A provisional agenda for the Hearing was also submitted to the
Parties and they were furthermore invited to advise the Arbitral Tribunal, on or before
23 June 2008, of any points of the said agenda on which they were able to reach an
agreement or any observations they might have thereon. The Parties were furthermore

informed that should they fail to reach an agreement on any of the points of the

This Submission was also accompanied by Exhibits C-44 to C-72 (Volume III) and Legal Authorities CLA-
79 to CLA-221 (Volumes V to IX).

CLA-151 to CLA-217 (Volume X).

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 10

 

20

ai

22

23

24

25

26

6

provisional agenda, the Arbitral Tribunal would make itself available for a telephone

conference on 26 June 2008.
On 16 June 2008 the Respondent filed its Rejoinder 5

By letter of 23 June 2008 addressed to the Arbitral Tribunal, the Claimant identified the
witnesses and experts it wished to call during the Hearing. Enclosed with this letter was
a summary table of the Parties’ positions and agreements on the items contained in the
provisional agenda ©. The Arbitral Tribunal was also informed that the Parties agreed

that a conference call with the Arbitral Tribunal take place on 26 June 2008.

By letter of 23 June 2008 addressed to the Arbitral Tribunal the Respondent identified

the witnesses and experts it wished to cross-examine during the Hearing.

The conference call with the Parties and the Arbitral Tribunal took place on 26 June

2008 as scheduled.

In a letter dated 27 June 2008 addressed to the Parties, the Secretary of the Arbitral
Tribunal summarized the agreements reached between the Parties during the conference

call regarding the organization of the Hearing.

By letter of 9 July 2008 addressed to the Parties, the Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal

transmitted a provisional schedule of the Hearing.

The Hearing on the merits took place at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. from

14 to 18 July 2008. A sound recording and a transcript of the Hearing were made.

This Submission was accompanied by further witness declarations and legal opinions.

The items were referenced in a document entitled « Pre-Hearing Items Considered by the Parties ».

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

The following persons were present:

The Arbitral Tribunal

The Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal

On behalf of the Claimant

Dr. Robert Briner, President

Mr. J. William Rowley QC, Arbitrator

Mr. Claus von Wobeser, Arbitrator

Ms. Natali Sequeira
(in the absence of Mr. Tomas Solis)

Mr. James L. Loftis,
VINSON & ELKINS RLLP

Mr. Gene J. Silva II,
VINSON & ELKINS LLP

Mr. Mark Beeley,
VINSON & ELKINS RLLP

Ms. Teresa Keck,
VINSON & ELKINS LLP

Ms. Miluska Cervantes,
AGUAYTIA ENERGY, LLC

Mr. Dean M. Moesser,
DUKE ENERGY CORPORATION

Mr. Eduardo Maldonado,
MALDONADO & MALDONADO, PERU

Ms. Connie Brown

Mr. Kenneth Leonczyk

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

Witnesses and Experts
on behalf of the Claimant

On behalf of the Respondent

Mr. Rex Canon

Mr. Jorge Avendajio

Mr. Jose Daniel Amado

Mr. Wayne Miller

Mr. Rudolph Dolzer

Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Mr. Jonathan C. Hamilton,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Mr. Frank A. Vasquez, Jr.,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Mr. Rafael Llano-Oddone,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Ms. Sabina Sacco,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Ms. Florencia Celasco,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Ms. Mairée Uran-Bidegain,
WHITE & CASE LLP

Mr. Modest F. Kwapinski,
WHITE & CASE LLP

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

Witnesses and Experts
on behalf of the Respondent

Representatives of the Republic of Peru

Mr. Eduardo Ferrero,
ESTUDIO ECHECOPAR

Ms. Maria del Carmen Tovar,
ESTUDIO ECHECOPAR

Ms. Caterina Miré Quesada,
ESTUDIO ECHECOPAR

Mr. Jaime Quijandria

Mr. Edwin Quintanilla

Mr. Alfredo Bullard

Ms. Maria del Carmen Vega

Dr. Michael Rosenzweig

Ms. Maria Teresa Quifiones

Mr. Carlos Ramirez,
COMMISSION FOR THE DEFENSE OF THE
PERUVIAN STATE

Mr. Pedro Gamio,
MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINES

Ms. Mariana Cazorla,
MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINES

Mr. Daniel Cémac,
OSINERGMIN

Mr. Percy Leon,
OSINERGMIN

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 14

 

27

28

29

Mr. José Luis Luna,
OSINERGMIN

Mr. Victor Ormeno,
OSINERGMIN

Mr. Manuel Talavera,
EMBASSY OF PERU

Ms. Yesenia Cabezas,
EMBASSY OF PERU

At the end of the examination of the witnesses and experts, counsel for both Parties
presented their Closing Statements. At the end of the Hearing, the Parties and the
Arbitrators stated that they had no further issues to discuss, and the Parties confirmed
that they were in agreement with the procedure as conducted by the Arbitral Tribunal up
to that time. The Tribunal thereupon invited the Parties to provide material comments

regarding the Transcript of the Hearing within a time period of three weeks.

By its letter dated 14 August 2008 addressed to the Tribunal, the Claimant
communicated its revisions to the Transcript and informed the Tribunal that the
Respondent had agreed to the Claimant’s proposed changes. By its letter of the same
date to the Tribunal, the Respondent enclosed a document containing corrections related
to the testimony of those witnesses and experts who testified in Spanish and informed

the Tribunal that the Claimant had agreed to the Respondent’s corrections.

By letter dated 3 November 2008, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID informed the
Arbitral Tribunal and the Parties that due to an internal reorganization of tasks at the
Centre, Mr. Tomas Solis had been replaced by Ms. Natali Sequeira as Secretary to the

Tribunal.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 15

 

30

31

By letter dated 26 November 2008, Mrs Eloise M. Obadia, Senior Counsel at ICSID (in
the absence of Ms Natali Sequeira) informed the Parties that the Arbitral Tribunal had,
as of 26 November 2008, declared the proceeding closed in accordance with ICSID

Arbitration Rule 38(1).

THE CLAIMS AND RELIEF SOUGHT

The Claimant formulated in its Opening Memorial of 9 October 2007 (hereinafter

referred to as “CI’) its Claims and the Relief sought as follows :

Peru induced AEL to make a significant investment into its infrastructure on
the basis of a guarantee that AEL’s investment would be treated at least as
well as any other investor operating in the same economic sector. Despite
this guarantee, Peru proceeded not only to offer a significantly more
advantageous investment model to favored investors, but also to treat such
investments in an arbitrarily better fashion than it treated AEL.

These acts of discrimination have been compounded by the inability of the
Peruvian courts to grant effective remedies for the same, despite clearly
finding that discrimination has occurred (discrimination being a violation of
Peruvian domestic law irrespective of the Conite Agreement). Even where
one organ of Peru has been forced to accept that it has acted improperly,
another has then stepped in to continue the violation. Such a campaign of
discrimination is all the more offensive as this claim is not based on a
generalized open ended promise found in an investment treaty, but is
instead founded on an direct bilateral contractual promise voluntarily and
specifically extended by Peru to AEL in contemplation of this very
investment.

AEL has accordingly been deprived of the benefit of its bargain with the
Peruvian state, a bargain which was the keystone of AEL’s investment of
over US$300,000,000. It is entitled, as matter of both Peruvian law and
under international law to be made whole for these breaches.

AEL therefore seeks, and is entitled to, the following relief:
(a) a declaration that Peru has breached the Conite Agreement by creating

investment regimes providing favorable treatment to comparable investors
and not affording such comparable treatment to AEL’s investment;

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 16

 

(b) a declaration that Peru has breached the Conite Agreement by:

(i) discriminating against AEL’s investment by refusing to define L-
252 as part of the STP, whilst defining a competitor’s transmission
line, with the same characteristics, as part of the STP, and

(ii) failing in such circumstances to effectively remedy such a breach
of AEL’s right to non-discrimination;

(c) a declaration that Peru has breached the Conite Agreement by:

(i) discriminating against AEL’s investment by failing to recognize L-
251 as an Exceptional Case, and failing to grant the full financial

benefits such a recognition affords whilst granting such benefits to
other similarly classified lines, and

(ii) failing in such circumstances to effectively remedy such a breach
of AEL’s right to non-discrimination;
(d) a declaration that Peru has breached the Conite Agreement by:

(i) discriminating against AEL’s investment by discounting the VNR,
Average Cost, and O&M costs data supplied by Eteselva, whilst
allowing other entities to recover 100% of their actual cost, and

(ii) failing in such circumstances to effectively remedy such a breach

of AEL’s right to non-discrimination;

(e) an order that the Respondent pays to the Claimant the sum of US$
140,600,000’, which is inclusive of interest and discounted in accordance
with applicable Peruvian regulations, in compensation for the Respondent’s
breaches of the Conite Agreement;

(f) the award of:

(i) its share of the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges

for the use of ICSID’s facilities; and

(ii) its legal and related fees in connection with these proceedings.

32 In its Reply Memorial of 22 April 2008 (hereinafter referred to as “CII”), the Claimant

sought the following relief:

In short, AEL avers that the Tribunal should reach the following findings as
to the remaining contentious issues between the parties:

(a) The Conite Agreement recognizes and provides a substantive right to
AEL that its investment (which consists of the Termoselva, Eteselva and
their assets) would not be discriminated against;

In its Reply Memorial this amount was reduced to US$ 132,310,000 (§ 151). At the Hearing this
amount was further reduced to US$ 91.1 million (see Transcript, p. 475, 476, 477 and C-73).

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 17

 

(b) Peru has in fact discriminated against AEL’s investment by affording
superior treatment (which AEL was never given the opportunity to enjoy) to
investors engaged in the same economic activity as AEL;

(c) Peru has no lawful excuse for such discrimination; and

(d) As a result of such discrimination AEL has suffered loss, which it may
recover in full measure.

In the circumstances of Peru not denying its conduct, but instead seeking to
defend such conduct through contorted, illogical readings of an agreement
designed to encourage foreign investment, any alterative finding would
signal a complete failure of the Conite Agreement to provide the protections
which were promised to AEL.

33 In its Counter-Memorial of 29 February 2008 (hereinafter referred to as “RI’”’), the

Respondent concluded that :

This case ultimately centers on contracts that Claimant sought from Peru
and agreed with Peru, pursuant to specific provisions of Peruvian law.
Claimant now wants this Tribunal to disregard those contracts.

Claimant’s Stability Agreement acts, by law, only to “freeze” certain laws
for a period of ten years. Claimant insists on interpretations of this contract
that are so strained as to present concerns of bad faith.

Claimant’s Electricity Transmission Concession Agreement provides, by
law, that Claimant’s transmission lines are subject to the Electricity
Concessions Law and its Regulations. Claimant instead urges this Tribunal
to disregard its own Transmission Concession and instead grant Claimant
the supposed benefits of the ISA BOOT Concession — a completely distinct
contract granted by public bidding to another foreign investor under
different economic terms and laws. Claimant wants the Tribunal to ignore
the Transmission Concession altogether because Claimant failed even to
submit it or cite it to the Tribunal. There can be no sufficient excuse
invented for such an omission.

 
 
 

 

and requested that “... the Tribunal dismiss Claimant's claims in their entirety.”.

34 In its Rejoinder of 16 June 2008 (hereinafter referred to as “RII’’), the Respondent

concluded that :

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 18

 

3.1.

35

36

37

8

The Stability Agreement is a “freezing agreement” that provides, in
pertinent part, for the “stability of the right to non-discrimination” as
specified therein for a specified term of ten years. Nothing in the Stability
Agreement, Peruvian law or any other conceivably applicable source of law
leads to the conclusion that claimant is entitled to cherry-pick from the
BOOT contract of a third party — at prejudice to other holders of 185
electricity transmission concession, as well as Peruvian consumers.
Claimant has utterly failed to satisfy its burden of proof.

BACKGROUND

THE CLAIMANT

The Claimant is a limited liability company created and existing under the laws of the
State of Delaware, (U.S.A.) It is the parent of the Peruvian company Aguaytia Energy
del Peru S.R.L. (“Aguaytia Energy”). In turn, Aguaytia Energy is the parent of two
further Peruvian legal entities, Eteselva S.R.L. (“Eteselva”) and Termoselva S.R.L.

(“Termoselva’’). These companies were set up in connection with the Aguaytia Project.

The Aguaytia gas fields are located in a remote region of Peru, east of the Andes
Mountains. The fields were discovered by Mobil Oil Corporation in 1961 but had not
been commercialized due to a lack of market for natural gas. At the beginning of the
1990s Peru enacted new laws for the hydrocarbon sector and the electric power circuit

together with the privatization of both these sectors.

The Executive Summary of the Information Memorandum prepared by The Chase
Manhattan Bank N.A. dated 9 September 1994 described the Aguaytia Project as

follows *:

C-37, Original Chase Information Memorandum, 9 September 1994.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

The Maple Gas Corporation ("Maple") was formed in 1986 to invest in oil
and gas related entities and assets. During the following six years, Maple
operated oil and gas producing properties, gas gathering and transmission
facilities, and gas processing and treating facilities. In addition, Maple
drilled and completed wells, constructed gas pipelines and plant facilities,
and marketed crude oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids ("NGLs").

In March, 1993, Maple was awarded the Aguaytia Project (the "Project")
by the Government of Peru pursuant to the terms of an international tender.
One year later after negotiating the contractual terms of the Project and
receiving the necessary governmental approvals, Maple’s Peruvian Branch
signed a 30-year license contract with the Government for the development
of the Aguaytia gas field. Though the field was discovered by Mobil Oil
Corporation in 1961, it had not been commercialized due to a lack of
market for the natural gas. The field has an estimated 302 billion cubic feet
of recoverable gas reserves and 21.9 million barrels of recoverable NGL
reserves.

With the enactment of new laws in Peru for the hydrocarbon sector and the
electric power sector as well as the current privatization of both these
sectors, free markets for hydrocarbons and electricity are being established
that make it possible to commercialize the gas field at this time. In addition,
under the leadership of President Alberto Fujimori, a number of structural
reforms have been successfully implemented in Peru which have revitalized
the Peruvian economy and pacified the country. The free market
environment coupled with a resurgent economy make Peru an attractive
investment opportunity.

The Project consists of both a Gas Project and a Power Project. The Gas
Project includes the drilling of additional gas wells in the field, the
construction and operation of gas processing facilities, the construction and
operation of two gas pipelines and one NGL pipeline, and the construction
and operation of NGL fractionation and storage facilities at a total capital
cost of U.S. $50.8 million. Gas from the field will be supplied to two new
power plants Maple will construct. NGLs will be fractionated, and the
resulting propane, butane, and natural gasoline will be sold to an existing
domestic market.

The Power Project includes the construction and operation of two gas-fired
thermoelectric power plants, as well as related electric substations and
transmission facilities. One plant with 110 megawatts ("MW") of capacity
(at peak conditions) will supply energy to the main power grid in Peru. This
grid is highly dependent on hydroelectric energy and requires additional
thermal capacity to increase its reliability and to satisfy increasing
electrical demand. With a revitalized economy, demand for energy is
growing rapidly. In 1993, for example, electric demand grew by seven
percent. Since the cost for gas is low relative to that of liquid hydrocarbons
such as diesel or residual fuel oil, and since Maple’s plant is the only gas-

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU

20

 

38

 

fired thermoelectric plant connected to the main power grid under active
development, it should be the lowest cost thermoelectric producer of energy
on the grid. As a result, the Maple plant will be a very competitive source of
electric energy and it is expected to be the first thermoelectric power plant
dispatched on the main power grid. A second power plant with a capacity of
30 MW (at peak load) will be built by Maple in the city of Pucallpa, the
largest city in the central jungle of Peru. This plant will become the base
load supply for the electric distribution system in the Pucallpa area and will
essentially displace the existing diesel fired generation facilities which are
inefficient and expensive to operate. The total capital cost for both power
plants and related substation and transmission facilities is U.S.$ 66.3
million.

A summary of the economics of the Gas and Power Projects are shown
below:

-Lax
S. $million) Rate of Return
32.

following information on the Project °

The investment will be made in developing the Aguaytia Comprehensive
Project (the "Project"), whose development will be assumed by The Maple
Gas Corporation del Peru, Sucursal Peruana ("Maple"), based on the
signing with Perupetro S.A. of the License Agreement for Site 31-C
Hydrocarbons Production dated March 30, 1994 (the "License
Agreement"). Maple will assign to Aguaytia Energy del PerO S.R. Ltda.
ninety-nine percent (99%) of its rights in the License Agreement, subject to
authorization and approval by the competent authority, in order to
participate jointly with the latter as contractor under the License Agreement
(the "Contractor").

Among other things, the License Agreement grants the Contractor the right
to produce natural gas from the Aguaytia reservoir located approximately
one hundred kilometers (100 kms.) west of the city of Pucallpa in the
department of Ucayali for an initial period of thirty (30) years, which may
be extended forty (40) years.

C-6, AEL Application for Registration of Legal Stability Contracts, 1996; see also § 42 infra.

The Application for Registration of Legal Stability Contracts of 1996 contained the

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 21

 

39

3.2

40

4

The Project has a hydrocarbon production component (the “Gas
Component”) and one for generation and transmission of thermoelectrical
power (the “Power Component”).

The Gas Component includes, among others, the production integrity and
capacity test of existing wells and drilling of additional wells for production
of natural gas in the contract area of the License Agreement; construction
and operation, either directly or indirectly, of: a) a natural gas processing
plant; (b) a natural gas liquids fractioning plant; (c) a liquefied petroleum
gas (LPG) supply plant; (d) gas pipelines for transportation of residue gas
and fuel pipelines for transportation of natural gas liquids, natural
gasolines, and liquefied petroleum gas; and (e) facilities for LPG storage,
loading, and unloading.

The Power Component includes, among others, the construction and
operation, either directly or indirectly, of: (a) a thermoelectric power plant
with minimum installed capacity of one hundred forty megawatts (140 MW),
near the city of Aguaytia (the "Aguaytia Thermoelectric Plant"); (b) a two
hundred twenty kilovolts transmission line (220 kV) approximately three
hundred ninety-eight kilometers (398 kms.) long; and (c) power
transmission and transformation facilities for transportation of power
generated at the Aguaytia Thermoelectric Plant from the latter to the town
of Paramonga on the country’s northern coast.

After having obtained the Legal Stability Agreement"” and the necessary concession for
the power transmission activities!’ it solicited a number of other entities and obtained

their involvement as initial shareholders in the Claimant".
THE RESPONDENT

The Respondent is the Republic of Peru.

According to the Claimant and not disputed by the Respondent the Republic of Peru is

§ 43 infra
§ 51 infra

C-1, Opening Memorial, § 29

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 22

 

responsible for its own conduct through the agency of the Ministry for
Energy and Mines (“MEM”) and for that of :

(a) the Comisién Nacional de Inversiones y Tecnologias Extranjeras
(“Conite”) to whom the co-ordination of foreign investment promotion was
delegated by means of Legislative Decree 662, Articles 23 and 30. 8

(b) the Comisién de Tarifas de Energia (“CTE”), which prior to
May 17, 1999 was known as the Comision de Tarifas Eléctricas, and which
was absorbed into the Organismo Supervisor de la Inversion en Energia'*
(“Osinerg”) on May 10, 2001." Prior to its absorption one of CTE’s
functions was to set the tariffs and compensations for the use of electricity
transmission systems.

(c) Osinerg, to which, since May 10, 2001, the regulation and supervision of
investments made in Peru’s electricity market (including the compensations
and tariffs related to the same) is delegated by means of Laws 2673410 and
27332,11 and by Supreme Decrees 032-2001-PCM, 054-2001-PCM and
055-2001-PCM.12 In the recitals to Supreme Decree 032-2001-PCM, it is
specifically noted that one of Osinerg’s functions is to act as a guarantee to
companies that operate and invest in the electricity sector “that the
regulatory activity of such agencies will be based exclusively on legal,
technical and economic criteria”. This is further explained in Articles 6 and
9 of Supreme Decree 054-2001-PCM:

 

Decisions and actions by OSINERG shall be aimed at
guaranteeing that there is no discrimination among the
ENTITIES to the effect that some are given an unjustified
competitive advantage over others.

OSINERG shail apply all laws and regulations in effect. Cases
or situations having similar characteristics shall be treated
similarly.

As a matter of domestic law, the conduct of CTE, Conite and Osinerg is
attributed to Peru. For domestic law purposes there is only one Republic of
Peru or ‘government’.!° Therefore, each administrative agency cannot be

considered independently, but rather must be considered as part of the

Following the date of the Conite Agreement, the functions and role of CONITE were assumed by a
successor entity, Agencia de Promocion de la Inversién Privada — Proinversion. Legislative Decree 662
is exhibited as CLA-1.

Renamed, since January 25, 2007, as Organismo Supervisor de la Inversién en Energia y Mineria &
sometimes referred to as “OSINERGMIN”.

By way of Supreme Decree 054-2001-PCM, Third Transitional Provision, (Exhibit CLA-2) authorized
under Law 27332 Third Final Provision (2000) (Exhibit CLA-3).

Article 43 of the Political Constitution of Peru, exhibited as CLA-7. See also Avendafio at 91[129-147].

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 23

 

Peruvian government when performing a function delegated to it by the
government. Accordingly, acts of an agency such as CTE, Conite or
Osinerg, when performing a governmental function delegated to it under
Peruvian law, are those of Peru.

3.3. DEVELOPMENTS BETWEEN 1996 AND 2005

42

43

After having received the license for the gas exploration for the Aguaytia field, Maple
with the assistance of Chase Manhattan Bank approached a number of prospective
investors'* which on 10 January 1996 gave rise to the formation of Aguaytia Energy

LLC.”

Maple also submitted to the Peruvian authorities an application for registration of legal
stability contracts”’. A Convenio de Estabilidad Juridica con Aguaytia Energy, LLC de
Estados Unidos de América was entered into between the Republic of Peru and
Aguaytia Energy, LLC on 17 May 1996 (hereinafter “Agreement”)”". This Agreement
was concluded on the letterhead of the Comisién Nacional de Inversiones y
Technologias Extranjeras (“CONITE”). The Claimant has submitted one translation
into English as C-1, the Respondent another translation under R-3. When citing this

document, the Tribunal shall use the translation furnished by the Claimant (C-1).

Although the two translations differ, especially in their syntax, the Parties have not

Cl, pp. 7 and 8.
C-37
cS
C6

C-1 and R-3 (the Claimant usually refers to this document as the « Conite Agreement», the
Respondent employs the term « Stability Agreement »).

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 24

drawn the attention of the Tribunal to any material differences between the two

translations which would have a bearing on the issues to be decided.

44 In view of the importance of this Agreement for the decision in this dispute, the

Tribunal finds it useful to cite the relevant parts of the Agreement:

ONE. AGUAYTIA has put forward before the National Commission of
Foreign Investments and Technologies CONITE an application for the
execution of a Juridical Stability Agreement under the provisions set forth in
Title II, Legislative Decree 662, and in Chapter One, Title V, of Legislative
Decree 757, and in the Regulations thereof approved by Supreme Decree
162-92-EF dated October 12, 1992, hereinafter referred to as the
REGULATIONS.

TWO. Pursuant to this Agreement, AGUAYTIA accepts the investment
terms established in Item a), Article 16, of the REGULATIONS. Hence, it
binds itself to the following:

 

I. To make cash contributions in the amount of US$
28,000,000 (Twenty Eight Million US Dollars) within a term not
to exceed two (02) years as from the date of execution hereof to
the capital stock of AGUAYTIA ENERGY DEL PERU
S.R.LTDA. a company incorporated in the city of Lima,
registered in Card 123779 of the Registry of Legal Entities of
the Public Records Office in and for Lima and Callao.

2. To channel the contribution originating from abroad,
referred to in Point I, through the National Financial System,
which must be evidenced on the certification issued by the bank
taking part in the transaction.

3. To register its investment with CONITE, which investment
shall be valued in freely convertible currency.

THREE Pursuant to the Agreement and throughout its effectiveness, the
STATE undertakes to guarantee juridical stability for AGUAYTIA in
connection with the investment referred to in ARTICLE TWO under the
terms set forth below:

 

1. Stability of the tax system applicable to the Income Tax
(VAT) as provided for in item a), article 10, of Legislative
Decree 662, effective as of the date of execution hereof.
Pursuant to this regulation, dividends and any other form of
profit distribution are tax-exempt, as provided for in item a),
article 25, of the Law on the Income Tax approved by
Legislative Decree 774 and any amending provisions being in
effect as of the date of execution hereof. According to the

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

aforesaid Law and the amending provisions thereto, any
remittances abroad of amounts payable to AGUAYTIA for any
of the items provided for herein are also tax-exempt.

2. Stability of the foreign currency free availability system, as
provided for in item b, article 10, of Legislative Decree 662,
which implies that AGUAYTIA shall have ready free access to
the foreign currency at the exchange market at the most
favorable rate it can obtain, and that the STATE shall not be
entitled to enforce upon it, with regard to the investment
referred to in ARTICLE TWO, any exchange market regulatory
system or mechanism intended to limit or restrict such right or
to imply for AGUAYTIA a less favorable treatment than that
extended to any individual or body corporate in the performance
of any foreign currency exchange operation.

3. Stability of the right of free remittance, of its profits and
capital cash flows pursuant to the provisions of item b), article
10, of Legislative Decree 662, which implies that AGUAYTIA
shall be empowered to transfer abroad, in freely convertible
foreign currency and waiving the requirement of any prior
authorization from any agency of the Central Government,
Regional or Local Governments, so long as the relevant
investment has been registered with the national Competent
Body and compliance has been provided with any applicable tax
obligations, without the STATE being capable of imposing any
restrictions or limitations whatsoever upon such right, the
following:

a) the full amount of its capital cash flows originating from
abroad, including the equity obtained from the sale of its stock,
participations or rights in and to companies, from the reduction
of capital or from the partial or full winding-up of companies,
originating from the investment referred to in ARTICLE TWO.

b) the full amount of dividends or proven net earnings drawn
from the investment addressed in ARTICLE TWO, as well as any
profits obtained from the consideration earned from the use or
enjoyment of those assets physically located in the country, and
intended for such investments; and

c) the full amount of the royalties and consideration earned
from the use and transfer of technology, trademarks and patents,
and any other industrial property item authorized by the
Competent National Body.

4. Stability of the right to use the most favorable exchange rate
pursuant to the pro visions of item b), article 10, of Legislative
Decree 662, which implies that AGUAYTIA shall have ready
access to the foreign currency at the exchange market at the

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

most favorable exchange rate it can obtain and that the STATE
shall not be empowered to force it to perform its foreign
exchange transactions under some system or mechanism which
extends a less favorable treatment than that currently applied to
any individual or body corporate. In the performance of any
foreign exchange operation, in accordance with the following:

a) in the case of the conversion of foreign currency into national
currency, AGUAYTIA shall be entitled to sell such currency to
any individual or body corporate at the most favorable buying
exchange rate it is able to obtain at the foreign exchange
market, at the time of performing the foreign exchange
transaction; and,

b) in the case of the conversion of national currency into foreign
currency, AGUAYTIA shall be entitled to buy such currency
from any individual or body corporate at the most favorable
selling exchange rate it is able to obtain at the foreign exchange
market, at the time of performing the foreign exchange
transaction.

5. Stability of the right to non-discrimination, as provided for
in item c), article 10, of Legislative Decree 662, which implies
that the STATE or neither one of its bodies, notwithstanding
these may include entities or companies from the Central
Government, Regional or Local Governments, may apply a
differentiated treatment to AGUAYTIA by reason of its
nationality, the sectors or types of economic activity it shall
develop, or the geographical location of the firm in which it
invests, and neither as far as the matters herein below specified:

a) exchange matters, accordingly, the STATE shall not be
entitled to apply to AGUAYTIA, as far as the investment referred
to in ARTICLE TWO, a foreign exchange system that shall imply
a less favorable treatment than that currently extended to any
individual or body corporate in the performance of any type of
foreign exchange transaction;

b) prices, rates or non-customs fees; accordingly, the STATE
shall not be empowered to apply to AGUAYTIA for these items,
as far as the investment referred to in ARTICLE TWO, any
differentiated amounts or rates;

c) a specific form of business incorporation; accordingly, the
STATE shall not be empowered to require from AGUAYTIA that
the firm AGUAYTIA ENERGY DEL PERU S.R.LTDA. in which
it shall invest, should adopt a specific business organization
type;

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

d) its capacity as an individual or as a body corporate;
accordingly, the STATE shall not be entitled to apply to
AGUAYTIA a differentiated treatment for this reason; and,

e) no other reason of equivalent effects, as is the case with the
application of discriminatory treatments for AGUAYTIA,
derived from any combination of the various items included in
this Article.

This Article is applicable without prejudice to the restrictions set forth
under article 3 of the REGULATIONS.

FIVE The term of effectiveness of this juridical Stability Agreement is ten
(10) years counted as from the date of its execution. Accordingly,
throughout this term, it may not be amended by either of the parties
individually, regardless of whether the national legislation could be
eventually amended and notwithstanding the fact that such amendments to
the national legislation may turn out to be more beneficial or harmful to any
of the Parties, than those agreed hereunder.

SIX AGUAYTIA shall be entitled to waive, for a single time only, the
juridical stability agreement granted to it hereunder, and must formalize
such waiver through a written notice to CONITE, which shall become
effective as of the date of its receipt by the latter.

If AGUAYTIA elects to exercise its right to waive the Stability Agreement
acknowledged to it herein, it shall automatically be governed by common
law.

NINE It is the intention of both parties that any problems that may arise
in connection with the performance of this Agreement shall be settled in the
most expeditious manner possible. As from this moment, it is agreed that
any litigation, controversy or claim among the parties, in connection with
the construction, performance, enforcement or validity hereof, shall be
submitted to the International Center for the Settlement of Investment-
Related Discrepancies, to be solved through international de jure
arbitration under the Conciliation and Arbitration Rules set forth in the
Covenant for the Settlement of Investment-Related Discrepancies among
States and Nationals from Other States, approved by Peru through
Legislative Resolution 26210.

Any expenses to be incurred in enforcing this Article shall be borne in equal
parts by the parties hereto.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 28

 

45

46

2

This Agreement was modified on 14 May 1998, by an Agreement of Partial
Amendment of Juridical Stability executed with Aguaytia Energy, LLC. (U.S.A.)
(“Acuerdo de Modificacion Parcial del Convenio de Estabilidad Juridica celebrado con
Aguaytia Energy, LLC de Estados Unidos de América”), according to which the amount
to be invested according to Article 2 of the Agreement was increased from

USD 28,000,000 to USD 63,200,000.

Article 1 of the Agreement refers to various Decrees. The parts relevant for this dispute

read as follows:

Legislative Decree 662 Approving the Juridical Stability System for Foreign

Investment” published on 2 September 1991:

5" WHEREAS Clause

The Government should grant a juridical stability system to foreign
investors by the acknowledgement of certain guaranties securing the
continuity of the established rules.

TITLE IT
JURIDICAL STABILITY FOR FOREIGN INVESTMENT

Article 10.- The Competent National Organization, on behalf of the State,
may execute with foreign investors, prior to the investment and registration
thereof, agreements to guarantee the following rights:

a) Stability of the effective tax system at the time of the agreement’s
execution.

By virtue of the tax system stability hereby guaranteed, a rate greater than
the one established in the appropriate agreement will not be imposed on the
foreign investors in the case of the income tax to be paid by the company
receiving the investment, or on profits and/or dividends distributed in their
favor. Thus, if the income tax to be paid by the company increases, the rate
imposed on foreign investors will be reduced accordingly to allow the
company’s profit they may freely dispose of, to be at least equal to the one
guarantee;

CLA-1

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 29

 

b) Stability of the free foreign currency disposal system and the rights
established in Articles 7 and 9 hereof; and,

c) Stability of the right to non-discrimination established in Article 2 hereof.

47 Article 2 of this same Decree reads as follows :

Foreign investors and the companies in which these participate have the
same rights and obligations as the local investors and companies). Such
rights and obligations are only limited by the exceptions established in the
Political Constitution of Peru and the provisions hereof.

In no case the domestic juridical regulations will discriminate among
investors or the companies based on the local or foreign share in the
investments.

48 Legislative Decree 757 of 13 November 1999, Title V (Judicial Stability of
Investments), Chapter 1 (Juridical Stability Agreements) contains Article 39 which is

relevant to the present dispute 3

The juridical stability agreements are executed pursuant to the provisions of
Article 1357° of the Civil Code and have force of law. Thus, they cannot be
unilaterally amended or terminated by the State. Such contracts have a civil
and non-administrative nature and may only be amended or cancelled by
agreement between the parties.

49 Supreme Decree 162-92 EF Approving the Regulations for Private Investment
Guarantee Systems of 12 October 199274 provides the following :
TITLE Ill
JURIDICAL STABILITY
CHAPTER IIT
GUARANTIES FURNISHED BY JURIDICAL STABILITY

Article 19.- Juridical stability guaranties investors and the companies in
which they participate, as applicable, the following rights:

2 CLA-18

4 CLA-19

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

30

 

a) Stability of the tax system referred to the Income Tax effective at the time
of the agreement’s execution in the cases foreseen in section a of Article 10°
of Legislative Decree N° 662, and Articles 38°, 40° and 41° of Legislative
Decree N° 757 pursuant to the provisions of Article 23° hereof;

b) The stability of the foreign currency free availability system, pursuant to
the provisions of section b of Article 10° of Legislative Decree N° 662,
which is applied pursuant to the provisions of section a of Article 3° hereof;
c) Stability of the right to free remittance of profits, dividends, capitals and
other income received subject to the provisions of Article 15° hereof;

d) Stability of the right to use the most favorable exchange rate in the
exchange market subject to the provisions of Article 13° hereof;

e) Stability of the right to non-discrimination, which is subject to the
provisions of Article 3° hereof;

f) Stability of the workers’ recruitment systems in any form, under the
provisions of section a of Article 12° of Legislative Decree N° 662,
especially when referred to the systems regulated in Legislative Decree N°
728 - Labor Promotion Law;

g) Stability of the export promotion systems pursuant to the provisions of
section b of Article 12° of Legislative Decree N° 662 which includes the
indirect tax refund system regulated by Article 8° of Legislative Decree N°
668, as well as the special systems included in Legislative Decree N° 704-
Free Trade, Special Treatment and Special Development Zones Law; and,
h) In the case of leasing agreements: total stability of the tax system.

50 ~— Article 3 referred to in Article 19 e) states :

CHAPTER I
INVESTORS’ RIGHTS

Article 3.- The right to non-discrimination among investors and companies
implies that the State, at any of its levels, in the case of Central, Regional or
Local Government entities, or companies owned thereby, should grant an
equal treatment thereto. Thus, they have the same rights and obligations,
with no other exceptions than the ones established in Article 126° of the
1979 Constitution and Article 13° of Legislative Decree N° 757 due to
national security reasons. Such exceptions are regulated by the provisions
of title IV hereof.

The non-discrimination referred to in this Article implies that no entity or
company of the Central, Regional or Local Governments, as appropriate,
will establish a differentiated treatment among investors or the companies
in which they participate based on the nationality thereof, the sectors or the
type of economic activities they are engaged in, or the geographical
location of companies. Neither will they be able to establish a
discriminatory treatment among investors or companies in which they
participate in the following matters :

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 31

 

51

25

b) Prices, tariffs of non-tariff duties. Thus, no differentiated amount or
charges will be applied thereto, except in the case of prices in which, as a
result of the company’s geographic location, the cost of assets is greater.

For the purposes of the provisions of this section, the following concepts are
defined as follows:

b. 1. Prices: Those referred to assets and services of public entities and
companies owned directly or indirectly by the State;

b.2. Tariffs: Those referred to utility services supplied by public entities and
companies owned directly or indirectly by the State; and,

b.3. Non-tariff duties: Those taxes charged by public entities in any of their
levels for the supply of services inherent to the State or the execution of
public works other than taxes and import duties. Administrative proceedings
fees are comprised within such duties.

c) Form of incorporation, ...

d) Their individual or corporate status, ...

e) Any other cost with equivalent effects ...

With Supreme Resolution Nr. 050-96-EM of 20 June 1996*> the Maple Gas
Corporation of Peru, Peru Branch, was granted the necessary concession for its power

transmission activities :

Article 1.- To grant The Maple Gas Corporation of Peru, Peru Branch, the
final concession to develop electric power transmission activities subject to
the terms and conditions set forth in the resolution hereto and those
described in the concession agreement approved by Article 2, assigning it
Code No. 14057796.

R-1, p. 11.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

32

 

52

53

and

This Resolution was published in the official gazette “El Peruano” on 21 June 1996.

Article 2.- Approve the concession agreement No. 078-96 to be executed
with The Maple Gas Corporation of Peru, Peru Branch, which contains 18
clauses and 8 exhibits.

The Final Concession Agreement which was executed between the Ministry of Energy

and Mines and the Maple Gas Corporation of Peru, Peru Branch °6 and signed before

the Notary Public on 16 July 1996 contains the following relevant parts :

Second.
Aim.

The aim of the agreement hereto is to establish the conditions, rights and
duties that regulate the electrical transmission final concession granted by
the Ministry to the concessionaire.

Third.
Applicable Governing Law.

The legal framework to which the agreement hereto is compulsorily subject
to is the Electric Concessions Law — Law Decree No. 25844 and its
Regulations approved by Supreme Decree No. 009-93-EM with the
amendments incorporated by Supreme Decree No. 02-94-EM, and the rest
of Peruvian laws in force in each instance.

Fourth.

Term of the Concession.

This final concession is granted for an indefinite term, effective as of the
date of the publication of the Granting Supreme Resolution.

Fifth.
General Conditions.

The final concession is granted subject to the following conditions:

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

5.1 The Ministry, at the Commission’s proposal, determines the Principal
Transmission Systems and the Secondary Transmission Systems pursuant to
Article 58 of the Law.

5.2 The use of the Concession’s electricity lines will be subject to a
compensation that shall be paid separately through two concepts named:

* Income Tariff and Connection Toll, for the lines in the Principal
Transmission System pursuant to Article 60 of the Law.

*Income Tariff and Secondary Toll, for the lines in the Secondary
Transmission System, pursuant to Article 139 of the Regulations.

5.3 There shall be no compensation for the use of the lines in the Secondary
Transmission System in a direction opposite to the preponderant flow of
energy.

In case of discrepancy and upon one of the parties’ request, the Commission
shall perform as resolver/decider pursuant to Article 62 of the Law.

5.4 If there were any discrepancies between the concessionaire and the
users due to the use of the facilities with respect to the transmission capacity
or the required extensions, these shall be resolved through an arbitration
proceeding.

The investments carried out by the user shall be reimbursable pursuant to
Article 62 of the Regulations.

5.5 According to the law and other regulations on the matter, the
concessionaire shall preserve the environment and the cultural patrimony of
the nation when developing its activities.

5.6 The Directorate shall carry out the enforcement, control and
supervision of the compliance with the agreement hereto pursuant to Article
101 of the Law, which the parties acknowledge to be an administrative
agreement.

5.7 The parties shall be able to submit to arbitration the disputes derived
from specific technical aspects of the agreement hereto pursuant to the
General Arbitration Act — Law No. 26572.

5.8 The concessionaire owning the principal transmission system is not
allowed to market electricity pursuant to Article 233 of the Regulations.

5.9 The concessionaire shall be able to directly attend to clients who do not
use electricity as a public utility by contractually establishing with these
clients the conditions of such supply.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

Sixth.

Rights and Duties.

6.1 Rights: The concessionaire shall have the following rights:

6.1.1 to provide electricity transmission service in the facilities owned by it.

6.1.2 to request from the Ministry the imposition of easements pursuant to
the provisions of Articles 110 and 111 of the Law.

6.1.3 to use, at no charge, the soil, undersoil and airspace of public roads,
streets, squares and any other property of public ownership, as well as to
cross rivers, bridges, railroads, electric and communication lines and any
other rights included in Article 109 of the Law, subject to the observance of
the law’s provisions.

6.1.4 to execute legal stability agreements, tax stability agreements and free
disposal of foreign currency agreements pursuant to item b) of Article 106
of the Law, complying with the corresponding paperwork and informing the
Directorate.

6.1.5 to an installment agreement of up to 36 monthly installments of the
CIF ad valorem rights pursuant to item a) of Article 106 of the Law, and
Supreme Decree No. 234-92-EF, for which it shall comply with the
corresponding paperwork.

6.1.6 to enforce the rights that the agreement hereto grants it with respect to
third parties, especially those related to the collection of a compensation for
use.

6.1.7 to request the support of the State, in cases of public disasters, internal
commotion and/or uprisings, so as to protect the works and facilities and
guarantee the continuance of the operation, pursuant to article 120 of the
Law.

6.1.8 to participate, if it is a transmission concessionaire of a principal
system, in the COES pursuant to the provisions of Article 81 of the
Regulations; and

6.1.9 all the others conferred by the relevant legislation.
6.2 Duties: The concessionaire undertakes the obligation to:

6.2.1 transmit electricity efficiently according to the provisions of clause 7
of the agreement hereto.

6.2.2 preserve and maintain its works and facilities in good conditions for
an efficient operation according to the quality standards set forth in the
agreement hereto.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

6.2.3 allow the use of its systems by third parties, who shall bear the costs of
extensions to be performed if needed and a compensation for the use
pursuant to Article 33 of the Law.

6.2.4 apply the regulated prices or compensations for the use, fixed by the
Commission, to the corresponding supply.

6.2.5 comply with all the rules of the national Electricity Code and the
applicable technical provisions as provided by Article 99 of the Law.

6.2.6 contribute to the sustainment of statutory and regulatory agencies
through allocations which in no case shall exceed 1% of the value of its
annual income, in accordance with item g) of Article 31 of the Law.

6.2.7 be part of the COES, if it is a concessionaire of a principal system, as
provided by Article 39 of the Law, contributing to its sustainment and
strictly respecting its regulations.

6.2.8 operate its facilities in accordance with the provisions issued by the
COES, pursuant to Article 32 of the Law.

6.2.9 file the corresponding information before the Directorate and the
Commission in accordance with the provisions of Articles 58 and 59 of the
Law.

6.2.10 develop its activities by respecting fair competition and/or antitrust
rules in force, or that may be enacted in the future, applicable to the electric

subsector.

6.2.11 perform the construction of works and assembly of facilities in the
terms established in Exhibit No. 5 called “The New Works”.

Twelfth

End of Concession and Grounds for Expiration

The concession shall end by a declaration of expiration or resignation; in
both cases the conveyance of the concession rights and of the assets
required to continue with its operation shall be carried out in accordance
with the provisions of the Law and its Regulations.

 

12.1 Expiration

The concession shall expire in the cases set out in Article 36 of the Law, and
additionally, in the case of a concessionaire of a principal system, pursuant
to Article 233 of the Regulations.

12.2 Resignation

The concessionaire shall be able to resign to its final concession by
notifying the Ministry of this decision with at least a years’ notice, pursuant
to Article 233 of the Regulations.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

36

 

54

The Directorate shall process the corresponding Supreme Resolution of

Acceptance, in which, during the years’ notice, the exact date that it shall
become effective shall be determined.

If there were any unfinished or not performed works, the Directorate shall
enforce the guarantees that the concessionaire had pledged.

Fourteenth
Judicial Jurisdiction

The agreement hereto is exclusively subject to the jurisdiction of the judges
and courts of the capital of Peru. The concessionaire hereby waives any
intention to submit the disputes that may arise to foreign courts as well as to
file any claim through diplomatic channels.

1998 when:

Aguaytia Energy requested the General Directorate of Electricity of the
Ministry of Energy and Mines (“DGE”) to acknowledge the completion by
Aguaytia Energy, directly or indirectly, of the performance of the works and
the start of the operation of the facilities of the Transmission Final
identified by Code No. 14057795 (the “Concession’s

 

Facilities”).

That, in response to the request set forth in the Remedy, through Written
Notice No. 649-98-EM/DGE of June 26, 1998, whose copy is included in
Exhibit 1 attached hereto and that makes part of it (the “Written Notice”),
the DGE informed Aguaytia Energy that, since the emergency situation,
which gave rise to Electrocentro S.A.’s request endorsed by the DGE in the
sense that Aguaytia Energy could operate the concession’s facilities, has
come to an end, the formal start of the electric power transmission activities
through the Concession’s Facilities shall depend on the compliance of the
obligations that in the opinion of the DGE are still pending, without
clarifying what those obligations are.

That, Aguaytia Energy is about to start the commercial operation of
Aguaytia’s Thermoelectric Plant. In order to transport the electric power
that this Plant generates, it requires to start the operation of the
Concession’s Facilities immediately, even if it’s temporarily under an
emergency condition like the one that caused the Concession’s Facilities to

It appears that the electric transmission lines were ready for operation in the Summer

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 37

 

be commercially used to attend to the emergency put forward by
Electrocentro S.A.

3.4 THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE TRANSMISSION LINES

55

56

The transmission lines erected by the Claimant are the following 8.

(a) transmission line L-251 (from the Aguaytia sub-station to the Tingo
Maria sub-station);

(b) transmission line L-252 (from the Tingo Maria sub-station to the
Vizcarra sub-station);

(c) transmission line L-253 (from the Vizcarra sub-station to the
Paramonga Nueva sub-station); and

(d) certain transmission and transformation facilities located at the Tingo
Maria sub-station (the “Tingo Maria Facilities”).

According to the Claimant, transmission lines in Peru were classified as follows :

As noted, the activities of generation, transmission, distribution and
marketing of electricity are in Peru governed by the provisions of the LCE
(the Electrical Concessions Law). Under the LCE, the transmission of
electricity is subject to price regulation. As a consequence the amount of
compensation earned for the use of the Transmission Facilities (and the
responsibility for the payment of the same) depends on the provisions of the
LCE and the RLCE. Under these provisions, the regulator (i.e. Osinerg and
previously CTE), must apply Article 58 of the LCE and Article 132 of the
RLCE to make a recommendation to MEM regarding the proper
classification of transmission systems.

Article 58 of the LCE, until July 24, 2006, required MEM to classify lines L-
251 and L-252 in one of two ways”, either as:

RI, p.13
cl, §35

The same is true of both L-253 and the Tingo Maria Facilities, but these were classified as part of the
STP by way of Ministerial Resolution No. 413-2000-EM/VME in November 2000 and do not accordingly
form part of the Classification Dispute

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

38

 

3.5

(a) part of the STP (the primary transmission system), in which case the

compensation for their use is paid exclusively by all the consumers of

electricity in Peru, or

(b) part of the SSTT (the secondary transmission system), in which case, at

all relevant times, the compensation for their use has to be paid by one of

the following, as determined by Osinerg:

(i) by the generators connected to the SEIN (to be applied if L-251 and L-
252 are used by the generators to connect to a busbar of SEIN’s*° SPT);

(ii) by the Demand connected to the SEIN (to be applied if L-251 and L-252
are used by the Demand to connect to a busbar of SEIN’s SPT); or

(iii) by the generators, the Demand and/or a combination of the same, on
the basis of regulator’s assessment of the use and/or economic benefit that
the transmission lines in question provides to each group, if L-251 and L-
252 are Exceptional Cases, being cases not falling into either of the above
two categories.

For these purposes, Termoselva is a generator. Accordingly, MEM’s

classification of L-251 and L-252 will determine what percentage of

Eteselva’s transmission fee Termoselva will be required to pay, and what
percentage will be payable by third parties — i.e. what income AEL’s
investment will receive.*!

THE BOOT CONCESSION

main grid needed to be reinforced.

On 1 December 1999, COPRI”, the agency responsible at the time for
conducting bids for bid-based public works concessions for infrastructure
projects, decided to conduct an international public bid for a BOOT
concession pursuant to the bid-based concessions regime explained above.
On 31 December 1999, a Supreme Resolution ratified COPRI’s decision

SEIN = Sistema Eléctrico Interconectado Nacional, or National Electrical Interconnected System

Cl, §§ 75-77

Towards the end of the 1990’s the Peruvian authorities came to the conclusion that the

COPRI = Comision para Ia Promocién de la Inversidn Privada, the Commission for the Promotion of

Private Investment, charged with promoting foreign investment into Peru.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

39

 

58

59

and appointed the special “CELE” committee charged with conducting
the international bid.

The subsequent bidding history is detailed in the witness declaration of Mr.
Anthony Laub Benavides, a member of the CELE. As Mr. Laub describes,
the CELE prepared an executive summary, dated April 2000, which
described the purpose of the proposed concession and noted the need for
this infrastructure project in Peru:

This planned 220 kV line, which will be linked at strategic
points to the 220 kV line that runs parallel to the coast, will
enhance the reliability of the system due to its ring design.
Moreover, it will permit a better use of the hydroelectric units of
the mountains region, and will provide energy to mining
projects nearby such as the Antamina project.

The CELE’s financial advisor (InterInvest), along with COPRI, circulated
this executive summary among potential investors. On 26 May 2000,
InterInvest submitted to the CELE a “Final Pre-Promotion Report”
detailing the progress of these invitations. In it, InterInvest noted that 15
companies had been contacted as potential operators, including both ISA
and Duke Energy (which currently holds a “controlling interest” over
Aguaytia). s

In July 2000, CELE prepared (and COPRI approved) a “plan for the promotion of

private investment” setting forth the main terms for the BOOT concession.**

This investment model was based on a Build, Operate, Own and, ultimately, Transfer

(“BOOT”) basis. Among various other incentives to potential bidders, the offer

envisaged “a stable remuneration scheme, independent of the actual load flow, due to its

classification as part of the Main (i.e. Principal) Transmission System’

+936

CELE = Comité Especial Lineas Eléctricas, Special Committee for Electricity Lines established by CONITE.

RI, §§ 134-136.

R-26.

RI, §

143 and Executive Summary dated April 2000 (R-24).

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 40

 

60

3.6.

61

38

The Republic of Peru called for an International Tender (“Concurso Ptblico
Internacional”) for the BOOT Concession. Among the various qualified bidders the
concession went to ISA (from Columbia). The ISA BOOT Concession was signed by
ISA and MEM representatives on 26 April 2001’, Neither the Claimant nor its

principal shareholders submitted bids to obtain this concession.**

CLAIMANT’S CLASSIFICATION AND DISCRIMINATION DISPUTES IN PERU

Shortly after the completion of the Transmission Facilities, the Claimant requested the
competent Peruvian authorities to review the classification of the Transmission Lines.
In part, these endeavors were successful, but the classification of L-251 and L-252 was
never decided in a manner fully satisfactory to the Claimant notwithstanding a
susbstantial number of decisions by the regulatory instances and by the Peruvian civil
and administrative courts based on various different procedures open to the Claimant
under Peruvian legislation. In the context of this Award it is not , however, necessary to
deal with the details of these various, partly unsuccessful, attempts by the Claimant to
obtain the result it requested. The claims were partially based on technical criteria
(direction of the flow of the electricity, etc.) or then based on alleged discrimination.
The discrimination claims were based on constitutional grounds. In this context the

Constitutional Tribunal of Peru in its decision of 30 January 2004 stated the following:

In this respect, it should be pointed out that equality before the law is a
constitutional right that has two fundamental components. As explained by
Peruvian author Francisco Eguiguren Praeli, one of them is equality of the
law or in the law, which consists of the preventing legislators from passing
laws that contravene the principle of equality of treatment, to which

  

R-4.

RI, § 137.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

4

 

62

4.1.

everyone has a right. The other is equality in the application of the law,
which imposes the obligation of all public agencies "to refrain from
applying the law in a different manner to persons in similar cases or
situations" (EGUIGUREN PRAELI, Francisco. Constitutional Studies.
ARA Editores. Ist Edition, May 2002, page 97) * (emphasis added)

the Claimant commenced on 10 May 2006 the present ICSID proceedings.

THE DISPUTE

POSITION OF THE PARTIES

4.1.1. Position of the Claimant

63

39

In order to justify its claims the Claimant advanced the following arguments”?

AEL's Contract

J. AEL and Peru entered into the Conite Agreement on 17 May 1996. The
Conite Agreement was entered as a part of Peru's general inducement to
foreign investors to invest capital into Peru.

2. The Conite Agreement contained:

(a) A promise by Peru to "guarantee legal stability for (AEL) in the
following terms: ... Stability of the right to non-discrimination, as provided
in Sub-paragraph c) of Article 10 of (LD 662)"

(i) While this is a stabilization of an existing right rather than a new right to
non-discrimination itself, legal stability cannot be said to exist if Peru itself
takes uncorrected action contrary to AEL's right to stability (i.e. an act of
discrimination by Peru is prima facie evidence of a breach of the right to
stability).

(ii) The reference to Art. 10 of LD 662 is enabling rather than defining in
nature (i.e. it speaks to Peru's capacity to give the promise rather than the

CLA-21, § 10.

In view of the lack of full success with the internal administrative and court procedures,

Excerpt from the “Case on behalf of Claimant” submitted in writing after the oral presentation at the
Opening Statement of the Hearing of 14 July 2008, pp. 1-3.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

scope of that promise). Art. 10 refers to Art. 2 which does offer a definition
of the scope of the right - "Foreign investors (i.e. AEL) and the companies
in which these participate (i.e. AEL Energy, Termoselva and Eteselva) shall
have the same rights and obligations as the local investors and companies
(the full suite of anti-discrimination protections offered under LD 757 and
the Constitution). Such rights and obligations are only limited by the
exceptions established (in the Constitution)."

(iii) It is noteworthy that the protection is expressed to cover both AEL and
its investments (although the investment vehicles will not, of course, have an
independent right to sue on this agreement).

(b) A representation (the Representation) as to the scope of the right to
nondiscrimination: "which implies that (Peru), at none of its levels .., may
impose on (AEL) a differentiated treatment based on its nationality, the
sectors or types of economic activity it develops ...and no other cause with
equivalent effect."

3. The rights generally enjoyed by local investors, and thus guaranteed to
AEL in a stabilized form (irrespective of the additional level of protection
granted through the Representation), arise out of:

(a) Art. 2 of the Constitution (general right to equality before the law);

(b) Art. 60 of the Constitution / Art. 7 of LD 757 (businesses to receive
same treatment irrespective of public/private ownership);

(c) Ar. 63 of the Constitution / Art. 12 of LD 757 (no discrimination on the
basis of nationality);

(d) Art. 12 of LD 757 (no discrimination or differentiation in respect of
tariffs on the grounds of type of economic activity); and

(e) SD 162-1992- EF (general restatement of the above principles).

4. The Conite Agreement grants a more comprehensive promise to AEL than
this broad web of protections however.

I Ij.

(a) The Re i presents a clear, and ung d promise
that AEL will not be discriminated against, including on the basis of
economic activity.

(b) This is a self-contained promise as to the scope of the protection that the
Conite Agreement affords, and is not limited by the excuses found in the
general Peruvian anti-discrimination regime (e.g. the ability to differentiate
or justify under the ‘six step test).

(c) In the event that the stabilized protection afforded under Peruvian law
does not reach this standard, then Peru will have separately breached its
contractual obligations if it does not honour the Representation in any
event.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

5. The interpretation of the Conite Agreement, and the standards by which
Peru's performance of the obligations contained therein are to be judged, is
governed by Peruvian law, subject to the prescriptive effect of international
law.

(a) The Conite Agreement contains no express nomination of governing law,
but does select ICSID arbitration, thereby importing Art. 42 of the
Washington Convention, which specifies that international law shall have a
prescriptive function in circumstances such as these.

(b) Peru's argument that the requirements of the first limb of Art. 42 are
satisfied by an implied choice of law in the Conite Agreement or through the
application of conflicts of law principles is bad - if such an argument were
correct, there are no circumstances where the second limb of Art. 42 would
ever be triggered.

(c) In any event, as a consequence of Peru reaching beyond its borders to
attract investment, its conduct attracts international law supervision as a
base line standard for its treatment of AEL.

(d) In the premises, Peruvian law and international law are materially the
same on the relevant issues, both recognizing:

(i) that Peru is under a duty to negotiate, execute and implement contracts
in good faith;

(ii) the principle of pacta sunt servanda;
(iii) that discrimination should not take place between investors; and

(iv) principles of contractual interpretation which require the use of textual,
purposive and systematic approaches, applying an assumption that the
parties negotiated in good faith.

II Peru's Breach of the Conite Agreement

6. Peru has breached the Conite Agreement by taking actions inconsistent
with the stability of AEL's right to non-discrimination:

(a) Osinerg/CELE-COPRVMEM applying more favourable treatment to
Etecen (a state entity) and ISA (an investor in the same sector) than
Eteselva in the classification of transmission lines as PTS or STS. This
violation has been exacerbated by the recognition of such discrimination by
the Constitutional Court, and the subsequent failure of Peru to remedy the
position.

(b) Osinerg/MEM applying more favourable treatment to other private and
state-held generation companies than Termoselva in allocating the
responsibility for paying the tariff for the use of STS lines;

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 44

 

(c) Osinerg/CELE-COPRVMEM affording more favourable treatment to
BOOT investors than to Eteselva in setting the tariff governing the amounts
payable for the use of transmission lines by third parties; and

(d) Allowing other foreign investors to take advantage of a more favourable
investment mechanism (i.e. the BOOT) than was available to AEL, but
denying access to such mechanism to AEL.

7. To be clear: AEL agrees that Peru is entitled to offer BOOTs and provide
the treatment it has to Etecen, Etesur, ISA, REP etc. Peru's breach of the
Conite Agreement is its failure to afford the same (or equivalent) treatment
to AEL.

4.1.2. Position of the Respondent

64

65

5.1.

66

The Respondent states that according to the plain language of the Agreement, the
Claimant was guaranteed the stability of the right to non-discrimination but no

substantive right to non-discrimination.

Furthermore, the Claimant has not proven that it was discriminated against by the
Respondent and, lastly, the Claimant has failed to satisfy the requirement for the alleged

damages, the analysis of which is fraught with error.

DISCUSSION

JURISDICTION

Article 9 of the Agreement provides that

. any litigation, controversy or claim among the parties, in connection
with the construction, performance, enforcement or validity (of this
Agreement), shall be submitted to the International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment-Related Discrepancies, to be solved through
international de jure arbitration under the Conciliation and Arbitration
Rules set forth in the Covenant for the Settlement of Investment-Related
Discrepancies amongst States and Nationals from Other States.”

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 45

 

67

68

69

70

The requirements of Article 25 of the Convention are fulfilled in the present case. The
dispute is a legal dispute and arises directly out of an investment by AEL, a national of
a Contracting State (U.S.A.) in the Republic of Peru, another Contracting State. In the
Agreement, both Parties to the dispute have consented in writing to submit such a
dispute to the Centre. The Tribunal furthermore notes that no Party has questioned the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal and the Parties have confirmed that the Tribunal had been

properly constituted*’.

On 18 July 2008, at the close of the Hearing in Washington D.C., the Parties and the
Arbitrators confirmed that they had no further issues they wished to raise and both
Parties confirmed that they were in agreement with the procedure as it had been

conducted up to that moment.”
The Concession Agreement of 16 July 1996 in Article 14 provides:

Judicial Jurisdiction

The agreement hereto is exclusively subject to the jurisdiction of the judges
and courts of the capital of Peru. The concessionaire hereby waives any
intention to submit the disputes that may arise to foreign courts as well as to
file any claim through diplomatic channels.

It therefore follows that this Tribunal is only competent to decide disputes between the
Parties which arise “in connection with the construction, performance, enforcement or
validity” of the Agreement. However, all disputes or controversies which might arise in

connection with “the conditions, rights and duties that regulate the electrical

Minutes of the May 18, 2007 Session, Chapter I, § 1.

Transcript, p. 1110, 18-22; p. 1111, 1-13.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 46

 

5.2.

71

72

73

transmission final concession” (Concession Agreement, Second Article, Aim) fall fully

and entirely within the jurisdiction of the Peruvian judges and courts.

APPLICABLE LAW
Article 42(1) of the Convention provides:

The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as
may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the
Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute
(including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international
law as may be applicable.”

The Tribunal therefore notes that basically the laws of the Republic of Peru shall apply
together with such rules of international law as may be applicable. The Parties have
developed this point to some extent and have also submitted expert reports, especially
on the question of what rules of international law might be applicable. However, both
Parties agree that the Agreement is a contract governed by the Peruvian Civil Code
(PCC). At the end of the procedure, both Parties seem to have come to the same

conclusion because, as Mr. Loftis for the Claimant stated:

We submit that Peruvian Law, properly understood and applied, and
international law lead to the same conclusion, so the issue is really of
limited currency.”

And Ms. Cohen Smutny for the Respondent stated

The question is does it matter, and maybe for different reasons both Parties
are of the view that it does not ultimately matter because Peruvian law

Transcript, p. 943, 17 to 19.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 47

 

74

5.3.

75

76

applies here, and it is consistent in all material respects with international
law.

The Tribunal has also reached the conclusion that for the resolution of this dispute it

need not look beyond Peruvian law.

MERITS

The basic question for the Arbitral Tribunal is: (i) whether the Agreement is to be
interpreted as providing a substantive guarantee of non-discrimination against the
investor under Article III(5); or (ii) whether the various Article III guarantees are to be
interpreted in the sense that the State may not, for the duration of the Agreement (ten
years), change the laws, rules, regulations, etc. which are in force at the time the
Agreement was concluded, but do not grant any substantive rights against future

discriminatory action as such to the investor.

If we conclude that the Agreement, properly construed, guarantees that the legal
framework in the five fields enumerated in Article III will not be modified during its
term, rather than creating a free standing, substantive protection against discrimination,
that is the end of the matter. This is because the Claimant asserts no case based on
detrimental legislative or other legal framework change, and it is common ground that
the Peruvian courts, and not this Tribunal, have jurisdiction over any alleged breach by

the state of its anti-discrimination laws.

Transcript 1040, 9 to 14.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU

 

77

78

The Agreement constitutes a contract between the Republic of Peru and the Claimant
subject to the PCC and therefore, has to be interpreted based on the rules established to

interpret contracts governed by Peruvian civil law.

In his first statement, Professor Jorge Avendajio, expert witness for the Claimant,

opined as follows regarding the interpretation of agreements under Peruvian Law :

50. The Civil Code contains specific provisions regarding the way in which
contracts must be interpreted, negotiated, entered into and executed.

51. The first rule is mentioned in Article 168, according to which “The legal
act must be interpreted in accordance with what is stated therein, and
according to the principle of good faith".

52. Article 169 of the Civil Code contains the systematic method of contract
interpretation, according to which "The clauses of legal documents are
interpreted through each other, attributing to the doubtful ones the sense
resulting from the clauses considered as a whole”. Indeed, "In legal
businesses the provisions of the parties should not be interpreted in
isolation, but should be correlated with the general context and economic
purpose they pursue”. "This is because businesses are usually a harmonic
whole or group, in such a way that the provisions that make them up should
be interpreted on a complementary basis, without the absolute
individualization thereof seeming correct, since the business as a whole
seeks global purposes, without prejudice to the particular provisions which
said ends or purposes contribute to.”

53. The finalist method of contractual interpretation is contained in Article
170 of the Civil Code, which provides that "Expressions having several
senses should be understood in the one that is most adequate to the nature
and object of the document”. The purpose of this method of interpretation is
to find the sense of the contractual agreement, taking into account the
nature of the business entered into between the parties. This criterion makes
it mandatory to consider the economic-social function of the business, as
well as the practical end it pursues.

54. On the other hand, according to Article 1361 of the Civil Code
“Contracts are mandatory as to whatever is stated therein. It is presumed
that the express declaration made in the contract responds to the common
will of the parties and whoever denies this coincidence must prove it”. In
other words, the interpretation refers to the declaration made in the legal
business and not to the subjective will of the contracting parties.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 49

 

79

80

81

82

83

84

55. Finally, Article 1362 of the Civil Code provides that “Contracts must be
negotiated, entered into and performed in accordance with the rules of good
faith and the common intention of the parties”. In this way, good faith is
not only a contractual interpretation criterion but also has the function of
being an integrating principle of the content of the legal acts.
Professor Alfredo Bullard Gonzalez, in his first opinion*® as expert for the Respondent,
cites the same articles from the PCC while stressing that the starting point of the

Peruvian system is the interpretation based on the expression of the parties’ will set

forth in the contract and not on the will itself, referring to Articles 168 and 1361 PCC:

Literal interpretation must be contrasted with the other interpretive criteria,
but without contradicting what the parties expressly indicated. 6

A further principle is that of the unity of the contract (systematic interpretation)

contained in Article 169 PCC.

According to Professor Bullard, the search for the true will is derived from the principle

of good faith set forth in Article 168 PCC.
Finally, Professor Bullard invokes the functional interpretation according to which

. one must search for or prefer, among various possible interpretations,
the interpretation that is consistent with the purpose or intent of the clause
that is subject to interpretation. v

In this context he bases his opinion on Article 170 PCC.

Both Parties seem to agree that the starting point of any interpretation must be the

wording of the text agreed upon between the parties. The Tribunal therefore starts its
§§ 35 through 54.

§ 40.

§51.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 50

 

85

86

87

48.

analysis with the text of the Agreement and the legal documents referred to therein, and
then examines whether the result requires modification after taking into account further
rules of interpretation under Peruvian civil law, especially the issue of whether this
result is consistent with the requirement of good faith and the common intention of the

Parties as provided for in Article 1362 PCC.
The Agreement in Article III states that:

... the STATE undertakes to guarantee juridical stability for AGUAYTIA in
connection with the investment referred to in ARTICLE TWO under the
terms set forth below: (emphasis added)

Section 5 of Article III provides:

5. Stability of the right to non-discrimination, as provided for in item c),
article 10, of Legislative Decree 662, which implies that the STATE or
neither one of its bodies, notwithstanding these may include entities or
companies from the Central Government, Regional or Local Governments,
may apply a differentiated treatment to AGUAYTIA by reason of its
nationality, the sectors or types of economic activity it shall develop, or the
geographical location of the firm in which it invests, and neither as far as
the matters herein below specified:

The term of effectiveness of this juridical Stability Agreement is ten (10)
years counted as from the date of its execution. Accordingly, throughout this
term, it may not be amended by either of the parties individually, regardless
of whether the i l legislation could be eventually led and
notwithstanding the fact that such amendments to the national legislation
may turn out to be more beneficial or harmful to any of the Parties, than
those agreed hereunder. (emphasis added)

The Agreement refers to the Legislative Decree 662"%, Article 10 (c). Legislative
Decree 662 of 2 September 1991 identified the purpose of the legislation in its 5°

WHEREAS Clause as follows:

CLA-1

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 51

 

88

89

90

The Government should grant a juridical stability system to foreign investors by
the acknowledgement of certain guaranties securing the continuity of the
established rules. (emphasis added)

It provides that the Competent National Organization (in our case CONITE) may enter

into agreements guaranteeing among other the following rights:

c) Stability of the right to_non-discrimination established in Article 2°
hereof. (emphasis added)

Article 2 of this same Decree reads as follows:

Foreign investors and the ies in which these participate have the
same rights and obligati as_the local investors and « ies. Such
rights and obligations are only limited by the exceptions established in the
Political Constitution of Peru and the provisions hereof. (emphasis added)

In_no_case_the_d juridical_regulati will discriminate_among

investors or the ies based on the local or foreign share in_the
investments.(emphasis added)

The conclusion from the plain wording of the Agreement and the various legal texts
referred to in the Agreement, and underlying the juridical stability regime of Peru, can
only be that the legal framework in the crucial various fields enumerated in the
Agreement will not be modified, either in favor of or to the detriment of the foreign
investor, Aguaytia, during the ten years duration of the Agreement. Nowhere, however,
are any individual, substantive rights created or guaranteed. What is guaranteed is the

stability of the legislative framework as it existed on 17 May 1996.

According to the Claimant, “even if a literal interpretation did support Peru’s position,

such an interpretative approach can only be the start of the exercise, and in applying

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 52

 

a1

92

49

50

51

the other factors, such as context and good faith, a very different picture would

emerge. ad

The Claimant then turns to the “Drafting Intent Interpretation”? Claimant points out
that the Agreement is principally a standard form contract with little scope for the
negotiation of its terms and the Claimant agrees that “no such substantive negotiations
took place. AEL did not benefit from any insight into what the drafters of the standard
form had intended — it could only judge what it would receive from the words of the

Conite Agreement itself and the objective context against which it was entered into. vol

The Claimant has not drawn the attention of the Arbitral Tribunal to any
contemporaneous documents reflecting its understanding of the Agreement at the time it
entered into it. The Agreement contains in Article III five different areas which were
being stabilized. The Claimant has not adduced any documentation regarding its
contemporaneous evaluation of these different rights. Especially, why the stability of
the right to non discrimination, as now interpreted by the Claimant, would have been of
particular importance to it, nor why it could consider at the time it entered into the
Agreement, that it contained a substantive right that it would not in any way be
discriminated by future actions of the State. The Claimant also did not identify any
Peruvian authority or publicly available arbitral authority to the effect that a Stability

Agreement stabilizing laws of non discrimination constitutes, in effect, a warranty or

Cll, § 46
Cll, p.16

cll, § 47.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 53

 

93

94

95

53

54

representation by the State that there will not be discrimination against the Contracting

Party as had been asked by Arbitrator Rowley.”

Of course “the guarantee is said to run to the ‘investor’s rights’” and they have been
“acknowledged as being given to protect the investor’s “long-term investment”.®* This,

however, in no way implies a substantive right protecting against future discrimination.

According to the Claimant, such a reading, that the Agreement does not convey any
substantive rights, would have the following consequences
“The word “stability” is defined (in other laws) in such a narrow way that
the guarantee (i) has no effective meaning, such that a subsidiary organ of
the State may actively discriminate, in violation of the allegedly stabilized
right to non-discrimination, without the State being in breach of the

guarantee in Clause 3(5); and (ii) its meaning is directly contradictory to
the Parties’ express agreement as to the meaning of the guarantee. vod

First of all, the Claimant has not produced any evidence which supports its allegation
that such an interpretation would be “directly contradictory to the Parties’ express
agreement”. Furthermore, it is beyond doubt that stability undertakings, such as those
entered into by the Respondent in the Agreement and contained in Article III, are of
undoubted importance for investors. There is no need here to dwell on the importance
for investors, obviously including the Claimant, of the stability guarantees given in the
field of taxes, foreign currency, free remittance of profits and capital and exchange
rates. Also, the “stability of the right to non-discrimination” itself is of obvious

importance for a foreign investor. It freezes the laws, rules and regulations applicable to

Transcript 96, 22; 97, 1-6
Cll, §54.

Claimant’s Closing Presentation, pp. 6 and 7.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 54

 

96

97

98

it, as they were in existence at the time the Agreement was concluded. This means that
no new law may be passed which would state that certain rules regarding non-
discrimination would no longer apply to the Claimant. It especially guaranteed the
constitutional right to equality before the law® (for instance a Peruvian Legislature
hostile to foreign investment could not have, during the duration of the Agreement,
worsened the status of the Claimant by modifying this constitutional right that foreign

investment would not be treated different from national investments).

It is also clear from the wording of the Agreement that the guarantees it contains
concerning juridical stability do not convey a most favored investor status. Whether and
to what degree such a status is possibly available to the Claimant is a question to be
resolved solely by the Peruvian authorities in applying the non-discrimination
provisions of the Constitution and the specific laws applicable in this context. However,
this ICSID Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the question, either in the first instance or
by way of an appeal against decisions of Peruvian Courts and administrative bodies as

the Agreement does not grant any substantive rights.

The claim of the Claimant is therefore denied.

COSTS

Article 9, paragraph 2 of the Agreement (the arbitration clause) provides:

Any expenses to be incurred in enforcing this Article shall be borne in equal
parts by the parties hereto.

See above § 59 and Decision of the Constitutional Tribunal of Peru of 30 January 2004 (CLA-21).

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC y. REPUBLIC OF PERU 55

 

99 ~The Claimant in its Opening Memorial requested as part of its relief the award of :

(i) its share of the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges for
the use of ICSID’s facilities; and

(ii) its legal and related fees in connection with these proceedings. 6
100 The Respondent in its Counter-Memorial stated :

Article 9 of the Aguaytia Stability Agreement expressly provides: “Any
expenses incurred as a result of the application of this Clause shall be borne
by the contracting parties in equal parts.” Claimant thus cannot recover
costs.

101. Claimant in its Reply Memorial did not rebut the position of the Respondent, nor did it

repeat its claim for costs. The matter was not raised by the Parties during the Hearing.

102 The Tribunal therefore need not decide whether Article 9(2) of the Agreement deals
with all costs incurred by the Parties (including legal fees, fees and expenses of
witnesses, etc.) or covers only the amounts paid to ICSID. In view of the interpretation
given by the Respondent to Article 9(2) of the Agreement (and not rebutted by the
Claimant), and in view of the outcome of these proceedings, the Arbitral Tribunal does
not have to apply the basic rule contained in Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention.
Each Party shall therefore bear its own legal costs and expenses and shall equally share

the payments requested by ICSID and made by the Parties.

56

pp. 62 and 63.

37

§ 399, p. 127.

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/13 — AWARD.
AGUAYTIA ENERGY LLC v. REPUBLIC OF PERU 56

 

NOW THEREFORE, the Arbitral Tribunal

DECIDES AND AWARDS AS FOLLOWS:

1. Denies the claim of the Claimant.

2. The Claimant and the Respondent shall bear their own legal costs and expenses and
share equally the payments requested by the International Centre for the Settlement of

Investment Disputes and made by the Parties.

[signed]

Robert Briner
President of the Tribunal
Date: 27 November 2008

[signed] [signed]
J. William Rowley QC Claus von Wobeser
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: 28 November 2008 Date: 28 November 2008

