INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
IN THE MATTER OF THE ARBITRATION BETWEEN

ALASDAIR ROSS ANDERSON ET AL
(CLAIMANTS)

Vv.

REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA
(RESPONDENT)

ICSID CasE No. ARB(AF)/07/3

AWARD

MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL

Dr. Sandra Morelli Rico, President
Prof. Jeswald W. Salacuse, Arbitrator
Prof. Raul E. Vinuesa, Arbitrator

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL,
Natali Sequeira

 

REPRESENTING THE CLAIMANTS: REPRESENTING THE RESPONDENT:
Mr. Francois G. Tremblay Mr. Esteban Agiiero Guier

Ms. Natacha Leclere Ms. Monica C. Fernandez Fonseca
Cain Lamarre Casgrain Wells, s.e.n.c.r.l. Mr. Luis Adolfo Fernandez Lépez

255, rue Racine Est, bureau 600, case postale 5420 | Costa Rican Ministry of Foreign Trade
Chicoutimi (Québec) G7H 6J6

 

 

Canada Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov
Ms. Marinn Carlson

Mr. Robert Wisner Mr. Patricio Grané *

Mr. W. Brad Hanna Sidley Austin LLP

McMillan LLP 1501 K Street N.W.

Brookfield Place, 181 Bay Street, Suite 4400 Washington, D.C. 20005

Toronto, Ontario MSJ 2T3

Canada * until August 7, 2009

 

 

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: May 19, 2010

VI.

VIL

VIL.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND. 3
THE FACTS OF THIS CASE 8

RESPONDENT’ S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

 

CLAIMANTS’ OPPOSITION TO OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY ..........004+ 15

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS

 

 

 

Costs 24
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL 25
ANNEX A 27

 

L

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

The procedural background of this proceeding has been long and somewhat

convoluted and therefore will only be summarized in its essence.

On May 10, 2004, a large number of individuals and companies from several
different nationalities submitted a single Request for Arbitration (the “Request’”) to
the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the
Centre’) against the Republic of Costa Rica (“the Respondent” or “Costa Rica’),
alleging violations of their rights under at least ten different bilateral investment
treaties. The Request included an application for approval by the ICSID Secretary-
General of access to the Additional Facility (AF) under Article 4 of the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules. Upon receipt of the Request, the Centre requested
additional information and sought clarifications regarding a series of errors and

defects contained in the Request for Arbitration.

Ultimately, on March 27, 2007, after significant revisions, the Secretary-General of
ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration, as amended and supplemented’, by one
hundred thirty seven (137) individual nationals of Canada (hereinafter “the
Claimants,” as listed in Appendix A to the present Award) against the Republic of
Costa Rica, pursuant to Article 4(2) of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility)
Rules (the “Arbitration (AF) Rules”). On the same day, the Secretary-General
dispatched the Notice of Registration to the parties and transmitted a copy of the
Request for Arbitration and its supplemental letters to the Republic of Costa Rica.
The Centre invited the Claimants to submit additional copies of the Request for
Arbitration, reflecting the amendments and clarifications made subsequent to May 10,
2004. The case was registered as ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/3 with the formal

heading of Alasdair Ross Anderson et al. v. Republic of Costa Rica.

' By Claimants’ letters of May 11, June 4, July 9, July 23, December 3 and December 23, 2004; January 13, January 26, February 16, March 18,
April 18, July 26, August 5, September 13, September 30, October 20, 2005; and January 16, February 22, November 29 and December 18, 2006.

Pursuant to Article 5(e) of the Arbitration (AF) Rules, the Secretary-General invited
the parties to proceed as soon as possible to constitute the Arbitral Tribunal. The
Claimants appointed Professor Jeswald W. Salacuse, an American national, as
arbitrator, and the Respondent appointed Professor Professor Ratil E. Vinuesa, a
national of Argentina, as arbitrator. Pursuant to Articles 6 and 10 of the Arbitration
(AF) Rules, the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Dr. Sandra

Morelli Rico, a Colombian national, as President of the Tribunal.

By letter of May 2, 2008, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID notified the parties
that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that, in accordance with
Article 13(1) of the Arbitration (AF) Rules , the Tribunal was deemed to have been
constituted and the proceeding to have begun on that date. On the same date, the
parties were also informed that Ms. Natali Sequeira would serve as Secretary of the
Arbitral Tribunal. A first session was subsequently scheduled between the Tribunal

and the parties to discuss preliminary procedural matters.

In response to the Secretary-General’s request dated March 27, 2007, the Claimants
filed on May 14, 2008 a Revised Request for Arbitration reflecting the amendments
and clarifications to their original Request for Arbitration, along with various

supporting documents.

On June 27, 2008, the Tribunal held its first session with the parties at the seat of the
Centre in Washington, D.C. During the session, the parties confirmed their
agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted in accordance with Articles
6 and 13 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules and that they did not have any objections in
this respect. During the session the parties also agreed on a number of procedural
matters reflected in written minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the
Tribunal. In particular, these matters concerned: i) the applicable arbitration rules for
the proceeding; ii) the representation of the parties; iii) the apportionment of the
procedural costs and the advance payments to the Centre; iv) the fees and expenses of
the members of the Tribunal; v) the place of arbitration; vi) the procedural languages;

vii) the records of the hearings; viii) the means of communication and copies of the

instruments; ix) the presence and quorum for meetings of the Tribunal; x) the
decisions of the Tribunal by correspondence or any other form of communication; xi)
the delegation of power to set time limits and sign procedural orders on behalf of the
Tribunal; xii) the phases of the proceeding (written and oral); xiii) number, sequence
and schedule of written pleadings; xiv) the production of evidence and witnesses’
testimony (written and oral); xv) dates and nature of subsequent sessions; and xvi)

publication of the award and the decisions related to the proceeding.

During the first session, the parties agreed that since the Respondent intended to raise
jurisdictional objections, the Tribunal would deal with the question of jurisdiction as
a preliminary matter. The schedule of pleadings on jurisdictional objections was
agreed as follows: Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction: September 26, 2008;
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction: December 23, 2008; Respondent’s
Reply on Jurisdiction: February 27, 2009; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction: April
27, 2009. In addition, the parties proposed that the Hearing on Jurisdiction be held
between August 3 and 7, 2009.

During the course of the first session, the counsel for the Respondent,
Dr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, expressed the Respondent’s intention to submit a request
for provisional measures on costs. On this point, the President stated that in the event
such request was formally submitted it would be dealt with pursuant to Article 46 of
the Arbitration (AF) Rules and it would determine the schedule for the other party to
submit observations. On July 8, 2008 the Respondent filed a Request for Provisional
measures whereby it requested that: i) the Tribunal order the Claimants to post a bank
guarantee (or an escrow account deposit administered by ICSID) equivalent to the
ICSID administrative fees that the Respondent might incur during the course of the
proceedings on jurisdiction; and ii) that the Tribunal order Claimants to represent that
they agree to be held jointly and severally liable for any amounts that the Tribunal
may award to cover Respondent’s legal fees and expenses. The Claimants’ submitted
their observations on the Request for Provisional Measures on August 6, 2008. The

Tribunal issued a Decision on Provisional Measures on November 5, 2008. The

Tribunal concluded that i) the facts presented by the Respondent did not constitute an
urgent situation that risked irreparable harm to the Respondent’s rights; ii) the
Respondent had only a mere expectation and not a right with respect to an eventual
award of costs; iii) the request to order the Claimants to be held joint and severally
liable for the payment of any costs eventually awarded to the Respondent is not in the
nature of a provisional measure to preserve existing rights; and iv) a Tribunal’s
decision in this respect might constitute a prejudgment on the responsibility of
individual parties. Therefore, pursuant to Article 46 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules, the

Tribunal denied Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures.

As agreed during the first session, the Respondent filed a Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction and Admissibility on September 26, 2008. By letter of December 18,
2008, the parties agreed to an extension for the filing of the Claimants Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility. According to the revised schedule, the
subsequent jurisdictional pleadings were submitted as follows: Claimants Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, on January 13, 2009; Respondent’s
Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, on April 10, 2009, and the Claimants’
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility on June 10, 2009. By letters of June 8,
2009 the parties agreed to a five day extension for the presentation of the Claimants’

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, which was submitted on June 15, 2009.

The hearing on jurisdiction was held as scheduled, from August 3 through August 6,
2009, at the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. Messrs. Robert Wisner and W.
Brad Hanna of the law firm McMillan LLP and Natacha Leclerc of the law firm Cain
Lamarre Casgrain Wells s.e.n.c.r.l., were present at the hearing on behalf of the
Claimants. Messrs. Stanimir Alexandrov, Patricio Grané, Marinn F. Carlson, and
Joshua Robbins of Sidley Austin LLP; Messrs. Esteban Agiiero Guier, Monica
Fernandez Fonseca, Luis Adolfo Fernandez and José Carlos Quirce of the Costa
Rican Government as well as Mr. Alan Thompson Chacon, Respondent’s legal
expert, were present at the hearing on behalf of the Respondent. During the hearing

the Tribunal heard the oral examination of the following Claimants’ witnesses:

Messrs. Patricia Lucie Fleming, Maurice Wilfrid Laframboise, Norman Albert Barr,
and Charles Bergeron, all of whom were also Claimants in this proceeding. The
following Respondent’s witnesses were also examined: Messrs. Sandra Castro Mora,
Walter Espinoza, Elizabeth Flores Calvo and Marietta Herrera Cantillo, all of whom

were officials of different Costa Rican state agencies and powers.

12. The Respondent objected to the presence in the hearing room of those Claimants who
were to appear also as witnesses prior to providing their oral testimony, on the
grounds that Article 39(2)? of the Arbitration (AF) Rules referred to the attendance of
witnesses only during their testimony, unless otherwise agreed by the parties*. The
Claimants’ counsel strongly objected to the exclusion of any Claimant from the
hearing room. They argued that Article 39(2) Arbitration (AF) Rules explicitly gives
parties the right to attend the hearing and that a party does not lose its rights simply
by being a witness. Moreover, the Claimants argued that to deny a party the right to
be present at a hearing in which his or her rights were at stake and to assist counsel in

presenting that party’s case would constitute a denial of due process.

13. On that point, the Tribunal decided by majority to allow those Claimants who were to
testify as witnesses to attend the entire hearing on jurisdiction. Thereafter, the parties
informed the Tribunal that they had agreed that the four Claimants scheduled to
testify as witnesses would remain in the hearing room until Respondent’s witnesses

had offered their testimony. When the time came for the four Claimants to testify,

> Article 39(2) of the Arbitration (AF) Rules provides: “(2) Unless either party objects, the Tribunal, after consultation with the Secreta
General, may allow other persons, besides the parties, their agents, counsel and advocates, witnesses and experts during thei
officers of the Tribunal, to attend or observe all or part of the hearings, subject to appropriate logistical arrangements. The Tribunal shall for such
cases establish procedures for the protection of proprietary or privileged information.” [emphasis added]

‘The Respondent had initially raised this objection by letter of July 29, 2009 addressed to the Tribunal, in which it stated that the presence in the
hearing room of the Claimants who were also witnesses, would allow them to listen to the testimony of any preceding Respondent’s witnesses
with the result of possibly influencing their own testimony. That circumstance would give the Claimants an unfair advantage with respect to the
Respondent whose witnesses would not have a similar opportunity. Thus, according to the Respondent, to allow the Claimant-witnesses to be
present in the hearing prior to their testimony would be contrary to the pr
Respondent had no objection to the presence at the hearing of the other Claimants, who would not be called as witnesses. By letter of July 30,
2009 the Claimants stated that it would be a fundamental violation of Claimants’ rights to due process denying them the right to be present, since
it is a widely accepted principle in arbitration that an arbitral tribunal may not exclude a party who wishes to be present from any hearing. In the
Claimants’ view, Article 39(1) of the Arbitration (AF) Rules grants the party an absolute right to be present at the hearing, while Article 39(2)
only addresses the need for both parties to consent before the hearing is opened to non-parties. Finally, according to the Claimants, the
Respondent's concerns about inequality are not substantiated as Respondent would also have representatives present throughout the hearing to

instruct counsel. Therefore Claimants requested the Tribunal to deny Respondent's request.

          

    

 

 
 

  

 

   

       
 

they were to leave the hearing room, and each testifying Claimant would then be

permitted to stay in the hearing room only after that Claimant had testified’.

14. The hearing on jurisdiction proceeded to its conclusion on the basis of this agreement.
Costa Rica’s witnesses namely, Ms. Marietta Cantillo, Mr. Walter Espinosa and Ms.
Sandra Castro Mora testified and were cross-examined. Thereafter Claimants Wilfrid
Laframboise, Patricia Lucie Fleming, Maurice Norman Albert Barr, and Charles

Bergeron testified and were cross-examined.

IL. THE FACTS OF THIS CASE

15. This dispute concerns the situation in which the Claimants, 137 individual nationals
of Canada, assert separate and distinct claims against Costa Rica for injuries to their
alleged individual investments as a result of various breaches of domestic and
international law, in particular the Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of Costa Rica and the Government of Canada for the Protection and
Promotion of Investment, signed on March 18, 1998, in force since September 29,
1999 (hereinafter referred to as “the BIT” or “the Canada-Costa Rica BIT’). Costa
Rica is a Contracting Party to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, signed in Washington in 1965
(the “ICSID Convention”). As Canada is not a Party to the ICSID Convention,
Schedule C of the Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the Administration of
Proceedings (hereinafter referred to as “Additional Facility,”) shall apply as provided

by Article XII 4(b) of the BIT.

16. In particular, Claimants alleged that Costa Rica, by failing to provide proper vigilance
and governmental regulatory supervision over the national financial system, had
injured their investments in violation of the BIT provisions regarding full protection
and security, fair and equitable treatment, due process of law, and protection against
expropriation.

* Hearing on Jurisdiction Transcript, August 4, 2009, pp. 371-72.

5 Article XII(4) provides that “The dispute may be submitted to arbitration under ... (b) the Additional Facility Rules of ICSID, if either the
disputing Contracting Party or the Contracting Party of the investor, but not both, is a Party to the ICSID Convention;...”

 

Luis Enrique Villalobos Camacho and his brother Osvaldo Villalobos Camacho
(hereinafter the “Villalobos brothers” or the “brothers”) at the time of the incidents
giving rise to this case were Costa Rican nationals engaged in various business
activities in Costa Rica. In particular, they owned and operated a currency exchange,
known first as Casa de Cambio Hermanos Villalobos (“the Villallobos Brothers
Money Exchange’) and later renamed Casa de Cambio Ofinter S.A. (‘‘Ofinter’).
From at least 1998 until Ofinter’s collapse in 2002, the Superintendencia General de
Entidades Financieras (SUGEF), the Costa Rican governmental financial regulatory
agency under the supervision of the Central Bank of Costa Rica, had licensed Ofinter
to engage in the money exchange business and regularly included it in the list of
authorized money exchanges, which it published periodically for purposes of
informing the public. Ofinter had offices in downtown San Jose, the capital city of

Costa Rica, and in the San Pedro Mall.

Sometime prior to 1996, the Villalobos brothers developed and instituted a scheme
whereby individuals and companies would place funds with the brothers in return for
a high interest rate on their deposits, as well as the repayment of the principal amount
under stipulated conditions. The office in which these transactions were carried out
was located in the San Pedro Mall, adjacent to Ofinter’s money exchange business,
with a separate entrance from the money exchange business. The Villalobos brothers
did not openly undertake a public solicitation of funds, nor did they explain to their
clients how they would use the funds raised. Instead, they conducted this part of their
business on a highly confidential basis and would accept contributions only from

persons introduced to them through recommendations from acquaintances.

Individuals or companies placing funds in the scheme were required to make an
initial minimum payment of US$10,000. The minimum period of deposit for amounts
up to US$99,000 was six months and twelve months for deposits of more than
US$100,000. Interest was credited monthly to depositors’ accounts and they were
entitled to withdraw interest on a monthly basis. In order to withdraw three or more

months’ worth of interest, a depositor had to provide the brothers at least a two-week

written notice. All withdrawals of principal required at least one month’s written
notice. The Villalobos brothers promised to pay those depositing funds with them a
minimum of 3% per month or a total of 36% interest per year. Some persons
withdrew their interest regularly when paid and others left the interest to accumulate
in their accounts with the brothers. Depositors who were willing to forego monthly
withdrawals were promised a rate of 2.8% per month, compounded, which was

equivalent to an annual interest rate of 39.29%.

20. Although Claimants argued that the deposits made with the Villalobos constituted a
form of participation in an enterprise according to Article I(g)ii of the BIT, evidence
on the record shows that deposits with the Villalobos brothers under the above
scheme were structured as personal loans to Luis Enrique Villalobos®. After filling
out a deposit form, depositors made payments of their deposits in one of three ways:
1) in cash delivered to a Villalobos brother or a Villalobos employee at the office in
the San Pedro Mall; 2) by check, usually made out to Luis Enrique Villalobos, to
Ofinter, to their brokerage account, or to another of their related entities; or 3) by wire
transfer to one of their bank accounts in Costa Rica, the United States, or another

country.

21. In return, as evidence of the transaction and as a receipt of the depositors’ funds, the
Villalobos brothers or an employee delivered to each depositor what some Claimants
referred to as a “guarantee check” drawn on an account in the name of Luis Enrique
Villalobos at the Banco Nacional de Costa Rica in the amount of the deposit made
with the brothers. The checks were undated and the deposit form filled out by the
depositors explained that the check was issued by Luis Enrique Villalobos, a physical
person, responsible for the amount shown on the check. At same time, the Villalobos
employee receiving the deposit made clear that the checks were not to be cashed and
that the account on which they were drawn did not have sufficient funds to pay the

amount indicated on the check. In fact, the account on which they were drawn

© Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, para. 36: “Claimants do not dispute that the guarantee cheques and the
documents accompanying the Beneficiary Statement establish that Enrique Villalobos was personally liable for payment of the principal
advanced along with the interest set out on the cheque. In this sense, the investments were personal loans evidenced by a promissory note or
debenture issued by the principal shareholder of Ofinter and its related companies.”

22.

23.

24.

remained inactive after 1997 and never had more than US$5,000. Often on the back
of the check, a Villalobos employee would write information concerning the interest
to be paid on the deposit. If a depositor wished to withdraw principal, he or she
would present the guarantee check when requesting payment and surrender it upon

payment.

Drawn by the high interest rates and the confidential nature of the scheme, more than
6,200 persons deposited a total of approximately US$405 million with the Villalobos
brothers over the years of the scheme’s operation. Many of the depositors, like the
Claimants in this case, were foreign nationals. They often deposited significant sums
of money with what appears to be relatively little investigation and research, relying
instead on the recommendations of friends and acquaintances who had previously
deposited funds with the brothers and attested to the fact that the Villalobos brothers
had regularly paid them the high interest rates promised. The Villalobos brothers
provided minimal documentation to the persons depositing funds with them, and
thereafter issued no periodic reports on the status of the funds received or the
enterprises in which the funds were purportedly invested. Moreover, the Villalobos
brothers made no reports to the tax or other governmental authorities of Costa Rica or
any other government on their operations or on the income earned by depositors in

the scheme.

It appears that agencies of the Costa Rican government inspected the Villallobos
currency exchange operation from time to time. It also appears that such agencies
came to suspect that the Villalobos brothers were conducting other unauthorized
activities in connection with the currency exchange. Although the authorities pursued
such leads, they were unable to gather sufficient evidence to prove wrongdoing. One
of the problems they encountered was that the depositors themselves refused to
cooperate by revealing to the authorities the nature of their business transactions with

the Villalobos brothers.

On June 5, 2002, the Costa Rican judicial authorities received a request for

cooperation and legal assistance from the Department of Justice of Canada, which

11

suspected that a criminal organization in Canada was using the Villalobos brothers
scheme to launder money obtained from criminal activities. Pursuant to this request,
Costa Rican law enforcement officials, having obtained a search warrant, raided the
Villalobos offices and seized various documents and other items on July 4 and 5,
2002. The operation in the San Pedro Mall was closed as a result, but the Villalobos
brothers moved their deposit business to another location in the same shopping mall,
where despite public knowledge of the raid, certain persons, including the Claimant
Norman Barr, continued to deposit funds with the brothers. After the raid, the
Villalobos brothers issued other types of instruments to depositors instead of the so-

called “guarantee checks” previously provided.

25. The Costa Rican government’s investigation after the raid revealed that the Villalobos
brothers had been engaged in illegal financial intermediation and had operated a
fraudulent Ponzi scheme whereby persons were induced to invest in the scheme by
promises of a high return. Interest payments were financed not from the investment of
such funds but from subsequent deposits by other persons. On November 27, 2002,
the Costa Rican authorities ordered the arrest of the brothers, closed Ofinter, and
seized the assets and accounts of the Villalobos brothers and their affiliated
enterprises. On December 18, 2002, the Central Bank of Costa Rica formally

cancelled Ofinter’s authorization to operate a currency exchange.

26. Although Osvaldo Villalobos Camacho was arrested and prosecuted for fraud and
illegal financial intermediation, his brother Enrique Villalobos managed to escape
capture and still remains a fugitive from justice at this time. Ultimately after a lengthy
trial involving many witnesses and voluminous documentation, on May 16, 2007 the
Trial Court of the First Circuit of San José found Osvaldo Villalobos Camacho guilty
of aggravated fraud and illegal financial intermediation for his participation in
operating the brothers’ financial scheme. The Trial Court sentenced him to eighteen
years imprisonment for his criminal conduct.” In their lengthy decision, the judges of

the Trial Court concluded that the Villalobos brothers had put in place and operated a

” Decision of the Trial Court of the First Circuit of San José No. 435-07, May 16, 2007 (Respondent’s Exhibit R-8).

Ponzi scheme in which they had used funds received from depositors to pay other
depositors and themselves, rather than to invest the funds so as to secure a return for
use in paying investors. The judges noted that the brothers’ scheme was cloaked in
secrecy and was designed to avoid notice by the public or detection by the
governmental authorities. On June 2, 2008, a decision of the Supreme Court of Costa

Rica upheld the conviction and prison sentence of Osvaldo Villalobos.*

27. Since the clients who had provided funds to the brothers were considered victims of
fraud, they were permitted under Costa Rican law to file a civil complaint for
compensation in connection with the criminal case against Osvaldo Villalobos. At the
Hearing on Jurisdiction in the present arbitration proceeding, the auxiliary attorney
general of Costa Rica, who was the prosecutor in charge of the criminal prosecution
against Osvaldo Villalobos, testified that only 300 persons chose to avail themselves
of this procedure.° It is not clear whether the reason for this limited participation was
the desire of most depositors to avoid the scrutiny of governmental and tax authorities
or their belief that such participation would be futile in terms of actually securing a
repayment of the funds that they had deposited with the brothers. As with the collapse
of any Ponzi scheme, relatively few assets remained under the control of the court to
satisfy even this relatively small number of claimants who participated in the criminal

proceeding.

28. The Claimants, considering that they have lost their deposits with the Villalbos
brothers, commenced this arbitration against the Costa Rican government for
compensation for their loss on the grounds that such loss had been caused by various
actions or omissions of the government of Costa Rica in violation of the Canada-

Costa Rica BIT.

* Decision of the Third Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica, June 2, 2008 (Respondent’s Exhibit R-84),
° Testimony of Walter Espinoza, Hearing Transcript, August 4, 2009, at page 382 line 3,

Il.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

In response to the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, the Respondent contends that
ICSID and this Tribunal lack jurisdiction to hear this dispute. In support of its
position, the Respondent advances five distinct jurisdictional objections, as well as an

admissibility objection to Claimants’ claim on expropriation.

The Respondent’s first jurisdictional objection is that none of the deposits made by
the Claimants with the Villalobos brothers constitute an “investment”, as that term is
defined in Article I of the BIT. Therefore, the Claimants are not entitled to seek the
protection of the BIT for the funds that they have allegedly lost as a result of their
participation in the Villalobos scheme since a tribunal under Article XII of the BIT

only has jurisdiction to hear disputes concerning “investments.”

The Respondent’s second jurisdictional objection is that certain of the Claimants are
not “investors” for purposes of Article I(h) of the BIT, which grants standing to bring

a claim against a BIT contracting state only to persons who are investors.

The Respondent’s third jurisdictional objection is that the Claimants’ claims arising
out of the search and seizure of Villalobos assets by Costa Rica, which Claimants
allege constituted an unlawful expropriation and denial of due process, are barred by
Article XII(3)(d) of the BIT which provides that a Canadian investor may submit a
claim against Costa Rica only if “no judgment has been rendered by a Costa Rican
court regarding the measure that is alleged to be a breach of this agreement.”
Respondent contends that Costa Rican Courts have authorized and subsequently

ratified the seizure of the Villalobos assets by the authorities of that country.

The Respondent’s fourth jurisdictional objection is that the majority of the claims in
this case are untimely and therefore barred by either Article XII(3)(c) or Article XV
of the BIT.

The Respondent’s fifth and final jurisdictional objection is that any claims of the

Claimants based on alleged violations of international agreements other than the BIT

35.

IV.

36.

37.

38.

39.

'° Article XII(3) of the BIT provides that

or of Costa Rican law are not covered by the BIT and its dispute settlement

provisions.

The Respondent also alleges that the Claimants’ claims of expropriation are
inadmissible and premature since the necessary procedural requirements have not

been fulfilled.

CLAIMANTS’ OPPOSITION TO OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

Claimants argue that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain the present case on the
basis that jurisdiction has to be determined on a prima facie standard and issues of

admissibility should not be decided as a preliminary matter.

Claimants reject Respondent’s main objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal,
arguing: (i) that they made an investment under Article I (g) of the BIT; (ii) that they
are “investors” under Article I(h) of the BIT; (iii) that all claims are timely and
complied with any necessary procedures under the BIT and (iv) that their claims are

not barred by the procedural requirement of Article XII (3)(d) of the BIT.'°

According to the Claimants, the funds provided to the Villalobos brothers are
“investments” as they fall within the examples listed in Article I (g)(i)(vi) of the BIT
and they meet the general definition of “investments” provided by that same Article I.
They also argue that the said funds are not within the exceptions listed in Article I(g).
They affirm that their investments were made in accordance with Costa Rican law

and within the territory of Costa Rica.

In reference to objections ratione personae, Claimants argue that all Claimants are
Canadian nationals, some of whom invested in Costa Rica indirectly through non-
Canadian holding companies owned and controlled by them. They also maintain that
Canadian successors of deceased investors have standing as investors under the BIT,

and they assert no claims on behalf of prospective investors.

  

“An investor may submit a dispute as referred to in paragraph (1) to arbitration in accordance with

paragraph (4) only if: ..(d) in cases where Costa Rica is a party to the dispute, no judgment has been rendered by a Costa Rican court regarding
the measure that is alleged to be in breach of this Agreement...”

40.

Al.

42.

Vv.

43.

Concerning objections ratione temporis, Claimants considered that none of their
claims are barred by Article XV which provides that “This Agreement shall apply to
any investment made by an investor of one contracting Party in the territory of the

other Contracting Party before or after the entry into force of this Agreement...”.

They also maintain that all of their claims were submitted within the limitation period
provided by Article XII(3) and that all Claimants filed the notices required under
Article XII(2) of the BIT. Claimants also argued that Article XII(2) is procedural in
nature and not jurisdictional. They assert that obligations under Article XII (2) and

Article XII (3) are independent.

Finally, Claimants argue that their expropriation claims are admissible on the basis
that at the time of submitting their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, six and a half years had elapsed since Costa Rican authorities seized
the assets of the Villalobos brothers without making these assets available to satisfy
the claims of their creditors, including those of the Claimants. Claimants who
participated in criminal proceedings against Osvaldo Villalobos have been unable to
collect any of the seized assets. Thus, Claimants argue that the exhaustion of Costa
Rican legal proceedings by those Claimants who did not participate in such criminal

proceedings would be futile.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS

At the outset, it should be noted that each of the five jurisdictional objections
advanced by the Respondent would, if established, have differing potential effects on
this case. A finding by the Tribunal in support of the first jurisdictional objection
would constitute a complete bar to the entire case advanced by all 137 Claimants,
since each of them must establish that they have an “investment”, as that term is
defined by the BIT, in order to bring an arbitration against Costa Rica. On the other
hand, a finding by this Tribunal in support of any or all of the other four jurisdictional
objections would have the result that this Tribunal would lack jurisdiction only with

respect to certain Claimants or certain issues that they advance. In view of the

44.

4S.

46.

importance and all-encompassing nature of the Respondent’s first jurisdictional

objection, the Tribunal will address that objection first.

For the Tribunal to have jurisdiction in this case, each of the Claimants, under Article
XII(2) has the burden to demonstrate, inter alia that he or she is “an investor” as

defined in Article I(h) of the BIT. An “investor” under Article I(h) of the BIT means:

“ (i) any natural person possessing the citizenship of one Contracting Party who is not

also a citizen or the other Contracting Party; or

(ii) any enterprise as defined by paragraph (b) of this Article, incorporated or duly

constituted in accordance with the applicable laws of one Contracting Party;

who owns or controls an investment made in the territory of the other Contracting

Party.”

Thus, in addition to their nationality, the Canadian Claimants must demonstrate that
they own or control an “investment,” as that term is defined in the BIT, in the

territory of Costa Rica.

Article I(g) of the Canada-Costa Rica BIT states: “ ‘investment’ means any kind of
asset owned or controlled either directly, or indirectly through an enterprise or natural
person of a third State, by an investor of one Contracting Party in the territory of the
other Contracting Party in accordance with the latter’s laws...” It then provides that
“investment” includes, “though not exclusively”, six listed categories of assets,
including (i) movable and immovable property and related property rights; (ii) shares,
stocks, bonds and debentures or any other form of participation in an enterprise; (iii)
money, claims to money, and claims to performance under contract having a financial
value; (iv) goodwill; (v) intellectual property rights; and (vi) rights conferred by law
or under contract, to undertake any economic and commercial activity, including any
rights to search for, cultivate, extract, or exploit natural resources. Article I(g) also
stipulates that certain types of assets are not included within the meaning of

investment. These include “real estate or other property not acquired in the

17

expectation or used for the purpose of economic benefit or other business purposes”
and “claims to money that arise solely from: (i) commercial contracts for the sale of
goods or services ... ; or (ii) the extension of credit in connection with a commercial

transaction...”"!

47. Thus, in order for this Tribunal to have jurisdiction over this dispute, the Claimants
must, at a minimum, establish that their deposits and resulting legal relationship with
the Villalobos brothers constituted “investments” as the term is defined by the
Canada-Costa Rica BIT. To do that, they must show that their deposits had three

characteristics:

 

1) that the deposits constituted “assets” under the BIT; 2) that the
Claimants owned or controlled those assets in the territory of Costa Rica in
accordance with Costa Rica law; and 3) that if the deposits satisfied these two
characteristics they did not fall within those categories of assets that the BIT
expressly excludes from the definition of investment. Thus, in order to find that the
Claimants’ deposits and resulting relationships with the Villalobos brothers
constituted an investment, the Tribunal at the outset must answer two basic questions
in the affirmative: A) Did the Claimants’ deposits and resulting legal relationships
with one or both of the Villalobos brothers constitute “assets” within the meaning of

"' The full text of Article I (g) of the Canada-Costa Rica BIT is as follows:

“(g) “investment” means any kind of asset owned or controlled either directly, or indirectly through an enterprise or natural person of a third
1g Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party in accordance with the latter's laws and, in

 

 

    
 

ble and immovable property and any related property ri
sock, bonds and debentures or any other form of parti

 

such as mortgay
ation in an enterps

liens or pledges;

 
  
 

 
 

ial value;

  

ind claims to performance under contract having a finan
gon
v. intellectual property rights;
vi. rights, conferred by law or under contract, to undertake any economic and commercial activity, including any rights to

search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resourc
but does not mean real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, not acquired in the expectation or used for the purpose of
economic benefit or other business purposes
For further certainty, investment does not mean, claims to money that arise solely from:
i, commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or enterprise in the territory of one Contracting Party to
a national or an enterprise in the territory of the other Contracting Party;
ii, the extension of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such as trade financing, where the original maturity of
the loan is less than three years.
Without prejudice to subparagraph (ji) immediately above, a loan to an enterprise where the enterprise is an affiliate of the investor
shall be considered an investment.
For purposes of this Agreement, an investor s
majority of the board of directors or otherwise to leg
the form of an investment does not

 

 

    

   

 

ll be considered to control an investment if the investor has the power to name a
ly direct the actions of the enterprise which owns the investment,

fect its character as an investment.

ty, returns shall be considered a component of investment. For the purpose of this Agreement, “returns” means all
amounts yielded by an investment, as defined above, covered by this Agreement and in particular, though not exclusively, includes
terest, capital gains, dividends, royalties, fees or other current income.”

   

     

 

 

the BIT?; and B) If so, did the Claimants own or control those assets “in accordance

with the laws of...” Costa Rica?

A) Did the Claimants’ Deposits and Resulting Legal Relationships with either or
both of the Villalobos brothers constitute “assets” under the BIT?

48. The Canada-Costa Rica BIT does not define the meaning of the word “asset.” The
French version of the BIT refers to “Jes avoirs de toute nature” and the official
Spanish version refers to “cualquier tipo de activo. The French word “avoirs” is
usually translated into English as “asset” and the Spanish word “activo” is also
translated in English as asset. In English, the ordinary meaning of the word “asset” is
“anything of value” or a “valuable item that is owned.”'? The Oxford English
Dictionary defines “asset” as “an item of value owned” and Webster’s Deluxe
Unabridged Dictionary (2" ed.) defines asset as “anything owned that has exchange

value” or a “valuable or desirable thing to have.” 8

49. On the basis of these definitions, one can say that a Claimant’s deposit of funds
resulting in an obligation of Enrique Villalobos to pay interest and principal was an
asset since it constituted a thing of value owned by that Claimant. As a result of
transferring their funds to Villalobos, the Claimants obtained a promise from Enrique
Villalobos to repay the principal amount under certain conditions and further to pay
the Claimants a specific amount of interest each month. That asset, embodied in an
agreement with Villalobos, promised them a specific return each month according to
a pre-determined interest rate and the right to the repayment of their principal deposit
upon stated conditions including notice. In fact, many of the Claimants received and
withdrew periodic payments of funds from their accounts with the Villalobos

brothers.

© The American Heritage jonary (2" ed). Note by the Tribunal: in the Spanish version of the Award, the definition of the Spanish word
“activo” is provided from the Diccionario de la Real Academia Espanola 22" ed).

® Note by the Tribunal: in the Spanish version of the Award, the equivalent definitions are provided from the Pequeftio Larousse Iustrado (2010).

 

50.

51.

52.

53.

That being so, it is clear to the Tribunal that the obligations of Enrique Villalobos to
the Claimants as a result of their deposit of funds constituted “assets” owned by the

Claimants within the meaning of the Canada-Costa Rica BIT.

B) Did the Claimants Own and Control Their Assets In Accordance with the

Laws of Costa Rica?

Under the BIT, not only must the Claimants demonstrate that they own the assets
which they assert constitutes an investment, but they must also demonstrate that they
own or control those assets in accordance with the laws of Costa Rica. The French
text of the BIT requires that the investments be owned “en conformité avec les lois”
and the Spanish version specifies that the asset must be owned “de acuerdo con la

legislacion.”

In interpreting the phrases “owned or controlled” and “in accordance with the

..laws...,” it should first be emphasized that the BIT states this requirement in
objective and categorical terms. Each Claimant must meet this requirement,
regardless of his or her knowledge of the law or his or her intention to follow the law.
Thus, the Claimants’ statements that they intended to follow the law or that they did
not know the law are irrelevant to a determination of whether they actually owned or

controlled their investments in accordance with the laws of Costa Rica.

Not all BITs contain a requirement that investments subject to treaty protection be
“made” or “owned” in accordance with the law of the host country. The fact that the
Contracting Parties to the Canada-Costa Rica BIT specifically included such a
provision is a clear indication of the importance that they attached to the legality of
investments made by investors of the other Party and their intention that their laws
with respect to investments be strictly followed. The assurance of legality with
respect to investment has important, indeed crucial, consequences for the public

welfare and economic well-being of any country.

20

54. In order to prevent economic hardship to individual citizens and reduce the risk of
financial crises, governments ordinarily seek to protect the savings of the public from
fraud and other harms that can do significant injury not only to individuals but to the
economy as a whole. They therefore seek to achieve this objective by regulating the
actions of individuals and companies who would raise capital from the public or
otherwise seek to serve as financial intermediaries.'* One means employed by Costa
Rica to protect the public savings is the Organic Law of the Central Bank of Costa
Rica, one of whose objectives, according to Article 2(d), is “to promote a stable,
efficient, and competitive system of financial intermediation.” Toward this end,
Article 116 of the Law provides that the only entities that may engage in financial
intermediation in the country are those that are expressly authorized to do so by law.
Furthermore, Article 157 makes it a crime to engage in financial intermediation

without authorization.

55. By actively seeking and accepting deposits from the Claimants and several thousand
other persons, the Villalobos brothers were engaged in financial intermediation
without authorization by the Central Bank or any other government body as required
by law. The courts of Costa Rica after a lengthy and extensive legal process
determined that Osvaldo Villalobos, because of his involvement in the scheme,
committed aggravated fraud and illegal financial intermediation. In securing
investments from the Claimants, the Villalobos brothers were thus clearly not acting
in accordance with the laws of Costa Rica. The entire transaction between the
Villalobos brothers and each Claimant was illegal because it violated the Organic
Law of the Central Bank. If the transaction by which the Villalobos acquired the
deposit was illegal, it follows that the acquisition by each Claimant of the asset
resulting from that transaction was also not in accordance with the law of Costa Rica.
Although the Claimants may not have committed a crime by entering into a

transaction with the Villalobos,’ the fact that they gained ownership of the asset in

See for example the United States Securities Act of 1933 which regulates the sale to the public of a “security,” which includes a wide range of
financial instruments

'S Ley Orgdnica del Banco Central de Costa Rica No. 7558 (Respondent's Exhibit R-40).

"© Costa Rica has not prosecuted the Claimants for their participation in the Villalobos scheme. At the Jurisdictional Hearing, the auxiliary

21

56.

57.

violation of the Organic Law of the Central Bank means that their ownership was not
in accordance with the laws of Costa Rica and that therefore each of their deposits
and resulting relationships with Villalobos did not constitute an “investment” under

the BIT.

Claimants’ counsel argued that in judging whether the Claimants’ deposits were
owned in accordance with the laws of Costa Rica, this Tribunal should look only to
whether the Claimants ownership rights in their claim to be paid the agreed-upon
interest and principal were legal obligations under Costa Rican law. By accepting the
deposits under the conditions outlined earlier in this decision, Enrique Villalobos
clearly became subject to that legal obligation. However, this Tribunal believes that
the approach suggested by Claimants’ counsel is too narrow and not a correct
interpretation of the treaty language “owned ... in accordance with the law” of Costa

Rica.

The ordinary dictionary meaning of the verb “own” is “to have or hold a property”!

or “to have or possess a property.”'* In order to determine whether the ownership of a
property is in accordance with the law of a particular country, one must of necessity
examine how the possession or ownership of that property was acquired and in
particular whether the process by which that possession or ownership was acquired
complied with all of the prevailing laws. In the present case, it is clear that that the
transaction by which the Claimants obtained ownership of their assets (i.e. their claim
to be paid interest and principal by Enrique Villalobos) did not comply with the
requirements of the Organic Law of the Central Bank of Costa Rica and that therefore
the Claimants did not own their investment in accordance with the laws of Costa
Rica. That being the case, the obligations of the Villalobos brother held by the

Claimants do not constitute “investments” under the Canada-Costa Rica BIT and

 

 

attomey general of Costa Rica, Walter Espinoza, stated; “From our point of view, they [the Claimants] did not violate criminal law.” Transcript,
Hearing on Jurisdiction, Tuesday, August 4, 2009, p. 430.
"" Webster's Third New International Dictionary. Note by the Tribunal: in the Spanish version of the Award, the definition of the Spanish word

ovided from the Diccionario de la Real Academia Espafiola (22" ed).
n Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (2” ed.). Note by the Tribunal: in the Spanish version of the Award, the definition

of the Spanish word “poser” is provided from the Pequefio Larousse Ilustrado (2010).

22

58.

59.

60.

61.

therefore this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the Claimants’ claims against Costa

Rica under the BIT.

The Tribunal’s interpretation of the words “owned in accordance with the laws” of
Costa Rica reflects both sound public policy and sound investment practice. Costa
Rica, indeed any country, has a fundamental interest in securing respect for its law. It
clearly sought to secure that interest by requiring investments under the BIT to be
owned and controlled according to law. At the same time, prudent investment practice
requires that any investor exercise due diligence before committing funds to any
particular investment proposal. An important element of such due diligence is for
investors to assure themselves that their investments comply with the law. Such due
diligence obligation is neither overly onerous nor unreasonable. Based on the
evidence presented to the Tribunal, it is clear that the Claimants did not exercise the
kind of due diligence that reasonable investors would have undertaken to assure
themselves that their deposits with the Villalobos scheme were in accordance with the

laws of Costa Rica.

On the basis of the foregoing analysis, the Tribunal concludes that the Respondent’s
objection to jurisdiction on the ground that the Claimants did not own or control
investments in accordance with the law of Costa Rica is established and that this

Tribunal is therefore without jurisdiction to hear and decide the Claimants’ claims.

In view of the fact that the Tribunal’s decision on the Respondent’s first objection to
jurisdiction is established and justifies a complete dismissal of the Claimants’ case,
the Tribunal does not consider it necessary or appropriate to consider and decide upon

the other objections to jurisdiction and admissibility raised by the Respondent.

For the reasons presented and pursuant to Article 45 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules,
the Tribunal decides to accept the first objection to jurisdiction raised by the
Respondent, and it therefore dismisses the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration on the

ground that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction “ratione materiae” to hear the dispute

23

which it presents. Therefore and pursuant to Article 44 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules,

the Tribunal declares the proceedings closed.

Costs

 

62. Article 58(1) of the Arbitration (AF) Rules provides: “Unless parties otherwise agree,
the Tribunal shall decide how and by whom the fees and expenses of the members of
the Tribunal, the expenses and charges of the Secretariat and the expenses incurred by
the parties in connection with the proceeding shall be borne.” The Tribunal thus has
discretion to determine the apportionment of costs between the parties. The Tribunal
notes that in reference to the allocation of costs, the practice of ICSID investment
arbitration differs from commercial arbitration, which tends to award costs to the
successful party.'? Most ICSID tribunals have determined that each party should bear
its own costs.”° In a few recent investment arbitration cases the principle that “costs
follow the event” has been followed by tribunals, which have determined that the
losing party should bear all or part of the costs of the proceeding and counsel fees.”!
Such departures from the established previous trend have been justified by tribunals

in light of the existence of special reasons or circumstances.

63. In the present case, the Tribunal, in concluding that Claimants’ claims lacked
jurisdiction ratione materiae, based its reasoning on a strict interpretation and
application of the BIT to the facts alleged by the Claimants. In evaluating the facts
presented, the Tribunal has found no evidence for concluding that special
circumstances exist, such as procedural misconduct, the existence of a frivolous
claim, or an abuse of the BIT process or of the international investment protection

regime.

” EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania (ICSID Case No ARB/05/13), Award of October 8, 2009, para. 322. See also Article 40(1) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules which provides: “...the costs of arbitration shall in principle be borne by the unsuccessful party. However, the
arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the
circumstances of the case.”

See i.e. Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of August 30, 2000; Tradex Hellas
(Greece) v. Albania (ICSID Case No, ARB/94/2), Award of April 29, 1999; ADF Group v. United States of America (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF\/00/1), Award of January 9, 2003; Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22),
Award of July 24, 2008.

> Phoenix Action Lid v. the Czech Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/05), Award of April 15, 2009

 

24

64.

VII.

65.

66.

In consequence of the above, the Tribunal, in the application of its discretionary
powers conferred by Article 58(1) of the ICSID (AF) Rules concludes that there are
no special circumstances that justify a departure from the accepted and rational
practice that each party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses and share equally

in the costs and charges of the Tribunal and the ICSID Secretariat.

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL

For reasons stated in the foregoing paragraphs and pursuant to Article 45 of the

Arbitration (AF) Rules, the Tribunal decides with unanimity that:

a) the Respondent’s preliminary objection ratione materiae to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction must be accepted on grounds that the deposits made by the Claimants
with the Villalobos brothers did not constitute an “investment” as that term is defined

in Article I of the Canada-Costa Rica BIT;

b) the Tribunal is accordingly without jurisdiction to entertain the dispute submitted

to it either in part or in whole; and

c) the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration is therefore dismissed in its entirety.

The Tribunal further decides that:

(a) The costs of the proceedings including the fees and expenses of the Arbitrators

and the Secretariat shall be shared by the Parties in equal portion; and that

(b) Each Party shall bear its own costs and expenses in respect of legal fees for their
counsel and their respective costs for the preparation of the written and the oral

proceedings.

25

     

hegurtddle SLO
AT: -~___ 7
Prof. Jeswald W. Salacuse Prof. Raul E. Vinuesa

Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: April 29,2010 Date: May 10, 2000

Nhe wlan

Dr. Sandra Morelli Rico
President of the Tribunal

Date: May 4,20 to

  

26

VIII. ANNEX A

List of one hundred and thirty seven (137) original Claimants attached to the letter sent
by the ICSID Secretary-General on March 27, 2007, accompanying the Notice of
Registration, by which ICSID approved access to the Additional Facility in this case and

registered the Request for Arbitration.

27

Alasdair Ross Anderson
Jeannine Anderson
Letty Anderson
Jean-Claude Barbu
Albert Barkhordarian
Norman A. Barr

Claude Beauchamp
Warren Becker

Michel Jean Bellefeuille
Lance Llewellyn Ralph
Bennett Lance

Charles Bergeron
Claudette Bernard
Susan Frances Berrezueta
Martin Eberhart Borner
Tessa Osbourne Borner
Andrew Leon Bowers
Robert M. Browne
Brian Roy Brownridge
Andrew (Wynne) Burns
Jackie (Jacqueline) Burns
Leonard B. Campbell
Carol Ann Christensen
Robert William Church
William Stewart Clark
Marcel Cloutier

Bruno Collet

Camille D’ Amour
Gilles Delamirande
Elmer Freeman Dow
Gladys Irene Dow
Kimberly Karmen Dow
William Eugene Draper
James Elmaleh

Neil Emerson

Janet L. Empey

Arnold Eric Flather
Patricia Lucie Fleming
Daniel Fontaine

Hazel Vaughan Forte
Raynald Paul Forte
Diane — Alexis Fournier
Diane Fraser

Patricia Glennie

Peter Jeffrey Glennie
Georges-Aimé Gouin
Serge Guay

Louise Hamel

Andre Hebert

LIST OF CLAIMANTS

50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
7S.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.

Francois Hebert

Pierre Hebert

Serge Hebert

Diane Hebert-Barbu
Richard Norman Herring
Lee Hineson

Edward J. Horvath
Gerald Walter Hunter
Shirley Hupp

Paul Hutt

Michael William Imbery
Gordon Jerry Jantzi
Marcel Jette

Shell Axel Johanson
Desiree Kantrim

Franz Kargl

Amy Teresa Khoo

Peter G. Kinzie

Dale Bruce Laverne Klassen
Rosemarie Elaine Klassen
Kathleen Beverly Knorr
Reinhold Knorr

Howard Lewis Krangle
Dennis Wayne Kurek
Rita Kurek

Stanley Kurek

Maurice Wilfrid Laframboise
Carole Lagace

Rejean Lagace
Marie-France Lamarche
Gisele Laurin Lavoie
Louise Lebeau

Dollard LeBlanc
Madeleine LeBlanc
Richard Lecavalier
Daniel Lefebvre

Robert Legault

Timothe Levesque
Jeffrey H. Macleod

Paul Mainville

Pierre Maltais

Michel A. Messier
David Elliott Milgram
Stanley Mracek

Patrick Murphy

Milton Daniel Oliver
Roger Ouellette

Robert Palmer

Jean Paquette

99.

100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
11.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131.
132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.

Pierrette Paquette
Marthe Paquin

Jamie Norman Payton
Beverly Joyce Penner

J. Heinrich Penner
Donna Potuzak

Robert Potuzak

Patrick Racicot

Luis Ramirez

Earl Reinboldt

Joyce Marie Renouf Fertig
Marie Ange Rice

Eric William Robinson
Daniel Stacey Roussel
Roger Allen Sanderson
Bradley Paul Sanson
Pierre Savignac

Edward William Saville
Jean Adonai Sicotte
Arthur Splett

Rick Splett

Gregory W. Spottiswood
Alfred Stopp

Luc Tessier

William B. Thorkelson
Alain Truchon

Anthony Adrian Van Leest
Margaret Van Leest
Herman Tjalke Vandonselaar
Gregory Gordon Warrian
Sheila Rae Warrian
Michael John Williams
Alan Reid Wilson

Albert Ross Wilson
Graham Wilson

James P. Wilson

Joan Frances Wilson
Sheila Wilson

Keith Woolford

