INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR
SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
(ICSID)

 

In the Matter of the Arbitration between

ALEX GENIN, EASTERN CREDIT LIMITED, INC.
AND A.S. BALTOIL

and

THE REPUBLIC OF ESTONIA

Case No. ARB/99/2

 

AWARD

Date of dispatch to the Parties: June 25, 2001

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

President: Mr. L. Yves FORTIER, C.C., Q.C.
Members of the Tribunal: Professor Meir HETH

Professor Albert Jan VAN DEN BERG
Secretary of the Tribunal: Mr. Alejandro A. Escobar

In Case No. ARB/99/2

BETWEEN:

Alex Genin,

Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and

A.S. Baltoil

Represented by:

Mr. Kurt Arbuckle

of the law firm Kurt Arbuckle, PC., as counsel
CLAIMANTS

And

The Republic of Estonia

Represented by:

Mr. Martin D. Beirne, Mr. Michael J. Stanley
and Mr. Christopher Bell

of the law firm Beirne, Maynard & Parsons, LLP
and

Mr. Allen B. Green

of the law firm Howrey & Simon, as counsel

RESPONDENT

AWARD

Oo

G.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INSTITUTION OF PROCEEDINGS
THE B.LT.

1) General Description
2) Relevant Provisions of the BIT Invoked by the Parties

THE FIRST SESSION OF THE TRIBUNAL
THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION
FACTUAL BACKGROUND TO THE ARBITRATION

1) Dramatis Personae
2) The Facts Giving Rise to the Dispute
3) Relevant Provisions of Estonian Law

THE WRITTEN PROCEDURE

1) Claimants’ Memorial

2)  Respondent’s Counter-Memorial
3) Claimants’ Response

4)  Respondent’s Rejoinder

THE ORAL PROCEDURE
1) Claimants’ Evidence
2) — Respondent’s Evidence

POST-HEARING SUBMISSIONS
1) Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial
2)  Respondent’s Post-Hearing Memorial

ISSUES AND ANALYSIS

1) Jurisdictional Issues

2) The Koidu Branch Purchase and its Aftermath
3) The Revocation of EIB’s License

4) The “Harassment” Claim

5)  Respondent’s Counterclaim

COSTS
AWARD

Page

a

aAuw

10

11
15

19
19
28
48
50

53
53
55

57
57
66

74
76
81
84
93
93

95
96

4 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

THE TRIBUNAL
Composed as above,
After deliberation,

Makes the following Award:

A. INSTITUTION OF PROCEEDINGS

1. By letter dated 11 March 1999, the International Centre for Settle-
ment of Investment Disputes (the “Centre” or “ICSID”) acknowledged
receipt of a Request for Arbitration dated 2 February 1999 (the “Request”)
from Mr. Alex Genin, a national of the United States of America; Eastern
Credit Limited, Inc., a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State
of Texas; and A.S. Baltoil, an Estonian company wholly-owned by Eastern
Credit (collectively, the “Claimants”).

2. The Request stated that Claimants wished to institute arbitration
proceedings against the Republic of Estonia (the “Respondent” or “Estonia”),
under the terms of a Bilateral Investment Treaty! entered into by the U.S. and
Estonia on 19 April 1994 and in effect as of 16 February 1997 (the “BIT”).

3. In their Request, the Claimants declared that an investment dispute
had arisen as a result of Respondent’s conduct, comprising violations of
numerous provisions of the BIT, in relation to Claimants’ investment in
Estonian Innovation Bank, a financial institution incorporated under the
laws of Estonia.

4, In the Centre’s letter of 11 March 1999 acknowledging receipt of
Claimants’ Request (copy of which was sent to Respondent, enclosing the
Request) ICSID requested from Claimants additional information
concerning the nature of the dispute alleged by them as well as regarding the

Treaty Between the Government of the Republic of Estonia and the Government of the
United States of America for the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, done
at Washington, D.C. on 19 April 1994. (See Part B of this Award for a description of the BIT
and its relevant provisions.)

AWARD 5

ownership of Estonian Innovation Bank at the time of the dispute. This
information was provided to the Centre by Claimants, in letters dated 6 and
14 April 1999.

5. By letter dated 6 May 1999, the Centre requested confirmation from
Claimants that the dispute covered by the Request related exclusively to
investments owned or controlled by Claimants. Confirmation was provided
by Claimants on the same date.

6. On 12 May 1999, the Secretary-General of ICSID transmitted to the
parties a Notice of Registration, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States (the “Convention”) and Rules 6(1)(a) and 7(a) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings, stating that the Request had been registered in the Centre's
Arbitration Register on 12 May 1999.

7. The Arbitral Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) was duly constituted on
21 September 1999. The Tribunal consists of Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C.,
Q.C. (nominated jointly by the two party-appointed arbitrators) as Presi-
dent, Professor Meir Heth (nominated by Claimants) and Professor Albert
Jan van den Berg (nominated by Respondent).

8. In the absence of any agreed request by the parties to vary the rules
of procedure laid down in the Convention and the ICSID Rules of Procedure
for Arbitration Proceedings, in effect from 26 September 1984 (the “Arbitra-
tion Rules”), the Tribunal has followed the direction provided in Article 44
of the Convention, to the effect that the proceedings shall be conducted in
accordance with Section 3 of Chapter IV of the Convention and the Arbitra-
tion Rules.

B. THE B.L.T.
1) General Description

9. The BIT is a bilateral investment treaty between the U.S. and the
Republic of Estonia. It entered into effect on 16 February 1997.

6 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

10. The objectives of the BIT, as delineated in its preamble, include
economic co-operation, increased flow of capital, a stable framework for
investment, development of economic and business ties, respect for inter-
nationally-recognised worker rights, and maximum efficiency in the use
of economic resources.

2) Relevant Provisions of the BIT Invoked by the Parties

11. The following constitutes a brief summary of the provisions of the
BIT invoked by the parties in this arbitration.

12. Article I sets out the definitions used in the BIT, including “invest-

ment”, “national” and “state enterprise”.

13. Article IT deals with the Parties’ obligations with respect to the treat-
ment of investments.

¢ Article II, Paragraph 2 (b) requires the Parties to ensure that the
conduct of governmental authority by a State enterprise is done in
a manner that is not inconsistent with the Party’s obligations under
the Treaty.

¢ Article II, Paragraph 3 (a) provides for the “fair and equitable” treat-
ment of investments and states that no investment shall be accorded
treatment less favourable than that required by international law.

¢ Article II, Paragraph 3 (b) prohibits the Parties from impairing by
arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management, operation,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or disposal of
investments.

¢ Article II, Paragraph 3 (c) provides for the respect of obligations
entered into with regard to investments.

¢ Article II, Paragraph 7 declares that each Party must provide effec-
tive means of asserting rights and claims with respect to invest-
ments, investment agreements and investment authorisations.

¢ Article II, Paragraph 8 requires that all laws, regulations, adminis-
trative practices and procedures, as well as adjudicative decisions
that pertain to or affect investments, be duly published.

AWARD 7

¢ Article II, Paragraph 11 prohibits interference with the granting of
rights under licenses and requires that nationals and companies of
either Party receive the better of national or most favoured nation
treatment with respect to certain activities associated with their
investment.

14. — Article II incorporates into the BIT the international law rules and
standards relating to expropriation and compensation.

¢ Article III, Paragraph 1 requires that an expropriation be done for
a public purpose; in a non-discriminatory manner; with payment
of prompt, adequate and effective compensation; and that it meet
the requirements of due process and the general principles of “fair
and equitable” treatment provided for in Article II, Paragraph 3 of
the BIT.

¢ Article III, Paragraph 2 requires the availability of prompt and
effective judicial or administrative review of claims relating to an
expropriation.

15. Article IV protects investors from certain government exchange
controls limiting current account and capital account transfers.

¢ Article IV, Paragraph 1 provides for the free transfer of investments.

16. Article VI deals with State-investor dispute resolution and defines
the term “investment dispute”.

17. Article IX reserves the right of a Party to take measures for the main-
tenance of public order and the fulfilment of its obligations to international
peace and security, including such measures as it considers necessary for the
protection of its own essential security interests.

¢ Article IX, Paragraph 2 prohibits the imposition of formal require-
ments that impair substantive rights under the BIT.

18. Article XII applies the Treaty to all investments that existed at the
time the Treaty became effective.

8 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

C. THE FIRST SESSION OF THE TRIBUNAL

19. By agreement of the parties, the First Session of the Arbitral Tribunal
was held on 12 October 1999, in Zurich, Switzerland, in accordance with,
and within the period set out in, Rule 13(1) of the Arbitration Rules.

20. At that Session, the parties confirmed that the Tribunal had been
properly constituted in accordance with the Convention and the Arbitration
Rules.

21. | Among the procedural and other matters addressed at the First
Session of the Tribunal, it was confirmed that the language of the proceed-
ings would be English and that the place of the proceedings would be Wash-
ington, D.C., the seat of the Centre.

22. It was also confirmed that the proceedings would comprise a written
procedure followed by an oral procedure.

23. At the First Session of the Tribunal, counsel for Respondent
informed the Tribunal of Estonia’s position to the effect that the Tribunal
lacked jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute as alleged by Claimants.” For
their part, Claimants rejected the merits of Estonia’s objection to jurisdic-
tion and argued that, in any event, the issue of jurisdiction and the
Tribunal’s consideration of the issue should be joined to the merits of the
dispute.

24. Following counsel’s presentations, and after deliberation among the
members of the Tribunal, the President informed the parties of the Tribunal’s
decision to establish a written and oral phase for the hearing of Respondent's
objection to jurisdiction as a preliminary matter, and a schedule was fixed, as
follows:

* 12 November 1999, for Respondent to file its Memorial in support

of its objection to jurisdiction;

2 Respondent's intention to raise this preliminary issue had previously been communi-
cated to the Centre in letters dated 6 April, 14 April, 12 May and 5 October 1999.

AWARD 9

* 13 December 1999, for Claimants to file their Memorial in
response to Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction; and

* 8 January 2000 for the oral hearing on jurisdiction, in London,
U.K.

D. THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION

25. In accordance with the schedule set by the Tribunal at its First
Session, an oral hearing took place on 8 January 2000, in London, U.K., on
the objection to jurisdiction raised by Respondent.

26. As submitted by counsel for Respondent, and as previously set out in
writing in Respondent's 12 November 1999 Memorial on jurisdiction,
Estonia advanced two principal grounds in support of its objection to juris-
diction, namely, that the matters alleged by Claimants had been “fully, finally
and fairly” litigated before the courts and administrative agencies of Estonia,
and that the facts do not evidence an “investment dispute” under the BIT
given Claimants’ de minimis interests in EIB. Both of these arguments were
strenuously contested by Claimants.

27. After deliberation, the President of the Tribunal delivered orally, on
8 January 2000, the Tribunal’s unanimous decision to the effect that Respon-
dent’s objection to jurisdiction was not ripe for decision and would, there-
fore, be joined to the Tribunal’s consideration of the merits of the dispute.

28. As regards the timetable for the arbitration of the merits, after consul-
tation with the parties, the Tribunal established the following schedule prior
to the close of the 8 January 2000 hearing:

* 23 March 2000, for the filing of Claimants’ Memorial on the merits;

* 16 June 2000, for the filing of Respondent’s Memorial (“Counter-
Memorial”) on the merits;

* 17 July 2000, for the filing of Claimants’ Response; and
* 17 August 2000, for the filing of Respondent's Rejoinder.

10 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

29. In addition, the Tribunal set the date of 2 October 2000 for the
commencement of the oral hearing on the merits, in Washington, D.c?3

E. FACTUAL BACKGROUND TO THE ARBITRATION
1) Dramatis Personae
Corporate Entities

30. Estonian Innovation Bank (“EIB”) is a financial institution incorporated
under the laws of Estonia. Its principal shareholders during the period relevant
to the arbitration were A.S. Baltoil, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and Eurocapital.

31. AS. Baltoil (“Baltoil”) is an Estonian company wholly-owned by
Eastern Credit, which in turn is owned by Mr. Genin.

32. Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. (“Eastern Credit”) is a corporation incor-
porated under the laws of the State of Texas, USA, and owned by Mr. Genin.

33.  “Eurocapital”, as used in this Award, refers both to Eurocapital
Group Limited (“Eurocapital Ltd.”) and Eurocapital Group Company
(“Eurocapital Co.”), an Isle of Man corporation, incorporated in 1988. As
stated by Mr. Genin during his testimony in the arbitration,* the two are in
fact the same company, of which Mr. Genin is the beneficial owner of all of
the outstanding (bearer) shares.

34. Pacific Commercial Credit is a company affiliated to Eurocapital. It
has two shareholders: Eurocapital and Eastern Credit.

35. The Koidu branch of Social Bank (the “Koidu branch”) was a branch
of Estonian Social Bank Limited (“Social Bank”), an insolvent Estonian
financial institution.

3 Prior to the close of the hearing on jurisdiction, the Tribunal also drew the parties’ atten-
tion to several questions that it wished the parties to address in their written submissions on the
merits, including as regards various aspects of Estonian law relevant to the arbitration. These
issues are summarised, below, where the written procedure is reviewed.

4 See Part G, below: “THE ORAL PROCEDURE”

AWARD i

Individuals

36. Mr. Alex Genin is a national of the United States of America. He is
EIB’s Chairman of the Board, as well as the owner, managing director and
sole shareholder of Eastern Credit. As mentioned, Mr. Genin is also the
beneficial owner of all of the outstanding (bearer) shares of Eurocapital.

37. | Mr. Michail Dashkovsky was the President of EIB. He was a share-
holder and the President of Baltoil, and the Claimants’ principal representa-
tive in Estonia.

38. Mr. Peep Sillandi was the President of EIB at the time of the signa-
ture of the Koidu branch Sales Agreement (discussed below). He was
succeeded as President of EIB by Mr. Michail Dashkovsky.

39. Mr. Vahur Kraft is the President of the Bank of Estonia and was its
Vice-President from 1991-1995, including at the time of the signature of the
Koidu branch Sales Agreement. He was previously Deputy Manager of the
Credit Department of Social Bank, from 1991 to 1993, and also worked in
the international department of Social Bank’s main office.

40. Ms. Pilvia Nirgi was the Head of the Banking Supervision Depart-
ment of the Bank of Estonia.

41. Ms. Eve Sirts was the head of the Off-site Supervision Sub-
department of the Banking Supervision Department of the Bank of
Estonia. She was also the Inspector/Share Capital Specialist of the Bank
of Estonia, reporting to Ms. Nirgi at all times relevant to the arbitration.

2) The Facts Giving Rise to the Dispute
42. It is useful to set out here, by way of background, certain facts of a

general nature, largely uncontested, relating to the principal issues in dispute
between the parties.

5 In the following sections of this Award, the parties’ detailed allegations and submissions
of fact and law are summarised.

12 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

43. On 12 August 1994, at an auction conducted by the Bank of Estonia,
the central bank of the Republic of Estonia, EIB agreed to purchase a local
branch of Estonian Social Bank Limited, an insolvent financial institution,
for 3,000,000 Estonian kroons (“EEK”). The branch in question is known
as the “Koidu” branch.

44, On 13 August 1994, a Sales Agreement (the “Koidu branch Sales
Agreement”) was signed by the President of EIB, Mr. Peep Sillandi,® and by
the Vice President of the Bank of Estonia (on behalf of the insolvent Social
Bank), Mr. Vahur Kraft.”

45. On 16 September 1994, EIB informed the Bank of Estonia, in
writing, of discrepancies that it had allegedly uncovered in the Koidu branch
balance sheet that had been furnished to potential purchasers of the branch
prior to the sale. EIB claimed from the Bank of Estonia, as trustee respon-
sible for Social Bank, the losses allegedly suffered by EIB as a result of these
discrepancies.

46. On 2 December 1994, the Bank of Estonia denied any liability for
such discrepancies and for whatever losses may have been suffered by EIB as
a result.

47. On 9 January 1995, EIB sued Social Bank before the City Court of
Tallin (“City Court”), in Estonia, seeking to recover its losses allegedly
caused by misrepresentations in the Koidu branch balance sheet.

48. On 3 May 1995, the City Court entered an order, pursuant to an
agreement between the parties, establishing EIB’s damages in the amount
of 20,977,117 EEK, representing approximately 2,893,991 EEK for non-
existent assets included on the Koidu branch balance sheet, and 18,083,126
EEK for non-performing notes. Certain payments were made by Social Bank
to EIB, leaving a total of 19,491,947 EEK owing.

© Mr. Sillandi was succeeded as President of EIB by Mr. Michael Dashkovsky, In that
capacity, Mr. Dashkovsky represented EIB during the period relevant to the arbitration.

7 Mr. Kraft was later named President of the Bank of Estonia, a position he occupied
throughout much of the period relevant to the arbitration.

AWARD 13,

49. In March 1996, the Bank of Estonia and EIB discussed the possi-
bility of EIB amortising its losses related to the Koidu branch over five years.
As explained more fully below, although Claimants allege that a binding
agreement was reached, Respondent contends that no such agreement was
ever concluded. In any event, in October 1996, the Bank of Estonia required
EIB to write off its Koidu-related losses.

50. On 12 April 1996, EIB and the Bank of Estonia concluded an
agreement—which Respondent claims was merely “tentative’—under the
terms of which EIB was to assign all of its claims against Social Bank to the
Bank of Estonia, in exchange for the latter’s assignment to EIB of various
obligations owed to it by third-party banks. As discussed below, that agree-
ment was never finalised.

51. In August 1996, EIB assigned its outstanding claims relating to the
Koidu branch losses, in the amount of 19,491,947 EEK (US $1,639,344), to
Eastern Credit.® Eastern Credit then proceeded to file a lawsuit in the State
of Texas, U.S.A., seeking, unsuccessfully, to recover those losses from the
Bank of Estonia.”

52. In early 1997, the Bank of Estonia conducted its annual audit of EIB.
In the course of their inspections, the Bank of Estonia’s inspectors requested
EIB to provide various information concerning certain of its shareholders,
including two of the Claimants.

53. On 18 March 1997, the Bank of Estonia issued “Prescription” !? no.
19-2406 (the “March 1997 Prescription”), requiring EIB, Eastern Credit,
Baltoil and Eurocapital Ltd. to apply for qualified holding permits, formally
entitling those entities to hold stock in EIB in accordance with Estonian law.

54. Although EIB claims that it complied with the March 1997
Prescription by submitting the required applications, on 24 March 1997 it

8 A “restated assignment” was entered into in May 1997, to correct certain omissions.
Claimants’ Memorial, para. 134.

? Tn June 1998, the US Court declared that it did not have jurisdiction over the Koidu
branch dispute and dismissed the case, without prejudice.

10 A “prescription” is a form of regulatory order, also referred to in the parties’ submis-
sions as a “precept”.

14 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

nonetheless challenged the validity of the Prescription in the Administrative
Court of Tallin (“Administrative Court”).!!

55. On 21 May 1997, the Bank of Estonia sent a letter to EIB requesting
further detailed information about its shareholders and their affiliates, and
enclosing a list (which the Tribunal shall refer to as the “May 1997 Regula-
tions/Guidelines”) stipulating the information to be provided.

56. On 19 June 1997, Estonian counsel for EIB met with representatives
of the Bank of Estonia to discuss the matter of the March 1997 Prescription
and the 21 May 1997 request for information. As discussed below, Claim-
ants allege that, at that meeting, the Bank of Estonia admitted that its
conduct was motivated by a desire to glean information of use to it in its
defence to the Texas lawsuit.

57. On 9 September 1997, while the proceedings challenging the
18 March 1997 Prescription were pending, the Council of the Bank of
Estonia voted a resolution revoking EIB’s banking license, effective imme-
diately.

58. On 11 September 1997, EIB instituted proceedings before the
Administrative Court, challenging the license revocation as regards both the
Bank of Estonia’s authority to revoke the license and the correctness of its
decision to do so in this case.

59. While the license revocation proceedings were pending, a minority
shareholder of EIB (unrelated to the parties to the arbitration) petitioned the
court on 18 November 1998, in separate proceedings, to order the liquida-
tion of EIB, on the grounds that EIB’s license had been revoked on
9 September 1997. The petition was granted.

60. On 12 January 1999, an application by EIB to stay the liquidation
pending the outcome of the license revocation proceedings was rejected,
which decision was subsequently upheld on appeal.

1! Those proceedings were suspended on 23 March 1998, by which time they had been
superseded by events: EIB’s license had been revoked by the Bank of Estonia and separate
proceedings challenging that revocation had been launched by EIB—see below.

AWARD 15

61. On 6 October 1999, EIB’s challenge to the revocation of its license
was dismissed, on the grounds, inter alia, that the bank was, by then, already
in liquidation.

3) Relevant Provisions of Estonian Law

62. The principal provisions of domestic law referred to by the parties
and relevant for the purposes of the Tribunal’s determination are found in
two Estonian statutes, namely, the Law of the Central Bank of the Republic
of Estonia, passed on 18 May 1993 and in force as of 18 June 1993, as
amended on 5 April 1994 (the “Bank of Estonia Act”)!? and the Law on
Credit Institutions, passed on 15 December 1994 and in force as of 20
January 1995 (the “Credit Institutions Act”)'?, Those provisions read as
follows:

Bank of Estonia Act
Part I. General Regulations

Article 2. Responsibilities of Eesti Pank'4

(4) Eesti Pank carries out the monetary and banking policy
and directs the credit policy of the Republic of Estonia.

(5) Eesti Pank carries out control over all credit institutions
within the Republic of Estonia. Eesti Pank supervises
their activities as regards to their correspondence to the
laws, obligatory norms and regulations as well as takes
measures to ensure the strict following of the laws,
norms and regulations.

(...)

Part IV. Control Over Credit Institutions

2 Claimants’ Exhibit 8 (English version).
13 Claimants’ Exhibit 9 (England version).

14 “Pesti Pank” refers to the Bank of Estonia.

16 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Article 17. Basic Generalities of Banking Supervision

(1) Eesti Pank provides control over all credit institutions
located in the Republic of Estonia through the Banking
Inspection and its own departments.

(...)

(5) Eesti Pank has the right to request from all credit insti-
tutions data, documents, reports and agreements as well

as to require appropriate explanations of these data.!°

Article 18. Issuing and Cancelling Licences

(1) Eesti Pank issues to credit institutions licences and can-
cels them in case the credit institution do not follow
established laws and regulations, or violate the law or
any demands imposed upon them by Eesti Pank.

(2) Conditions for issuing and cancelling licences for credit
institutions are established by Eesti Pank.

Credit Institutions Act
Article 19. Withdrawal of the Licence

Eesti Pank may withdraw the licence

(...)

15 Claimants have alleged that certain words are missing from Article 17(5) of the English
version of the Bank of Estonia Act that has been filed as an exhibit in these proceedings.
According to Claimants, the correct translation of art. 17(5) is: “Eesti Pank has the right to
request from all credit institutions data, documents, reports and agreements relating to their
operations as well as to require appropriate explanations of these data.” While the matter was
the object of testimony and submissions during the hearing, the controversy, such as it is, need
not be resolved. Even if Claimants’ contention is accepted, that is, even if art. 17(5) of the Bank
of Estonia Act is read so as to include the qualifying words “relating to their operations”, this
would have no impact on the Tribunal’s assessment of the Bank of Estonia's conduct or its deter-
mination of the merits of Claimants’ claims in this arbitration.

AWARD

(5) if wrong or misleading data, information, advertisements
or reports are submitted or published deliberately;

Article 28. Qualifying Holding

A qualifying holding within the meaning of this law is a
holding of capital representing 10% or more of the under-
taking’s share capital or of the voting rights, or which makes
it possible to exercise significant influence over the manage-
ment of the undertaking, either on the basis of a contract or
in some other way.

Article 29. Increasing and Disposing of Qualifying Holding

(1) A credit institution or individual who is willing to
acquire, directly or indirectly, a qualifying holding of a
credit institution, or to increase such a holding to
exceed 20%, 30% or 50% of the credit institution's
share capital or number of votes, must apply for autho-
rization from Eesti Pank. The application shall be sub-
mitted in writing and must contain information on the

size of the intended holding.

(2) The obligation to obtain authorization set out in Clause
1 of the present Article applies also to cases when:

1) _ the acquisition or increase of a qualifying holding
results from the activities of third parties;

2) the credit institution might, as a result of a trans-
action, become a subsidiary of some other person.

(3) Eesti Pank will refuse authorization to acquire or
increase a qualifying holding in a credit institution;

1) to a person who lacks an immaculate business
reputation;

2) if it may restrict free competition.

(4) Eesti Pank will make a notification of its decision con-
cerning the authorization mentioned in Clause 1 of the

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

present Article no later than one month after the receipt
of the application.

(5) Should Zesti Pank refuse the authorization mentioned
in Clause 1 of the present Article, the transaction of
acquiring or increasing the qualifying holding will be
forbidden.

(6) Accredit institution and a person wishing to dispose of a
qualifying holding in a credit institution is required to
first inform Eesti Pank.

Article 59. The Basis and Limits of Supervision

(1) The activities of credit institutions are subject to super-
vision by Eesti Pank. The objective of such supervision
is to guarantee that the establishing and activities of all
the credit institutions conform with the existing laws
and other legal acts issued on their basis.

(...)

(6) The Banking Supervision Department will carry out
continuous inspection of a credit institutions activities
and its condition on the basis of regular reports submit-
ted by the latter. If necessary, the Banking Supervision
Department is entitled to :

1) demand that a credit institution submit supple-
mentary information, in order to specify informa-
tion in the reports;

2) demand information from persons who are share-
holders of the credit institution, as well as from
legal persons in which the credit institution is a

shareholder;

3) carry out on-site inspection of a credit institution’s
clients, relating to issues concerning the relations
between the client and the credit institution.

(7) The principles and procedures of the consolidated
supervision of a credit institution and parties connected

to it, shall be established by Eesti Pank.

AWARD 19

Article 60. On-Site Inspection of Credit Institutions

(1) The Banking Supervision Department is entitled by
this law and its own Statutes to carry out on-site inspec-
tion of credit institutions.

(2) When being inspected on site, it is the obligation of the
credit institution to allow the employees of the Banking
Supervision Department and other persons authorised
by Eesti Pank in accordance with this law:

1) to enter all the rooms of the credit institution pro-
vided all security regulations established by the
credit institution are observed;

2) to use a separate room for performing their duties.
The credit institution shall appoint a competent
representative whose responsibility is to provide
the inspector will (sic) all the necessary documents
and with explanations related to these documents.

Article 69. Methods of Winding Up a Credit Institution
(1) A credit institution’s activities may be wound up:

(...)

2) on the initiative of Eesti Pank or other persons
listed in the law and on the basis of a court order
(hereinafter compulsory liquidation);

E THE WRITTEN PROCEDURE
1) Claimants’ Memorial

63. As ordered by the Tribunal, Claimants duly filed their Memorial,
with supporting documentation, on 24 March 2000.

20 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

64. — In their Memorial, Claimants allege what they refer to as “eight trans-
gressions” of the BIT committed by Respondent, arising in particular as a
result of the conduct of the Bank of Estonia and its representatives. These are
summarised, below.!

65. The central theme that emerges from Claimants’ written submissions
is that Respondent’s actions were allegedly motivated by a desire to destroy
EIB, by revoking the bank’s operating license, as a means of evading its
liability arising from the Bank of Estonia's role in the Koidu branch affair and
by an intent to retaliate for the launching of the Texas lawsuit.

Claim 1: The Bank of Estonia is Responsible for EIB’ Losses Relating to
the Purchase of the Koidu Branch

66. Claimants allege that, in the summer of 1994, Mr. Kraft, then Vice
President of the Bank of Estonia, wrote to Estonia’s financial institutions
regarding the auction of various branches of the insolvent Social Bank,
among them, the Koidu branch. Enclosed with that letter, inter alia, was a
copy of the Koidu branch’s balance sheet.

67. Claimants declare that EIB agreed to purchase, and did purchase, the
Koidu branch in reliance on Mr. Kraft’s representations, including, in partic-
ular, the balance sheet provided by him. The agreed purchase price for the
Koidu branch was 3,000,000 EEK (in addition to the assumption of the
branch's liabilities), which, in accordance with the Koidu branch Sales Agree-
ment, EIB paid to the Bank of Estonia, apparently in partial payment of
amounts owed to the Bank of Estonia by Social Bank.

68. It is Claimants’ contention that the balance sheet of the Koidu
branch submitted to EIB in advance of its purchase of the Koidu branch
contained serious misrepresentations, and that, moreover, the Bank of
Estonia was aware of these misrepresentations. Indeed, Claimants allege that,
as Deputy Manager of the credit department of Social Bank from 1991 to
1993, Mr. Kraft had been directly involved in the evaluation of the particular
loans that were misstated in the Koidu branch balance sheet.

16 Ac che outset of their Memorial, Claimants also reiterate their argument in support of
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in these proceedings, as originally submitted in their Memorial on
Jurisdiction, discussed above.

AWARD 21

69. Claimants submit that the Bank of Estonia refused to remedy the
situation caused by its complicity in the misrepresentations of the assets of
the Koidu branch and to compensate EIB for losses resulting from those
misrepresentations. Those losses, Claimants state, total 19,491,947 EEK,!”
in addition to the 3,000,000 EEK paid to purchase the Koidu branch.

70. Claimants submit that, by its conduct, the Bank of Estonia violated
Article II, Paragraph 3 (a) of the BIT. Specifically, it is submitted that the
Bank of Estonia failed to give EIB’s (and hence the Claimants’) investment
in the Koidu branch fair and equitable treatment, that it failed to provide full
protection for the investment and that such treatment falls below the stan-
dards required by international law.

71. — Claimants also allege that the requirement that EIB’s payment for the
Koidu branch be made directly to the Bank of Estonia, rather than to Social
Bank, should be regarded as an expropriation for a non-public purpose, done
in a discriminatory manner and without payment of prompt, adequate and
effective compensation, thus violating Article III, Paragraph 1 of the BIT.

Claim 2: The Bank of Estonia Entered Into, and then Breached, a Settle-
ment Agreement

72. Claimants contend that the Bank of Estonia acknowledged its partial
responsibility for EIB’s losses resulting from the purchase of the Koidu
branch. Specifically, Claimants allege that, on 12 April 1996, EIB and the
Bank of Estonia entered into an agreement under the terms of which EIB was
to assign all of its claims against Social Bank to the Bank of Estonia, in
exchange for the latter’s assignment to EIB of various obligations owed to it
by third-party banks (the “Koidu Settlement Agreement”).!® According to
Claimants, it remained only for the Bank of Estonia to arrange with those
banks for the extension of certain of the obligations in question (essentially,
for the Bank of Estonia to extend the terms of various loans) before the
Koidu Settlement Agreement could be finalised and signed.

73. Claimants state that, on 14 June 1996, Mr. Michail Dashkovsky,
President of EIB, inquired of Mr. Kraft as to when the Koidu Settlement

17 See para. 48 of this Award.
18 Claimants’ Exhibit 29.

22 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Agreement would be ready for signing. According to Claimants,
Mr. Dashkovsky was assured that only “technical” matters remained
outstanding and that the required contract would be completed and signed
shortly.

74. Claimants allege that, on 17 July 1996, the matter still unresolved,
Mr. Dashkovsky sent a letter to the chief of the Bank Inspectorate of the
Bank of Estonia. In reply, EIB received, on 5 August 1996, a letter signed by
Mr. Andres Sutt, secondary head of the Bank Inspectorate, enclosing what
was purportedly a draft text of the agreement concerning the assignment of
claims.!? Claimants stress that this so-called “draft” contained terms that
bore little resemblance to those agreed on 12 April 1996 and were far less
generous as regards the consideration for EIB’s claims against Social Bank.

75. On 5 August 1996, Mr. Genin, on behalf of EIB, responded by
letter, rejecting the changes to the Koidu Settlement Agreement and noti-
fying the Bank of Estonia that he considered it to be in breach of that Agree-
ment.7° Claimants contend that, in so doing, EIB rejected only the 5 August
1996 text proffered by the Bank of Estonia, and not the April 1996 Settle-
ment Agreement itself.

76. Claimants submit that the conduct of the Bank of Estonia as regards
the Koidu Settlement Agreement constitutes a violation of Article II, Para-
graphs 3 (a) and (c) of the BIT, which provide, respectively, for the fair and
equitable treatment of investments and for the respect of obligations entered
into with regard to investments.

Claim 3: The Bank of Estonia Attempted to Cause EIB’ Capital to Fall
Below Minimum Capitalisation Requirements

77. Claimants allege that, by letter dated 21 March 1996, the Bank of
Estonia agreed to allow EIB “to amortise the damages resulting from the
purchase of the branch of Estonian Social Bank over a maximum of five years
(...)” (the “Write-Off Agreement”).”! This, they claim, was expressly
intended to enable EIB to maintain its capitalisation above the legally

19 Claimants’ Exhibit 31.
20 Claimants’ Exhibit 32.
21 Claimants’ Exhibit 37.

AWARD 23

required minimum, and to avoid the under-capitalisation that would have
resulted had EIB been required to write off its approximately 19,000,000
EEK Koidu branch-related losses all at once. Claimants argue that the Bank
of Estonia's letter also demonstrated its view that EIB was sufficiently healthy
and well-managed to absorb those losses by the end of the five-year period.

78. Claimants allege that, on 10 October 1996, the Bank of Estonia
reneged on the Write-Off Agreement, instead requiring EIB to charge its
Koidu branch-related losses as costs and noting, moreover, that this would
cause EIB’s equity to fall below minimum required levels.7”

79. As mentioned above,”? in August 1996, Eastern Credit had taken an
assignment of EIB’s claims (restated in May 1997) in order to pursue those
claims in a United States court. The consideration owed to EIB for the
assignment was to have comprised the first 15,000,000 EEK recovered in the
litigation; alternatively, it was hoped that a settlement could be reached with
the Bank of Estonia. In either case, Claimants allege, there was no need for
Eastern Credit actually to transfer funds to EIB to pay for the assignment. In
December 1996, however, after receiving the Bank of Estonia's 10 October
1996 letter reneging on the Write-Off Agreement, Claimants state that
Eastern Credit made full payment to EIB for the assignment of claims, in the

amount of 19,491,947 EEK (US $1,639,344).

80. Claimants contend that the Bank of Estonia intentionally breached the
Write-Off Agreement in order to engineer a shortfall in EIB’s capital levels that
would justify the revocation of the bank’s license. Claimants declare that the
resulting payment by Eastern Credit was made with the express aim of
ensuring that EIB would be able to write off the Koidu branch losses without
falling below the minimum capital requirements imposed by Estonian law and
constituted an additional “investment” for which Respondent is liable.

81. Claimants submit that the Bank of Estonia’s actions violate Article II,
Paragraphs 3 (a) and (c) of the BIT, as well as Article III, Paragraph 1. In
addition, Claimants allege breaches of Article II, Paragraph 3 (b), prohibiting
arbitrary or discriminatory measures, and Article IX, Paragraph 2, prohib-

22 Claimants’ Exhibit 38.
23 See para. 51 of this Award.

24 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

iting the imposition of formal requirements that impair substantive rights

under the BIT.
Claim 4: The Bank of Estonia’s 18 March 1997 Prescription Was Illegal

82. As noted earlier, on 18 March 1997, the Bank of Estonia issued
Prescription No. 19-2-406, requiring EIB and certain of its shareholders
(Eastern Credit, Baltoil and Eurocapital Ltd.) to apply for “qualified
holding permits” entitling them, under Estonian law, to hold stock in EIB
in excess of certain specified percentages (so-called “qualified holdings”) of
EIB’s share capital.

83. Claimants allege that Eastern Credit’s shares in EIB were already
legally held pursuant to a foreign investment license granted by the Bank of
Estonia on 7 October 1992, permitting Eastern Credit to acquire a 33%
interest in EIB.24 Claimants also state that, on 30 June 1995, an entity
known as Eurocapital Co. had been granted a qualified holding permit for
an interest in excess of 50% of EIB, and the Bank of Estonia was well aware
that Eurocapital Ltd. and Eurocapital Co. were in fact one and the same
company. Claimants further allege that Baltoil’s 5% shareholding in EIB did
not, on its own, even constitute a “qualified” holding requiring a permit.

84. While contesting the validity of the March 1997 Prescription, Claim-
ants state that EIB and the shareholders in question nonetheless complied
with its terms, by submitting the requested applications on 18 April 1997.

85. Claimants submit that the issuance of the Bank of Estonia’s
18 March 1997 Prescription violates Article II, Paragraphs 3 (a) and (b) and
Article IX, Paragraph 2 of the BIT, as well as Article II, Paragraph 11,
relating to interference with the granting of rights, licenses, permits.

Claim 5: The Use of Unpublished and Legally Baseless Regulations—
The 1997 Regulations/Guidelines

86. Claimants allege that the Bank of Estonia’s purpose in requesting
detailed information concerning EIB’s shareholders—and, in particular, the

24 Claimants’ Exhibit 42.

AWARD 25

use of the 1997 Regulations/Guidelines—was unrelated to any legitimate
supervisory activity. The information requests, say Claimants, fell “like rain
out of a clear blue sky”, unrelated to any supposed concern regarding quali-
fied holdings. Those requests, say Claimants, served merely as a pretext, first,
to gain information to assist the Bank of Estonia in its defence to the United
States litigation launched by Eastern Credit and, ultimately, to revoke EIB’s
license.

87. Claimants contend that the Bank of Estonia had no legal right to
much of the information requested—for example, balance sheets of EIB’s
shareholders and information concerning the shareholders of the share-
holders of E[B—and that EIB did not possess and could not possibly have
provided such information in any event. Indeed, Claimants declare that EIB
in fact provided all of the information requested by the Bank of Estonia of
which EIB had knowledge.

88. Claimants submit that the Bank of Estonia's use, in particular, of
“unpublished, secret and legally baseless regulations” (i.e., the 1997 Regula-
tions/ Guidelines enclosed with its 21 May 1997 request for information) to
glean information to which it had no legal right constitutes a violation of
Article II, Paragraph 8 of the BIT, requiring that all laws, regulations, admin-
istrative practices, etc., affecting investments be duly published.

Claim 6: The Bank of Estonia Revoked EIB’ License on a Pretext

89. Claimants assert that the reasons stated by the Bank of Estonia for
the revocation of EIB’s license are mere pretexts. In Claimants’ words:

Of course, all of these prescriptions and demands for infor-
mation would have meant nothing had they stopped at this
point. However, on September 9, 1997, the Bank of Estonia
used the supposed requests for information and the sup-
posed requirement for applications to acquire qualifying
holdings as its reasons for revoking the license of [EIB].

25 Claimants’ Memorial, para. 166.

26 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

90. Claimants contend that the Bank of Estonia’s conduct, and in partic-
ular its revocation of EIB’s license, was designed to enable the Bank of
Estonia to avoid its liability to EIB for its involvement in the Koidu branch
affair. Claimants also contend that they were denied due process in the
matter of the license revocation.

91. Claimants submit that the Bank of Estonia's revocation of EIB’s
license without due process, without prior notice of any kind and for reasons
which were totally pretextual, comprises a violation of Article II, Paragraph
3 (a) and (b), Article II, Paragraph 11, Article III, Paragraph 1, Article IX,
Paragraph 2 of the BIT, as well as Article IV, Paragraph 1, providing for the
free transfer of investments.

Claim 7: Respondent is Responsible for the Forced Liquidation of EIB
and the Dismissal of its Challenge to the License Revocation

92. As indicated above, on 11 September 1997, EIB challenged the revo-
cation of its license in proceedings before the Administrative Court. While
that challenge was pending, the Administrative Court, in separate proceed-
ings, granted a petition by a minority shareholder of EIB to order the bank's
liquidation, on the grounds that the bank’s license had been revoked.

93. On 12 January 1999, the City Court refused to stay the liquidation
of EIB pending the outcome of the litigation over the revocation of its license
(which decision was upheld by the District Court on appeal) and, on
6 October 1999, EIB’s license revocation challenge was dismissed by the

Administrative Court, on the grounds that the bank was in liquidation.2°

94. Claimants submit that the Estonian courts, by refusing to allow the
liquidation of EIB to be stayed pending the outcome of litigation regarding
the revocation of its license, and then dismissing the license revocation
proceedings on the grounds that a liquidation was pending, have committed
a travesty of justice for which the Republic of Estonia is liable under Articles
II, Paragraphs 3 (a) and (b), Article III, Paragraph 1 and Article IV, Paragraph
1 of the BIT, in addition to Article II, Paragraph 7, requiring that investors
be provided with effective domestic means of asserting investment claims.

26 Claimants’ Exhibits 78 and 79.

AWARD 27

Claim 8: The Republic of Estonia is Responsible For Harassment

95. Claimants allege that, on 15 January 1999, Alex Genin received a
letter from the Estonian police stating that a criminal investigation was
pending against Eastern Credit. They further claim that Eastern Credit was
subsequently accused of various false charges, but that the Estonian author-
ities never pursued a criminal case against the company, their purpose being
to intimidate rather than prosecute.

96. Claimants also allege that, on 18 September 1997, Mr. Dashkovsky,
the President of EIB and Claimant's principal representative in Estonia, was
confronted by the Manager of Control of the Department of Immigration
and Citizenship of the Republic of Estonia and threatened with deportation
and the refusal to extend his residency permit; the officer in question also
allegedly questioned Mr. Dashkovsky about Mr. Genin.

97. Claimants submit that the Republic of Estonia, by threatening crim-
inal charges against one or more of the Claimants, among other forms of
harassment, has violated Articles II, Paragraphs 3 (a) and (b) of the BIT.

Damages

98. Claimants claim damages in the amount of US $1,639,344 repre-
senting their alleged losses resulting from misrepresentations associated with
the purchase of the Koidu branch of Social Bank (based on the amount paid
by Eastern Credit to purchase EIB’s claims against Social Bank in December
199677) plus 10% interest as of the date of payment.

99. Claimants also request damages relating to the loss of their original
3,000,000 EEK investment in EIB, which they submit should be calculated
on the basis of the current fair market value of EIB had its license not been
revoked. Claimants’ valuation of their losses in this regard, as stated in their
Memorial, is based on the expert valuation provided by Mr. Bryan V. Murray
of B. V. Murray Company (discussed below), who calculated EIB’s potential
worth, currently, to be between US $50 and US 70 million.2°

27 See paras. 48-51 of this Award.
28 Claimants’ Exhibit 88.

28 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

2) Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

100. As ordered by the Tribunal, Respondent duly filed its Counter-
Memorial, with supporting documentation, on 19 June 2000.

101. In an “overview” of its case, at the outset of its Counter-Memorial,
Respondent summarises the series of events leading to the revocation of EIB’s
license. It states that, in the course of its 1997 audit of EIB, the Bank of
Estonia requested, and was denied, information concerning the identity of
the bank’s largest shareholders and regarding what appeared to be irregular
transactions with related parties. Respondent declares that EIB’s refusal, in
addition to violating Estonian law, “only invited further scrutiny”.?? Closer
examination revealed, it claims, serious violations of Estonia’s banking laws
and regulations by EIB, as well as a “pattern of reporting false and misleading
information to regulatory authorities”. In Respondent's words:

[EIB] did nothing to ameliorate the situation and, conse-
quently, its license was revoked by the Bank of Estonia.
Although numerous legal challenges were brought in Esto-
nia, Claimants are again seeking a review of the Bank of
Estonia’s actions in this arbitration.°°

102. Respondent further states: “At the heart of the matter were the
banking regulators’ legitimate concerns over the nature and identity of
[EIB’s] owners.”>!

103. In sum, Respondent’s basic tenet is that the Bank of Estonia's
concerns, and EIB’s alleged refusal to provide the information requested of it
and required by Estonian law, justifiably led to the decision to revoke the
bank's license.

The Factual Background as Described by Respondent

104. Ina lengthy review of the facts, Respondent alleges that, during the
1997 audit of EIB, Ms. Eve Sirts, banking examiner of the Bank of Estonia,

29 Counter-Memorial, p. 1.

AWARD 29

asked for information concerning the identity of the bank’s largest share-
holders and for explanations about irregular transactions with seemingly
related parties. Respondent states that Ms. Sirts was denied any information.
Respondent also alleges that, upon closer examination, serious violations of
Estonian banking law were discovered, as well as a pattern of false and
misleading reporting.

105. Respondent contends that EIB did nothing to improve the situation
and that this led to its license revocation. Respondent reiterates that this
action was justified in view of the banking regulators’ legitimate concerns
over the nature and identity of EIB’s owners.

Eurocapital Group Limited

106. Respondent submits that Eurocapital Ltd. is an Isle of Man corpora-
tion, incorporated in 1988, that owned in excess of 70% of EIB. Respondent
alleges that Eurocapital is not a claimant in this arbitration and, in any event,
could not avail itself of the BIT because of its nationality.

107. Respondent alleges that the shareholders of Eurocapital and its state
of incorporation were never disclosed to the Estonian banking authorities
and that this was one of the central concerns that led to the revocation of
EIB’s license.

Estonian Banking Reform

108. Respondent claims that the Bank of Estonia is responsible for the
banking reform that has taken place in Estonia over the last decade. It is
directly responsible for regulating the banking industry, including the estab-
lishment and enforcement of regulations regarding minimum share capital
requirements.

109. Respondent asserts that Mr. Vahur Kraft presided as Governor of the
Bank of Estonia for a five-year term starting in April 1995 and was the Vice-
Governor from 1991-1995. During the period relevant to this arbitration,
Ms. Pilvia Nirgi was the Head of the Banking Supervision Department, and
Ms. Eve Sirts was the Inspector/Share Capital Specialist, reporting to
Ms. Nirgi.

30 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

110. Respondent claims that, in December 1994, the Estonian Parliament
passed the Credit Institutions Act, which contained important financial
reforms. Respondent also states that both the Credit Institutions Act and the
Bank of Estonia Act grant certain powers to the Bank of Estonia which enable
it to carry out its mandate, including the right to obtain information relating
to a financial institution, its operations and its shareholders.

Claimants’ Initial Investment in EIB

111. Respondent alleges that, in 1992, Eastern Credit applied for a foreign
investment license in order to become a shareholder of EIB. Respondent
claims that, as part of its application, Mr. Genin submitted a balance sheet
for Eastern Credit which reflected that it had over $34,400,000 in assets;
after reviewing the application, the Council of the Bank of Estonia decided
to grant the license to Eastern Credit.

112. Respondent contends, however, that the license was obtained by
presenting false financial information. It alleges that a majority of Eastern
Credit’s assets, $34,041,987, was reported as “investments in subsidiaries”,
while Eastern Credit’s tax returns for 1991, 1992 and 1993 did not identify
any such investments and expressly stated that Eastern Credit did not control
any foreign corporations.

113. Moreover, Respondent alleges that Eastern Credit’s initial investment
in EIB was actually paid for by Eurocapital. Similarly, according to Respon-
dent, when Baltoil purchased EIB shares in 1993, it did so with funds wired
from the same Eurocapital account.

114. Respondent states that Baltoil never sought permission for its share-
holding in EIB and made no disclosure about its relationship to Eastern
Credit or Eurocapital. As a result, Baltoil is not a party to any “investment
agreement” with the Estonian Government, such as to render its claim arbi-
trable.

115. Respondent also contends that Baltoil’s shareholding should not be
considered part of Eastern Credit’s 1992 application for the following
reasons :

¢ Eastern Credit never mentioned Baltoil in its request for a foreign
investment license;

AWARD 31

¢ Eastern Credit requested permission for an interest up to 33%,
which it acquired in its own name;

*  Baltoil’s 20% interest was acquired in 1993, more than a year after
Eastern Credit applied for its shareholding; and

¢ Eastern Credit and Baltoil had a combined shareholding of 51%,
far in excess of what Eastern Credit sought permission to hold.

116. Respondent also submits that no claim by Baltoil should be
permitted since the BIT does not apply to domestic corporations who invest
in their home state.

117. Respondent alleges that, by 1994, Eurocapital had acquired a
majority ownership of EIB through its surrogates Eastern Credit and Baltoil,
although it had never applied for a foreign license or entered into any agree-
ment with the Estonian regulators.

The Auction of the Koidu Branch

118. Respondent claims that notice of the auction of the Koidu branch
was sent to all Estonian financial institutions on 11 August 1994. Respon-
dent also alleges that the assets of the said branch were available for inspec-
tion and that arrangements were made for potential bidders actually to visit
the branch and review the assets on-site.

119. Respondent further contends that all documents concerning the
value of the assets purchased were prepared and presented by Social Bank
personnel, not by the Bank of Estonia. In this regard, Respondent asserts that
neither Mr. Kraft nor any other Bank of Estonia official prepared the docu-
ments representing the value of the branches sold, nor did they make repre-
sentations concerning the assets during the auction.

120. Respondent claims that Mr. Kraft had no specific knowledge of the
Koidu branch assets sold at the auction and that, although Mr. Kraft had
worked, years earlier, in the international department of Social Bank’s main
office, he had no dealings with the Koidu branch operations.

121. Respondent alleges that Mr. Peep Sillandi, President of EIB, was
present at the auction, and that he bid for, and ultimately purchased, the

32 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Koidu branch of Social Bank on behalf of EIB. Respondent contends that
Mr. Sillandi was invited to inspect the assets on-site at the Koidu branch
subsequent to the auction, and that EIB personnel in fact visited the Koidu
branch and undertook their own due diligence with regard to the assets
purchased, to their satisfaction, before the transaction was completed.

122. Respondent asserts that the purchase price of 3,000,000 EEK was
paid to the Bank of Estonia, rather than to Social Bank, in partial satisfaction
of Social Bank’s debt to the Bank of Estonia.

123. Respondent alleges that, one month after the auction, Alex Genin and
EIB’s President, Mr. Sillandi, wrote to the Bank of Estonia, alleging that
approximately 7,200,000 EEK worth of loans outstanding on the Koidu
branch books were in default and non-performing. Respondent also submits
that, on 2 December 1994, the Supervision Department of the Bank of
Estonia reviewed EIB’s claim and determined that it was unfounded, since EIB
had conducted its own due diligence before agreeing to the transfer of assets.

124. Respondent contends that, after the claim was denied by the Bank
of Estonia, EIB brought a lawsuit against Social Bank in the City Court,
that EIB and Social Bank settled the lawsuit in 1995 and that an agreement
was reached by virtue of which EIB returned some of the Koidu branch
assets to Social Bank in return for certain monetary payments (totalling
approximately 20 million EEK). Respondent points out that no represen-
tatives of the Bank of Estonia or the Estonian Government were parties to
the agreement.

Eurocapital Group Companys Qualified Shareholding in EIB

125. Respondent contends that Claimants should not be entitled to an
award relating to Eurocapital’s investment in EIB, since Eurocapital is not

covered by the BIT.

126. Respondent alleges that, on 21 April 1995, a letter was sent to
Mr. Kraft at the Bank of Estonia, on the letterhead of Eurocapital Group
Ltd., in regard to a possible $1,000,000 investment in EIB. The letter was
purportedly signed by Gregory FE. Zak, Eurocapital Ltd.’s Vice President of
Finance. Respondent alleges that Mr. Zak did not author the 21 April 1995
letter from Eurocapital Group Ltd.; that the signature is not his; that he
never authorised anyone to prepare the letter on his behalf; that the signature

AWARD 33

was placed on the letter by Ms. Delores Severson, Mr. Genin’s secretary;
that Mr. Zak and Eurocapital Ltd. never made a $1,000,000 investment in
EIB; and that Mr. Zak was never even aware of an entity known as Euro-
capital Co.>”

127. Respondent submits that subsequently, on 1 June 1995, EIB
submitted an application for a qualified shareholding of “Eurocapital Group
Company (a finance company located in England)” and that the permit was
granted by the Bank of Estonia on 30 June 1995.

128. Respondent contends that Eurocapital Ltd. was hiding behind other
companies in order to acquire and maintain, secretly, a controlling interest
in EIB, first through Eastern Credit and Baltoil (a combined 51% interest in
1993 and 1994) and then through Eurocapital Co.

129. Respondent contends that, regardless of whether there was one or
more “Eurocapitals”, Eastern Credit’s purported investment in EIB in fact
was owned by Eurocapital, for the following reasons :

* EIB voted to sell shares to Eurocapital;

¢ Eurocapital applied for a qualified shareholding;

¢  Eurocapital funds were used to purchase Eastern Credit’s shares;

¢ Eurocapital ledgers do not reflect a loan to Eastern Credit;

¢ the EIB share ledger names Eurocapital as the shareholder;

¢ Eastern Credit’s tax return does not reflect a controlling interest in
EIB;

¢ Eastern Credit’s tax return does not reflect a loan from Eurocapital;

* there is no evidence that Eastern Credit deposited funds with
Eurocapital to purchase the shares;

* Eurocapital claimed the investment as its own in the Texas litiga-
tion; and

¢  Eurocapital presented a claim to the EIB liquidation commission
based on its investment in EIB.

32 Counter-Memorial, pp. 9-10.

34 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

EIB Struggled to Meet Minimum Capitalisation Requirements

130. Respondent contends that EIB struggled to satisfy the capital
requirements for lending institutions in Estonia. Respondent states that, in
June 1995, EIB was warned that its insolvency indicator was below the
minimum of 8% and that its risk concentration was too high. Respondent
alleges that EIB was able to maintain its marginal status only by artificially
inflating its balance sheet.°?

131. Respondent asserts that, under the new banking law implemented in
1995 by means of the Credit Institutions Act:

¢ the qualified shareholding requirement was introduced as part of
the Credit Institutions Act;

¢ the Bank of Estonia was given the responsibility of scrutinising
banks’ balance sheets to make sure the many capital and liquidity
requirements were properly met; and

¢ the Bank of Estonia was given broad powers to inspect commercial
banks in order to fulfil its mandate.

132. Respondent alleges that EIB, given its precarious financial situation
in early 1996, sought assistance from the Bank of Estonia. Respondent also
states that, on 12 April 1996, the Bank of Estonia entered into a tentative
agreement with EIB™ in which the Bank of Estonia would transfer
5,000,000 EEK worth of debentures to EIB in exchange for EIB’s claim
against the insolvent Social Bank; the Bank of Estonia further agreed to try
to reach an agreement with a third party—Commercial Bank of Industry and
Building (“Commercial Bank”)—that would possibly result in the assign-
ment to EIB of an additional 10,000,000 EEK notes.

133. Respondent contends that this tentative agreement was not an admis-
sion that the Bank of Estonia was responsible for representations concerning
the Koidu branch, but was, rather, an action motivated by its desire to assist
a financial institution in difficulty.

33 Counter-Memorial, p. 13.

34 ‘The “Koidu Settlement Agreement”.

AWARD 35

134. Respondent states that the Bank of Estonia gave no guarantees as
regards the third-party agreements and, in the end, was unable to conclude
the 10,000,000 EEK agreement with Commercial Bank. Respondent states
that the Bank of Estonia offered instead to assign to EIB 5,000,000 EEK
worth of bills with Estonian Land Bank (“Land Bank”) and pay EIB up to
5,000,000 EEK in recovered loans. Respondent contends that this offer had
much more value than the claims against Commercial Bank that were the
subject of the original, tentative agreement.

135. Respondent asserts that, on 5 August 1996, Mr. Genin responded to
this offer by stating that he considered the tentative agreement of 12 April
1996 to be “null and void”.

Requests for Information Followed by the Texas Lawsuit

136. Respondent claims that, on 20 September 1996, due to reforms in
banking legislation as well as a general concern about the ability of Estonian
banks to meet their share capital requirements, the Bank of Estonia sent a
letter to all credit institutions requesting information concerning their share-
holders, shareholders of shareholders, subsidiaries and affiliated corporations

of the shareholders.

137. Respondent states that, on 9 October 1996, EIB identified its largest
shareholder as “Eurocapital Group”, a Texas company and, shortly thereafter,
EIB reported that its largest shareholder was “Eurocapital Group, Ltd., a UK
company”.

138. Respondent denies that its 20 September 1996 letter and subsequent
requests for information were sent in an effort to harass EIB or retaliate for
the Unites States lawsuit filed against the Bank of Estonia. Respondent notes
that similar requests had been sent at the beginning of 1996, well before the
Texas lawsuit was filed, and that even the 20 September 1996 request was
sent before the Bank of Estonia received notice of the lawsuit.

The “20,000,000 EEK Juggle”

139. Respondent alleges that, by October 1996, Social Bank had gone out
of business and filed for bankruptcy, and that EIB had filed a bankruptcy
claim in the Estonian courts against Social Bank for the amount of the
unpaid settlement agreement (approximately 19,000,000 EEK).

36 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

140. Respondent submits that :

* following the filing of EIB’s bankruptcy claim and because recov-
ery of the full amount from Social Bank was unlikely, the Bank of
Estonia directed EIB to reclassify its claim as a “doubtful account”
on its balance sheet, by the end of October 1996, in accordance
with sound accounting practices;

* no response was received from EIB by the deadline;

* on 4 November, the Supervision Department of the Bank of Esto-
nia followed up on this matter;

* in response to this inquiry, EIB informed the Bank of Estonia that
the claim had been sold to Eastern Credit for 20,000,000 EEK on
25 October 1996;

¢ Eastern Credit did not pay anything on the closing of the transac-
tion; rather, it promised to pay in four instalments over more than
two years.?°
141. Respondent contends that the agreement between EIB and Eastern
Credit is inconsistent with an earlier agreement, dated 26 August 1996, in
which EIB had purportedly already assigned all of its rights and claims
regarding the Koidu branch to Eastern Credit, in exchange for the first
15,000,000 EEK recovered by Eastern Credit.3¢

142. Respondent submits that the 25 October 1996 agreement between
EIB and Eastern Credit was simply a manoeuvre concocted to inflate EIB’s
balance sheet, by reporting a 20,000,000 EEK asset when, in reality, such an
asset did not exist.

143. Respondent alleges that the Bank of Estonia, having discerned the
nature of the transaction, instructed EIB to classify it as a loan, not a receiv-
able, so as to reflect the true value of the asset. Respondent alleges that EIB
refused to do so, claiming that it would classify the transaction as a sale from
the moment of the transaction regardless of when it might actually receive
payment. Respondent also states that Eastern Credit made its first “payment”

35 Counter-Memorial, p. 17; Respondent's Exhibit 29.

36 Counter-Memorial, p. 17; Respondent's Exhibit 27.

AWARD 37

to EIB with worthless shares of stock in a defunct company called Landmark
International (“Landmark”).

144, Respondent also alleges that EIB entered into a similar series of ques-
tionable transactions relating to stock in a defunct yacht manufacturer, Tolly-
craft Corporation (“Tollycraft”). Respondent claims that the Tollycraft stock
was purchased by EIB for a price much higher than their worth and was then
sold to Eurocapital, a few months later, for only half of the purchase price.>”

Two Eurocapitals, Pacific Commercial Credit, More Questions

145. Respondent contends that the Bank of Estonia's requests for informa-
tion were prompted in part by inconsistent references to Eurocapital Group
and an undisclosed relationship to a company, Pacific Commercial Credit,
that had received hundreds of thousands of dollars from EIB. Respondent
points out that the Bank of Estonia subsequently learned that Pacific
Commercial Credit had two shareholders, Eurocapital Group Limited and
Eastern Credit, and that the “Eastern Credit” in question appeared to be an
Isle of Man corporation and not a Texas corporation, suggesting that there
may as well have been two corporations named “Eastern Credit”.

146. Respondent claims that, following a January 1997 request for addi-
tional information, EIB identified its largest shareholder as “EuroCapital
Group Ltd.”°?

The 1997 Audit of EIB

147. Respondent states that, from 4 February 1997 through 7 March
1997, the Bank of Estonia conducted its annual audit of EIB. Ms. Sirts was
assigned the specific responsibility of verifying the share capital of EIB.
Respondent claims that, despite numerous requests, EIB refused to clarify
the confusion surrounding “Eurocapital”.

148. Respondent further asserts that, during the audit, several other
unusual and irregular facts were discovered, including:

37 Counter-Memorial, p. 19; Respondent's Exhibit 106.
38 Counter-Memorial, p. 20; Respondent's Exhibit 82.

3° Counter-Memorial, p. 21; Respondent's Exhibit 58.

38 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

¢ EIB had given a proxy to invest its funds to Alex Genin, Gregory
Zak and Harri Faiman;

¢ EIB funds were invested in Landmark and Tollycraft stock
acquired from a related entity, Eastern Credit, at inflated prices;

* not all of the stock transactions were reflected on the books of EIB;

* interest-free loans (approximately US $600,000 to US $800,000)
had been made to Pacific Commercial Credit Limited without
proper documentation; and

* questions had arisen about a Russian company called SAIS.

149. Respondent asserts that Ms. Sirts’ requests for information in regard
to these matters, both oral and in writing, were denied or ignored by EIB.

150. Respondent also submits that the formal inspection report issued
following the audit raised additional questions concerning EIB’s share-
holders, their affiliates and suspect transactions.

The March 1997 Precept (Prescription)

151. Respondent asserts that the Estonian Credit Institutions Act requires
a party or related parties seeking to acquire a 10%, 30% or 50% share-
holding (or to increase an existing shareholding to such levels) to obtain
permission from the Bank of Estonia, in the form of a qualified holding
permit.

152. Accordingly, Respondent claims that the Bank of Estonia issued, on
18 March 1997, Prescription No. 19-2—406 requiring EIB and certain
shareholders to apply for a qualified holding permit, because (1) no qualified
shareholding had ever been sought or issued in the name of “Eurocapital
Group Limited” and (2) the combined shareholding of Eastern Credit and
Baltoil, which claimed to be related, put them above the 10% threshold.4?

153. Respondent alleges that, immediately following issuance of the

March 1997 Prescription, EIB’s lawyers wrote to the Bank of Estonia,
claiming that Eurocapital Group Limited “has never acquired nor enlarged a

4° Counter-Memorial, p. 23.

AWARD 39

holding in the share capital of EIB”. Further, in legal pleadings filed that
same day, EIB challenged the Prescription and claimed that it was “unfa-
miliar with Eurocapital Group Limited”.“!

154. Respondent contends that Claimants attempted to create the illusion
that they were trying to comply with the Bank of Estonia's request. In this
regard, Respondent states that, on 24 March 1997, Mr. Dashkovsky filed
with the Estonian court copy of a letter from EIB addressed to “Eurocapital
Group Company, Eastern Credit and AS Baltoil” with no names of individ-
uals or addresses. Respondent also claims that, on 27 March 1997,
Mr. Dashkovsky wrote to Ms. Nirgi at the Bank of Estonia and told her that
he had asked for the shareholders’ help in obtaining the requested informa-
tion.

155. Respondent asserts the following :

¢ Mr. Dashkovsky was the sole shareholder and president of Baltoil,
as well as the European representative of Eurocapital and Eastern
Credit;

«Mr. Genin was the managing director and sole shareholder of East-
ern Credit;

* the letters in question were, in effect, letters written by
Mr. Dashkovsky to himself.

156. Respondent claims that it was a ruse and fiction to suggest that
Mr. Dashkovsky, as president of EIB, and Mr. Genin, as chairman of EIB’s
board, were unable to provide the information requested.

157. Respondent states that, on 18 April 1997, the Estonian law office of
Kaasik & Co. applied for qualified holdings for Eurocapital Ltd., Eastern
Credit and Baltoil. Respondent submits that the Bank of Estonia responded
by requesting additional information concerning the applicants, necessary to
evaluate their suitability to be qualified shareholders. Respondent submits
that, in this regard, the Bank of Estonia provided “internal guidelines” (i.e.,
the “March 1997 Regulations/Guidelines”) delineating the exact informa-
tion sought, but that EIB refused to supply this information.

41 Counter-Memorial, p. 23; Respondent's Exhibit 70.

40 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

The License Revocation

158. Respondent contends that EIB’s pattern of refusing to answer the
Bank of Estonia's questions; barely meeting, for a number of years, the
minimum capital requirements and, on numerous occasions, falling below
the statutory minimum; and conducting a series of questionable transac-
tions, fully warranted increased regulatory scrutiny and justified the eventual
revocation of EIB’s license.

159. Respondent submits that, during the February 1997 audit, inspectors
discovered once again that EIB’s share capital was below the minimum
required level, and an appropriate instruction was issued to EIB. Respondent
also claims that, on 27 June 1997, another precept was issued to EIB
requiring it to comply with the minimum capital requirements by 21 July
1997.

160. Respondent alleges that, on 16 July 1997, Eurocapital converted
subordinated debt of EIB into stock in the bank, without prior permission
of the Bank of Estonia. Respondent further contends that the Bank of
Estonia repeatedly asked to see information concerning this debt instrument,
but that EIB refused to comply.

161. Respondent claims that, on 30 July 1997, representatives of the Bank
of Estonia again visited EIB to follow up on these issues, at which time the
inspectors learned the following:

¢ that Landmark shares had been acquired from Eastern Credit for
$3.75 a share and then sold to Eurocapital a few months later for
$2.50 a share;

¢ that Tollycraft shares had been acquired directly from Tollycraft,
many for only $1.50 a share;

¢ that EIB was planning to have its shares listed on the NASDAQ
market in the United States.

162. Respondent submits that EIB’s purported plans to go public in the
US were speculative, at best, as no business plan was shown to the inspectors

“2 Counter-Memorial, p. 26; Respondent's Exhibit 84.

AWARD 41

and no supporting documentation was ever provided. On the contrary,

Respondent points out that EIB’s business plan for 1997, furnished to its

auditors earlier that year, made absolutely no reference to this purported
3

plan.”

163. Respondent states that, during the week of 7 August 1997, based on
the information gleaned during the July inspection as well as EIB’s and its
shareholders’ continued refusal to submit data in support of their application
for qualified shareholdings, the Bank of Estonia conducted a special inspec-
tion of EIB; the inspectors continued to ask questions about particular trans-
actions and relationships, but still received no answers. Respondent declares
that the report issued following the special inspection mentions several prob-
lems, the most notable of which related to the bank’s capital adequacy rate.
Respondent alleges that, rather than a 38.5% rate, as reported by EIB, the
true rate was only 10.91%.

164. Respondent alleges that the recommendation to revoke EIB’s license
was made by Ms. Sirts following the August 1997 special inspection, and was
based on EIB’s repeated presentation of false and misleading information, its
refusal to provide information requested in accordance with the law, and its
failure to meet the minimum capital requirements for a banking institution.

165. Respondent claims that the recommendation was transmitted to the
Council of the Bank of Estonia, which voted on 9 September 1997 to revoke
EIB’s license as of 10 September 1997,4 and that a formal notice was sent
to EIB containing the following instructions :

(1) to call a meeting of shareholders in order to decide on
reorganisation or dissolution;
(2) not to prefer one client over another;

(3) to make no transactions concerning the bank’s share
capital until all claims are settled; and

(4) to forward a notice of annulment to all foreign corres-
pondent banks.

“3 Counter-Memorial, p. 27; Respondent's Exhibit 60.
44 Counter-Memorial, p. 28; Respondent's Exhibit 90.
45 Counter-Memorial, p. 28.

42 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

166. Respondent alleges that EIB ignored all of these instructions.
Specifically:

(1) no decisions on the future of EIB were taken until a
minority shareholder petitioned the bank into involun-
tary liquidation in 1999;

(2) EIB continued to make preferential transfers to Eastern
Credit and Eurocapital: it paid the rent for Eastern
Credit’s office in Texas, and paid $21,000 every two
months to Eurocapital as “management fees”;

(3) EIB’s management made a share capital-related transac-
tion in 1997 by, in essence, transferring $2,900,000 to
Eurocapital (as “collateral” for its investment as a share-

holder);

(4) EIB did not notify correspondent bank ABN AMRO
that its license was revoked, and the Bank of Estonia
was therefore required to do so itself.

167. Finally, Respondent claims that EIB launched a challenge to the
license revocation in the Estonian courts one day following notice of the
revocation. Respondent contends that the Estonian judicial system was
accessible to the Claimants, that there are no allegations, much less evidence,
that the system was anything other than impartial, and that Claimants have
no grounds for a “denial of justice” claim.

Respondent’ Defences

168. After describing the factual background to the dispute, Respondent
sets out its defences to the claims alleged by Claimants.

The pre-BIT claims are untimely

169. Respondent first submits that most, if not all, of Claimants’ claims
are not “investment disputes” within the meaning of the BIT and that several
are, moreover, time-barred. In this regard, Respondent notes that the first
three of Claimants’ eight claims arose prior to 16 February 1997, the date on
which the BIT came into effect, and are therefore not actionable.

AWARD 43

170. Respondent then addresses the merits of each of the so-called “eight
transgressions” alleged by Claimants in their Memorial.

Claimants’ Claim 1: The Koidu Branch

171. Respondent submits, first, that there is no “investment agreement” or
“investment authorisation” between Claimants and the Republic of Estonia,
as those terms are used in the BIT. For this reason, there is no arbitrable
“investment dispute” under the BIT in this case.

172. In this regard, Respondent contends as follows:

* neither Mr. Genin, Baltoil or Eastern Credit ever obtained the
legally required permission for a shareholding in EIB that, when
combined, exceeded 10%;

* in the absence of such authorisation to invest in EIB, there was no
“investment agreement” under the BIT;

* for the same reasons, “investment authorisation” for Claimants’
holdings in EIB was also lacking;

¢  Baltoil never applied for a qualified holding permit for its interest
in EIB, as required by law;

¢ Eastern Credit’s 1992 foreign investment license was obtained on
false pretences (i.e., that the company had US$34,000,000 in
assets) and was, in any event, superseded by the enactment in 1995
of the Credit Institutions Act, which required Eastern Credit to
obtain a new authorisation;

¢ Eastern Credit’s purchase of EIB’s claims relating to the sale of
Koidu branch does not represent an “investment” under the BIT.
Moreover, the rights and remedies purchased from EIB did not
include the right to ICSID arbitration, and Claimants do not
allege misconduct by Respondent with respect to the alleged
investment represented by the assignment. Further, Eastern Credit
never paid for the assignment of EIB’s claims: the alleged Decem-
ber 1996 transfer of funds for this purpose was illusory.

173. Respondent submits that there was no misrepresentation made by the
Bank of Estonia in the sale of the Koidu branch. Indeed, Respondent alleges

44 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

that all representations concerning the Koidu branch assets were made by
Social Bank personnel. Respondent also contends that Mr. Kraft had no
specific knowledge of the Koidu branch assets sold at the auction and that he
did not make any representations whatsoever concerning those assets.

174. Respondent submits that, after the auction, Claimants had the
opportunity to inspect the Koidu branch assets and to review them on-site,
at the branch, prior to going forward with the transaction. Respondent
contends that Claimants availed themselves of this opportunity, which
demonstrates that they did not, in fact, rely on whatever prior representa-
tions concerning the assets may have been made.

175. Respondent states that the 3,000,000 EEK payment for the Koidu
branch was made to the Bank of Estonia (and not Social Bank) in order to
satisfy Social Bank’s obligations to the Bank of Estonia. Respondent submits
that this is clearly not a case of expropriation, and that, even were it to be
considered an expropriation, it would be an expropriation of Social Bank’s—
not EIB’s—assets.

176. Respondent submits, lastly, that, even if Eastern Credit legally
acquired EIB’s claims relating to the sale of the Koidu branch, those claims
were already time-barred in 1996, since the statute of limitations for a fraud
claim, under Estonian law, is one year.

Claimants Claim 2: The “Tentative” Koidu Settlement Agreement

177. Respondent contends that the 12 April 1996 agreement between EIB
and the Bank of Estonia was only a “tentative” settlement agreement, “little
more than a conditional memorandum of understanding” and not enforce-
able under Estonian law.

178. Respondent alleges that, because the Bank of Estonia was unable to
obtain certain third-party approvals necessary to give effect to the tentative
agreement, it proposed another form of agreement to EIB. Respondent
contends that, when Mr. Genin refused this second offer, on 5 August 1996,
the tentative agreement of 12 April 1996 became “null and void”.“° In any

46 Counter-Memorial, p. 37; Respondent's Exhibits 24 and 26.

AWARD 45

event, Respondent alleges that Claimants suffered no damage as a conse-
quence of these events.

Claimants’ Claim 3: EIB’ Reduction In Capital

179. Respondent submits that the claim based on EIB’s reduced capital
does not involve an arbitrable “investment agreement” between Claimants
and the Republic of Estonia.

180. Respondent declares that, more than two years after the Koidu
branch acquisition, its banking regulators determined that EIB’s approxi-
mately 20,000,000 EEK claim against Social Bank should be reclassified on
its books as a “doubtful account”. Respondent alleges that, in order to avoid
this reclassification, EIB sold the claim to Eastern Credit.

181. Respondent contends that there was no agreement between EIB and
the Bank of Estonia regarding amortisation of EIB’s Koidu branch-related
losses over five years (the so-called “Write-Off Agreement”). Respondent
claims that EIB’s ability to amortise those losses was, in any event, unrelated
to the Bank of Estonia's instructions to reclassify the asset in question, which
simply constituted prudent banking oversight.

Claimants Claims 4 & 5: The Qualified Holding Prescription

182. Respondent alleges that, in the course of routine semi-annual
inquiries, inspectors of the Bank of Estonia discovered many discrepancies in
EIB’s books and records. Respondent alleges that EIB either refused to
provide information regarding these discrepancies or provided inadequate
information.

183. Respondent claims that, among the questions raised by EIB’s records,
it was discovered that Eurocapital Co. (the company that had applied for and
received a qualified holding permit in 1995) was not listed as a shareholder,
but that there were two companies listed as Eurocapital Ltd. EIB, Respon-
dent claims, stated that the companies were one and the same, but refused to
provide any documentation in this regard to the inspectors.

184. Estonia also claims that its inspectors uncovered evidence of ques-
tionable transactions, including:

46 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

* Pacific Commercial Credit, a subsidiary or affiliate of Eurocapital,
was receiving “deposits” from EIB;

¢ EIB was involved in the purchase and sale of shares of two corpora-
tions, Tollycraft and Landmark, that were misleadingly and inaccu-
rately reported; and

* Claimants themselves, through these transactions, had diverted
millions of dollars from EIB to their own accounts.

185. As indicated above, Respondent alleges that Eastern Credit, Baltoil
and Eurocapital Ltd., were not authorised to be shareholders of EIB, none of
them ever having applied for qualified holding. However, Respondent
acknowledges that “Eurocapital Group Co.” did apply for, and was granted,
a qualified holding permit in 1995.

186. Respondent contends that the above-mentioned discrepancies and
Claimants’ confusing, if not deceptive, use of what appeared to be multiple
shell companies, justified the Bank of Estonia's requests for information.
Respondent also submits that the information requested by the Bank of
Estonia from EIB was directly related to Bank of Estonia’s oversight respon-
sibility and had nothing to do with the US litigation.

187. Respondent states that the Bank of Estonia’s power to obtain infor-
mation relating to a financial institution, its operations and its shareholders
derives from the Credit Institutions Act and the Bank of Estonia Act, and that
its requests, as indeed all of its conduct in this case, were in full conformity
with its statutory rights and responsibilities.

188. Finally, Respondent submits that Claimants have failed to demon-
strate any damages arising from these “transgressions” and that, in any event,
its claims are barred by the one-month statute of limitations relating to
administrative acts under Estonian law.

Claimants’ Claims 6 & 7: The License Revocation

189. Respondent submits that EIB’s license was revoked because EIB
committed serious violations of the Estonian banking code. In particular :

¢ EIB repeatedly refused to provide information or reported false
and misleading information to regulatory authorities;

AWARD 47

¢ EIB’s principal shareholders did not have qualified holding per-
mits;

¢ EIB had difficulties in meeting its minimum capitalisation require-
ments;

¢ EIB, its shareholders and their affiliates were responsible for a
series of questionable transactions; and

¢ EIB artificially inflated its balance sheet.

190. Respondent submits that, for the above-mentioned reasons, EIB’s
license revocation was justified. Respondent also contends that this revoca-
tion cannot be considered an expropriation.

191. Respondent declares that there was no denial of justice in the Esto-
nian courts, and that much of what Claimants now complain of was due to
their own dilatory tactics in the various Estonian proceedings.

192. Finally, Respondent submits that Claimants’ claims are time-barred.
Claimants’ Claim 8: Harassment

193. Respondent claims that the criminal investigation of Mr. Genin for
possible tax evasion and Mr. Dashkovsky’s troubles with the Immigration
Board had nothing to do with the matter of EIB’s conduct.

194. Respondent submits that, in any case, this claim is not an “invest-
ment dispute” under the BIT and therefore does not give rise to an arbitrable
claim, and further submits that Claimants have failed to demonstrate any
damages relating to the alleged harassment.

Damages and Counterclaim

195. As a preliminary matter, Respondent submits that Eastern Credit’s
purchase of EIB’s claims relating to the sale of the Koidu branch does not
involve an investment agreement with the Republic of Estonia and, there-
fore, is not an arbitrable “investment dispute” under the BIT.

196. Respondent also contends that the transfer of EIB’s claims relating to
the sale of the Koidu branch to Eastern Credit was entered into for the

48 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

purpose of artificially inflating EIB’s balance sheet and that there is no
evidence that any money was ever paid to EIB. Indeed, Respondent alleges
that Eastern Credit, employing feigned transactions, used over-valued
stock to divert in excess of US$500,000 from the coffers of EIB to the

Claimants.4”

197. Similarly, Respondent alleges that Claimants diverted in excess of
US$1,000,000 in transactions involving the purchase and sale by EIB of
shares in Tollycraft Corporation.*®

198. Respondent submits that Claimants’ request for the future value of
EIB, following a merger and/or a public offering, is purely speculative, and
that such damages may not be recovered under Estonian law. Respondent
also points out that such a claim is based on ownership of 100% of EIB,
while Claimants (to the exclusion of “Eurocapital”) only owned 9.2% of EIB
49 Thus, Respondent contends that,
even assuming that any damages resulting from that violation could be estab-
lished, Claimants would only be entitled to 9.2% of those damages.

at the time that the license was revoked.

199. Respondent also alleges that Mr. Genin and Mr. Dashkovsky took
approximately US$ 2,900,000 out of EIB after the license was revoked, and
that this constitutes a preferential transfer in violation of Estonian law.

200. Respondent submits Claimants are not entitled to recover any sums
from Respondent, but should, rather, be required to return the proceeds of
their various illicit transactions.

201. By way of counterclaim, Estonia requests damages in excess of
US$3,400,000 for money illegally diverted from EIB by the Claimants, plus
the costs of the arbitration.

3) Claimants’ Response
202. As ordered by the Tribunal, Claimants filed their Reply Memorial

(“Reply”), with supporting documentation, on 18 July 2000.

47 Counter-Memorial, p. 52.
48 Counter-Memorial, p. 53.
4° Counter-Memorial, p. 54, referring to Claimants’ Exhibit 12.

AWARD 49

203. In their Reply, Claimants address a series of preliminary points.

204. First, Claimants allege that Eastern Credit owns Baltoil, and that
there is overwhelming documentation contained in public records in Estonia
in that regard. Claimants also state that it is not possible for them to prove
who the shareholders of Eurocapital Ltd. were at the time that the transac-
tions at issue in this arbitration occurred, because the shares of Eurocapital
Ltd. are, and always have been, issued to bearer.

205. Claimants reiterate their contention that the Bank of Estonia revoked
EIB’s license in order to avoid its responsibility for misrepresentations in
connection with the sale of the Koidu branch, and that the Bank of Estonia
created so-called “regulations” (the 1997 Regulations/Guidelines) in order to
discover information from EIB’ shareholders that it hoped to use in the
United States litigation.

206. Claimants point out that the only trouble that EIB had in main-
taining its legal capital requirements resulted from the losses it suffered in the
purchase of the Koidu branch, for which the Bank of Estonia is responsible.
Indeed, it was the Bank of Estonia's breach of the April 1996 Koidu Settle-
ment Agreement that imperilled the bank’s capitalisation. Further, the third
party agreement that the Bank of Estonia claims was a condition of the
Settlement Agreement was, in essence, irrelevant.

207. Claimants contend that all transactions concerning Landmark Inter-
national, Tollycraft and Pacific Commercial Credit are legitimate. Moreover,
Claimants submit that the Bank of Estonia revoked EIB’s license on the sole
ground of the alleged failure to apply for qualified holdings. For this reason,
it is Claimants’ contention that Respondent's arguments regarding these
transactions have nothing to do with the present arbitration.

208. Claimants assert that all of the relief sought by them is grounded in
breaches of the BIT that occurred after the date on which the BIT entered
into force. Claimants point out that the Treaty specifically applies to invest-
ments that were already in effect at the time the Treaty went into force.

209. Claimants reiterate their position that the assignment of claims to
Eastern Credit by EIB was not limited to claims against Social Bank, but

50 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

rather covered any claims arising out of the sale of Koidu branch, including
claims against the Bank of Estonia.

210. Claimants contend that the assignment of EIB’s claims to Eastern
Credit was validly paid for with the transfer of Landmark and Tollycraft
shares.

211. Claimants submit that the one-year statute of limitations raised by
Respondent only applies to a cause of action to cancel a contract on the basis
of misrepresentation, and not to a cause of action for compensation. Claim-
ants allege that the cause of action for compensation, which comprises the
sort of claims made in this arbitration, has a ten-year statute of limitations
under Estonian law.

212. Finally, as regards the amount of damages claimed, Claimants submit
that Respondent has not offered any evidence as an alternative to
Mr. Murray’s valuation of the fair market value of EIB.

4) Respondent’s Rejoinder

213. As ordered by the Tribunal, Respondent filed its Rejoinder Memorial
(“Rejoinder”), with supporting documentation, on 18 August 2000.

214. In its Rejoinder, Respondent reiterates that EIB lost its license
because it failed to follow the law governing the operation of a commercial
bank in Estonia.

215. Respondent states that, under international law, it is the party
alleging a violation of international law giving rise to international responsi-
bility that has the burden of proving the allegation. Respondent submits that
Claimants have failed to meet this burden.

216. Respondent reiterates that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
over the claims that relate to acts that occurred before the entry into effect of
the BIT, citing, as examples, Claimants’ claims 1 to 3.

217. Respondent also contends that the Bank of Estonia at all times acted
in conformity with the relevant banking laws and regulations.

AWARD 51

218. Respondent then reviews its position with respect to each of the
issues addressed in its Counter-Memorial.

Claimants’ Claim 1: The Koidu Branch

219. Respondent contends that Claimants’ claim regarding compensation
for misrepresentations in the sale of Koidu branch is not related to an
“investment” for which there may be an “investment dispute” under the BIT;
that the investment in question is a domestic claim by EIB; and that Eastern
Credit should not be able to convert an acquired domestic claim into an
international dispute. Respondent also contends that this “investment” is
pre-BIT and is therefore not subject to arbitration.

220. Respondent further submits that there is no proof that the Bank of
Estonia made any misrepresentations in the sale of Koidu branch.

Claimants’ Claim 2: The April 1996 Settlement Agreement

221. Respondent reiterates its contention to the effect that the April 1996
Koidu Settlement Agreement between EIB and the Bank of Estonia was
merely a memorandum of understanding, or tentative agreement, and that
no final agreement was ever entered into. Respondent also points out that
this attempt to reach an agreement was ultimately rejected by Alex Genin,
who declared all prior agreements, including the tentative agreement, “null
and void”.

222. Respondent submits that the allegations relating to this claim are pre-
BIT and, for this reason, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the
matter.

Claimants’ Claim 3: EIB’s Reduction in Capital

223. Respondent reiterates its contention that there was no agreement
between EIB and the Bank of Estonia to amortise EIB’s losses relating to the
sale of the Koidu branch over a five-year period. Respondent explains that
such an accounting mechanism is recognised in Estonia and is available to
all, but that EIB apparently chose not to avail itself of this mechanism.

224. Respondent also submits that the allegations relating to this claim are
pre-BIT and are therefore not subject to arbitration.

52 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Claimants’ Claims 4 & 5: The Qualified Holding Prescription

225. Respondent submits that the requests for information by the Bank of
Estonia from EIB were reasonable and in accordance with published Esto-
nian law.

226. Respondent also submits that, under Estonian law, the claims
relating to the March 1997 Prescription or the September 1999 license revo-
cation are barred by the Estonian statute of limitations.

Claimants’ Claim 6: The License Revocation

227. Respondent reiterates its position that the Bank of Estonia was justi-
fied in revoking EIB’s license and that it did so in accordance with the laws
of Estonia.

228. Respondent also reiterates its submission that the litigation before
Estonian courts and the statute of limitations for challenging administrative
acts gives rise to an absolute, jurisdictional bar to arbitration on this issue.

Claimants’ Claim 7: The Actions of the Estonian Courts

229. First, Respondent points out that it was a minority shareholder of
EIB, over whom Respondent exercised no control, who initiated mandatory
liquidation of EIB. For this reason, Respondent contends that this act cannot
be attributed to the Republic of Estonia.

230. Respondent further submits that the Bank of Estonia revoked EIB’s
license in accordance with Estonian law and that this was neither the result
of, nor did it give rise to, any denial of justice in the Estonian administrative
or judicial process.

231. Respondent also reiterates that Claimants’ prior resort to litigation in
Estonia divests the Tribunal of jurisdiction.

Claimants’ Claim 8: Harassment
232. Respondent reiterates its position that the claim of “harassment” is

not an “investment dispute” and that the acts described in the claim have no
relation to this case.

AWARD 53

Damages

233. Respondent asserts that the valuation report prepared by Mr. Murray
is flawed; that it is Claimants’ burden to construct a credible model of
damages; and that they have failed to do so in this case. Respondent also reit-
erates its contention that Claimants have suffered no damages from the
actions of the Bank of Estonia.

234. In any event, Respondent reiterates that the appropriate measure of
damages in this case is the quantum actually lost by the Claimants and not
the value of a 100% interest in EIB.

235. Moreover, Respondent reiterates that Claimants illicitly diverted
nearly US$3,000,000 to Eurocapital following the revocation of EIB’s
license, and that the proceeds from these transactions must be returned.

G. THE ORAL PROCEDURE

236. In accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, each party filed with the
Tribunal, prior to the commencement of the oral hearing, written statements
by its witnesses.

237. As scheduled, the hearing commenced on Monday, 2 October 2000,
in Washington, D.C. Eleven witnesses were heard and counsel for the parties
presented extensive oral arguments.

238. The hearing ended on Friday, 6 October 2000.
1) Claimants’ Evidence

239. On behalf of Claimants, the following two expert and four fact
witnesses appeared and gave evidence during the oral hearing:

¢ Mr. Brian V. Murray and Mr. Janos Eros, both of whom were
involved in the preparation of the expert valuation prepared for
Claimants, gave evidence jointly, as agreed by counsel and the Tri-
bunal. They testified as to the nature of their mandate (to value
EIB, not its operating license per se), the conduct of their mandate
and the conclusions reached by them. They testified that, in their

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

opinion, the most realistic valuation could be attained only on the
basis of a “going concern” analysis and by means of a “price to
book value” assessment. Their “going forward” approach involved
estimating a value for EIB had it been able to achieve its business
plan objectives, one of which included a possible merger with Evea
Bank and eventual listing on U.S. stock markets. The witnesses
stressed that they had no mandate to conduct an audit of EIB or to
test the financial or other information provided to them by Messrs.
Genin and Daskkovsky, which formed the basis of their analysis.

Mr. Alex Genin testified, over almost two full days, regarding vir-
tually all aspects of Claimants’ claims as well as the issues raised in
Respondent's submissions. This included the origin and nature of
the Claimants’ respective shareholdings in EIB, the ownership and
inter-relationship of the various companies in which Mr. Genin is
involved, and the actions of EIB and its shareholders, on one hand,
and of the Bank of Estonia, on the other, comprising the factual
background to the arbitration. Of particular interest was
Mr. Genin’s disclosure, for the first time in these proceedings, that
he is the beneficial owner of the “bearer” shares of Eurocapital.
Mr. Genin also gave evidence regarding the transactions at issue in
the arbitration, involving himself, his companies, EIB and third
parties, including as regards the purchase and sale of Landmark
and Tolleycraft stock. He also testified as to the history of his rela-
tionship with the Bank of Estonia and, in particular, Mr. Kraft;
this included evidence concerning his companies’ various requests
for investment authorisation, as well as the alleged Koidu Settle-
ment Agreement and Write-Off Agreement between the central

bank and EIB.

Mr. Michail Dashkovsky gave evidence regarding his ten-year rela-
tionship with Mr. Genin, working on projects in Russia and Esto-
nia, and his eventual appointment as president of EIB. Along with
Mr. Genin, Mr. Dashkovsky was a key participant in almost all of
the events on which Claimants’ claims are based, including EIB’s
purchase of the Koidu branch and the subsequent negotiations,
with Mr. Kraft of the Bank of Estonia, regarding the losses alleg-
edly suffered by EIB as a result of that purchase. Mr. Dashkovsky
also testified regarding the ownership of the various companies at
issue in the arbitration. In addition, he gave evidence regarding the
relationship between EIB and the Bank of Estonia, the latter’s

AWARD 55

2)

240.

audits, inspections and requests for information, EIB’s responses to
those requests and, generally, regarding events leading up to the
revocation of EIB’s license. Finally, Mr. Dashkovsky testified
regarding the alleged harassment suffered by him at the hands of

the Estonian authorities.

Mr. Viktor Kaasik, Claimants’ and EIB’s Estonian counsel, gave
evidence regarding certain aspects of the Estonian statutes at issue
in the arbitration (the Credit Institutions Act and the Bank of Esto-
nia Act), as well as regarding the proceedings launched by EIB to
challenge the 9 September 1997 revocation of its license.
Mr. Kaasik testified that, in his opinion, much of the information
requested of EIB and its shareholders by the Bank of Estonia prior
to the revocation of EIB’s license was illegal, and the revocation
itself constituted a breach of Estonian law.

Mr. Janus Mody, a lawyer working with Mr. Kaasik’s law firm, tes-
tified regarding EIB’s responses to the Bank of Estonia’s various
information requests, including the May 1997 filing of applica-
tions for qualified holdings and the EIB’s request regarding the
legal basis of the March 1997 Regulations/Guidelines. He also gave
evidence regarding certain provisions of the Bank of Estonia Act
and the Credit Institutions Act and, in particular, their English
translations. Of particular relevance was Mr. Mody’s testimony
regarding a meeting with representatives of the Bank of Estonia,
prior to the revocation of EIB’s license, at which he claims to have
shown those present a document containing information respon-
sive to the Bank of Estonia's various requests, in response to which
he was told that the sole purpose of those requests was to garner
information that would be of use to Bank of Estonia in its defence
to the Texas litigation initiated by Eastern Credit.

Respondent’s Evidence

The following two expert and three fact witnesses appeared and gave

evidence on behalf of Respondent:

Mr. Paul Varul testified regarding his expert opinion concerning
the Bank of Estonia Act and the Credit Institutions Act. He gave evi-
dence regarding the origin and the nature of these statutes and
their applicability to the questions at issue in this arbitration. His

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

testimony covered the specific provisions of the Estonian legisla-
tion that, in his opinion, empower the Bank of Estonia to request
such information as it considers necessary in the exercise of its reg-
ulatory and supervisory functions; this includes the legislative pro-
visions empowering the Bank of Estonia to revoke an institution's
license, provisions which, in Mr. Varul’s opinion, were respected in
this instance.

Mr. Vahur Kraft, President of the Bank of Estonia, gave evidence
principally in respect of the sale of the Koidu branch of Social
Bank and the subsequent events relating to alleged discrepancies in
the branch's balance sheet. Mr. Kraft also testified regarding the
nature and content of the so-called Koidu Settlement Agreement,
which he described as tentative, and, generally, regarding the
action of the Bank of Estonia leading up to and surrounding the
revocation of EIB’s license. In particular, Mr. Kraft described the
decision-making process immediately preceding the Bank of Esto-
nia’s revocation of EIB’s license on 9 September 1997, and
explained the reasons for the Bank of Estonia’s decision.

Ms. Eve Sirts, the head of the Off-site Supervision Sub-department of
the Banking Supervision Department of the Bank of Estonia, pro-
vided evidence concerning details of the Bank of Estonia’s various
requests for information, which culminated in its decision to revoke
EIB’s license. Ms. Sirts testified regarding the conduct of the Bank of
Estonia’s inspections and audits of EIB, as well as regarding the rea-
sons for those inspections and their results. In particular, she gave evi-
dence with respect to the various “concerns” regarding EIB alleged in
Respondent's written submissions, such as the identity of Eurocapital,
alleged self-dealing among EIB and its shareholders and EIB’s alleged
misstatement of assets on its books. Ms. Sirts also described the
nature of the March 1997 Regulations/Guidelines, including their
use by the Bank of Estonia in this and other instances.

Mr. Aare Tark, Estonian counsel to the Bank of Estonia, gave evi-

dence and answered questions from the Tribunal.>° He testified
as to various procedural issues associated with the Estonian legal
proceedings launched by Claimants, and expressed his opinion

50 While a witness statement by Mr. Tark had been filed by Respondent, neither Claim-

ants nor Respondent expressed a desire to examine him at the hearing.

AWARD 57

1)

241.

that the long delays in the conduct of those proceedings was the
fault of EIB. He also gave evidence regarding the Bank of Estonia's
authority to issue Prescriptions (Precepts) and described the nature
of such Prescriptions and the obligations arising therefrom.

Mr. Joseph Anastasi, a representative of Deloitte & Touche gave
evidence seeking to rebut the expert report and testimony of
Claimants’ witness, Brian V. Murray. Although Mr. Anastasi did
not participate in the Deloitte & Touche report in this regard,
which was filed with Respondent’s written submissions, his testi-
mony was permitted by agreement of the parties and with the con-
sent of the Tribunal. Accordingly, Mr. Anastasi testified in
particular as regards the assumptions underlying Mr. Murray’s
report and the methodology employed by him, which, in his opin-
ion, rendered Mr. Murray’s conclusions inaccurate.

H. POST-HEARING SUBMISSIONS
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial

As ordered by the Tribunal, Claimants duly filed their Post-Hearing

Memorial, with supporting documentation, on 19 December 2000.

242.

In their Post-Hearing Memorial, Claimants summarize what they

refer to as “the core issue” in this case as follows:

243.

(. . .) Estonia violated the [BIT] when its state enterprise, the
Bank of Estonia, revoked [EIB’s] license at a time when the
bank was a solvent and growing institution, the depositors
and creditors of the bank were in no danger, and the [Claim-
ants’] investment in the bank posed no potential harm to the
Estonian banking system.>!

“Boil{ing] this case down to its essence”, Claimants’ declare:

(.. .) [w]hat makes the Bank of Estonia's actions so unjust,
so unfair, and so totally without due process is the complete

51 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 1.

58 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

lack of any legitimate reason to take the extreme measures of
destroying (EIB].>2

244. Claimants’ post-hearing submissions focus on “the nature of the
conduct of the Bank of Estonia as reflected in its actions and the allegations
it has attempted to make in this proceeding.”

245. Claimants emphasise that the motivations of the Bank of Estonia are
at the heart of the matter, and are relevant in determining whether or not its
actions were fair, just and in accordance with the requirement of due process.

246. Claimants declare that the case that the Bank of Estonia attempted
to make when it revoked EIB’s license and that it is now defending in this
arbitration is but an “illusion”, that is, “an attempt (...) to persuade the deci-
sion-maker that some circumstance is true without meeting [the] burden of
proof on that issue.”

“Proof vs. Illusion”

247. Claimants submit that they have met their burden of proof on the
evidence that they have adduced.

248. They state that, on 9 September 1997, EIB’s license was revoked, for
four stated reasons:

(1) the address of Eurocapital Group on EIB’s stock register
was Houston, Texas, while on the list of stockholders it
was the Isle of Man;

(2) the Bank of Estonia refused to recognise that Eurocapi-
tal Co. and Eurocapital Ltd. are the same entity;

(3) the EIB failed to provide information on the sharehold-
ers of Eurocapital Group;

(4) EIB’s shareholders did not provide information sufficient
to determine their application for qualified holdings.

% Ibid, p. 2.

4 Ibid. p. 3.

AWARD 59

249. In response, Claimants state the following :

(1) Eurocapital Group has both an Isle of Man address and
a Houston, Texas, address;

(2) the Bank of Estonia knew, on 9 September 1997, that
Eurocapital Group Company and Eurocapital Group
Ltd. are the same company;

(3) the Bank of Estonia knew that the shareholder of Bal-
toil was Eastern Credit, that Eastern Credit was owned
by Mr. Genin and had been informed in April 1996,
that Mr. Genin was also Eurocapital Group’s owner and
sole shareholder;

(4) the necessary investment licenses and authorisations
had already been granted to Claimants.

250. Claimants contend that, in order for “misinformation” to be a
ground for license revocation, the allegedly wrong or misleading data in
question must have been communicated deliberately, which is not the case
with EIB.°°

251. Claimants allege that, on 10 February 1997, the Bank of Estonia
requested information about EIB’s shareholders that it had already twice
requested in 1996, at the time EIB and the Bank of Estonia were involved in
the United States litigation over the Koidu branch. Claimants contend that
Estonian law did not allow the Bank of Estonia to request this information.

252. Claimants reiterate that, when the Bank of Estonia sent EIB a set of
regulations in support of its request for information in regard to Claimants’
applications for qualified holding (the March 1997 Regulations/Guidelines),
EIB responded with its own request regarding the legal basis for the regula-
tions. Claimants state that the Bank of Estonia never responded to this
request. Claimants contend that the Bank of Estonia's decision to revoke
EIB’s license, while ignoring EIB’s legitimate request, was unfair, unjust and
contrary to due process.

55 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, pp. 8-9; Claimants’ Exhibit 16 to Respondent's
Exhibit 3.
56 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, pp. 9-10; Claimants’ Exhibit 9, Article 195.

60

253.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Claimants submit that the Bank of Estonia’s decision to revoke EIB’s

license is flawed in three respects :

254.

(1) the stated reasons were false;

(2) even in the event that the reasons were true, those rea-
sons are purely formalistic, with no substantive basis;

(3) even in the event that the reasons were true and based
on substantive issues, revocation was a disproportionate
remedy in the circumstances.

Claimants also allege that, as a result, the Bank of Estonia’s revocation

of EIB’s license is unjust, unfair and devoid of due process.

255.

256.

The Bilateral Investment Treaty
Claimants submit that the Bank of Estonia has violated the BIT:

by revoking EIB’s license;

by failing to abide by the April 1996 Koidu Settlement Agreement;
and

by failing to abide by the March 1996 Write-Off Agreement.
In this regard, Claimants refer to the following provisions of the BIT:

Article 2, Paragraph 2 (b), requiring Estonia to ensure that the
conduct of governmental authority by the Bank of Estonia was not
inconsistent with its obligations under the Treaty;

Article 2, Paragraph 3 (a), requiring Estonia to accord “fair and
equitable” treatment to Claimants’ investment;

Article 2, Paragraph 3 (b), prohibiting Estonia from impairing by
arbitrary means Claimants’ activity related to that investment;

Article 2, Paragraph 3 (c), requiring that Estonia abide by its agree-
ments entered into in connection with Claimants’ investment;

Article 2, Paragraph 7, requiring Estonia to provide effective means
for the Claimants to assert claims and enforce their rights regard-
ing their investment;

AWARD 61

¢ Article 3, requiring an expropriation to meet the requirements of
due process (paragraph 1) and requiring the availability of a
prompt review of the expropriation (paragraph 2);

¢ Article 7, Paragraph 1, rendering the Treaty applicable to invest-
ments that existed at the time the Treaty became effective.

257. Claimants contend that the BIT applies retroactively to all invest-
ment disputes that arise from a failure by the State to abide by the Treaty,
even if the controversy initially arose before the Treaty went into effect.

“The Defenses That Never End”

258. Claimants contend that most of the Bank of Estonia's stated justifi-
cations for its actions were not mentioned at the time of EIB’s license revo-
cation. Claimants contend that these justifications have been constructed for
the purpose of this arbitration.

“Inconsistent Reasoning”
259. Claimants allege the following:

¢ Eastern Credit has held an authorised qualified holding in EIB
since the early 1990s;

*  Baltoil is the subsidiary of Eastern Credit; and

¢  Eurocapital Group Ltd. has held an authorised holding since 1995.

260. Claimants contend that the Bank of Estonia concocted, in 1997, a
technical argument that the above-mentioned entities had neither applied
nor received permission for qualified holdings in EIB.

261. Moreover, Claimants allege that Estonian law requires the Bank of
Estonia to notify an applicant for a qualified holding of its decision in regard
to that application within one month. Claimants submit that this was not
done for the above-mentioned entities when they re-applied for qualified
holdings, in 1997. Claimants state that the Bank of Estonia instead
responded, on exactly the 30th day after receipt of the applications, by
sending the March 1997 Regulations/Guidelines.

62 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

262. Claimants assert that, while Respondent claims that the March 1997
Regulations/Guidelines were established in 1995, the information suppos-
edly required by that instrument was never requested of Eurocapital when it
applied for a qualified holding, in 1995, approximately six months after the
Credit Institutions Act went into effect. Claimants contend that the March
1997 Regulations/Guidelines were fabricated specifically so that the Bank of
Estonia could use them to get information from EIB for use in the United
States litigation.

“When is an Eye Really an Ear”

263. Claimants assert that the fact that Mr. Genin has incorporated
numerous companies for specific purposes (such as the need to have a corpo-
rate entity in different countries) merely reflects the scale of Mr. Genin’s
business activities, not that he is engaged in any improper activity.

264. Claimants emphasise that it is Estonia that bears the burden of
proving that the existence of those corporations is related to activity that
affected EIB in an improper way. Claimants submit that Estonia has failed
to provide any evidence that these companies were involved in any wrong-

doing.

265. Regarding the Landmark and Tollycraft stock transactions, Claim-
ants contend that, overall, EIB lost no money in these transactions.°” Claim-
ants also submit that the Respondent has not proved any wrongdoing merely
by showing that this stock was purchased by the bank and ultimately sold to
its shareholders. Claimants allege that the reason for transferring the stock
into EIB in the first place was to cover losses caused by the Bank of Estonia's
reneging on the March 1996 Write-Off Agreement.

266. Claimants submit that Respondent bears the burden of proving that
Claimants have acted improperly in a manner that related to the revocation
of EIB’s license. Claimants declare that Estonia has provided no evidence of
such wrongdoing or of any relationship between the conduct in question and
the revocation of EIB’s license.

57 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 30-31; Claimants’ Exhibit 98-100.

AWARD 63

“Alex Genin’s Testimony Concerning Eurocapital”

267. Claimants acknowledge that Mr. Genin declared at the hearing that
he considers himself to be the beneficial owner of Eurocapital Ltd., after
having previously maintained, throughout the case, that he was not the
owner of the company.

268. Claimants contend that the fact that this declaration was not made
previously does not have any bearing on the merits of the case, because
Estonia already knew, in essence, that Mr. Genin was the owner of Euro-
capital Group—in early 1996, EIB stated this fact in its report to the Bank
of Estonia.°® Further, there is nothing in the record that would in any way
indicate that Estonia believed the shareholder of Eurocapital to be anyone
other than Mr. Genin, or that the Bank of Estonia believed there was
anything improper in Mr. Genin’s ownership.

269. In addition, Claimants suggest that Mr. Genin’s ownership of Euro-
capital is actually favourable to his claims in the arbitration:

* since the BIT defines an investment as being “direct or indirect”,
an investment in the name of Eurocapital Ltd. is arbitrable;

* the ownership issue in no way changes the fact that Eastern Credit
had entered into an agreement with Eurocapital Ltd. to borrow
funds for the purchase of EIB stock in its own name.

270. Claimants state that the Bank of Estonia was not concerned about
Eurocapital Ltd. until the US litigation began, and that all the matters that
the Bank of Estonia complained about in September 1997, when it revoked
EIB’s license, had been evident at least since 1995.

271. Claimants concede that Mr. Genin’s failure to reveal the fact that he
considered himself the beneficial owner of Eurocapital Ltd. could be consid-
ered to have affected this case. They declare that, as a result, it would be
appropriate for the Tribunal to adjust the amount of costs to be awarded in
the arbitration, to reflect the extra work and expenses to which Mr. Genin’s
conduct in this regard has contributed.

58 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 32; Claimants’ Exhibit 16 to Respondent's
Exhibit 3.

64 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

272. However, Claimants submit that, even had Mr. Genin stated at the
outset that he was the beneficial owner of Eurocapital Ltd., it is clear that
Respondent would have investigated the matter in any event, given that the
shares are issued to “bearer” and are currently held as collateral by another
individual. Claimants contend that, while the issues that would have been
raised might have been different, the issue of Eurocapital’s ownership would
not have been eliminated altogether.

‘A Matter of Perspective”

273. In regard to Mr. Hobbs, the promoter of the Tollycraft stock who was
apparently found to have engaged in securities fraud, Claimants state that
there is no indication that Mr. Genin was in any way related to those matters.

274. Claimants contend that, whether or not Mr. Hobbs is a criminal,
there is no proof of any wrongdoing by Mr. Genin.

“Get Out Your Straightedge”

275. Claimants submit that, throughout the arbitration, whenever Estonia
is unable to reply to the documentary evidence, it qualifies that evidence as
forged. For example, the Bank of Estonia denies receiving the 26 May 1997
letter produced by Claimants, in which Mr. Mody, Estonian counsel to EIB,
requests the legal justification for the March 1997 Regulations/Guideline,
even though internal Bank of Estonia documents indicate that personnel
from EIB reminded the Bank of Estonia of this letter well before the EIB’s
license was revoked in September 1997. Similarly, Estonia suggests that
Claimants’ Exhibit 80, a letter predating the license revocation by a year, in
which various “rumours” regarding the Bank of Estonia's intentions vis-a-vis
EIB are recorded—intentions that were actually manifested over the course
of the ensuing year—is a forgery.

276. Finally, Claimants reiterate their submissions to the effect that the
Bank of Estonia revoked EIB’s license on totally fabricated grounds and
without any prior notice, that Respondent caused negative publicity for EIB
and its investors, and that it harassed those investors and Mr. Dashkovsky.°

5° Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 44.
© Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 45.

AWARD 65

277.

“Damages”

Claimants explain the valuation of EIB conducted by B.V. Murray &

Company, by stating the following :

278.
projections of the value of the merged entity as of the end of 1999, are as
follows:

279.
awarded is the market value of the investment at the time that the injury
occured,°! including future profits.

Claimants own a total of 84.145 % of EIB (assuming that Euro-
capital is a direct investment of Genin);

the value of EIB, as valued by B.V. Murray & Company in Septem-
ber 1997, when EIB’s license was revoked, ranges between US$20
million to US$21 million;

at the time, there was good chance that EIB would merge with a
financial institution known as EVEA Bank;

the total equity in a merged EIB/EVEA entity would have been
151.6 million EEK; EIB’s share would have been 82.3 million EEK
(54%), while EVEA Bank’s share would have been 69.3 million
EEK (46%);

Claimants would have owned 84.145% of 54% of the merged
bank, i.e. approximately 46%;

B.V. Murray & Company's three alternate valuations, based on

$29 million to $36 million, based on Estonian market conditions
at the time;

$67 million to $112 million, as a bank publicly traded on the less
volatile, more liquid US markets.

$100 million to $125 million, as an “internet stock” traded on US
markets.

As a matter of law, Claimants argue that the amount that should be

61 Claimants cite the AAPL v. Sri Lanka case.

66 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

280. Claimants state that the calculation of damages should also include
the 5% interest in EIB held by a company called OCS, which was bought
back by Eurocapital, out of fairness towards OCS, when EIB’s license was
revoked by the Bank of Estonia.°”

2) Respondent’s Post-Hearing Memorial

281. As ordered by the Tribunal, Respondent duly filed its Post-Hearing
Memorial, with supporting documentation, on 19 December 2000.

282. In its Post-Hearing Memorial, Respondent states that Claimants’
entire case lacks credibility; that their assertions are unsubstantiated, as
nearly all their “proof” derives from the self-serving declarations and unreli-
able oral testimony of Mr. Genin and Mr. Dashkovsky; and that no credible,
contemporaneous evidence—documentary or otherwise—has been offered
to support their claims of misrepresentation, breach of contract, denial of
justice or harassment.

283. Respondent claims that Mr. Genin’s evasiveness at the hearing illus-
trates that he was attempting to circumvent Estonian banking regulations
and deceive Estonian banking officials.

284. Respondent submits that, based on what has been revealed about EIB
in this proceeding, it is abundantly clear that it was not unfair, inequitable
or arbitrary for the Estonian regulators to act to protect depositors and cred-
itors by revoking EIB’s license.

“Jurisdiction is Absent”

285. Respondent alleges that Mr. Genin controlled EIB—both directly
and indirectly—through his subordinates and other corporations over which
he had unlimited authority. Three such corporations, Eurocapital Ltd.,
Eastern Credit and Baltoil, held over an 85% interest in EIB when the license
was revoked.

® Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, pp. 45-49. Claimants refer to their Exhibit 103.

AWARD 67

286. Respondent also submits that the testimonial and documentary
evidence proves that Mr. Genin dominated and controlled EIB and its
majority shareholders. Specifically :

* Mr. Genin was Chairman of the Board of EIB;

«Mr. Genin and his surrogates, Mr. Dashkovsky, Ms. Dee Severson,
Mr. James Sutherland, and Mr. Joselito Sangel, engaged in numer-
ous, non-arms length transactions with EIB;

* Mr. Genin had unlimited investment authority for EIB;

* in exercising his authority, Mr. Genin reportedly transferred assets
(e.g. the Tollycraft and Landmark stock he had obtained both per-
sonally and in the names of Eastern Credit and Eurocapital) to EIB
without requiring or producing any written documentation;

* one of the few written documents regarding the transfers of shares
was unilaterally disregarded by Mr. Genin: Mr. Genin entered into
a “put” agreement with EIB which he ignored once he felt that the
bank had benefited enough from the instrument (although EIB
had the right under the agreement to sell its remaining 500,000
shares of Tollycraft stock to Eurocapital for $4.50 per share,
Mr. Genin decided that Eurocapital should only pay $1.75 per
share);

¢ Although the Texas litigation is not “litigation in the host State”,
which would divest the Tribunal of jurisdiction, it provides further
evidence of how Claimants dominated EIB and ignored the tradi-
tional boundaries between a company and its shareholder—in that
instance, by means of a self-serving “assignment” of EIB’s rights to
Eastern Credit;

* Messrs. Genin and Dashkovsky used EIB to pay for their Houston
office space;

¢ EIB paid substantial “management fees” to Eurocapital, although
there is no evidence that there was any type of management agree-
ment between the two companies;

¢ Mr. Dashkovsky was the “formal decision maker” who first autho-
rised EIB’s decision to pursue litigation in the Estonian courts over
the Koidu bank dispute;

68 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

* Mr. Genin admitted he was the owner and sole shareholder of
Eastern Credit throughout the relevant period;

«Mr. Genin beneficially owned Eurocapital at all relevant times, and
held a “full” power of attorney to act on Eurocapital’s behalf

« Mr. Genin made decisions to appoint and replace Eurocapital’s
directors, including his secretary and his wife, and also dictated

how Eurocapital’s ledgers were handled;©?

* Respondent also submits that there is no evidence that anyone other
than Mr. Genin (through his companies and Mr. Dashkovsky) con-
trolled EIB.

287. Respondent submits that the parties to the arbitration are, in effect,
the same as those in the Estonian court proceedings and that, for this reason
alone, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction in this case.

288. Respondent contends that, under Article VI (3) of the BIT, ICSID
has no jurisdiction if the “national or company” submitted the dispute for
resolution to the courts or administrative tribunals of Estonia. Respondent
also alleges that it would be contrary to the BIT to allow an entity (EIB) to
sue in one forum while its parent company or shareholders sue, derivatively
elsewhere, for the same alleged wrong.

289. Respondent also submits that Baltoil is not owned by Eastern Credit,
as claimed by Claimants, and therefore Baltoil cannot be a proper claimant
in this arbitration under Article VI (8) of the BIT.

“Genin’s Story is not Credible”

290. Respondent contends that Mr. Genin’s testimony is discredited for
the following reasons, and should therefore be rejected by the Tribunal :

¢ he lacks credibility;

* he repeatedly gave inconsistent statements on key issues in this
case;

© Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, pp. 3-4.

AWARD

291.

he deliberately misrepresented facts when it was to his legal and
financial advantage to do so; and

he engaged in questionable financial activities.

Respondent contends that there are many inconsistencies in

Mr. Genin’s testimony, e.g. the refusal or inability to explain the origin and
nature of Eurocapital, while finally admitting, during his cross-examination,
that he is its legal owner.”

292.

Respondent alleges that Claimants’ entire relationship with the Bank

of Estonia was predicated upon false and misleading information :

293.

Eastern Credit misrepresented its financial condition when it orig-
inally submitted financial statements to the Bank of Estonia in
1992, listing $34 million in assets which it did not, in reality, own.

Eurocapital’s application for a qualified shareholding in EIB, in

1995, was likewise predicated upon false information submitted by Genin
and Dashkovsky to the Bank of Estonia:

294,

Eurocapital misrepresented itself as “Eurocapital Group Company”
when, in fact, there is no evidence that such a company ever
existed;°

Ms. Severson, Mr. Genin’s secretary, forged the signature of Euro-

capital Ltd.’s CFO, Mr. Gregory Zak, on the application.©%

Respondent contends that this evidence is but part of a larger pattern

of conduct in which Mr. Genin and his associates fabricated documents and
evidence to support their ends, for example:

Mr. Genin admitted that he used fictitious names on commercial
contracts;

Mr. Genin knowingly participated in false “confirmations” of non-

existent transactions; and.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, pp. 7-9.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 11; Respondent's Exhibit 146.

6 Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 10; Respondent's Exhibit 109.

70 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

* Mr. Genin manufactured evidence of US $41 million damages as
. - 67
made-up expenses for another Genin entity (Sovtex).

295. Respondent submits that, given Claimants’ pattern of conduct, no
weight should be given to allegations that are not substantiated by credible,
independent evidence.

296. Respondent contends that the testimony at the hearing on the merits
showed the extent to which Mr. Genin, aided and abetted by Mr. Dashkovsky,
regularly engaged in self-dealing between and among his companies to further
his own personal interests. For example:

« Mr. Genin prepared and signed documents as both borrower and
lender;

* the funds of many of Eurocapital’s clients were regularly commin-
gled with Eurocapital’s own money;

«Mr. Genin used his companies to buy his house (Pacific Commer-
cial Credit) and his car (Eastern Credit);

¢ EIB agreed to settle its lawsuit with Social Bank in exchange for
the latter’s promise to pay over 20 million EEK, although EIB
“never contemplated that those payments would be met by Social
Bank”;

* Mr. Genin used worthless stock in a defunct corporation, Tolly-
craft, through a series of feigned transactions, to inflate artificially
EIB’s balance sheet;

* similarly, Mr. Genin acquired shares of Landmark for less than
$0.15 per share from Peter Hobbs, which he immediately conveyed
to EIB at a much higher price;

¢ EIB executed a “put” with Eurocapital, but sold shares to Eurocap-
ital below the strike price when Mr. Genin decided the bank had
benefited “enough”;

¢ EIB made a $2.9 million “deposit” of its money with Eurocapital
to secure Eurocapital’s claim against EIB.

°7 Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 11.
68 Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 12.

AWARD 71

“Dashkousky’s Story is not Credible”

297. Respondent contends that Mr. Dashkovsky lacks credibility for the
following reasons :

¢ he (along with Mr. Genin) executed most of the documents involv-
ing related-party transactions;

* he conceded on cross-examination that he effectively “sent to him-
self” a letter from EIB to Eastern Credit, Baltoil and Eurocapital
requesting information from those companies;

* although he knew the answers to the questions posed by the Bank
of Estonia, he never provided the bank’s regulators with the infor-
mation requested during their inspections.

“The Revocation of EIB’ License was Justified”

298. Respondent claims that the decision to revoke EIB’s license was not
made overnight, but was based on events that had occurred over the better
part of a year. The bank’s license was revoked for several reasons, as disclosed
in the minutes of the meeting of the Council of the Bank of Estonia and in
the formal “denunciation” (revocation notice) of the license. Those reasons

included:
* the submission of incorrect or misleading information about share-
holders;

¢  Eurocapital Ltd. had not been granted permission for a qualified

shareholding;

¢ EIB had refused to provide information concerning its sharehold-
ers and concerning parties and companies related to those share-

holders;

¢ the instructions contained in the 10 February 1997 and 13 February
1997 letters had not been fulfilled; and

* the documents necessary to consider the granting of an authorisa-
. : - . 9
tion for a qualified shareholding had not been submitted.

© Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 17.

72 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

299. Respondent also submits that Claimants, even when purportedly
“responding” to the Bank of Estonia’s requests for information, never actually
provided the information requested.

300. Respondent reiterates that Estonian banking law permits the Bank of
Estonia to request information from financial institutions, and specifically
provides for the revocation of an institution’s license in the event that such
information is not transmitted. Respondent also asserts that Estonian
banking officials had legitimate questions about the identity EIB’s share-
holders.

301. For these reasons, Respondent contends that the Bank of Estonia's
requests for information in order to determine EIB’s shareholders’ identity,
as well as its decision to revoke EIB’s license to operate as a depository insti-
tution, were not unfair, arbitrary or inequitable.

302. Respondent reiterates that, following the license revocation, EIB was
given the opportunity to challenge the action in the Estonian courts, that it
availed itself of its due process rights and was heard, repeatedly, in a series of
legal challenges. Respondent also states that there is no evidence of any irreg-
ularity or fraud in the Estonian legal system; no reasons have been offered by
Claimants as to why the Tribunal should effectively “disavow the Estonian
legal system at the international level.”

“The Koidu Branch Claims Have no Merit”

303. Respondent contends that the Koidu branch claims fail for several
reasons:

Claimants offer no evidence that Mr. Kraft had knowledge of the
condition or value of the Koidu branch assets that EIB purchased;

Mr. Kraft had not worked for Social Bank for years, and was never
in a position at Social Bank that would have given him knowledge
of the Koidu assets;

EIB’s purchase of the Koidu branch assets is not an “investment”

under the BIT.

304. Regarding the 12 April 1996 “tentative agreement”, Respondent reit-
erates that Claimants have not adduced any evidence that the Bank of

AWARD 73

Estonia acted improperly, nor did they submit proof that the Bank of Estonia
breached a binding agreement by failing to obtain the third-party consent
necessary for agreement to be finalised. Respondent also contends that EIB
never intended to perform its obligations under the Settlement Agreement.

305. Respondent contends that the Koidu branch claims should fail
because no damages have been demonstrated. It submits that Claimants have
offered no credible evidence regarding how the fair market value of their EIB
shareholding—which Respondent alleges comprises no more than approxi-
mately 8%—was diminished by any alleged wrongdoing relating specifically
to the Koidu branch affair.

306. Finally, Respondent reiterates that all of the claims relating to the
Koidu branch concern events that occurred in 1994-1996, thus pre-dating

the BIT.
“Claimants Have Suffered No Damages”

307. Respondent contends that Claimants have suffered no damages in
the present case, for the following reasons :

* Claimants presented no evidence of the fair market value of their
pro rata portion of EIB as of the date of the revocation of its
license;

¢ Mr. Murray’s opinion is not credible and does not prove the fair
market value of Claimants’ interest. No independent investigation
of the information upon which he based his opinion was ever
made; the valuation was based on totally unrealistic growth projec-
tions;”?

¢ Mr. Murray failed to account for the relatively small percentage of
EIB shares actually owned by Claimants (approximately 8%) and
the value that might be assigned such a small portion even in an
eventual merger with EVEA Bank;

¢ EIB was not insolvent at the time of the license revocation.
Mr. Genin and Mr. Dashkovsky transferred approximately $2.9
million of EIB’s funds to Genin-controlled trading accounts of

79 Respondent's Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 27.

74 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Eurocapital Ltd. and gave up $2.75 per share on Tollycraft shares
when EIB intentionally waived its right to force Eurocapital Ltd.
to purchase the shares at $4.50 each under a pre-existing “put”
option agreement;

* Claimants failed to mitigate any damages that they may have suf-
fered. For example, the license revocation did not prevent EIB from
reorganising as a lending (as opposed to a depository) institution.

308. Respondent also contends that Claimants should not be entitled to
claim damages on the basis of Eurocapital’s interest in EIB, since Eurocapital
is not a party to the arbitration. Likewise, Respondent contends that, since
there has been no evidence that Baltoil was owned by Eastern Credit at the
time of the alleged wrongful actions, its interest should not be accounted for.

309. Finally, Respondent states that the Tribunal should award Estonia the
$2.9 million transferred out of EIB by Mr. Genin and Mr. Dashkovsky, so that
it may continue the liquidation process. As long as these funds are held by
Eurocapital, Respondent states that it will be impossible to wind down the
bank and distribute its funds to any remaining creditors and shareholders.

“Mr. Genin’s Conduct Compels an Award of Costs & Fees”

310. Respondent claims that Mr. Genin’s conduct throughout this case,
and his extraordinary efforts to obfuscate the truth, demonstrate his severe
lack of credibility. By way of example, Respondent cites the issue of
Mr. Genin’s ownership of Eurocapital.

311. Respondent submits that an award requiring Claimants to reimburse
it the costs and fees incurred defending itself in this proceeding is a proper
means for the Tribunal to sanction Mr. Genin’s conduct.

I. ISSUES AND ANALYSIS

312. Given the exceedingly lengthy and detailed submissions made by the
parties, and the extensive documentation filed by them as evidence, the
Tribunal has summarized, above, in greater detail than might otherwise have
been the case, the parties’ respective positions. At the end of the day,
however, and as the foregoing recital makes clear, the issues to be determined
are relatively few.

AWARD 75

313. The claims—the so-called “eight transgressions” of the BIT—alleged
by Claimants, and addressed at length in the parties’ respective written
submissions, can properly and logically be grouped into three categories:

(1) Claims relating to EIB’s purchase of the Koidu branch and
its losses arising therefrom (“Transgressions” 1 and 2);

2) Claims relating to the revocation o! ’s license
(2) Clai lating hi i f EIB’s li
(“Transgressions” 3 to 7);

(3) Claims concerning the alleged harassment of Messrs.
Genin and Dashkovsky (“Transgression” 8).

314. By way of counterclaim, Respondent asks the Tribunal to order the
restitution of $2.9 million allegedly transferred out of EIB by Messrs. Genin
and Dashkovsky and currently held by Eurocapital, failing which Respon-
dent claims it will be impossible to finalize the liquidation of EIB.

315. Accordingly, the substantive issues to be determined may be simply
and comprehensively stated as follows:”!

(1) Did Respondent, in the person of its agency, the Bank
of Estonia, violate the BIT or Estonian law in relation
to the sale of the Koidu branch to EIB or in regard to
the handling of losses relating to EIB’s purchase of the
branch (and if so, what damages are owed as a result)?

(2) Did Respondent, in the person of its agency, the Bank
of Estonia, violate the BIT or Estonian law by revoking
EIB’s license (and if so, what damages are owed as a
result)?

(3) Did Respondent, in the person of its police or other
agencies, violate the BIT or Estonian law by “harassing”
Messrs. Genin and/or Dashkovsky (and if so, what
damages are owed as a result)?

(4) Is Respondent's counterclaim justified (and if so, what
damages are owed as a result)?

71 ‘The issue of the costs of the arbitration, and their allocation as between the parties, is
dealt with in the following section of this Award.

76 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

316. From the foregoing, and consistent with its obligations under the
Convention and the BIT, it is evident that the mandate of the Tribunal is to
determine whether the conduct of Respondent or its agencies, as alleged in this
case, constitutes a breach of the BIT. More specifically, the fundamental ques-
tion is whether the conduct of the Bank of Estonia as regards the sale of the
Koidu branch and the revocation of EIB’s license, and of the Estonian police
as regards their treatment of Messrs. Genin and Dashkovsky, was such as to rise
to the level of violations of the international law standards of “fair and equal
treatment” and “non-discriminatory and non-arbitrary treatment” of invest-
ment, as those standards are reflected in Articles II(3)(a) and (b) of the BIT.

317. For the reasons explained more fully below, this multi-part question
must be answered in the negative.

318. Prior to addressing the four issues identified above, however, it is
necessary to consider the objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in this case,
as formulated by Respondent.

1) Jurisdictional Issues

319. The Tribunal wishes to express the following observations regarding
the matter of jurisdiction. The amount of $1.6 million paid by Eastern
Credit for the claims it bought from EIB could only with difficulty be
considered an “investment” within the meaning of Articles I and VI of the
BIT, for many of the reasons set out by Estonia in its Counter-Memorial.”7
Moreover, the payment was not made in cash, as required by Article 27(2) of
the Law on Credit Institutions, and could not, therefore, qualify as additional
capital. As a result, if the entirety of Claimants’ case revolved around EIB’s
purchase of the Koidu branch and the losses allegedly suffered by Claimants
as a result, it is possible that jurisdiction would not be present. This is not,
however, the case. Rather, “the heart of the matter” to be determined by the
Tribunal, to borrow Respondent's words,”? is the legitimacy of the Bank of
Estonia’s concerns regarding EIB and its reaction to those concerns, that is,
its revocation of EIB’s license. Claimants, too, recognize that “the core issue”
in the arbitration is the revocation of EIB’s license.’4 The Tribunal agrees. As

72
73
74

Counter-Memorial, pp. 31-33.
Counter-Memorial, p. 1; see also para. 102 of this Award.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, p. 1; see Part H of this Award.

AWARD 77

such, the question of jurisdiction relates essentially to Claimants’ ownership
interest in EIB (as opposed to EIB’s ownership interest in the Koidu branch)
and whether that interest constitutes an investment under the BIT such as to
afford jurisdiction to the Tribunal.

320. The Tribunal has no hesitation in stating that Respondent's objection
to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over claims relating to Claimants’ owner-
ship of EIB and the loss of that investment do not withstand scrutiny and

should thus be dismissed.

321. Estonia claims that the Claimants were not entitled to submit their
dispute with the Government of Estonia for settlement by binding arbitra-
tion provided for in the BIT, for two reasons. First, Respondent submits that
Claimants’ claims do not relate to “investments” as that term is understood
in the BIT. Second, Estonia argues that those claims were previously litigated
in Estonia and the U.S.; both the BIT and the Convention include provi-
sions relating to choice of forum, and by choosing to litigate their disputes
with Estonia in the Estonian courts, argues Estonia, Claimants have
exhausted their right to choose another forum to relitigate those same
disputes.

322. In his declaration in support of Estonia’s contentions, Prof. Andreas
E Lowenfeld expresses his opinion that Claimants, Eurocapital Group and
EIB “(. . .) are affiliated with one another, and that they are or were all
controlled or managed by Mr. Alex Genin and/or his associate Mr. Michael
Dashkovsky.””> Prof. Lowenfeld goes on to state:

If I am correct that all of the corporate entities are affiliated
with one another and are or have been under common con-
trol, it follows, in my view, that any resort to local adminis-
trative or judicial remedies by any member of the group is
attributable to all members of the group and to the group
itself . . . It would be wholly inconsistent with the principle
{of “election of remedies”] . . . and in particular with the
objective of avoiding inconsistent decisions, for one member
of the group to try a domestic court, for another member of

7 Declaration of Prof. Andreas E Lowenfeld dated 10 November 1999, Exhibit B to
Respondent's Memorial in support of its objection to jurisdiction, p. 11. Prof. Lowenfeld also
testified, on behalf of Respondent, at the 8 January 2000 hearing on jurisdiction.

78 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the group to try an administrative proceeding, and for still
another member of the group (or its controlling sharehold-
ers) to submit the dispute to arbitration pursuant to the BIT
and the ICSID Convention.”

323. In order to assess the validity of Prof. Lowenfeld’s conclusion that
Claimants have forfeited their right to have their claims arbitrated under
ICSID’s auspices, it is appropriate to consider, one by one, the conditions
laid down in the Convention and the BIT for ICSID to have jurisdiction in
this case. Those conditions are:

(1) A legal dispute arising directly out of an investment;

(2) between a Contracting State or an agency of a Con-
tracting State; and

(3) a national of another Contracting State;

(4) consent to submit the dispute to ICSID; and, as a con-
dition attached to Respondent’s consent given in the
BIT,

(5) that the Claimants have not submitted the dispute for
resolution to the courts or administrative tribunals of
Estonia or in accordance with any applicable, previ-
ously agreed dispute-settlement procedure.

324. The term “investment” as defined in Article I(a)(ii) of the BIT clearly
embraces the investment of Claimants in EIB. The transaction at issue in the
present case, namely the Claimants’ ownership interest in EIB, is an invest-
ment in “shares of stock or other interests in a company” that was “owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly” by Claimants. The investment of Claim-
ants in EIB is also embraced by the meaning of the term “investment” under
the Convention.

325. An “investment dispute” is defined in Article VI(I) of the BIT as a

“dispute arising out of or relating to: (a) an investment agreement . . . (b) an
investment authorization . . . or (c) an alleged breach of any right conferred

76 Id.

AWARD 79

or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment”. The revocation of
EIB’s license is, without doubt, covered by this definition.

326. It is also significant to note that Article XII of the BIT provides for
the application of the BIT to all investments made prior to, and existing at
the time of, the entry into effect of the Treaty, on 16 February 1997.

327. The Bank of Estonia is an agency of a Contracting State. The Esto-
nian central bank is a “state agency”, as defined by the BIT, which stipulates
in Article II 2(b) that “Each Party shall ensure that any state enterprise that
it maintains or establishes acts in a manner that is not inconsistent with the
Party's obligations under this Treaty wherever such enterprise exercises any
regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority that the Party has
delegated to it, such as the power to expropriate, grant licenses . . .”. The
Republic of Estonia is therefore the appropriate Respondent to a complaint
relating to the conduct of the Bank of Estonia.

328. The Claimants are nationals of another Contracting State.
Mr. Genin is an American citizen and Eastern Credit is a U.S. corporation
wholly-owned by him. Baltoil is an Estonian corporation wholly-owned by
Eastern Credit and therefore entitled to be considered a national of the
United States by virtue of Article 25(2)(a) of the Convention and Article
VI(8) of the BIT.

329. Estonia's consent to resolution of disputes by submission to ICSID
arbitration is provided in Article VI(3) of the BIT. Claimants provided
evidence of their consent to submit this dispute to ICSID arbitration in their
Request and in their Exhibit B.

330. The first four conditions having been satisfied, the fundamental issue
as regards the matter of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in this case relates to
whether the Claimants have submitted the dispute for resolution to the
courts or administrative tribunals of Estonia or in accordance with any appli-
cable, previously agreed dispute-settlement procedure. Two questions arise in
this regard. First, to what extent were the issues litigated in Estonia and the
United States identical to those raised by the Claimants in this arbitration?
And second, is it proper to consider EIB and the Claimants as a “group” and
to view EIB’s legal acts in Estonia as an “election of remedy” for the group as
a whole?

80 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

331. As to the first of these questions, the Tribunal is of the view that the
lawsuits in Estonia relating to the purchase by EIB of the Koidu branch of
Social Bank and to the revocation of EIB’s license are not identical to Claim-
ants’ cause of action in the “investment dispute” that they seek to arbitrate
in the present proceedings. The actions instituted by EIB in Estonia
regarding the losses suffered by EIB due to the alleged misconduct of the
Bank of Estonia in connection with the auction of the Koidu branch and
regarding the revocation of the Bank’s license certainly affected the interests
of the Claimants, but this in itself did not make them parties to these
proceedings.

332. The distinction between the causes of action brought by EIB, in
Estonia, and by the Claimants, here, is perhaps best illustrated by the
circumstances of EIB’s recourse to the courts in the matter of its license revo-
cation. The effort by EIB to have the Bank of Estonia’s decision overturned,
and its license restored, was in effect undertaken on behalf of all the Bank’s
shareholders (including minority shareholders), as well as on behalf of its
depositors, borrowers and employees, all of whom were damaged by the
cessation of EIB’s activities. It is quite obvious that this matter had to be liti-
gated in Estonia; there was no other jurisdiction competent to deal with the
restoration of the status quo. The “investment dispute” submitted to ICSID
arbitration, on the other hand, relates to the losses allegedly suffered by the
Claimants alone, arising from what they claim were breaches of the BIT.
Although certain aspects of the facts that gave rise to this dispute were also
at issue in the Estonian litigation, the “investment dispute” itself was not,
and the Claimants should not therefore be barred from using the ICSID
arbitration mechanism.

333. Estonia also submits that since Article VI(8) of the BIT qualifies EIB
as a U.S. “national or company”, its resort to the courts and administrative
tribunals of Estonia should preclude the “parents” from submission of their
dispute to an ICSID arbitration. However, as mentioned above, EIB had no
choice but to contest the revocation of its license in Estonia, in the interest
of all its shareholders, whereas the Claimants submitted to ICSID arbitration
an “investment dispute”, as defined by the BIT, seeking compensation for
what they claim was a violation of their rights under the BIT.

334. For similar reasons, the litigation instituted by one of the Claimants,
Eastern Credit, in the United States, should also not be an obstacle to ICSID
arbitration. The U.S. litigation did not relate to the major issue at stake

AWARD 81

here—the revocation of EIB’s license—and should not be considered resort
to an alternative forum under Article VI (2)(a) of the BIT such as to preclude
submission of the present “investment dispute” to arbitration.

335. As regards the question of jurisdiction over the last of Claimants’
claims, arising from the alleged harassment of Messrs. Genin and Dashk-
ovsky, the Tribunal declines to address the matter other than to state that the
question need not be resolved given the lack of any support for the claim
itself. Moreover, the claim, if not entirely abandoned by Claimants, has been
relegated to secondary—if not tertiary—status in Claimants’ submissions at
the hearing and subsequently.

2) The Koidu Branch Purchase and its Aftermath

336. The facts relating to the Koidu branch transaction, and the parties’
submissions in this regard, are dealt with in some detail above, in Parts E, F
and H of this Award. Many of the facts pertinent to this Award are indeed
uncontested as between the parties. For present purposes, it is sufficient to
highlight those events of particular relevance, which include the relevant

facts as found by the Tribunal.

337. On 12 August 1994, EIB purchased the Koidu branch of Social
Bank, in an auction organized by the Bank of Estonia. The Sales Agreement
was signed, on behalf of Social Bank, by Mr. Vahur Kraft then Vice-President
of the Bank of Estonia. The purchase price of 3 million EEK was paid to the
Bank of Estonia, according to the instructions of Mr. Kraft. On
16 September 1994, EIB informed the Bank of Estonia that the assets of the
branch fell short of the amounts stated in the balance sheet provided to it in
advance of the auction, creating a loss of approximately 7.25 million EEK.
EIB blamed Kraft, inter alia, for the discrepancies and claimed that he should
have been aware of them, having formerly been an officer of Social Bank.

338. The Inspection Department of the Bank of Estonia, designated by
the parties in the Sales Agreement of 13 August 1994 as a final arbiter in the
event of a dispute “with regard to the description of the Object”, determined
that EIB’s claim against Social Bank was unfounded.

339. EIB sued Social Bank for recovery of its losses, but on or about 28
April 1995 the parties reached an out-of-court settlement entitling EIB to
transfer to Social Bank some 21 million EEK of the Koidu branch assets and

82 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

receive payments totalling approximately 17 million EEK in instalments
stretching over close to three years. These payments were secured by loans
totalling some 47 million EEK from the loan portfolio of Social Bank, that
were apparently worthless. Only about 1 million EEK were paid on account
of this settlement since Social Bank was declared bankrupt soon after signing
the settlement.

340. EIB applied to the Bank of Estonia, asking for compensation for its
losses. The Bank of Estonia agreed to cover a substantial part of EIB’s claim
against ESB Finanskontor Ltd. (the successor to Social Bank), by assigning
to EIB its rights in loans granted to other Estonian banks in the total amount
of 15 million EEK. A tentative agreement to this effect was signed on
12 April 1996. On 5 August 1996, the Bank of Estonia sent EIB the draft of
an agreement that altered some of the terms of the tentative agreement.

341. Claimants contend that the 12 April 1996 tentative agreement was
binding and that the changes made in the new agreement diminished the
value of the package that had been promised in the tentative agreement. For
this reason, EIB refused to sign the second agreement and assigned to Eastern
Credit its interest in the settlement with Social Bank. The Claimants also
consider the purchase by Eastern Credit of EIB’s claims, resulting from the
Koidu branch purchase, to be a separate investment of more than $1.6
million in Estonia. Eastern Credit went on to sue the Bank of Estonia and
Mr. Kraft in Texas.””

342. Another offshoot of the Koidu branch affair relates to the accounting
treatment of the losses arising from the purchase of the branch in EIB’s
balance sheet. In a letter dated 4 March 1996 to EIB, Mr. Sutt from the Bank
of Estonia’s Bank Inspectorate suggested that the loss would be amortized
over a period of no more than five years. Six months later, the Bank of
Estonia demanded an immediate write-off of the said loss, resulting in a
capital deficiency for EIB.’®

343. In sum, Claimants claim that the Bank of Estonia violated
Article II(3)(a) of the BIT, which provides for the fair and equitable treat-
ment of investments, by the following acts or omissions:

77 The assignment was substituted later by a sales agreement selling EIB’s claims arising
from the acquisition of the Koidu branch to Eastern Credit for 20 million EEK.
78 Claimants’ Exhibit 38.

AWARD 83

(1) Its refusal to compensate EIB for the losses resulting
from the misrepresentations of the Koidu branch assets
in which the Bank of Estonia participated;

(2) the Bank of Estonia’s breach of the tentative agreement
to settle the Koidu branch controversy with EIB;

(3) the Bank of Estonia's reversal of its previous agreement
to allow a gradual amortization of the losses caused to
EIB, which necessitated the $1.6 million sale to Eastern
Credit of EIB’s claims arising from its acquisition of the
Koidu branch.

344. These claims are rejected, for the following reasons.

345. First, there is no legal basis for the demand that the Bank of Estonia
compensate EIB for its losses arising from the Koidu branch purchase. The
claim that Mr. Kraft participated in the misrepresentation of the branch
assets is simply not substantiated. His previous association with Social Bank,
in a head-office function, does not support the contention that he was aware
of the condition of the credit portfolio of the branch at the time of the
auction. On the other hand, the officers of EIB who conducted the negotia-
tions regarding the purchase of the branch clearly acted unprofessionally and,
indeed, carelessly. A credit portfolio cannot be checked on the spot in a few
hours; the buyers should have known that Social Bank was on the verge of
bankruptcy and should thus have taken extra precautions, such as insisting
on warranties relating to the quality of the assets. The responsibility for the
result of EIB’s conduct, including its omissions, is EIB’s alone.”?

346. Second, although the Claimants contend that the April 1996 agree-
ment with the Bank of Estonia was intended to be final, despite the heading
“Tentative Agreement”, this Tribunal is not persuaded that the proposed
change in the package of assets offered to EIB in August 1996 justified its rejec-
tion by EIB without further negotiation. Simply put, the claim that the Bank
of Estonia breached a binding agreement was not proven to our satisfaction.

347. Third, no convincing explanation was provided to the Tribunal
regarding why the Bank of Estonia was willing to allow a gradual writing

79 Ie should be noted, however, that one would expect a central bank handling an auction
of the assets of a failing institution to be more attentive to the potential risks to the buyers.

84 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

down of the Koidu branch’s bad assets; neither were we adequately informed
why this decision was apparently reversed.®° In any event, whatever was the
reason for the Bank of Estonia's apparent change of mind, it cannot be
considered a breach of agreement. Both the decision to allow gradual amor-
tization and its reversal were regulatory rulings, and the demand to write
down the losses at once was not, in the circumstances, unreasonable
according to accepted accounting practices.

3) The Revocation of EIB’s License

348. We turn now to the crux of the case to be determined—what Claim-
ants refer to as “the core issue” and Respondent calls “the heart of the matter”:
the revocation of EIB’s license. In doing so, the Tribunal considers it imperative
to recall the particular context in which the dispute arose, namely, that of a re-
nascent independent state, coming rapidly to grips with the reality of modern
financial, commercial and banking practices and the emergence of state insti-
tutions responsible for overseeing and regulating areas of activity perhaps previ-
ously unknown. This is the context in which Claimants knowingly chose to
invest in an Estonian financial institution, EIB.

349. As described above,*! the Claimants consider the repeated demands
by the Bank of Estonia to apply for approval of their holdings in EIB, and
the demands for information grounded on what they claim were legally base-
less regulations, as distinct transgressions of their rights under various provi-
sions of the BIT. However, it seems to the Tribunal that these claims are in
fact part and parcel of the principal issue at stake, namely, the legitimacy of
the Bank of Estonia’s revocation of EIB’s license. They will therefore be
treated as such.

   

350. According to Article 42 (1) of the Convention “the Tribunal shall
decide a dispute in accordance with such rules as may be agreed by the
parties. In the absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of
the Contracting State party to the dispute (including its rules on the conflict
of laws) and such rules of international law as may be applicable.” In the
present case, in the absence of any agreement by the parties to the contrary,
it is the law of the Republic of Estonia that applies. Moreover, neither party

80 The Claimants contend that it was an act of retaliation following the lodging of the
lawsuit in Texas.
81 See Parts F and G of this Award.

AWARD 85

has argued otherwise or contended that particular rules of international law
(other than as set out in the BIT and the Convention) apply, and there is no
basis on which to conclude that the application of rules of international law
would effect a result any different than that reached on the basis of Estonian
law.

351. The essence of the explanation given by Respondent for the Bank of
Estonia’s demands to submit fresh applications for “qualified holdings” in
EIB by Eurocapital Eastern Credit and Baltoil is as follows:

It became apparent from EIB’s limited and evasive disclo-
sures that Eastern Credit claimed to be the shareholder of
Baltoil and that, together, they owned more than 10% of
EIB. Under the law, a party wishing to acquire a 10% inter-
est in a bank must first make an application for a qualified
holding. Eastern Credit and Baltoil, however, had never

applied for their qualified holding.

Similarly, “Eurocapital Group Limited” had never applied
for a qualified holding. Although a company called “Euro-
capital Group Company” did apply in 1995, it appeared to
inspectors that the investment was held in the name of Euro-
capital Group Limited and there was great confusion over
the identity of that entity. It was unknown whether “Com-
pany” and “Limited” were the same entities (sic); which
“Limited” was the investor (Hong Kong or Isle of Man);
who was behind Eurocapital; and how Eurocapital was
related to EIB and other shareholders. The only facts that
were known with any degree of certainty were that “Limited”
had not applied for a qualified shareholding and . . . was not
authorized to be a shareholder.5”

352. This is exceptionally formalistic reasoning. On its own, the explana-
tion could not have justified, in the opinion of the Tribunal, the revocation
of EIB’s license, as eventually occurred. However, the facts amply demon-
strate that, although its reasoning may have been superficial, the decisions
reached by the Bank of Estonia and the actions taken by it as a result were
not unsound. A few examples of Claimants’ lack of prudent cooperation in

82 Counter-Memorial, pp. 39-40.

86 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

providing information required by the Bank of Estonia, by virtue of its
powers according to Article 17 (5) of the Bank of Estonia Act, suffice to make
the point.®? Eurocapital used alternate addresses in the U.S., U.K. and Hong
Kong, and the enquiries of the Bank of Estonia with the regulatory authori-
ties of the Isle of Man and Hong Kong yielded ambiguous results. EIB
refused to supply to the Bank of Estonia clear, reliable data concerning share-
holders of their shareholders, inter alia, shareholders of Eurocapital. Tell-
ingly, as discussed above, it was not until Mr. Genin testified at the hearing
in these proceedings, and only after substantial questioning, that the Bank of
Estonia, and indeed the Tribunal, learned for a fact that all of the companies
in question, including Eurocapital, were owned, at all relevant times, by
Mr. Genin himself, either directly or indirectly.54

353. In the opinion of the Tribunal, there is no doubt but that the Bank
of Estonia's demands for information on EJB’s shareholders and their share-
holders were validly based on Article 59 (6) of the Credit Institutions Act®

and constituted entirely legitimate and fully proper exercises of the central
bank’s regulatory and supervisory responsibilities. The information sought
was needed to assess whether EIB granted credit to, or was otherwise engaged
in transactions with, related parties. The unreasonable reluctance of EIB to
divulge this information gave rise to genuine suspicion that transactions with
related parties had taken place. Indeed, in the inspection carried out by the
Bank of Estonia from 4 February 1997 to 7 March 1997, the inspectors took
particular exception to the deposit of $650,000 with Pacific Commercial

83 Article 17(5) provides (see Part E. 3) of this Award):
Eesti Pank has the right to request from all credit institutions data, documents,
reports and agreements as well as to require appropriate explanations of these
data.
84 See Transcript, pp. 426-429, and especially p. 429, lines 15-21.
Article 59(6) provides (see Part E. 3) of this Award):
The Banking Supervision Department will carry out continuous inspection of
a credit institution's activities and its condition on the basis of regular reports
submitted by the latter. If necessary, the Banking Supervision Department is
entitled to:

1) demand that a credit institution submit supplementary information, in
order to specify information in the reports;
2.

demand information from persons who are shareholders of the credit insti-
tution, as well as from legal persons in which the credit institution is a
shareholder;

2

carry out on-site inspection of a credit institution's clients, relating to issues
concerning the relations between the client and the credit institution.

AWARD 87

Credit Ltd., a company located in Hong Kong at the same address as Euro-
capital Group (HK). In the Inspection Report, the following comments
appeared in the section on EIB’s share capital:

During the inspection of EIB the Banking Supervision
Department requested information in respect of sharehold-
ers, related parties as well as subordinate companies and
subsidiaries. No such information was provided. By this
action, Article 60 Section 2 clause 2 of the Credit Institu-
tions Act and Article 17 Section 5 of the Bank of Estonia
Act were violated.°°

354. In its letter dated 21 May 1997, the Bank of Estonia demanded that
the applicants for qualified holdings in EIB submit to the central bank
certain documents and information that were specified in the attached
Procedure for the acquisition, increase and disposal of a qualifying holding
in a credit institution appended to the letter. These were the so-called “Regu-
lations/Guidelines”. EIB, through its lawyers, contested this demand by
purporting to require the Bank of Estonia to “notify by whom and under
which legal basis the specified order has been established” 87

355. We consider that the Bank of Estonia was fully authorized by
Article 17(5) of the Bank of Estonia Act to make such a demand. We find,
further, that the Bank of Estonia was fully empowered to utilize and to
communicate to commercial banks, such as EIB, the sort of “guidelines”
appended to its demand. However, we consider that it was somewhat irreg-
ular to send such a demand to EIB more than 30 days after submission of
the various applications for qualified holdings, on 18 April 1997, when
Article 29(4) of the Credit Institutions Act stipulates that the Bank of
Estonia must notify its decision on an application for the acquisition of a
qualifying holding not later than one month after receiving such applica-
tion. In any event, fortunately or unfortunately as the case may be, the
21 May 1997 demand cannot be regarded as a breach of the relevant stat-
utes or the BIT such as to have caused Claimants any damages or to afford
them any recourse.

86 See EIB Inspection Report, Respondent's Exhibit 80.
87 Respondent's Exhibit 79.

88 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

356. In its report dated 27 June 1997, the Banking Supervision Depart-
ment of the Bank of Estonia reported to the Governor of the Bank of Estonia
on EIB’s transactions in the shares of Landmark and Tollycraft. The
prudence of these investments was, without a doubt, highly questionable.
The amount invested was excessive in relation to EIB’s capital, the prices of
the shares fluctuated widely and Mr. Genin was associated with the
promoters of both. The report concludes that booking the Tollycraft shares
according to their market price would reduce EIB’s capital below the
minimum required. Although the Tolloycraft transaction was covered by a
put option provided by Eurocapital Ltd., which, as alleged by Claimants,
protected EIB, the Landmark shares purchased on 31 October 1996 for
$3.75 per share were sold four months later to Eurocapital Ltd. at $2.50 a
share, for a loss of $500,000.

357. It is quite obvious that the Banking Supervision Department had
good reason to be critical of various aspects of EIB’s business and operations.
It was perfectly justified to request the information which it sought. The
question the Tribunal must answer, however, is whether the central bank
afforded Claimants due process in the procedure leading to the revocation of
EIB’s license. Not without some hesitation, we conclude that the actions of
the Bank of Estonia did not amount to a denial of justice.

358. The principal reasons why the Tribunal is concerned with the process
which led to the revocation of EIB’s license are the following. No notice was
ever transmitted to EIB to warn that its license was in danger of revocation
unless certain corrective measures were taken, and no opportunity was
provided to EIB to make representations in that regard. When the Council
of the Bank of Estonia was convened on 9 September 1997 to discuss the
revocation of EIB’s license, no representative of EIB was invited to respond
to the submission made by P. Nirgi, head of Banking Supervision, and A.
Schmidt, head of the Legal Department, as to why revocation of EIB’s license
was necessary or appropriate in the circumstances.

359. The document presented to the Council by Nirgi and Schmidt
accused EIB of violating numerous Articles of the Bank of Estonia Act and
of the Credit Institutions Act. The main contention related to the discrepancy
between the name of the major shareholder in the share register of EIB
(Eurocapital Group Ltd.) and in the list of shareholders as at the same date
presented to the Banking Supervision Department in the course of an inspec-
tion (Eurocapital Group Company). As a ground for revocation, this conten-

AWARD 89

tion is, as mentioned above, exceedingly formalistic since the amount of
EIB’s shares held by the two entities on 31 July 1997 was identical and one
could have presumed that the two “Eurocapitals” were, in fact, one and the
same. But since the authorization to acquire a qualifying holding in EIB was
granted in 1995 to Eurocapital Group Company and the share register of
EIB recorded Eurocapital Group Limited as the major shareholder, it is argu-
able that the Bank of Estonia was justified in concluding that the latter share-
holder had not received a permit to acquire a qualified holding. It should also
be recalled that in its action before the Tallin Administrative Court of
24 March 1997, EIB, through its lawyers, had claimed that Eurocapital Ltd.,
the major shareholder of record had never acquired or increased a qualifying
interest in EIB.

360. The effect of the Bank of Estonia’s refusal to recognize Eurocapital
Ltd.’s shareholding as a legally-held qualified holding was that the company’s
holdings in excess of 10% less 1 share were deduced from EIB’s capital and
resulted in a large capital deficiency. This result, and the ramifications which
flowed therefrom, are, in the end, soundly based on Article 29(1) of the
Credit Institutions Act.88

361. Can the revocation of EIB’s license be justified on grounds that, at
first blush, appear extremely technical? It is the opinion of this Tribunal that
the decision taken by the Bank of Estonia must be considered in its proper
context—a context comprised of serious and entirely reasonable misgivings
regarding EIB’s management, its operations, its investments and, ultimately,
its soundness as a financial institution.

362. The unlimited authority given to Mr. Genin to invest money on
behalf of EIB made the identity of Eurocapital’s shareholders a matter of
genuine and pressing regulatory concern. Contrary to Claimants’ repeated
assertions, both in their written submissions and during the hearing, the
reluctance of Mr. Genin to divulge the beneficial ownership of Eurocapital,

88 Article 29(1) provides (see Part E. 3) of this Award):
A credit institution or individual who is willing to acquire, directly or indi-
rectly, a qualified holding of a credit institution, or to increase such a holding
to exceed 20%, 30% or 50% of the credit institution's share capital or number
of votes, must apply for authorization from Eesti Pank. The application shall be
submitted in writing and must contain information on the size of the intended
holding.

90 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

which would have enabled the Bank of Estonia’s Banking Supervision depart-
ment to understand the relationship of the various entities associated with
him, was the cause of legitimate concern and cannot be considered to have
been a mere excuse, or pretext, to revoke EIB’s license. Mr. Genin’s failure to
disclose the true ownership of the companies in question was one of the very
reasons for the Bank of Estonia's suspicions regarding EIB—even if the
central bank was unable, at the time, to identify precisely the cause of its
unease or to confirm its suspicions regarding self-dealing among EIB’s share-
holders and affiliated entities.

363. In sum, the Tribunal finds that the Bank of Estonia acted within its
statutory discretion when it took the steps that it did, for the reasons that it
did, to revoke EIB’s license. Its ultimate decision cannot be said to have been
arbitrary or discriminatory against the foreign investors in the sense in which
those words are used in the BIT.8? The decision, as it turns out, was further
justified by subsequent revelations and appears even more understandable

with hindsight.

364. The Tribunal considers, however, that certain procedures followed by
the Estonian authorities in the present instance, while they do conform to
Estonian law and do not amount to a denial of due process, can be charac-
terized as being contrary to generally accepted banking and regulatory prac-
tice. They include the following:

(1) No formal notice was given to EIB that its license
would be revoked unless it complied with the Bank of
Estonia’s demands within a reasonable time;

8

no representative of EIB was invited to the session of the
Bank of Estonia’s Council that dealt with the revocation
to respond to the charges brought by the Governor;

(3) the revocation of the license was made immediately
effective, giving EIB no opportunity to challenge it in
court before it was publicly announced.

365. Having considered the totality of the evidence, the Tribunal
concludes that while the Central Bank’s decision to revoke EIB’s license

89 See Dolzer and Stevens, Bilateral Investment Treaties, 1995, pp. 61 et seq.

AWARD 91

invites criticism, it does not rise to the level of a violation of any provision of

the BIT.

366. The Tribunal has also considered the question whether the Bank of
Estonia’ procedures violated the international law standards of “fair and
equal treatment” and “non-discriminatory and non-arbitrary treatment” of
investment as those standards are reflected in the US-Estonia Bilateral
Investment Treaty.”°

367. Article II(3)(a) of the BIT requires the signatory governments to treat
foreign investment in a “fair and equitable” way. Under international law,
this requirement is generally understood to “provide a basic and general stan-
dard which is detached from the host State’s domestic law.”?! While the exact
content of this standard is not clear,” the Tribunal understands it to require
an “international minimum standard” that is separate from domestic law, but
that is, indeed, a minimum standard. Acts that would violate this minimum
standard would include acts showing a wilful neglect of duty, an insufficiency
of action falling far below international standards, or even subjective bad
faith.?? Under the present circumstances—where ample grounds existed for
the action taken by the Bank of Estonia—Respondent cannot be held to have
violated Article II(3)(a) of the BIT.

368. Article II(3)(b) of the BIT further requires that the signatory govern-
ments not impair investment by acting in an arbitrary or discriminatory way.
In this regard, the Tribunal notes that international law generally requires
that a state should refrain from “discriminatory” treatment of aliens and alien
property. Customary international law does not, however, require that a state
treat all aliens (and alien property) equally, or that it treat aliens as favour-
ably as nationals. Indeed, “even unjustifiable differentiation may not be

90 See Articles I1(3)(a) and (b) of the BIT.

91 Dolzer and Stevens, p. 58; see also American Manufacturing and Trading, Inc. v. Zaire,
Award of 21 February 1997 in ICSID Case No. ARB/93/1, ICCA Yearbook YB Vol. XXII,
1997, pp. 60-86 (noting that the standard is “an objective obligation which must not be inferior
to the minimum standard of vigilance and of care required by international law.”)

% See lan Brownlie, Principles of Public International Law (5th ed.), p. 529 (noting that
“[d]he basic point would seem to be that there is no single standard.”)

° In this regard, see Brownlie, pp. 527-531.

92 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

actionable.” In the present case, of course, any such discriminatory treat-
ment would not be permitted by Article II(1) of the BIT, which requires
treatment of foreign investment on a basis no less favourable than treatment
of nationals.

369. In any event, in the opinion of the Tribunal, there is no indication
that the Bank of Estonia specifically targeted EIB in a discriminatory way, or
treated it less favourably than banks owned by Estonian nationals. Moreover,
Claimants have failed to prove that the withdrawal of EIB’s license was done
with the intention to harm the Bank or any of the Claimants in this arbitra-
tion, or to treat them in a discriminatory way.?>

370. The Tribunal has further considered whether the Bank of Estonia's
actions constituted an “arbitrary” treatment of investment as that term is
used in Article II(3)(b) of the BIT. In this regard, it is relevant that the
Tribunal has found no evidence of discriminatory action.”° In addition, the
Tribunal accepts Respondent's explanation that it took the decision to annul
EIB’s license in the course of exercising its statutory obligations to regulate
the Estonian banking sector. The Tribunal further accepts Respondent's
explanation that the circumstances of political and economic transition
prevailing in Estonia at the time justified heightened scrutiny of the banking
sector. Such regulation by a state reflects a clear and legitimate public
purpose.”

371. It is also relevant that the Tribunal, having regard to the totality of
the evidence, regards the decision by the Bank of Estonia to withdraw the
license as justified. In light of this conclusion, in order to amount to a viola-
tion of the BIT, any procedural irregularity that may have been present
would have to amount to bad faith, a wilful disregard of due process of law
or an extreme insufficiency of action. None of these are present in the case
at hand. In sum, the Tribunal does not regard the license withdrawal as an

 

  

°4 See Dolzer and Stevens, pp. 61-62. See also Oppenheim’s International Law, Volume 1
“Peace” (9th edition), p. 933 (noting that “[a] degree of differential treatment as between
national and foreign investment may be called for, and is not necessarily contrary to the state’s
international obligations”).

°5 See Brownlie, p. 541, footnote 96 (“[tJhe test of discrimination is the intention of the
government’).

% See para. 363 of this Award.

%7 See Brownlie, p. 551.

AWARD 93

arbitrary act that violates the Tribunal’s “sense of juridical propriety.”°°
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Bank of Estonia’s actions did not
violate Article II(3)(b) of the BIT.

372. It is to be hoped, however, that Bank of Estonia will exercise its regu-
latory and supervisory functions with greater caution regarding procedure in
the future.

373. In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that Claimants have failed to show
that the Bank of Estonia’s conduct in cancelling EIB’s license rose to the level
of a violation of the BIT or of the international law principles enshrined
therein.

4) The “Harassment” Claim

374. As regards Claimants allegations of harassment of Messrs. Genin and
Dashkovsky by the Estonian authorities, the Tribunal is far from convinced
that the allegations made by Claimants, even if true, could amount to a viola-
tion of the BIT. In any event, the Tribunal finds that Claimants have failed
to prove that such contacts between Respondent's agents and Messrs. Genin
and Dashkovsky as did take place amount to harassment. Claimants’ claim
in this regard is, accordingly, denied.

375. For all of the foregoing reasons, Claimants’ claims against the
Respondent Republic of Estonia are dismissed.

5) Respondent’s Counterclaim

376. In its various submissions, Respondent asks the Tribunal to award it,
by way of counterclaim, an amount equivalent to sums allegedly transferred
out of EIB by Messrs. Genin and Dashkovsky, and currently held by Euro-
capital, failing which the liquidation of EIB cannot, it says, be finalized. Its

°8 See the ICJ’s decision in the Elettronica Sicula or ELSI Case (United States v, Italy), ICJ
Reports (1989), pp. 15, 73-77 (defining the concept of arbitrariness as “not so much something
opposed to a rule of law, as something opposed to the rule of law. .. . It is a wilful disregard of
due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of juridical propriety”).
Compare Amco Asia Corp. v. Indonesia, Final Award of 5 June 1990 in ICSID Case No. ARB/
81/8, ICCA Yearbook YB Vol. XVII, 1992, pp. 73-105 (following the Elettronica Sicula Case
and finding that procedural irregularities amounted to a denial of justice in the circumstances
of that case).

94 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

claim is expressed in varying fashions, and in varying amounts, in various
99 :

places.°? The apparent confusion need not, however, be resolved for the

purposes of this Award, for the reason that Estonia has failed to demonstrate

to the satisfaction of the Tribunal the merits of its request.

377. The Tribunal notes that Respondent’s allegations are belied, inter
alia, by the terms of a letter dated 15 November 2000 regarding the current
amount of EIB’s assets, addressed to counsel for Claimants by the Liquida-
tion Committee of EIB.!°° That letter reads, in its pertinent part:

We have received your request for information concerning
Estonian Innovation Bank [EIB]. The purpose of this letter I
(sic) to respond to the questions forwarded to you by the
Arbitral Tribunal.

All existing depositors of [EIB] have received their
deposits back, except for a few depositors who are currently
unlocatable. The total amount of deposits that have not
been returned because the depositor is unlocatable is
893,827.40 EEK. If any of these depositors are located,
there is money reserved to return the full amount of their
deposit. The total amount currently held by the bank in
assets is 57,429,515.24 EEK.

All of the creditors of the bank have been paid in full.

To date, no shareholder has received any payment or
distribution.

378. In the light of the foregoing, Respondent’s counterclaim is
rejected.!°!

°° The sum of $3.4 million is mentioned in Respondent's Counter-Memorial at p. 53, $3
million in its Rejoinder at p. 15 and $2.9 million at p. 28 of its Post-Hearing Memorial.

100 Filed subsequent to the hearing, pursuant to a request by the Tribunal, as Claimants’
Exhibit 116.

101 4 question also arises, which need not be and is not answered here, as to whether
Respondent is the proper party to the request set out in its counterclaim. Without deciding the
issue, the Tribunal notes that, even if the facts alleged by Respondent in support of its counter-
claim were true, the proper claimaint of the sums in question is arguably not the Republic of
Estonia but the Liquidation Committee of EIB.

AWARD 95

J. COSTS

379. Two factors, in particular, have shaped the Tribunal’s determination
of the allocation of the costs of the arbitration. Both of those factors relate
to the conduct of the parties as demonstrated by the written and oral
evidence adduced by them.

380. First, the Tribunal cannot but decry Mr. Genin’s failure to cooperate
with the Estonian banking authorities during the period in which the salient
facts underlying the dispute took place. His concealment, right up until his
cross-examination by Respondent's counsel during the hearing, of his owner-
ship of the companies in question was an element of both substantive and
procedural significance, with effect on the conduct of the arbitration. Claim-
ants themselves concede, in their Post-Hearing Memorial, that Mr. Genin’s
conduct could be considered to have affected the case and that it is thus
appropriate for the Tribunal to take this conduct into account when consid-
ering the allocation of costs. The Tribunal cannot but concur with both parts
of that statement.

381. On the other hand, as mentioned above, the awkward manner by
which the Bank of Estonia revoked EIB’s license, and in particular the lack
of prior notice of its intention to revoke EIB’s license and of any means for
EIB or its shareholders to challenge that decision prior to its being formal-
ized, cannot escape censure.

382. Either of these factors, alone, might have impelled an award of costs
against the offending party.

383. Accordingly, and taking into consideration the circumstances of the
case, the Tribunal determines that each party shall bear all of the expenses
incurred by it in connection with the arbitration. The costs of the arbitra-
tion, including the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the ICSID, shall be borne by the parties
in equal shares.

384. Inasmuch as the parties have advanced to the ICSID deposits of
equal amounts in respect of, and adequate to pay, the costs of the arbitration,
no monetary award is required.

96 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

K. AWARD

385. For all of the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously decides:

Respondent's objections to jurisdiction are dismissed;

(2) The Republic of Estonia, in the person of its agency,
the Bank of Estonia, did not violate the BIT or Esto-
nian law in relation to the sale of the Koidu branch of
Social Bank to EIB or in regard to EIB’s claims con-
cerning losses relating to its purchase of that branch;

(3) The Republic of Estonia, in the person of its agency,
the Bank of Estonia, did not violate the BIT or Esto-
nian law by revoking EIB’s license;

(4) The Republic of Estonia did not “harass”
Messrs. Genin or Dashkovsky, in violation of the BIT
or Estonian law;

(5) All of Claimants’ claims are dismissed;
(6) Respondent’s counterclaim is dismissed; and

(7) Each party shall bear all of its own costs and expenses
incurred in connection with the proceedings, and the
costs of the arbitration shall be borne by Claimants and
Respondent, respectively, in equal shares.

L. YVES FORTIER, C.C., Q.C.
President
Date: 18 June, 2001

PROFESSOR MEIR HETH PROFESSOR ALBERT JAN van den BERG
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 13 June, 2001 Date: 07 June, 2001

