INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR
SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
(ICSID)

 

In the Matter of the Arbitration between

ALEX GENIN,
EASTERN CREDIT LIMITED, INC. AND
A.S. BALTOIL
Claimants

and
THE REPUBLIC OF ESTONIA

Respondent

Case No. ARB/99/2

 

DECISION ON CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR
SUPPLEMENTARY DECISIONS AND RECTIFICATION

Date of dispatch to the Parties: April 4, 2002

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

President: Mr. L. Yves FORTIER, C.C., Q.C.
Members of the Tribunal: Professor Meir HETH

Professor Albert Jan VAN DEN BERG
Secretary of the Tribunal: Mr. Alejandro A. Escobar

In Case No. ARB/99/2

BETWEEN:

Alex Genin,

Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and.

A.S. Baltoil (“Claimants”)
Represented by:

Mr. Kurt Arbuckle

of the law firm Kurt Arbuckle, PC., as counsel

And

The Republic of Estonia (“Respondent”)
Represented by:

Mr. Martin D. Beirne, Mr. Michael J. Stanley
and Mr. Christopher Bell

of the law firm Beirne, Maynard & Parsons, LLP
and

Mr. Allen B. Green
of the law firm Howrey & Simon, as counsel

DECISION ON CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR SUPPLEMENTARY DECISIONS 3

THE TRIBUNAL
Composed as above,
After deliberation,

Makes the following Decision:

A. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On 25 June 2001, the ICSID Secretary-General dispatched to the
parties certified copies of the Award rendered by the Tribunal in this arbitra-
tion (the “Award”).

2. On 7 August 2001, in accordance with Article 49 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 49 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, Claimants
submitted a Request for Supplementary Decisions and Rectification of the
Award (the “Request”).

3. By letter dated 24 September 2001, after consultation among the
members of the Tribunal, the President advised the parties that the Tribunal
granted Respondent until 12 October 2001 to submit a response to Claim-
ants’ Request, and ordered the parties to confer among themselves with a
view to setting a timetable for the written phase of the procedure associated
with the Request.

4, By letter dated 27 September 2001, the parties jointly advised the
Tribunal of their agreed procedural timetable, which was confirmed and
accepted by the Tribunal on 4 October 2001.

5. In accordance with the procedural timetable, Claimants duly filed a
Memorial in Support of their Request dated 9 November 2001 (“Claimants’
Memorial”), and Respondent filed a Memorial in Response dated 13
December 2001 (“Respondent’s Memorial”).

6. By letter dated 19 December 2001, the Secretary of the Tribunal
advised the parties that, as proposed in their agreed procedural timetable of
27 September 2001, the Tribunal did not envisage the need for a hearing in
order to consider issues associated with the Request, and requested that the

4 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

parties confirm that they did not object to the Tribunal deciding the Request
on the basis solely of the parties’ written submissions. By letters dated 7
January 2002 and 10 January 2002, respectively, Claimants and Respondent
confirmed that they had no objection to the Tribunal proceeding to consider
and decide the Request in the manner set out in the Secretary's 19 December
2001 letter.

B. THE ICSID CONVENTION AND ARBITRATION RULES

7. Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, in accordance with which
the Request is made, reads, in pertinent part:

The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45
days after the date on which the award was rendered may
after notice to the other party decide any question which it
had omitted to decide in the award, and shall rectify any
clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award. Its deci-
sion shall become part of the award and shall be notified to
the parties in the same manner as the award. (. . .)

8. Similarly, Arbitration Rule 49, entitled “Supplementary Decisions
and Rectification”, reads, in part:

qd) Within 45 days after the date on which the award was
rendered, either party may request, pursuant to Article 49(2)
of the Convention, a supplementary decision on, or the Rec-
tification of, the award. (. . .)

C. DECISION

9. Having considered the parties’ arguments as set out in their written
submissions, and after deliberation among the members of the Tribunal, the
Tribunal unanimously decides that Claimants’ Request for Supplementary
Decisions and Rectification must be denied, for the reasons explained below.

1) Supplementary Decisions

10. With respect to the supplementary decisions requested by Claimants,
the Tribunal considers it necessary to state that these do not concern ques-

DECISION ON CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR SUPPLEMENTARY DECISIONS 5

tions which it omitted to decide. Rather, they relate to issues that Claimants
themselves failed virtually altogether to address in either their written or oral
submissions in the arbitration.

11. In their Memorial, Claimants state that the Tribunal, in its Award,
failed to discuss three provisions of the BIT in respect of which Claimants
had alleged violations by the Republic of Estonia, to wit: Article III, para. 1
(expropriation); Article IV (free transfer of investments and capital); and
Article IX, para. 2 (prohibiting the imposition of formalities that impair
substantive rights under the BIT).! In fact, however, the extent to which
these provisions were ever raised by Claimants is limited to their mere invo-
cation in the concluding paragraphs of certain sections of Claimants’ pre-
hearing submissions.” Claimants neither adduced evidence nor made argu-
ments concerning the BIT provisions that they now suggest were “omitted”
from the Tribunal’s Award. Indeed, the provisions of the BIT in question
were not even mentioned by Claimants either during the hearing or in their
post-hearing submissions.>

12. Throughout the arbitration, from the first to the last of Claimants’
extensive and exceptionally detailed submissions, the Claimants structured
and presented a case “the core issue” of which they themselves described as
the alleged lack of fairness and due process involved in the Bank of Estonia's
decision to revoke EIB’s license.” As the Tribunal noted in its Award, the
Claimants explicitly declared, in their Post-Hearing Memorial:

Boilling] this case down to its essence . . . what makes the
Bank of Estonia's actions so unjust, so unfair, and so totally
without due process is the complete lack of any legitimate
reason to take the extreme measures of destroying (EIB].°

' These and other provisions of the BIT are described at paragraphs 9 to 18 of the Award.
? This is well and amply demonstrated by Respondent in its Memorial in Response to Claim-
ants’ Request.

By way of example, a word search of the transcript of the 2 — 6 October 2000 hearing reveals
that the word “expropriate” or “expropriation” was mentioned only 4 times during those 5 days—all
by counsel for Respondent and all during opening submissions on the first day of the hearing.

See para, 242 of the Award, quoting from Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial.

> See para. 243 of the Award.

6 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

13. In its Award, the Tribunal addressed all of the questions raised by
Claimants with at least as much seriousness and care as did Claimants
themselves in their written and oral submissions. Each of the so-called
“eight transgressions” or “eight violations” of the BIT alleged by Claim-
ants and around which their written and oral submissions were presented
are discussed in detail in the Award. Simply put, there was no omission on
the part of the Tribunal that now requires it to render any supplementary
decision.

14. The foregoing explains why the Tribunal did not consider it neces-
sary to address in its Award, specifically and in detail, the three provisions of
the BIT identified in Claimants’ Request. However, it is important to state
that the Award itself reveals that the issues now raised by Claimants are in
fact dealt with, implicitly if not explicitly, in both the reasoning and the
conclusions set out in the Award. Based on its consideration of all of the
evidence before it, and in view of all the parties’ submissions, the Tribunal
found that none of the impugned conduct of the Republic of Estonia
amounted to a violation of any provision of the BIT or Estonian law, and it
accordingly dismissed all of Claimants’ claims.

15. | No more need be said in respect of this aspect of Claimants’ Request.
2) Rectification

16. As regards Claimants’ request for rectification of paragraph 356 of
the Award, the Tribunal states, to the extent that any such statement is neces-
sary, that the findings contained in that paragraph concerning, inter alia,
what it refers to as the “highly questionable” prudence of the transactions in
question, are based on its consideration and evaluation of the positions and
evidence adduced by both Claimants and Respondent.

17. In sum, the Tribunal considers that paragraph 356 of the Award
speaks for itself. The paragraph is both clear and comprehensive, and
requires no rectification.

3) Conclusion

18. For all of these reasons, and as stated above, Claimants’ Request for
Supplemental Decisions and Rectification is denied.

DECISION ON CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR SUPPLEMENTARY DECISIONS 7

D. COSTS

19. The Claimants had their “day in court”. In fact, they had their week
before the Tribunal. Not content with the result, they initiated further
proceedings, as was their right, making the Request which the Tribunal
hereby denies.

20. In the present instance, the Tribunal has no hesitation in ordering
that the costs associated with Claimants’ Request shall follow the result.
Specifically, and in accordance with Article 61 of the ICSID Convention and
Arbitration Rule 47(1)(g), the Tribunal orders that the costs of the present
proceeding - that is, the expenses incurred by the parties as well as the fees
and expenses of the members of the Tribunal associated with the Request -

shall be paid in full by Claimants.

21. In this regard, the Tribunal assesses the expenses incurred by the
Respondent in connection with the present proceeding in the amount of
US$26,485.43, in accordance with the Respondent's Statement on Costs
submitted on March 11, 2002, and assesses the fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal associated with the Request in the amount of
US$14,769.15, in accordance with the Secretariat's communication of
March 14, 2002. Accordingly, the Tribunal orders Claimants to reimburse
Respondent the total amount of US$41,254.58 within 15 days of the date
on which the present decision is dispatched to the parties.

L. YVES FORTIER, C.C., Q.C.
President
Date: 02 April, 2002

PROFESSOR MEIR HETH PROFESSOR ALBERT JAN van den BERG
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 25 March, 2002 Date: 29 March, 2002

