IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER THE
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

-and -

THE ARBITRATION RULES OF THE
UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (1976)

- between -

Alicia Grace; Ampex Retirement Master Trust; Apple Oaks Partners, LLC; Brentwood
Associates Private Equity Profit Sharing Plan; Cambria Ventures, LLC; Carlos
Williamson-Nasi in his own right and on behalf of Axis Services, Axis Holding, Clue and F. 305952;
Carolyn Grace Baring; Diana Grace Beard; Floradale Partners, LLC;

Frederick Grace; Frederick J. Warren; Frederick J. Warren IRA; Gary Olson; Genevieve
T. Irwin; Genevieve T. Irwin 2002 Trust; Gerald L. Parsky; Gerald L. Parsky IRA; John
N. Irwin III; José Antonio Cafiedo-White in his own right and on behalf of Axis Services, Axis
Holding and F. 305952; Nicholas Grace; Oliver Grace III; ON5
Investments, LLC; Rainbow Fund, L.P.; Robert M. Witt; Robert M. Witt IRA; Vista
Pros, LLC; and Virginia Grace

(the “Claimants”)

and

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES

(the “Respondent”)

ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER No. 6
DECISION ON THE CLAIMANTS’ APPLICATION FOR
INTERIM MEASURES

 

Tribunal
Prof. Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo, President
Mr. Andrés Jana Linetzky, Arbitrator
Mr. Gabriel Bottini, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Celeste E. Salinas Quero

December 19, 2019

IL.

Ill.

IV.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Procedural background

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Parties’ positions 4
A. Claii 4
B. Respond 10
The Tribunal’s analysis 12
A. Introduction 12
B. The specific requested measures 14
C. The appropriateness of the req 1 measures 16
Order 20

 

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

Procedural background

On July 19, 2019, Claimants requested an extension of the deadlines for the submission of
the Statement of Claim and Statement of Defense (the “Request for an extended briefing
schedule”).

On July 21, 2019, Claimants filed an Application for Interim Measures, accompanied by
the following documentation: Appendices A to E, Witness Statement of Mr. Carlos
Williamson-Nasi dated July 18, 2019; Witness Statement of Mr. Gonzalo Gil White dated
July 18, 2019; Witness Statement of Mr. Jose A. Caiiedo-White dated July 18, 2019;
Factual Exhibits C-0001 to C-0083; and Legal Authorities CL-0033 to CL-0057 (the
“Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures” or “Claimants’ Application”).

On July 22, 2019, Claimants requested an expedited briefing schedule for the Application
(the “Request for an expedited briefing”).

By letter of the same date, the Tribunal invited Respondent to submit comments, no later
than July 29, 2019, on (i) Claimants’ request of July 19, for an extension in the briefing
schedule for the Statement of Claim and Statement of Defense; and (ii) Claimants’ proposal
of July 22, for an expedited briefing schedule for the Application for Interim Measures.

On July 29, 2019, Respondent submitted, among others, its comments on Claimants’
Request for an extended briefing schedule of July 19, 2019 and Claimants’ Request for an
expedited briefing of July 22, 2019, accompanied by the following document: Annex A —
Proposed Schedule and Factual Exhibits R-0001 to R-0004 (the “Respondent’s
Comments”).

On August 7, 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 (on the Procedural
Calendar). The Tribunal decided, among others, to extend the time limit for the submission
of the Statement of Claim and Statement of Defense, and invited Respondent to submit a
response to Claimants’ Application by September 18, 2019.

On September 6, 2019, Claimants submitted a letter informing the Tribunal of two recent
developments that, in their view, rendered the measures requested in the Application
especially urgent. Claimants informed the Tribunal that Respondent had requested and
obtained Interpol Red Notices (international arrest warrants) against two Claimants and
three of its witnesses. Claimants also informed the Tribunal of the amparo proceeding in
Mexico, in which Claimants had recently obtained a recording of the hearing “where the
prosecutor requested and the judge issued the oral arrest warrants against Claimants and

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

the witnesses.”! Claimants additionally sought leave to submit into the case record (i) the
recordings of the hearing, and (ii) a short submission (not to exceed five pages) describing
the contents of the recording.

On September 9, 2019, the Tribunal invited Respondent to submit comments on Claimants’
letter by September 13, 2019.

On September 13, 2019, Respondent submitted its observations to Claimants’ letter and
requests of September 6, 2019. Respondent indicated that it would not oppose Claimants’
request for leave to submit the hearing recording and the transcript of the recording.
Respondent requested a two-week extension of time to submit its response to Claimants’
Application for Interim Measures.

By letter of September 16, 2019, the Tribunal decided to (7) grant Claimants leave to
submit (i) the recordings of the hearing with (ii) the transcript of the hearing, and (iii) a
five-page letter describing the contents of the hearing to the Tribunal; and (2) grant
Respondent a two-week extension until October 2, 2019, to submit its Response to
Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures.

On September 25, 2019, Claimants submitted the recording and the transcript of the
hearing, as well as a six-page submission.

On September 29, 2019, Respondent submitted that Claimants had not followed the
Tribunal’s instructions and instead filed a submission on “new” arguments and revelations.
Respondent requested that the Tribunal grant it an additional 10 days to respond to
Claimants’ submissions. Respondent further requested that the Tribunal bar Claimants
from making any additional submissions.

On October 2, 2019, Claimants informed the Tribunal that it was “agnostic” on whether
the Tribunal should grant Respondent’s request for an extension of time to submit its
Response. Claimants additionally requested that the Tribunal issue its decision as
expeditiously as possible.

On October 3, 2019, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it granted Respondent a ten-day
extension from October 2, 2019, to submit its Response to Claimants’ Request for Interim
Measures and Claimants’ letter of September 25, 2019.

On October 7, 2019, Claimants submitted the Statement of Claim, with accompanying
witness statement, expert reports, appendices and indexes of legal authorities and exhibits

' Claimants’ letter of September 6, 2019, page 2.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

(the “Statement of Claim”). On October 10, 2019, Claimants submitted accompanying
exhibits C-0183 and C-0216 to C-0216.30 which were audio recordings (exhibit C-0220
was intentionally omitted) (the “Audios”).

Further to the Tribunal’s invitation, on October 12, 2019, Respondent submitted its
Response to the Application (the “Respondent’s Response”).

On October 21, 2019, Respondent submitted that the Audios accompanying the Statement
of Claim were leaked to the press, in breach of the provisions of Procedural Orders No. 1
and No. 3. Respondent further submitted that as public officials they had the duty to report
to the competent authorities any accusation related to corruption and, thereby, were obliged
to share the Audios.

On November 4, 2019, the Tribunal invited the Parties to a telephonic hearing on
Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, which, after exchanges with the Parties was
scheduled for December 3, 2019.

On December 3, 2019, the Hearing on Interim Measures took place by telephone. In
addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the Tribunal, the following
persons participated in the Hearing on Interim Measures:

For the Claimant:

Counsel:

Mr. Juan P. Morillo Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan, LLP
Mr. Philippe Pinsolle Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan, LLP
Mr. David M. Orta Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan, LLP
Ms. Dawn Yamane Hewett Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan, LLP
Mr. Daniel Pulecio-Boek Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan, LLP
Ms. Julianne Jaquith Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan, LLP
Ms. Ana Paula Luna Pino Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan, LLP

For the Respondent:
Counsel:

Director General de Consultoria Juridica de

Comercio Internacional, Secretaria de

Economia

Direccién General de Consultoria Juridica de

Comercio Internacional, Secretaria de

Economia

Mr. Alan Bonfiglio Rios Direccién General de Consultoria Juridica de
Comercio Internacional, Secretaria de

Mr. Orlando Pérez Garate

Ms. Cindy Rayo Zapata

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

Economia

Direccién General de Consultoria Juridica de

Ms. Blanca Del Carmen Martinez . .
Comercio Internacional, Secretaria de

Mendoza

Economia
Mr. Stephan E. Becker Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman, LLP
Mr. David J. Stute Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman, LLP
Interpreters:

Mr. Charles H. Roberts
Ms. Silvia Colla

IL. The Parties’ positions
A. Claimants

(a) Respondent has engaged in a series of actions intended to persecute Claimants as
retaliation for initiating these arbitration proceedings

20. Claimants argue that Respondent has engaged in a “relentless” series of persecutions as
“retaliation” for the Claimants’ initiation of the present arbitration proceedings.” These
actions are presented as forcing Claimants, as well as Integradora and its subsidiaries, to
spend a considerable amount of resources to respond to and defend against them.?
Claimants’ application specifically refers to the following actions:*

- Eight criminal investigations launched by Respondent against Integradora,
Perforadora, their directors, employees and lawyers. Claimants argue that these
investigations lack any legal basis and are solely motivated by the objective of taking
over the Jack-Up Rigs and defaming everyone associated with them.> Claimants
describes these investigations as a “carefully orchestrated and methodically executed
effort” to deter from further pursuing these arbitration proceedings.® Claimants refer
specifically to:

2 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §3.

3 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §9 and §11.

+ An overview of the chronology of events according to the Claimants can be found in Claimants’ Appendix D and
Appendix E.

5 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §6.

6 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §27.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

1. (“The PGR Investigation”) — an investigation following a complaint filed by
the Bondholders before the Procuraduria General de la Repiiblica, used by the
Respondent “to fabricate evidence” against Perforadora to be used to further
attack Perforadora in other criminal proceedings.”

2. (“The Improper Representation Investigation”) — an investigation for a
procedural fraud (fraude procesal) by way of improper representation “based
on allegations that warrant no serious consideration.”*

3. (“The Sham Companies Investigation”) — an investigation for fraudulent
administration (administracién fraudulenta) focusing on Perforadora’s
relationship with sixteen “sham” or “ghost” companies that supposedly
facilitate tax evasion.? Claimants specifically argue that Respondent rewarded
a Mexican Judge in this case “for issuing baseless and suspicious orders by
promoting him [...] from trial judge to appellate judge.”!°

4. (“The Contempt Investigation”) — an investigation against Perforadora and
its employees based on a complaint that these were in contempt of the Rigs
Take-Over Order.!!

yw

(“The Duplicative Amparos Investigation”) — an investigation against Mr.
Alonso Del Val for having omitted to describe all amparos related to the
Mexican criminal investigations. '*

6. (“The Tax Evasion Investigation”) — Claimants further refer to a media
report about the Mexican Ministry of Finances (Secretaria de Hacienda y
Crédito Publico) complaint filed with the PGR against Mr. Cafiedo, the Non-
Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors of Integradora and one of the
Claimants; Mr. Gil, CEO and a director of Integradora, and Mr. Cajiedo’s
cousin; and Mr. Gustavo Mondragon, an employee in Integradora’s tax
department for an improperly claimed deduction in a 2014 tax return.'*
Claimants argue that on information and belief it is the first time that such a

7 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, $42.
8 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, $46.
° Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures,
‘0 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures,
1! Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §73.

2 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §75.

'3 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §§77-78.

 

21.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

criminal complaint is filed against directors and executives of a company for
this type of deduction.'*

(“The First Investigation Against Quinn Emanuel”) — Claimants further
refer to a media report about an ongoing investigation against Quinn Emanuel
focusing on whether the firm used information obtained from another Quinn
Emanuel client to prepare the Notice of Arbitration.'>

(“The Second Investigation Against Quinn Emanuel”) — Claimants argue
that they have learned that the Bondholders were working with Mexican
prosecutors in the PGJCDMX to obtain charges and obtain arrest warrants
against Quinn Emanuel and its attorneys for prevaricato, which under Mexican
law makes it a crime to represent conflicting interests in the same litigation.'®

Seven tax audits against Integradora and its subsidiaries. Claimants argue that none of
these audits have any merit or foundation in Mexican law.!”

Pemex’s continued refusal to pay Perforadora approximately USD 24 million that it
owes since late 2017.'8

Respondent’s attempt to obtain, outside the proper course of this arbitration, the
evidence underlying Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration.

The arrest warrants issued by Mexico against two Claimants (Messrs. Cafiedo White
and Williamson-Nasi) ant three of their witnesses (Messrs. Gil White, Del Val and
Villegas

) 20

As mentioned above, Claimants informed the Tribunal that after having filed their
Application for interim measures, the Respondent had in the meantime requested and
obtained Interpol Red Notices against two Claimants and three of their witnesses.
Claimants further reported about the amparo proceeding in Mexico, in which the judge
issued oral arrest warrants against the above-mentioned Claimants and witnesses.7!

4 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §80.

'5 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures,

§81-82.

 

6 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §§83-84.

‘7 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures,
'8 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures,

and 89-91.

 

© Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §$11 and 94-95.

2° Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §§
2 See supra §7.

§29-32.

 

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

(b) This Tribunal has broad authority to issue interim measures

22. Claimants filed its request on the basis of Articles 26(1) of the 1976 UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules and 1134 of the NAFTA. Claimants argue that pursuant to these rules,
the Tribunal enjoys wide powers to issue interim measures in support of the underlying
arbitration. Claimants submit that the requested measures relate to the subject matter of the
dispute as, absent such interim measures, Claimants would suffer irreparable injury to their
rights.?? Claimants further seek to protect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, including their ability
to pursue their NAFTA claim.”

(c) Claimants’ request meets the three criteria generally used by tribunals in
UNCITRAL and NAFTA cases when assessing a request for interim measures

23. Claimants argue that despite the silence of Articles 26(1) of the 1976 UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules and 1134 of the NAFTA, tribunals in UNCITRAL and NAFTA cases
generally consider three criteria when assessing a request for interim measures:*+

(i) whether the tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction;
(ii) whether the interim measures are necessary to:
- prevent acts of retaliation by the respondent State against the claimants;

- protect the claimants from suffering greater injuries during the pendency
of the arbitration (i.c., necessary to preserve claimants’ right to the status
quo);

- prevent that the claimants suffer an irreparable injury; and

- protect the integrity of the arbitral proceedings, including the claimants’
ability to pursue their claim; and

(iii) whether there is an urgent need for the tribunal to issue the interim measures.

24. Claimants submit that the three above-mentioned criteria constitute a mere guidance for
the Tribunal as its power to order interim measures should be understood as discretionary

% Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §100.
% Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §103.
% Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, $105.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

in nature.2> Claimants however submit that, in any event, all of the three criteria are met in
26

the present case to justify an order of interim measures.
Firstly, Claimants submit that the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction as Articles 1120,
1121 and 1139 of the NAFTA afford a basis on which the Tribunal’s jurisdiction might be
founded.’

Secondly, Claimants argue that the requested measures are necessary to prevent further
acts of retaliation and persecution by Respondent against Claimants.?* Claimants
underscore that Investor-State tribunals have already granted interim measures staying
criminal proceedings against a claimant.”?

Claimants further argue that the right to non-aggravation of the dispute is well established
under international law and that Respondent’s attacks are increasing Claimants’ injuries
during the pendency of the arbitration, thus altering the status quo and unnecessarily and
improperly aggravating the dispute.*?

In addition, Claimants argue that Investor-State tribunals have issued interim measures
when, absent such measures, the claimant would have suffered an injury or harm that a
monetary award could not fully and properly have compensated.*! Claimants argue that
they precisely seek interim measures to prevent suffering injuries which no monetary
award could properly and fully compensate.*? In their view, absent any interim measures,
Respondent’s acts of retaliation and persecution would likely cause the issuance of more
arrest warrants against possibly other Claimants and against Integradora’s and
Perforadora’s key employees.**

Claimants further argue that the requested measures are necessary to protect the integrity
of the proceedings as, otherwise, Respondent would make it impossible or significantly
more challenging for Claimants to pursue this NAFTA claim because key witnesses would
either be imprisoned or under criminal prosecution; and key evidence could become
unavailable to Claimants.*4

°5 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, $105.
26 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §106.
27 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §§107-114.
28 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §§115-116.
2° Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §115.

*° Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures,
+! Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §

  

§117-122.
123.

* Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §125.
% Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §126.
¥ Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, $128.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

Claimants further submit that Respondent has demonstrated that it will continue to injure
Claimants absent an order from this Tribunal, as it failed to reply to Claimants’ letters
requesting that it “cease and desist from its retaliatory and persecutory actions.”*>

Thirdly, Claimants argue that, even if neither NAFTA nor the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules expressly require “urgency” for the Tribunal to order interim measures, in the present
case the measures are urgently needed as Respondent will not cease its actions.*°

(d) Claimants’ request meets other criteria occasionally used by tribunals in
UNCITRAL and NAFTA cases when assessing a request for interim measures

Claimants submit that—although not mandatory—they also meet other criteria
occasionally used by Investor-State tribunals when deciding whether to issue interim
measures.*7

Claimants submit that they established a prima facie case on the merits, as they are U.S.
investors in Mexico who have alleged violations of NAFTA based on the conduct of the
Mexican state.**

Claimants further submit that the interim measures will not disproportionally burden
Respondent.*? Claimants specifically underscore that the requested measures are limited to
the pendency of the proceedings and that Respondent would incur no loss of any kind.*°

(e) Claimants request is timely

Claimants submit that they acted quickly to notify Respondent of the matter. The Claimants
have been sending letters to Respondent since July 2018, alerting it to each of the instances
of retaliation and persecution described above, and requesting that Respondent cease
attacks which are “aggravating the dispute and threaten to irreparably injure [their]
rights.”*! In the absence of any response, Claimants argue that they have no alternative
than to file this application to protect themselves from Respondent’s “abuse of its executive
branch powers.”4?

85 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, $129.
%6 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §133.
*7 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §134.
%8 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §136.
» Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §140.
*° Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §142.
*! Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §88.

*2 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §145.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)

Procedural Order No. 6
36. Claimants accordingly request the Tribunal to order Respondent to:

(i) refrain from arresting Claimants or the witnesses that will support their
NAFTA claim during the pendency of this arbitral proceeding;

(ii) confirm whether it is conducting any investigations against Quinn Emanuel or
its attorneys and, if so, to immediately suspend any such investigations; and

(iii) order any additional relief it deems appropriate to preserve Claimants’ rights.*?
B. Respondent

(a) Respondent submits that the mentioned investigations are in conformity with
Mexican Law and are still pending at this stage

 

37. Respondent does not deny the existence of the various investigations mentioned by the
Claimants; Respondent however does not admit the veracity of the facts reported in the
Application for interim measures.** Respondent further denies any participation in the
ongoing disputes between the Bondholders, on the one side, and Integradora and
Perforadora, on the other side.*>

38. Respondent argues that the present arbitration proceedings do not provide any immunity
to persons or entities participating in these proceedings.*° Respondent further submits that
in Mexico, as in any other legal system committed to the rule of law, national authorities
have the obligation to investigate acts (or omissions) that may constitute a crime, in
accordance with the principles of presumption of innocence, access to justice, due process
and legality.*”

3 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §146 (see also §97). In fact, in these paragraphs, Claimants also
included the request of another interim measure, namely “that the Tribunal order México to [...] cease subverting the
procedures laid out in this NAFTA proceeding by using domestic proceedings to obtain evidence for use in this
arbitration.” This request was withdrawn during the Hearing on Interim Measures, on the basis of two events: (a) the
evidence that Mexico was seeking-the tapes and recordings that, according to the Claimants, establish that Mexico
retaliated against the Claimants and their investments for not agreeing to participate in requests for bribes that were
being made by Mexican Governmental officials to Claimants—were produced in the context of the presentation of
Claimants’ Statement of Claim: so Mexico is already in possession of that evidence. And (b) there have not been
additional efforts by Mexico to subvert the evidentiary requirements in this proceeding. Respondent took note of
Claimants’ withdrawal, regardless of Mexico’s position on the recordings presented by Claimants.

+ Respondent’s Response, §15.

45 Respondent’s Response, §8.

46 Respondent’s Response, §9.

47 Respondent’s Response, §10.

 

  

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

48 Respondent’s Response,

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

Respondent submits that all persons and entities under investigation are subject to
proceedings in conformity with Mexican law, have access to ordinary means of defense
available in such investigations and have benefited—and continue to benefit—from legal
representation.*®

(b) Claimants fail to demonstrate the necessity, urgency and proportionality of the
requested measure to order Respondent to refrain from arresting Claimants or the
witnesses that will support their NAFTA claim during the pendency of this arbitral
proceeding

Respondent argues that—apart from the need to establish prima facie the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal and the existence of a right susceptible of protection—the criteria for the
Tribunal to take into account are:

(i) the necessity of the requested measure;
(ii) the urgency of the requested measure; and
(iii) the proportionality of the requested measure.*”

Respondent states that Claimants’ submission fails to underscore the “clear message” of
investor-State tribunals having been requested to order interim measures following
criminal investigations. Respondent submits that in such cases a high standard is applied
to justify interference with a State’s sovereign police powers.*’ Respondent argues that
none of the three criteria are met in the present case.

Firstly, Respondent underscores that the requested measures are not necessary to prevent
an irreparable injury given that Claimants have not been prevented to pursue their claim in
these proceedings during the past year. Respondent further highlights that none of
Claimants live in Mexico and none is subject to arrest.>!

Secondly, Respondent submits that Claimants fail to concretely demonstrate the urgency
of the measures.”

 

* Respondent’s Response, §131.
5 Respondent’s Response, §138.
5! Respondent’s Response, §§150-152.
52 Respondent’s Response, §§153-157.

 

44.

4S.

46.

47.

Ill.

48.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

Thirdly, Respondent argues that Claimants’ request is overly broad in that it fails to
precisely identify the persons to protect.*? Respondent submits that the request for interim
measures is used as a tool by Claimants in relation to ongoing procedures against the
Bondholders and other parties.**

 

(c) Claimants fail to demonstrate the necessity, urgency and proportionality of the
requested measure to order Respondent to cease subverting the procedures laid
out in this NAFTA proceeding by using domestic proceedings to obtain evidence
for use in this arbitration

Respondent submits that Claimants have not submitted any information supporting their
request on the necessity to prohibit the investigation of allegations of possible acts of
corruption. Respondent argues that, in any case, Claimants have not reported any news on
this matter since October 2018, which in itself demonstrates the absence of any urgency or
necessity of protection.*>

(d) Claimants fail to demonstrate the necessity, urgency and proportionality of the
requested measure to order Respondent to confirm whether it is conducting any
investigations against Quinn Emanuel or its attorneys and, if so, to immediately
suspend any such investigations

Respondent argues that Claimants request is entirely based on suppositions. The continued
traveling and representation of Claimants by the lawyers in question demonstrates that the
requested measures are neither necessary, urgent or proportional.*°

Respondent accordingly requests the Tribunal to dismiss the request for interim measures
in its entirety.*”

The Tribunal’s analysis

A. Introduction

At the outset, the present case appears to be particularly complex from a variety of
viewpoints. One of the obvious signs of such complexity stems from the high level of

53 Respondent’s Response, §158.

4 Respondent’s Response, §159.

°5 Respondent’s Response, §161. As previously mentioned (supra note 43), this request was withdrawn by Claimants
during the Hearing on Interim Measures.

56 Respondent’s Response, §§163-166.

57 Respondent’s Response, §167.

49.

50.

51.

52.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

litigation between the Parties, both within and—especially—outside the proceedings
before the Tribunal. Apart from these proceedings, the number and diversity of procedures
involving the Parties are, indeed, quite significant. It must be highlighted that in several of
them, in addition, intervene third parties closely linked to the underlying transactions of
this arbitration, i.e. the Bondholders. Furthermore, such Parties’ activism explains the time
elapsed between the submission of Claimants’ Application and the present Procedural
Order.

When considering a request such as the one that forms the subject of this Procedural Order,
it is obvious that the Tribunal must concentrate on the legal aspects relevant to the task in
front of it, in application of the rules governing the proceedings. This does not mean that
no attention should be paid to the intense activity carried out by the Parties before all types
of public authorities. Rather, it implies that the Tribunal must avoid entering into the
substantial analysis of the various administrative, judicial and police procedures in
progress, over which it most certainly lacks jurisdiction. Accordingly—as a matter of
principle and for present purposes—it is not for the Tribunal to study or decide about the
origin, justification or outcome of the ongoing or past procedures involving the Parties or
other actors related to this case.

What does however clearly fall within the scope of the mandate of the Tribunal is the
paramount need to protect the integrity of the arbitration process and the equally important
need to avoid any aggravation of the dispute. Consequently, were the Tribunal to conclude
that, as a result of Respondent’s actions—such as those mentioned in the preceding
paragraphs—the integrity of the proceeding could be affected or the dispute could be
aggravated, it would have to avoid it using all available measures.

Nevertheless, in order to do so, and given the seriousness of Claimants’ allegations with
respect to Respondent’s alleged conduct, the required burden of proof shall be particularly
high.*®

Claimants specifically request the Tribunal to order Respondent to:

(i) refrain from arresting Claimants or the witnesses that will support their
NAFTA claim during the pendency of this arbitral proceeding;>° and

58 See, in general, Corfu Channel (UK v. Albania), IC} Reports 1949.
5° See supra §36(i).

53.

54.

55.

56.

© See supra §36(i

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

(ii) confirm whether it is conducting any investigations against Quinn Emanuel or
its attorneys and, if so, to immediately suspend any such investigations.

Concerning the generic request of “order any additional relief it deems appropriate to
preserve Claimants’ rights,”°! Claimants clarified during the Hearing on Interim Measures
that it is not a separate request but a way to tell the Tribunal that when it exercises its
discretion in awarding any measure it might order any variation of them.

In order to decide whether to grant Claimants’ request, the Tribunal must first establish
which powers are available within the framework of the applicable rules and, where
appropriate, apply for each of the specific requested measures the different criteria which
are nowadays routinely invoked by international courts and tribunals when deciding
whether or not to adopt such measures. Before this, however, it appears necessary to
consider the precise content of each of the requested measures.

B. The specific requested measures

The first requested measure refers to the exercise of powers of the State with respect to
the investigation and prosecution of possible criminal offenses. Specifically, Claimants
request that the Tribunal order Respondent to refrain from exercising said competence with
respect to the persons acting as Claimants and/or witnesses in the present case. Although a
request of these characteristics is not so unusual in arbitration between investors and
States, the granting of such measures can only take place in very particular circumstances.

In order to decide on the requested measures, it must be stressed that the Tribunal is not
bound by any previous decisions reached by other international courts and tribunals on the
granting of interim measures. The Tribunal is however mindful of the need to take into
account previous decisions, where relevant, and in particular as the Parties have extensively
referred to a series of cases to argue whether or not the requested measures should be
granted. Nevertheless, the Tribunal underscores that—this being particularly true for
requests for interim measures—it needs to be mindful of the factual differences which exist
between the different cases. On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal finds that investor-
State tribunals, regardless of the underlying applicable legal framework, as a matter of

 

©! See supra §36(iii).

© See supra §36(i).

63 See in particular the recent empirical study conducted by the British Institute of International and Comparative Law
with White & Case LLP: 2019 Empirical study: Provisional measures in investor-state arbitration. The study found
that the stay of criminal investigations or proceedings is the fourth most requested type of interim measure.

 

https://www.biicl.org/publ. s/2019-empirical-study-provisional-measures-in-i

14

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

principle, have consistently recognized the undisputed sovereign right of a State to pursue
a criminal investigation within its territory. Investor-State tribunals have unmistakably
indicated that this right should in no circumstance lightly be interfered. The Tribunal has
no difficulty in agreeing on this point. This does not mean that the Tribunal lacks any power
to appreciate the regularity of the ongoing procedures and investigations, as will be further
discussed in this Procedural Order.

57. Indeed, in addition to the common criteria used to decide whether or not to issue interim
measures,” the fact that the object of the requested measure is to order the State to refrain
from exercising its prerogatives introduces an additional element to be considered by the
Tribunal. Specifically, the Tribunal must analyze—with all the elements available to it—
whether the State is exceeding its powers and, should it find this point to be verified, the
extent to which such conduct has had a detrimental impact on the arbitration procedure.

58. The second requested measure differs from the previous one, as it does not affect the
Parties but the legal counsel of Claimants. In this sense, should Claimants’ statements be

© For an overview of the case law, see: Cameron Miles, Provisional measures before International Courts and
Tribunals, Cambridge University Press, 2017, spec. p. 377-382. See for instance City Oriente Limited v. Republic of
Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on
Provisional Measures dated November 19, 2007, at §62: “[T]he Tribunal notes that it has great respect for the
Ecuadorian Judiciary and that it acknowledges Ecuador’s sovereign right to prosecute and punish crimes of all kinds
perpetrated in its territory.”; Lao Holdings N.V. v. Lao People's Democratic Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6,
Ruling on Motion to Amend the Provisional Measures Order dated May 30, 2014 at §21: “Neither the ICSID
Convention nor the BIT imposes a prohibition on a State that enjoins it from exercising criminal jurisdiction over such
matters. In particular, they do not exempt suspected criminals from investigation or prosecution by virtue of their
being investors.”; PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea, \CSID
Case No. ARB/13/33, Decision on the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures dated January 21, 2015 at §145:
“(T]he Tribunal agrees with the tribunal in Caratube International Oil Co. LLP v. Kazakhstan that the State’s
investigative powers, including in criminal matters, are ‘a most obvious and undisputed part of [its] sovereign right ...
to implement and enforce its national law on its territory’ and ‘a particularly high threshold must be overcome before
an ICSID Tribunal can indeed recommend provisional measures regarding criminal investigations conducted by a
state’.”, citing Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. The Republic of Kazakhstan, (CSID Case No. ARB/O8/12,
Decision Regarding Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures dated July 31, 2009, at §§ 134-137; Hydro S.r.l.
and others v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/28, Order on Provisional Measures dated March 3, 2016
at §3.16: “It is trite to say that criminal law and procedure are a most obvious and undisputed part of a State’s
sovereignty.”; Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. The Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Provisional Measures dated April 8, 2016, at §185: “The Tribunal
is also aware of the decisions of other tribunals which have expressed the view that provisional measures are an
extraordinary remedy and that tribunals should exercise particular caution when asked to restrain a sovereign State’s
exercise of its right to conduct criminal investigations and prosecutions relating to conduct within its territory.
However, such powers must be exercised in good faith, respecting a claimant's rights to have its claims fairly
considered and decided by an arbitral tribunal.”

65 See infra §62.

© See supra §36(ii).

 

 

 
 

59.

60.

61.

62.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

confirmed, the Tribunal would face a potential serious issue that could lead to a violation
of Claimants’ fundamental right of access to justice.

Nonetheless, it should be borne in mind that what has been requested regarding this issue
is, on the one hand, the confirmation about the existence of some ongoing investigation,
and, on the other hand, the immediate suspension of such investigation. This means that,
as of now, the Tribunal can only consider the first of these issues (i.e. to request
confirmation of the existence of such investigations), leaving the second (i.e. to order the
suspension of such investigations) for a potential later stage.

C. The appropriateness of the requested measures
Having thus presented the measures requested by Claimants, it becomes necessary:

- firstly, to establish the scope of the Tribunal’s powers under the applicable legal
framework to adopt measures such as those described and,

- secondly, to apply to each of those measures the criteria that allows to conclude if it is
indeed appropriate to grant them.°”

There is no doubt that the Tribunal is empowered to order interim measures under the
applicable legal framework to this arbitration proceeding. Indeed, the first sentence of
Article 1134 of the NAFTA states that “fa] Tribunal may order an interim measure of
protection to preserve the rights of a disputing party, or to ensure that the Tribunal's
jurisdiction is made fully effective, including an order to preserve evidence in the
possession or control of a disputing party or to protect the Tribunal's jurisdiction.” For its
part, Article 26(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules indicates that “[a]t the request of
either party, the arbitral tribunal may take any interim measures it deems necessary in
respect of the subject-matter of the dispute [...].”

The effective exercise of the power of this Tribunal to grant each of the requested measures
depends, in essence, on the fulfillment of three conditions:

(i) the danger of a risk if the requested measures are not adopted [periculum in
mora] also sometimes mentioned as the risk of irreparable harm;

(ii) the likelihood of success on the merits [fumus boni iuris]; and

© See infra $62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

(iii) the need, efficiency and proportionality of the measure.

Although the criteria indicated are partially different from those described, respectively,
by Claimants® and Respondent,” there is no doubt that they are generally admitted when
it comes to determining the source of a request for provisional measures.’? Obviously,
given the generality of these formulated criteria, they must be adapted to the specific
characteristics of the requested measures in the context of this case, as will be done
hereafter.

Regarding measure referred in §52(i), even if it were accepted that the issuance of the
“apprehension” orders constitutes in itself an urgent situation—what Claimants posit rather
than demonstrate-, it cannot be considered proven—at least so far—that the actions of the
Mexican authorities are not based on regular procedures established in their criminal law,
in particular because such actions has been taken precisely in the application of such
procedures upon the action of private parties (i.e. the Bondholders). Lacking evidence that
the Mexican judicial authorities are acting improperly, the granting of the requested
measure would be inappropriate. Indeed, such granting would appear disproportionate and
its efficiency could also be doubted.

The Tribunal has not found any evidence in the documents presented or in the statements
of the Parties during the Hearing on Interim Measures that allows inferring that these
actions exceed the regular framework of State powers. For example, from the reading of
the 167 pages of the transcript of the hearing held before a local Mexico City judge on July
16, 2019, it appears that all arrest warrants issued respond to the complaints made by the
Bondholders; and as stated by Respondent, the Mexican authorities before which these
complaints have been filed cannot do anything else than activate the judicial mechanisms
to investigate such complaints.

Accordingly, in the present context, although the Tribunal is ready to accept that a possible
detention of a Claimant and/or witness could affect and ultimately endanger Claimants’
rights, at this stage such detention has not taken place, not being sufficient in the eyes of
the Tribunal, the damage alleged by Claimants created by the possibility that such detention
would occur. The only person said to have been arrested (Mr. Del Val) is apparently free

8 Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, $105. See supra §23.

© Respondent’s Response, §131. See supra §40.

7 See, among many other references, Resolution on “Provisional measures,” IDI, Hyderabad Session (2017). In
particular, see §2: “Provisional measures are available if the applicant for such measures can show that: (a) there is a
prima facie case on the merits; (b) there is a real risk that irreparable injury will be caused to the rights in dispute
before final judgment; (c) the risk of injury to the applicant outweighs the risk of injury to the respondent; and (d) the
measures are proportionate to the risks” (http://www. idi-iil.org uploads/2017/08/3-RES-FINAL-EN-COR. pdf).

17

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

and, according to the comments offered by the Parties, said person would in principle be
willing to collaborate with the Mexican authorities.”!

Furthermore, the Tribunal has not been presented with any evidence that the directors of
Oro Negro—subject to the various procedures listed in the Application—as well as the
companies, have not been able to exercise their rights in the Mexican judicial system. To
the contrary, evidence suggests they have been able to defend their rights.’

In addition, the request for assistance from Interpol and the request for the so-called Red
Notices mentioned at a late stage by Claimants” do not affect the previous considerations
as they are a foreseeable consequence in the wake of criminal proceedings in respect of
persons who are not within reach of the jurisdiction of the Mexican authorities.

Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that the measure requested in §52(i) cannot be granted,
at the present time, in the manner proposed by Claimants. However, the Tribunal, based on
the risk that the activity within the powers of the State could unjustifiably prejudice the
integrity of this arbitration proceeding, will consider the issuance of an order addressed to
Respondent requesting its collaboration for the arbitration to take place in an effective way
in order to ensure the adoption of a fair decision. In this sense, Respondent shall abstain
from adopting any unjustified measure that may aggravate the dispute. A measure like this
can be framed under Claimants’ generic request (“any additional relief”).”*

The measure requested in §52(ii) is, as noted above, different from the previous one. The
potential curtailment of the exercise of the fundamental right of access to justice—by
impeding the activity of Claimants’ legal counsel—would be, if proven, extremely serious.

The evidence produced does not, at the present stage, demonstrate that Quinn Emanuel or
its lawyers are currently subject to a criminal investigation in Mexico. The only evidence
invoked by Claimants are media reports mentioning in potential terms that possibility, and
their suspicion that the Bondholders would be working with members of the PGJCDMX
to coordinate the investigation and prosecution for certain crimes against Quinn Emanuel.

7! Respondent’s Response, §151. During the Hearing on Interim Measures, Claimants argued that the fact that Mr. Del

Val was

riginally ready to act as an essential witness called by Claimants and has now changed his position would

    

demonstrate the perverse effects of Mexico’s actions. However, so far there is no evidence of Mr. Del Val’s original
willingness to testify in favor of Claimants.

72 Claimants themselves have recognized this. See Claimants’ Application for Interim Measures, §§59, 67, 75.

7 See supra §7.

74 See supra §53.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

As already stated,’ the requested measure referred to in §52(ii) is composed of two
successive steps. At first, Respondent should be ordered to confirm whether such
investigations is taking place and, it should be added, under which circumstances these are
being carried out. The suspension could, in a second step, only be ordered if such
investigations are confirmed to exist.

Regarding the first step, the Tribunal finds that the measure in question must be considered
in the form of a request for information, having due regard to the sovereign prerogatives of
the Mexican State, based on the potential gravity of the prosecution of lawyers and the law
firm that represents Claimants, in particular if this investigation is related to the dispute in
front of the Tribunal. In effect, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to grant the measure
referred to, with said limitation.

During the Hearing on Interim Measures, Respondent indicated that it asked two concrete
judicial authorities (the Fiscalia General de la Repiiblica and the PGJCDMX) for the
existence of the above-mentioned investigations. According to Respondent, the answer was
in the negative. Considering that there is no evidence of such questions and answers, the
Tribunal considers necessary to explicitly formulate the same question by means of this
Procedural Order in order to receive a concrete and formal answer thereto.

The Tribunal can and will only decide on the appropriate measures to be taken with respect
to the second step once the response or reaction of the Mexican authorities has been
received and properly assessed.

As a whole, this Decision is taken on the basis of the elements presented by the Parties so
far. Consequently, nothing prevents the Tribunal from modifying it, if additional and
relevant pieces of evidence are brought to its attention at a later stage. The Tribunal also
emphasizes that the analysis carried out to adopt this decision does not in any way lead to
a prejudgment which could later prevent this Tribunal from ruling on the claims before it.

5 See supra $58.

Alicia Grace and others v. United Mexican States

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/4)
Procedural Order No. 6

Iv. Order
77. On the basis of the foregoing considerations, the Tribunal:
i) orders Respondent to make all the efforts to collaborate for the arbitration to take

place in an effective way, and to abstain to adopt any unjustified measure that may
aggravate the dispute; and,

ii) requests Respondent —and specifically the Fiscalia General de la Reptiblica and the
PGJCDMX-— to provide concrete information about the existence of any
investigation against Quinn Emanuel and/or its lawyers acting in this arbitration.

On behalf of the Tribunal,

[Signed]

Prof. Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo
Presiding Arbitrator
Date: December 19, 2019

20

