INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
ALMASRYIA FOR OPERATING & MAINTAINING
TOURISTIC CONSTRUCTION Co., LLC
Claimant

and

STATE OF KUWAIT

Respondent

(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/2)

 

AWARD ON THE RESPONDENT’S APPLICATION UNDER RULE 41(5) OF THE
ICSID ARBITRATION RULES.

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez, President
Mr. Pascal Dévaud, Arbitrator
Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Catherine Kettlewell

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 1 November 2019

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimant:

Mr. Tarek Ahmed Mohamed Abd El Nasser
85 Elmaryotia St.

Sphinx Tower

El Harm

Giza, Egypt

Dr. Ezzat Ahmed Youssef
28 Mourad St.

Sky Tower

Giza, Egypt

Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Saud Al Qemlas

Senior State Attorney
Department of Legal Advice &
Legislation

Al-Sharg- Ahmed Al Jaber St.
Al Fatwa and Al Tashriea Tower
Beside Sharq Police Station
Kuwait City 13060

Kuwait

Mr. Charles L. O. Buderi

Ms. Luciana Ricart

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
99 Gresham Street

London EC2V 7NG

United Kingdom

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Rubén Dario 281, 9" Floor

Col. Bosque de Chapultepec

11580 Mexico City

Mexico

Mr. Fuad Zarbiyev

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
tue d’Italie 8

Case postale

1211 Geneva 3

Switzerland

III.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES .....c.cscececeeceeeeeeeseseseseeeseeeeeeeseeeeeeeneseseaeseenssenstenseeneeees 5
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 6
THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 9
A. Whether The Preliminary Objections Filed By The Respondent Were Timely... 10
B. The Legal Standard Under Rule 41(5)......cccecsseesseseeseseessseesseeeseeseeesseesseenees ll
Cc. Whether Non-Compliance With Article 10(2) Of The Bit Renders The Claim
Manifestly Without Legal Merit
Dz. Whether The Claim Under Article 7 Of The Bit Is Manifestly Without Legal
Merit 20
COSTS 23
DECISION 25

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration

Proceedings

 

BIT

Agreement for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments Between the
Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt
and the Government of the State of Kuwait

 

Claimant or Almasryia

Almasryia For Operating & Maintaining
Touristic Construction Co., LLC

 

Ex. [C-] [R-]

Exhibit [Claimant] [Respondent]

 

Ex. [CL-] [RL-]

Legal Exhibit [Claimant] [Respondent]

 

Hearing

Hearing on  Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections held in Paris, France on 14
December 2018

 

ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18, March 1965

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for the Settlement of

Investment Disputes

 

Request for Arbitration

Claimant’s Request for Arbitration dated
October 10, 2017.

 

Respondent

The State of Kuwait

 

Respondent’s Preliminary Objections

Application of The State of Kuwait Pursuant to
Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules
dated September 3, 2018.

 

Statement of Claimant

Claimant’s Observations on Respondent’s 41(5)
Objections dated September 30, 2018.

 

Tr. H. [page:line]

Transcript of the hearing

 

 

VCLT

 

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre’”) on the basis of the Agreement for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments Between the Government of the Arab
Republic of Egypt and the Government of the State of Kuwait (the “BIT”), dated April 17,
2001 and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and

Nationals of Other States, dated 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

The Claimant is Almasryia For Operating & Maintaining Touristic Construction Co., LLC
(“Almasryia” or the “Claimant”), a company incorporated under the laws of the Arab

Republic of Egypt.

The Respondent is the State of Kuwait (“Kuwait” or the “Respondent”). Almasryia and
Kuwait are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The Parties’ respective

representatives and their addresses are listed above on page 2.

The dispute relates to property rights over a piece of land located north of Al-Khafji city
in the Kuwaiti Region of Wafra (the “Land”). The Claimant entered into a joint venture
investment agreement on 15 May 2009 with Mr. Faisal Bandar Al-Otaibi and Bin Samar
Contracting Co. to “develop and construct many touristic hotels, real estate and logistics
projects” on the Land.' The Claimant allegedly purchased a 5% interest in the Land from
Mr. Al-Otaibi in exchange for $20 million dollars in accordance with the joint venture
agreement.” Only after executing the Agreement, Mr. Al-Otaibi unsuccessfully attempted
to secure a deed of ownership to the Land through legal proceedings “inside Kuwait”
before Courts of Kuwait “in its own name.”* According to Almasryia, Kuwait’s failure to
grant Mr. Al-Otaibi a deed of ownership for the Land destroyed its joint venture investment

in violation of Kuwait’s obligations under Articles 6 and 7 of the BIT. During the hearing,

' Request for Arbitration, p. e.

? Ibid.

> Request for Arbitration, p. f, see also Statement of Claimant, p. 4.

Claimant withdrew the claim under Article 6 and affirmed that it only claimed under

Article 7.4

The merits of such allegations are not the subject of this decision. This decision concerns
a preliminary matter, namely Kuwait’s application (the “Preliminary Objections”) —
submitted on 3 September 2018 — for dismissal of all of Almasryia’s claims on the grounds
that they are “manifestly without legal merit,” pursuant to Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Rules

of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”).
PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 24 October 2017, ICSID received a Request for Arbitration of the same date from
Almasryia (the “Request for Arbitration”), as supplemented by letters of 5 December
2017, 5 January 2018, and 27 January 2018.

On 14 February 2018, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for
Arbitration in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the
Parties of the registration. In the Notice of Registration, the Acting Secretary-General
invited the Parties to proceed to agree on the number of arbitrators and the method of their
appointment pursuant to Rule 7(c) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings, and to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as

possible in accordance with Articles 37 to 40 of the ICSID Convention.

On 20 May 2018, the Claimant requested that the Tribunal consist of three arbitrators, and
that each Party appoint one arbitrator, with the President of the Tribunal to be appointed

by agreement of the Parties, pursuant to Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

By letters of 28 May 2018, the Claimants appointed Mr. Pascal Dévaud, a national of

Switzerland, and the Respondent appointed Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper, a national of Germany.

On 10 July 2018, having failed to agree on the presiding arbitrator, ICSID communicated
to the parties that the President would be appointed by the Chairman of the ICSID

4 Tr. H., p. 80:10-19.

Administrative Council (the “Chairman”) pursuant to Articles 38 and 40(1) of the ICSID
Convention. Following consultations with the Parties, the Chairman appointed Prof.
Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez, a national of Mexico, in accordance with Article 38 of the

ICSID Convention.

On 2 August 2018, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1), the Secretary-General
of ICSID notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and
that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Catherine

Kettlewell, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as the Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 3 September 2018, the Respondent filed its Preliminary Objections pursuant to
Arbitration Rule 41(5).

On 21 September 2018, the Tribunal held a first session by telephone conference in

accordance with Arbitration Rule 13(1).

On 30 September 2018, the Claimant filed observations on the Respondent’s Preliminary

Objections pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(5).

On 22 October 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 concerning procedural

matters.

On 2 November 2018, the Tribunal requested the Claimant to provide an update on the

status to obtain a visa to travel for the hearing.

On 9 November 2018, the Tribunal invited the Parties to confer and propose an agenda and
timetable for the upcoming hearing on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objection. On 26
November 2018, the Respondent submitted the exchanges of the Parties regarding this
matter and provided its proposal and comments. On 30 November 2018, the Tribunal
issued its decision on the agenda and timetable for the hearing. The Tribunal also indicated

that the Claimant’s request for translation English/Arabic was granted.

A hearing on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections was held at the World Bank
facilities in Paris on 14 December 2018 (the “Hearing”). The following persons were

present at the Hearing:

Tribunal:

Professor Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez President
Mr. Pascal Dévaud Arbitrator
Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper Arbitrator
ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Catherine Kettlewell Secretary of the Tribunal

For the Claimant:

Dr. Ezzat Ahmad Mohammed Youssef
Dr. Mohamed Tanweer Mohamed El-

Rafie
For the Respondent:

Mr. Charles L. O. Buderi Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Luciana Ricart Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Mariana Gomez Vallin Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Saud Algemlas Legal Advice and Legislation Department —
Council of Ministers, State of Kuwait

Ms. Noura Al Roudan Legal Advice and Legislation Department —
Council of Ministers, State of Kuwait

Ms. Dhuha Alyaseen Legal Advice and Legislation Department —
Council of Ministers, State of Kuwait

Ms. Dhuha Al-Sayer Legal Advice and Legislation Department —
Council of Ministers, State of Kuwait

Mr. Talal Alzimami Legal Advice and Legislation Department —

Council of Ministers, State of Kuwait

Court Reporter:

Ms. Anne-Marie Stallard The Court Reporter Ltd.
Interpreters:

Ms. Maha El-Metwally English-Arabic interpreter

Ms. Michele Antaki English-Arabic interpreter

19. On 17 December 2018, the Tribunal referred to section 21.3 of Procedural Order No. 1 and
gave instructions to the Parties regarding corrections to the transcript. Pursuant to the
Tribunal’s instruction, any transcript corrections agreed by the Parties or adopted by the

Tribunal would be entered by the court reporter. On the same date, the Centre informed

Til.

20.

21.

22.

23.

the Parties that the audio recording of the Hearing was available in the file sharing platform

created for this case.

On 7 January 2019, the Respondent submitted its proposed corrections to the transcript and
indicated that it had not received comments from the Claimant. On 9 January 2019, the
Tribunal invited the Claimant to briefly comment on the Respondent’s proposed revisions.
On the same date, the Claimant indicated that it had no comments. On 10 January 2019,

the court reporter provided the revised transcripts to the Parties and the Tribunal.

On 17 June 2019, the Tribunal invited the parties to provide their submission on costs for
this phase of the proceeding by 1 July 2019. On 1 July 2019, being a simultaneous
submission, the Secretary of the Tribunal received Respondent’s submission on costs. On
2 July 2019 and not having received Claimant’s submission on costs, the Tribunal granted
Claimant an extension until 9 July 2019. The Tribunal instructed the Secretary of the
Tribunal not to forward Respondent’s submission on costs until she received both
submissions pursuant to section 12.2 of Procedural Order No. 1. The Secretary of the
Tribunal informed the Tribunal that she had not received Claimant’s submission on costs
by the extended deadline. Thereafter, the Tribunal instructed the Secretary to acknowledge
receipt of Respondent’s Submission on Costs, to copy Claimant’s counsel and to forward

it to the Tribunal.

The proceeding was closed on 1 November 2019.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

This procedure concerns the Preliminary Objection submitted by the Respondent under

Arbitration Rule 41(5) which provides the following:

“Unless the parties have agreed to another expedited procedure for making
preliminary objections, a party may, no /ater than 30 days after the constitution
of the Tribunal, and in any event before the first session of the Tribunal, file an
objection that a claim is manifestly without legal merit. The party shall specify
as precisely as possible the basis for the objection. The Tribunal, after giving
the parties the opportunity to present their observations on the objection, shall,

24.

25.

26.

at its first session or promptly thereafter, notify the parties of its decision on
the objection. The decision of the Tribunal shall be without prejudice to the
right of a party to file an objection pursuant to paragraph (1) or to object, in the
course of the proceeding, that a claim lacks legal merit.” (Emphasis added)

According to this rule, unless the parties have agreed to another expedited procedure,
objections on whether a claim is “manifestly without legal merit” are allowed provided that
they are filed “no later than 30 days after the constitution of the Tribunal” and in any event
“before the first session of the Tribunal.” It is undisputed that the Parties have not agreed
to another expedited procedure for making preliminary objections. However, compliance
with the time limit of 30 days was questioned by the Claimant at the hearing.> The Tribunal
will address first this allegation and then proceed with its analysis under the provision at

issue.

Whether the Preliminary Objections Filed by the Respondent were Timely

Regulation 29 of ICSID’s Administrative and Financial Regulations establishes that:

“(1) All time limits, specified in the Convention or the Rules or fixed by a
Commission, Tribunal, Committee or the Secretary-General, shall be
computed from the date on which the limit is announced in the presence of the
parties or their representatives or on which the Secretary-General dispatches
the pertinent notification or instrument (which date shall be marked on it). The
day of such announcement or dispatch shall be excluded from the calculation.

(2) A time limit shall be satisfied if a notification or instrument dispatched by
a party is delivered at the seat of the Centre, or to the Secretary of the competent
Commission, Tribunal or Committee that is meeting away from the seat of the
Centre, before the close of business on the indicated date or, if that day is a
Saturday, a Sunday, a public holiday observed at the place of delivery or a day
on which for any reason regular mail delivery is restricted at the place of
delivery, then before the close of business on the next subsequent day on which
regular mail service is available.” (Emphasis added)

The application containing the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections filed by the
Respondent was submitted on 3 September 2018. In light of this provision, the Tribunal
disagrees with the Claimant that this application is “on its face ... non-compliant.” The

Secretary-General notified the Parties of the Tribunal’s constitution on 2 August 2018.

5 Tr. H., p. 55:18-25, 56:1-2.

According to this Regulation 29, the day of dispatch shall be excluded from calculation.
Therefore, the Preliminary Objections were filed within the 30-day period and were thus

timely in accordance with Arbitration Rule 41(5).°
B. The Legal Standard Under Rule 41(5)

27. The Respondent’s Preliminary Objection requires us to examine Arbitration Rule 41(5) in
accordance with the general rule of interpretation enshrined in Articles 31 and 32 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“VCLT”). We begin our analysis with the said

provision.

28. Rule 41(5) provides in its relevant part that: “a party may ... file an objection that a claim
is manifestly without legal merit.” (emphasis added) At the outset, the Tribunal observes
that the word “manifestly” qualifies the term “without legal merit.” “Manifestly” as an
adjective means’: “readily perceived by the senses and especially by the sense of sight” as
well as “easily understood or recognized by the mind: obvious.”* The word “merit” has
several meanings: “obsolete: reward or punishment due; the qualities or actions that
constitute the basis of one's deserts; a praiseworthy quality: virtue; character or conduct
deserving reward, honor, or esteem; spiritual credit held to be earned by performance of
righteous acts and to ensure future benefits; the substance of a legal case apart from matters
of jurisdiction, procedure, or form; individual significance or justification.”? On the other
hand, “legal” has also several definitions: “of or relating to law; deriving authority from or
founded on law: de jure; having a formal status derived from law often without a basis in

actual fact: titular; established by law especially: statutory; conforming to or permitted by

6 The Respondent's Preliminary Objections were presented earlier since the ICSID Secretariat was closed on Monday,
3 September in observance of Labor Day. See: https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/News.aspx?Cl
7 In the context of the WTO, the Appellate Body has cautioned that dictionary definitions may be a start in the process
of interpretation, however, an interpretation according to the VCLT is a holistic exercise: “The Appellate Body has
previously held that, while a panel may start with the dictionary definitions of the terms to be interpreted, in the process
of discerning the ordinary meaning, dictionaries alone are not necessarily capable of resolving complex questions of
interpretation because they typically catalogue all meanings of words. Dictionaries are important guides to, but not
dispositive of, the meaning of words appearing in treaties ... Under Article 31 of the Vienna Convention, the "ordinary
meaning" of treaty terms may be ascertained only in their context and in the light of the object and purpose of the
treaty.” WTO, Appellate Body Report, China — Publications and Audiovisual Products, para. 348 (fs omitted).

8 “Manifestly” Merriam-Webster.com. 2019. https://www.merriam-webster.com. (29 March 2019).

° “Merit” Merriam-Webster.com. 2019. https://www.merriam-webster.com. (29 March 2019).

   

 

ll

law or established rules; recognized or made effective by a court of law as distinguished

from a court of equity; of, relating to, or having the characteristics of the profession of law

or of one of its members; created by the constructions of the law.”!°

29. The tribunal in Trans-Global Petroleum v. Jordan examined the ordinary dictionary

meaning of “manifestly” as well as the context provided by other provisions of the ICSID

Convention and determined that: “...the ordinary meaning of the word [manifestly]

requires the respondent to establish its objection clearly and obviously, with relative ease
and despatch.” In light of this, it considered that the standard under Rule 41(5) was “set
high” and that although “[the] exercise may not always be simple ... [and] thus be
complicated; [...] it should never be difficult.” (emphasis added)''!

30. As to the phrase “without legal merit” it noted the significance of the adjective “legal” and

considered that it “is clearly used in contradistinction to ‘factual’”, which would indicate

that a tribunal is not concerned “per se with the factual merits.”!? The phrase “legal merit
was considered in Brandes v. Venezuela as covering “all objections to the effect that the

proceedings should be discontinued at an early stage because, for whatever reason, the

claim can manifestly not be granted by the Tribunal.”!

10 “| egal” Merriam-Webster.com. 2019. https://www.merriam-webster.com. (29 March 2019).

"| Trans-Global Petroleum, Inc. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/25, Tribunal’s Decision
on the Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, 12 May 2008 (hereinafter Trans-
Global Petroleum y. Jordan) (Ex. RL-6), para. 88. In the same sense, para. 105 referring to a test of “clarity, certainty
and obviousness.” See also Brandes Investment Partners, LP v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No.
ARB/08/3, Decision on the Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, 2 February
2009 (hereinafter Brandes v. Venezuela) (Ex. RL-7), paras. 62-64, and Global Trading Resource Corp. and Globex
International, Inc. v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/11, 1 December 2010 (Ex. RL-10), para. 35. In MOL
Hungarian Oil and Gas Company Ple v. Republic of Croatia (hereinafter MOL v. Croatia), ICSID Case No.
ARB/13/32, Decision on Respondent’s Application under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5), 2 December 2014 (Ex. RL-
11), paras. 44 and 45, the tribunal agreed with the standard drawn in Trans-Global Petroleum y. Jordan, although it
distinguished between a claim “by an investor that can properly be rejected out of hand” and “one which requires
more elaborate argument for its eventual di: that such di had to be

” Trans-Global Petroleum v. Jordan (EX. RL-6), paras, 93 and 97. The Tribunal takes note that during the hearing,
the Claimant placed an emphasis on the legal as opposed to the factual nature of an objection under this provision:
“So the drafter needs to convey us or to transfer to us a very important message, that please, abide to the word “legal.”
It’s not a matter of fact. It’s not a matter of discussing facts here. It’s not a matter of interpretation or analysis to be
concluded by the Tribunal whether to go to this side, interpreting this discussion, for the Claimant or for the
Respondent. No basis or no rules for any interpretation or analysis or any disputable facts in this stage of the case.
Accordingly, it is demonstrated that the application of Rule 41(5) does not include any objections that might raise a
challenge based on the factual flaws of a case.” (emphasis added) Tr. H., p. 66:3-14.

3 Brandes v. Venezuela, (Ex. RL-7), para. 55.

31. In this regard, investment tribunals have held that Rule 41(5) concerns “‘a legal impediment
to a claim” (not a factual one) which can go to jurisdiction or the merits of the dispute.'*
Nonetheless, the tribunal in Trans-Global Petroleum v. Jordan recognized that “it is rarely
possible to assess the legal merits of any claim without also examining the factual premise

upon which that claim is advanced.” ' In that case the tribunal expressed its view that:

“[T]he tribunal need not accept at face value any factual allegation which the tribunal
regards as (manifestly) incredible, frivolous, vexatious or inaccurate or made in bad
faith; nor ... accept a legal submission dressed up as a factual allegation. The
Tribunal does not accept, however, that a tribunal should otherwise weigh the
credibility or plausibility of a disputed factual allegation.”'®

32. The tribunal in Eskosol v. Italy also recognized the “level of sophistication” of investment

proceedings while emphasizing that “the Rule 41(5) procedure is not intended, nor should
it be used, as the mechanism to address complicated, difficult or unsettled issues of law.”!”
The Tribunal agrees with the interpretations provided by the aforementioned tribunals and

also shares the view expressed in Emmis v. Hungary, that a tribunal:

“must ordinarily presume the facts which found the claim on the merits as
alleged by the claimant to be true (unless they are plainly without any
foundation). In the application of those presumed facts to the legal question of
its jurisdiction, the tribunal must then decide whether, as matter of law, those
facts fall within or outside the scope of the consent to arbitrate. Where the
objection is taken under the procedure provided in Rule 41(5), it will decide to
grant the objection if one or more of the claims fall clearly outside the scope of
its jurisdiction so that, for the purpose of these proceedings, the claim must be
treated as being ‘manifestly without legal merit’.”!* (emphasis added)

'4 Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg, and RSM Production Corporation v. Grenada,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6, Award, 10 December 2010 (Ex. RL-5), paras. 4.2.1 and 6.1.1. “[T]he Parties agree that
Rule 41(5) pertains only to legal defects, including those involving either jurisdiction or the merits, but not to factual
defects. This does not mean that factual premises of claims may not be acknowledged in order to understand the
essence of the legal claim asserted”, Eskosol S.p.A. in liquidazione v. Italian Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/50,
Decision on Respondent’s Application under Rule 41(5), 20 March 2017 (hereinafter Eskosol v. Italy) (Ex. RL-8),
para. 35. See also Brandes v. Venezuela, (Ex. RL-7), paras. 55 and 59.

'S Trans-Global Petroleum v. Jordan, (Ex. RL-6), para. 97.

16 Thid, para. 105.

17 Eskosol v. Italy (Ex. RL-8), para. 41.

18 Emmis International Holding, B.V., Emmis Radio Operating, B.V. and Mem Magyar Electronic Media Kereskedelmi
és Szolgaltaté Kft. v. Hungary (hereinafter “Emmis v. Hungary”), ICSID Case No. ARB/12/2, Decision on
Respondent's Objection under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5), 11 March 2013 (Ex. RL-12), para. 26.

13

33. In view of the above, our task will be to determine whether taking the facts as a given,
unless they are plainly without foundation, the claims are such that they “manifestly” (i.e.

clearly and obviously) lack legal merit.

Cc. Whether Non-Compliance with Article 10(2) of the BIT Renders the Claim
Manifestly Without Legal Merit

34, The Respondent argues that one of the grounds in which the claims manifestly lacks legal
merit is “jurisdictional in nature.” In the Respondent’s opinion, Article 10(2) of the BIT
conditions Kuwait’s consent to the lapse of a six-month negotiation period from the date
on which an investor notifies Kuwait of a dispute under the BIT. According to the
Respondent, the Claimant did not comply with the mandatory requirement of giving notice
to Kuwait under Article 10(2) of the BIT, nor did it comply with the mandatory requirement

of waiting six months after giving such notice before initiating this arbitration.'?

35. The Claimant argues that, pursuant to an agreement, it ordered its partner to “follow all
legal steps of ICSID rules for arbitration and to implement article 10(2) and 10(3) ... to
convince the State of Kuwait to back down from its illegal refusal ... and to inform the
state of Kuwait by our explicit consent to solve this disputes by arbitration in accordance

with ICSID rules and the ... convention.””°

36. Article 10 of the BIT establishes the following:

“] — Disputes which arise between a Contracting State and an investor belonging to
the other Contracting State, in relation to an investment in the territory of the first
State which returns to the latter, shall be settled, as far as is possible, by amicable
means.

2 —If that dispute cannot be settled within six months of the date on which either of
the two parties to the dispute requested an amicable settlement by notifying the other
party in writing, then the dispute shall be referred for resolution by one of the

© Respondent's Preliminary Objections, paras. 52, 53 and 58.
2 Statement of Claimant, p. 16.

37.

38.

39.

21 Aor

following means, to be chosen by the investor who is a party to the dispute.”?!

(Emphasis added)

The Tribunal observes that the first paragraph of Article 10 uses the language “shall be
settled” when referring to amicable means. While such language could normally indicate
an obligation, the phrase “as far as possible” presupposes that there will be cases where
settlement under those conditions will not be achieved and resort to paragraph 2 will have
to be made. All together the phrase “shall be settled, as far as is possible, by amicable
means” would seem to indicate an obligation of the parties to try to settle the dispute
through amicable means as a preferred method for dispute resolution while recognizing

that this scenario may not always be possible.

On the other hand, paragraph 2 also incorporates mandatory language (“shall be referred
for resolution’’) and in addition to that, it establishes a period of six months from the date
in which either of the two parties “requested an amicable settlement by notifying the other
party in writing.” The Tribunal observes that the language used is conditional: the
provision allows the referral of the dispute for resolution “if” the dispute is not solved
within six-months starting from a specific action (“the request of an amicable settlement’)
through written notification. The language of this provision plainly indicates that neither
the written notification nor the six-month time-period is optional; rather, these steps are to

be complied with before an arbitration may be initiated.

The purpose of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 10 is to allow the Parties in a dispute to try
to reach a solution of the matter before resorting to arbitration. It seeks to prevent a dispute
by giving advance notice to a State so that, if possible, a positive solution to the dispute
may be achieved. This requirement is an integral part of the State’s consent rather that a
negligible formality. However, although the treaty does not force the parties to reach an
amicable settlement, the provision does condition resort to arbitration to the fulfillment of
certain requirements, among them a notification to the other party in writing. In this

Tribunal’s view compliance with the terms of Article 10 should be clear and unequivocal.

ment for the Promotion and i 1 Protection of Between the Government of the Arab

Republic of Egypt and the Government of the State of Kuwait, Articles 1 and 2 (Ex. R-03).

15

40. The Tribunal concurs with the opinion expressed by other investment tribunals to the extent

that:

“The six-month waiting period requirement ... is designed precisely to provide the
State with an opportunity to redress the dispute before the investor decides to submit
the dispute to arbitration... by imposing upon investors an obligation to voice their
disagreement at least six months prior to the submission of an investment dispute to
arbitration, the Treaty effectively accords host States the right to be informed about
the dispute at least six months before it is submitted to arbitration. The purpose of
this right is to grant the host State an opportunity to redress the problem before the
investor submits the dispute to arbitration ... Claimant has deprived the host State
of that opportunity. That suffices to defeat jurisdiction.”??

“[It] constitutes a fundamental requirement ... It is not an inconsequential
procedural requirement but rather a key component of the legal framework
established in the BIT and in many other similar treaties... It amounts to ... an
essential mechanism ... which compels the parties to make a genuine effort to
engage in good faith negotiations before resorting to arbitration.”>

“The explicit requirements that the parties must seek to engage in consultations and
negotiations ... and that there be a ... waiting period ... are accepted by the Tribunal
as pre-conditions to submitting the dispute to arbitration ... compliance is an
essential element of Turkey’s prospective consent to qualify its sovereignty to permit
unknown future investors of the other contracting State to claim relief under the
terms of the BIT against it in an international forum.”*+ (Emphasis added)

41. At the hearing, the Claimant argued that the waiting period “[was] a mere procedure and
directly period to attempt alternative dispute resolution.””> To support its argument, the
Claimant relied on SGS v. Pakistan. In that case, the provision at issue indicated that

consultations had to take place between a State and the investor. If such consultations did

not result in a solution within 12 months, the dispute would be submitted to arbitration.”°

22 Burlington Resources INC. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No ARB/08/5, Decision on jurisdiction, 2 June
2010 (Ex. RL-29), paras. 312 and 315.

23 Murphy Exploration and Production Company International v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/4,
Award on Jurisdiction, 15 December 2010 (Ex. RL-30), paras. 149, 151 and 154. In addition, “[a] failure to comply
with that requirement would result in a determination of lack of jurisdiction”, Enron Corporation and Ponderosa
Assets, L.P. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 January 2004 (Ex.
RL-27), para. 88. In the same vein, see: Kili¢ Insaat Ithalat Ihracat Sanayi Ve Ticaret Anonim Sirketi v. Turkmenistan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/1, Award, 2 July 2013 (Ex. RL-28), para. 6.2.9.

2 Tulip Real Estate Investment and Development Netherlands B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No. ARB/11/28,
Decision on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issue (Ex. RL-31), paras. 71 and 72.

25 Tr H., p. 77:6-8.

26 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, (CSID Case No. ARB/01/13, Decision
of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003, para. 183.

 

16

The tribunal considered such requirement to be directory and procedural in nature rather

than jurisdictional and mandatory:

“Tribunals have generally tended to treat consultation periods as directory and
procedural rather than as mandatory and jurisdictional in nature. Compliance with
such a requirement is, accordingly, not seen as amounting to a condition precedent
for the vesting of jurisdiction ... It should also be noted that in the prolonged period
of time from termination of the PSI Agreement by Pakistan to the submission of
SGS’s written consent under the BIT, there was Jittle indication of any inclination
on the part of either party to enter into negotiations or consultations in respect of
the unfolding dispute. Finally, it does not appear consistent with the need for orderly
and cost-effective procedure to halt this arbitration at this juncture and require the
Claimant first to consult with the Respondent before re-submitting the Claimant’s
BIT claims to this Tribunal.”?” (Emphasis added)

42. In the view of that tribunal, such procedural requirement could, for the sake of efficiency,
be waived if there was no indication that consultations would be fruitful. The Claimant also
quoted Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania. In that case, the tribunal took the same view and

adopted a “useful purpose” approach.

“Tn the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, however, properly construed, this six-month period
is procedural and directory in nature, rather than jurisdictional and mandatory. Its
underlying purpose is to facilitate opportunities for amicable settlement. Its purpose
is not to impede or obstruct arbitration proceedings, where such settlement is not
possible. Non-compliance with the six-month period, therefore, does not preclude
this Arbitral Tribunal from proceeding. If it did so, the provision would have curious
effects, including: - preventing the prosecution of a claim, and forcing the claimant
to do nothing until six months have elapsed, even where further negotiations are
obviously futile, or settlement obviously impossible for any reason, - forcing the
claimant to recommence an arbitration started too soon, even if the six-month period
has elapsed by the time the Arbitral Tribunal considers the matter. ... In this case,
the course of events amply demonstrated that any further delay on BGT’s part would
not have served any useful purpose. By the time the Request for Arbitration was
filed, a long process of negotiation and renegotiation had already failed, and the
Republic’s position was entrenched — in particular by virtue of Minister Lowassa’s
public statement of 13 May 2005, and the steps that had since been taken to deport
City Water personnel, and take over its operations. It was therefore entirely
reasonable for BGT to proceed to arbitration, rather than seeking to resolve the
dispute through “local remedies or otherwise”.””? (Emphasis added)

2 Ibid, para. 184,

28 Ty, H,, p. 77:22-25.

2° Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award, 24 July 2008,
paras, 343-347. The tribunal in Biwater v. Tanzania also recalled the reasoning in CMS v. Argentina on whether the
State had suffered or would suffer prejudice. The Claimant has also made reference to Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech

17

43.

44.

4S.

The Tribunal respectfully disagrees with the views expressed in the cases referred to by the
Claimant in as much as they considered certain consultation requirements procedural to be
directory and procedural in nature. Moreover, in this Tribunal’s opinion there are certain
features that differentiate those cases from this one, such as: the difference in the treaty text
at issue, the fact that in light of the circumstances and evidence presented those tribunals
took into account the usefulness of consultations, as well as the fact that in two of those
cases either a notification had been made or a process of consultations had even taken

place.

The Tribunal turns now to examine whether it is manifest that the Claimant failed to
comply with the requirement in Article 10(2) of the BIT, in light of the facts as put forward,
and thus whether a legal impediment to the claims manifestly exists. The Claimant
contends that this requirement was fulfilled. Thus, its legal premise is that, by virtue of the
BIT it is entitled to have recourse to arbitration and the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections in that regard should be dismissed.*” The Tribunal observes, however, that a
notification from the Claimant to the State of Kuwait pursuant to the BIT requesting for an

amicable solution to a dispute has not been submitted to the State of Kuwait.

Specifically, the Claimant argues that it complied with Article 10(2) of the BIT, relying on
the documents contained in exhibits C-8 and C-9. Exhibit C-8 contains a series of
communications from agencies in Kuwait referencing Mr. Al-Otaibi and the heirs of
another Kuwaiti national, but none of those communications identify the Claimant or the
BIT at issue. Exhibit C-9 contains a letter that identifies the Claimant and the BIT is a
communication solely from the Claimant to a Kuwaiti national mentioned in the other
exhibits. However, this letter appears to be merely a between private parties to a contract
whereby one party (the Claimant) request the other (a Kuwaiti national mentioned in other

exhibits) to comply with its contractual obligations. The letter is not addressed to the State

Republic. In that case, the tribunal took the view that the six-month waiting period was not a jurisdictional provision
and its purpose was “to allow the parties to engage in good-faith negotiations before initiating arbitration.” The tribunal
took into account that there was no evidence that the Respondent would have accepted to enter into negotiations and
that another interpretation would amount in that case to an “unnecessary, overly formalistic approach.” Ronald S.
Lauder v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 3 September 2001, paras. 181-190.

30 Statement of Claimant, pages 16 and 17. Tr. H., p. 69:1-23.

46.

47.

48.

of Kuwait, nor does it mention any specific provision of the BIT, a request for an amicable
solution of the matter or even a dispute under the BIT. Consequently, the Tribunal
considers that it is obvious that this does not constitutes a notification from the Claimant

to Kuwait requesting an amicable settlement of the dispute under Article 10(2) of the BIT.

In reference to one of the letters, the Claimant stated at the hearing: “I'm the one meant by
the word ‘partners’. Nobody else proclaiming that. Yes, the Respondent says that there is
-- the name of the Claimant is not mentioned here, but nobody else is proclaiming that he
is the partner. I am the partner meant by this word here.”?! Additionally, evidence as to
official legal representation from Claimant by the Kuwaiti national has not been presented
to this Tribunal. The Tribunal further notes that the Joint Venture Agreement referenced
does not provide for representation since it indicates that procedures in Kuwait should be

made in the name of the Kuwaiti national and not in the name of the Claimant.

In examining whether the claims manifestly lacks legal merit. We have taken the facts as
pleaded by the Claimant. However, although the Claimant argues that it complied with the
six-month waiting period and the notification requirement through a series of letters, none
of these letters remotely support the Claimant’s position. This is manifest, clear and
obvious just from simply looking at the text of the letters. While we must take the factual
allegations at face value, we do not consider this is the case when the evidence presented

flatly and unequivocally contradicts the legal premise advanced.

In light of the above, the Tribunal considers that it is manifest that the Claimant did not
request an amicable settlement of the dispute through a written notification to the
Respondent in accordance with Article 10(2) of the BIT. The Tribunal thus considers that

there is a legal impediment which goes to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

3 Tr. H., pp. 69:24-25 and 70:1-4.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

D. ‘Whether the Claim Under Article 7 of the BIT is Manifestly Without Legal
Merit

The Respondent argues that the Claimant’s expropriation claim is manifestly without legal
merit since it “ignores the basic principle that liability for expropriation under international
law is dependent on the existence and nature of the rights allegedly expropriated” and that
“the existence and nature of such rights are defined by the domestic law of the State which
has allegedly taken the expropriatory action.”>? In the Respondent’s view, Mr. Al-Otaibi,
the Kuwaiti national who sold “an interest in the Land, [did] not possess any such property
rights”, therefore, “he was quite obviously not able to transfer any such rights to Claimant”
which, in turn, “lacks any legal grounds for asserting a claim against Respondent that it has

expropriated such (non-existent) rights.”??

The Claimant argues in its Request for Arbitration that it entered into a Joint Venture
Agreement with Mr. Al-Otaibi, a Kuwaiti national, by virtue of which it “purchased and

became the owner of 5% of the property of the whole land, in addition to his shares of 50%

of this joint venture agreement.”** In its Statement of Claim it indicates that:

“.,.the claimant (the second party) purchased 5% of the Kuwaiti land owned by the
first party for an amount of $20 million in order to establish with the first and third
party residential and touristic communities and to invest in this land to establish such
constructions and touristic resorts and to obtain 10% of all profits gained from land
and constructions ... the Kuwaiti government prevented the claimant from taking
ownership of the land, and seized and expropriated it for public benefit and did not
hand over or compensate the claimant for the value of its share.”*> (Emphasis added).

According to the Claimant, the Respondent owes “compensation for the land which [it]

expropriated from the Claimant.”*°

In its relevant part, Article 7 of the BIT provides the following:

22 Respondent's Preliminary Objections, para. 50.

3 [hid, para. 51.

Request for Arbitration, p. “e”.

+5 Statement of Claimant, p. 4.

*6 [bid, p. 13. Although in the Request for Arbitration the Claimant argued breaches to Articles 6 and 7 of the BIT in
its Request for Arbitration, upon a question from the Tribunal, it clarified that only Article 7 is being challenged. Tr.
H., p. 80:10-19.

20

“1 — (a) Investments made by investors belonging to either of the two Contracting
States in the territory of the other Contracting State shall not be subject to
nationalisation, expropriation, or confiscation, nor shall they be subject, directly or
indirectly, to measures whose effect is equivalent to nationalisation, expropriation,
or confiscation (referred to collectively hereinafter as “expropriation’”) by the other
Contracting State, except for a public purpose relating to a national interest of that
Contracting State, and then in return for compensation that is immediate, sufficient
and effective, and on the condition that those measures are taken on a non-
discriminatory basis, and in accordance with legal procedures in general usage.

3 — “Expropriation” also includes cases when a Contracting State expropriates the
assets of a company or enterprise which was set up or founded in accordance with
the laws in force in its territory, in which an investor belonging to the other
Contracting State has a majority or important share, through owning stocks, shares,
bonds, rights, or other interests.

4—The term “expropriation” also includes any interference or regulatory procedures
carried out by a Contracting State such as incorporating or restricting the investment,
or the forced sale of all or part of the investment, or any other similar procedures
having the same effect of seizing the property or expropriating it, and arising from
which procedures, the investor is in actuality dispossessed of his property, or his
majority or substantial interest in his investment, or suffers loss or damage to the
economic value of the investment.”

53. Asan essential starting point, investment tribunals have recognized the existence of rights
under the relevant domestic law within the context of expropriation claims, such as in

Emmis v. Hungary:

“Claimants must have held a property right of which they have been deprived. This
follows from the ordinary meaning of the term. The Oxford English Dictionary
defines ‘expropriate’ as ‘(of the state or an authority) take (property) from its owner
for public use or benefit’/‘dispossess (someone) of property’”... The Tribunal in
Waste Management II made the same point when it held that the object of
expropriation is the property of the claimant ... In order to determine whether an
investor/claimant holds property or assets capable of constituting an investment it is
necessary in the first place to refer to host State law. Public international law does
not create property rights. Rather, it accords certain protections to property rights
created according to municipal law.” *” (Emphasis added)

37 Emmis v. Hungary, para. 162 (Ex. RL-24). That tribunal also held that: “it is important to emphasise that the
protection from expropriation in relation to rights conferred under contract still requires identification of a property
interest or asset held by the claimant... Moreover, such an interpretation also accords with the separate and distinct
function of the protection against expropriation as compared to the other protections included within the framework
of the wider investment treaty.” See paras. 165 and 167.

21

54.

55.

56.

57.

The tribunal in EnCana v. Ecuador also expressed that: “for there to have been an
expropriation of an investment or return (in a situation involving legal rights or claims as
distinct from the seizure of physical assets) the rights affected must exist under the law
which creates them, in this case, the law of Ecuador.” ** Likewise, in Quiborax v. Bolivia,
the tribunal agreed that: “in order for a right to be expropriated, it must first exist under the

relevant domestic law (in this case, Bolivian law).”*?

The Claimant argues that the Respondent “prevented [it] from taking ownership of the
land” and that it “expropriated its land and did not enable it to register its ownership in
government departments.”4? The Claimant alleges two bases for its ownership rights: a
deed issued by Saudi Arabia in favor of Mr. Al-Otaibi, a Kuwaiti national [not the
Claimant] and a private joint venture agreement between Mr. Al-Otaibi and the Claimant
whereby Mr. Al-Otaibi agrees to sell the Land once such Land is recognized by Kuwaiti

authorities.“!

With regard to the private joint venture agreement, the Tribunal considers that a promise
between two private parties contained in a private instrument, which has not been

sanctioned or recognized by the host state, cannot be the basis of a property title.

In addition, regarding the deed, the Claimant has not argued or provided any evidence that
such title [issued by Saudi Arabia in favor of a Kuwaiti national], has been recognized or
registered by any Kuwaiti authority. Rather, it has asserted that the Respondent has

“prevented the claimant from taking ownership of the land.” In that regard, Article 7 of

38 EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN3481 (UNCITRAL), Award, 3 February 2006,
(Ex. RL-25), para. 184.

3° Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kaplin v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID Case
No. ARB/06/2, Award, 16 September 2015, (Ex. RL-3), para. 135. See also, Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, (CSID
Case No. ARB/04/1, Decision on Liability, 27 December 2010, (Ex. RL-26), para. 39.

4° Statement of Claimant, p.11.

4! At the hearing, the Claimant was asked by the Tribunal whether it “had ever had any title to property” and “what
[was] the title of Claimant?”, to which the Claimant responded “yes ... [t]he title agreement is owning 5% of the
disputed land.” Tr. H., p. 116:6-13.

® Statement of Claimant, page 4.

22

Iv.

58.

59.

60.

the Real-estate Registration Law, which was discussed during the hearing.* This provision

provides the following:

“The non-registration shall result in that the said rights shall not be created,

transferred, changed or cancelled among the concerned persons or others.”*+

Once again, the Tribunal is of the view that, while it must take the facts as given by the
Claimant as true, it is not to turn a blind eye as to what the evidence provided shows on its
face. In this case, it is obvious that an essential element for the Claimant’s expropriation
claim is missing, i.e. the existence of property rights in accordance with the laws of Kuwait.
Therefore, the legal premise that it owns 5% of the land which was expropriated by the

Respondent manifestly lacks legal merit.

COSTS

As stated in the procedural history, the Parties were invited to make their submission on
costs. Having not received Claimant’s submission on costs, the Tribunal examined the
Respondent’s Submission on Costs and found it reasonable under the circumstances of the
case. It decided to ignore the Claimant’s failure to submit its statement on costs and
expenses, because in any event, as explained below, it has determined that the Claimant

has to bear them.

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides that “the Tribunal shall, except, as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the
proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of
the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall

be paid.”

*3 At the hearing, the Respondent consulted with Kuwaiti counsel and indicated that “ownership of real property is
effective upon registration of that property under Kuwaiti law.” Tr. H., p. 96:19-20. Claimant has neither contested
this assertion nor offered an alternative interpretation of the relevant provision of Kuwaiti law.

§ Tr. H., pp. 85:24-25, and 86:1.

23

61. This provision grants the Tribunal with authority and discretion to allocate costs and fees.
In the excercise of such authority and discretion, the Tribunal notes that the practice
varies from case to case in light of the particular circumanstances. In the present case, the

Tribunal considers that costs should follow the event.

62. The Respondent has been succesful in defeding its Objection on the grounds that the
Claimant’s claims are “manifestly without legal merit”, pursuant to Rule 41(5) of the
Arbitraton Rules. The claim was brought without complying with the requirements
established in Article 10(2) of the BIT and the Claimant failed to demostrate that it had a
property right in accordace with the laws of Kuwait in order to bring an expropriation claim
under Article 7 of the BIT. Thus, the claim should have never been brought in the first

place.

63. In light of the Tribunal’s findings, the Tribunal deems appropriate to order the Claimant to
bear its fees and expenses as well as the Repondent’s fees and expenses, which in the view

of the Tribunal are reasonable.

64. The costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to:*°

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Prof. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez US$ 95,218.60
Mr. Pascal Dévaud US$ 112,858.1147
Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper US$ 38,822.22

45 See Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, (CSID Case No. ARB/07/20, Award, 14 July 2010, para. 152; Cortec Mining
Kenya Limited, Cortec (Pty) Limited and Stirling Capital Limited v. Republic of Kenya, \CSID Case No. ARB/15/29,
Award, 22 October 2018, para. 388; PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd. v. Independent State of Papua New
Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/33, Award, 5 May 2015, paras. 400-403; CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro,
ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8, Award, 26 July 2016, paras. 220-221. See also CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro,
ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8, Decision on Annulment, 1 May 2018, paras. 150-151; RSM Production Corporation and
others v. Grenada, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6, Award, 10 December 2010, para. 8.3.4.

4° The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account once all
invoices are received and the account is final.

47 Due to the default in the payment of advances in this case, the Tribunal wishes to note that there was a total of
US$8,124.94 of additional fees which are owed to Mr. Dévaud. Therefore, the total amount that Mr. Dévaud would
have claimed in this case would have been US$120,983.05.

24

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

ICSID’s administrative fees USS 84,000.00

Direct expenses (estimated)** US$ 22,460.27
Total US$ 353,359.20

The Claimant advanced to the Centre US$149,935 and Respondent advanced $200,000.”
Given the outcome of the proceeding, the Tribunal deems appropriate to order the Claimant

to bear the arbitration costs.

DECISION
Accordingly, for the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides:

To accept the Respondent’s Preliminary Objection that the Claimant’s claims manifestly
lacks legal merit due to the Claimant’s obvious non-compliance with Article 10(2) of the

BIT.

To accept the Respondent’s preliminary objection that the expropriation claim manifestly
lacks legal merit since it is obvious that an essential element for the Claimant's
expropriation claim is missing, i.e. the existence of property rights in accordance with the

laws of Kuwait.

That the Claimant shall bear all the costs of this proceeding, including fees and expenses
of the Members of the Tribunal. Therefore, the Claimant shall pay the Respondent
US$ 200,000 in arbitration costs, and the legal costs incurred by Kuwait, in the amount of

US$ 612,986.39.

*8 This amount includes estimated charges relating to the dispatch of this Award (courier, printing and copying).

49 On 12 September 2019, pursuant to Regulation 14(3)(d), the Secretary-General informed the parties of the default
and gave an opportunity to either of them to make the required payment. On 30 October 2019, the Tribunal once
more invited either party to make the required payment.

If there is to be a remaining balance, this will be reimbursed to the parties in proportion to the payments that they
advanced to ICSID.

25

70. This Award is adopted by a majority vote of two to one. Mr. Pascal Dévaud is dissenting.

26

Lett Kin sprs

 

Prof. Rolf Knieper Mr. Pascal Dévaud
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 1 NOV 2019 Subject to the attached dissenting opinion.
ate:
__

Mr. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez
President of the Tribunal

Da 1 NOV 2019

