INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

ALPHA PROJEKTHOLDING GMBH
(Claimant)

and

UKRAINE
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/16

Members of the Tribunal:
Hon. Davis R. Robinson, President
Dr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov

Secretary of the Tribunal: Ms. Eloise M. Obadia

Representing Claimant:

Dr. Leopold Specht

Mira Suleimenova

Specht Rechtanswalt GmbH
Vienna, Austria

Laura Steinberg
Sullivan & Worcester
Boston, MA, USA

Representing Respondent:

Yevhen Korniychuk
Larysa Lischynska
Ministry of Justice
Kiev, Ukraine

Nickolay Atanasov

Dr. Sergei Voitovich
Dmytro Shemelyn
Grischenko & Partners
Kiev, Ukraine

Andriy Alexeyev
Proxen & Partners
Kiev, Ukraine

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. PROCEDURAL AND FACTUAL BACKGROUND .....cccssssssssesseesesseesesseeneeneeneeeneen

II. GOVERNING LAW

 

A. Overview

 

B. The Standards of Disqualification under the ICSID Convention and the
Arbitration Rules

 

IH. TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS.

A. The Merits of R dent’s Proposal

 

P

1. Shared Educational Experience ..........c.ccccccece eee eeceeeseseseesesceeeteceeeseseneeneeeaeee

N

a. Arbitration Rule 6(2)

b. The IBA Guidelines

Non-Disclosure of Shared Educational Experience .....0...0.ccceeeeeeeeeeeeees

 

c. Analysi

w

-

The “Brief Phone Call”

. The Purported Lack of Arbitral Experience and Its Alleged Implications.........

 

B. Timeli of R dent’s Proposal

Iv. CONCLUSION

 

11

13

13

20

21

25

26

27

30

IL PROCEDURAL AND FACTUAL BACKGROUND

1. On June 5, 2007, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received a Request for Arbitration dated June 1, 2007 (the “Request”)
from Alpha Projektholding GmbH (‘“Alpha” or “Claimant”) against Ukraine (“Ukraine” or
“Respondent”) (Alpha and Ukraine, together, the “Parties”). Alpha, an Austrian limited liability
company, submitted the Request pursuant to Article 9 of the 1996 Agreement for the Promotion

and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between Ukraine and Austria.!

2. By letter of August 28, 2007, Claimant invited Respondent to reach an agreement
concerning the number of arbitrators and the method of their appointment. Claimant offered to
agree on the formula provided in Rule 2(3) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”). Respondent did not reply to this offer, which was
reiterated in a letter from Claimant of September 19, 2007. By letter of September 24, 2007,
Claimant informed the Centre that it opted for the formula provided in Article 37(2)(b) of the
1965 Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States (the “ICSID Convention”).” By letter of the same date, Respondent agreed to this
formula, pursuant to which the tribunal in this case (the “Tribunal”) was to “consist of three
arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each party and the third, who shall be the president of the

Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the parties.”

3. By letter of October 22, 2007, Claimant appointed Dr. Yoram Turbowicz, a
national of the State of Israel, as arbitrator in this proceeding. On October 25, 2007, the
Secretariat of the Centre transmitted to the Parties a copy of a letter of the same date concerning
Dr. Turbowicz that had been received from Dr. Leopold Specht of the law firm of Specht
Rechtanswalt GmbH of Vienna, Austria (the “Specht Firm”), Counsel to Claimant. Dr. Specht’s
letter stated that it “attached the curriculum vitae of Dr. Yoram Turbowicz.” The curriculum
vitae of Dr. Turbowicz that was attached to both Dr. Specht’s letter and the Secretariat’s letter of
October 25, 2007 records in pertinent part, under the heading “Educacion” [sic], the following

! See Agreement for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between Ukraine and Austria

(signed on November 8, 1996).
2 See Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States
(October 14, 1966).

information: “1988-90 Harvard Law School, Doctor of Juridical Science (S.J.D.)” and “1987-8
Harvard Law School, Master of Laws (LL.M.).”

4. On November 10, 2007, Dr. Turbowicz submitted a declaration pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 6(2) (the “Turbowicz Declaration”). The last paragraph of the Turbowicz
Declaration, the language of which is in keeping with the text of Arbitration Rule 6(2), states in
pertinent part: “Attached is a statement of (a) my past and present professional and other
relationships (if any) with the parties and (b) any other circumstances that might cause my

reliability for independent judgment to be questioned by a party.”

5. By letter of November 22, 2007, Respondent appointed Dr. Stanimir A.
Alexandrov, a national of Bulgaria, as arbitrator in this proceeding. By letter of November 23,
2007, Claimant informed the Centre that the Parties had not reached an agreement on the
candidacy of the President of the Tribunal and requested the ICSID Secretary-General, pursuant
to Rule 4(1) of the Arbitration Rules, to refer a request to designate the President of the Tribunal
to the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID. On February 4, 2008, the Chairman of
the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Hon. Davis R. Robinson, a citizen of the United

States of America, as third and presiding arbitrator in this proceeding.

6. By letter of February 8, 2008, the Secretariat of ICSID informed the Parties that,
as of that date, the Tribunal was “deemed to have been constituted and the proceeding to have
begun.” The letter reported that “all the arbitrators” had accepted their appointments and
attached copies of the declarations of each of the three arbitrators as required under Rule 6(2) of

the Arbitration Rules.

7. The Tribunal held its First Session with the Parties on April 1, 2008, in
Washington, D.C. (the “First Session”). The minutes of the First Session, as approved by the
Parties (the “Minutes”), record the following at section 1, page 2: “The parties confirmed their
agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted and that they had no objections to its
members.” In accordance with Article 44 of the ICSID Convention, it was agreed that the ICSID

Arbitration Rules in force as of April 10, 2006 would apply to the proceeding.

8. Pursuant to a schedule agreed to by the Parties, on July 1, 2008, Claimant filed its
Memorial and, on October 1, 2008, Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial. Following the
submission of the latter, the Parties agreed to a second round of written pleadings. Accordingly,
Claimant filed its Reply on November 26, 2008 and, on January 21, 2009, Respondent filed its
Rejoinder. An oral hearing on jurisdiction and admissibility and on the merits took place in
Paris, France from March 23 to March 27, 2009, at the conclusion of which the Parties agreed
upon two rounds of written, simultaneous post-hearing submissions, the first on May 18, 2009

and the second on June 17, 2009.

9. On December 8, 2009, Counsel for Respondent sent an email message to the
Secretary of the Tribunal, referring to ICSID’s letter of February 8, 2008 that distributed to the
Parties the respective declarations of the three members of the Tribunal, noting that Counsel for
Respondent “cannot find a statement of Dr. Turbowicz, which is mentioned as attached” to the
Turbowicz Declaration, and requesting a copy of the statement. On the same date of December
8, 2009, the Secretary of the Tribunal responded to Counsel for Respondent, attaching a copy of
the Secretariat’s letter of February 8, 2008 and pointing out: “As you will see, Mr. Turbowicz

did not file a statement.”

10. On December 23, 2009, Counsel for Respondent submitted a letter to the
Secretariat of ICSID (‘“Respondent’s December 23 Letter”) stating: “The Respondent has
recently been informed that the member of the Tribunal Dr. Yoram Turbowicz and Counsel for
the Claimant Dr. Leopold Specht maintain personal relations, which have arisen in the course of
their studies in the Harvard University, where Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht were together
enrolled in LLM (1987-1988) and SJD programs (Dr. Turbowicz in 1988-1990 and Dr. Specht in
1988-1992)” (hereinafter referred to as “Respondent’s Assertion”). Respondent’s December 23
Letter noted that Dr. Turbowicz “did not mention any of such facts” in any statement
accompanying the Turbowicz Declaration and requested Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht to

comment.

11. Dr. Specht responded to Respondent’s Assertion in a letter to the Secretary of the
Tribunal dated December 30, 2009 (“Dr. Specht’s December 30 Letter”), in which he contended

that Respondent’s December 23 Letter failed “to be specific” about Respondent’s Assertion. Dr.

Specht also stated as follows: “As can be taken from Dr. Turbowicz and from my CV, we both
studied at Harvard Law School. We know each other from this time. At no time have Mr.
Turbowicz and I maintained business relations of any kind or have worked together on
professional matters. Since our departure from Harvard Law School, we have maintained no

social relationship.”

12. By a letter dated January 25, 2010, Respondent proposed the disqualification of
Dr. Yoram Turbowicz as a member of the Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as “Respondent’s
Proposal”). Respondent’s Proposal referred to Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention according
to which a member of an ICSID tribunal “shall” be a person “who may be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment.” Respondent’s Proposal made the following principal points:

(1) Dr. Turbowicz’s shared matriculation with Dr. Specht at Harvard Law School was not
disclosed as part of the Turbowicz Declaration;

(2) ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(2) requires a member of an ICSID tribunal to declare any “past
and present ... relationships with the parties and . . . any other circumstance that might
cause . . . reliability for independent judgment to be questioned by a party;”

(3) The statement in Dr. Specht’s December 30 Letter addressing whether a “social
relationship” existed between Dr. Specht and Dr. Turbowicz was “neither sufficient nor,
strictly speaking, entirely convincing;”

(4) “[PJublicly available sources” did not provide “relevant information about Dr.
Turbowicz’s experience in transnational investment or commercial arbitration;” and

(5) “The fact that Dr. Specht has selected, as an arbitrator, for an obviously complicated
investment arbitration case, a person without relevant professional experience, but his
former co-student, may not have other reasonable explanation than that Dr. Specht relied
on the person whom he personally knew.”

Respondent’s Proposal further contended that Dr. Turbowicz’s silence in reaction to
Respondent’s December 23 Letter “obviously” gave rise to “justifiable doubts” as to his

reliability for independent judgment.

13. Respondent also argued that its proposal should “not be considered as submitted
belatedly” because Respondent could not have reasonably expected that “counsel for an
opposing party [would] appoint the arbitrator from his co-students and/or verify such

circumstance from the very outset of the case.” Respondent contended that, once it became

aware of the school relationship between Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht, Counsel for Respondent
sent Respondent’s December 23 Letter and thereafter expeditiously submitted Respondent’s
Proposal “within the time limits of the ICSID Arbitration Rule 9, i.e. ‘before the proceeding

[was] declared closed.”

14. On February 6, 2010, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the Parties by letter
that ICSID had received on February 5, 2010 Respondent’s Proposal pursuant to Article 57 of
the ICSID Convention. The Secretary indicated that pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6),
the proceeding was suspended until a decision was taken on Respondent’s Proposal. The
Secretary also invited Dr. Turbowicz “to furnish to the Tribunal any explanations that he may
have, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3).” On February 15, 2010, Dr. Turbowicz
transmitted to the Secretary and to the two other members of the Tribunal (the “Two Other
Members”) a statement dated February 11, 2010 and entitled “Proposal for Disqualification —

Arbitrator’s Response” (“Dr. Turbowicz’s Response”).

15. Dr. Turbowicz’s Response confirmed that Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht “studied
together at the Harvard Law School, some twenty years ago” and that this shared experience was
how they “came about knowing of each other.” Dr. Turbowicz insisted that he would not have
accepted the assignment in the first place had he thought that he possessed the “slightest bias in
the consideration of the case, objectively, seemingly or subjectively.” Dr. Turbowicz explained
that he did not attach any statement to the Turbowicz Declaration because he “deemed” that the
relationships to which Arbitration Rule 6(2) refers, did not “exist” in this case and that,
consequently, no statement was “warranted.” In his response, Dr. Turbowicz attested that he
had no “professional or business relationship” with either of the Parties. He argued that there
was no “other relationship” which by its “nature, scope, intensity or character” fell within the
“purview” of the kind of “other relationship” contemplated by Arbitration Rule 6(2) and thus no
statement was “properly called for” as part of the Turbowicz Declaration. The fact that he and
Dr. Specht studied together at Harvard Law School could, in Dr. Turbowicz’s opinion, neither
“objectively nor subjectively” constitute a relationship of the “sort” coming within the language
of Arbitration Rule 6(2). Dr. Turbowicz stressed: “Since our studies we never had any business
or other professional relations. Nor have I ever been involved in Dr. Specht’s personal or

professional life.”

16. On February 16, 2010, the Secretary sent a letter to the Parties (the “February 16
Letter”) that: (1) attached Dr. Turbowicz’s Response; (2) invited Respondent and Claimant to
provide comments by February 19, 2010; and (3) asked Respondent to provide more details
regarding Respondent’s Assertion about the maintenance of “personal relations” between Dr.

Turbowicz and Dr. Specht, “including when and how Respondent was so informed.”

17. On February 18, 2009, Dr. Specht responded to the February 16 Letter on behalf
of Claimant (“Dr. Specht’s February 18 Letter”). Dr. Specht’s February 18 Letter stressed
Respondent’s failure to substantiate its charge of ongoing “personal relations” between Dr.
Specht and Dr. Turbowicz. Dr. Specht reiterated that he and Dr. Turbowicz “have never worked
together on professional matters and have not maintained a social relationship since departing
from Harvard Law School.” Dr. Specht’s February 18 Letter emphasized that the curriculum
vitae of Dr. Turbowicz that was transmitted to the Parties noted Dr. Turbowicz’s education at
Harvard Law School and cited both the dates attended and diplomas granted. Dr. Specht
observed that his own curriculum vitae “has been posted on [his] firm’s website at least since the

inception of this proceeding.”

18. Dr. Specht’s February 18 Letter also noted Dr. Turbowicz’s “experience as [a]
legal practitioner, including service as an arbitrator” as well as Dr. Turbowicz’s involvement
“with arbitration matters under free trade agreements between Israel and other states.” Dr.
Specht objected to Respondent’s description of Dr. Turbowicz as a “person without relevant
professional experience” as being “ill advised.” Dr. Specht’s February 18 Letter characterized
Respondent’s Proposal as “belated” and, as a result, requested its dismissal. Dr. Specht argued
that, if Respondent’s Proposal was sustained at this late stage in the proceeding, its effect on

Claimant would be “extremely prejudicial.”

19. On February 19, 2010, Counsel for Respondent submitted its observations on Dr.
Turbowicz’s Response, on the February 16 Letter and on Dr. Specht’s February 18 Letter
(“Respondent’s February 19 Letter”). Therein, Respondent noted that it was “undisputed” that
the Turbowicz Declaration made no reference to the “established fact” of the “joint studies and
personal acquaintance” of Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht. Respondent asserted that it had “no

duty” as a result of the October-November 2007 correspondence to review the “CVs of

arbitrators and counsel in order to calculate possible intersections of their biographies” because
Respondent was “entitled to rely” upon prospective arbitrators exercising their duty of disclosure
in a bona fide fashion. Respondent’s February 19 Letter also took note of the “further
subsequent contact” of Dr. Turbowicz with Dr. Specht mentioned in Dr. Turbowicz’s Response —
specifically, a “brief phone call” from Dr. Specht in 2007 inquiring as to whether Dr. Turbowicz
was available to serve as an arbitrator in this proceeding. Respondent also criticized Counsel to
Claimant for not having selected “from the universe of available arbitrators” a person “with no

links” to Dr. Specht, rather than having chosen someone “whom he personally knew.”

20. Additionally, in Respondent’s February 19 Letter, Respondent declined to provide
details explaining when and how Respondent was informed that Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht
maintained “personal relations,” as requested in the February 16 Letter. Respondent declined to
provide these details on the following basis: “Unfortunately, the source of this information . . . is
unlikely to be accepted as evidence in this arbitration and therefore is not disclosed by
Respondent.” Respondent also challenged Claimant’s contention that Respondent’s Proposal
was “time-barred.” Respondent’s February 19 Letter cited a number of scholarly works and
judicial decisions in Canada and the United States as supporting Respondent’s Proposal.
Respondent’s February 19 Letter stressed that the April 10, 2006 amendments to the Arbitration
Rules placed an “additional duty” upon arbitrators by requiring the disclosure of “any other
circumstance that might cause [their] reliability for independent judgment to be questioned by a
party.” Respondent characterized the “nature of the relationship” between Dr. Turbowicz and
Dr. Specht as “unquestionably” falling within this new portion of Arbitration Rule 6(2).
Respondent’s February 19 Letter concluded that the attendance by Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht
together at Harvard Law School, and the failure to disclose that relationship, were sufficient to
show that Dr. Turbowicz was not a person who could be relied upon to exercise independent

judgment.

21. On February 22, 2010, the Secretary of the Tribunal reiterated by letter to the
Parties (the “February 22 Letter”) the request of the Two Other Members for details about the
source of Respondent’s belief that Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht maintained “personal relations”
and the facts supporting this belief. The February 22 Letter recorded their “dissatisfaction” with

the position adopted in Respondent’s February 19 Letter on the basis that “it is the responsibility

of the Two Other Members to determine evidentiary matters in connection with Respondent’s
Proposal and not the Parties’ responsibility.” The February 22 Letter concluded: “If
Respondent, as is its right, chooses not to provide such information, then the Two Other
Members will have no choice but to disregard this aspect of Respondent’s Proposal.” On
February 24, 2010, Counsel for Respondent replied to the February 22 Letter and stated, with
respect to the reiterated request for information related to Respondent’s Assertion, that
Respondent “regretfully, is unable to provide additional evidence on the matter in question”

(hereinafter referred to as “Respondent’s Decision”).

22. On February 25, 2010, at the behest of the Two Other Members, the Secretary of
the Tribunal wrote to the Parties asking that Respondent (a) confirm the remaining grounds for
Respondent’s Proposal for the disqualification of Dr. Turbowicz and (b), in light of
Respondent’s Decision not to identify the source of or to substantiate Respondent’s belief that
Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht maintained “personal relations,” “inform the Tribunal when, and
under what conditions, Respondent and Counsel for Respondent first became aware” of the

contemporaneous attendance by Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht at Harvard Law School.

23. On March 1, 2010, Counsel for Respondent replied by letter to the February 25
Letter (“Respondent’s March 1 Letter”). Therein, Counsel for Respondent confirmed
Respondent’s “special emphasis” on the failure of Dr. Turbowicz to disclose his attendance at
Harvard Law School with Dr. Specht as a part of the Turbowicz Declaration and reiterated points
that Respondent had made in previous correspondence. As to when Respondent learned of the
joint attendance, Respondent’s March | Letter referred to (1) the information that Respondent
received in November of 2009 (but that, because of Respondent’s Decision, Respondent chose
not to disclose) and (2) Dr. Specht’s December 30 Letter. Respondent’s March | Letter adopted
the position that December 30, 2009 was the date that could “be correctly taken” by the Two
Other Members for purposes of calculating the timeliness of Respondent’s Proposal because
December 30, 2009 was the “first moment in time” when the fact of the prior acquaintance

between Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht “was established by admissible evidence.”

24. On March 1, 2010, the Secretary, at the request of the President, asked Dr.

Turbowicz and Claimant to provide any additional comments or further information that each

deemed appropriate or necessary in reaction to Respondent’s March | Letter. Neither Dr.
Turbowicz nor Claimant submitted any additional comments or further information in response

to this request.

IL. GOVERNING LAW

25. Before analyzing Respondent’s Proposal, the Two Other Members believe it first

necessary to summarize the governing law in this matter.

A. Overview

26. The Two Other Members are acting subject to the ICSID Convention, as
implemented by the Arbitration Rules in force as of April 10, 2006. The following are excerpts
of provisions of the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules that are of significance to

Respondent’s Proposal.

27. Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention describes the necessary personal
qualifications for service as an arbitrator in an ICSID proceeding and provides in pertinent part:

Persons designated to serve ... shall be persons of high moral character and

recognized competence in the fields of law, commerce, industry or finance, who

may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment.

28. Article 57 of the ICSID Convention addresses the subject of arbitrator challenge
and stipulates:

A party may propose to a. . . Tribunal the disqualification of any of its members

on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by

paragraph (1) of Article 14.

29. Article 58 of the ICSID Convention establishes the procedure for deciding a
proposal for disqualification under Article 57:

The decision on any proposal to disqualify a[n] . . . arbitrator shall be taken by the

other members of the... Tribunal .. . .”

30. Rule 6 of the Arbitration Rules deals with the constitution of a tribunal. Rule 6(2)
sets forth the language of a required arbitrator declaration and, as amended on April 10, 2006,

states in pertinent part:

Before or at the first session of the tribunal, each arbitrator shall sign a declaration
in the following form:

 

“To the best of my knowledge there is no reason why I should not serve on the
Arbitral Tribunal. . . . Attached is a statement of (a) my past and present
professional, business and other relationships (if any) with the parties and (b) any

other circumstance that might cause my reliability for independent judgment to be
questioned by a party. I acknowledge that by signing this declaration, I assume a
continuing obligation promptly to notify the Secretary-General of the Centre of

any such relationship or circumstance that subsequently arises during this
proceeding.”

31. Rule 9 of the Arbitration Rules amplifies on the process for disqualification and

accentuates the requirement of an objection being submitted on a timely basis:

A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article 57 of
the ICSID Convention shall promptly, and in any event before the proceeding is
declared closed, file its proposal with the Secretary-General, stating its reasons
therefor . . . . The arbitrator to whom the proposal relates, may, without delay,
furnish explanations to the Tribunal . . . . [T]he other members shall promptly
consider and vote on the proposal in the absence of the arbitrator concerned . . . .
The proceeding shall be suspended until a decision has been taken on the
proposal.

32. Finally, Rule 27 of the Arbitration Rules addresses the subject of waiver:

A party which knows or should have known that a provision . . . of these Rules

. .. has not been complied with and which fails to state promptly its objections

thereto, shall be deemed . . . to have waived its right to object.

33. In discerning the meaning of these governing provisions as applied to the
particular circumstances of Respondent’s Proposal, the Two Other Members will follow the rules
of interpretation set forth in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
(“Vienna Convention”),’ to which both Ukraine and Austria are parties and which is regarded as
confirmatory of customary international law. The Two Other Members particularly recall
Paragraph | of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention: “A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith
in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context
and in light of its object and purpose.” To the extent that the ICSID Convention or the

Arbitration Rules may be silent or ambiguous on a given point, the Two Other Members find

See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (May 23, 1969).

10

guidance in the preparatory papers, other decisions made under the ICSID Convention and

decisions made pursuant to other international arbitral rules.*

B. The Standards of Disqualification under the ICSID Convention and
the Arbitration Rules

34. The ICSID Convention’s standard for challenge found in Article 57 embodies an

objective criterion that imposes the stringent requirement of a “manifest” lack of the qualities set

forth in Article 14(1) — namely the qualities of “high moral character,” “recognized competence”

and reliability “to exercise independent judgment.” Respondent does not in any way seek to
impugn Dr. Turbowicz’s character, and Respondent does not raise any doubt as to his legal
competence (although Respondent does question the extent of his arbitration background).
Instead, Respondent focuses its attention on the last of the three qualifications: reliability “to

exercise independent judgment.”

35. The Two Other Members observe that, under Article 14(1) of the ICSID
Convention, as interpreted by past ICSID decisions, an analysis of an arbitrator’s reliability “to
exercise independent judgment” entails two concepts: impartiality and independence.>
Commentators have observed a distinction between impartiality and independence:

It is generally considered that “[in]dependence” is concerned exclusively with
questions arising out of the relationship between an arbitrator and one of the
parties, whether financial or otherwise . . . . By contrast the concept of
“impartiality” is considered to be connected with actual or apparent bias of an

4 See W. Michael Tupman, Challenge and Disqualification of Arbitrators in International Commercial

Arbitration, 38 Int’! & Comp. L. Q. 44 (1989) (“Tupman”) (noting that arbitrators look “not only to the ICSID
Convention and arbitration rules but also to other international conventions, rules of international arbitration
established by other international bodies . . . [which] may be considered as a matter of comparison, and as
embodying . . . the general principles governing international arbitration.”) (quotation marks omitted).

5 See, e.g., Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios Integrales del
Agua S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17 and Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de
Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19, Decision on the
Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal, October 22, 2007 (“Suez Aguas Decision”),
at para. 28 (concluding, based on the different language employed in the English and Spanish versions of Article
14(1), that “the two standards of independence and impartiality” apply in disqualification decisions);
Participaciones Inversiones Portuarias SARL v. Gabonese Republic, ICSID Case. No. ARB/08/17, Decision on
Proposal for Disqualification of an Arbitrator, November 12, 2009 (“PIP Decision”), at para. 21 (“[L]a notion
d’indépendance contenue a l’article 14(1) de la Convention CIRDI s’entend du devoir d’indépendance et
d’impartialité ....”).

 

 

ll

arbitrator — either in favour of one of the parties or in relation to the issues in
dispute.®

36. Other ICSID tribunals have likewise recognized the need to “apply the two

standards of independence and impartiality,””

noting that:

[I]ndependence relates to the lack of relations with a party that might influence an
arbitrator’s decision. Impartiality, on the other hand, concerns the absence of a bias or
predisposition toward one of the parties.*

Accordingly, this decision addresses both concepts. °

37. Further, in keeping with the rules of interpretation of the Vienna Convention, the
Two Other Members must perforce assign significance to the use of the adjective “manifest” in
the language of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention describing the standard that a challenge
must meet in order to prevail. According to Webster’s Dictionary, the word “manifest” connotes
something that is “obvious” to one’s understanding and that is “readily perceived by the senses”
and “easily understood or recognized by the mind.”'° The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
correspondingly defines the term “manifest” as something which is “[c]learly revealed to the eye,

mind or judgement; open to view or comprehension; obvious.”''! Thus,

An arbitrator cannot, under Article 57 of the [ICSID] Convention, be successfully
challenged as a result of inferences which themselves rest merely on other
inferences . . . . The facts established or undisputed must, in the circumstances of
the particular case, be plainly capable of giving rise to the inference claimed to be
derived from such facts. The inference resulting from the facts must be that,
manifestly, that is, clearly, the person challenged is not to be relied upon for
independent judgment, or that a readily apparent and reasonable doubt as to that
person’s reliability for independent judgment has arisen from the facts established
or not disputed.'
° Nigel Blackaby et al., REDFERN AND HUNTER ON INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION 267-68 (5th ed. 2009)
(“Redfern”), at para. 4-77.
Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19, and Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and InterAguas Servicios
Integrales del Agua S.A., ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Second Decision on Disqualification, May 12, 2008 (“Suez
Aguas Second Decision”), at para. 27.
Id. at para. 28.
See also “Remarks of the ICSID Secretary-General,” News from ICSID, Winter 1989, at 5 (“The
Convention contains a second condition related to the topic of independence and impartiality that parties must
observe i in the selection of arbitrators.”).
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary (10th ed. 2002) (““Webster’s Dictionary”) at 706.
" Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (Sth ed. 2002) at 1691.
n SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13,
Decision on Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator, December 19, 2002 (“SGS Decision”), reprinted in 8
ICSID Reports 402 (2005); see also Tupman at 44-45 (describing Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of

12

9

v3

In sum, “the term ‘manifest’? means ‘obvious’ or evident. Accordingly, this decision will

apply this standard.

IH. TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

38. Based upon the argumentation and evidence stemming from Respondent’s
Proposal, the Two Other Members must render a decision on either or both of two grounds: first,
the merits of Respondent’s Proposal and, second, the timeliness of Respondent’s Proposal. The

Two Other Members address these two grounds in that order.

A. The Merits of Respondent’s Proposal

39. With Respondent’s Decision not to divulge the source or other information
regarding Respondent’s Assertion that Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht “maintain personal
relations,” the Two Other Members, as foretold in the February 22 Letter, have determined that
they have “no choice but to disregard this aspect of Respondent’s Proposal.” They reach this
conclusion because the burden of proof for such an assertion rests upon Respondent.'* Indeed,
“Article 57 places a heavy burden of proof on the Respondent to establish facts that make it
obvious and highly probable, not just possible, that [the challenged arbitrator] is a person who
may not be relied upon to exercise independent and impartial judgment.”!* Respondent, for
whatever reason, has chosen not to provide any evidence in support of Respondent’s Assertion,

thereby wiping clean the slate as far as this assertion is concerned.

40. Consequently, as most recently confirmed in Respondent’s March | Letter, the
sole remaining bases for Respondent’s Proposal are: (1) the fact that Dr. Turbowicz and Dr.

Specht attended Harvard Law School together some twenty years ago and came to know each

 

Indonesia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Disqualification, June 24, 1982 (unreported) (“Amco Decision”)
(“The challenging party must prove not only facts indicating the lack of independence, but also that the lack is
‘manifest’ or ‘highly probable’, not just ‘possible’ or ‘quasi-certain’.”)).

8 Suez Aguas Second Decision at para. 29.

See, e.g., SGS Decision at 402 (““[T]he party challenging an arbitrator must establish facts, of a kind or
character as reasonably to give rise to the inference that the person challenged clearly may not be relied upon to
exercise independent judgment”); Tupman at 49 (noting that “doubts in the mind of the challenging party alone are
not sufficient”).

' Suez Aguas Second Decision at para. 29.

4

other at that time; (2) the fact that Dr. Turbowicz did not disclose this shared educational
experience as a part of the Turbowicz Declaration; (3) Dr. Turbowicz’s purported lack of
requisite arbitration experience, which suggests to Respondent that his selection was motivated
by his lack of independence and impartiality; and (4) the fact that, some time earlier in 2007, Dr.
Specht telephoned Dr. Turbowicz and inquired “in a brief phone call” as to Dr. Turbowicz’s
availability to serve as arbitrator in this proceeding. For their part, Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht
both deny that they have maintained any kind of relationship whatsoever since their days
together at Harvard Law School, be it professional or business or social or personal or of any

other sort.

Al. These then are the facts and the inferences to which the Two Other Members must
direct their attention in order to decide upon Respondent’s Proposal. In determining whether
Respondent has submitted adequate proof of a manifest lack of independence and impartiality,
the Two Other Members agree with the Suez Aguas Decision that both concepts implicate states
of mind that, on an objective basis, can “only be inferred from conduct.”'® The Suez Aguas
Decision also properly observes that the bulk of the previously reported ICSID challenge
decisions are “based on some alleged professional or business relation” between the challenged
arbitrator and one of the parties.'” There is no such relation in this case. Indeed, as explained
below by reference to the remaining aspects of Respondent’s Proposal, the meager facts
identified by Respondent — either viewed in isolation or taken together — do not demonstrate a
lack of independence or impartiality on the part of Dr. Turbowicz — much less a manifest lack of

these qualities.

1. Shared Educational Experience

42. The Two Other Members first consider whether the shared educational
experience of Dr. Specht and Dr. Turbowicz indicates a lack of independence and impartiality.
As observed by Prof. Schreuer, “[a] relationship with a party affecting the eligibility as arbitrator
may be of a personal, family or business nature . . . [however,] [n]ot every past contact,

professional or personal, with a party would disqualify a person from being appointed as

16
”

Suez Aguas Decision at para. 30.
Suez Aguas Decision at para. 32.

arbitrator.”'* In particular, Prof. Schreuer observes that even “[p]rofessional contacts between an
arbitrator and legal counsel representing one of the parties are not, as a rule, an obstacle to the
exercise of independent judgment.”!° The Two Other Members are aware of no case and of no
scholarly learning that holds, or even argues, that long-ago encounters at an educational
institution, standing alone, provide objective grounds, either real or perceived, for justifying an
obvious misgiving as to impartiality or for demonstrating an evident lack of reliability as to

independence. Certainly, Respondent has cited no such authority.

43. There is, however, pertinent learning from a challenge decision that highlights the
need for especially persuasive evidence in order to satisfy the dictates of Articles 14(1) and 57 of
the ICSID Convention. The dismissal in Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic emphasizes that a challenging party must rely on
established facts rather than on “mere speculation or inference” because “the application of a
subjective, self-judging standard instead of an objective one would enable any party in
arbitration who becomes discontented with the process for any reason to end it at any time at its

sole discretion simply by claiming that an arbitrator is not independent or impartial .. . .”?° The

 

tribunal further observed that “[a]ll the circumstances need to be considered in order to
determine whether the relationship is significant enough to justify entertaining reasonable doubts

as to the capacity of the arbitrator . . . to render a decision freely and independently.”

44. In the opinion of the Two Other Members, the factual footing for this aspect of
Respondent’s Proposal is particularly insufficient because, in order to establish a real or apparent
conflict within the express terms of the ICSID Convention, Respondent’s Proposal requires the
creation of the very inferences that the common definition of the term “manifest” does not in its

ordinary meaning permit.

45. In sum, the Two Other Members see no grounds or authority on which to

determine that the shared educational experience and resulting acquaintance between Dr.

8 Christoph H. Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY 513 (2nd ed. 2009) (“Schreuer

COMMENTARY”), at para. 22-23.

8 Schreuer COMMENTARY at 513, para. 23.

Compaiita de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Challenge to the President of the Committee, September 24, 2001, at para. 25.

at Id. at para. 28.

20

15

Turbowicz and Dr. Specht in and of themselves evidence either a relationship that might
influence Dr. Turbowicz’s freedom of decision-making or the presence of any predisposition

toward the positions of one party over those of the other.

2. Non-Disclosure of Shared Educational Experience

46. The Two Other Members next consider the implications of the fact that Dr.
Turbowicz did not disclose in his Declaration of November 10, 2007 his shared educational
experience with Dr. Specht. The Two Other Members must decide whether this fact of non-
disclosure provides an underpinning to Respondent’s Proposal of such a proportion that the non-
disclosure, in and of itself, indicates a manifest lack of the qualities required of arbitrators under

Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention.

47. A determination of whether a transitory and long-ago schooling acquaintance
between an arbitrator and a counsel to a party is a fact requiring disclosure under the terms of
Arbitration Rule 6(2) is a question that requires the Two Other Members to review the language
of that rule, as amended through 2006, in some detail. The relationship between the
requirements for disqualification under Articles 14(1) and 57 of the ICSID Convention and the
disclosure parameters of Arbitration Rule 6(2) is not a perfect match. The scope of the
disclosure declaration is considerably broader than the requirements that must be met in order to
achieve disqualification. On the one hand, the discrepancy between the two makes common
sense because it encourages the very disclosure of facts upon which a decision to disqualify, or
not to disqualify, can only be founded; but, on the other hand, this discrepancy leaves a hole to
be filled where, as here, the very fact upon which the challenging party relies in seeking to
disqualify an arbitrator is not disclosed as a part of the relevant Arbitration Rule 6(2) declaration
and, according to the challenging party, only came to its actual knowledge late in the arbitration

process.

48. The preparatory work papers behind Arbitration Rule 6 do not provide
meaningful guidance on the intended consequence of this discrepancy under the provisions of
Articles 14(1) and 57 of the ICSID Convention. Furthermore, the Parties have cited no case or

scholarly reference that might help to enlighten the meaning of this gap. As a result, the Two

16

Other Members have to take the language of those two Articles and of Arbitration Rule 6(2),
along with whatever preparatory history does exist, and then apply the Vienna Convention’s
rules of interpretation so as to garner the meaning of that language in its “context” and “in the
light of its object and purpose.” Thus, it is left to the Two Other Members to square the circle,
so to speak, and they will now proceed to do so within the confines of the particular facts of this

case.

a. Arbitration Rule 6(2

49. The last paragraph of Arbitration Rule 6(2) was added in two parts. Amendments
to the rule in 1984 contributed the following new language to the text of the required declaration:
“Attached is a statement of my past and present professional, business and other relationships
with the parties.” According to a description of the 1984 amendments prepared by Antonio R.
Parra, Counsel at ICSID at the time, the addition to Arbitration Rule 6(2) was intended as a
“reflection of current practice . . . that arbitrators include in their declarations . . . a statement of
any past or present relationship they may have with the parties.”* The Two Other Members
note the explicit limitation of the language of this 1984 amendment, and of the description of its
intention, to relationships with the “parties,” without any reference to relationships with counsel

to the parties.

50. Then, on April 10, 2006, Arbitration Rule 6(2) was amended again, with “(a)”
placed before the phrase “of my past and present professional, business and other relationships
(if any) with the parties” that was added in 1984 (“6(2)(a)”) and with the following new clause:
“and (b) any other circumstance that might cause my reliability for independent judgment to be
questioned by a party” (“6(2)(b)”). The text of Arbitration Rule 6(2), as amended, does not
provide a fixed form of wording to cover the contingency where a declarant considers that there
is no basis on which to attach such a statement; that is, there are no separate words supplied in
the text of Arbitration Rule 6(2) to the effect that, as far as the declarant is concerned, there are

no relationships or other circumstances that fall within the form of declaration found in

2 “Revised Regulations and Rules,” News from ICSID, Winter 1985, at 6.

17

Arbitration Rule 6(2) (e.g., there is no provision allowing a declarant to place a checkmark in

favor of an assertion akin to: “There are no such relationships or circumstances.”).

51. The October 22, 2004 Discussion Paper of the ICSID Secretariat on Possible
Improvements of the Framework for ICSID Arbitration (the “Discussion Paper’) is instructive in
understanding the import of the new 6(2)(b) that was ultimately adopted in 2006. The
Discussion Paper states:

With the large number of new cases, the disclosure requirements for ICSID

arbitrators might usefully be expanded. Under the UNCITRAL Arbitration

Rules, an arbitrator is required to disclose to the parties any circumstances likely

to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his or her impartiality or independence.

The relevant ICSID provisions . . . could be amended similarly to require the

arbitrator to disclose, not only past and present relationships with the parties, but

more generally any circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to the

arbitrator’s reliability for independent judgment. This might in particular be

helpful in addressing perceptions of issue conflicts among arbitrators.”>
The Two Other Members observe that Respondent’s Proposal does not in any way involve the
question of “issue conflicts,” thereby leaving only the more general comment of the Discussion

Paper for the Two Other Members to ponder as to drift and meaning.

52. Subsequently, a May 12, 2005 Working Paper of the ICSID Secretariat on
Suggested Changes to the ICSID Rules and Regulations (the “Working Paper”) attached drafts of
suggested changes that took account of “comments received on the Discussion Paper.”** Among
these attached drafts was the language proposed to be added to Arbitration Rule 6(2), along with
an accompanying “Note” that states in part:

As pointed out in the Discussion Paper . . . , the suggested changes expand the

scope of disclosures of arbitrators to include any circumstances likely to give rise

to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s reliability for independent judgment.”°
Beyond these observations by the ICSID Secretariat, the Two Other Members are unaware of

any other pertinent drafting history that might shed further light on the intended meaning and

23

Discussion Paper of the ICSID Secretariat on Possible Improvements of the Framework for ICSID
Arbitration, October 22, 2004, at para. 17.

ad Working Paper of the ICSID Secretariat on Suggested Changes to the ICSID Rules and Regulations, May
12, 2005, at para. 7.

35 Working Paper of the ICSID Secretariat on Suggested Changes to the ICSID Rules and Regulations, May
12, 2005, at p. 12.

18

scope of the language that, as proposed in the Working Paper, later became 6(2)(b) in 2006. And
the Schreuer COMMENTARY has the following to say on the topic: “[N]o further specification of

the type of circumstances envisaged by this Rule is provided.””°

53. Taking all these factors into account, the Two Other Members conclude that
6(2)(a) by its plain verbiage only addresses relationships with parties whereas 6(2)(b) is not
similarly or unambiguously constricted in its reach. Further, 6(2)(b) is broader than 6(2)(a) in
another significant feature through its use of the word “circumstance” rather than of the word

“relationship.” According to Webster’s Dictionary, “relationship” connotes the “state of being
related or interrelated,’?’ thereby requiring in this instance a personal connection of some sort,
whereas “circumstance,” again according to Webster’s Dictionary, connotes a “condition, fact or

event accompanying, conditioning, or determining another,”

thereby referencing certain facts
or situations that are attendant to, or are surrounding, certain other facts or situations. In effect, a

circumstance is more inclusive than is a relationship.

54. But, whereas 6(2)(b) is in these enumerated respects more expansive than 6(2)(a),
6(2)(b) is in certain other respects narrower than 6(2)(a). For example, the text of 6(2)(b) does
not include the words “past and present” or the words “(if any)” that appear in 6(2)(a). Thus,
6(2)(b) appears to be intended as less encompassing than 6(2)(a) in terms of both the time period
that is covered and the kinds of connections that are covered. That 6(2)(b) is less inclusive than
6(2)(a) in these respects is bolstered by the fact that the “Note” contained in the Working Paper
speaks of the additional language of 6(2)(b) as meant “to include any circumstances likely to
give rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s reliability for independent judgment.” The
Two Other Members read this Note as indicating the intention of the drafters that the words
“might cause” that appear in 6(2)(b) (i.e., “any other circumstance that might cause my reliability
for independent judgment to be questioned by a party”) are to be interpreted in the manner
explicated in the Note; that is, that 6(2)(b) calls for the disclosure of facts, in time and in kind,

signifying an unspecified degree of likelihood of impairment to impartiality or independence

Schreuer COMMENTARY at 512, para. 20.

Webster’s Dictionary at 984.

Webster’s Dictionary at 207.

Working Paper of the ICSID Secretariat on Suggested Changes to the ICSID Rules and Regulations, May
12, 2005, at p. 12.

19

whereas 6(2)(a) calls for total disclosure of any and all relationships with the parties, even those

that are ancient in age or subjectively minor in character.

55. In sum, in order to accomplish the dual goal of a comprehensive disclosure of the
relationships defined in 6(2)(a), but of a more flexible and limited level of disclosure of any
other circumstance based on likelihood, the drafters chose, for the purposes of 6(2)(b), to adopt a
“Sustifiable doubts” test such as that encapsulated in Article 9 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules rather than to follow the much higher “manifest” threshold that must be met in order to
sustain a challenge under the ICSID Convention. The difficulty lies in the lack of detailed
guidance as to what facts need to be disclosed, and as to what facts do not need to be disclosed,

under the more elastic scope of 6(2)(b).

b. The IBA Guidelines

56. To ascertain the facts requiring disclosure under 6(2)(b), the Two Other Members
seek guidance from the 2004 International Bar Association Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in
International Arbitration (“IBA Guidelines”).°° The Two Other Members find the IBA
Guidelines to be instructive because they relate to the UNCITRAL “justifiable doubts” standard
that is referenced in the Discussion Paper and in the Working Paper that led to the adoption of
6(2)(b). Further, since their adoption in 2004, the IBA Guidelines have been widely used as a
catalogue of the bases for challenge as well as for the parameters of an arbitrator’s duty of
disclosure.*! Multiple tribunals applying the ICSID Convention have recognized the persuasive

authority of the IBA Guidelines.*”

30 See International Bar Association Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration (May 22,

2004), at 4 (noting that the IBA Guidelines reflect their drafters’ understanding of “best current international
practice”).
* See, e.g., PIP Decision at para. 24 (noting that the IBA Guidelines provide “une indication utile” of the
standards for determining the independence and impartiality of an arbitrator); Gary R. Born, INTERNATIONAL
COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION 1391 (2009) (“The IBA’s Guidelines address the appropriate scope of contacts between
a party and potential co-arbitrators.”).

» See, e.g., Hrvatska Electroprivreda, d.d. v. Republic of Slovenia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/24, Decision on
Disqualification, May 6, 2008, at para. 12; EDF Int'l S.A., SAUR Int'l S.A. and Leon Participaciones Argentinas
S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB 03/23, Decision on Disqualification, June 25, 2008, at paras. 25,
34, 50, 60; Azurix v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009,
at para. 263; Participaciones Inversiones Portuarias SARL v. Gabonese Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/17,
Decision on Disqualification, November 12, 2009, at para. 15; The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania, ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/3, Decision on Participation of Counsel, January 14, 2010, at note 3.

20

57. General Standard (3) of the IBA Guidelines deals specifically with the subject of
facts requiring disclosure. General Standard (3) stipulates in subparagraphs (a) and (c):
(a) If facts or circumstances exist that may, in the eyes of the parties, give rise to
doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence, the arbitrator shall

disclose such facts or circumstances . . . prior to accepting his or her
appointment....

(b) Any doubt as to whether an arbitrator should disclose certain facts or

circumstances should be resolved in favour of disclosure.

58. The IBA Guidelines outline a series of examples in the practical application of
General Standard (3) for the purpose of drawing a line between what the IBA Guidelines regard
as necessary disclosure, on the one hand, and as unnecessary disclosure, on the other hand. The
IBA Guidelines thus aim to strike a reasonable balance between those facts and circumstances

that ought to be disclosed and those that ought not to be disclosed.

59. Facts requiring disclosure are further elucidated by Part II of the IBA Guidelines,
entitled “Practical Application of the General Standards.” This Part describes four different
categories of fact patterns: (1) a “non-waivable red list” of certain relationships that not only
must be disclosed in every case but are also so problematic that the parties to the arbitration do
not have the power to waive them, meaning that in every such instance the arbitrator is ineligible
for appointment; (2) a “waivable red list” of relationships that must be disclosed in every
instance but which the parties can affirmatively agree to waive; (3) an “orange list” of
relationships which must be disclosed but which are deemed accepted if no objection is raised
within a specified time period; and (4) a “green list” of relationships that an arbitrator need not
disclose at all.°* The comments to the IBA Guidelines stress that the presence of the “green list”

is intended to place a limit to disclosure “based on reasonableness.”**

c. Analysis

60. The Two Other Members now turn to the application of Arbitration Rule 6(2), as
informed by the IBA Guidelines, to the facts of this proceeding — namely, the non-disclosure of
IBA Guidelines at 9.

IBA Guidelines at 17-25.
IBA Guidelines at 19.

21

the shared educational experience and the resulting acquaintance between Dr. Turbowicz and Dr.

Specht.

6l. What is striking to the Two Other Members is that long-ago acquaintanceship at
an educational institution was not perceived by the drafters of the IBA Guidelines as the kind of
relationship that was deemed worthy of any mention even in the “green list” of fact patterns,
much less the “orange list” or the “red list.” Further, among the types of “green list” connections
not requiring disclosure is a category entitled “contacts with another arbitrator or with counsel
for one of the parties” that include (i) “membership in the same professional association or social
organization” and (ii) previous service “together as arbitrators or as co-counsel.”*° In this
proceeding, there is no evidence of even this minimal level of connection between Dr.
Turbowicz and Dr. Specht. Long-ago acquaintanceship at school, the Two Other Members note,
has neither the currency of co-membership in some professional or social group nor the
professional intimacy of prior service as co-arbitrator or as co-counsel. Presumably, an
acquaintanceship of this attenuated nature carries not even the level of connection justifying its
inclusion on the IBA Guidelines’ “green list.” In the view of the Two Other Members, this

strongly suggests that the existence of such an acquaintanceship does not require disclosure.

62. Respondent’s February 19 Letter refers to a number of case precedents from
courts in the United States and Canada that purportedly diverge from the conclusion suggested
by the IBA Guidelines, in that they advocate disclosure to dispel even the slightest reason to
question the independence and impartiality of an arbitrator. Respondent cites this case law for
the proposition that proactive and full disclosure by prospective arbitrators is necessary to avoid
placing parties in the awkward position of being perceived as challenging a sitting arbitrator’s
integrity. However, these citations are inapposite because the underlying constituent documents
have material differences from the language of the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules
and the relationships described in these cases are not those of academic classmates but are rather
of a professional or business nature not present here. Furthermore, the standards that the Two
Other Members are to apply are those recognized by international law and not by States with no
involvement in this case. Certainly, the citations in Respondent’s February 19 Letter are facts to

be taken into account, but the Two Other Members are persuaded that the state of international

*6 IBA Guidelines at 22.

22

law as to the duty of disclosure is best evidenced by the IBA Guidelines and not by the American

and Canadian domestic law precedents cited by Respondent.

63. The Two Other Members also pay heed to Respondent’s point that in a given
case, the very failure to disclose relevant and material circumstances might evidence partiality,
regardless of whether actual bias is established. But here there is no professional, business,
personal, social or other relationship of any kind between Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht that is
of a reasonably recent date, such as within the past three years as specified as the relevant period
for disclosure of certain connections appearing on the IBA Guidelines’ “orange list.” Rather,
here there is only an antiquated and attenuated academic affiliation of two decades ago that the
Two Other Members regard as trivial as compared to the relationships involved in the various
cases cited in Respondent’s February 19 Letter. The Two Other Members therefore conclude
that the IBA Guidelines, as well as the examples set forth therein, can only reasonably be read as
indicating that the circumstance of being classmates at Harvard Law School, without more, is not
something calling for disclosure under General Standard (3) as a fact that, on an objective basis,
“may, in the eyes of the parties, give rise to doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or

independence.”

64. Despite this conclusion, the Two Other Members must, as promised, still seek to
square the circle between the disclosure standards of Arbitration Rule 6(2) and the
disqualification dictates of Articles 14(1) and 57 of the ICSID Convention. In this regard, the
Two Other Members cannot agree with the suggestion, found in Respondent’s Proposal, that
reconciliation is best achieved by simply imputing the “justifiable doubts” standard inherent in
Arbitration Rule 6(2) into Articles 14(1) and 57 of the ICSID Convention. Rather, there is a
clear distinction between the parameters of the duty to disclose and the standards required to
uphold the merits of a particular challenge. Two pertinent comments to the IBA Guidelines state
in this regard: “non-disclosure cannot make an arbitrator partial or lacking independence; only

the facts or circumstances that he or she did not disclose can do so;”*”

and “no presumption
regarding disqualification should arise from a disclosure.”** The Two Other Members agree with

both of these propositions, but, in addition, are of the view that certain facts or circumstances are

IBA Guidelines at 18.
IBA Guidelines at 18.

23

of such a magnitude that failure to disclose them either (1) would thereby in and of itself indicate
a manifest lack of reliability of a person to exercise independent and impartial judgment or (2)
would be sufficient in conjunction with the non-disclosed facts or circumstances to tip the
balance in the direction of that result. However, neither of these conditions is present in this case

due to the de minimis character of the facts and circumstances presented by the Respondent.

65. Whether or not Dr. Turbowicz would in hindsight have been wise to disclose the
fact that he and Dr. Specht were students together is subject to debate. Certainly, had Dr.
Turbowicz done so, the imbroglio stemming from Respondent’s Proposal this late in the
proceedings would have been avoided. Further, the Two Other Members are the first to
acknowledge that the integrity of the international arbitration process requires that prospective
arbitrators disclose at the outset relevant and material facts that to a reasonable third-person
arguably might call into doubt that candidate’s impartiality or independence. This is especially
so in light of the limited appeal mechanisms that adhere to international arbitration in contrast to

those of domestic law systems.

66. Nonetheless, the Two Other Members believe that the IBA Guidelines, while not
determinative in any sense, affirmatively discourage the disclosure of the shared educational
experience of Dr. Turbowicz and Dr. Specht. Further, the Two Other Members view the position
taken in the IBA Guidelines as reflective of the legitimate concern that a requirement to disclose
trivial or superficial facts will prove burdensome to parties and arbitrators, will unnecessarily
circumscribe the freedom of choice in the selection of party-appointed arbitrators and will
encourage frivolous challenges. In sum, based on their analysis of the IBA Guidelines, the Two
Other Members agree with the conclusion reached in the Suez Aguas Second Decision that “[a]
reasonable interpretation of ICSID Arbitration Rule 6 is that an arbitrator is required to disclose a
fact only if he or she reasonably believes that such fact would reasonably cause his or her
reliability for independent judgment to be questioned by a reasonable person.”*” Such a
“reasonable person” test is not, in the opinion of the Two Other Members, met under the facts
before them. Finally, whether disclosed or not, the affiliation stemming from such a shared
educational experience does not implicate the standards for disqualification set forth in the

ICSID Convention.

Suez Aguas Second Decision at para. 46.

24

3. The Purported Lack of Arbitral Experience and Its Alleged
Implications

67. The Two Other Members turn next to Respondent’s suggestion that Dr.
Turbowicz lacked the kind of arbitration experience that would be expected of a person
appointed to serve in such an “obviously complicated investment arbitration case” and
Respondent’s corresponding speculation that the “personal relations” between Dr. Turbowicz
and Dr. Specht motivated Claimant’s appointment. Respondent’s February 19 Letter points out
that “it was open to . . . Dr. Specht to choose, from the universe of available arbitrators, an
arbitrator with no links to him” but that he instead chose someone “whom he personally knew,”
thereby implying that Dr. Turbowicz was selected because he would be partial to Claimant’s

case.

68. First, the Two Other Members, based on their professional experience, believe
that some previous association of a party or its counsel with the person whom a party chooses to
appoint as arbitrator is not an unusual circumstance. As stated in the SGS Decision:

It is commonplace knowledge that in the universe of international commercial

arbitration, the community of active arbitrators and the community of active

litigators are both small and that, not infrequently, the two communities may
overlap, sequentially if not simultaneously. It is widely accepted that such an
overlap is not, by itself, sufficient ground for disqualifying an arbitrator.

69. It seems not unreasonable to expect that where a party-appointed arbitrator is
involved, as is the case with Dr. Turbowicz, and as specifically contemplated by the arbitral
process that the ICSID Convention establishes, the party making the selection will, in many
instances, have some form of acquaintance with that person.*! Indeed, the decision on
disqualification in Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia concluded that a
party-appointment system inherently presumes some form of acquaintance between the designee
and the party making the selection.*” Thus, the Two Other Members are of the view that it is the
nature and the extent of the acquaintance that have significance for Articles 14(1) and 57 of the

ICSID Convention and for Arbitration Rule 6(2), and not the fact of acquaintance without more.

* SGS Decision at 404.
4 See Schreuer COMMENTARY at 509, para. 5 (noting that “the principle of freedom of choice for the parties
in the constitution of the tribunal . . . enables them . . . to select persons who enjoy their special confidence”).

See Tupman at 44-45 (describing the Amco Decision).

25

70. Second, the Two Other Members observe that prior arbitral experience in an
ICSID case is not a sine qua non to appointment as an ICSID arbitrator because, if it were, there
would never be a first time for anyone, obviously an impossibility. The ICSID Convention does
not place this or any comparable limitation upon the freedom of parties to nominate whom they
choose, so long as the necessary qualifications of Article 14(1) are fulfilled. To that end, the
curriculum vitae of Dr. Turbowicz that the Secretary of the Tribunal sent to the Parties on
October 25, 2007 lists under the heading “Work Experience” the following: “01-06 Lawyer, ...
International trade law, Investments, Director of Companies and Arbitrator,” which suggests that

Dr. Turbowicz possesses competence in the field of law as required by Article 14(1).

71. Throughout the pleading process, Respondent never expressed any hesitation
about Dr. Turbowicz’s “recognized competence” in the field of law, and the Two Other
Members are unaware of any basis on which Respondent could have done so. Absent such a
showing, the Two Other Members decline to second-guess Dr. Turbowicz’s curriculum vitae or

to assign hidden agendas to Claimant on the basis of Respondent’s speculation or conjecture.

4, The “Brief Phone Call”

72. The final aspect of the merits of Respondent’s Proposal which the Two Other
Members must consider is the telephone call that Dr. Specht made to Dr. Turbowicz in 2007 to
determine his availability to serve as arbitrator. There is nothing in the record to indicate that this
“brief phone call” dealt with any issue other than the question of Dr. Turbowicz’s availability.
Nonetheless, in Respondent’s view, the fact of this telephone call should have been disclosed as
a part of the Turbowicz Declaration, even though Respondent’s March 1 Letter acknowledges

the event as of “minor importance.”

73. First, the Two Other Members believe that such inquiries are not out of the
ordinary as a matter of practice. For example, the Schreuer COMMENTARY specifically notes that
“[t]he appointment of arbitrators involves preliminary consultation with prospective
appointees ... 8 Indeed, it is common to nominate an arbitrator after discussing whether he or

8 Schreuer COMMENTARY at 492, para. 8; see also Gary R. Born, INTERNATIONAL COMMERCIAL

ARBITRATION 1391 (2009) (“It is common and ordinarily unobjectionable practice for parties, or their counsel, to

26

she is in a position to accept the assignment. In short, Respondent has produced no evidence
supporting a finding of impropriety in the holding of the “brief phone call,” and the Two Other

Members are unaware of any rule that either forbids or discourages such an inquiry.

74. Second, with regard to the issue of Dr. Turbowicz’s purported duty as a part of
the Turbowicz Declaration to disclose this “brief phone call” with Dr. Specht, the Two Other
Members remark that a circumstance that appears on the IBA Guidelines “green list” of contacts
not requiring disclosure deals with the situation where the “arbitrator has had an initial contact
with the appointing party . . . (or the respective counsels) prior to appointment, if this contact is
limited to the arbitrator’s availability and qualifications to serve .. . .”“* This exact circumstance
is present here, as there is nothing in the record that would indicate that the “brief phone call”

exceeded a discussion of Dr. Turbowicz’s availability and qualifications.

75. Accordingly, the Two Other Members conclude that Dr. Turbowicz was not
obliged to disclose the “brief phone call” with Dr. Specht, and they further conclude that the fact
of this telephone call does not give cause for any doubt about the independence and impartiality

of Dr. Turbowicz.

B. Timeliness of Respondent’s Proposal

76. Having addressed the substance of Respondent’s Proposal, the Two Other
Members now express their views as to its timeliness. For prudential reasons, as hereinafter
explained, the Two Other Members dismiss Respondent’s Proposal on the merits but nonetheless
believe it warranted that they appraise the promptness with which Respondent did, or did not,

make its objection known.

77. Rule 9(1) of the Arbitration Rules requires that a “party proposing the
disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article 57 of the Convention shall promptly, and in
any event before the proceeding is declared closed, file its proposal with the Secretary-General,

stating its reasons therefor” (emphasis added). Under Arbitration Rule 27, a party’s failure

 

contact potential choices for a co-arbitrator, to ascertain their suitability, availability and interest
269, para. 4-82 (“In practice, a person approached by a party to act as a party-nominated arbitrator
any relevant facts informally to the prospective appointing party in the first instance.”).

IBA Guidelines at 24.

”); Redfern at
ly discloses

 

 

27

promptly to state its objections and promptly to propose disqualification of an arbitrator results in

the waiver of the right to object.

78. A number of ICSID challenge decisions have wrestled with the temporal
dimension of this mandate of promptness. For example, the Suez Aguas Decision posited that, in
the absence of an objective quantification of what is intended by the word “promptly,” the
interests of an “orderly and fair arbitration proceeding” require that any disqualification proposal
must be lodged “in a timely fashion’ and “without delay.”“° The Suez Aguas Decision held
that a delay of fifty-three days in filing a challenge failed to satisfy these demands.” A
challenge decision of more recent vintage is the November 6, 2009 decision on disqualification
in CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, where the observation was made:

It is on a case by case basis that tribunals must decide whether or not a proposal
for disqualification has been filed in a timely manner . . . . The sanction for the
failure to object promptly is waiver of the right to make objection.”“*

The Cemex Decision cites Azurix Corp v. Argentine Republic as considering a “delay of eight
months as obviously too long” and CDC Group PLC v. Republic of Seychelles as “arriving at the
same conclusion for a delay of 147 days.”“” The Schreuer COMMENTARY devises a formula for
determining promptness in the following fashion: “Promptly means that the proposal to
disqualify must be made as soon as the party concerned learns of the grounds for a possible

disqualification.”*°

79. Here, the Two Other Members are confronted with a proposal for disqualification
which, on the one hand, was lodged more than two years after the distribution of Dr.
Turbowicz’s curriculum vitae but, on the other hand, was allegedly filed within weeks of the

Respondent gaining actual knowledge of the overlap in the education of Dr. Turbowicz and Dr.

  
 

Suez Aguas Det
Suez Aguas Det
Suez Aguas Decision at para. 26.

CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case. No. ARB/08/15, Decision on Proposal for Disqualification of an Arbitrator, November 6,
2009 (“Cemex Decision”), at para. 36.

” Cemex Decision at para. 37 (citing Azurix Corp v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/12,
Decision on the Challenge to the President of the Tribunal, 25 February 2005 (unpublished) (reported in the
Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009, at para. 35) and CDC Group PLC v. Republic of Seychelles, ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, at para. 53).

50 Schreuer COMMENTARY at 1200, para. 11.

‘ion at para. 18.

28

Specht. The question before the Two Other Members is whether Respondent, in the absence of
proof of actual knowledge, should be deemed to have had constructive knowledge of the shared
educational experience at a much earlier time for purposes of the promptness analysis required

under Rule 9(1).

80. Certainly, in the experience of the Two Other Members, it is standard practice to
perform some investigation into the background and connections of an opposing party and its

>! With the advent of the Internet and

counsel in the early stages of an international arbitration.
such applications as “Google” and “Wikipedia,” an inquiry of this nature has become simple and
easy, and the electronic response is nearly instantaneous. Dr. Specht’s February 18 Letter, in a
stance that Respondent has not contested, assures that his personal curriculum vitae, including a
reference to his years of education at Harvard Law School, has been available at all relevant
times under the website of the law firm that carries his name. There is nothing in the record to
indicate that Respondent or Counsel to Respondent undertook any foray into the Internet to
inspect his background or to compare it to Dr. Turbowicz’s background. In a case in which
related correspondence is generally conducted via email and CD-ROMs are utilized to convey
documentary evidence, the Two Other Members do find credulity strained if Respondent and
Counsel to Respondent insist that over these many months, no referral was made, or should have
been made, to the Internet to ascertain publicly available information about Dr. Specht and his

background.

81. Nonetheless, as appealing as such a construct may appear, the Two Other
Members think it preferable not to divine some carefully crafted, modern-day duty to perform a
routine examination into the background of a party and its counsel at an early date, failing which
a party may be found to have not promptly objected, resulting in a waiver under Arbitration Rule
27. The Two Other Members recall in this regard that Respondent’s Proposal expressly contends
that Respondent as an opposing party could not “reasonably” have been expected “to verify such
circumstance [of the common attendance at Harvard Law School] from the very outset of the

case.” While the global realities of this computerized, digitized age might reasonably lead to the

st See Tupman at 51 (noting as early as 1989 that “[a]lthough the burden of disclosing facts is primarily on an

arbitrator, a party also has some duty to conduct at least a minimal background check to confirm or expand on the
facts disclosed, or uncover additional facts. Far from hindering the arbitral process, such a check is not all that time-
consuming or expensive.”).

29

opposite conclusion (that is, to a recognition of a constructive duty to perform basic Internet
research in the early stages of a proceeding), the Two Other Members conclude that they need

not determine this issue in order to reach a decision in this case.

82. Accordingly, the Two Other Members choose to rely for their decision upon their
analysis of the merits of Respondent’s Proposal rather than upon an analysis of the proposal’s
timing. The Two Other Members thus decline to rule on the question whether Respondent’s
Proposal is time barred, although other arbitrators charged with resolving only this issue might

reasonably reach the conclusion that it is.

Iv. CONCLUSION

83. On the basis of the record before them, the Two Other Members decide that, in
accordance with the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules, Respondent’s Proposal must
be dismissed for failure to prove any fact that would indicate a manifest lack of impartiality or
independence on the part of Dr. Turbowicz. The Two Other Members further conclude as a part
of this decision that, under the terms of Arbitration Rule 6(2), Dr. Turbowicz had no duty to

disclose in the Turbowicz Declaration the remaining facts cited in Respondent’s Proposal.

84. The Two Other Members reserve the right to award costs in connection with this

decision as part of the Award.

85. As from the date hereof, the state of suspension of the proceedings under

Arbitration Rule 9(6) is hereby terminated.

/signed/ /signed/
Hon. Davis R. Robinson Dr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov
President Arbitrator

DATED: March 19, 2010

30

