Annex C

Preliminary redacted version of the Award

dated March 5, 2011

INVESTMENT AD HOC ARBITRATION

between

CLAIMANT
v/
THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

RESPONDENT

 

AWARD

Marsch 5, 2011

 

Rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal composed of:
Hans Stuber (Arbitrator)
Bohuslav Klein (Arbitrator)

Antonio Crivellaro (Chairman)

Place of Arbitration: Vienna

i.

I

VI.

o

CONTENTS

 

Introduction: the dispute in brie

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The parties 2

ILA The Claimant sees . 2

IB TheR de .2
. The Arbitral Tribunal seeeteneeenees 3
. Jurisdiction ~ Venue ~ Language ~ Applicable law.

IVA ji

IV.B Venne

IV.C  Languag

TVD Applicable litt. .sussusesiensensinetinienininieninnnn cnt

    

IV.D.1. The law governing the mesits ........

wae yw w a

 

IV.D.2. The law governing the procedure...

  

The facts preceding the arbitration... eee

 

 

WA The assignment of receivables ..1.....

VB Theb and the court decisions.

 

V.C The origins of she arbitral dispute...

  

V.D Appointment of the Members of the Tribunal.

Procedural History 10

 

VILA The preparatory phase.....

 

VIB The Milan meeting of November 5, 2009.

 

VIC The exchange of written pleadings
VID The oral argument 19
VIB Post-hearing submi 24

   

 

VII. The Parties’ respective case 25

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

     

 

   

VILA Applicable law nS
VILA Claimant we 25
VILA.2 Respond . 25

TIIB Ai ibil svseesensersannaes 26,
VIL.B.1. Respondent.... 26
VILB.2 Claimant... 27

VILC icle 28
VILC.1 Respondent. 28
Qo. not an “investor”

We) failed ro establish that it has irs “seat” in 28

Oo) failed to establish “real economic activities” in cy)

ja. ~ acquisition of receivables 15 not a gualifying “investment”

(i)(@) - * acquisition of sceivables is a transaction that lacks
the characteristics of an “investment”... 33

jb), has not shown a “claim to perforrnance having an economic
value” 35

 

(i)(©) The BIT denies protection of investments which are not made in accordance

with the bost State aw.

 

 

 

 

G@-~ ~~ has not established a bona fide investment wccesu nine 3T
VIL.C.2 Claimant 38
VILD Merits, 40
VILD.1 Claimant 4
@ “Snuestment” in the Slovak, Republic collapsed because of the

judgment by the Regional Court of September 5, 2007

 

2

 

(i) The Regional Court judgment of September 5, 2007 violates Slovak law ..

(iti) In failing t0 take remedy against the wrong judiciary decisions, the Slovak Republic
Aft the inwestment unprotected and thus breached its obkgations under the BIT....45

(ti)(a) The Slovak Republic failed to “protect” and to ensure a “fair and equitable

treatment” to the Claimant’s investment....... 46

 

(ii) (6) The measures adopted by the Slovak Republic amount to expropsiation ....47

(iv) The Claimant is entitled to the compensation of damages deriving from the wrongful
48

 

decision by the Regional Court...
VILD.2 Respond sssnsenente 49

 

 

() The acts of the Trustee may not be attributed to the Slovak: Republic...

(i) claim for breach by the Slovake Republic of the “Jair and equitable

treatment” standard is MCTHUSS so... 50

 

(é)(a) “Denial of justice” as the relevant standard to establish the Respondent's
liability 50

 

Gi)(b) Further recourses were available to In connection with the

bankruptcy proceedings 51

  

(i)(C) The bankruptcy proceedings did not result in a denial of justice urns ue 54

(it) ‘s claim for breach by the Slovak Republic of she obligations under
Article 4(1) of the BIT is meritless...

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

(| claim for “expropriation” has no ground

() . request for compensation shall be rejected .... 60
(s)(a) The standards for compensation under the BIT. 61
(by. failed to prove that the Respondent was the cause of its loss ..61
~o is in any event not entitled to the losses it claims...

VIII. The Issues to be decided: the Tribunal’s analysis ... we 63,
VILA Appheable law. +63
VIILB Adi bhi . 65
VIILC Jurisdt 70

VIILC.1 Is the Claimant an investor?..... 10

  

 

(i) — Constitution or other organization under the laws of Snitgerlan

(i) ~— The Swiss seat...

   

(iii) Real economic activities.

 

iii

 

VIILC.2 Are the Claimant’s businesses in Slovakia an investment? ...

 

(Under the BIT.

 

(ii) Under international law rules .

 

VIILC.3 Does the Claimant’s claim satisfy the prisna facie test of a treaty

   

claim?

 

IX. Costs
IX.A Fees and expenses of the Tribunal.
IXB The costs for legal representation...

 

IX.C The Tribunal’s ruling on the apportionment of costs.

 

X. Dispositive section ..

L

INTRODUCTION: THE DISPUTE IN BRIEF

‘The dispute concerns an alleged “investment” rade in the Slovak Republic by
the Swiss Claimant. According to the Claimant, the Slovak Republic has
breached its duties under the “Agreement between the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic and the Swiss Confederation on the promoteon and reciprocal protection of
mivestments’? concluded at Berne on October 5, 1990 and entered into force on
August 7, 1991 (the “BIT”). When the BIT was concluded, the Respondent was
not yet a sovereign State. This occurred on January 1, 1993, following its
separation from the Czech Republic. Since such a date, the Slovak Republic
succeeded to the BIT as the legal successor of the previous (united) Federal

Republic.

The Claimant contends that the Respondent has failed to protect its
“investment” consisting of the acquisition of certain “receivables” from a
private Slovak company. The receivables consisted of sums payable to the
assignor by a debtor, who at the time of the assignment of the receivables had
been declared bankrupt. In the Claimant’s view, the Slovak judiciary, particularly
the Regional Court of Bratislava by its decision dated September 5, 2007, made
the Claimant definitively unable to enforce the credits (claims) it had acquired
towards the debtor. By this wrong and unrevised decision, the Slovak Republic
has failed to accoxd fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security

to the Swiss investor, and expropriated its investment.

‘Therefore, the Claimant has initiated an arbstraon under Article 9 of the BIT’
seeking redress of the treaty breaches and an award ordering the Slovak
Republic to compensate the Claimant for the value of its entire financial loss,
corresponding to the value of the non-enforced receivables, plus interest and

legal costs.

‘The Respondent, the Slovak Republic, objects that the conditions for the
applicability of the BIT are not met, arguing that the Claimant is not an
“nvestor” in the terms of Article 1(1) of the BIT and that the acquisition of the
teceivables is not an “investment” in the meaning of Article 1(2) of the same
BIY. It therefore contends that the BIT has been arbitrarily invoked by the
Claimant and that the present Tribunal Jacks jurisdiction to decide on the

Claimant’s claims.

11.B

Moreover, the Respondent argues that even if jurisdiction could be established
the Claimant’s claims ate without merits. In essence, it observes that, at most,
what the Claimant complains of could be viewed as -» but in reality is not — an
error in law made by a Slovak court and thus reproaches the Claimant for
equating the Tzibunal established under the BIT to a sout of “court of appeal”
having the power to cotrect such an error: this is inadmissible because the

Tribunal has no such power.

In conclusion, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to dismiss the entirety of
the Clasmant’s claims for lack of jurisdiction and to order the Claimant to bear
its own arbitration costs and to refund to the Respondent the amount of its
arbitration costs.

THE PARTIES

The Claimant

The Respondent

The Respondent is the Slovak Republic (“Slovak Republic” or
“Respondent”), represented by: (3) Ms. ,

‘ . , Managing employees at the Ministry of Finance of
the Slovak Republic; (ii) . to.
the same Ministry of Finance, Stefanovicova 5, 81782 Bratislava, the Slovak
Republic; (ii) Mr. David Pawlak, David A. Pawlak LLC, c/o Soltysinsky
Kawecky & Szelzak, ul. Wawelska 15B, 02-034 Warsaw, Poland with registramon
at 1661 Crescent Pl. NW, Ste 304, Washington, D.C. 20009, USA and RLR, P.C.
369 Lexington Avenue, 1611 Floor, New York, NY 10017, USA

_ employees at

Proper powers of attorney were issued to the above empowered representatives

I.

by the Minister of Finance of the Slovak Republic, copy of which was given to

the Tribunal.

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL.

As a result of the appointments zecorded in the file (see Section V.D below), the

Arbitral Tribunal is composed of:

- Professor Antonio Crivellaro, Studio Legale Bonelli Erede Pappalarde,
via Michele Barozzi 1, 20122, Milan, Italy, Chairman, appointed by the
Chairman of the ICC Court of Arbitration; and

- Mr. Hans Stuber, Froriep Renggli, Geafenaustrasse 5, CH-6304, Zug,

Switzerland, arbitrator appointed by the Claimant; and

- Mr. Bohuslav Klein, Kralupské 14, Prague 6, 161 00, Czech Republic,
arbitrator appointed by the Respondent.

At the organizational meeting held in Milan on November 5, 2009 (see sub-
section VI.B), the three arbitrators confirmed the acceptance of their
appointment and the Parties acknowledged that they had “xo objections as to the
consttution and composition of the Tribunal’ (§ 1 of the minutes of the meeting,

referred to as the “Milan Minutes”).
A Secretary to the Tribunal has been appointed by the Tribunal with the

consent of the Patties. The Secretary is Mr. Francesco Perillo, Studio Legale
Bonelli Erede Pappalardo, via Michele Barozzi 1, 20122, Milan, Italy.

JURISDICTION ~ VENUE ~ LANGUAGE — APPLICABLE LAW

Jurisdiction

The jurisdiction of this Tribunal is based on Article 9 of the BIT, which reads as
follows:
(1). For the purpose of solving disputes with respect to investments
between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting
Party and [without] prejudice to Article 10 of this Agrcement
(Dispores between Contracting Parties), consultations will take place
between the parties concerned.

(2). If these consultations do not result in a solution within six months,

@).

(4)

(5

the dispute shall upon request of the investor be submitted to an
arbitral tribunal. Such arbitral wibunal shall be established as folows

(a) The arbitral tribunal shall be consututed for each individual case.
Unless the parties to the dispute have agreed otherwise, each of
them shall appoint one arbitcator and these two arbitrators shall
nominate a chairman who shall be a national of a third State. The
arbitrators are to be appointed within two months of the reccipt
of the request for arbitration and the chairman is to be nominated
within further two months.

(b) If the periods specified in paragraph (2) of this Asticle have nor
been observed, either party to the dispute may, in the absence of
any other arrangements, invite the President of the Const of
Asbitration of the Intemational Chamber of Commerce in Paris,
to make the necessary appointments. If the President is prevented
from carrying ovt the said function or if he is a national of a
Contracting Party the provisions in paragraph (5) of Article 10 of
this Agreement shal! be applied mutatis mutandis.

(©) Uniess the parties to the dispute have agreed otherwise, the
tribunal shall determine its procedure, Its decisions are final and
binding Each Contracting Party shall ensure the recognition and
exceution of the arbitral award.

(d) Fach party to the dispute shall bear the costs of its own member
of the tribunal and of the chairman and the remaining cost shall
be bore in equal parts by both parties to the dispute. The
tribunal may, however, in its award decide on a different
proportion of costs to be borne by the parties and this award shall
be binding on both pasties

In event of both Contracting Partics having become members of the
Convention ef Washington of March 18, 1965 on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of otber States,
disputes under this article may, upon request of the investor, as an
alternative to the procedure mentioned in paragraph 2 of this article,
be submitted to the International Center for Settlement of
Investment Disputes.

The Contracting State which is a party to the dispute shall at no time
whatever during a procedure specified in paragraphs (2) and (3) of
this Article or during the execution of the respective sentence assert
as a defence the fact that the investor has received compensation
under an insurance contract coveting the whole or part of incurred
damage.

Neither Contracting State shall pursue through diplomatic channels a
dispute submitted to arbitration, unless the other Contracting State

does not abide by ox comply with the award rendered by an arbitral
tsibunal

15 At the Milan organizational meeting of November 5, 2009, the Parties and the
arbitrators have mutually acknowledged that the Tnbunal was constituted
pursuant to the above quoted Article 9(2) of the BIT (§ 1 of the Milan Minutes).

IV.B Venue

16. As agteed in § 5 of the Milan Minutes, the place of the arbitration is Vienna,
Austria, where the hearing of October 11, 2010 was held.

IV.C Language

17. The language of the arbitration is English (see § 6 of the Milan Minutes)
Evidence drawn up in a different language was translated into English. Oral and

written pleadings were submitted in English.
IV.D Applicable law

IV.D.1 The law governing the merits

18 The matter was discussed at the Milan organizational meeting. No agreement
was reached between the Parties on the law applicable to the substance of the
dispute. Therefore, each Party was invited to address the issue in its first written
submission. In the event that the Parties would still disagree, the selection of the
rules of law to be applied to the substance of the dispute would be made by the
Tribunal in its award. In their respective submissions, the Parties reached
divergent conclusions, the Claimant giving prevalence to domestic (Slovak) law
and the Respondent giving prevalence to international law, particularly

investment law, as better specified in Section VII below.

19. Given the Parties’ disagreement, this is an issue that the Tribunal must itself
resolve as a preliminary matter. The Tribunal will discuss and resolve this matter
in Section VIILA below.

IV.D.2T he law governing the procedure

20. Although Article 9(2)(€) confers to the Tribunal the power to “determine its
procedure’, at the Milan organizational meeting it was agreed that the present
proceedings would be governed by the Unciwsal Arbitration Rules in force in

21.

22.

23.

24.

Novembet 2009 (“Oncitral Rules”). Moreover, it was agreed that: “Where these
rides are silent or éncemplete, the Parties jointly or, failing their agreement, the Tribunal may
establish the rules of procedure which are needed in any specific case” (see § 6 of the Milan
Minutes).

As a matter of fact, whenever needed to resolve procedural issues, the Uncitral

Rules wese indeed applied during the proceedings either in addition to or as an
inspiration for the specific procedutal directions issued by the Tribunal.

THE FACTS PRECEDING THE ARBITRATION

Whereas the factual evidence provided by the Claimant was somehow
incomplete and disordered, an exhaustive chronology of events, with an ordered

exhibition of the relevant documents, was made by the Respondent.
The assignment of receivables

On June 15, 2007, the Claimant entered into a contract fox the assignment of
receivables with the Slovak company (che “Assignment

Contract”).! .

* The document was produced by the Respondent as R-51.

V.B The bankruptcy proceedings and the court decisions

28.

29.

2 See the Extract from the Slovak Commercial Registry relating to
exhibits enclosed to the Claimant's Statement of Claim.

31d

» Jisted among the

31.

V.C The origins of the arbitral dispute

35.

36.

38

42.

VLA

44

Appointment of the Members of the Tribunal

As seen above, Mr. Hans Stuber was appointed as first arbitrator by the
Claimant on May 19, 2008.

On July 18, 2008, the Respondent appointed Prof. Boeckstiegel as second
arbitrator. Between October 2008 and February 2009, Mr. Stuber and Mr.
Boeckssiegel exchanged mutual] proposals for the appointment of the Chairman
of the Tubunal, but failed to reach an agreement. On February 5, 2009, the
Claimant requested the Chairman of the ICC Court of Arbitration (appointing
authority) to make this appointment under Article 9(2)(b) of the BIT.

On March 3, 2009, the Respondent informed the Claimant that Prof.
Boeckstiegel had resigned and that the Slovak Prime Minister had appointed Mr.
Bohuslav Klein on March 16, 2009. Mr. Stuber and Mr. Klein consulted each
other with segard to the appointment of the Chairman and, considering that the
appointing authority had been already approached, agreed to let it proceed to
such an appointment.

On request made by the Claimant under Article 9(2)(b) of the BIT, on June 23,
2009 the President of the ICC Court of Arbitration appointed Prof. Antonio
Crivellaro as Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The preparatory phase

On July 3, 2009, the Chairman informed the Parties of the full constitution of

45.

46.

47.

the Tribunal pursuant to Article 9(2)(b) of the BIT and suggested that an
organizational hearing be held in Milan between September and October 2009
in order to establish, iter aha, the seat of the atbitration, the language of the
proceedings, the procedusal Jaw and the law applicable to the merits of the
dispute. Considering that the Tribunal was unacquainted with the object of the
dispute, the Chairman invited both Parties to provide the Tribunal with a
summary presentation of their respective cases, to be submitted by July 31, 2009
(Claimant) and August 31, 2009 (Respondent). Both Parties accepted the above

invitation.

On July 20, 2009, the Claimant submitted a short presentation of its case. It
summarized the facts that led to the arbitration highlighting the provisions of
Slovak law that it considered breached by the Regional Court’s decision of
September 5, 2007 and the alleged breach of the BIT’s provisions

On August 24, 2009, the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic submitted a
short presentation of the arguments it intended to rely upon to defend its case.
After reserving the tight to further review its defences and after briefly
describing the factual background, the Slovak Republic raised an objection to
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, arguing that the Claimant did not qualify as a bona fae
investor under the BIT, that there was no investment within the meaning of the
BIT, and that there was no link between the domestic ceurt decisions and the

damages complained of by the Claimant.

On September 24, 2009, the Claimant, although not requested, teplied to the
Respondent’s submission of August 24, 2009, exhibiting a statement made on
September 16, 2009 by the (first) bankruptcy Trustee appointed by the Distnct
Court 1 On September 29, 2009, following the Claimant’s
unauthotized submission of September 24, 2009, the Chairman informed the
Parties that the Respondent would have the opportunity to counter-reply
thereto and that, pro futuro, any party-submission had to be made in strict

accerdance with the schedule set forth by the Tribunal.

‘The Chairman further advised the Parties that a preliminary mecting would be
held in Milan, at his office, on November 5, 2009 and that the Parties would be
provided in advance with the agenda of the meeting. On October 2, 2009, the
Slovak Republic confizmed that five persons would attend the preliminary
meeting in Milan en its behalf. Moreover, it replied to the statement by

closed to the Claimant’s correspondence of September 24, 2009 by

49

VLB

50.

51

52.

submitting a letter signed by a t the Slovak Ministry of Finance

). On October 23, 2009, the Tribunal solicited the Claimant to
specity by October 29, 2009 whether it would attend the meeting scheduled on
November 5, 2009 and circulated a list of matters to be discussed and decided at

the forthcoming meeting.

On Octeber 25, 2009, the Claimant confirmed that it would attend the meeting
of November 5, 2009 and that it would be represented by its counsel,

On November 2, 2009, the Respondent informed the Tribunal
and the Claimant that .
from the Ministry of Finance as well as Mr. David A. Pawlak from David A
Pawlak LLC would attend the November 5 meeting.

The Milan meeting of November 5, 2009

The meeting took place on November 5, 2009 in the office of the Chairman
(Studio Legale Bonelli Erede Pappalardo), in via M. Batozzi 1, 20122, Milan,
Italy. In addition to the Membets of the Tribunal and its Secretary, the following
persons attended the meeting: .. cepresenting the Claimant;

v and Mr. David A.

Pawlak representing the Respondent.

The Parties and the Tribunal discussed the issues refetred to in the agenda
proposed by the Chairman on October 23, 2009. The procedural agreements
were recorded and signed by the Parties and the Arbitrators (see the Milan
Minutes). The most important

the language, the applicable law, fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the
timetable for the subsequent written pleadings.

Accordingly, it was agreed that the Claimant was to file a fully exhaustive
Statement of Claim by January 15, 2010 (the “SOC”) and the Respondent a fully
exhaustive Statement of Defence by March 31, 2010 (the “SOD”). It was
further agreed that, should the Respondent raise jurisdictional objections and
request the proceedings’ bifurcation, the Claimant was to reply on the
bifurcation by Apml 30, 2010 and the Respondent was to file a rejoinder by May
31, 2010.

VLC The exchange of written pleadings

53.

54.

55.

56

On January, 15, 2010, the Claimant submitted its SOC, together with 30
“enclosures” which, however, were not accompanied by English translawons as
required in § 6 if the Milan Minutes.

By unrequested submission of February 4, 2010, the Respondent reacted to the

SOC and saised the following objections:

4) under the Uncitral Rules, the SOC should amount to a “Notice of
Axbitration”, but the Claimant’s SOC was grossly deficient in several
respects; in particular, it did not include the supporting documents
showing compliance with the requirement in Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT
nor any witness statement (contrary to § 14 of the Milan Minutes);

(i) the SOC did not include English translations of the exhibits, contrary to
§ 6 of the Milan Minutes and the Uncitral Rules;

(i) many of the documentary materials invoked by the Claimant in suppect

to its arguments were not produced;

(iv) the SOC did not contain the essential elements capable of identifying the
Respondent, contraty to Section 18(2) of the Uncitral Rules.

Consequently, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to “terminate” the
proceedings under Section 28 of the Uncitral Rules due to the Claimant's “failure
to communicate its claint”, and to show sufficient cause for such failure, within the

period of time fixed by the ‘Tribunal.

In addition, the Respondent produced certain letters exchanged between the
Counsel for the Claimant and the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic in
December 2009 and January 2010. The letters concerned the issue of whether
the Slovak Republic had properly empowered its counsel to represent it in the
present arbitration. According to the Respondent, the above correspondence
showed an improper interference by the Claimant against the arbitration
ptoceedings and an attempt to obstruct the Respondent’s right to choose its

counsel
Finally, in the same above letter, che Respondent suggested that, given the

inadequacy of the “Notice of Arbitration” filed by the Claimant on Januaty 15,
2010 and its emdent misunderstanding on the remedies provided under the BIT

57.

for settling investment disputes, it would be convenient for the ‘Tribunal to
convene the Parties to a “conciliation” of the dispute, as contemplated in § 16
of the Milan Minutes, by warning the Claimant on the fundamental deficiencies
in its case and the likely consequences thereof should the dispute be resolved by
arbitradon. In order to favour this outcome, the Respondent declared to be
available to renounce to claim the recovery of the arbitration’s costs incurred up
to then in the case that the Claimant would withdraw the arbitration claim.

On February 8, 2010, the Tribunal invited the Claimant to comment on
Respondent's submission of February 4, 2010. The Claimant gave its comments
on February 10, 2010, when it filed a submission accompanied by 38
“enclosures” (30 of which coincided with those produced on January 15, 2010)
each of them coupled with the relevant Englisb translation. In respect of the
Respondent's protests, the Claimant rebutted as follows:

@ the powers of attorney granted to the Respondent’s Counsel were not in
accordance with Slovak law, which, in the Claimant’s view, is exclusively
competent to govern the matter, in particular with a certain Act of 2001
ruling the organization of the State central bodies and the roles of the
Ministers and their delegates. Thus, the Claimant had written the above
letters to the Ministry for the purpose of sttessing that the
representatives appointed by the Respondent had not been properly
instructed under the above law provisions;

(i) this did not amount to an improper interference of the arbitration
proceedings. If any delay would result from the improper procedures
followed by the Slovak Republic in designating its representatives in the
arbitration, only the Slovak Republic would be liable thereof;

(ui) the Claimant had not failed te demonstrate its real economic activities in
Switzerland. What the Claimant had to say in this respect had been
amply atgued in the SOC, to which the Claimant had attached the
documents that it deemed relevant and useful;

(iv) it was true that the Claimant had failed to produce the required English
tuanslations, but this was made for limiting the translation costs to
specific documents that the Tribunal would request to be translated;

(v) the Respondent had been propetly identified in accordance with Section

58.

18(2)(a) of the Uncitral Rules, which simply requices that a statement of

claim must include the names and addresses of the parties; and

(7) the alleged failure to produce all invoked documents had no ground
because any Party had the right to supplement or amend its case during
the course of the proceedings, cither spontancously or on the Tribunal’s

request.

Given the above procedural dispute, on Febsmary 18, 2010, the Tribunal issued

the following directions:
1. Termination of the proceedings

Asticle 28(1) of Unciweal Rules applies to the case in which a party “fails to
communicate his claim [or his defence] withour showing sufficient cause
for such a failure”. It thus applies to a case of default or absentia. Here, a
“Notice of Arbitration” has been filed. It has the form and substance of a
statement of claim. If it is deficient or unmeritorious, as contested by the
Respondent, this concerns the merits of the Claimant’s case, which the
Respondent has the right co rebut in its next statement of defence (31
March 2010). The words “without showing sufficient cause” do not tefer
to the merits, as implied in Mr. Pawlak’s letter, but rather refer to the
“cause for such failure”, ie. to the possible justification for the failure, for
instance an impediment or delay justifying an extension of the time-limit
for filing the claim.

The Claimant has met the requirements established in Axticle 28(1) and
also in Artide 18(2) of Uncitral Rules and termination of the proceedings
at this stage would be arbitrary. Obviously, this is without prejudice to the
Respondent's right to submit whatever defence against the claim and its
smerits.

2. The evidence of “real economic activities”

This matter shovid have been raised at the proper time and place, i.e. in
the next statement of defence. rejects the critique. The
Tribunal reserves its decision on this point after exhaustion of the

pleadings.
3, Exhibits without translation

In this respect, the Tribunal fully shares the Respondent’s complaint. It
must be clear that the Janguage of this arbitration is English, as agreed,
This obviously applies also to documents relied on by the patties,
irrespective of whether the other party is familiar with the original
language of the document. The documents must be understood by the
arbitrators much more than by the other party and chis is why in
international arbitration a third language — common to al people involved

= must be adopted.

‘The Tribunal acknowledges chat ! has now cured this defect.
On the assumption that the delay wil) cavse no harm to the Respondent,
the Tribunal adits the late translanons, but reminds the Claimant that a
similar defect must not be repeated.

4, The failure to produce documents invoked in the statement of
chim

A tribunal cannot teach one party as to how it should present its case. If
an argument is xaised upon reliance on certain documentary evidence
which however is not produced, the party runs the risk that the tribunal be
bound to disregard the argument for lack of proof.

However, this is once again a complaint that the Respondent should have
xaised at the proper time and place, ic. in its next statement of defence,
where it has the tight to argue that the Claimant does not meet its burden

of proof,
5. “Improper Interference”

‘The Tribunal is of the view that there is no need for it to take position in
respect of this matter. ‘Che complaint refers to an internal exchange of
correspondence between paftics. The Tribunal sees no reason why the
exchange could obstruct or interfere against the arbitration proceedings

Concerning the request for disclosure of documents -- which seems to be
one of the matters addressed in the exchange of letters between Mr.

and the Ministry of Finance — the patties are reminded that they
have the right, if the so wish, to request the Tribunal to order exhibition of
documents provided that the request identifies the specific document,
shows its relevance, justifies why the requesting patty is not in the
possession of the document and is not incompatible with confidentiality
or privilege restrictions. This would not be an “interference” but, on the
contrary, quite a usual procedural matter.

For the above reasons, unless and until the pasties will submit a specific
application on whether and how the Tribunal should make vse of the
exchange of letters exhibited by Mr. Pawlak, the Tsibunal will totally
disregard such an exchanges

“ {tis worth noting that, at this stage, the Claisnant had not yet requested the Tribunal to expunge
from the procedure all Respondent’s defences for lack of valid representasion (absence of proper
powers of attorney) and consequently render a “default judgment”. At the time of its response
dated February 10, the Claimant was still treating the letters to the Slovak Ministry of Finance as an
intemal exchange. The formal request to the Tribunal to make a default judgment was raised by the

Claimant at a later date, ie, on April 23, 2010 (see § 61).

16

59.

60.

61.

6. Request for Conciliation

The Tribunal considers that application of Item 16 (“Conciliation”) of the
Milan Minutes is bighly premature. The Tribunal must, at least, receive a
proper statement of defence and probably organize a hearing before taking
a sumilar step. If, at that stage, the Tribunal will reach the conclusion drat st
would be convenient in tezms of saving costs and time to present its
provisional views for a quicker and less costly disposal of the case, it will
not miss such an opportunity. However, mutual consent by the parties
should be shown before the Tribuna) may take such a crucial decision. For
the tisne being, mutual consent is absent: ~ does not endorse
this proposal in his recent letter.

On March 31, 2010, the Respondent filed two submissions: the Statement of
Defence and Objections to Jurisdiction and the Request for Bifurcation of the
proceedings. The first submission was accompanied by: an Expert Opinion
rendered by . the bankruptcy procedures under Slovak law;
two appendixes, one relating to the dispute’s key persons and entities, the other
highlighting the chronology of events; the legal authorities relied on by the
Respondent (from RL-1 to RL-119); three binders of exhibits (from R-1 to R-
86) and a CD-ROM containing the electronic vetsion of all pleadings and
exhibits.

On Apzil 7, 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7, whereby it invited
the Claimant to take position by Apsil 23, 2010 on the Respondent’s Request for
Bifurcation.

On April 23, 2010, the Claimant expressed its written consent to the requested
bifurcation. It took this opportunity for further addressing otier questions
raised in the Respondent’s SOD, for instance the question of whether the
consultation procedure established in the BIT as a pre-arbitral attempt to
amicably resolve the dispute had been validly exhausted or not, and the question
of whether the Claimant was an investor and its transactions in the Slovak
territory amounted to an investment in the meaning of the BIT. Finally the
Claimant formally raised the objection that, due to lack of valid representation
in the ptoceedings since their start, the Respondent had “failed to appear at the
hearing’ and “failed to submit its Statement of Defence”. It thus requested the Tsibunal
to render a “defan/t judgment” on the above ground. The request was infer alia
based on Section 28(3) of the Uncitral Rules, according to which: “If ene of the
parties fails to produce the documentary evidence requested by the tribunal or by the other party

and fails to show sufficient cause for such failure, the arbitral inbunal may make the avard on

62.

63.

64.

65.

the evidence before if?

By Procedural Order No. ? dated April 28, 2010, the Tribunal acknowledged the
Parties’ agreement on the separation of jurisdiction from merits and
consequently invited the Claimant to file a fully exhaustive Memorial on
Jurisdicuon by May 31, 2010 (the “CMJ”) and the Respondent to file a Reply on
Jurisdiction by June 30, 2010 (the “RRJ”). Moreover, in the same Order the
‘Tribunal invited the Respondent to submit new powers of attorney to its
representatives, containing the express ratification by the Respondent of all

defences made by them since the start of the proceedings.

By letter of May 7, 2010, the Respondent addressed two matters. First, it
submitted the new powers of attorney granted by the Slovak Republic to its
representatives and requested the Tribunal to issue an Order definitively
accepting such powers and to dismiss the Claimant's call for a default judgment.
Second, it highlighted that, following the Claimant’s consent to the proceedings’
bifurcation, the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 2 extended the original
deadline fixed for the Claimant’s Memorial on Jutisdiction (referred to in § 14 of
the Milan Minutes) from April 30 until May 31, 2010, thus granting the Claimant
a total of two months, while it maintained the original one month period fos the
submission of the Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction June 30, 2010). Hence,
the Respondent requested an extension for the filing of its Reply unt) July 16,
2010.

On May 11, 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3. With regard to the
powers of attorney recently re-issued by the Respondent, the Tribunal declared
that it was fully sawsfied with the powers received on May 7, 2010, which zneer
alia endorsed and tatified any action and defence made by the Respondent’s
Counsel up to that date. The Tribunal pointed out that it had accepted as valid
and exhaustive, pursuant to international arbitration practice, also the powers
originally issued by the Respondent, however asking it to renew them through
an express ratification clause in order to overcome the doubts raised by the
Claimant. It therefore dismissed the Claimant’s request for a default judgment,
clarifying that Procedural Order No. 3 “puts an end wo the issue of Respondent's
representation and the proceedings shatl continue in order to resohe the outstanding issues

involved in the dispute”.

With regard to the tme-extension requested by the Respondent the Tribunal
fixed July 30, 2010 as the extended deadline for the filing of the RR). On May

66.

67

VID

68.

31, 2010, the Claimant submitted a “Stotement to the Olgections to Jurisdicton” raised
by the Respondent in SOD, accompanied by 5 exhibits duly translated. On July
16, 2010, the Respondent submitted the RRJ, accompanied by new exhibits (R-
87 to R-92), additional legal authorities (RI.-120 to RL-139) and a CD-ROM
containing an electronic version of the above documents. The Respondent
pointed out that it reserved its right to request a heating under Section 15(2) of
the Unciteal Rules. It further invited the Tribunal to specify the matters that it
intended to resolve at the jurisdictional phase and to inform the Patties whether
it planned to convene a heating on such preliminary matters.

On August 9, 2010, the Chairman informed the Parties that the Tribunal
intended to convene a hearing on jurisdiction. Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the
Uncitral Rules, the Tribunal had an autonomous power to convene the Parties
to a hearing ixrespective of the Parties’ request. In the present case, the hearing
was necessary in the light of the divergent posiwons held by the Patties with
respect to the preliminary matters.

Concerning the place and date of the hearing, by letter of September 1, 2010,
the Chairman advised the Parties that the heating would take place in Vienna
(Austria), at the Hilton Plaza Hotel, on October 11 and 12, 2010 (the “October
Hearing”). With regard to the issues to be discussed at the heating, in the letter
the Chairman clarified the following:
“in principle all issues of whatever kind are admissible to debate, provided
they were addressed in the briefs filed by the parties so far. In this respect,
the arbitrators have unanimously agreed that, before the heating date, the
Tribunal will provide the parties by a sufficient advance notice a
questionnaire listing the matters in relation to which they intend to raise
questions during the hearing”.

The oral argument

As anticipated in the Chaitman’s letter of September 1, 2010 on September 9
the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 which included a list of the issues that
the Tribunal intended to resolve in the upcoming decision on jurisdiction and of
the questions on which the Tribunal wished to receive clarifications from the
Parties at the October Hearing. Procedural Order No. 4 contained, therefore, the
following procedural directions:

tl

4. Issues which will form the object of the award on jurisdiction

After examination of the Pasties’ pleadings on the bifurcated issues and in
the exercise of its discretion to determine the scope of any preliminary or
pactial award (Article 32(1) of the Uncital Rules), the Tribunal notifies the
Parties that in its forthcoming award on jerisdiction it will decide the

following issues:

(@) whether the Claimant har satisfied the conditions precedent to the start of the
arbitration (pro per notice of claim, proper request of consultations);

(ii) whether the Claimant qualifies as an investor under the appluable treaty (including
in particdar, whether the Claimant is an investor in the meaning of Article 1(b) of the
treaty),

(iii) whether the Claimant's transactie(s) in the Slovak Repubhe quabifies as an
investment under the treaty and applicable international law (which inclides the
question of whether the acquisition of receivables is pex se an investment and whether
the requirements in Article 2c) of the treaty ave satisfied).

In substance, the Tribunal considers that it is ready to resolve all three
issues indicated by the Respondent at p. 3 of its Request for Bifurcation
dated 31 March 2010

In the same request {p. 5), the Respondent suggested two possible
additional matters to be resolved at the preliminary stage, namely: (a)
whether the acts of the trustee may be attributed to the Slovak Republic
under the international law principles on State responsibility; and (b)
whether further recourses were available before the Slovak judiciary in
relation to the defense of the Claimant’s rights in the bankruptcy
proceedings. After reflection, the Tribunal is of the view that both such
issues need further pleadings and evidence.

Indeed, in investment arbitrations the common practice shows that
attribution and exhaustion of local remedies are ruled in the merits
decision.

The same applies, in the present case, to the issue of whether the
Claimane’s investraent was made in good faith and in accordance with the
laws of the host State, especially considering that it is unclear whether the
Respondent applies the bona fide test against the inveswnent as such, or
against the manner and timing ef the Claimant’s commencement of this
arbitration.

On the contrary, jurisdiction may be readily assessed in respect of the fixst
three requirements, which are in essence strictly jurisdictional and
exhaustively pleaded.

5. A possible 4 preliminary issue

The Claimant challenges the appellate court decision of 5 September 2007
and the rejection of the claims by the second trustee

It is unclear whether our Tribunal is requested to rule that these measures

are erred in domestic (Slovak) law and should be revised by our ‘Tribunal
under this law, or whether the Claimant’s case is that - by misapplying

Slovak law on bankruptcy proceedings - the appellate court and the
tmustee have (avtomatically?) rendered the Slovak Republic responsible for
a treaty breach, ie. for expropriation and violation of the duty to accord
fair and equitable (xeatment and due protection to the foreign investor.

The Claimant is requested to clarify its position on this point at the
October hearing. The Tribunal’s questionnaire herebelow includes specific
questions to the Claimant also in this respect, The Claimant is obviously at
Liberty not to confine its argument to the Tribunal’s questions and to base
its case also on additional or different arguments

Depending on the clarifications received at the hearing, the Txibunal
ceserves to decide whether or not to address in the preliminary award also
the so-called “prima fasie test” on the existence of a plausible treaty claim.
This is a question that directly affects the jurisdiction of a treaty based
tribunal and is commonly addressed in the jurisdictional decision, provided
that the Tribunal considers that it has received all needed information.

6. Tribunal’s questionnaire to the Patties

At the hearing, the Tuibunal wishes to receive from the Parties the
following clanfications:

Preliminary issue (4)

Questions to the Respondent

Would the Respondent better clacify why it considers that the set of
correspondence between the Parties in the file (Claimant’s submission of
31 May 2010, § 138, which describes the letters exchanged between the
Parties from November 2007 through July 2008) is insufficient to satisty
the conditions precedent set forth in Article 9(1) and (2) of the applicable
investment treaty?

Did the Respondent also consider the precedents where investment
tribunals have adopted a non-formalistic approach in respect of the
present matter? Is its position that these precedents are here irrelevant? If
so, why?

Prelirninary issue (ii)

Questions to the Claimant

Would the Claimant clarify whether the documentary evidence it has
produced to establish its “sear” and “real economic activitier” in Switzerland
constitutes the entirety of the proof that it may offer in this respect?

How does the Claimant comment the csitiques expressed by the
Respondent against the evidential weight of the above documents?

Preliminary issue (ii)

to both P;

 

ies

In order to resolve the present issue, should the Tribuna) exclusively
consider the contract by which the Claimant acquired the receivables or

21

also the defensive activities in which the Claimant was involved during the
bankcuptcy proceedings?

Does it make a difference, in the Parties’ view, to treat the assignment
agreement as a single isolated uansaction as opposed to treating it in
conjunction with the overall involvement of the Claimant between 2007
and 2008? Would the value and duration of the “contribution” remain the
same in either case?

Are the Parties of the view that a principle or practice exists in
international investment law requiting that a business transaction must
have a minimum value in order to qualify as a protected investment? In
the affirmative, what would the minimum amount be?

Questions to the Claimant

Does the monetary value of the alleged investment correspond to the
price paid tc for the acquisition of the receivables? Is this the
amount invested, or is it the acquisition price plus other expenses? Are the
additional expenses exclusively those required to attend the judicial and
hustee proceedings?

If the investment value coincides with the price of acquisition of the
“receivables”, why does the Claimant claim the, much higher, value of the
“teceivables” as quantified between assignor and assignee in the
assignment contract? Was the value of the receivables, at the assignment’s
date, estimated by some third party, or agreed between assignor and
assignee, or declared by the assignor?

Had the Claimant checked dhe accuracy of the amount when it agreed on
the assignment?

What was the precise legal nature of the “ceceivables” at the tine of their
assignment Fron * to the Claimant? Were they unilateral and still
pending claims raised by towards », of rather definitive
wredits (or liquidated claims) legally enforceable by the assignor against the
debtor?

Would the Claimant elaborate on the business reasons for which it
acquired the seceivables in the amount of approximately from

towards the bankrupt debtor against a cash payment of
approximately ® Would it elaborate on the circumstances
surrounding the above acquisition?

Does the Claimant confirm that the validity of the agreement between
itself and | __« for the assignment of receivables is an issue which is still
pending before some Slovak forums, as contended by the Respondent
(Statement of Defence of 31 Match 2010, §§ 97 ro 102 and Jast submission
dated 16 July 2010, §§ 86--87, p. 35)?

Atticle 2(c) of the investment treaty requires that, in order for a claim or a
tight to qualify 4s an investment, its object must consist in a “perfermance
having an ecoromic value”: what was the “performance” in respect of which

22

69.

che Claimant became a creditor by vistue of the assigament of receivables?
By whom was the Claimant enticed to expect the “performance”? ‘The
assignor? The debtor? The bankruptcy supervisory authorities?

To what extent the quotations extracted by the Claimant from intemer
(Claimant’s submission of 31 may 2010, §§ 177 to 180) are relevant to the
definition of investment in the meaning of customaty or treaty
international Jaw rules?

Potential prelizninary issue (in)

Questions to the Claimant

Was the appellate court decision of 5 September 2007 rendered towards all
creditors of Hid it affect the Claimant individually and
exclusively?

If the court decision injured a plurality of creditors in the same mannez,
could the Claimant better explain why it considers that it amounted to a
disctiminatory expropriation affecting the Claimant alone?

The Respondent objects that the authority of this Tsibunal exclusively
concerns decisions on treaty breaches committed by States and that the
present Tribunal has no power to cure possible errors in (internal) law
made by domestic courts (Statement of Defence, §§ 103 ff): how does the
Claimant comrnent on the said objection?

Does the Claimant assume that international — customary or treaty ~ Jaw
prohibits wrong judiciary decisions as such, or that it prohibits “denial of
justice”, that is a system of justice which falls below a certain standard? Is
the Claimant’s case that the Slovak judicial system does not meet the
standards required by international Jaw?

7. The Parties’ liberty to plead

The Tribunal wishes to clarify that, by submitting the above questions to
the Parties, it simply indicated the matters in respect of which it considers
that i needs to receive clarifications.

The Tribunal does not intend to limit the Parties’ rights to plead as they
deem fit to their respective case, They are at liberty to axgue at the hearing
on whatever other basis

The hearing on jurisdiction took place on October 11, 2010 at the Hilton Plaza
in Vienna (Austria), starting at 9.30 am and ending at 6.30 pm. In addition to the
Members of the Tribunal, its Secretary and ‘(who took care of
the transcription services), the following persons attended the mecting:

Representing the Claimant: ‘ and.

Representing the Respondent: |
7 at the

70,

7

VLE

72.

Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic).

During the October Heating, nd Mr. Pawlak made oral pleadings
on behalf of the Respondent and on behalf of the Claimant. Both
counsel made use of power-point presentations (copy of which was circulated to
the Members of the Tribunal and the opposing Party) and based their respective
pleadings on the gwestionnaire prepated by the Tribunal in Procedural Order No.
4. Several questions were raised to the Parties’ representatives by the Members
of the Tribunal, to which each Party gave its #wn answers. A transcript (the
“OHT”) recorded the debate and was distributed to the Members of the

Tribunal and the Parties.

Acthe end of the heasing, the Tribunal accepted Claimant’s request to produce,
by October 18, 2010, a statement by

and allowed the Respondent to submit its comments on the said
statement by October 29, 2010. The Tribunal further directed that both Parties
had to submit their respective Statement of Costs by November 30, 2010.

Post—hearing submissions

The Claimant submitted statement on October 15, 2010. On
October 29, 2010, the Respondent submitted its comments and an exces-pt of a
Swiss company’s internet website. In brief, it requested the Tribunal to exercise
its discretion under Section 25(6) of the Uncisral Rules and “give no weigh?” to -

On November 30, 2010, the Claimant submitted the “Cost Statement’,
accompanied by an “advance invoice? issued by
_ tas a breakdown (“Naratives”) of the
global amount. On the same date, the Respondent submitted its Statement of
Costs, accompanied by: (i) an affidavit by which describes
and justifies the costs sustained by the Ministry of Finance and attaches theiz
detailed spreadsheet; (ii) the invoices issued to the Ministry and a backup of the
expenses incurted duting the proceedings by David A. Pawlak LLC; (iii) a
spreadsheet referring to the Respondent’s further expenses and (iv) a backup of
the Respondent’s further expenses. Globally, the Respondent claims €
and asks the Tribunal to put the entirety of this amount at the charge
of the Claimant based on the legal authorises and on the arguments discussed in

its “Submission on Costs”

24

VII. THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE CASES

VILA Applicable law

VILA.1 Claimant

74. ‘In the SOC, the Claimant states that the BIT has no choice-of-law clause and
“the Slovak law should be applicable to the case including the Treaty as part of the Slovak:
legal syste”. Yt further specifies that, under the Slovak legislation and
Constitution, disputes arising from the misconduct of State organs or entities

(such as courts) can only be governed by the same “legislation and Constitution” 5

75. No other explanation was given by the Claimant on this point, either in its
subsequent memosials or at the October hearing.

VILA2 Respondent

76, Amore thorough analysis was made by the Respendent in its SOD.¢ It refers to
abundant case-law and authorities which distinguish the tespective sole of
domestic and international law in the resolution of investment disputes. ‘The
Respondent emphasizes that the Claimant’s claim and the ensuing dispute arise
from an international treaty. Therefore, the sources of law which “supply the rule
of decision” that the Tribunal must apply in the present arbitration are the treaty
itself ~ the BIT ~ plus the relevant rules of international law. International law is
inevitably applicable, since it is the law that necessarily governs all basic
elements of any decision, such as the interpretation of the investment treaty in
guestion; the definition of the terms used in the treaty, eg. “investment”,
“onvestor”, “expropriation”, “fair and equitable treatment” and so on; the
determination of whether an investor has discharged the burden of proving its
ughts under a given treaty and the State’s breaches thereof; and the definition of
the damages that may be indemnified to an investor in case the host State is

liable for treaty violations

77. In the Respondent’s view, Slovak law remains relevant, but merely in the sense
that a possible breach by the host State of municipal law provisions constitute a

5 SOG, § 153.
SOR, §§ 103-129.

78.

VILB

“fact” that may, or may not, amount to a violation of a treaty provision or to a
breach of any other relevant rule of international law applying to the protection

of foreign investors

The same concepts were re-stated by the Respondent in its Reply of July 16,
2010, where it inter alia emphasized that in its submission of May 31, 2010 the
Claimant had not denied the application of mandatory rules of treaty
interpretation and other international law rules televant to the resolution of
investment disputes.’ At the hearing, the Respondent focused again on the
decisive role of the international rules on treaty interpretation when it must be
determined whether a certain person qualifies as an “investor” or a given
business transaction qualifies as an “investment”; in addition, it drew the
Tribunal’s attention on the need not to depart from the above tules in the
interpretation of the specific BIT here in question and of the requirements

established therein forits applicability to certain Swiss investors.

Admissibility

VILB.T Respondent

79

80.

The Respondent objects that the Claimant failed to satisfy the condition
precedent to submit its claim to arbitration, which is here represented by the
duty of the Claimant to activate “consultations between the parties concerner?” before
referring the matter to arbitration, as required by Article 9(1) of the BIT. Arucle
9(2) clarifies that the investor may tefer a dispute to arbitration “xf these
consultations do not result in a solution within ax months’, meaning that ~ absent any

consultation ~ arbitration cannot be resorted to.

The Respondent infers that the Claimaat’s referral to arbitration was made in
the absence of any proper consultation and before expiry of the six-month
period provided for in the BIT. In fact, no claim had been notified by the
Claimant to the Respondent in 2007 or 2008. None of the letters of November
5, 2007, April 2, 2008 and even May 19, 2008 (appointing } ~) did
amount to a proper notice of claim, or notice of dispute or, even less, to a
“request for arbitration” in the terms of the BIT. Properly speaking, the

7 RR, §§ 14-26

8 OHT,

p. 19 ff and pp. 34-35

26

Respondent has never received a “request for arbitration” by the Claimant and
no consultation were ever engaged in connection with this dispute. The letter of
July 14, 2008 by the Ministry of Finance had in fact clarified that the dispute was
still pending before the domestic judiciary pursvant to national law.

81. Consequently, the precondition to submission of a clainy to arbitration was
never met. This means that the consent to atbitration by the Slovak Republic is
missing and that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the case.? The same
objections were repeated by the Respondent in its Reply of July 16, 2010! and

at the October Hearing.
VIIB.2 Claimant

82. Contrary to the above Respondent’s allegations, the Claimant contends that the
condition precedent to validly commence the BIT arbitranon has been met. The
Claimant repeatedly requested the Slovak Government to open-up consultations
to amicably settle the dispute under Article 9 of the BIT (by letters of
November 5, 2007, April 2, 2008 and May 19, 2008)? However, the
Government “did not accept the request of the Claimant” and “failed to set any date for
consultations’, thereby showing no interest in addsessing ot pursuing the
Claimant's proposals and rather hindering the proper course of the pre-arbitral

stage.

83. Having actively attempted to consult with the Ministry of Finance and
unsuccessfully waited for over six months the Ministry’s reaction, the Claimant
validly proceeded to the appointment of the first arbitrator in accordance with
Axticle 9(2)(b) of the BIT.’

84. At the October Hearing the Claimant underlined that the BIT does not provide
for “any particular form of notice of a request to begin consultation, nor the solution of

SON, §§ 135-148.
RR, GG 89-97.
¥ OHT, p. 32, p. 98 and ff. and p. 173 and ff.

® OHT, pp. 113-115, where the Claimant clarifies that “she BIT does prescribe neither fa] particular form
of notice of a request to begin consultation, or the sobution of {sitwations) where one party is constantly refusing te
{hold} any consultation”.

8 CM), § 138; OHT, pp. 114-115
1 CMJ, §§ 135-140. The matter has been also referred to by the Claimant inn the SOC, §§ 149-150.

27

situation where one party is constantly refusing to held any consultation” and that the
“reluctance” by one party to proceed with consultations may not alone prevent
the other from legitimately seizing an arbitral tribunal under Article 9 of the
BIT. Hence, while it made all reasonable efforts to abide by the BIT provision,
the Respondent’s reluctant conduct amounted to 2 mere dilatory tactic.§

Jurisdiction

VILC1 Respondent

85.

86.

87.

88.

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the dispute

on the following independent grounds.
@ . is not an “investor”

The Respondent relies on Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT, which defines the term
‘Snvestor” as follows

“The term “investor” refers, with segard to either Contracting Party, to
(-] (©) legal entities [...] which are constituted or otherwise daly
organized under the aw of that Contracting Party and have their seat,
together with seal economic activities, in the territory of that same
Contracting Party” (emphasis added].

‘The Respondent’s case is that | is not an “investor” under the
above provision. In fact, the mete incorporation of » in Switzerland
— resulting from the Excerpt from the Commercial Registry enclosed to the

Claimant’s SOC — is alone insufficient to establish its status as a BIT “investor”.
Rather, in addition to its incorporation under Swiss law, the Claimant was
ound to prove to have both a “seat” and “real economic activities” in
Switzerland, which it failed to.16

@@) .. failed to establish dvat it has its “seat” in Switzerland

‘The Respondent argues that the Claimant follows a wrong legal approach when
claiming that it has a Swiss “sea¢” upon the mere assertion that it is domiciled at
‘Seat’ has a precise meaning under the BIT, namely the

'S Claimant’s Power Point presentation at the October Heating, pp. 1-2 and OHT, pp. 113-115, pp.
163-165 and pp. 187-188.

4 SOD, §§ 149-173; RRJ, §§ 27-72; OHT, pp. 42-63

principal place of an actual business

89. First, the Claimant cannot rely on a Slovak commercial code provision in order
to find that it has a “seat” in the texritory of a Contracting Party:!7 the meaning
that the key-term “seat” might have under national law of the Contracting
Parties (either Slovak or Swiss) is irrelevant in the context of the BIT
interpretation, which is governed by the international rules of treaty
interpretation exclusively® Secondly, a mere domicile in - in the
Respondent’s words, “#5 not a sufficient basis to establish that. —~ | ~ .

J is an investor under the Treaty’

90 To prove that . isa | “nerve center (as
contends”), the Claimant had the burden to produce telephone records,
rental agreements and rental payments, invoices, purchase orders, banking
records, contracts for sale and services, utility bills or even witness statements?)
However, « , did not There is no evidence in the record that
-u.+-- principal place of business, its

headquatter or the address at which it “genuinely administers its business’ 23

91. On the one hand, . | confirmed that (a) approximately 8@ other
companies have their offices at the same address in (as showed by the
Respondent in the SOD?5); (¥) it has no own fixed telephone line;?4 and (¢ it has

” CM), §§ 155-156

8 SOD, §§ 125-126; RRJ, §§ 37-38; OHT, pp. 34 and 55

© SOD, § 154.

® SOC, §1.

* SOD, § 155; RRJ § 34; ONT, pp. 49 and 51

 Sce OMIT p. 51, where Counsel for the Respondent emphasises: “We don't have anything of this in the
record. Nothing” and p. 52, where he concludes on the issue by stating that: “Given there facts that have
already been reviewed, the proper conclusion is olrvious has not proven ond cannot prove its compliance with the
trealy's requirement far bringing a claim”.

% SOD, § 162.

24 CMJ, § 154; RRJ, § 35; OWT, p. 52.

25SOD, fn. 185

26 CMJ, § 172, where the Cloimant clarifies that “In she 27 Century (...) mobile phones are used as a
common tool”, OIT, p, 52 and 58-59, where the Cevnsel for the Respondent zebuts that “We have
absolutely no evidence of cell phone usage”.

29

no employees? On the other hand, the Respondent criticises the Claimant for

having submitted wholly inadequate evidence which fatally undermine its

claim. In fact

0)

(i)

5)

the reference to a purported “oral rental agreement”? is devoid of
evidenwary support and may not be credited (there is no evidence of the
agreement itself, its parties, the term, the price, the paysnent records, the
receipts, a Witness statement from the counterparty, etc.);3°

with regard to the Swiss bank account telied upon by the Claimant to
support a finding of a Swiss seat,3! there is no evidence as to the names
of the account holders, the authorized account signatories, the branch of
the Swiss bank where the account is held and of bank statements
presumably sent by the bank to

in any event, the mere opening of a Swiss bank account does not per se
entitle the holder to claim treaty-protection as an “investor”; and

even though the Claimant refers to “proper bookkeeping” as a basis for
asserting the existence of a Swiss seat, it actually provides no
bookkeeping records ot testimony of where those records are made or
maintained, or by whom; moteover, the alleged “bookkeeping” is
certainly not “proper”, given that the 2007 tax return provided by

- demonstrates that in books there is no mace of
the receivables allegedly acquired from “4

92. In the light of the above, the Respondent concludes that the Claimant has not

met the burden of proving that it has a Swiss “seat”. Consequently, the

Respondent requests the Tribunal to reject the allegation tha

7 CM), § 167; OHT, pp. 52 and 56-58.
2% OHT, p. 52-53.

2 CMY, § 157

3° RRJ, §§ 39-40; OHT,, pp. $5-56

3 CMJ, § 157

2° RRJ, §§ 41-42; OHT, pp. 59-60

38 CM), § 157
3s
62

2007 tax return is referred to as R-80. See also RNJ, §§ 43-44; OHT, pp. 60-

93.

94.

95.

96.

ptincipal place of business (or “seat””) and to dismiss the
entire claim because of _ * lack of standing under Axticle 1(1)(b) of
the BIT3s

db) failed ro establish “real economic activities” in Switzerland

 

The Respondent objects that the Claimant has failed to establish that it
performs “real economic activines’ in Switzetland as provided under Article 1(1)(b)
of the BIT 36

In the Respondent’s view: (a) the “real economic activities” requirement is an
exceptional treaty clause which reflects the Contracting Parties’ tention to
deny protection to “mailbox” or “shell” companies*? and (b) the “real economic
activities” clause, given the mandatory application of the rules of treaty
interpretation of the Vienna Convention, shall be interpreted in accordance with

the “ordinary meaning” of the terms used in the treaty’s text3*

The Respondent emphasises that treaty protection is granted to companies
which have an effective link with the State which they claim to be a nasonal of,
meaning that they must run — in the territory of that State - an actual,
independent and verifiable activity, produce or sale visible and tangible goods or
services, earn profits and eventually “foster economic prosperity’ for the Srates which

are party to the treaty?

In other words, to prove its “teal economic activities’, a company would
provide factual and documented descriptions of the business it runs in its own
State or the products or services it offers, websites’ screenshots, notes of
management meetings and decisions, annual reports and balance sheets, a list of
customers, vendors, suppliers, lenders or borrowers etc.4°

3 SOD, §§ 149, 152 and 155; RRJ, § 31; OHT, p. 63
% SOD, §§ 157-173; RRJ, 45-72; OHT, pp. 71-80.
27SOD, § 157; OHT, p. 47

28 SOD, §§ 125 and 158, were tlhe Respondent points out that relevance must be given to “she sreaty's
text, iks preambie and anuexes and any related agreements or instruments”; RRJ, § 45.

39 SOD, §§ 159-362; RRJ, § 45.
“SOD, § 178.

31

97. however, presents no such proof whatsoever.*! On the contrary,
the poor information which the Claimant provides and the only document on
which it relies upon to prove “real economic activities” in Switzerland ~ ic. a
copy of its tax filing for 2007 (Claimant’s exhibit 38 or R-80) — “only raise further
doubts about. Status and its conduct in prosecuting this treaty clain?’

98. ‘The Respondent further highlights the following. The Claimant merely declares,
but does not prove, that it has been acwtve mainly in the field of financial
services, collection of debs, sale of goods, interests in companies, acquisition
and sale of property.*> The Claimant's reference to the Sixth Council Directive
of 1977 on the harmonization of the EU Member Sates taxation laws and to a
decision by the European Court of Justice of 1996 has no relevance. With
reference to its alleged “contracts” made in Switzerland, the Claimant refrains
from exhibiting any of them because they would be subject to “business
secrecy”, which is not believable*s The unsupported allegation of the existence
of a daughter company in Slovakia‘ is irrelevant and insufficient to establish
“real economic activities” in Switzerland 47

99. Finally, the contents of the un-translated 2007 tax return offesed by
248 only confirm that is nothing more than a “mailbox”

company.

© SOD, §§ 167-173, referring inter alivr to SOC, §§ 125 and 149.

2 RRJ, § 46. See also RRJ, § 70, where the Respondent concludes that: “Ou she record, is, at
most, mailbox company with a formal registry address (and ne mere)in\ — 2”.
3 SOC, § 3.

4 CM), §§ 150-153 (where the Claimant cites § 3 of its letter dated April 23, 2010); RRJ, § 47; OHT,
pp. 71-72.

+5 CMJ, §§ 168-171, RRJ, § 48; OHT, p. 73.

“© CMJ, § 172; RRJ, §§ 59-60; OT, p80.

OH, pp. 71 and 73.

* Claimant’s letter of February 10, 2010; CMJ, §§ 150-153, 158-161 and 162.

SOD, § 172, whete the Respondent points out that the tax filing suggests that . has
no telephone number on its own, no employees and that the majority of its shareholders do not
maintain a Swiss residence; RRJ, §§ 49-58 and fn. 47, where the Respondent dissects the Claimant's
2007 tax return and concludes that the Claimant's vague references to selected figures thereof (such
as: payment of bank fees, payment of taxes and existence of a loan agreement) do not suffice to
prove its compliance with the BIT Article 1(1)(b); OHT, pp. 73-79 (in particular p. 74-75, where the

Respondent’s Counsel clatifies that the proof that yas not shown “real economic
activities” in Switzerland is given by the utter absence of evidence of activities during 2008 and by

32

100.

101.

102.

103.

In the light of the above, the Respondent contends that the Claimant has not
met the burden of proving its “real economic activities” in Switzerland and, on
this independent basis, requests the Tribunal to dismiss t claim for
Jack of standing under Article 1(1)(b) of the BITS°

(iy) acquisition of receivables is not a qualifying “investment”
The Respondent refers to Article 1(2)(c) of the BIT, providing as follows:

“The term “investment” shall include every kind of assets and particularly
{..) (©) claims and rights to any performance having an economic valve”,

The Respondent denies that purported acquisition of receivables
might qualify as an “investment” entitled to treaty protection, both in general
terms, ic. under customary international law, and under the applicable BIT
provision. In fact: (i) such acquisition lacks the charactetistics of an
“investment”; (ii) 1 cannot show a claim for performance having an
economic value at the tine of the challenged appellate Court decision and (i#)
the acquisition of receivables was not made in good faith and in accordance with

host-State Jaw.5!

Ga) isition of 8 les is a ion that lacks the

characteristics of an “investment”

The Respondent argues that, pursuant to common principles of international
Jaw, in order to enjoy treaty protection, an investment must: (i) entai) a
contribution to the economy of the host State; (#) extend over a cettain period
of time, and (#) involve some risk,5? More specifically, the Respondent clarifies

that:

(i) “contribution” includes contributions in cash, kind or labeur that
involve a significant flow of capital, resources or activities into the host

State’s economy;5*

 

the fact that the mere holding of a bank account cannot alone enaitle to treaty protection, otherwise
18,000 mailbox companies in _ with a bank account could legitimately claim it).

5° SOD, § 173; RRJ, §§ 45 and 72; OHT, pp. 79-80.
51 SOD, §§ 174 and 218; RRJ, §§ 73-88; OHT, pp. 81-97.
2 SOD, § 179.

58 SOD, §§ 180-181

(is) “duration” is to be analyzed in light of all surrounding circumstances and
of the investor's overall commitment and niust refer to an established

economic relationship;

(ii) “risk” means that the investment must entail a risk which goes beyond
the risk of doing business generally and which leaves the investor in a
situation where he does not know the amount he wil] end up spending.ss

104. In addition, the Respondent points out that Article 1(2) of the BIT does not
extend its protection to “teturns” (ie. expected or future returns), which thus

cannot equate to “investments” s¢

10S. he Claimant, however, failed to show that its acquisition of receivables from
satisfied the above requicements and thus failed to establish an
“investment” under the BIT and under international law. In particular:

Q) the receivable’s acquisition from was a mere commercial
transaction involving a (modest) cash payment in exchange for the
assignment, which ultimately reflected an extraction of resources from
Slovakia sather than a “contnbution” fostering the host: State’s

economy;s”

(i) . recorded activities in Slovakia are limited to a one-off
transaction pursuant to a four-page contract of assignment and thus had

no “duration”;58

(i) the exposure was limited to the price of the assignment (approx. €
) which constitures an ordinaty commercial risk assumed by all
those who enter into this kind of business speculations;5? and

5 SOB, § 182

55 SOD, § 183.

56 RRJ, §§ 78-81 (in particular fn. 56, where the Respondent indicates that, under the BIT, “returns”
are payment relating to investments, but are not investments in themselves)

SOB, § 181; RR, § 45.

58 SOD, § 182; RRJ, §§ 76-77, where the Respondent highlights that. sole basis for
contending that it met the duration requirement is a vague reference to a purported daughter
company in Slovatia, which however is not shown as being actually connected with .

 

5° SOD, § 183.

34

106.

107.

108.

(iv) the turnover proceeds which the alleged “investment” may have
genexated (or would have been expected to generate) are not included
within the protection granted under Articles 1(2) or 1(3) of the BIT 6°

For the foregoing reasons, the Respondent maintains that | failed to
prove thar it made an “investment” in the territory of the Slovak Republic when
acquiting the receivables from Hence, the Respondent requests the
Tribunal to reject the allegation chat, made an “investment” within
the meaning of Article 1(2) and to dismiss the claim for lack of jurisdiction.6t

Ge). . has not shown a “claim to performance having an economic value”

The Respondent argues that the Claimant has not shown a “claim os sight to
performance” that fits within the terms of Article 1(2)(c) of the BITS? In order
to satisfy the definition referred to in the aforementioned BIT clause, “claims
and rights to any performance” must be rights conferred by the law that are (4)

specific; (i) clear; (i#) enforceable and that () have a value.®

However acquisition of receivables does nor meet the above

tests, since:§4

0) no performance was due from, £0 under the
Assignment Contract; it was a “one-off” transaction, without any

ongoing “performance”;

(a) in the SOC, the Claimant defines “claim” the claim acquired against the
bankrupt debtor s6 which, however, was far from being

“cleat” or “specific”;7

60 RRJ, §§ 78-81 (in particular § 81, where the Respondent explains that Article 1(3) of the BIT
defines “returns” as “amounts yielded”, thus using the past tense and therefore excluding expected
or future returns).

6 SOD, § 185.
SOD, §§ 186-192; RRJ, §§ 82-88
© SOD, § 187

“Id,

6 SOD, § 188.
“© SOC, §§ 6 and 108.
67 SOD, § 189,

35

109.

110.

111.

Gia) . could not legitimately enforce its alleged claim, given chat
the party having a claim to performance was 3 and

(iv) the claim against the debtor - was deprived of “economic
value” prior to adjudication by the competent authorities of all creditors’
claims and distribution of the bankrupt’s assets; eventually
failed to gain admission as a creditor to the bankruptcy.

In the light of the above, | has never had any claim or sght to
performance satisfying the criteria of specificity, clarity and enforceability or a
claim having an economic value at the time of the alleged violations of the BIT
(nor subsequently). Therefore, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to state
that the Claimant failed to show a “qualifying investment” under Article 1(2)(c)

BIT and to dismiss its claim.

Gi) The BIT denies of i which are not made in dance with

the host State Jaw

According to Article 2(1) of the BIT, “investments” made in the territory of one
Contracting Party by “investors” of the other Contracting Party must be made:

“{...) ip accordance with the lvws and regulations of the former
Contracting Party”

Although this Atticle reflects the Contracting Parties’ intention to exclude from
the BII”s application and substantive protection the “investments” which are
contrary to host State law,” ‘as not established compliance with
Slovak anti money laundering law in force on the date of the Assignment
Contract, which provided that unusual business operations, characterized by
cash payments in excess of € be teported to the financial police without
undue delay.” * cash payment of approx. * was certainly

% Jd See also SOD, § 191, where the Respondent, relying upon the expext opinion refecred 10 in
Exhibit R-1, explains chat tad no standing to claiin for the receivables until the
issuance of a deccee by the court approving joinder as 2 pasty to the bankruptcy
proceedings. At the time of the challenged decision, however, (September 5, 2007)

had not yet registered its claim with the bankmmptcy court; RRJ, § 83.

69 Id.

7 SOB, § 195
2 SOD, § 208.

112.

113.

114.

Id
BId.

an unusual business operation, but was not reposted to the competent

authorities.”

Hence, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to ascettain that Claimant's
acquisition of receivables is contrary to the host State law in effect at the
selevant date, and must also for that reason be disqualified from the protection
accorded by the BIT pursuant to Article 2(1) of the BIT.73

@a _has not established a bona fide investment

Finally, the Respondent emphasises that, in addition to comply with the host
State law, “investnents” deserve treaty-protection only if made in compliance
with the international principle of good faith.7* In order to correctly proceed to
the bona fide test, several factors should be examined, such as the timing of the
investment; the timing of the request for arbitration; the timing of the claim; the
substance of the transaction and the nature of the operation.75

The Respondent argues that “the timeline of events and surrounding circumstances deny
. bona fide”,”6 given inter alia that:?? ) when, realised
that satisfaction of the receivables in the Slovak courts via | claim was in
jeopardy, it sought to create international jurisdiction where none existed; (z)
, Counsel for the Claimant in the present proceedings, acted both
on behalf of and. , statting from June 15, 2007 onwards; (di)
several persons and entities issued criminal complaints against the conduct of
the first bankruptcy Trustee ( ), complaining that he was somehow
personally connected with _ (uy). activites seemed to
be controlled by the company which is legally represented by : Orat
least related thereto; and (v) had a favourable approach towards
as opposed to other creditors (he proceeded, for instance, to
acknowledge ~ proof of debt as first and “despite its numerous defects”).

% SOD, § 202
% SOD, § 204
2 SOD, § 205
7 SOD, §§ 205-217.

37

115. Further to the above, it is the Respondent’s position that the above outlined

circumstances do not qualify cquisition of receivables as a bona
fide investment and therefore prevent it from enjoying the protection granted by
the BIT.

VILC.2 Claimant

116. The Claimant argues that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the present
dispute as the Slovak Republic interfered and failed to protect the investment
hat the Claimant made in its tertitory.”? In the Claimant’s reasoning, the Slovak
Republic is responsible for any wrongful conduct of Slovak courts — which “are
to be viewed as agencies of the State acting in the name and om behalf of rhe State? — and
thus “has an obligation under international lan?’ to remedy any treaty violation that

such courts should cause.8°

117. With regard to the reasons why the Tribunal has jurisdiction to heat the case, it

is the Claimant’s position that:

(i) the “Extract from the Commercial Registry” attached to the SOC
demonstrates that it has a “seat” in Switzerland, from where it
administers its business, it holds its headquarters, keeps proper books,
rents its office and opens a bank account.8! Moreover, reference is made
to the definition of “seat” given under Slovak lawS* and to the contents
of the EC] judgment in Case C-110/94.8? In brief, the Claimant asserts

7 SOD, §§ 201 and 218.
SOC, § 148
SOC, §§ 146 and 148,

8 The Extract is commented upon in Claimant's letter of Aptil 23, 2010, § 2 and in CMJ, §§ 150-
186. See also OHT, p. 118 and the Claimant’s Power Point presentation at the October Hearing, p
2, where the Claimant asserts that the Commercial Registry shows that “the Claimant is peforming
several types of business activitie?” in the Swiss territory.

& CMY, § 156, where the Claimant mentions Article 2(3) of Law no. 513/1991, according to which
“a registered office af a legal entity shall be the address (...] which is registered in the business registry as the registered
office”, OHT, §

83 Claimant’s letter of April 23, 2010, § 3, where the Claimant indicates that the EC] had ruled that:
“Even the first investment expenditure incurred for the prrposes of a bust ness may be regarded as an economic activity
within the meaning of Article 4 of the Sixth Directive 77/388 on the harmonization of the lavs of the Member
States relating to turnover taxes, and, in that context, the tax authority must takee into account the declared intention
of tise business to engage in an activity subject to value added tax’. See also CMJ, §§ 150-153 and OHT, pp.
119-120, where the Claimant relies upon the relevant previsions of EC Regulation No. 44/2001

that, given the above evidence, it has met the burden of proving that it

maintains a “seat? in Switzerland;$+

qu) the 2007 tax return (showing the company’s turnover, its profit and loss
statement, the bank fees charged for the company’s transactions, etc.)
cleacly demonstrates that has real economic activities in
Switzerland and is not a “mailbox company”;8 in addition, the
Claimant’s real economic activity is shown by the vatious contracts it
entered into which, however, are under business secrecy and cannot be
disclosed;8*

(iii) the fact that the Claimant has no cmployees or a telephone line does not
allow the Respondent to conclude that it is not an “investor” desetving
BIT protection: nowadays many businessmen are sole entrepreneurs and

work through mobile phones;*?

(iv) was active in the Slovak Republic through its daughter
company (established in 2004), meaning that its economic activities in
the Slovak territory were not limited to the acquisition of
reccivables;*

(v) the receivables acquisition from 38 an “investment”®? because:

(a) it implied a “right to a performance having an economic value”,
as it was expected to generate revenues after a certain period of
time;

 

and the Jugano Convention on recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and comsnercial
matters of 1988 to show it has a Swiss domicile

8 SOC, § 149.
8 OHT, pp. 120, 129 and 150, where the Claimant's Counsel clatifies that the Claimant’s operations
are effectively run in Switzerland by a Swiss national ( ) residing in Switzerland, that

being “sufficient”, in his view, to prove real economic activities.

8% Claimant’s letter of April 23, 2010, § 35 CMJ, §§ 157-165; OHTT, p. 121 and ff. where the
Claimant’s Counsel, in ordec to demonstrate that the Claimant holds seal economic activities in
Switzerland, advances a formal request to submit a witness statement by current
executive.

® CMJ, §§ 167-172; OHT, p. 129.

6 CMJ, §§ 175-176

89 OHT, p. 136 ff, where the Claimant’s Counsel clarifies the definition of “investnent”.

90 CMJ, §§ 177-180.

39

(b)

©

(a)

©

it involved a high degrce of “cisk”, because there was no certainty
as to the expected revenues nor as to the future outcome of the

bankxuptcy procedure;

it was not a “one-off transaction”, the Claimant having a strong
connection with the Slovak market (proved inter aha by the
existence of a Slovak daughter company since 2004),

it was made in compliance with Slovak law, including the relevant
provisions of Slovak Civil Code and was formally acknowledged
by both the Slovak courts and the bankruptcy Trustee as being

enforceable under Slovak bankruptcy law;%3 and

it was made in good faith, as it was an investment made for the
mere purpose of generating proceeds and not with the intent to
“create international jurisdiction where none existed’; in fact, the
Claimant made the investment before the issuance of the decision
by the Regional Court, thus it could not be aware of its harmful
contents beforehand, moteover, is an independent
person who was appointed through a random selection and
following the procedure set forth in the Bankruptcy Act.%

118. For the above reasons, the Claimant requests the Ttibunal to ascertain that it

has jurisdiction over the case.°®

VILD Merits

119. Although the present award focuses on jurisdiction, the Tribunal is of the view

that it should summarize the position that the Patties took on the merits, both

for the sake of completeness and for the frequent overlap between procedural

and substantive issues

 

2 CMY, § 180
2 CMY, § 182.
°3 CM), §§ 193-196
CMJ, §§ 198-218.

 

% SOC, §§ 146, 148 and 150

 

VILD.I Claimant

120. The Claimant’s principal contention is that the judgment by the Regional Coust
of September 5, 2007 — which is considered in blatant violation of the laws of
the Slovak Republic’ — resulted in the utter collapse of the “investment” it
made in the Slovak territory”

121, Given that the Slovak courts are “official bodies” of vie Slovak Republic and that
the latter is responsible for the formers’ wrongful conducts, the Claimant
invokes the BIT to seek full compensation from the Slovak Republic of the
damages it suffered as a result of the aforementioned judgment.

 

@ i ” in the Slovak I because of

the judgment by the Regional Court of September 5, 2007
122. On June 15, 2007 ~ when bankruptcy had already been declared ~
: entered into the Assignment Contract with 1, n the context

of a regular business transaction which complied fully with the laws of
Slovakia 9 The Claimant, however, observes that “[ljad there been any doubts about
the stability of the judicial systen of the Slovak. Repubke (it) would not have made such
investment’ 00 Tp fact, after the declaration of i bankruptcy by the
District Court on June 7, 2007, ¢ claims against the bankrupt
were acknowledged by the bankruptcy Trustee { ‘in an amount of
. 4 On September 5, 2007, however — after filing of the
appeal to the June 7 decision by - former executive manager (
j ~ the Regional Court overruled the first instance judgment and

96 SOC, § 5S and ff, where the Claimant defines the Regional Court decision as being “illegal”,
OHT, p. 160 and ff.

7 SOC, § 92 OH'TT, p. 152, where the Claimant’s Counsel clarifies that, contrary to the
Respondent’s allegations, the Claismant has never contested the second trustee's actions and that the
Slovak Republic's international liability arises from the Court’s actions exclusively. See infra §§ 142
and €€ of this Award.

98 SOC, § 145.

SOC, §§ 93-94 and 122. See also supra § 23 of this Award.

190 SOC, §§ 95 and 123.

1! SOC, §§ 22 and 108. See also SOC, § 25, where the Claimant explains that the bankruptcy trustee

acknowledged the creditors’ petitions for an overall amount of | thich, compared
to the value of the bankeupt’s assers (: ), would have allowed satisfaction of all
creditors.

remanded the case to the District Court for further action.'02

123. The Claimant complains that, as a consequence of the above decision, both the
recovery petision filed by: _ with the District Court of Bratislava on June
15, 2007 (R-33) and the subsequent claims’ acknowledgment by the bankruptcy
Trustee ceased to be effective.t°? Consequently, the claims that bad
against (which were meanwhile transferred to , became
statute-barred, given that the statute of limitation period — running from the
date on which invoices were to be settled by under the
contract for works! ~ lasted four years by operation of law.1°5

124. Hence was “deprived of fullyfledged ownership rights’ and its property
“destructed’ 6 The legal nature of its receivables indeed inevitably changed, the

latter becoming judicially unenforceable.”
(ii) The Regional Court j of. 5, 2007 violates Slovak Jaw

125. The Claimant argues that the Regional Court decision of September 5, 2007 is in
violation of several provisions of Slovak Jaw#08 In particular, the Regional
Court:109

12 SOC, § 32.
3 SOC, (6 33, 35 and ff. and 115.

105 Id, where the Claimant further lists @ series of Slovak law provisions, among which Section
392(1) (“ln relation 10 rights to discharge, the statute of limitations shall start on the day the obligation was
breached, save for certain rights with different statue of limitations regulation set out in the tani”), Section 397
(Unless set out otherwise, the tera of the statute of limitations shall be four years”) and Section 402 of the
Slovak Commercial Code (“The statute of limitations shail cease to ran, when the creditor, in order to satisfy or
deterrnine his rights, takes any legal action which, aceording to regulations on judicial proveeings, is regarded as the
commencement of judicial proceedings, or elaiming af his rights in an already ongoing proceeding”).

5 SOC, §§ 34, 96, 116 and 124.

1 SOC, § $4, where the Claimant explains that, by vistue of the Regional Court decision,
enforcement of the receivables was no more possible because, in the further phase of the
bankruptcy proceedings before the District Court, the trustee would have taised the statute of
limitations’ objection and thus rejected the Claimant’s recovery petition.

18 SOC, §§ 55 and ff. and §§ 110 and ff.
19 SOC, § 56.

42

@ failed to examine whether ] was entitled to appeal the decision
of the Distsict Court dated June 7, 2007, even though the Claimant had
proves thal solely was entitled to act on behalf of the
bankrupt" Thus, the Regional Court had to reject i appeal
in accordance with Section 218(1) of the Slovak Code of Civil

Procedure;

(ii) failed to examine whether the appeal against the District Court decision
was indecd admissible pursuant to Section 22(3) of the Bankruptcy
Act? Given that in this case the petitioner was actually the debtor, the
Regional Court had to reject : appeal on the grounds of
inadmissibility;¥3

Gil) failed to apply the relevant provisions of the Bankmptcy Act (ex
speciais), when deciding on the appeal, and instead applied the merely
supplemental provisions of the Slovak Code of Civil Procedure;}!4

(iv) issued a decision 60 days after the appeal was filed, thus losing its
authority to decide on the matter as presctibed in Section 22(3) of the
Bankruptcy Act, according to which, in pertinent part: “[...] [he covrt of
appeal shall resolve on the appeal within 30 days from delivery of the petition 9S

20 The Claimant relies upon the excerpt from che Slovak Commercial Registry relating to
{enclosed to the Claimant’s SOC), listing . tecutive from May 27,
2004 to Apzil 6, 2009.

™ SOC, §§ 60, where the Claimant indicates that Section 218(1) of the Slovak Code of Civil
Procedure provides énter alia that: “The court of Appeal shall reject appeal which {...] was filed by a person
who is not entitled to do <0”. See also SOC, § 111.

12 According to Section 22(3) of the Bankruptey Act: “gains! the resolution on declaration of bankruptcy
the appeal can be filed by the debtor provided that he #s not the petitioner. Where the court of appeal learns that the
court of first instance resolved on declaration of vankzrupley in contradiction with the lam, the court of appeal shall
modify the decision of the court of first instance 0 that the bankruptcy proceedings shall be eased otherwise it shall
confirav the decision af the first instance caurt”. See SOC, §§ 62 and 110

43 SOC, §§ 61 and 63, where the Claimant indicates that Section 218(1) of the Slovak Code of Civil
Proceduse provides inter alia that: “The court of Appeal shall reject appeal which {...] és directed toward: a
decision against which the appeal is not admissible”.

4 SOC, §§ 64-66, where the Claimant explains that according to Section 22(3) of the Bankruptcy
Act, should the court of first instance’s decision on bankruptcy be challenged, then the court of
appeal shall either directly amend the decision (if wrong) or confirm it but has no power to quash it.
See also SOC, § 112.

¥3 SOC, §§ 62, 67 and 112.

43

126.

127.

128.

129.

(v) failed to consider that there was a lawsuit already pending on the issue of

whether the appellant ( ) was entitled to act on behalf of the

bankruptcy petitioner "6

The Claimant had no means to challenge the judgment of the Regional Court,
given that Section 198(1) of the Bankruptcy Act provides dat:
“The court shall decide during the proceedings according to this Act.
Appeal against the resolution is admissible only if provided herein. No

extraordinary appeal against resolution rendered hereunder shall be
admissible”.17

Notwithstanding the above provision, executive manager and the
bankruptcy Trustce filed an extraordinary appeal before the Supreme Court of
the Slovak Republic, which however was denied by a decision of April 23,
2008, Hence, following the remand by the Regional Court to the lower courts
for resuming bankruptcy, on May 29, 2008 the District Court again
declared bankrupt, appointed a new Trustee and invited the creditors

to submit their petition within a 45-day sme.

The Claimant duly filed its petition with the (second) bankruptcy Trustee on
June 23, 200820 The bankruptcy ‘Trustee, however, rejected the petition “due 10
expiration of the four year statute of limitations’, thus definitively preventing the

Claimant from satisfying its claims.}24

After a further appeal by against the District Court decision dated
May 29, 2008, the Regional Court, by judgment dated July 16, 2008, applied
Sections s 22(3) of the Bankruptcy Act and 218(1) of the Slovak Code of Civil
Procedure (see supra fn. 111 and 112) and rejected the appeal on the grounds

46 SOC, § 72
117 SOC, §§ 73-74

48 SOC, § 73 and copy of the Commercial Bulletin No. 94/2008 where the decision was published,
enclosed to the SOC. See also R-62.

N» SOC, § 75.
20 SOC, § 76. petition is enclosed to the S@C and also referred te in R-69.

12 SOC, §§ 77, 113 and 115. Moreover, the Claimant asserts (SOC, § 108) that the illegitimate
judgment by the Regional Court deprived it of its right to “file an incident ation against the decisien of the
[second] trustee cand was not able te demensirate legitimacy of bis lain (...)”

44

130.

131.

132.

that , was not entitled to act. on behalf of the debtor.!2?

Faced with the above situation, the Claimant emphasizes the impropricty of the
judiciary’s behaviour on the overall issue of . banktuptcy and the
contradictory outcome of the two decisions.¥3 In particular, the Claimant

complains that:

Q) on September 5, 2007, the Regional Court decided on an appeal: (a)
which was filed by an individual who lacked standing ( » 6
which overtuled a decision that could not be appealed (the District Court
decision of June 7, 2007), () ignoring the pending lawsuit on the status of
the appellant as the debtor’s legal representative; and (d) without abiding
by the 30-day period set under the Slovak law for the issuance of such a

judgment;

G) on July 16, 2007, the Regional Court decided on the same appeal as
under (i) above, however rejecting it - within the prescribed ure-limit —
on the unique grounds that the appellant ( 7 again) was not
entitled to challenge the first instance decision of May 29, 2008 because
he lacked standing.”4

In brief, the Claimant underlines both the non compliance of the Regional
Court’s decisions with the applicable Slovak laws and the resulting deprivation
of the ownership rights it acquired over the receivables by virtue of the
Assignment Contract!

Gili) In failing 10 take remedy against the wrong judiciary decisions, the Slovak

R blic left_the is and thu, hed its objigati

ler the BIT

 

 

In the light of the above, the Claimant contends that the Slovak Republic, which
has an obligation under the BIT to protect Swiss investments made in its
territory, “failed so secure” enforcement of the Slovak laws by its judiciary, thus

2 SOC, §§ 78-82.
3 SOC, §§ 83-84

124 Jd,

2S SOC, §§ 34 and 84.

45

133.

134.

135.

causing severe damages to the Claimant.6 In particular, the Claimant argues
that the Regional Coust ~ when deciding on the appeal filed against the
banksuptcy declaraton by the District Court — breached the Slovak
Constitution, the Bankruptcy Act, the Commercial Code and the Code of Civil
Procedure Notwithstanding the above law-infringements, the Slovak Republic
did nothing to prevent the Regional Court from. acting in such a way or actively
protecting the Claimant’s investment, thereby breaching Articles 4 and 6 of the
BIT.

Given that the Claimant demonstrated that the acquisition of receivables is an
investment under Asticle 1(1)(b) of the BIT which complies with the laws of the
Slovak Republic!?® and that the “‘Uegal’ decision of the Regional Court destroyed
its investment in Slovakia,!9 the Slovak Republic is liable towatds the Claimant
for compensating the corresponding value of the statute-barred receivables, plus

connected damages, under the aforementioned BIT provisions 8°

(iia) The Slovak Republic failed to “protect” and to ensure a “fair and equitable

treatment” to the Claimane’s investment

According to the Claimant, the notion of “fair and equitable treatment”
(referred to in Article 4(2) of the BIT) must be interpreted broadly, meaning
that this clause “imposes obligations beyond customary international requirements of good
faith treatment”, thas comprising such principles as pacta sunt servanda, protection

of acquired tights and protection of property.3?

To establish whether a State breached the “fair and equitable treatment” clause,

both the factual context and the actions it (or its bodies) carried out, acquire

26 SOC, §§ 85-86; OHT, p. 158, where the Claimant’s Counsel states that, as a result of the actions
by the Regional Court, “the (Claimant lost judicial protection of its investment”

47 SOC, §§ 87-89, 98-102 and 118-119.
328 SOC, §§ 93-95, 121 and mpra Secuon VILC2

29 SOC, §§ 96 and 103-107, whece the Claimaot lists the vatious Slovak law provisions breached by
the Regional Court and finally concludes that the Regional Court should have “dismissed” the appeal.
49 SOC, § 89.

31 The relevant clause of Asticle 4(2) of the BIT reads as follows: “Each Contracting Party shall ensure
Jair and equitable treatnsent within its territory of the investonents of the investors of the other Contracting Party.
fy"

22 SOC, §§ 134 and 136.

46

136.

137.

selevance433 In the present case, the Slovak Republic breached the
aforementioned BIT clause when the Regional Court illegally quashed the
District Court decision on 3ankmuptcy (instead of merely amending
or confirming it) and ordered to re-open the bankruptcy proceedings. In so
doing, the Slovak Republic indirectly undermined the Claimant’s tight to
enforce the receivables within the bankruptcy, although the same sight had been
previously acknowledged by the same Slovak judiciary (decision of the District
Court dated June 7, 2007).

Moreover, the Claimant argues that “the Slovak Republic took unreasonable and
discriminatory measures” when the Court ordered that a new stage of

bankruptcy was to initiate, given that its “Swiss” investment was not treated (or
“protected”, in the sense of Article 4(1) of the BIT!) the same way as the
Slovak ones: in fact, the principal consequence of the second bankruptcy
declaration by the District Court was that the Claimant was the only creditor to
be excluded from the list of those admitted to vecovery.236 Hence, the above
resulted in a violation of both Articles 4(1) and 4(2) of the BIT, the Slovak
Republic having failed to take the appropriate and non-discriminatory measures
in order to accord full protection to the Claimant’s investment and ensure it a

fair and equitable treatment.”

Gii)(b) Lhe measures adopted by the Slovak Republic anount to expropriation

Article 6 of the BIT (which is headed “Dispassesston, compensation’), provides in
the first paragtaph that:
“Neither of the Contracting parties shall take, either dixectly or indirectly,

measures of expropriation, nationalization ox any othes measure having
the same nature or the same effect against investments of investors of the

83 SOC, § 135.
4 SOC, § 137.

185 Article 4(1) of the BIT provides, in the first part, that: “Each Contracting Party shall protect within its
territory investments made in accordance with its lavs and regulations by investors of the other Contracting Party and
shall not impair by ble or measiires the manag Muse, enjoyment,
extension, sale and liquidation of such investments {...).

26 SOC, §§ 138-140; OHT, p. 153, where the Claimant's Counsel observes that [he diseiminatory
approach is to be seen in that the other creditors had different deadlines and their claims had vot been expired,
meaning [that they] eid not become statute barred due to the decisions of the court dated 5 September 2007”.

87 SOC, §§ 135 and 143-144.

47

138.

139.

140.

other Contracting party, unless the measures are taken in the public
incetest, on a non discriminatory basis, and under due process of law, and
provided that provisions be made for effective and adequate
compensation”.

According to the Claimant, the notion of “expropriation” set forth in the
aforementioned provision must be interpreted broadly. An expropriation thus
takes place “whenever the State takes steps that effectively neutralize the benefit of the
property, assets, for the foreign owner {...] regardless of the form that the interference takes’ 8
It also takes place as the “fndizec?” result of a measure adopted by the Strate,
which does not per se affect the investor's property but ultimately interferes with
its use or with the enjoyment of its results.3° In this case, the Slovak Republic
(through the action of the judicial bodies) unlawfully quashed the bankruptcy
declaration which, after acknowledgment by the first Trustee, formally enuded

the Claimant to exercise its recovery rights.'4°

As a result of the Claimant’s exclusion from the second stage of the banksuptcy
proceedings, the Claimant indeed “ended up in a situation where its ownership right lost
2s fundamental attributes’, and thus suffered a loss which ‘7s to be considered as an
expropriation" In fact, there is no doubt as to the causal link between the
breaches of Slovak laws by the Slovak judiciary and the damages suffered by the
Claimant (ultimately resulting in the expropsation of its investment), which the
Slovak Republic must now be held liable to compensate.

(iv) The Claimant is entitled t0.the jon of d: deriving from the
srongful decision by the Regional Court

As a consequence of the breaches by che Slovals Republic of its obligations

under the BIT, the Claimant suffered damages for which it now claims

compensation as follows:*43

138 SOC, § 128.
89 SOC, §§ 129 and 131-132
149 SOC, § 130.

41 SOC, § 116.

¥2 SOC, §§ 119 and 130

443 SOC, (§ 108 and 154; OHT, pp. 138 and ff, where the Claimant’s Counsel clarifies that the
Claimant “claims the reparation for the injtary cased by the court's wrongful decision” and the “fair market value
of the receivable”, corresponding to the receivables’ value “if the wrongful act of the Slevate conrt would mot
have been committed” given drat, a8 confirmed by the first uustee, “the [Claimant would hane collected (the)

48

o € , namely the amount that the first Trustee had acknowledged
as being due to the Claimant by the bankrupt, plus contractua) penalty
corresponding to 0,1% of the owed sums for each day of late payment and,
after calculation as at the fourteenth day, a contsactual penalty
corresponding to 0,5% for each day of late payment;

7 € , namely the amount that the first Trustee had considered as not
being due by the bankrupt to the Claimant, but that had anyway
to pay to the Claimant on the basis of issued under
the contract for works between _ «plus contractual

penalty corresponding to 0,1% of the owed sums for cach day of late
payment and, after calculation as at the fourteenth day, a contractual penalty
corresponding to 0,5% for each day of late payment;

* costs and expenses associated with the present arbitration, including the
counsel’s fees and expenses.

VILD2 Respondent

141.

142.

143.

The Respondent contends that, should the Tribunal find it has jurisdiction to
hear the case,. , fail on the merits. The Claimant indeed

misapprehends the Slovak Republic’s obligations and the standards applicable
under the BIT and in any event fails utterly to meet its burden of proof.

(@) The acts of the Tmstee may not be attributed to the Slovak

In the Respondent’s view, the main act of which the Claimant seems to
complain in the SOC, is the decision by the second Trustee of September 18,
2008, which allegedly resulted in the illegitimate exclusion of the reccivables

from the second phase of banksuptcy.!44

‘The Respondent points out that, under both Slovak and international law, the
actions of a trustee cannot be attributed to the State.445 In fact, the trustee is not

 

whole value of the receivables, not only (the) invested amount, if the bankryptey proceedings would have not been
cancelled by the decision of the Slovak court”

484 SOD, §§ 220-221 referring to SOC, §§ 117 and 115. Sec, however, OHT, p. 170 and ff, where

the Respondent’s Counsel points out that. , “aid that the acts of the trustee are not she subject
of its dain”, which is a concession very much welcomed by the Respondent, given that “i har quite
serious consequences for elaine”.

4 SOD, §§ 223-227, in particular § 223, where the Respondent refers to Act No. 8/2005 on

49

a State organ, nor can he be said to be acting under the direction or control of
the State.4° In any event, the only challenged actions which occurred after

+ party-petition to join the bankruptcy on November 6, 2007 are those
of the Trustee, which, taken alone, can certainly not form the valid basis of a

treaty-claim.347

144. Hence, there is no basis for a finding of State’s international responsibility for
the actions of the Slovak Trustee and the Respondent requests the Tribunal to

dismiss all of . .., claims solely on this grounds.'48
i). claim for breach by the Slovak Republic of the “fair_and

equitable treatment” standard ig meritless

145. Notwithstanding the above, the Respondent anyway rebuts each of the grounds
sustained by the Claimant to defend its treaty~claims.

ai

   

the. relevant

 

(@@) “Denial of justi

 

to establish che Respondent's liability

146. Preliminarily, the Respondent asserts that  _ claims ‘aise the
question of whether the system of justice provided by the Slovak Republic
complied with the standard of justice required by international law, which means
whether the Slovak Republic committed a “denial of justice” 4 It clasifies that “to

establish a denial of justice, . .-] must show a manifest injustice in the sense of a

lack of due process leading to an oxtcome which offends a sense of judicial propriety” and
which is “clearly improper and disereditable” 190

147. Given that, has prima facie failed to establish the occurrence of a

“denial of justice”, its clainy should be dismissed on this basis alone.t

 

Trustees (R-20), which, at § 12.3, “clearly states that they are directly responsible for damages caused by their
acts, and that the State is net responsible for ary such damage’. See also § 224, where the Respondent, in
order to further show that the trustee’s actions may not be attributed te the State under Slovak law,
explains that “the irustee derives its remuneration not from the State's court but at a percentage of the proceeds of
the sale of the bankrigppty estate”.

446 SOD, § 223.
47 SOD, § 228,
48 SOD, §§ 227-
49 SOD, §§ 232-233.
89 SOD, § 234

1 SOD, § 238, where the Respondent states that despite it addressed clainy for a

 

(ub) Further recourses were available te . in pnection with the

bankroptcy proceedings

148. The Respondent points out that, in international law: “[7]o demal of justice may be
established where there is a reasonably available national mechanism to correct the challenged
action” 152 In fact, in evaluating how a State performs its internattonal obligation
to provide an adequate system of justice, a tribunal must consider the system’s
ability to correct inevitable errors and the mechanisms of recourse that the
State’s system makes effectively available+53 In the circumstance, there is no
doubt that the Respondent’s judicial system unquestionably provided

with sufficiently adequate recourses to addxess, before the domestic
courts, the complaint it now raises before the Tribunal.454

149. The Claimant ts indeed incorrect when it asserts that, as a result of the remand
by the Regional Court, the statute of limitations of its purported claims had

expired.

A. The receivables’ Statute of Limitations had not expired: the Claimant wrongly
interpreted the applicable law

150. The relevant provisions of Slovak law are Sections 392 and 397 of the
Commercial Code and Section 46 of the Bankruptcy ActJ%5 Assuming that
“ "was authorized to assign the receivables and given that the last issued
invoice (No. ’) was dated June 15, 2007, the Statute of Limitations

 

denial of justice under its “merits defences”, the Tribunal should dismiss it as a jurisdictional
matter. In fact, having the Claimant failed to establish a prima facie case, “rnternational jurisdiction is
lacking because the allegations, even if accepted as true, are not capable of establishing the claim for a denial of
justice.

1s2 SOD, § 235.

183 SOD, § 239.

"4 SOD, §§ 242-263.

155 SOD, §§ 246-248. Section 392 of the Commercial Code provides that: “Concerning a right 10
paformance, the Statute of Limitations begins to run on the day the performance should have taken place or
performance should have started (due date) {...] For a right te partial performance, the Statute of Limitations runt
for each partial performance separately”. Section 397 of the same Code stipulates that: “Unless otherwise
stated by law for specific rights, the Statute of Limitation runs for each partial performance separately’. Finally,
according to Section 46 of the Bankruptcy Act “Any debts receivable and payable by the bankrupt deblor,
which are not yet due for payment, which accrued prior to the passing of the bankruptcy order, and whith are pertinent
to the property Kable to the bankruptcy, shail be regarded as due and payable after the passing of the bankrupty
order”,

$1

151.

152.

154.

would have started te nun in June 2007 and not expired before June 201 1.156

is incorrect when asserting that, upon remand by the Regional
Coutt, the effects of the Junc 7, 2007 order (and, consequently, of the i
tmely application for recovery of the claims coveted énter alia by the above
invoice) ceased to exist. Applying Section 405(2) of the Commercial Code,!s7
and considering that the date of publication of the Regional Court’s order was
September 24, 2007, the Statute of Limitations would have extended ex ge on
all timely claimed receivables until September 24, 2008. Moreever, the second
order in the i bankruptcy proceedings was published on June 3, 2008
filed its petition on June 23, 2008, thus well within the Statute

and

of Limitations.15*

In any event, given the provision of Section 402 of the Cemmercial Code
(according to which the Statute of Limitations is interrupted for the duration of
applicable court proceedings!) — and provided that the proceedings in which

. Claimed its right are the bankruptcy proceedings ~ the
Statute of Limitations appears to be stil interrupted to this day, such

proceedings having not yet terminated.16°

Hence, pursuant to Sections 402 and 405(2) of the Slovak Commercial Code,
the Statute of Limitations has not expired and | has not lost its right

over the receivables as a result of the remand by the Regional Court.161
B. The second Trustee decision to exclude. claims was not final

In the second stage of the bankruptcy proceedings, one of the two reasons why
the Trustee refused admission of claims was that the limitations’

56 SOD, § 248.
487 SOD, § 250. According to Section 405 of the Comunescial Code: “1. Ifa right ts asserted prior to the
expiration of the statute of limitations in accordance with Sections 402 through 404 above, but no ruding was ado pled
in the matter of the said right, che Statute of Liritations shall be treated as if it had never been tolled 2 If at the
conclusion of the judicial or arbitration proceedings stated in subsection 1 above the Statute of Limitations expired, or
there ts less than a year prrior to its expiry, the Statute of Linaitations shall be extended so that it shall not expire
earlier than one year from the day that the judiaal or arbitration proceedings conclude”.

458 SOD, §§ 251-252.

459 SOD, fn. 52.

460 SOD, §§ 255-256.

161 SOD, § 257

$2

period had expired on all of them: the Trustee was, however, incortect, and
could have contested such wrong decision.16?

155. Under Section 32(6) of the Bankruptcy Act, the creditor holding a contested
debt (ic. a claim contested by the Trustee) may petition a court to determine its
status within 30 days from the date on which the Trustee’s deadline to contest
claims has expired# | had thus unt] at least October 19, 2008 to

contest the Trustee’s determination before the supervising court, but failed to.

156 itself acknowledged that a determination of a trustee is not final.164
Hence, lost its tight to recovery because it failed to timely assert its
right to the claims’ admission before the supervising court.165

c Pasther recourses were avatlable to under Slovaks law

157. Under the Slovak Constitution, anyone has the right to a public hearing before
an impartial tribunal without undue delay.6 Slovak law provides means of
recourse in the event that a court fails to act or acts without any objective

reason.!67

 

162 SOD, § 253, where the Respondent highlights that the other reason for refusal of admission by
the second trustee was the invalidity of the Assignment Contract between and

but that in any event, even if the second teustee also exred with segard to that assignment’s
invalidity, such venial exror would “sof even conre close 10 establishing a treaty violation”.

"83 SOD §§ 254 and 62, where the Respondent refers to Section 32(8) of the Bankruptcy Act,
according to which the contested debts held by a creditor who fails to timely petition the court
must be disregarded for the purposes of tbe bankruptcy.

4 SOD, §§ 254 and 258, where reference to letter to the Ministry of Finance of
September 24, 2009 is made, in which stated that: “A// the ereditors whose receivables mere
rejected by the former trustee also had a right to file the so-called imidental complaint against such rejection” and
also that: “The Claimant did not file an incidental complaint because the fact that the recivable was already
statute-barred was irrefutable”.

155 SOD, §§ 248 and 257

466 SOD, § 259, where the Respondent emphasizes the contents of Atticle 46(2) of the Slovak
Constitution (vefetred to in R-6), pursuant to which: “Aryone who claims to have been deprived of bis rights
by a decision of a public administration body may turn to the court to have the laufulness ef such decision
reexamined, unless Laid down otbenvise by law. The reexamination of decisions concerning basic rights and freedoms
may not, howener, be exclided from the court's authority”. The Respondent further refers to Section 49 of
Act No. 38/1993, to Article 46(3) and to Article 9(2) of Act No. 514/2003 Coll. on liability for
damages caused by exercise of public authority (as amended), which confirm the aforementioned
provision and provide the injured party with a right to adequate compensation

167 SOD, § 260, where reference to Act No. 757/2004 Coll. on Courts is made (R-21), which
enables an aggrieved party to complain to the Chairman of the court in the event of a complaint to
court procedures, Should the aggrieved parcy not be satisfied with the action taken on his

53

158.

159.

160.

161.

Prior to the issuance of a bankruptcy order, new civil cases may be brought, zz.
to eliminate any perceived Statute of Limitations risk (as also confirmed by
indeed, only the bankruptcy order, and not the banktuptcy’s

di related to the

ement, precludes com of a pr
debtor’s property). Consequently, after quashing of the first bankruptcy order
by the Regional Court, | was able to commence ordinary civil action
against to claim the receivables and thus interrupt the receivables’

Statute of Limitations!

‘ailed to avail itself of the above available recourses, thus failing to
adequately protect its alleged investment.17”°

(i) Lhe bankmptey proceedings did not result in a denial of justice

lodged five complaints against the September 5, 2007 decision by
the Regional Coust.7! None of those, however (either independently or taken
together), amounts to a denial of justice.

A Alleged failure of the Regional Court to examine whether «was entitled to
appeal to the District Court's bankruptcy order

In order to show that the Regional Court did not fail to examine whether the
person who filed the appeal was autherized to do so, the Respondent notes that
more than a year prior to the iniwation of the bankruptcy proceedings, the
Regional Court resolved, in a final way, that the resolutions of the
general meeting held on April 20, 2005 were invalid: it therefore established that
never formally became . __ executive and consequently that
had not been recalled from his function as executive of - 4
thus continuing to be entitled to act in its name and on its behalf, including in
the context of a bankruptcy!”

 

complaint, it may eventually invoke Article 48 of the Constitution and refer che matter to the
Constitutional Court

168 SOD, § 261, where reference to SOC, § 18 is made.

¥% SOD, § 262.

170 SOD, § 263.

31 SOD, § 265, referring to SOC, §§ 56 and Ff. See also s#ypra Section VII.D.1(i)

m SOD, § 273 and R-24 namely the decision by the Regional Court of February 14, 2006 on the
20

resolutions of general meeting of April 2

 

162. Moreover, in its decision of September 5, 2007, the Regional Court indeed
examined the question of admissibility of : authorization to appeal
the bankmaptcy order, and followed the detetmination of the February 14, 2006
judgment referred to in the foregoing paragraph.1? Anyway, if
would not have been authorized to act on behalf « and thus to file
appeal to the bankruptcy order in its name, the Regional Court would have had
a further reason to quash the wrongful District Court decision and remand the

case to the first instance courts.1¥4

B. Alleged failure of the Regional Court to examine whether an appeal filed by the
debtor, while the debtor had abeady petitioned for bankruptey, ts admissible

163. is wholly incorrect when it asserts that was not
authosised to file appeal and that the Regional Court did not exanine the

appeal’s admissibility.

164. In fact, the bankruptcy petition was filed by _ as individual and not as
representative, given that he was not entitled to act in its name and

on its behalf275 . 8 debtor, was thus entitled to file an appeal against

the bankruptcy order under Section 22(3) of the Bankruptcy Act, and the

Regional Coutt resolved such issue basing itself upon this very assumption.'76

165. ‘The Claimant anyway utterly fails to show an “extreme misapplication of law”,

as required fot a finding of denial of justice.1””

Cc Alleged mistake by the Regional Court te apply the Code of Civil Procedure instead
of the Bankruptcy Act as lex specialis

166. The Respondent contends that the Regional Court did not err when applying
the Code of Civil Procedure to resolve the issue and that, as a consequence,
complaints thereon should be fully disregarded.

1) SOD, § 276
24 SOD, § 277.
1% SOD, §§ 278-280.

6 SOD, § 281. According to Section 22(3) of the Bankruptcy Act: “Jn appeal may be filed against the
bankeruptey order by the debtor, unless the petition in bankruptcy has been filed thereby”. The Resnonclent points

out that the Regienal Court remanded the question of who was entitled to act for @ the
istrict court, which is the “primary finder of fact”
"7 SOD, § 282.

55

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

According to Section 196 of the Bankruptcy Act, the provisions of the Code of
Civil Procedure shall apply »wtatts mutandis to bankruptcy procecdings, unless
the same Act expressly provides otherwise.7® The Bankruptcy Act, however,
does not contain a provision regulating the procedure of the appeals Court in
the event that the decision of the first instance Court has a specific defect.17

The Regional Court thus correctly applied Section 221 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, which permits the appeals court to cancel the decision of the court
of first instance where it suffers from one of the defects exhaustively listed

therein.180

D. Alleged incompetence of the Regional Court to decide, having failed 20 resolve the
appeal within the 30-day statutory deadline

According to the Respondent, the issuance by the Regional Coust of a decision
after the prescribed 30-day period does not result in a loss of competence to
decide.

Preliminarily, the Claimant’s assertion that resolving a dispute within 60 days
instead of 30 constitutes a treaty violation is in itself absurd, which suffices to

reject its complaint 11

In any event, the mere breach of the period within which courts of appeal
should decide does not per se amount to a violation of the sight to a fair trial;
moreover, even if the entitled party (in this case | and not

might theoretically have sought sanctions against late decisions by the court
under the applicable legislation, the Court of appeal would never bave lost its
competence to decide on the appeal against the bankruptcy order. 82

BE, — Alleged failure of she Regional Court to consider a pending lawsuit between Messrs.
wd on the position of manager

"8 SOD, § 283.
19 SOD, § 285.

#9 SOD, §§ 286-287, where the Respondent explains that the Regional Court found that the
District Court: (i) wrongly denied a party to the proceedings an opportunity to act before the court;

(ii) made an incorrect legal evaluation; and (iii) did not investigate and evaluate other proposed
evidence. Therefore, it cancelled the first instance decision pursuant to Section 221(1)(£) and (b)

81 SOD, § 290.
48 SOD, §§ 291-293

172. With the purpose of showing that the Claimant’s allegation that the Regional
Court failed to consider . pending lawsuit is false and that anyway it
does not provide a basis for a valid complaint the Respondent clarifies that:

4) under Section 197 of the Bankruptcy Act, the Regional Court could not
interrvpt the proceeding to await the result of the ongoing liugation
between and regarding the control over

~ ass

(ii) anyway, the mere fact that the Regional Court did oot elaborate on the

absence of a final result in the ongoing disputes betweer and

does not establish that the Coust did not take such ongoing

proceedings into account. On the contrary, these htigations are
acknowledged several times in the Regional Court’s decision.

173. Finally, the Respondent points out that Slovak law provides an additional
mechanism for adequately reviewing decisions and conduct of judges.'®8
_ however, again failed to invoke it.

174. To sum up, given that “denial of justice” is the relevant standard to be
considered in order to establish whether a violation of the “fair and equitable
weatment” indeed occurred, the Respondent requests the Tribuna) to dismiss
the Claimant’s claim for breach of Article 4(2) of the BIT because of its utter
failures to provide sufficient clements to satisfy the “extreme test” of an
“extreme misapplication of law’, as customarily required for a finding of a

denial of justice.18*

ii) _claim for breach by the Slovak Republic of the ob

83 SOD, § 296 and R-18. The Respondent further explains that the banlu-uptcy proceedings before

die Regional Coust were not interrupted for reasons of procedural celerity and that, under normal

circumstances, the Code of Civil Procedure allews interruption pending a connected lawsuit.

8 SOD, § 298.

988 SOD, §§ 300-301, where the Respondent, to describe such additional mechanism, illustrates that
seized the Judicial Council (established under the Constitution) to initiate disciplinary

proceedings against a judge regarding the Regional Coust decision of September 5, 2007. On

February 5-6, 2008, the Judicial Council unanimously agreed that “¢here was nething unfair” in that

decision. The Respondent thus concludes that this issue cannot be resolved differently ey the

present ‘Tribunal

16 Id

175.

176.

177

ex Article 4(1) of the BIT is meritless

 

Undes Article 4(1) of the BIT:

“Bach Contracting Party shall profect within its teriitory investments
made in accordance with its faws and regulations by investors of the other
Contracting Party and shall not impair by unreasonable or discriminatory
measures the management, maintenance, vse, enjoyment, sale and
liquidation of such investments [...)”.

The Claimant's claims that the Slowak Republic failed to afford “ful protection and
security? and that it “took unreasonable and discriminatory measures when the (Regional
Court] siopped the bankruptcy’? ate mcritless.®7 Moreover, the Respondent
contends that the Claimant “farled to establish impairment by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures”, meaning that it failed to demonstrate that the Regional
Court decision was directed specifically against it, to harm it, on the grounds of
its nationality.18 Not only the Claimant failed to present evidence to support

such a showing, but, as demonstrated by the Respondent:?®

@ the Regional Court gave the Claimant’s nawonality no significance
whatsoever (and could not actually give a significance thereto, - ,
not being a party to the proceedings pending before it);

(i) the Regional Court decision was in accord with Slovak law, and the
Claimant anyway failed to demonstrate why its “invesunent” was treated
differently from the others and thus “discriminated”;

(ii) the Regional Court decision affected all the creditors in the bankruptcy

in precisely the same manner.

Moreover, the Claimant failed to demonstrate that the Regional Court decision
impaired the “management, maintenance, use, enjoyment, extension, sale and liquidation”

of its receivables.!

87 SOD, §§ 303 and ff, where reference to SOC, §§ 138 to 154 is made.
88 SOD, § 305.
1 SOD, § 306.

190 SOD, § 307, where the Respondent clarifies that the Claimant should have further proven that
the alleged disctiminatory measure reduced the actual possibilities for the exercise of the tight in
question,

58

178. In brief, the Claimant has not met the burden to establish that the Respondent
impaired its xeceivables thcough “wxreasonable or discriminatory measures” in the
meaning of Article 4(1) of the BIT.

(C7 dain for “expropri:

 

179. The Respondent is of the view that the Claimant’s case is simply not one of
“exproptiation” 3 Article 6(1) of the BIT provides that:
“Neither of the Contracting Parties shall take, either divectly or indixectly,
measures of expropriation, nationalization ot any other measure having

the same nature or the same effect against investments of investors of the
other Conteacting Party {...)”

186. The Regicnal Court decision, which the Claimant treats as the main source of
the damages complained of, did not expropriate or nationalize
alleged receivables in the meaning of Article 6(1) of the BIT.193
still today retains hold of its receivables and the Slovak authorities do not seen
to pursue (ot to have ever pursued) any action amounting to an indirect
exproptiation of receivables under international law or to a
measure otherwise depriving it of their possession.!°4 Moreover,
conduct itself clearly shows that the Respondent could not have compulsorily
dispossessed it of its receivables.195

181. Hence, given that neither the State nor other creditors acquired control over
property or fruits, no actual or effective seizure of .
receivables could have ever taken place. Its “expropriation” claim should
therefore be dismissed.'°°

182. In any event, the Respondent further argues that even if an attempt to

191 SOD, § 308.
19 SOD, §§ 309 and ff.
83 SOD, § 310.
19 SOD, § 311.

5 SOD, §§ 312-313, where the Respondent explains that well after the alleged expropriatory
decision by the Ree*snal Court, the Claimant: (i) entered into an amendment of the Assignment

Contract with , (November 5, 2007, R-S1\: and (ii) considered itself entitled to claim for the
receivables’ recovery in the second phase of . bankruptcy proceedings Gune 23, 2008,
R-68 and R-69).

6 Jd

“expropriate” alleged investment would have actually taken place

in the Slovak tertitory, it could not have amounted to an “expropsiation” in the
meaning of Article 6(1) of the BIT, given that:

@

0)

@)

at the ame of the Regional Court decision (September 5, 2007), _ +

Jacked standing to claim the receivables’ recovety in the
bankruptcy proceedings (its petision to join the proceedings is dated June
23, 2008) and therefore could not possess 4 “vested” right capable of
being “expropriated” within such a context (which circumstance would
alone suffice to reject, claim under Article 6(1) of the

BIT);

the finding of an “expropriation” requires that the investor be in the
position to establish that it was deprived of a reasonably expected
economic benefit of its investment! | ., however, undertook
an investment which was “spec/ative or, in the best of circumstances,
imprudent’. Shen it acquired the seceivables, the Claimant was indeed
aware of the complexity and uncertainty of obtaining a full satisfaction in
the context of bankruptcy. In addition, the wording itself of
the Assignment Contract warned . _ of both 2. 2. ,
rights under the first assignment contract with and of the
pending bankruptcy proceedings. ‘Therefore, : cannot be
said to have bad reasonable investment-backed expectations, nor to

having been illegitimately deprived thereof 1%

request for compensation shall be rejected

183. The Claimant fails to idenwfy the standard according to which the Tribunal

must assess the compensation it claims and to adequately show any loss

197 SOD, §§ 314-318. where the Respondent argues that it is unconceivable that “all those persons or

entities to whom

had covtractually obligated itself are entitled t0 obtain compensation for expropriation from

the Slovak State for tle conduct ef its courts’, as the Claimant wishes it were. To legitimately collect the

receivables through the bankmotcy Proceedings, .. , should indeed have had a “vested”
night. The fact that | --- condd have registered as a party to the bankzuptcy proceedings at the
relevant time, but failed to, has no relevance whatsoever.

198 SOD, § 319.

199 SOD, §§ 320-323.

resulting {rom the measure complained of 200

()(@) The standards for compensation under the BIL

184. According to the Respondent, the only reference to amounts of compensation
under the BIT is found in Article 6(1), providing that, in case of measures of
exproptiation, nasionalization or any other measure having the same nature or
the same effect against investments of investors of the other Contxacting Party:

“provisions be made fer effective and adequate compensation”.

185. However, while the above standard may be the appropriate one in case of
compensation for claims of “expropriation” (i.e. where the commission of a
wrongful act is followed by the obligation for the party to repair the injury it
caused), it cannot be considered as being applicable to “sonexpropriation claims’,
such as those raised by _ in the present arbitration."

186. The Respondent thus emphasizes that, under international law, “only direct
damages caused by the breach can be taken into account in the calculation of compensation.
Indsrect, remote or speculative damages are not permitted’ and finally concludes that, as a
matter of fact, | “has not even attempted to establish the measure of damages
that should apply to its non-expro priation claims” 202

 

¢ that the Respondent was the cause of its loss

187. In the Respondent’s view, it is unquestionable that “compensation will only be

(yb) failed to pi

awarded if there is a sufficient causal link between the breach of the treaty and

the loss sustained” 203

188. In this case, even assuming liability for the Regional Court decision, the affected
party ~ if there has to be one - is Io fact, | has invoked a
“Yarseaching theory of causation” which is not objectively tenable and should
therefore be dismissed outright. An opposite decision would indeed result in an
indefinite number of potential claimants, and thus expose the Respondent to a

200 SOD, § 324.
20! SOD, §§ 326-327.
202 Ia

293 SOD, § 329.

189.

190.

limutless number of unbeatable aggressions.2°*

(Xe) «s.in any_event pot entided to the losses it claims

In the light of the above reasoning on the standards to be applied for
establishing the damages’ extent, the Claimant “should receive nothing, and cannot
sustain its claim Jor full satisfaction” 245 In fact, the amounts claimed by

are out of all proportions with reality, and cannot be seriously sustained before
the Tribvnal.?°6

paid approximately SKK... ,. (€ =. +) toacquire . | 3
receivables against . As of the date of the Assignment Contract,
however (which is the same day on which issued invoice No.
to... _ Claiming payment of the liquidated damages), the claims’ value
purportedly amounted to SKC . (ie. € -. . +), 87% of which
(approx. SKK wie € | 1) in liquidated damages.
presently claims € as compensation for the allegedly suffered

darnages.2” However, it fails to document the actual or expected damages
deriving from the Respondent’s alleged treaty breach and relies upon an

incorrect “satisfaction rate’ when calculating the above amount.

The Respondent thus suggests the “fair market valve” as a reliable guide to be
adopted while assessing the damages sustained by the Claimant.2 Based upon
such line of reasoning, however, the amount claimed by | results

absurd and anyway unsustainable, given that:

® the claimed amount is almost seventeen times greater than the price paid
by | to acquire the receivables, thus implying an expected
2s SOD, § 330.
205 SOD, § 331.
206 SOD, § 339.
207 See supra Section VIID.1(v).
28 SOD, § 335, referring to SOC, § 6, where asserts that the “satisfaction rate of the

Claimant” shall be established having regard to the publication of the number of votes of all
creditors in the Commercial Bulletin, where one vote equates SKK

2” SOD, § 336, where the “fair market value” is defined as “the price that a milling buyer weuld have paid
fo a willing seller for the arses on the date of the taking in circumstances in which cach had a goed information, each
desived 1 maximize bis financial gain, and neither was under duress ar threat

62

return on investment of over 1600%;21

Gi) it rests upon the assumption that | would have collected
100% of its claims at the banksuptcy’s outcome;?4

(ii) it refers to certain contractual penalties which arose from an invoice
issued on June 15, 2007, thus after the debtor’s declaration of
bankruptcy (dated June 7, 2007) and which were therefore unqualified
fora settlement in the first phase of the bankruptcy proceedings;*2

(iv) although the amount was not denied by the first Trustee
may not recover any alleged damage corresponding to the receivables covered by the
innoice as a result af the cancellation of the bankyruptey order by the

regional court?.A3

192. To conclude, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to reject the claim for

compensation, as unsupported, improper and excessive.744
VIII. THe ISSUES TO BE DECIDED: THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

VIILA Applicable law

193. The Parties have an opposite view as to the law goveming the merits: the
Claimant requests the Tribunal to apply Slovak law, whereas the Respondent
considers that the dispute should be decided under international — customary or
treaty -- law rules governing State-protection of foreign investors and foreign

investments.

194. At the Milan Meeting, Parties and Arbitrators agreed that, if the present issue

210 SOD, §§ 337 and 339, where the Respondent defines such a return rate as ever “suheard of”
2 SOD, § 338, whee the Respondent clarifies that average rates for receivables’ recovery in the
context of Slovak bankruptcy proccedings are between 5 and 10% of the claims’ value.

22 SOD, § 343, where reference to Section 100(2)(c) of the Bankruptcy Act is made, which excludes
contvactual penalties from satisfaction in the bankruptcy if the right to them was established, or the
contractual penalty was impose, after the bankruptcy declaration.

28 SOD, § 345.

26 SOD, § 347, where the Respondent points out that: “! | showld not be permitted to avoid
taxes that (it) world have been required 0 pay on any income acted as a result of the difference between the value of
the assigned slaim and incoyne fier distribution frem the banksriptey estate on the basis of the vale ef rhe
aukenowledged clain?”.

63

195.

196.

197.

was to be resolved by the Tribunal, it would do so “raking into account both the
Parties’ arguments and international case law on investment disputes’ (§ 8 of the Milan

Minutes).

The above understanding is in itself sufficient to guide the Tribunal towards the
application of internationa) sather than domestic law. The “international case-law on
investment disputes’ does indeed show that the cules of international law, be they
treaty or customary rules, cannot be disregarded in the resolution of investor-to-
State disputes that arise from an alleged breach of an investment treaty by the

host State.

Yhe main issues before this Tribunal are whether the Claimant qualifies as an
investor, whether its operations in Slovakia qualify as an investment and
whether it is plausible, at the present jurisdictional phase, that Slovalcia breached
its internationa} duties for the reasons and in the circumstances alleged by the
Claimant. No such issue might be resolved if the Tribunal would only be guided
by Slovak law provisions. The notions of investor or investment protected by a
BIT are exclusively governed by the BIT itself and by international customary
rules implicitly or explicitly referred to in the BIT2!§ In turn, whenever the
Tribunal needs to interpret the BIT, the only source of law to which it must
refer are the interpretative criteria established in Article 31 of the Vienna

Convention en the Law of Treaties.21

This does not imply that the Tribunal is allowed to disregard Slovak law or the
manner in which it has been applied by Slovak judiciary in the bankruptcy
proceedings which, according to the Claimant, were prejudicial to its business in
Slovalda. Unquestionably, the ‘Tribunal has the duty to also consider these
“domestic” aspects of the dispute. However, two caveats must be kept in mund:

@ In respect of jurisdiction, it is not Slovak law which determines the pre-
requisites that an investor and an investment should meet in order to be

28 Sec, fer instance, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16, ADC Affliate Limited and ADC @ ADMC
Management Limited v. The Republic of Hungary, Award of 27 September 2006, fff] 288 to 293, ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/1, LG¢E Energy Corp, LG¢7E Capital Corp and LG&E International Inc. v. The
Argentine Republic, Decision on Liability, ) 89.

216 See, inter alia, UNCITRAI. Arbitration, Romak SA v. The Republic of Uxbehistan, Award of 26
November 2009; UNCITRAL Arbitration, Ronald S. Lander v. the Czech Republic, Final Award, 3
September 2001; ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13, Jan De Nul NV and Dredging International NV v.
Arab Republic of Egpt, Award on Jurisdiction, 16 June 2006.

64

198.

199.

admitted to treaty protection; this determination can only be made
applying the rules of international law, the BIT being the primary source

(x) By contrast, municipal law and the way it ts enforced by State organs
may well be relevant to the merits. Even in such a contest municipal law
is not the “governing” law, but it consttutes a factual circumstance to be
considered for ascertaining whether the host State committed a breach
of its international duties in the enforcement of its own law"? This may
for instance be the case of a miscatriage or denial of justice committed in
patent disregard of the investor's procedural or substantive rights under
domestic law, or of an intolerable abuse in the administration of a public
contract between the investor and a State entity governed by municipal
law, or of any other behaviour of State oxgans amounting to an
intolerable impropriety in the way they apply internal law provisions
against a foreign investor. In all above cases, reference to internal law is
necessaty to establish whether the host State is also liable for a violation
of an international obligation under the applicable treaty or general

international law.

Hence, a possible breach by the State of its own law is not per se sufficient to
constitute a breach of its international law duties, which only occurs in the
specific cases where the former gives inevitably rise to the latter. This means
that an investment tribunal cannot avoid applying international law, either
independently or as a means to establish whether the violation of a domestic
rule of law — or any other State measure ~ engages the international

responsibility of the State.

 

This being the approach adopted, the Tribunal resolves the present issue by

deciding to give prevalence to international law.

VIILB Admissibility

200.

Pursuant to Article 9(1) and (2) of the BIT (entirely quoted at § 14 supra), in case

2 The case in which the most clear distinction has been elucidated between the role of
imernational and municipal law in matters of intemawional responsibility is ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Compara de Aguas del Aconguija SA. and Vivendi Universal 1. The Argentine Republic,
Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, {f] 94 and ff, where the Annulment Committee has imer alia
quoted and commented Aracle 3 of the International Law Comrnission Articles on State
Responsibility,

65

of dispute the parses should first try to settle 1 by consultations and the
investor may activate the arbitral proceedings if the dispute is not settled within
six months following the investot’s fist request for opening consultations. The
Tribunal is of the view that the Claimant sufficiently complied with this
requirement. It is quite possible that the Claimant did not employ the most
perfect forms when it firstly notified the State of the outbreak of the dispute
and proposed an attempt of pre-arbitral settlement. However, the Tribunal does
not see these perfectible defects as a deficiency which renders the State’s
consent to arbitral jurisdiction ineffective, as alleged by the Respondent, whose

objection is excessively severe.

201. The relevant case-law endorses a less formalistic view. For instance, the tribunal
in Ezhyl ». Canada dismissed the objection based on the six-month provision
because, in the ciscumstances of the case, any further negotiation would have
been pointless or “futdle”™8. In Sa/ini », Morocco the tribunal was satisfied that an
attempt to reach an amicable settlement had been made, which rnerely implies
“the existence of grounds for complaint and the desire to resolve these matters out-of court?™®
According to the tribunal in Lander ». The Czech Republic, the requirement of a
six-month waiting period is not a jurisdictional provision, i.e. is not a bmit set to
the authority of the tribunal to decide on the merits of the dispute, but “a
procediralruce that must be satisfied by the Claimant’. Since, on the evidence available,
it was unlikely that the sespondent would have accepted to enter into
negotations with the claimant, tbe tribunal held that “To insist that the arbitration
proceedings cannet be commenced until six months after the Notice af Arbitration would, in
the circumstances of this case, amount to an unnecessary, overly formalistic approach wlsich
would not serve to protect any legetimate interests of the Parties’. [t conchaded that it had
“jurisdiction in the present proceedings,

202. A similar approach was followed in SGS » Pukéstan, Bayindir v. Pakistan and
Occidental v, Ecuador, either because the consultation period was not found to be
mandatory and the parties’ behaviour did not show any actual willingness to

218 NAPTA Arbitration, Ethy/ Corporation v. The Government of Canada, Axvard on Jurisdiction, 24 Jone
1998, 4M] 84 to 88.

29 ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Salini Costnutori SpA and Waltrade SpA. v. Kingdom of Moree,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001, | 20

2% UNCITRAL Arbitration, Ronald S. Lauder v. the Czech Republic, Final Award, 3 September 2003,
$W 18720191.

66

203.

204.

205.

enter into negotiations”; or because some kind of pre-arbitration notice,
although not perfectly framed, had been served on Pakistan and this was
sufficient to provoke its reaction in favour of negotiation; Pakistan failed to
seply and was thus foreclosed from relying on the defectiveness in the claimant’s
notice as a jurisdictional impediment?*; or because the requirement does not

necd to be respected if attempts at a negotiated solution proven futile?%,

It seems that the only tribunal which did not share the above view is the tribunal
constituted in Enron v. Argentina under the Argentina-United States BIT, which ~
in an obiter dictum (the requirement was indeed found as having been met in the
given case) — defined the requirement of a six-month negotiation period as
jurisdictional in nature, so that “4 failure to comply with that requirement would result
in a deterennation of lack of purtsdiction”??4.

However, as observed by the most prominent commentator of the ICSID
Convention “[T]se question of whether a mandatory waiting period is jurisdictional ar
procedural is of secondary importance. What matters ts whether or nor there was a promising
opportunity for a settlement. There would be litth point in declining jurisdiction and sending
the parties back ta the negotiating table if these negotiations are obviousty futile. Negotiations
remain possible while the arbitration proceedings are pending. Even if the institution of
arbitration was premature, compelling the claimant to start the proceedings anew would be a

highly uneconomical solution,

The cases relied on by the Respondent (Exreko v. Poland and Burlington v. Ecuador)
do not contradict the above jurisprudential trend. The passage quoted from
Euxreko decision ~ according to which every treaty clause must be interpreted “as
meaningful rather than meaningless’ ~ first did not relate to the six-month provision,

221 ISCID Case No. ARB/01/13, SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S_A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003, {] 184.

22 ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29, Bayindir Insaat Turigm Ticaret Ve Sanayi AS. » Islamic Republic of
Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, if] 88 to 102.

23 ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Ouidental Exploration and
Production Company » The Republic of Ecuador, Decision on Jurisdiction, 9 September 2008, {f] 92 to
94

24 ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3, Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, LP. ». Argentine Republic,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 January 2004, 4] 88.

23 C, SCIMEVER, Interaational Investment Law, ed. by P. Muchlinski, F. Ortino ¢ C. Schrever, Chapter
21: Consent to Arbitration, Oxferd University Press, 2008, p. 846.

67

206.

207.

but to the umbrella clause of the relevant treaty??6, unquestionably more
important than a consultaton clause; second, does not contrast the approach of
the present Tribunal, which is also keen to interpret the consultation clause as
“meaningful” rather than “meaningless”. As regards Burlington, that tribunal
shared the same view of this Tribunal, namely that “The six-month woiting period
requirement (...] 2s designed precisely to prende the State with an opportunity to redress the
dispute before the investor decides to submit the dispute 10 arbitration”. The Burtington
tutibunal declined jutisdiction over the relevant claim because the claimant firstly
informed the respondent of the existence of the dispute in the request for
atbitrarion fled to ICSID and never before, thereby depriving the respondent of
the opportunity, accorded by the treaty, to redress the dispute in the pre-arbitral
phase.””? This is not what occurred in the present case.

To the knowledge of the Tribunal, at least another ICSID tribunal has recently
sided with Burkngton tribunal, declining jurisdiction on the finding that the
claimant gave notice of the dispute to the respondent only three days before
filing the request for arbitration to ICSID, thus impeding the respondent State
to be made aware of the existence of the dispute and possibly settle the matter
by negotiation during the six-month “cooling-off period’, as provided in the
relevant treaty,228 As seen before, the present case is different, since Slovakia
was given sufficient time to consider the possibility of negotiating the matter in

dispute.

Comparing the above jurisprudential trend with the facts of the present case
(see supra Section V.C), the Tribunal is of the view that the Claimant
satisfactorily complied with Acticles 9(1) and 9(2) of the BIT. They require that
“consultations will take place? and that if they “do not result in a solution within six
months” the dispute becomes arbitrable. sll what is required is that consultations
be at least attempted and that the six months lapse without any resulting
solution. This is precisely what has occurred.

26 Ad hoc arbitration under the Netherlands-Poland BIT, Exreko BW. v. Republic of Poland, Pastial
Avard, 19 August 2005, 4.248

27 ICSTD Case No. ARB/08/5, Burlington Resources Inc, u. Republic of Exmader ond PetroBeuador,
Deaision on Jurisdiction, 2 June 2010, $f] 311-312

28 ICSID Case No. ARB/08/4, Murphy Exploration and production Company International v. Republic of
Exnador, Avid on Jurisdiction, 1§ December 2010, ff] 101 and ff.

68

208.

209.

210.

211.

Between November 2007 and July 2008, the Claimant wrote five letters to the
Government of Slovakia (three to the Ministry of Justice, two to the Ministry of
Finance) in which the matter in dispute was identified and the Claimant
expressed its availability to settle it out-of-court with clarity. The Government
replied three times, in February, May and July 2008. In the last (July) letter, the
Minister of Finance accepted the idea of entering into “seaningful disewsstons on the
dispute”. While it is true that in May 2008 (more than six months after the first
letter of November 2007) the Claimant had already appointed the first
arbitrator, it made cleat that it was not abandoning the attempt of settlement.
Availability to the secdement was once again offered by the Claimant in its (last)
letter of July 2008.

The above set of correspondence abundantly fulfils the BIT requirement.
Articles 9(1) and 9(2) do not impose specified formalities for the consultations.
Nor do they requite that the Claimant should at this stage submit a formal and
detailed “notice of claim” et “notice of arbitration” to the Respondent. The
Claimant unambiguously referred to alleged breaches of the BIT and made
reference to a possible BIT arbitration. Slovakia was unquestionably given the
opportunity to redress the matter before the start of arbitration. This is precisely
the rationale of the BIT requirement, i.e. avoiding that a State be brought before
an intetnational investment tribunal all of a sudden, without being given the

oppottunity to discuss the matter with the other party.29

Slovakia could also enter into negotiations with the Claimant after appointment
of the first arbitrator ot after full constitution of the Tribunal, if it so wished. It
failed to do so, most likely because it considered that the dispute was
unmeritorious and any negotiation pointless. It is perfectly legitimate for a State
to refrain from making concessions to an investor in order to avoid arbitration
when it thinks that the investor is wrong: in such cases, there is simply nothing

to negowate from the State’s viewpoint.

Be it as it may, the Respondent cannot however treat the institution of the
arbitration as invalid. If the Claimant’s insistence in having the dispute arbitrated
after expity of the six months proves to be unmeritorious, a remedy remains
available to the Respondent, i.e. asking the Tribunal to charge the arbitration

costs on the Claimant, as Slovakia has indeed requested.

22 As occurred in the Burlingzon case refereed to by the Respendent.

212.

The Respondent's objection is therefore dismissed

VIII.C Jurisdiction

VULCT Is the Claimant an investor?

213.

214,

215.

216.

In order to qualify as an investor under Article 1(1)(b) and (c) of the BIT, a
Swiss claimant must establish that (i) it is “constituted or otherwise duly organized
under the laws of Switzerland’, (ii) that it has its “sea/” in Switzesland; and (ii) that it
performs “real economic activities’ in Switzerland. Whether satisfies
the second and third requirement has been the subject matter of a long debate
(supra Section VILC).

(@ — Constintion.or other ization under the Jaws of.

The Claimant provided an excerpt from the ~ Commercial Registry,
confirming that _ is a corporation duly constituted and organized
under Swiss law with registered office in 1, Switzerland. The Respondent

does not contest that the Claimant meets this requirement.

(i) ~~ The Swiss seat

All that the Claimant has offered to prove that it has a Swiss “seat” is the
following: (i) the fact that it has been incorporated under the laws of
Switzerland, as shown by an exceipt from the —__ Commercial Registry; (z) its
domicile in - *, where it has its “headquarters”; (##) the assertion that the
company books are kept in Switzerland, (w) a UBS price-list of the costs of
handling a bank account; (z) a tax declaration relating to the fiscal year January
to December 2007 showing the company’s turnover, profit and/or loss; (wi) the
assertion that it has a daughter company active in Slovakia; and (vid) the
definition of company “seat” pursuant to the Slovak commercial code.

The Tribunal must agree with the Respondent that the above indiaa ate
insufficient to establish the existence of a Swiss seat in the meaning of

international business law.¥° At the most, it is established that _ 1s.

280 Sce E.C. SCHLEMMER, Investonent, Investor, Nationality and Shareholders, in International Investment Jaw,
ed. by. P, Muchlinski, F. Ortino e C. Schrever, Chaprer 2, Oxford University Press, 2008, p. 49 and
(f, in particular p. 75, where the author addresses the distinction between the “brass plate company”
that is incorporated in one country but carries out its main operations elsewhere, on the one hand,

217.

218.

219.

domiciled in Switzerland, under the laws of which it is incorporated. The fact
that Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT requires a Swiss “seat” as a distinct element in
addition to “constitution and organization under Swiss law” demonstrates that
the mere incorporation in Switzerland is insufficient to consutute a “seat” in the
terms of the BIT.

Proof of a “business seat”, in the meaning of an effective center of
adminiswation of the business operations, requires additional elements, such as
the proof that: the place where the company board of directors regularly meets
ot the shareholders’ meetings are held is in Swiss terntory; there is a
management at the top of the company sitting in Switzerland; the company has
a certain number of employees working at the seat; an address with phone and
fax numbers are offered to third parties entering in contact with the company;
certain general expenses or overhead costs are incurred for the maintenance of
the physical location of the seat and related services, which would be a clear
indication that a business entity is effectively organized at a given Swiss place.

However, none of these requirements were satisfied by the Claimant. The
Respondent requested the Claimant to provide its Swiss phone number, and the
reply was that there was none. The Claimant was also requested to disclose the
office rental agreement, and the reply was that there is just an “oral” rental
agreement, the patties and terms of which remained unknown. Even the
existence of a bank account opened in the name of. , ~is doubtful: the
UBS list of prices is a standard document created for the clients, but .

has failed to prove that it is one of them.

Wii) Real economic activities

Similar conclusions must be drawn in respect of the “real economic activities”
of in Switzerland. The 2007 tax return indicates a quite modest
tumover and nothing has been exhibited for the outstanding years. The
Claimant was unable to establish number and type of its clients, type of its
operations, kind of contracts it enters into, quantity and type of personnel,
nature and composition of its managing bodies. It even admitted that it has no

employee.

The Claimant has exclusively produced, after the Vienna October Hearing and

 

and the corporation having its “efctive.ceat of management” in one given place, on the other hand

221.

222.

223.

with the Tribunal’s and Respondent’s consent, a “to whom it may concern”
statement made by its sole director i According to

, the company is “Zncorporated and existing under she laws of Switzerland”; it
“conducts a real business activity’; has “valid long-term contracts with various Swiss entities
ve: domitiliation, financial advisory, accounting and legal services, tax services and the like’;
and has “various accounts with Swiss and foreign banks”. .... -..... explains that “No
disclosure of the names and addresses of the business partners of the Company is made herein

since such disclosure is rvost unusual under nornral business practices in Switzerland”

Neither the Respondent nor the Tribunal had invited to breach
the confidentiality of its contracts with third parties. It could at least provide a
descriptive list of contracts and some samples concealing the names and
whatever datum identifying the parties, or witness statements or affidavits issued
by clients, banks or public officers testifying the existence and nature of the
activities conducted by, in Switzerland. Consequently, the letter of
the director has no evidential weight in these proceedings, where the Claimant
had the burden to substantiate its proper standing in the clear meaning of
Axticle 1(1) of the BIT, as specifically required since the Milan meeting.

In contrast with such a burden, and despite the repeated reminders by the
Respondent and the Tribunal itself, during the proceedings the Claimant was
constantly unable to produce anything but its own assertions or the assertion of
its own (sole) official. It was at a very late stage of the proceedings and upon
insistence by the Tribunal that it made a (non-spontaneous) offer to produce

affidavit. What instead needed was a documentary evidence
formed at the time when the activities were conducted, rather than an isolated
statement created for the purpose of the /itts. Even the powers of . . are
unknown and not documented, notwithstanding at the October Hearing the
Tribunal invited the Claimant to exhibit the powers of the company organ

issuing the statement.

affirmation that. , holds accounts in Swiss banks is
immaterial: to substantiate “real economic activities” he should have attached
the bank account documents relating to the time of the events giving rise to the
dispute, i.e. relating to the tme when the receivables were aceuired in Slovaldia
and the acquisition was Followed by the bankruptcy proceedings. These or other
similar documents would have established that, at that ime, was

actually conducting real economic activives in Switzerland. Even the telephone

72

224.

225.

226.

227.

 

and fax numbers presented on the letterhead of are not those of
: in its comments dated October 29, 2010, the Respondent proved
that they belong to .. a tax advisory service, a fact which was not

denied by the Claimant in fusther correspondence.

Under the foregoing circumstances, the Claimant is far from sheeting the
standard imposed under the BIT. The Tribunal sides with the Respondent in
that the BIT requires more than the mere incorporation in one of the
contracting parties, and that Article 1(1) is a special (and rather uncommon)
clause by which the two contracting States intended to exclude from treaty-

protection “mailbox” or “papes” companies.

The Tribunal is persuaded that the above interpretation coincides with the
authentic expression of the intention of the Parties to the BIT. It must therefore
give effect to such an intention. Pursuant to Arcicle 31 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, any treaty clause must be interpreted “in
good faith and in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in
their context and in the light of its objective and purpose” (Aracle 31(1)). Article 31(2)
specifies Uiat the context and purpose comprise the treaty “preamble”.

Now, the good faith ordinary meaning of the word “real” cannot but be
“actual”, or “effective”, or “genuine”, or “verifiable”, or “visible”, or “tangible”,
or “objective”. The BIT preamble underlines that the purpose pursued by the
two Contsacting States was intensifying the economic cooperation to the mutual
benefit of both States and fostering their economic prosperity. It is illogic to
assume that the above goals could be achieved by giving treaty protection or by
attracting into the host country “shell” companies which are unable to establish
the kind and level of activities that they conduct in their own State. No State is
anxious to promise special guarantees, privileges and protections to investors

which bring no benefit to its economy.

Concluding on this matter, the Tribunal is of the view that, 48 not
an “investor” in the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT. This is per se sufficient

to oblige the Tribunal to decline jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims.

However, since also the two jurisdictional requirements addressed in Section

 

21 SOD, {f 157, inter alia quoting Z. DOUGLAS, The International Law of Investment Claims, Cambridge
University Press, 2009, pp. 317 fF.

VIILC.2 have been Jengthily discussed during the proccedings, the Tribunal will
discuss them as well for sake of completeness.

VIU.C.2 Ase the Claimant's businesses in Slovakia an investment?
229. The only transaction made by in Slovakia which gave rise to the
dispute was the acquisition of receivables from \ The question of whether

230.

231.

232.

233.

it qualifies as an investmient must be examined both under the BIT and under

international law rules.

@) — Underthe BrT

‘The BIT definition of investment is given in its Article 1(2), which corresponds
to the usual model for similar treaties. In abstract terms, the only category which
could apply to the Claimant’s case is the definition included in letter (c) of the
list in Article 1(2), which refers to “every kind of assets’, iackuding in pasticular “(c)
claims and rights te any performance having an economic value”. As usval in this type of
treaties, the list is not exhaustive, but simply “includes” some of the most typical

categories of investments.

The category in question must in any case consist of an “asset” as prescribed in
the opening statement of Article 1(2). According to common practice, “asset”
means a right or claim having an economic value and deriving either from law
or from contract, towards a given debtor, for the performance of a given
obligation. This implies that, when the claina arises from a contract, the contract
itself should qualify as an investment. This in turn implies that the contract
satisfies certain minimum requirements, such as duration, contribution and risk.

However, the contract in question is the Assignment Contract, which is not a
contract with an ongoing duration. It is rather a contract which exhausts its
object and purpose by its sole stipulation by the parties and the effects of which
~ the assignment ~ take place immediately. In substance, it is a mere purchase-
sale contract, by which one party sells to the other certain receivables globally
amounting to approximately € in exchange for the much more

modest price of approximately €

Moreover, the Claimant has failed to establish with clarity by whom the
“performance” was due. No performance was per se due by | , who
exhaustively accomplished all it had to do by selling the claims it had towards
which it transferred all relevant sisks and

 

234.

235.

236.

burdens, including the burden of taking whatever measure necessaty to make
the claims good. Not even was bound to any duty of performance
towards ~, being a third party with respect to the Assignment
Contract. Finally, no “due” performance could be expected by. ,

from the Slovak authorities ~ administrative or judicial ~ who had the power to
validate or not the assigned receivables in the interest of creditors
and to supervise the correctness of the bankruptcy proceedings: these
authorities were indeed bound exclusively by the bankruptcy law and by the

duty to assure par condicio amongst all creditors.

In the practice of investment arbitrations, an investment was found to exist
under the category of “claims or rights to money or to performance” in the case
of contracts for public works or infrastructures, or concessions of public
services, or long-term loans or similar financing instcuments, made by the
investor with a State or State-entities. The object of the dispute was the alleged
non-petformance or defective performance of the contract obligations by the
host-country or its own agencies.%? In such cases, the underlying contracts were
long-term contracts having a significant importance for the economy of the

host-State.

No such pre-requisite is satisfied by the Assignment Contract. The Claimant
does not complain that it was entitled to any performance by the Republic of
Slovakia under the Assignment Contact as such and that the Republic failed to
perform it. On the contrary, the Republic was completely extraneous to the
transaction and its economy received no benefit whatsoever therefrom.

According to Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, the treaty must be
interpreted not only pursuant to its “ordinary meaning”, but also taking into
account the general context, the object and the purpose of the treaty. As seen
before, the object and purpose of the BIT, as reflected in its preamble, is to
intensify the economic cooperation to the mutual benefit of both States and
attract foreign investments with the aim to foster their economic prosperity. It is
hard to see how the Assignment Contract might have contributed to either the
mutual economic cooperation between States or to the growth of Slovak
economic prosperity. It was rather a private, neutral and speculative business,

having no impact on the State economy.

282 Several examples are given by the cases mentioned in foomote 234 hereunder.

75

237.

238.

239.

240.

The interpretative criterion set forth by Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention
must also apply to the terms of the list contained in Article 1(2) of the BIT.
Doing otherwise would be inconsistent with the B{T-context and ignore its
object and purpose. More than that, a merely literal application of category (c)
of Article 1(2) would lead, in the present case, to what Article 32(2)(b) of the
Vienna Convention defines as a “sanifestly absurd or unreasonable result’, i.e. an

outcome to be necessarily avoided.

Conclusively, even though Atticle 1(2) of the BIT provides for a very broad
definition of the term “investment”, the Assignment Contract cannot be classified
as an investment under the BIT and therefore the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction

over the case.

Gi) Under international law rules

The Tribunal is awate that the multitude of bilateral and multilateral investment
treaties — although containing different definitions (either narrow or broad) of
what constitutes an “investment” ~ explicitly or implicitly refers to an
“objective” definition given by international law, as applied by other treaty-
based tribunals. Tribunals must therefore be cautious to enforce the tme
intention of the Contracting Parties to the specific treaty forming the basis of
their jurisdiction, which cannot grossly depart from the “objective” case-law
definition. The caution is even more necessary in the present case, considering
that the BIT here in question also provides for an alternative dispute mechanism
(as soon as available) allowing the investor to also opt for submitting the dispute
to ICSID arbitration (see Article 9(3) of the BIT). This means that, although the
BIT gives a broad “investment” definition, the two Contracting States must
have inevitably intended to refer to what constitutes “investment” under the
ICSID Convention as concretely applied in the relevant case-law.

Now, when determining whether a given contractual transaction qualifies as an
investment, investment tribunals constituted under the ICSID Convention tend
to make a double check, both under the applicable bilateral treaty and under the
ICSID Convention. The present Tribunal is not an ICSID tribunal and its
conclusion under the BIT could be viewed as sufficient for denying jurisdictien.
However, as earlier observed, the BIT definition of investment is not an entirely
self-standing concept, but refers to a more general concept given by
international law mules. Moreover, the Pardes have abundantly pleaded also this

76

 

aspect of the investment notion. Because of this and of the xeasons given in the
foregoing paragraph, a response by the Tuibunal is pertinent also in this
respect.233

241. A more than abundant number of cases have contributed to elucidate the notion
of investment under the ICSID Convention and, more in general, intesnational
customaty law. It is now common ground that the necessary conditions or
characteristics to be satisfied for attributing the quality of “investment” to a
contractual relationship include: (a) a capital contribution to the host-State by
the private contracting party, (2) a significant duration over which the project is
implemented and (<) a sharing of operational risks inherent to the contribution
together with long-term commitments* This is not the case here, the
Assignment Contract being far from satisfying, even in part, the above

characteristics.

242. Trade of financial operations unquestionably more substantive than a modest
assignment of receivables were not accepted by international tribunals as
amounting to an “investment”: this was for instance the case of a temporary
teansfer of a company’s shares which failed to satisfy the pre-requisites of
duration and substantial conttibution to the State’s economy*s, of the
acquisition of certain fiscal credits by the State, which also did not meet the

233 The need for an investment (also non-ICSID) tribunal to interpret the BIT definition of
investment consistendy with the general international law criteria and thus make a “double test” is
inter alia admitted by E. CABROL, Pren Neka v. Crech Republic and The Notion of Investment Under
Bilateral Investraent Treaties — Does “Investrnent” really mean “ewery kind of asset”®, in Yearbook on International
Investment Law & Policy 2009-2010, ed. by K.P. Sauvant, Oxford University Press, 2010, pp. 217 and
ff, past. pp. 230 and f

234 JCSID Case No. ARB/97/4, CSOB ». The Slovak Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999,
48) 64 and 90; ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Saliné Costruttori Sip. and Mtalstrade SpA, v. Kingdom of
Morve, Decision on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001, 1 52 and 54; ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29, Bayindir
Insaat Twrizm Ticar! Ve Sanayi AS. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14

November 2005, ff} 105 to 138 ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13, Jan De Nul NV and Dredging
International NV v. Arab Republic of Egpt, Award on Jurisdiction, 16 June 2006, 91; ICSID Case
No, ARB/05/3, LEST S.pA. and Astaldi S.p.A. v. Peoples Demouratic Republic of Algeria, Award on
Jurisdiction, 12 July 2006, 4] 72; ICSID Case No. ARB/0S/07, Saipen S.pA. v. People's Republic of
Bangladesh, Award on Jurisdiction, 21 Maxch 2007, §] 99; ICSID Case No. ARB/03/06, MCI Poner
Group, LC and New Turbine, Inc. v. Boador, Award of 31 July 2007, 1 165; ICSID Case No

ARB/05/22, Bivaler Gaff (Tanzania( Ltd v. United Republic of Tamania, Award of 24 July 2008, {ff
312-317; ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Malaysian Historical Salvors SDN v. Tbe Government of Malaysia,
Decision of the Ad Hor Committee on the application for annulment, 16 Apsil 2009, Hl 78-795
UNCITRAL Arbitration, Romak SA v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, Axoard of 26 November 2009.

25 ICSID Case No. ARB/07/20, Mr. Saba Fakes v. The Republic of Turkey, Award of 14 July 2010.

77

abovementioned requirements”, of a services contract with the host State for
the location and salvage of an ancient vessel that sank off the Malaysian coast
two centuries ago, for lack of capital contribution, insufficient duration,
presence of exclusively ordinary commercial risks and absence of any significant

contibution to the economic development of the host State.237

243. One of the most recent cases has further contributed to clarify chat a transacton
undertaken “sth the sole purpose of taking advantage of the rights contained in such
instruments, without any significant economic activity, does not satisfy the basic pre-requisite of
any investment worth of being protected by international treater’ 8 The same decision
further clarified that an investment treaty concluded between two States “vannot
contradict’ the above principle. This ruling was given in an ICSID dispute, but
this Tribunal is of the view that the same rationale may be transposed to an
invesument dispute different from an ICSID arbitration, the feature of which is
of being based on a purely speculative transaction deprived of any significant
economic activity in the host country. This is precisely the case of the dispute at

stake. The Respondent did indeed rely also on such precedent, and tightly so.

244. Another illustrative example is given by Joy Mémng decision, in which an ICSID
tribunal declined jurisdiction holding that a contract for the supply of important
machinery and equipment, including significant related services (engineering,
erection, maintenance, inspection, testing, commissioning, training and technical
assistance) was no more than a “sale”, although a complex one, and, as such, did
not amount to an investment“! If the above complex contract did not qualify
as an investment, this is a jortori the case for an assignment of receivables such

as the one giving rise to the present dispute.

236 ICSID Case No. ARI3/06/19, Nations Energy Inc. » The Republic of Panama, Award of 24
November 2010.

27 ICSID Case No. ARB/@5/10, Malaysian Historical Salvors SDN v. The Government of Malaysia,
Awatd on Jurisdiction, 17 May 2007.

28 ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Phoenix Action Ltd v. The Czech Republic, Awatd of 9 Apsil 2009, 9
93. For an intevesting comment on this important decision, sce E. Si.VA-ROMERO, Observations sur
ta notion Pinvestissement apres la sentence “Phoenix”, in The Paris Journal ef International Arbitration (Les
Cahiers de Arbitrage), 2010, n. 4, pp. 987 and ff.

239 Ibidern, 496

240 SOD, 4] 181.

21 JCSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Joy Mming Machinery Lid. ». The trab Republic of Exgpt, Award on
Jurisdiction, 30 July 2004, 4] 54 te 63.

78

246.

247

The constant jurisprudential wend has led the most prominent doctrine to
exclude in categorical terms that a mere one-off sale transacdon might qualify as
an investment.#? The Tribunal cannot ignore the general consensus formed
around the above doctrine.

In conclusion, the Tribunal is further comforted that | did not
“invest” in the Republic of Slovakia in the propet technical meaning, which

confirms that it lacks jurisdiction over the case.

Having so determined, the Tribunal does not need to address two additional
objections raised by the Respondent, according to which the Claimant’s alleged
investment was not made in accordance with Slovak law or was not made in
bona fide. Having decided that 1t is incompetent to decide on the case, it is not
necessary to establish whether these additional objections are grounded or not.

VIIC3 Does the Claimant’s claim satisfy the prirma facie test of a treaty daim?

248.

249.

After having denied jurisdicuon on the above firm grounds, the Tribunal does
not need to expand on the merits of the Claimant’s claim for breach of treaty. It
will limit itself to the prima facie test, which is typically conducted by an
international investment tribunal at the jurisdictional phase. The prima facie
standard is meant to determine whether the claims ate sufficiently plausible
under the BIT. In other words, the Tribunal should be satisfied that, if the facts
or contentions alleged by the Claimant are ultimately proven true, they would be
capable of constituting a violation of the BIT.3 Few considerations will suffice

to dispose of this matter.

As framed by the Claimant, its allegation that the Slovak Republic has breached
the BIT in several respects is based on the assumption that the present Tribunal
would have the authority to correct or cure an error in law possibly made by a
Slovak court as an appeal court would do. In other words, the Claimant seems

282 C, SCHREUER, with L. MALINTOPPI, A. REINISCH and A. SINCLAIR, The ICSID Convention: A
commentary, TE ed., Cambridge University Press, 2009, pp. 128 ff.

2%® This approach was inter alia followed by the ICSID wibunals in: ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3,
Innpregilo SpA. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Decision ov Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005, ] 108; ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/29, Bayindir Insaat Turizan Ticaret Ve Sanayi AS. ». Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, § 195; and ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13, Jan De Nul
NV and Dredging International NV v. Arab Republic of Egpt, Award on Jurisdiction, 16 June 2006, $f]
to 71.

79

250.

252.

253.

to assume that international law prohibits “wrong” judiciary decisions as such
and that the State becomes automatically responsible in international law if one.
of its courts has made a decision which is (possibly) wrong under municipal law.

This is sufficient to conclude that the Claimant's claims are far from meering the
prima face plausibility test. What international law prohibits is not a possible
error in law, but a system of justice which falls below a minimum standard so as
to lead to an inevitable denial of justice. However, the Claimant did not dare to
assert that the Slovak judicial system belongs to such a category, which would be
obviously unsustainable. And it was also scarcely convincing when it crivicized
the judicial decisions as wrong in municipal law

It has-been clarified during the proceedings that the impugned judiciary
decisions concerned all «creditors to the same degree, and were not
exclusively pronounced towards or on request of the Claimant, nor were. they
meant to harm the Claimant alone. In addition, the Respondent has
convincingly objected that other remedies were still available to the Claisnant in
internal law in order to try to obtain revision of the judgment that it considered
prejudicial to its interest. The non-exhaustion of local remedies is per se sufficient
to exclude the States’ responsibility in international law for actions or omissions

of its judiciary.

In conclusion, the prima face test of a plausible treaty-claim is far from being
met. This inevitably implies that, even in the (remote) case that the Tribunal
would retain jurisdiction over the case, it would be highly unlikely that the
Claimant’s claims could successfully overcome the merits’ examination. In other
words, the -denial of jurisdiction leads to no substantial injustice to the
detriment of the Claimant.

Costs

Pursuant to Article 38 of the Uncitral Rules, the term “costs” includes the fees
and expenses of the Tribunal, ic. those of its members and the costs of any
service required by the Tribunal, here the transcription services. They also
include the costs for legal representation of the parties as clauned during the
proceedings “only to the extent that the arbitral iribunal determines that the amount of such
costs is reasonable” (Article 38(e)).

Article 38 of the Uncitral Rules requires the Tribunal to “fix the costs of arbitration

80

257.

IX.B

258.

in 14s award”. This is done here-below.
Fees and expenses of the Tribunal

a\t the Milan mecting, the Parties and the Arbitrators agreed that the global
amount of € would svffice to cover the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal and that the Secretary impbed no additional cost. Each Party paid half
of the sum on an ad hoc bank account opened by the Chaieman as agreed (§ 9 of
the Milan Minutes). Under the above agreement, the Tribunal had the right to
fix additional advance payinents if the duration and complexity of the case
exceeded the oxiginal expectations. However, the Tribunal considers that the

advance payments made ley the Pasties remain sufficient.

Each Arbitrator will addtess a pre-paid invoice of its own fees and costs
seimbursement to the Party responsible for payment. Pursuant to the Tribunal’s
apportionment of costs decided hexe-below, this Party iv.

‘The costs for legal representation

As indicated in § 73 here-above, the Claimant has claimed € without
detailed explanations. The Respondent has claimed € with abundant

explanatiens and evidence.

Exercising the discretion given to it by Article 38(e) of the Uncitral Rules, the
Tribunal considers that the Respondent’s claim is much more reasonable and

substantiated than the Claimant's claim.

81

IX.C

260.

261.

262.

263.

The Tribunal’s ruling on the apportionment of costs

The Tribunal’s jurisdicnon is founded on the BIT, Asticle 9(2)(d) of which
addresses the matter of costs, as follows:
Each party to the dispute shall bear the costs of its own member of the
tribunal and of the chairman and the remaining cost shall be bome in
equal parts by both parties to the dispute. The tribunal may, however, in
its award decide on a different proportion of costs to be borne by the
patties and this award shall be binding on both parties (emphasis added}

The present proceedings are governed by the Uncitral Rules, Aracles 40(1) and
(2) of which govern the matter of costs as follows:
1. Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbization shall in
principle be berne by the vnsvecessful pasty. However, the arbitral
tribunal may apportion each of such costs between dre patties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the
circumstances of the case [emphasis added].

2. With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance referred
to in article 38, paragraph (¢), the arbitral tribunal, talting into account the
circumstances of the case, shall be fee to determine which party shal) bear
such costs or _may.apportion such costs between the parties if it
determines that apportionment is reasonable [emphasis added)

Both Article 9(2)(d) of the BIT and Articles 40(1) and (2) of the Uncitral Rules
confer broad powers to the Tribunal in determining the costs issue. This is in
line with the general tendency in international arbitration law, whereby the
tribunals have an inevitable discretion in giving weight to the specific

circumstances of the case when making any such apportionment.

In the present case, there is a winner, the Respondent, and a loser, the Claimant,
who failed to meet the basic jurisdictional requirements and also failed to saxisfy
the prima facie test of a treaty-claim. Therefore, by exercising its discretion, the
Tribunal deems it justified to depast from the general rule in Article 9(2)(d) of
the BIT and to apply its second part empoweting the Tnbunal “so decide on a
different proportion’. Accordingly, the Tribunal applies the general principle
according to which “costs follow the even?”, implying that each Patty should bear a
share of costs proportional to its own loss. Since the Tribunal is here accepting
all preliminary objections raised by the Respondent, the Tribunal considers it
fair to leave dhe Respondent totally harmless and indemnified of the entirety of

the arbitration costs.

82

264.

265.

266.

267,

268.

269.

As a matter of fact, the tribunal rejected the Respondent's objection based on
non-compliance with the “waiting period” provision. However, the objection
was not prima facte frivolous: it is indeed almost constantly raised by respondent
States. Second, resolving that matter took a negligible time to the atbitrators in
the context of the full case and did not make any significant difference in the

overall arbitration costs.

In some cases, the rigour of the “loser pays” ule is mitigated to take into
account possible aggravation of the costs caused by the winning party, for
instance by unnecessarily burdening the time and costs of the proceedings. But
in the present case the Tribunal sees no such undisciplined behaviour in the
Respondent’s defences, which were efficient and professional. It is therefore
inclined not to mitigate the severity of the 0/100 apportioning.

The Claimant’s original claim was in itself seriously defective. It was reasonable
to expect. that the deficiencies would be cured during the proceedings, which
however did not occus. Starting from the Milan meeting of Novesnber 2009, the
Claimant was made aware of the doubts and queries raised by the Respondent
concerning the jurisdictional requirements set forth in Articles 1(1) and 1(2) of
the BIT. If the Claimant knew, as it should have known, that it risked to be
unable to establish compliance with those requirements, it was probably more

prudent for it to withdraw the claim at that stage.

On February 4, 2010, after analysis of the Claimant’s Statement of Claim, the
Respondent inéer aa proposed to the Claimant to reconsider its position in the
light of the chen alleged “fundamental deficiencies” in its case, declaring that if
the Claimant withdrew the claim the Respondent would renounce to claim
recovery of the arbitration costs incurred up to the time. This was a second
important reminder rat should have induced the Claimant to reconsider its
stategy. It however failed to accept this proposal, thus consciously undertaking
all sisks inherent to a highly problematic case.

In brief, che Tribunal sees no reason why the Respondent should bear any part
of the arbitration costs in a case where it was bound to withstand a claim which

has been wrongly brought before an incompetent forum

Consequently, shall keep at its own charge all costs it has incurred
in relation to the present arbitration, including the 50% share of the costs
advanced to the Tribunal and the costs of its own defence and representation

83

and — in addition — is bound to reimburse to the Republic of Slovakia both the
50% share of the costs advanced to the Tribunal and 100% of the costs for

defence and representation claimed by the Republic of Slovakia.

270. The Tribunal has attentively checked the cortectness and adequacy of the sum
claimed by the Respondent for its own legal defence. It amounts to €

thus being slightly higher than the legal costs claimed by the

Claimant, who therefore may not reject them as excessive. Moreover, the claim

was accompanied by convincing explanations given by the Ministry, satisfactory
substantiation of all relevant expenditures and clear evidence. They are therefore

fully admissible to compensation.

x. DISPOSITIVE SECTION

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal unanimously orders and awards as

follows:
(a) the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the present dispute;

(b) the Claimant shall bear the entirety of its own legal and other costs;

© the Claimant shall pay to the Respondent the amount of € as
reimbursement of half of the Tribunal’s costs advanced by the
Respondent plus € as Respondent’s legal costs;

(@) all other claims and objections are dismissed.

Done in Vienna, place of the arbitration, on March§ 2011, in five originals.

Hans Stuber Bohuslav Kein

(arbitrator)

   

Antonio Crivellaro
Olu

84

