 

AMCO v. Republic of Indonesia:
Resubmitted Case
Decision on Jurisdiction

A. BACKGROUND
1. On January 15, 1981 Amco Asia Corporation (“Amco Asia”), Pan American
Development Limited (“Pan American”) and PT Amco Indonesia (“P.T. Amco”)
filed with the Secretary General of ICSID a Request for Arbitration against the
Republic of Indonesia. The Tribunal established for purposes of this arbitration
gave an Award on Jurisdiction on September 25, 1983. On November 21, 1984 it
gave an Award on the Merits.
2. The Claimants had contended that whereas their investment in the building
and management of a hotel complex in 1968 had been authorized by the Republic
of Indonesia for a period of thirty years, in 1980 the Republic seized the investment
in an armed military action and then unjustifiably cancelled the investment licence.
Various decisions of the Jakarta courts later rescinded a Lease and Management
Agreement relating to the hotel. The Republic of Indonesia contended that any
military or police assistance was only directed to supporting the legal right of an
Indonesian national to control the hotel and was not a seizure of the hotel by the
government; that the cancellation of the investment licence was fully justified; and
that the Jakarta courts had acted in a binding and lawful manner in rescinding the
Lease and Management Agreement. In its counterclaim Indonesia asserted that, as
the cancellation of the investment licence was justified due to violations of
Indonesian and applicable international law, P-T. Amco was obliged to return tax
and other concessions granted by Indonesia.
3. A description of the claims, defences and counterclaim are to be found at
paragraphs 142-146 of the Award on the Merits. The applicable law, by virtue of
Article 42, paragraph 1 of the ICSID Convention was “Indonesian law, which is
the law of the state party to the dispute, and such rules of international law as the
Tribunal deems to be applicable, considering the matters and issues in dispute.”
(Award on the Merits, para. 148).
4. The Tribunal found in favour of the Claimants, ordering the sum of
US$3,200,000 with interest to be paid, outside of Indonesia. The Republic of
Indonesia's counterclaim was rejected. Orders were also made as to fees, expenses,
arbitrators’ fees and expenses and charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes.

CASES 67

5. These findings on the merits were naturally made in the form of findings on
specific contentions advanced by the parties

6. On March 18, 1985 the Republic of Indonesia filed with the Secretariat of
ICSID an application under Article 52 of the Convention, for the annulment of
the Award on the Merits made on November 21, 1984. An Ad Hoc Committee
was established pursuant to Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention, under the
Chairmanship of Professor Dr. Ignaz Seidl-Hohenveldern. The Ad Hoc Commit-
tee ordered, and later confirmed, a stay of enforcement upon the furnishing by
Indonesia of an irrevocable and unconditional bank guarantee.

7. Written pleadings and oral hearings ensued in 1985 and 1986. On May 16,
1986 the Ad Hoc Committee handed down its Award,

8. The Ad Hoc Committee described the Award on the Merits of the Tribunal
thus:
“The Tribunal awarded damages to Amco in the amount of US$3,200,000 plus
interest on the following grounds:

(a) Indonesia had failed to protect P:T. Amco’s right to manage the Kartika
Plaza Hotel under a contract with PT. Wisma, a private corporation organized
under Indonesian law and controlled by INKOPAD, 2 body connected with
the Indonesian Army. P-T. Wisma had resorted to illegal selt-help in ies dispute
with P'T. Amco and had taken over the management of the hotel with the help
of Army and Police personnel on March 31-April 1, 1980. Indonesia's failure
to protect P.T. Amco’s rights in this regard was violative of a host State’s duty
under international law (© protect foreign investors’ rights and interests.

(b) BKPM, Indonesia’s Capital Investment Coordination Board, had on July 9,
1980 revoked P.T. Amco's licence to do business in Indonesia, without the prior
warning required by BKPM Decree 01/1977. The failure of BKPM to give
prior warning to P-T. Amco, and the grant of no more than one hour's hearing
to P.T. Amco's representatives in the revocation proceedings, amounted in the
view of the Tribunal to a violation of the fundamental principle of due process.
(©) In its revocation order, BKPM found that

(i) PLT. Aeropacific rather than PT. Amco had carried out P:T, Amco’s
obligation to manage the hotel under the investment licence; an

i) P.T. Amco had contributed only US$1,399,000 of foreign capital of
which US$1,000,000 was in the form of loan and US$399,000 in the form of
equity capital, instead of the US$3,000,000 of foreign equity capital plus
USS1,000,000 of loan capital promised by, and required from, P.T. Ameo in
its application for the investment licence and in the Lease and Management
contract (Award, para. 129).

‘The Tribunal held that the above two grounds did not justify BKPM’s
revocation of P.T. Amco’s investment licence, considering that:

() Indonesia must have known and had tolerated management of the
Kartika Plaza Hotel by P.T. Aeropacific, which management had in any case
ceased two years before the revocation order;

(ii) PT. Amco had invested US$2,472,490 in equity capital rather than
2 total of US$1,399,000, of which US$1,000,000 was in loan funds and
1US$399,000 in equity funds, as stated by BKPM.

(iii) The shortfall of 1/6 of the required investment was not material under
the circumstances of the case.

(d) The Tribunal awarded P-T. Amco damages for the illegal deprivation of its

168 ICSID REVIEW-—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

rights co manage the Kartika Plaza Hotel from April 1, 1980 until the stipulated
date of expiry of the contract in 1999. The decisions reached by the Indonesian
courts before whom P.T. Wisma had on April 24, 1980 commenced proceedings
against P.T. Amco for rescission of the management contract on grounds of
breach thereof by P.T. Amco, which decisions granted P.T. Wisma’s demand
for rescission, were based on the fact chat the management contract had become
inoperative by reason of BKPM having revoked PT. Amco’s license to do
business in Indonesia. The Tribunal did not feel bound by the decision of the
Indonesian courts and so awarded damages to P-T. Amco. The Tribunal,
referring to the right to repatriate capital imported into Indonesia under
Indonesia's Foreign Investment Law, held Amco entitled to receive the damages
awarded to it in United Seates dollars and outside Indonesia.”

Decision, para. 3
9. The Ad Hoc Committee described the grounds on which Indonesia sought
annulment of the Tribunal’s Award on the Merits thus:

“indonesia seeks the annulment of the Award for the following reasons:

(2) That the Arbieral Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, seriously depart

ed from a fundamental rule of procedure, and failed to state the reasons upon

which it based the Award in deciding that claimant's investment shortfall was

not material and did not justify the revocation of PT. Amco's license, and that

the amount of foreign equity capital invested by claimants was approximately

US$2,5 million;

(b) That the Arbitral ‘Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of

procedure in deciding not to consider the merits of all the grounds justifying

the revocation of P.T. Amco'’s licen:

(©) That the Arbitral Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, seriously depart

cd from a fundamental rule of procedure, and failed to state the reasons upon

which it based the Award in deciding that Indonesia violated due process in

revoking the investment license and therefore must compensate claimants;

(@) That the Arbitral Tribunal failed to state the reasons upon which it based

the Award in deciding that Indonesia incurred State responsibility for failure to

afford adequate protection to a foreign investor;

(©) That the Arbitral Tribunal failed-to state the reasons upon which it based

the Award in deciding that Indonesia shall compensate claimants in US dollars

outside Indonesia, converted from rupiahs at the exchange rate prevailing as of

April 1, 1980.”

Decision, para. 4.
10. The Decision of the Ad Hoc Tribunal of May 16, 1986 was to annul the
Award, with certain qualifications. The final paragraph of the Decision states (p.
47):

“the ad hoc Committee by unanimous decision annuls the Award as a whole

for the reasons and with the qualifications set out above. The annulment docs

not extend to the Tribunal’s findings that the action of the Army and Policy

personnel on March 31~April 1, 1980 was illegal. The annulment extends,

however, to the findings on the duration of such illegality and on the amount

of the indemnity due on this account... .
11. As can be seen, the dispositif refers both to annulment “as a whole” and
“with ... qualifications.” To understand the scope of the annulment it is therefore
necessary to refer to the “qualifications set out above” in the Decision. The

CASES 169

substance of the annulment claims are dealt with at pp. 21~46 of the Decision. The
following pertinent findings may be noted:
The Ad Hoc Committee rejected Indonesia's contention that the Tribunal
failed to evaluate the acts of the Army and Police personnel concerned
under Indonesian law (para. 59).
The absence of reasons for not requiring Amco to exhaust local remedies
was not a ground for annulment (para. 63).
The finding of the illegality of the acts of Army and Police personnel and
persistence of that illegality even after the issuance of an interlocutory
decree by the District Court was not to be annulled for manifest excess
of power or for failure to state reasons (para. 66 and dispositif).
The Tribunal bad not manifestly exceeded its powers by assuming
jurisdiction over the matter of the legality of the acts of the Army and
Police personnel (para. 68).
The portion of the Award by which the Tribunal had refused to regard
the letters by the Bank of Indonesia as comparable to a required warning
under BKPM Decree 01/1977 was not to be annulled for failure to apply
the applicable law (para. 71).
The taking into consideration by the Tribunal of an administrative
regulation issued by BKPM was not a failure to apply the applicable law
(para. 72).
The holding of the Tribunal that P-T. Amco was denied a fair and
adequate hearing during the revocation procedures was not annulled by
any failure to apply the applicable law amounting to a manifest excess of
power or to state reasons (para. 79).
‘The affirmation of the Tribunal of the “illegality of the revocation
procedure while, at the same time, conditioning the award of damages
upon the existence of substantive reasons” for the revocation, was not an
excess of powers by the Tribunal in applying and interpreting Indonesian
Law (para. 83).
The Tribunal’s rulings on the assignment of management functions to
Aeropacific was not to be annulled for excess of powers or failure to state
reasons (para. 86).
Indonesia's claim for nullity based on unequal treatment of the parties in
certain respects was rejected (paras. 88 and 123).
Indonesia’s claim for nullity based on unequal treatment of the parties in
the allocation of burden of proof in the calculation of shortfall was
rejected (para. 90).
The holding of the Tribunal concerning modalities of payment were not
to be annulled for failure to interpret and apply Indonesian law (paras.
119 and 120).
12. All of these findings are, in the view of the present Tribunal, pertinent to an
understanding of the “qualifications set out above” referred to in the dispositif of the
Decision of the Ad Hoc Tribunal—qualifications to the “annulment as a whole.”

170 ICSID REVIEW ~FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

13, The meaning of “annulment as a whole” subject to such qualifications is
better understood by reference to the specific annulment findings of the Ad Hoc
Tribunal, which are as follows:
‘The finding of the Tribunal that Amco had reached the investment sum
of US$2.471,490 was a failure to apply the relevant provisions of
Indonesian law and to state reasons and was annulled (paras. 95 and 98).
The Tribunal’s ruling on the non-materiality of the shortfall of P-T.
Amco’s investment is annulled as a consequence of the annulment of the
conclusions of the Tribunal on the calculation and the amount of P’T.
‘Amco's investment (para. 103).
‘The Tribunal’s finding that BKPM was not justified in revoking Amco's
licence on account of the shortfall in investment, is annulled as a
consequence of the annulments in paras. 95 and 98 (para. 105).
The granting of compensation by the Tribunal for procedural defects in
the revocation order was annulled (para. 106).
The Ad Hoc Committee annulled the grant of damages to P.T. Amco in
paras. 280-281 of the Award for the period beyond July 9, 1980 (para.
109).
The Tribunal’s findings on the amount of damages as a whole were
annulled (para. 110).
The Tribunal’s rejection of Indonesia’s counterclaim for recovery of tax
and import facilities granted to P.T. Amco was annulled (para. 116).
The Tribunal’s finding that all other submissions of the parties were
rejected, is annulled (para, 117).
14, In the light of the above determinations of annulment, and the rejection of
annulment in the other claims listed above, the present Tribunal issued on 21
December 1987 a Provisional Indication as to what had been annulled and what
remained as res judicata. It provisionally indicated that the Award on the Merits of
21 November 1984 was annulled in respect of the following matters:
1. the amount actually invested by P:T. Amco
. the calculation of any shortfall in respect of the required equity investment
3. the materiality of any such shortfall to the revocation by BKPM of PT
‘Amco’s licence
‘The finding that the withdrawal of the licence by BKPM was unlawful
for substantive reasons; and legal consequences thereof
the award of damages generally, i.e. in respect of acts of the army and
police as well as claimed illegalities in respect of the licence revocation.
15. In its Provisional Indication of 21 December 1987 the present Tribunal stated
that the following findings of the Tribunal in its Award on the Merits of 21
November 1984 remained res judicata for purposes of the present proceedings:
the illegality of acts of the army and police
exhaustion of municipal remedies in respect thereof
whether such acts of the army and police constitute a tort
unlawfulness of the revocation of the licence in respect of the procedures
followed

x

>

 

y

eeNe

CASES m

5. the inadequacy of the hearing given to P.T. Amco
6. the inability of the ICSID Tribunal to set aside the revocation orders.

THE JURISDICTION OF THE PRESENT TRIBUNAL: THE
IDENTIFICATION OF RES JUDICATA

16. Both parties agreed with the Provisional Indication of what had been
annulled. However, there was not total agreement on the question of res judicata
On January 13, 1988 Amco submitted written observations and exhibits on the res
judicata effect of the Award on the Merits of 21 November 1984 in view of the
Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee on 16 May 1986, On January 14, 1988
Indonesia submitted its written observations and exhibits on these matters.
Indonesia’s submissions included 2 legal Opinion rendered by Professor W.M.
Reisman.
17. On January 30 and February 1 1988 there were held hearings in London on
jurisdiction, including on questions of res judicata.
18. The written observations of the parties and their oral argument address what
we may term the principle and theory of res judicata, and the application of such
principle and theory to specific questions arising out of the Award on Merits and
the Decision on Annulment.
19. The present Tribunal also believes it helpful to deal with the general approach
to res judicata before its application to specific issues arising in this case.

B. THE GENERAL APPROACH TO RES JUDICATA
20. Amco has generally taken the view that only those portions of the Award
that were specifically annulled by the Tribunal are annulled; all other findings
remain res judicata for purposes of the proceedings before the present Tribunal.
Occasionally, as we shall indicate below, Amco have appeared to advance specific
arguments of application that are not always fully consistent with this general
position taken.
21. There is no quarrel between the parties with Professor Reisman’s view that
when an Ad Hoc Committee issues a qualified nullification of an award rendered
by an ICSID Tribunal, a subsequent Tribunal, initiated by the claim of one or
both of the original parties, must treat the unannulled parts of the award as binding
on the parties and res judicata and hear relitigation of and decide only those parts
which were nullified by the Ad Hoc Committee. (Reisman opinion, p. 5.)
22. However, that apparently elementary proposition is at once rendered prob-
Iematic, not because of any difficulty in identifying what parts of the Award remain
unannulled, but because it is contended by Indonesia that parts of the annulment
Decision, beyond the dispositif as to what is annulled, are binding upon the
subsequent Tribunal and constitute res judicata along with the unannulled portions
of the Award. The principle said to lead to this outcome is what we may term the
principle of integrality of the annulment Decision—that is to say, that certain
findings of fact and law are necessarily essential to, or necessarily flow from, the
annulment Decision; and that as the annulment Decision must be binding on the

m ICSID REVIEW--FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

subsequent Tribunal, so also must be the reasons that led to it and the consequences
that follow upon it.

23. Indonesia, drawing on Professor Reisman’s Opinion, contends that a failure
to treat such integral findings as res judicata would be a failure to give effect to the
Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee and an effective nullification of parts of its
findings (Reisman Opinion, pp. 5-6).

24. OF course, this begs certain questions, notably, does giving effect to the
Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee require endorsing all of the Ad Hoc
Commitree’s findings? And to what exactly is the subsequent Tribunal bound to
give effect? In the view of Indonesia, “‘in interpreting the ad hoc Decision, the
second Tribunal must accept the interpretations of the ICSID Convention and the
findings and forms of expression of the Ad Hoc Committee and interpret them
in good faith.” (Ibid., p. 6.)

25. The present Tribunal believes that there is here a certain circularity, in that
if “the Decision” properly understood, are the decisions to annul certain points
and not others, little interpretation is called for. If, however, “the Decision” means
decisions to annul (and not annul) and the reasoning therefore, then rather more
questions of interpretation will arise. And that depends upon whether it is indeed
correct that “the second Tribunal must accept...the findings and forms of
expression of the Ad Hoc Committee.” (lbid., p. 6)

26. The principle of res judicata is a general principle of law: see David, L’ Arbitrage
dans le commerce international (1982) para. 339; Cheng, General Principles of Interna-
tional Law (1953) at 336. It is a principle known both to international law and to
Indonesian law. It is also generally acknowledged that (unless an instrument shall
provide otherwise), nullification may be total or partial (except in the case of
corruption of the arbitrator, such corruption tainting the entire award).

27. So far as the text of Article 52 of the ICSID Convention is concemed, it is
stipulated that, provided the possible grounds are met “The Committee shall have
the authority to annul the award or any part thereof...” The present Tribunal
does not find the slight difference of structure of the provision in the Spanish
language as compared with the French and English language versions of any
significance for present purposes, as there is common cause that unannulled parts
of the Award are in principle res judicata. The problem rather is whether reasons
of the Ad Hoc Committee are to be treated as res judicata, even if that has the effect
of rendering annulled parts of the Award as effectively closed off from redetermi-
nation, notwithstanding that the normal effect of partial annulment is to place the
“parties in the legal position in which they stood before the commencement of
the proceedings which gave rise to the award which has been impeached...”
Common Article 4 of the 1930 Committee of Jurists, reporting to the League
Council on the proposed nullification competence of the Permanent Court, Annuaire de
Institut de Droit International, New York sess., Vol. II, p. 304, Annex 1228, as cited
by Professor Reisman,

28. After a fall fifty five pages of carefull analysis and scholarly study Professor
Reisman reaches the following conclusion:

CASES

“Under the ICSID Convention, an ad hoc Commuttee may annul all or part of

an award, If it decides to annul only part of the award, those parts of the award

which have not been annulled are res judicata as between the parties. In my

‘opinion, these conclusions are mandated by the ordinary meaning, objects, and

purposes of the text and the context of ICSID Article 52. They are consistent

with the historical development, of which the ICSID experiment is a part, and

also compelled by international policy considerations. They are consistent with

more general practice. The alternative interpretation would lead to an absurd

ity. An interpretation which refused to give effect to the particular nullification

competence of an ad hoc Committee would render those words in the Con-

vention meaningless by making decisions of partial nullification, which the ad

hoc Committee has been mandated to undertake, of no legal effect.” (p. 56).
29. The present Tribunal agrees.
30. The problem is still to determine whether the reasons of the nullifying body are
also res judicata for a subsequent Tribunal. The Orinoco Steamship Company Case,
Hague Court Reports (1916) 226; 5 AJIL (1911) 20 does not address that particular
question. The passage quoted by Professor Reisman at p. 60 of his Opinion (“The
general principle, announced in numerous cases is that a right, question, or fact
distinctly put in issue and distinctly determined by a court of competent jurisdiction as
a ground of recovery, cannot be disputed”) does not dispose of this question. It
tells us what matters in the original Award on the merits are res judicata as between
the parties.
31. In so far as the principle is sought to be applied to the effect of the Decision
of the Ad Hoc Committee upon the position of the parties before the present
Tribunal, the question remains as to exactly what it is that has been “distinctly put
in issue and distinctly determined.” The answer to that is clearly not the same, for
the Ad Hoc Committce was not an appeal court, rehearing the case on its merits.
Rather, what was put in issue, and determined, was whether, in reference to
specified matters, the first Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers, failed co
state the reasons on which the Award was based,! or seriously departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure. The Ad Hoc Committee's determination on each
of these matters that was put in issue is binding.
32. It is by no means clear that the basic trend in international law is to accept
reasoning, preliminary or incidental determinations as part of what constitutes res
judicata, The finding of the Pious Fund Case Hague Court Reports (1916) 1, cannot
be read in that way, for the Tribunal said only chat “all the parts of the judgment
enlighten and mutually supplement each other and. .. all serve to render precise
the meaning and the bearing of the dispositif (decisory part of the judgment) and
to determine the points upon which there is res judicata. ..” Had the Decision of
the Ad Hoc Committee as to what was and was not annulled (and as to what thus
was and was not judicata in the Award) been unclear, all the points in the Decision
would undoubtedly have to be relied on to interpret and clarify the dispositif. But
the Decision is clear.
33. It isin the same sense that Judge Anzilotti’s celebrated dictum in the Chorzow

 

4 Article $2(1)(b), 52(1)(d) and 52(1)(e). Ie has not been suggested that ocher grounds in Article §2—that
the Tribunal was not properly constituted oF that there was corruption—fll for consideration,

4 ICSD REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Factory Case PCI], Series A, No. 13, p. 27 is to be understood, when he says “it is
certain that it is almost always necessary to refer to the statement of reasons to
understand clearly the operative part and above all to understand the causa petendi.”
But he affirms at both the beginning and end of the dictum that it is the operative
part of a judgment which contains the Court's binding decisions.

34. We note too the view of de Visscher, Aspects récents de droit procedural, 1966
at p. 179 that “L'autorité de Ja chose jugée ne s'attache qu’au dispositif de la
sentence 4 l'exclusion des motifs.” Professor de Visscher, while acknowledging the
difficulty sometimes in distinguishing reasoning from dispositif, finds the Chorzow
Factory Case to be authority for his opinion. See also Abi-Saab, Les exceptions
préliminaires dans la procédure de la Cour internationale, 1967, p. 247, who believes
the distinction between reasons and dispositif to be well founded in both French
law and the practice of the International Court, res judicata applying to the latter.
35. This approach is shared by Spencer, Bowes and Turner, Res Judicata, 2nd ed.,
at para. 63, who say that when 2 matter is set aside by an appeal tribunal for want
of jurisdiction (rather than because of a reversal on the merits), there is a decision
of nullity, but not a decision “in the sense of deciding the question of right, title,
or liability in the dispute. . . which question is henceforth in the same position as
if it had never been heard or determined at all.”

36. Interestingly, Millar, “The Premises of the Judgment as Res Judicata in
Continental and Anglo-American Law,” 39 Michigan Law Review (1940) p. 1 at
pp. 8-9 says that:

. it is true everywhere that the rule of res judicata applies to the conclusion,

but as regards the effect upon the premises wide differences exist between the
Anglo-American law and the continental.”

 

 

37. His survey of practice suggests that res judicata docs not extend in the
continental systems to any part of the premises. Sce farther, Lauterpacht, Private
Law Sources, 1927, pp. 245-247, Cheng, General Principles of International Law,
1953, Chapter 17, “Res Judicata,” pp. 350-356.

38. So far as international law practice is concemed, authors have not been able
to show a clear trend towards the acceptance of reasons as res judicata. Thus
Simpson and Fox, International Arbitration (1959) 259 say:

“Occasionally states have agreed to submit the question whether an arbitral
award was void to a second ad hoc tribunal. In such a case, the second tribunal

sits as a court of cassation rather than of appeal. It may only uphold or quash the
award, in whole or in part; it cannot substitute findings of its own.” (Italics added)

This appears from the Orinoco Case itself, Arbitrator Scott there states clearly

 

 

[whereas] the appreciation of the facts of the case and the interpretation of the
documents were within the competence of the Umpire and as his decisions,
when based on such interpretation, are not subject to revision by this Tribunal,
whose duty it is not to say if the case had been well or ill judged, but whether
the award must be annulled.”

5 AJIL (1911) at 231.
(In fact, the Tribunal in the Orinoco Case had been given express powers by
the parties to substitute its own findings, and went on to do so).

CASES 175

40. The mater is perhaps not finally determined as 2 general principle of law
In any event, this Tribunal believes that at the end of the day its view on this
difficult question must rest on an appreciation of its special position within the
framework of ICSID.

41. Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention envisages the possibility of annul-
ment, as does Article 52(6) (Professor Reisman usefully addresses in his Opinion
the likely reasons and Jack of significance of the absence of any reference to partial
annulment in these clauses, in contrast to Article 53(3)). The Convention history
clearly shows that it was decided not to allow an appeals procedure, but rather to
introduce the possibility of total or partial nullity.

42. Commenting on a preliminary draft of what is now Article 52(1) (see ICSID,
History of the Convention Vol. I Analysis of Documents, p. 230), the representative of
Honduras urged inclusion of “violation or unwarranted interpretation of princi-
ples of substantive law” as an additional ground for annulment. The Chairman
responded that if the draft were to “expand to cover serious errors in the
application of substantive law, it would be tantamount to providing for an appeal,
a step which thus far had not been contemplated.” (ICSID, History of the
Convention Vol. II Pt. I Documents Concerning the Origin and the Formulation, p. 340)

No addition was made.

43. The authority given to the Ad Hoc Committee is clearly that of nullity and
not of substantive revision.

44. If the present Tribunal were bound by “‘integral reasoning” of the Ad Hoc
Committee, then the present Tribunal would have bestowed upon the Ad Hoc
Committee the role of an appeal court. The underlying reasoning of an Ad Hoc
Committee could be so extensive that the tasks of'a subsequent Tribunal could be
rendered mechanical, and not consistent with its authority—as indicated in Article
52(6), which speaks of “the dispute” being submitted to a new Tribunal.

45. This will be the approach of the present Tribunal in deciding particular claims
concerning res judicata, It is emphasised that, far from reviewing or failing to apply
the Decision of the Ad Hoc Tribunal, it is an approach that is fully consonant with
the formulation that the Ad Hoc Tribunal has itself chosen in indicating what is
and is not nullified, and thus what is and is not res judicata.

46. This Tribunal fully accepts each and every determination by the Ad Hoc
Committee that a finding of the first Tribunal is or is not nullified. All of these
matters are res judicata, and this Tribunal thereby gives full effect to the Decision
of the Ad Hoc Committee.

C. RES JUDICATA: APPLICATION TO SPECIFIC CLAIMS OF THE
PARTIES

47. In application of their respective approaches to res judicata the parties have
made various specific claims as to what may and may not be relitigated before the
present Tribunal.

I. Matters Sought by a Party to be Annulled by the Ad Hoc Committee, but Expressly
not Annulled, or Expressly Confirmed, are Res Judicata

48. This principle is agreed by the parties and by the present Tribunal. The

176 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

examples offered by Indonesia (Observations on the Jurisdiction of the New Tribunal,
p. 33, para. 2) are also the subject of agreement: (j) the responsibility of Indonesia
to compensate P.T. Amco for damages for the events of March 31-April 1, 1980;
(i) the first Tribunal’s finding that the procedure of the licence revocation was
unlawful; and (iii) three of the modalities of payment (currency, date of con-
version, place of payment).

49. These examples should therefore be added to the list provisionally indicated
by the present Tribunal on 21 December 1987 (see above, para. 14),

50. Within this category Amco has listed certain findings additional to those
provisionally indicated by the Tribunal on December 1987. The first of these was
“The finding that the Indonesian court decisions neither interrupted nor cut off
claimants’ right to damages arising out of either the wrongful actions of the Army
and Police or the revocation of claimants’ investment license.” (Observations on Res
Judicata, January 13, 1988, p. 2(1)).

1. Before the Ad Hoc Committee Indonesia had contended that the Tribunal
did not apply Indonesian law and gave no reasons for its finding that there existed
an uninterrupted causal link between the illegality of the acts of Atmy and Police
personnel and the revocation of the licence by BKPM. The Award on the Merits
(para. 258) had found that “such causal link continued, in any event, up until July
9, 1980, the day on which the Chairman of BKPM issued the Decision of
Revocation of the license, and possibly for the supplementary period of time
which the effective implementation of the same would have lasted, had not the
previous dispossession already produced the effects which would have been those
of the revocation.”

52. The Ad Hoc Committce found that the above conclusion of the Tribunal
could not be annulled for manifest excess of power or for failure to state reasons.
(Decision, para. 66).

53. The present Tribunal cannot accept Indonesia's view (Observations on
Jurisdiction of the New Tribunal, p. 35, para. 5(ii)) that the issue of the intervening
‘effect of the Indonesian court judgments can be relitigated, Lack of intervening
effect of the interlocutory decree as upheld by the Supreme Court judgment of
August 4, 1980 cannot be relitigated and is res judicata.

54. However, the present Tribunal believes that it may be helpful to indicate to
the parties at this juncture that it finds it has jurisdiction to deal with any
intervening effect of the Supreme Court decision rendered on April 30, 1985, such
matter being admissible as a new fact available only after the Award was rendered.
55. Also res judicata is the finding of the first Tribunal that the illegality (and any
attendant right to claim in respect thereof) continued uninterrupted at least until
July 9th. As to any continued illegality beyond July 9th, the first Tribunal alluded
to this possibility, but avoided pronouncing on it. This remains open for
consideration by the present Tribunal.

56. Amco has advanced a second contention that the finding that the Aeropacific
sublease was riot a valid substantive reason for revocation of the investment licence
is res judicata (Observations on Res Judicata, January 13, 1988, p. 2).

CASES 7

57. The present Tribunal finds this to be correct. The first Tribunal found, for
reasons advanced at paras. 206-219 of its Award, that the assigning of the sublease
was not a sufficient ground for revocation. The Ad Hoc Committee held in clear
terms that in making the above ruling the Tribunal had not failed to apply the
applicable law or to state sufficiently pertinent reasons (Decision, para. 86).

58. Amco has further contended, thirdly (Ibid., p. 2) that “the finding that both
sides share equally the burden of proof on how much claimants invested” is res
judicata, this finding having been raised before the Ad Hoc Committee, which
refused to treat it as a ground of annulment. Paragraphs 90-91 of the Decision are
cited by Amco in support of this contention.

59. The present Tribunal is unable to accept this view. In fact, when carefully
examined, neither the first Tribunal nor the Ad Hoc Committee made the
determination that “both sides share equally the burden of proof” on how much
the claimants invested. The finding of the first Tribunal was a rejection of a strict
allocation of burden of proof. (See Award, page 108). For its part, the Ad Hoc
‘Tribunal rejected the Indonesian claim for nullity on grounds of unequal treatment
in the question of burden of proof (Decision, paras. 90-91). The present Tribunal
finds for these reasons that there is no res judicata as to an equal sharing of burden
of proof, and does not find it necessary to determine whether, if such a prior
finding had existed, it would constitute res judicata, given its procedural character.

60. Amco's fourth claim (Observations, p. 2) is that the finding that the principle
of materiality exists in Indonesian law is res judicata. The present Tribunal finds
that the Ad Hoc Committee accurately recites the arguments as they arose before
the first Tribunal on the existence and relevance of materiality. The Ad Hoc
Committee concluded that Indonesia had acknowledged the existence of materi-
ality in Indonesian civil or contract law and “may thus be regarded as conceding
the relevance of materiality understood as proportionality in its administrative
law" (Decision, para. 102). In the view of the present Tribunal no issue of res judicata
here arises, there being no determination of the legal position by the first Tribunal,

and no legal finding challenged before the Ad Hoc Committee and confirmed

by it.

61. Amco’s fifth claim of res judicata (Observations on Res Judicata, p. 2) is the
finding that “grounds not mentioned in BKPM's revocation decree cannot be used
after the fact to justify the revocation.” Indonesia, by contrast, contends that three
of the substantive grounds for licence revocation, including the claim of tax fraud,

have never been decided upon by the Tribunal and can therefore be relitigated

(Observations on the Jurisdiction of the New Tribunal, p. 35).

62. The present Tribunal makes the following preliminary point: On Indonesia's very

broad approach as to what constitutes res judicata, it would seem that the res judicata

effect of the Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee is not only the annulment of the

finding of the Tribunal that the revocation order was invalid; but also opinion

offered by the Ad Hoc Committee that the revocation order was valid. If indeed

the validity of the revocation Order is res judicata, it is hard to see how substantive

grounds for the licence revocation fall to be relitigated.

8 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

63. However, from the different starting point of the present Tribunal on res
judicata, explained above, paras. 20-42, the issue is a real one that requires further

examination

64. This first Tribunal found it unnecessary to consider certain grounds suggested

by Indonesia for revocation of the licence, riot being grounds relied on in the legal
act which pronounced the revocation: “It is not for the Tribunal co build
hypotheses, nor to try to guess thoughts which the authority of the revocation did
not express.” (Award, para. 205). The pronouncements of the Ad Hoc Tribunal

clearly showed that it thought no case for annulment was made. In para. 124 of
the Decision (incorrectly numbered para. 122) the Ad Hoc Committee says that
the Tribunal “gave sufficient reasons for holding these grounds irrelevant” and
gocs on to say that “the Tribunal did not find it necessary to rule on the possible
additional grounds.”

65. A finding by a Tribunal that, in the circumstances before it and in the context
of its own reasoning, it is unnecessary to rule on certain matters, is not res judicata
for another Tribunal whose circumstances or reasoning may or may not be similar.

Farther, a decision that it is unnecessary to rule on a matter is not a finding chat
certain matters “cannot be used after the fact to justify the revocation" —it is a

discretion as to its preferred methods of reasoning exercised by the initial Tribunal.

The present Tribunal finds that no res judicata exists in respect of this matter for
present purposes. The absence of res judicata extends to all the grounds mentioned
in para. 121 of the Ad Hoc Committee's Decision. Tax matters may therefore fall
for consideration in the context of grounds for licence revocation—a matter quite
distinct from the separate issue (on which see below, paras. 115-27) of whether a

new claim for tax fraud can be brought in the present proceedings.

. Amco’s sixth and seventh contentions are (Observations on Res Judicata p. 2)
that “the finding that damages are to be paid in U.S. dollars outside Indonesia is
res judicata”; and that “the finding that the applicable date for converting to U.S.
dollars any damage expressed in rupians is the date that the damage occurred.”
67. Both of these findings were challenged by Indonesia as providing grounds
for annulment, These challenges were considered and rejected by the Ad Hoc
Committee (Decision, paras. 118-120). These findings clearly have the character
of res judicata for purposes of these proceedings. (And see further paras. 83-84
below.)

68. These sixth and seventh contentions should therefore be added to the list
provisionally indicated by the present Tribunal on 21 December 1987.

IL, Matters Adverse to Either Party on the Merits, whick have not been put before the
Ad Hoc Committee for Annulment

69. Amco, in its Observations on Res Judicata, 13 January 1988, at p. 5, Fifth
Category of Findings, includes in this category the following:? (i) the finding that
the treatment accorded Claimants by the Indonesian Courts did not constitute
denial of justice; (i) the finding that BKPM, not just Parliament, had authority to
revoke investment licences; (iii) the finding that Claimants were obligated to invest

2 Numbering added by the Tribunal for convenience of reference.

CASES 9

$3 million of foreign capital; (iv) the finding that loans should be excluded when
calculating the amount of investment; (v) the finding that the foreign capital which
claimants caused KLM and Mr. Pulitzer to invest in the hotel was not to be
included in the investment calculation; (vi) the finding chat P.T. Wisma was not
acting as the alter ego of the Indonesian military in connection with the takeover
of the hotel.

70. Amco’s contention is that none of these findings was essential to the Award
and Claimants should therefore not be precluded from relitigating them.

71. Indonesia identifies in this category (i) the decision that the Indonesian courts
{have not}* committed a denial of justice; and (ji) ewo of the modalities of payment
with respect to any damages suffered by Amco group, the rate of interest (six per
cent per annum) and the date it begins to run (January 15, 1981),

72. Indonesia’s contention is that these matters cannot be relitigated.

73. The Tribunal is unable to accept Amco’s contention. Matters decided by the
first Tribunal but never put forward for annulment are binding on the parties and
can not be relitigated. This is not because, as Indonesia suggests (Observations,
January 14, 1988, p. 33) such matters are implicitly confirmed by the Ad Hoc
‘Committee and are therefore binding, but simply because, never having been
before the Ad Hoc Committee, they remain binding as res judicata of the first
Tribunal. However, it follows from the present Tribunal’s general approach to res
judicata that, while unchallenged findings of the first Tribunal will constitute res
“judicata, not every incidental statement or procedural ruling made by the first
‘Tribunal is to be treated as a “finding” to which this principle applies.

74. The Tribunal now applies the principle above to the items listed by Amco
and Indonesia.

75. As to item (j) listed by Amco, (the finding that the treatment accorded
Claimants by the Indonesian courts did not constitute a denial of justice), the
present Tribunal finds that this is res judicata as this issue was addressed and
determined in the Award (Award, paras. 150 and 262) and was not annulled by
the Ad Hoc Committee.

76. As to item (ii) listed by Amco (the finding that BKPM, not just Parliament,
had authority to revoke investment licences), this was addressed and determined
in the Award. The first Tribunal did not accept Indonesia's arguments that only
Parliament had the power to cancellation (Award, para. 212 at p. 94).

77. As to item (ii) listed by Amco (the finding that claimants were obligated to
invest $3 million of foreign capital, rather than a lesser amount up to $3 million)
this was addressed and determined in the Award (Award, paras. 29 and 330).

78. As to item (iv) listed by Amco (the finding that loans should be excluded
when calculating the amount of investment), this was addressed and determined
in the Award (Award, para. 228).

79. As to item (v) listed by Amco (che finding that the foreign capital which
Claimants caused KLM and Mr, Pulitzer to invest was not to be included in the

2 Indonesia confirmed to the Tribunal on March 11, 1988 that a typographical error in its claim should be
amended to read as here shown,

 

|
.

180 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

investment calculation), this was addressed and determined in the Award (Award,
para. 27).

80. As to item (vi) listed by Amco (the finding that PT. Wisma was not acting
as the alter ego of the Indonesian military in connection with the take over of the
hotel) this was addressed and determined in the Award (Award, paras. 161~63).
81. All of these issues were definitely determined by the Tribunal and none of
them was annulled by the Ad Hoc Committee, They are therefore res judicata.
82. As to item (i) listed by Indonesia (the decision that the Indonesian courts have
not committed a denial of justice), the present Tribunal’s views are given in para
75 above.

83. As to item (ii) listed by Indonesia (that two of the modalities of payment
(rate of interest and date from which it runs) are res judicata, the arguments of the
parties may be summarised as follows. Indonesia contends that it had before the
‘Ad Hoc Committee sought annulment by reference to findings in three different
aspects of the modalities of payment—US dollars as the currency of payment; the
situs of payment to be outside of Indonesia; and the date of conversion of the
payment currency. The Ad Hoc Committee rejected Indonesia's contentions,
leaving the findings of the first Tribunal 2s res judicata. Two further aspects of the
modalities of payment (rate of interest, date from which it runs) were never
challenged, and thus likewise remain res judicata, Amco by contrast contended (see
Observations on Res Judicata, January 13, 1988, p. 2) that, notwithstanding the fact
that no challenge to the findings of the first Tribunal on interest rate and date were
made before the Ad Hoc Committee, these matters are to be regarded as integral
to the calculation of compensation; as the compensation amount had been set aside,
these two items (not specifically affirmed as res judicata by the Ad Hoc Committee)
can be relitigated,

84. The present Tribunal finds that the rate of interest and the date from which
it runs no more or less integral to the calculation of compensation than the other
modalities of payment. An unchallenged finding of an initial Tribunal remains res
judicata, and it can readily be seen that it cannot be necessary for such a finding to
be brought before an annulment committee (in the hope that an undesired
challenge will be rejected) for it to be affirmed as res judicata.

LIL, Matters Expressly Annulled Can Therefore Be Relitigated
85. The present Tribunal obviously affirms that matters expressly annulled may
be relitigated, and agrees that two items identified by Indonesia—(i) the restitution
of the tax and import concessions granted to P.T. Amco and (ii) the quantum of
damages (if any) owed to PT. Amco for the period April 1 to July 9, 1980
(Observations on the Jurisdiction of the New Tribunal, January 14, 1988, p. 35)
fall within this category. The present Tribunal observes, however, that this list is
by no means exhaustive.

IV. Matters that Were Expressly Annulled but which Are Said To Be Res Judicata
because of the Integrality of the Committee’s Reasons

86. In its Observations on the Jurisdiction of the New Tribunal of January 14,
1988, Indonesia acknowledges that certain findings have been annulled. However,

CASES 18

adhering to its arguments that not only the Ad Hoc Committee’s decision to anauul
certain portions of the Award is res judicata, but also matters that are “integral 10”
such findings, Indonesia lists six further items as res judicata. Amco, by contrast,
contends that each of these matters can be relitigated, having been anaulled by the
Ad Hoc Committee. It is convenient to provide in full Indonesia's listing of items
said to be res judicata under this head
(i) the Amco group did not satisfy their investment obligation and therefore
the licence revocation was substantively justified and lawful;
(ii) the calculation of the Amco group's actual investment;
Giithe materiality of the investment shortfall;
(iv)the procedure relating to the licence revocation cannot per se support an
award of damages;
(v) damages due for wrongful acts of the army and police terminate on July
9, 1980;
(vi)P-T. Amco’s right to manage the hotel ended on July 9, 1980.
87. As indicated above, the present Tribunal is unable to accept the very broad
view of res judicata, whereby matters said to be “integral” to nullity decisions of
the Ad Hoc Committee are said to be binding, even if the conclusion to which
they lead is the striking down of a prior finding by the Tribunal and a rehearing
upon such prior findings.
88. Turning to heading (i) above, the present Tribunal notes that this is an
example of the Ad Hoc Committee treating the annulment ground under Acticle
52(1)(b)—“that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers”—as having been
evidenced by a perceived failure to apply the applicable law, by virtue of its having
been applied in a manner that reaches a conclusion believed untenable by the Ad
Hoc Committee. ‘The present Tribunal is clearly bound by the particular decision
of the Ad Hoc Committee that the determination of the sum invested by the first
‘Tribunal is nullified, It is clear from paragraph 98 of the Decision that the Ad Hoc
‘Tribunal relied on at least two grounds for its conclusion. Further, if one turns to
the Dispositif at p. 47 of the Decision and acknowledges general annulment subject
to identifiable qualifications, this heading does not qualify as an identifiable
qualification. Furthermore, neither an understanding of the distinction this Tri-
bunal has already made (para. 40 above) between appeal from the merits and
nullification under Article 52(1)(b), nor an-understanding of the reasons given by
the Ad Hoc Tribunal require the statements that Amco did not satisfy its
investment obligation, and that the licence revocation was substantively justified,
to be treated as res judicata rather than reopened for argument.
89. The same considerations apply to headings (ji) and (ii).
90. As for heading (iv), if the Ad Hoc Committee had stated not only that the
award of damages was to be nullified, but also that Indonesian law properly
understood did permit damages for procedural defects, the present Tribunal would
have been bound (on its views of the scope of res judicata and on the critical
distinction between appeal and nullification functions) to have reached the same
conclusions as in i-iii above.
91. However, the situation is still less clear, in that the first Tribunal does not

182 ICSID REVIEW-FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

seem ever to have found in terms that procedural defects alone justify damages,
nor has the Ad Hoc Committee clearly pronounced on this precise issue. At
paragraphs 201-202 of the Award the Tribunal explains its reasons for finding that
the procedures did not afford due process of law to the claimants. At paragraph
74 of the Decision the Ad Hoc Tribunal notes that the Tribunal found it had to
accept the BKPM revocation order as a definitive act, and it could do not more
than “award compensation to P’T. Amco for damages, if any, sustained by it from
the definitive revocation order. The amount of such compensation was of course
dependent on whether or not the revocation was justified on substantive grounds.”
Ic is not clear to this Tribunal why the Ad Hoc Committee in para. 10 refers to
para. 74 to support the statement “according to the findings of the Award itself,
no compensation was due for the lack of three warnings and for other procedural
defects of the revocation rider” if BKPM was in fact justified in revoking the
licence on substantive grounds.
92. For all of these reasons, item (iv) falls for reconsideration. In seeing whether
damages are due, and if so in respect of what period, che present Tribunal is not
precluded from itself examining whether there should be under Indonesian law
an clement reflecting damages for procedural violations.
93. The Tribunal turns now to heading (v), namely that claim that damages due
for wrongful acts of the army and police terminate on July 9, 1980. This matter
has already been addressed above (at para. 51), It has been explained that there is
a res judicata as to the unlawful acts of the police and army up to July 9, 1980, and
compensation due for that period. (See para. 109 of the Decision). The finding
that the period of violation (by virtue of the acts of police and army) continued
beyond July 9 is nullified and therefore has to be determined afresh by this
Tribunal.
94, The claim under (v), as formulated by Indonesia, would effectively require
the present Tribunal to accept two tiers of reasoning to arrive at a finding of res
judicata. The Ad Hoc Committee did not simply state that the Tribunal had acted
in excess of powers or had failed to state reasons as to the substantive correctness
of the licence revocation (which would clearly have required the substantive
correctness of the licence revocation to be decided de novo by the present Tribunal).
Instead, it offered the view that the substantive revocation was wrong; and
proceeded from there to state that this entailed consequences turning on the date
of July 9th. The present Tribunal does not accept that these two findings by the
Ad Hoc Tribunal, obiter to the nullity function, constitute res judicata.
95. As for (vi), namely that P.T. Amco's right to manage the hotel ended on July
9, 1980, it is correct that in paragraph 107 of its Decision the Ad Hoc Committee
states:
“As the withdrawal of the investment licence cannot be considered unjustified,
the resulting effect of such withdrawal cannot be considered unjustified either,
i.e., P-T. Amco's inability to exercise its right to manage the Kartike Plaza Hotel
4 of the day of issuance of the revocation order (uly 9, 1980), whatever would
have been the outcome of the litigation by P.T. Wisma against P.T. Amco before
the Jakarta courts.”

 

CASES 183

96. However, for all the reasons elaborated above the present Tribunal finds that
it has for itself to decide whether P.T. Amco had any right to manage beyond July
9, 1980, whether on grounds addressed by the first Tribunal or Ad Hoc Commit-
tee, or otherwise.

97. Finally, the Tribunal notes that all these items, viz. (i)~(vi), are stated to be
matters that cannot be relitigated because of the integrality of the Ad Hoc
Committee's reasons. (Observations on Jurisdiction of New Tribunal, p. 34.) In fact,
items (i)-(iv) in a sense relate to the Ad Hoc Committee's reasoning in reaching
its nullity decisions, while (v) and (vi) are really stated consequences upon the
nullity decisions (and indeed are dealt with under that description at p. 41 of the
Decision). The present Tribunal notes that the consequence of annulment is stated
in Article 52(6) to be submission of the dispute a new Tribunal, for its own
consideration, should a party so request.

98. The Tribunal here refers also to Indonesia's contention at p. 34 of its
Observations on the Jurisdiction of the New Tribunal, Indonesia there contends that
no unjust enrichment claim may be advanced by Amco because this would create
“a seemingly new argument to evade the legal force of res judicata.” But unjust
enrichment was never the subject matter of a finding by the first Tribunal, as
although the issue had been advanced before that body, it reached its pertinent
findings on other grounds. Even if the present Tribunal had found that the
statement of the Ad Hoc Committee on the lawfulness of the licence revocation
was res judicata, the claim of unjust enrichment could still be advanced in the
present proceedings.

D. JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE
99, In its Observations of January 14, 1988 on the jurisdiction of this Tribunal,
the Republic of Indonesia objected to the jurisdiction ratione personae of Amco
Asia, This objection was stated to be based on new facts that did not become
known to Indonesia until after the date of the Award, namely, that Amco Asia, a
company registered in Delaware was dissolved under the laws of Delaware on
December 27, 1984, approximately one month after the rendering of the Award.
A different company, bearing the name Amco Asia Corporation, was then
incorporated under the laws of the state of Delaware. It was said by Indonesia in
its Observations of January 14, 1988 that this new company was created “for the
sole purpose of creating the semblance of its status on a claimant.”
100. However, at the oral hearings held in London on January 30th and February
1, 1988, Amco told the Tribunal that it was not suggested that Amco Asia
Corporation was a claimant in the present arbitration. Rather, the situation was
that Amco Asia continued in existence under the laws of the state of Delaware for
purposes of this arbitration.
101. Having heatd oral argument on this point, the Tribunal then invited the
parties to make further brief written submissions on this issue. This Amco and
Indonesia did, on February 22nd and 23rd, 1988 respectively.
102, It was agreed by both parties that the law which governs the dissolution of

184 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Amco Asia was the law of the state of Delaware. However, Indonesia drew a
distinction between the dissolution of Amco Asia and the legal effect of such
dissolution on the holder of rights and duties under an agreement to arbitrate
Indonesia contended that in the facts and circumstances of the present case, Article
42(1) of the ICSID Convention provided the guide to the appropriate applicable
law; and that Indonesian law only was to be applied. Indonesia stated that “under
Indonesian law, once a limited liability corporation is dissolved, it ceases to exist
for any purpose”: Supplementary Submissions on Jurisdiction, February 23, 1988.
103. The Tribunal does not believe that the distinction put forward by Indonesia
leads to the conclusion that Indonesian law should apply. Nor does the Tribunal
find it necessary to pronounce upon the respective place of Indonesian law and
intemational law in Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention.

104. Indonesia stated in its Supplementary Submissions on Jurisdiction of February
23, 1988, at p. 17: “Generally speaking, the question of whether a corporation has
been terminated or suspended is determined by the local law of the state of
incorporation. . . The analysis would not be different under Indonesian law.” In
the view of the Tribunal, the same rule applies to the question of whether that
corporation is still an existing legal entity for a particular purpose. The rule as it
applies to the effect of dissolution should not be different from the rule applied,
in international contracts, to the effect of creation of such a corporation, When a
company enters into an agreement with a foreign legal person, the legal status and
capacity of that company is determined by the law of the state of incorporation.
Similarly, one should apply the law of the state of incorporation to determine
whether such a company, though dissolved, is still an existing legal entity for any
specified legal purpose.

105. The dissolution of Amco Asia was governed by the law of the state of
Delaware. Under Delaware law Amco Asia remains a juridical entity for purposes
of any action, suit or proceeding begun by or against it prior to or within three
years of dissolution or until such action, suit or proceeding is completed and any
judgment, order or decree therein is executed: Section 278, Delaware General
Corporation Law.

106. Delaware law (as would be the case in most leading jurisdictions) regards
arbitration as “proceedings”: Section 122(2) Delaware Corporation Law.

107. It is also the case that Amco Asia is not prohibited by the law governing its
dissolution from remaining in existence for purposes of this arbitration because of
any failure to meet prescribed time limits. Section 278 of the Delaware General
Corporation Law allows the continuation in existence of a dissolved corporation
in respect of a proceeding begun by or against it “either prior to or within three
years after the date of its expiration or dissolution." The Tribunal finds correct the
contention of Amco in its supplemental observations of February 22, 1988 that
whether this arbitration is deemed to have been commenced on January 15, 1981
with the filing of the claimant's request for arbitration, or on May 12, 1987, with
the filing of the claimant's request for resubmission, such arbitration would have
been within the time limits presented by Delaware law.

108. Thus, the acknowledgement that Delaware law governs the dissolution of

CASES 135

Amco Asia results only in the status quo ante, namely that Amco Asia continues in
existence for purposes of the present arbitration. There is thus no “consequence
of dissolution,” different from the status quo ante, to which Article 42(1) of the
ICSID Convention could be said to apply.

109. The Tribunal therefore finds that it continues to have jurisdiction ratione
personae over the dissolved Amco Asia.

E, NEW CLAIMS/COUNTERCLAIMS

110. On June 12, 1987 the Republic of Indonesia filed its Request for Resubmis-
sion. Amico had already filed its Request for Resubmission on May 12, 1987. In
paragraph 4 of its Request Indonesia explained that by this separate Request it was
resubmitting certain aspects of the investment dispute, rather than those submitted
by Amco for decision by the new Tribunal. These were often aspects “which it
had asserted in the previous arbitration.” Indonesia's claims were summarized on
pp. 13-15 of its Request, item C of which, headed “Tax Fraud,” indicated that
“Indonesia further claims to recover corporate taxes that P.T. Amco has not paid
to the Indonesian Government since 1973. Indonesia will submit further evidence
in this arbitration providing a systematic course of tax evasion by P.T. Amco over
many years.” In a footnote Indonesia refers to “the restitution of tax and other
concessions and... tax fraud.”

111. In its communication to the parties of 21 December 1987, the Tribunal
invited observations on the following matter: “May the parties bring before the
present tribunal new claims and counterclaims arising out of this dispute or are
they limited to the claims and counterclaims as formulated before the arbitral
tribunal which gave its Award in December 1984.” The observations of Amco on
this matter were received on 20th January 1988 and of Indonesia on 21st January
1988. Amco contended that compensation for tax fraud was a new claim, or
counterclaim, not made in the dispute submitted to the first Tribunal and that it
should not be considered by the present Tribunal. Indonesia contended that the
alleged tax fraud was raised in the first arbitration but was not decided. There
being no decision on this point the Ad Hoc Committce found that there was
nothing relevant for annulment (Decision, para. 124). (Indonesia had submitted the
first Tribunal’s decision not to consider the tax fraud as a ground for annulment.)
112. Indonesia further contended that, even had the tax fraud claim not previous-
ly been raised, it could still be introduced as a new claim, or counterclaim, before
the present Tribunal. This was subject to the qualification that a new claim not be
res judicata as an underlying predicate of a finding of the Ad Hoc Committee, nor
time-barred, and that it be otherwise within the present Tribunal’s competence
ratione materiae. According to Indonesia, the tax fraud claim met these qualifica-
tions and could therefore be introduced.

113. At the London hearings held on January 30th and February 1, 1988 the
parties further addressed the Tribunal on this issue. At that time, Amco not only
reasserted that the tax fraud had not been dealt with, save in rebuttal, before the
first Tribunal, but also that it could not be introduced now as it was beyond the

 

186 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

jurisdiction ratione materiae of the new Tribunal. At the conclusion of the hearings
the parties were invited to provide brief supplementary submissions to assist the
Tribunal in ascertaining whether indeed the matter of tax fraud had been before
the firse Tribunal, and on its competence ratione materiae to this matter. Memoranda
were received from Amco on February 22, 1988 and from Indonesia on February
3, 1988.

114. In the view of the Tribunal the issue falls to be decided in relation to three
questions. First, is the claim of tax fraud a new claim or an old claim, in the sense
that it had or had not been advanced before the first Tribunal? Second, if it is a
new claim, are new claims in principle admissible before a new Tribunal
established by request of the parties subsequent to annulment or partial annulment
of the Award of the first Tribunal? And third, if the answer to the second question
is in the affirmative, is this particular claim within the jurisdiction of the present
Tribunal ratione materiae? It may be that a negative conclusion on either the second
or third questions would make it unnecessary for the remaining questions to be
solved by the Tribunal. However, the Tribunal believes that these matters raise
issues of importance not only for the parties but also for the ICSID system
generally, and has therefore resolved to address each of these questions in turn.

1. ‘Tax Fraud as an existing or new claim
115. The Tribunal has reviewed the written observations on the scope of claims
and counterclaims of Indonesia of January 21 1988, and of Amco of January 20,
1988, the exhibits referred to therein, the relevant portions of the oral hearings in
London at the end of January 1988, and the two further written submissions and
exhibits submitted by Amco and Indonesia on February 22nd and 23rd 1988
respectively.
116. We find the evidence clear that the matter was referred to during the
hearings on the merits before the first Tribunal, and that argument was addressed
in some detail. It is equally clear, however, that the issue of tax fraud was advanced
by Indonesia as one of the arguments justifying the licence revocation. It was raised
as a defence in the course of argument, and not as a counterclaim.
117. Insofar as that is the case, the question of whether the allegation relating to
tax fraud was quantified, and whether, given the status of the evidence available
to Indonesia at that time, it was possible to quantify in a more definitive manner,
is academic.
118. The Tribunal notes in this context the relevance of Rule 40 of the Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration proceedings. This provides:

(1) Except as the parties otherwise agree, a party may present an incidental or

additional claim or counterclaim arising directly out of the subject-matter of

the dispute, provided that such ancillary claim is within the scope of the consent

of the parties and is otherwise within the jurisdiction of the Centre.

(2) An incidental or additional claim shall be presented not later than in the

reply and a counterclaim no later than in the counter-memorial, unless the

‘Tribunal, upon justification by the party presenting the ancillary claim and

upon considering any objection of the other party, authorizes the presentation

of the claim at a later stage of the proceeding.

 

 

CASES 187

119. It would seem that Indonesia, having sufficient information to advance
argument on tax fraud at the Copenhagen hearings, was in a position to have
sought to make a request at that time under Rule 40(2), although the actual
formulation and quantification could, with the permission of the Tribunal, have
been deferred. No such request to advance an additional claim was made.

120. The fact that argument was exchanged on the question of tax fraud, in the
context of justifying the revocation of che license and in support of an “unclean
hands” argument, does not mean that tax fraud was 2 claim in existence before
the first Tribunal, For that to have been so, it would have been necessary for it to
have been advanced as a counterclaim or as an additional claim under Rule 40.
121. leis therefore necessary to proceed to examine whether tax fraud may now
be introduced as a new claim in the present proceedings.

2. Amco's contention that ‘Tax Fraud is outside the Jurisdiction of the present Tribunal
Ratione Materiae

122, Itis contended by Amco that the tax fraud claim would be precluded from
being advanced de novo before the present Tribunal because it is not a legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment” within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the
Convention. Given the finding of the Tribunal that the tax fraud issue was not a
claim as such before the previous Tribunal, Amco is not estopped from raising this
argument for the first time now. Amco contends, in its Supplemental Observations
of February 22, 1988 that, even if subject matter jurisdiction under Article 25(1)
is literally construed, and even if disputes relating to taxes are not per se excluded,
“it does not follow that every tax dispute with an investor isa dispute arising directly
out of an investment.” Amco argues that this particular tax dispute is related only
in the most indirect way to the investinent.

123. Indonesia, by contrast, in its Supplemental Observations of February 23,
1988, points to the central place in its investment programme of tax concessions
and advances arguments to show that ICSID jurisdiction covers tax matters, and
that it must be permitted to a host state, as much as to an investor, to advance tax
claims under the ICSID by them.

124, In fact, both parties agree, as does the Tribunal, that tax claims may be
within ICSID's jurisdiction and that claims in relation thereto would be available
to both parties to an investment dispute.

125. The issue is therefore whether this particular claim falls within Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention. In answering this question the Tribunal believes that it
is correct to distinguish between rights and obligations that are applicable to legal
or natural persons who are within the reach of a host State's jurisdiction, as a
matter of general law; and rights and obligations that are applicable to an investor
as a consequence of an investment agreement entered into with that host state.
Legal disputes relating to the latter will fall under Article 25(1) of the Convention.
Legal disputes concerning the former in principle fall to be decided by the
appropriate procedures in the relevant jurisdiction unless the general law generates
an investment dispute under the Convention.

126. The obligation not to engage in tax fraud is clearly a general obligation of

 

1 ICSD REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Jaw in Indonesia. It was not specially contracted for in the investment agreement
and does not arise directly out of the investment.
127. For these reasons the Tribunal finds the claim of tax fraud beyond its
competence ratione materiae.
3. May claims not presented to an ICSID Tribunal be advanced before a new Tribunal
constituted under Article 52(6) of the Convention?
128. In its communication of 21 December 1987 the Tribunal invited submissions
from the parties on whether parties may bring before the present Tribunal claims
and counterclaims other than those presented to the initial Tribunal.
129. In its Observations of 20 January 1988 Amco contended that Article 52(6)
of the Convention provides that if an award is annulled “the dispute shall, at the
request of either party, be submitted to a new Tribunal. ..,” and that different
claims and counterclaims would “constitute a different dispute.” Indonesia, in its
Observations of January 21 1988, emphasized a relationship between Article 52(6)
and Article 25(1) of the Convention, and contended that what was required was
to ensure that the jurisdiction of the new Tribunal did not go beyond what was
permitted under Article 25(1). An ICSID dispute was “the entire complex of issues
between the parties relating to an investment. Accordingly, the ICSID Convention
allows for the assertion of additional claims or counterclaims if they arise directly
out of the subject matter of the dispute, Reference was made to Article 46 of the
Convention, to Arbitration Rule 40, Note B(a), and to the ICSID Convention,
Vol. Il, Pt. 2, Documents Concerning the Origin and the Formulation of the
Convention, p. 270. An Opinion was also entered by Dr. Aron Broches elaborat-
ing these arguments. While agreeing that the new Tribunal must check that any
new claims arise directly out of the dispute, are within the scope of the consent of
the parties, and are not res judicata (Ruule 55(3)), Dr. Broches stated that otherwise
parties are free to present new claims or counterclaims. Dr. Broches opined that
“there is no justification for arbitrarily reading into the Convention a restriction
on a party’s right to present claims or counterclaims other than the dispositive one
of Arbitration Rule 55(3).” In this context he referred to Article 46 of the
Convention on the presentation of additional claims.
130. Article 46 provides:

“Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal shall, if requested by a

party, determine any incidental or additional claims or counterclaims arising

directly out of the subject matter of the dispute provided that they are within

the scope of the consent of the parties and are otherwise within the jurisdiction

of the Centre.”
131. But Article 46 is to be read together with Rule 40, which provides specific
procedures and time limits for the intervention of ancillary or additional claims,
which, as noted above, have not been pursued here. It is also clear that Article 46
and Rule 40 are directed essentially to the question of additional claims presented
before an ongoing single Tribunal hearing an arbitration and does not in terms
address the issue of new claims and counterclaims as it may arise in relation to a
new Tribunal under Article 52(6).
132. Nor is the matter resolved by reference to Article 25, for while indeed the

CASES 189

jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to “any legal dispute arising out of an
investment” Article 52(6) (which presupposes that Article 25 jurisdiction already
exists) states that if an award is annulled “the dispute” shall be submitted to a new
Tribunal.
133. Article 52 is not a provision for starting a totally new arbitration, restricted
only by the requirements of Article 25. Rather, it is a procedure for resubmission
of an existing dispute in respect of which Article 25 jurisdiction exists.
134. In che present proceedings the Tribunal is meeting to reconsider an original
award annulled only in part. The wording of Rule 55(3), which covers this
situation, signifies that this is not a totally new proceeding constrained only by
Article 25 (and by consideration of res judicata). It is a reconsideration of the dispute.
Note B to Rule 55 speaks of the procedure for resubmission as being “roughly
analogous to that for an original request,” and continues “It is... . especially
important to. . . state in detail what aspects of the former dispute (the one to which
the annulled award related) are to be considered by the new Tribunal.” (Italics
added.)
135. “A dispute” in arbitration is to be understood not merely as subject matter
within the scope of jurisdiction that is contested, nor even arguments that have
been advanced in oral hearings and responded co. Argument is directed to
supporting a dispute: it does not define the dispute. A dispute is defined by claims
formally asserted and responded to in claim and defence, ot in counterclaim and
reply to counterclaim—in other words, the causes of action.
136. “The” dispute or “the former” dispute is necessarily the dispute as formu-
lated in the pleadings before the first Tribunal whose Award (save insofar as it is
res judicata) is now being reconsidered. The principle of finality to litigation also
leads to the same view.
* * *

For all these reasons the Tribunal finds that the tax fraud issue is beyond its

jurisdiction in the present proceedings.

F, INDONESIA AS A NEW CLAIMANT/DEFENDANT

137. The Secretary General of ICSID has registered, on May 21 1987 and June
24 1987, two requests from Amco and Indonesia respectively, for the resubmission
of the dispute under Article 52(6) of the Convention.

138. In its Resubmission Request and in its Submissions of January 14 1988 on
the jurisdiction of this Tribunal, Indonesia has described itself as 2 Claimant,
specifying in the latter document certain causes of action. Brief oral argument was
also submitted by the parties at the hearing in London on January 30-February 1,
1988 on whether Indonesia has the status of a claimant, as well as a defendant, in
these resubmitted proceedings.

139. As these proceedings are a resubmission of what is not res judicata in the
dispute brought before the first Tribunal, the starting point is that the parties in
this resubmission are in the same position as they were before the first Tribunal.
‘The reconsideration by this Tribunal is not a totally new proceeding unrelated to

190 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENY LAW JOURNAL

the first proceeding,
140, The Tribunal has carefully considered Indonesia's contention chat not all of
the arguments it wishes to advance could be placed before us, save by virtue of it
being a claimant. The ability to advance new claims turns on the considerations
we have identified above, (paras. 101ff) and not on ones's status as claimant or
defendant. And there is a great flexibility to introduce new or to expand existing
argument, without any charge in designation as claimant or defendant

141. The very fact the Secretary General has registered two requests for resub-
mission means that Indonesia is entitled to identify, as it sees fit, all the aspects of
the existing dispute that are to be reconsidered.

142. Indonesia is not disadvantaged by being in the position of defendant and
the Tribunal rules that the pleadings on the merits should proceed on the basis
adopted heretofore, so far as the respective positions of the parties are concerned.

London 10th May 1988

{sh
Rosalyn Higgins

Is ‘s)
Per Magid Marc Lalonde

