-Date of dispatch to the parties: June 5, 1990

May 31, 1990

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

(I.¢.8.1.D.)

In the Matter of the Arbitration between

Amco Asia Corporation, Pan American Development
Limited and P.T. Amco Indonesia

The Republic of Indonesia

The Arbitral Tribunal composed of:

Professor Rosalyn Higgins, Q.C., Chairman
Appointed by agreement
of the parties

The Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.C., Q.C. Member
Appointed by Amco

Per Magid Member

Appointed by Republic
of Indonesia

made the following award

Paragraphs

I. BACKGROUND ... ... see eee cee 1-22
II. THE CLAIMS, DEFENCES AND COUNTERCLAIM 23-35
III. ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED eee aoe 36
37-40

IV. APPLICABLE LAW ... eee eee oe

Vv. THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE FINDING OF THE
FIRST TRIBUNAL THAT THE CONDUCT OF THE
ARMY AND POLICE CONSTITUTED AN UNLAWFUL
ACT FOR WHICH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDONESIA
IS INTERNATIONALLY RESPONSIBLE oe

VI. THE BKPM REVOCATION OF PT AMCO'S LICENCE

(a)
(b)

(c)

(a)

(e)

(f£)

The so-called "single limb" argument

Procedural Irregularities and the
BKPM Decision wee see tee

The information known to BKPM at the
time of its decision eee wee

The application of the law to these
findings ore aoe eee oes

Amco's request for an adverse
inference ... see eee wee

The lawfulness of BKPM's decision
by reference to grounds other than
shortfall of equity investment

VII. FURTHER CLAIMS AND ARGUMENTS

(a)
(b)

(c)

Estoppel

Legal Effect of the Indonesian
Supreme Court Decision of

April 30, 1985 on Amco's entitlement
to damages ... eee eee eee

Unjust enrichment eee tee

VIII. COUNTERCLAIM eee nee see see

41-63

64-69
70-90
91-112
113-140

141

142-143

144-145

146-153
154-156

157-162

Paragraphs
IX. DAMAGES

(1) The period between April 1 and
July 9, 1980 eee eee see 164-166

(2) The period subsequent to July 9,
1980

(a) Mitigation ... eae see 167-169
: (b) Principles of compensation 170-187
i (c) The method of valuation ... * 188-199

(ad) Assumptions relating to the
valuation of hotel profits:

1980-1989
(i) The base period eee 201-203
(ii) The office and store

rental income eee 204-207

(iii) The level and the
depreciation rate of the

 

replacement reserve 208-211
(iv) Entitlement to
depreciation 212-222

(v) Entitlement to cash flow 223-224
(vi) The impact of the

Ramada contracts ... 225-232
(vii) The hotel market in

Jakarta 1980-1983 ... 233-236
(viii) The treatment of

corporate taxes eae 237-246
(ix) Tax rates to be applied 247-249
(x) The exchange rate ... 250-253
(xi) The inflation rate 254
(xii) Risk factor eee 255
(xiii) Discount rate see 256
(xiv) Interest rate eae 257-258

(e) Assumptions relating to the valuation
of hotel profits: 1990-1999

 

(i) The base period . 260
: (ii) The office and rental. store
: income aoe 261
aid (iii) The level and the
! depreciation rate of the
i replacement reserve 262
; (iv) Entitlement to depreciation 263
i (v) Entitlement to cash flow 264
(vi) The impact of the Ramada
contracts eee 265

(vii) The hotel market in “Jakarta 266

Paragraphs

(viii) The treatment of corporate

 

taxes eee 267
(ix) Tax rates see 268
(x) Exchange rate eee 269
(xi), (xii) and (xiii) Discount

rate (including inflation rate
and risk factor) nee 270-282
(f) Final calculation of damages 283-284
xX. costs eee eee see eee sae 285-291

XI. SET-OFF OF ANNULMENT COSTS wee 292-295

I.

ASIA CORP. A
Ve
REPUBLIC OF INDONESTA
ICSID/ARB./81/1

AWARD

BACKGROUND

On January 15, 1981, Amco Asia Corporation ("Amco

Asia"), Pan American Development Limited ("Pan
American") and P.T. Amco Indonesia ("PT Amco") filed
with the Secretary General of the International
Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
("ICSID") a Request for Arbitration against the

Republic of Indonesia. When referred to

collectively, the claimant companies will hereafter

be designated as "Amco". The Tribunal established

for purposes of that arbitration ("the First

Tribunal") rendered an Award on Jurisdiction on
September 25, 1983 (23 ILM (1984) 351). On

November 20, 1984 it gave an Award on the Merits (1

Int.Arb.Rep. (1986) 601, "the First Award").

The First Award may be referred to for the full
facts of the case. For convenience of reference,

the following salient facts are here summarized:

An enterprise known as P.T. Bluntas was established
in 1964 by the Bank of Indonesia and an Indonesian
private investor to develop an apartment/hotel
complex on a specified site in Jakarta. The
structural framework of the basement and the first
two floors was erected but construction stopped in
1965 due to lack of funds. In 1967, at the order
of the new Indonesian government, all the shares in
P.T. Bluntas were sold to a cooperative established
under Indonesian law for the welfare of Indonesian
army personnel, known as Inkopad. Inkopad caused
the name of PT Bluntas to be changed to PT Wisma

"Kartika" (hereafter referred to as "PT Wisma") .

On 22 April 1968 a Lease and Management Agreement
was entered into by Amco Asia, a company
incorporated in Delaware, U.S.A., and PT Wisma,
under which Amco Asia was to complete, at its own

cost, the original construction (referred to in the

3
Agreement as "the Annex") and another six storey
building. The Agreement provided that Amco Asia
would invest "up to the sum of us$4,000,000"
overall, with "up to the sum of US$3,000,000" being
used for the six storey building. PT Wisma was to
grant Amco Asia a nineteen year lease for both
structures. Any disagreements would be settled by
negotiation, failing which there would be
arbitration. The key terms of the 1968 Lease and
Management Agreement are summarised in paragraph 11
of the First Award. The full text is to be found
in the written pleadings submitted for this
arbitration. (Exhibits to the Counter-Memorial,”
Volume 1, Tab.1.) An addendum to the 1968 Lease and
Management Agreement was signed on May 18, 1968 by
PT Amco and PT Wisma, specifying how the profits
were to be shared. The enterprise was known as the

Hotel Kartika Plaza project. (Ibid, Tab.2).

On May 6, 1968 Amco Asia submitted to the Government
of Indonesia an application (Previously Filed
Claimants' Documents Cited in Amco's Memorial,
Vol.I, Tab.5; Indonesia Exh., Vol.I, Tab.4) to

establish PT Amco under the aegis of the 1967

* Hereafter referred to as "Indonesia Exh.".

4
Foreign Investment Law (Previously Filed Claimants'
Documents, Vol.I, Tab.1). The application underwent
various amendments (Indonesia Exh., Vol.I, Tab.5).
The authorised share capital of PT Amco was to be
$3,000,000, divided into 30,000 shares with a
nominal value of $100 per share, all of which
“represented foreign capital". In the amended
application it was proposed that there be an
exemption from corporate taxes for three years; and
for dividend tax for three years. PT Amco was to
be exempt from import duties with respect to capital
goods, including spares and parts, if PT Amco used
“its own foreign exchange or supplemental foreign
exchange in the limits set in the Government
regulations in force". (Indonesia Exh., Volume I,
Tabs. 4 and 5). The application also included an
arbitration clause which referred any dispute
between PT Amco and the Government of Indonesia to
IcsID. On July 29, 1968, Amco Asia was granted
permission by the Minister of Public Works to
establish PT Amco within the framework of the 1967
Foreign Investment Law and in accordance with the

amended application.

As described in the Award of the First Tribunal,

(paras.37-39), PT Amco's Articles of Incorporation

5
set a final date for capitalisation. The Articles
of Incorporation were set out in a Notarial Document
No. 106 dated September 27, 1968, upon request of
the Minister of Justice amended by Notarial Document
No.49 dated December 13, 1968. At the time of the
incorporation, 20 per cent of the authorised capital
was declared issued with 10 per cent having been
paid up, half of which was issued to and paid for
by Amco Asia and the other half issued to and paid
for by a non-resident Dutch business man, Mr. T.K.
Tan (First Award, para.37). In the Notarial
Document No.49 a new provision was added to the
Articles of Incorporation, viz. that "the entire
unissued portion of shares must be issued within a
period of 10 years beginning today, unless this time
should be extended by those responsible, or if
required at the request of the Board of Directors".
No evidence of any decision to extend the time
period of 10 years was put before the First Tribunal
(First Award, para.39). Under the Articles of
Incorporation, the issue of the US$3m. shares should

have taken place before the end of 1978.

The Articles of Incorporation of PT Amco were then

prepared and presented to the Ministry of Justice

6
for approval. To meet the position of the Ministry,
various notarial documents were executed to effect
changes to the Articles of Incorporation (First
Award, paras.33-40). On January 25, 1969 the
Minister of Justice approved the Articles of
Incorporation, which were then registered with the
Central Jakarta District Court on January 29, 1969.
On April 4, 1969, the Articles of Association were
published in Supplement No.27 to the State Gazette

of Indonesia No.41 of 1969 (Ibid., para.40).

7. On January 24, 1969 PT Wisma agreed to extend the
term of the 1968 Lease and Management Agreement to
thirty years.” on August 22 1969 PT Amco entered
into a Sub-Lease Agreement whereby certain other
persons and airlines would manage and operate the
Kartika. Plaza hotel, and would guarantee credit
facilities to PT Amco to enable it to complete the
construction of the hotel. On October 13 1970 a

second sub-lease was entered between PT Amco and the

"The lease was originally granted for 19 years.
In the letter of January 24, 1969 (Previously Filed
Claimants' Documents, Vol.I, Tab.4; Indonesia Exh.,
Vol.I, Tab.3) it gets extended to 30 years, which is said
to be 10 years more than that originally granted. See
also the reference in para.52 of the First Tribunal's
Award to 20 years. In any event, the subsequent 1978
Profit-Sharing Agreement (Indonesia Exh. Vol.II, Tab.47)
was to terminate September 30, 1999.

7
Aeropacific Hotel Association ("Aeropacific"), a
partnership consisting of the same sub-lessees as
in the sub-lease of August 22, 1969 (ibid., Tab.42).
Aeropacific was to complete construction of the
hotel and also assumed responsibility for a loan of
US$1,000,000 from Algemene Bank Nederland N.V.
("ABN") that PT Amco had undertaken to obtain under
the first sub-lease agreement. PT Wisma and Amco
Asia agreed in writing to respect the terms of this
second sub-lease, which was to supersede the first.
The second sub-lease continued in operation until
June 1, 1978. Relations between PT Amco and
Aeropacific gave rise to problems and led to
arbitration and then to resolution by agreement on

March 29, 1980. (First Award, para.77).

In 1971 PT Amco sought recognition from the Ministry
of Public Works of Pan American Development Limited
("Pan American"), a Hong Kong company, as a capital
investor in the Hotel Kartika Plaza project, stating
that Amco Asia had in fact entered into the 1968
Lease and Management Agreement with PT Wisma as
agent and nominee for and on behalf of Pan American.
The Ministry of Public Works in turn notified the
Foreign Investment Board that permission was

required to transfer a portion of Amco Asia's shares

8
to Pan American. This transfer was approved on May

1, 1972. (Ibid., paras.41-45).

Faced with legal skirmishing between PT Amco and
Aeropacific during the first few months of 1978,
Inkopad undertook the management of the hotel, from
dune, 1978. However, after a few months, in light
of its difficulties in administering the property
without the assistance of a professional manager and
following representations by Amco, Inkopad
authorised PT Wisma to enter with PT Amco into a
"Profit-Sharing Agreement for the Management of the
Kartika Plaza Land and Building with all its
contents" (ibid., paras.77-78). That Agreement was
signed on October 6, 1978 and PT Amco resumed
management of the hotel. On July 4, 1979, with the
Agreement of PT Wisma, PY Amco entered into a
Licence Agreement and an International Management
Agreement with Ramada Inns Inc. and Ramada
International Inc., respectively. From November
1979 to March 31, 1980 PT Wisma and PT Amco were in
disagreement on a number of matters (listed at
Paragraph 87 of the First Award). Particularly
important was the disagreement concerning the
amounts which the respective parties thought were

due from PT Amco to PT Wisma under the Profit

 

10.

9
Sharing Agreement of 1978. PT Amco stated that it
was not in a position to finalise all figures but
denied that US$54,609 was still due to PT Wisma
(Ibid., para.88). PT Wisma indicated that if it was
not paid by specified dates (first set at March 15,
and then at March 30, 1980) : then the management of
the Kartika Plaza building would be conducted by PT

Wisma as the owner (Ibid, para.89).

A small advance was made by PT Amco but it did not
pay the full US$54,609 claimed. In the last few
days of March various meetings were held by senior
executives of PT Wisma at which plans were made for
the taking of sole control of the Kartika Plaza
property (Ibid., paras.90-92). On March 31, 1980
PT Wisma notified all Managers and Department Heads
that henceforth the responsibility for the
management of the Kartika Plaza and Hotel was to lie
with a Management Council established by PT Wisma
(Ibid., para.93). After reviewing the conflicting
evidence about the presence of military personnel
at the hotel during March 31st and April 1st and
thereafter (Ibid., paras.97-109), the First Tribunal

declared that it was "satisfied that on or about the

* The First Award speaks of March 15, 1978, which is

surely a misprint.

11.

10
critical period there was a taking of the claimants'
rights to the control and management of the land and
all the Kartika Plaza building" (Ibid., para.155).
Further, the First Tribunal was "satisfied that a
number of army and police personnel were present at
the hotel premises on the lst April, 1980 and by
their very presence assisted in the successful
seizure from PT Amco of the exercise of its lease

and management rights" (Ibid., para.155).

After intervention by the army and police on March
31/April 1 1980, Colonel Soejupto, Chief Executive
of PT Wisma, issued a "Decree or Letter of Decision"
whereby a Management Council, to be chaired by Lt.
General R. Soerjo, was given the authority to manage
the property, and PT Amco was relieved of its
Management role. (Ibid., para.92). The First
Tribunal found that "[{o]n the basis of the proven
actions and omissions of the army/police personnel
in connection with the takeover the Tribunal cannot
but draw the conclusion that an internationally
wrongful act was committed and that this act is
attributable to the Government of Indonesia which
therefore is internationally responsible". (Ibid.,

para.172).

12.

13.

11

After PT Wisma took over control and “Management of
the Kartika Plaza on March 31/April 1, 1980, it
reported certain information to the Capital
Investment Coordinating Board (Bodas Koordinasi
Penannanam Modal, hereafter "BKPM"). This body is
responsible for examining applications by foreign
investors, making recommendations to the Indonesian
government and supervising the implementation of
approved investments. After holding meetings with,
and receiving further information from,
representatives of PT Wisma, a report made by Mr.
Usman of BKPM recommended that PT Amco's Foreign
Capital Investment Licence be reviewed. Pursuant
to a request by the Chairman of BKPM on May 12, 1980
for guidance, the termination of the licence was
approved by the President of Indonesia and on July
9, 1980 BKPM revoked PT Amco's licence. (For

details see First Award, paras.110-130).

On April 24, 1980 PT Wisma filed a suit claiming
that PT Amco had failed to perform its investment
and reporting obligations required by BKPM and the
Bank of Indonesia and asked the Central Jakarta
District Court to rescind the 1968 Management and

Lease Agreement, as amended, and the 1978 Profit

14.

15.

12
Sharing Agreement. On May 28, 1980, two days before
PT Amco was notified of the suit, the Court granted
ex parte PT Wisma's request for an interlocutory
decree giving PT Wisma the right to manage the
Kartika Plaza pending the final outcome of the suit.
PT Wisma was ordered to make a monthly accounting
of its management. On July 8, 1980 the Greater
Jakarta Court granted PT Amco's request to postpone
application of the interlocutory decree. On July
28, 1980 PT Wisma appealed this judgment, notifying
the Indonesian Supreme Court that BKPM had revoked
PT Amco's licence. On August 4, 1980, the Supreme
Court reversed the judgment of the Greater Jakarta

Court.

The case now returned to the courts for hearings on
the merits. By November 1983 it had reached the
Jakarta Appellate Court, which found in favour of
PT Wisma. (For details, see First Award, paras.134-

141).

In bringing a case before the First Tribunal, PT
Amco claimed that Indonesia had seized its
investment in the building and management of the

Kartika Plaza complex and then unjustifiably

16.

13
cancelled its investment licence. Indonesia
contended that any military or public assistance was
only directed to supporting the legal right of PT
Wisma to control the hotel and was not a seizure of
the hotel by the government. It denied PT Amco's
claim that the cancellation of the investment
licence was unlawful, both procedurally and
substantively, and that the courts had acted in an
unlawful manner in rescinding the Lease and
Management Agreement. In its counterclaim Indonesia
asserted that, as the cancellation of the investment
licence was justified, PT Amco was obliged to return
tax and other concessions granted by Indonesia. A
full description of the claims, defences and
counterclaim are to be found at paragraphs 142-146

of the First Award.

The First Tribunal found in favour of the claimants,
ordering the sum of US$3,200,000 with interest to
be paid, outside of Indonesia. Indonesia's
counterclaim was rejected. Orders were also made
as to fees, expenses, arbitrators' fees and expenses

and charges for the use of the facilities of ICSID.

17.

is.

14
On March 18, 1985 the Republic of Indonesia filed
with the Secretariat of ICSID an application under
Article 52 of the Convention, for the annulment of
the First Award which had been made on November 20,
1984. An Ad Hoc Committee was established pursuant
to Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention. The Ad
Hoc Committee ordered, and later confirmed, a stay
of enforcement upon the furnishing by Indonesia of

an irrevocable and unconditional bank guarantee.

Written pleadings and oral hearings ensued in 1985
and 1986. On May 16, 1986 the Ad Hoc Committee
rendered its Decision (1 Int.Arb.Rep. (1986) 649;
25 ILM (1986) 1439). It decided to annul the First
Award "as a whole for the reasons and with the
qualifications set out above." (Decision of the Ad
Hoc Committee, final para.). The annulment did not
extend to the First Tribunal's findings that the
action of the army and police personnel on March
31/April 1, 1980 was illegal. The annulment did
however extend to the findings on the duration of
such illegality and on the amount of the indemnity
due on this account. (Decision of the Ad Hoc

Committee, p.47).

19.

15
On May 12, 1987, pursuant to Article 52(6)" of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 55 of the Arbitration
Rules, Amco submitted to the Secretary General of
ICSID a Request for Resubmission of a Dispute. On
June 12, 1987, Indonesia submitted to the Secretary
General of ICSID a Request for Resubmission of a
Dispute. On October 20, 1987 the present Tribunal
("the Tribunal") was constituted. On December 21,
1987 the Tribunal issued a Provisional Indication
as to what determinations of the First Tribunal had
been annulled by virtue of the Decision of the Ad
Hoc Committee and what remained as res ‘judicata.
On January 13, 1988 Amco submitted written
observations and exhibits on the res judicata effect
of the First Award in view of the Decision of the
Ad Hoc Committee on May 16, 1986. On January 14,
1988 Indonesia submitted its written observations,
exhibits and an expert Legal Opinion on these
matters. Various other jurisdictional matters were
contested. On January 30 and February 1, 1988 oral
hearings were held in London on jurisdiction,

including on questions of res judicata.

 

*
In
Convention.

fact, Amco referred to Article 53 of the

20.

21.

16
The Tribunal considered the representations of the
parties in deciding on the scope and effect of the
Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee to annul the First
Award, with certain qualifications. On May 10,
1988, the Tribunal gave its Decision on Jurisdiction
(3 ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law Journal 166

(1988); 27 ILM (1988) 1281).

The parties filed the following briefs on the
merits, along with extensive legal and factual
exhibits:”

Claimants' Memorial, July 11, 1988.

Respondent's Counter-Memorial, September

12, 1988.

Claimants' Reply, October 17, 1988.

Respondent's Rejoinder, November 14, 1988.
A variety of correspondence on different issues has
occurred between the parties and the Tribunal; and
action (including certain interlocutory decisions)
has been taken upon this correspondence as

necessary.

Several of the factual exhibits had not been

produced before the First Tribunal.

17

22. Hearings on the merits were held in Washington, D.C.
from September 18 to 29, 1989. The following
witnesses testified:
Ms. S. Pellaupessy
Mr. W.S. Djohari
Dr. A. Noer
Mr. N. Hanafi
Mr. E. Abdurrachman
Mr. D. Mathias
Professor D. Dapice
called by Indonesia.
Mr. J. Fox
called by Amco.
During these hearings oral argument was presented
for the Claimants by
Mr. William Rand
Mr. Robert Hornick
Mr. Paul Friedland.
Oral argument was presented for the Respondents by
Ms. Carolyn Lamm
Mr. Charles Brower
Professor Sudargo Gautama

Mr. Aldo Badini.

18

II. THE CLAIMS, DEFENCES AND COUNTERCLAIM

23.

24.

In its Request for Resubmission Amco advanced five
essential claims: namely, that by reason of
wrongful acts of the Indonesian army and police, it
had suffered damage; that in revoking its licence,
BKPM gave Amco no proper warning and denied it a
fair hearing, a chance to rebut charges or to make
good any deficiencies; that BKPM was not
substantively justified in revoking the licence on
either of the two grounds given in its revocation
order; that the rescission by the Indonesian courts
of aAmco's Lease and Management Agreement was
wrongful because it had no proper jurisdiction of
the action and no evidence was presented of breach
of contract; and that Indonesia was unjustly
enriched as a consequence of these unlawful acts.
Damages ‘of "not less than US$15,000,000" were

claimed.

The Republic of Indonesia, in its own Request for
Resubmission, claimed that as Amco had breached its
licence, it must make restitution of tax and other
concessions granted only by virtue of the licence.
These were itemized as a US$77,955 exemption from

capital stamp duties; a Rp. 29,691,965 exemption

25.

26.

19
from company tax in 1972, together with penalties
and interest; and a Rp. 424,348,207.08 exemption
from customs duties (US$1,022,525.70 at the
prevailing exchange rate). Indonesia further
claimed tax allegedly evaded by Amco since 1973,
estimated to be in excess of US$150,000. In
addition, Indonesia claimed that, as a provisional
measure pursuant to Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, Amco should pay to Indonesia one half of the
cost of the annulment proceeding, which amounted to
US$103,313.75, with accrued interest until the date

of effective payment.

In its Decision on Jurisdiction of May 10, 1988, the
Tribunal found that the tax fraud claim was beyond
its jurisdiction. The Tribunal further ruled that
the pleadings on the merits should proceed with the
parties being in the respective positions they were
before the First Tribunal. Indonesia's remaining
claim in its Request for ission thus b ‘

in the proceedings on the merits, a counterclaim.

In its Memorial, Amco characterised its first cause
of action variously as assistance by Indonesia in

"the unlawful taking of the hotel from Amco on or

 

27.

28.

20
about April 1, 1980" (p.21) and as "an unlawful
taking of an interest in a hotel" (ibid).
Indonesia, in its Counter-Memorial, asserted that
the only loss from the activities of the army and
police was a temporary loss of Amco's right of
control over the hotel; and that that loss ended
either on the date of the licence revocation (July
9, 1980) or when the army and police left the hotel

in October 1980.

Amco did not break down its quantification of loss
claimed for the "taking of the hotel" or of the
"interest in a hotel" into periods related to claims
against the army and police, BKPM and the courts.
It advanced a global claim for this loss. By
contrast, Indonesia claimed that the temporary loss
of control by Amco caused by the army and police
action (the illegality of which was res judicata
pursuant to this Tribunal's Decision on
Jurisdiction) had no intrinsic value. In oral
argument it was thus said there was either no

quantifiable damage or the damage was de minimis.

Amco contended in its Memorial that damages due "for

the taking" (p.27) were not "cut off by" (i.e. did

29.

21
not terminate upon) the licence revocation (the
second cause of action), which was procedurally
unlawful (which finding this Tribunal had in its
Decision on Jurisdiction held to be res judicata).
In its Memorial Amco affirmed that violation of due
process gave rise of itself to compensation. This
was denied by Indonesia, which took the position in
its Counter-Memorial and Rejoinder that procedural
irregularities must be shown to be the cause of any
injury before damages are due; and that the damage
was caused by PT Amco's own failures, which led to

a lawful revocation of the licence by BKPM.

Amco also contended that its entitlement to
compensation was not "cut off by" the Indonesian
Supreme Court decision of April 30, 1985, which
affirmed lower court judgments terminating the Lease
and Management Agreement. Although it was res
judicata that these lower court judgments did not
terminate any rights to compensation held by Amco,
Indonesia claimed in its Counter-Memorial that the
Supreme Court decision, being the final judicial

recourse, had this effect.

30.

31.

32.

22
In its Memorial Amco's second cause of action
concerned the unlawfulness of the licence
revocation. Amco contended that compensation was
due for the procedural violations by BKPM,
regardless of any substantive grounds. Amco further
contended that BKPM's substantive decision to revoke
the licence was unlawful. Two arguments were
advanced in support of this claim. First, there had
been two stated grounds of revocation, but one of
these had been found by the first Tribunal to be
unlawful (a finding that was res judicata). The
remaining single ground by itself was not sufficient
to sustain the substantive finding. Second, the
remaining ground of under-investment and under-
registration of foreign equity capital was said to

be invalid.

Indonesia rejected each of these arguments and
further found that the licence revocation was valid
on other grounds also, even if these were not

explicitly relied on in the revocation decision.

Amco's third cause of action was that Indonesia
would be unjustly enriched if permitted both to

retain the benefits of Amco's investment and the

33.

23
earnings which Amco could have made from its |
investment. Indonesia, denying that Indonesian law
knew the concept of unjust enrichment or that
international law regarded it as a distinct rather
than merely ancillary right, said that it was not
Indonesia but rather PT Wisma that had benefitted
from hotel revenues. Any benefit to Indonesia from
PT Amco's investment was too indirect, speculative

and unquantifiable.

PT Amco had in its Request for Resubmission
quantified globally the damage claimed to be due,
setting it at US$15,000,000, plus interest
compounded annually at a rate per annum equal to the
Singapore Interbank Offered Rate plus 1% from April
1, 1980, the date of effective payment. However,
in the Memorial the sum claimed was US$10,171,000.
The First Tribunal had found interest to be owed at
the Indonesian statutory rate of 6% per annum from
January 15, 1981 to the date of effective payment.
Amco claimed in its Memorial that, although this
finding was res judicata, it was inapplicable in the
present arbitration because Indonesian law makes
market rate interest applicable to monetary awards
for wrongful acts and for unjust enrichment claims.

Indonesia contended that the res judicata character

34.

- 35.

24
of the finding of the first Tribunal did not permit

of such arguments.

Indonesia also made a counterclaim in its Counter-
Memorial for the restitution of all monies which
would have been paid by PT Amco, for example as tax
and import duties, but for the tax holiday granted
by the licence. This was done on the basis that
under Indonesian law a failure to comply with
foreign investment law resulted in the withdrawal
of all the facilities that had been granted from the
date of their approval. These sums were quantified

at US$1,936,914.92.

For the determination of these issues the Tribunal
has had the benefit of the oral and written
submissions of the parties, and the witnesses who
testified. The Tribunal has also had access to the
transcript of argument and testimony before the

First Tribunal.

i
i

 

25

III. ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED

36.

The Tribunal's Decision on Jurisdiction identified
what issues of the First Tribunal are res judicata
for purposes of the present Tribunal, and what
issues may be reargued. The claims, defences and
counterclaims of the parties have been formulated
accordingly. The issues have, quite naturally, been
approached by the parties in ways that are not
identical. In resolving those aspects of the
dispute between Amco and Indonesia on which there
are no res judicata findings of fact or law, the

Tribunal finds that the following issues arise:

- What is the applicable law?

- What was the damage caused to Amco by the

unlawful acts of army and police?

- Did Indonesia's responsibility by virtue of the
acts of the army and police continue beyond

July 9, 1980?

- What is the compensation due for any damage
shown to be caused by the acts of the police

and army?

26
Does the procedurally unfair character of the
BKPM decision to revoke Amco's licence (which
finding remains res judicata for this
arbitration) per_se entitle Amco to damages;

and if so how are these damages to be assessed?

Was the BKPM decision unlawful, either by
virtue of procedural irregularities, or for

substantive reasons?

If the liability of Indonesia continued beyond
the date of revocation by BKPM, was it brought
to an end by the judgment of the Supreme Court
of Indonesia on April 30, 1985, affirming the
findings of the lower courts that the Lease and

Management Agreement should be rescinded?

If BKPM's decision to revoke Amco's licence is

unlawful, what compensation is due?

What are the relevant principles of any due

compensation?

What are the techniques by which any due

compensation is to be calculated?

If BKPM's revocation of Amco's licence is

Iv.

37.

27
lawful, is Amco required to repay all tax and
other concessions which it received by virtue

of the licence?

APPLICABLE LAW

The question of applicable law was not specifically
addressed in the written pleadings of the parties.
Amco simply noted that "where ... the law of the
host state contains no express rule on the point,
the Tribunal is authorized under Article 42(1) [of
the ICSID Convention] to look to international law"
and cited the Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee in
the case of Kléckner v. Cameroon (Memorial, p.24;
XI Yearbook of Commercial Arbitration, (1986)
p.162). Indonesia, in both its Counter-Memorial and
Rejoinder, advanced legal arguments on each of the
issues under first, the heading of Indonesian law
and second, the heading of international law. In
oral argument, however, Mr. Brower explained that
international law was only relevant if there was a
lacuna in the law of the host state, or if the law
of the host state was incompatible with
international law, in which case the latter would
prevail. Indonesia provided the Tribunal with many

authorities and with travaux préparatoires of the

38.

28
ICSID Convention, said to sustain its view on the

applicable law under Article 42(1).

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

"The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in
accordance with such rules of law as may be
agreed by the parties. In the absence of such
agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of
the Contracting State party to the dispute
(including its rules on the conflict of laws)
and such rules of international law as may be
applicable."

The First Tribunal stated that

"(t]he parties having not expressed an
agreement as to the rules of law according to
which the disputes between them should be
decided, the Tribunal has to apply Indonesian
law, which is the law of the Contracting State
party to the dispute, and such rules of
international law as the Tribunal deems to be
applicable, considering the matters and issues
in dispute." (First Award, para.148).
The Ad Hoc Committee, in its Annulment Decision,
stated that it considered Article 42 “controlling,
in exactly the same way that the Tribunal regarded
the same article decisive of the law governing the
substantive dispute before it." (Decision on
Annulment, para.19). The Ad Hoc Committee then went
on to state that Article 42(1) of the IcSID
Convention "authorises an ICSID tribunal to apply

rules of international law only to fill up lacunae

39.

40.

29
in the applicable domestic law and to ensure
precedence to international law norms where the
rules of the applicable law are in collision with
such norms" (ibid, para.20). The role of
international law is thus "supplemental and

corrective" under Article 42(1) (ibid, para.22).

Amco submitted no contrary arguments or authorities
on the question of applicable law, and there was no

contested issue between the parties on this matter.

This Tribunal notes that Article 42(1) refers to the
application of host-state law and international law.
If there are no relevant host-state laws on a
particular matter, a search much be made for the
relevant international laws. And, where there are
applicable host-state laws, they must be checked
against international laws, which will prevail in
case of conflict. Thus international law is fully
applicable and to classify its role as "only"
"supplemental and corrective" seems a distinction
without a difference. In any event, the Tribunal
believes that its task is to test every claim of law
in this case first against Indonesian law, and then

against international law.

Vv.

41.

30

Cc NG __O: TH! F
[DUCT OF I!
ON: W CT FOR GO"

OF INDONESIA IS INTERNATIONALLY RESPONSIBLE.

In the First Award, certain findings were made
relating to the role of the army and police. The
First Tribunal found that the events of April 1,
1980 onwards deprived Amco of the right to operate
the hotel. Referring also to the revocation of the
licence, the First Tribunal described "the prejudice
suffered" as consisting of "the loss of incorporeal,
patrimonial and potentially profitable rights"
(First Award, para.253). Having then established
a causal link between the "prejudice suffered" by
loss of the right to operate the hotel, and the
illegal acts of the army and police (para.257), the
First Tribunal then proceeded to determine damages.
It did not make a distinction between damages
related to prejudice caused by the acts of the army
and police, and prejudice caused by the licence

revocation.

42.

43.

31
The Ad Hoc Committee, while nullifying the
conclusions of the First Tribunal on the calculation
and the amount of the investment made by Amco, and
on the non-materiality of the shortfall, upheld the
findings of illegality of the acts of the army and
police (Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee, para.60).
Further, in a section entitled "On the grant of
damages resulting from the action by Army and Police
personnel", the Ad Hoc Committee reiterated that it
did not annul "this part of the Award, nor the
finding that Amco is entitled to damages from

Indonesia". (Ibid., para.108.)

After the Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee, and the
requests by the parties for the resubmission of the
dispute, the present Tribunal noted that there was
agreement between the parties that "the
responsibility of Indonesia to compensate PT Amco
for damages for the events of March 31-April 1,
1980" was yes judicata (Decision on Jurisdiction,
paras.48-49). It further held that it was also res
judicata that compensation would be due for the
unlawful acts of the army and police up to July 9,
1980 (para.93). The finding that violation by
virtue of the acts of the police and army continued

beyond July 9th was however nullified and thus fell

32

to be considered afresh by the present Tribunal.

44. In its Counter Memorial in the present proceedings,
Indonesia claimed that
"PT Amco's loss as a consequence of the

activities of the Army and Police was at most
the loss of its non-exclusive right to

manage... Its value, if any, was d inimis."
(Counter Memorial, pp.109-110).

45. In its Reply Amco contested that this ignored the

finding of the First Tribunal that:

"“(wjhile it is right to say that the claimants'
deprivation of the rights they had acquired did
not result from this de facto dispossession,
the fact of the matter is that the actual
prejudice they suffered, consisting in the
deprivation of the profit they were entitled
to expect by exercising said rights, commenced
on April 1, 1980, and that at this date, the
cause of the prejudice was the dispossession:
in other words, during this very first stage,
there was effectively a causal link between the
dispossession and the prejudice." (First Award,
para.257, cited at p.5 Reply).

Amco thus took the view that it was not open to
Indonesia, given the findings of this Tribunal on
res judicata, to contest that harm had occurred
consisting of the deprivation of the profits to

which they were entitled; only the amount and its

 

46.

47.

33

calculation could be contested before this Tribunal.

As indicated above (paras.42-43), it is res judicata
that the army and police acted unlawfully in respect
of the events of March 31-April 1 1980; that PT
Amco suffered prejudice thereby; and that it is the
responsibility of Indonesia to compensate for such
prejudice. However, the precise nature of the
prejudice suffered during this period and its
quantification remain issues properly open before

this Tribunal.

The title to the hotel building and land was held
by PT Wisma and the support of the army and police
in the actions of March 31-April 30 thus did not
expropriate the hotel as such. The rights held by
PT Amco in relation to the hotel were rights of
management and control on the one hand, and of
participation in the profits on the other.
Indonesia contended that rights of management and
control have no inherent value, but are rights
ancillary to the entitlement to a share of the
profit. Indonesia claimed that unless it could be
shown that the loss of rights of management and

control caused a diminution of profits by comparison

48.

49.

34
to what would have been achieved if Amco had
retained management, loss of management rights of
itself occasioned no harm to Amco and thus gave rise

to no compensation.

Indonesia in oral argument elaborated its position
that while the action of the army and the police was
relevant to the loss of management and control, it
did not mean that Amco could not continue to receive
the share of profits to which it was entitled under
its 1978 Profit Sharing Agreement with PT Wisma.
Amco contended that paragraph 257 of the First Award
(see above, para.45) made it res judicata that the
dispossession effected by the army and police did
indeed prevent the receipt by Amco of its share of

the profits.

The wording of paragraph 257 is not entirely easy.
It is not certain whether, in its reference to
"deprivation of the profit they were entitled to
expect", the First Tribunal was referring to a de
facto inability to receive, from April to July 1980,
its share of the profits under the 1978 Agreement;
or whether it was rather saying that the legal right

to secure profits from the Hotel Kartika venture was

50.

35
ultimately lost by the revocation decree of July
9th, the path to which began with the dispossession
of March 31-April 1. It is not sufficiently clear
to the present Tribunal which meaning was intended
by the First Tribunal; and neither the Ad Hoc
Committee's Decision at paragraph 109 nor the
present Tribunal's Decision on Jurisdiction,
paragraph 93, makes a finding on this particular

aspect.

The Tribunal believes that paragraph 257 is not to
be understood as entailing a res judicata in the
sense contended for by Amco (para.42, infra). The
Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee was to annul with
qualifications, one such being the illegality of the
acts of the army and police. But paragraph 257 goes
beyond mere affirmation of such illegality and is
therefore not to be treated as res judicata.
Accordingly, the Tribunal therefore finds that,
while it is res judicata that the army and police
acted unlawfully up to July 9, 1980, and that some
compensation is due therefor, it is necessary to
identify exactly what rights were lost; and in

respect of any so lost, the damage caused.

51.

52.

36
In a situation where management is not being paid’
a fee under a management service contract, its
remuneration lies in the commercial importance that
management will have on profitability. The evidence
before the Tribunal indicates that the 1980 results
were significantly above those for 1979. This was
true of the first quarter of 1980 (under the PT Amco
management) as much as for the rest of the year.
It also may have been the case that 1979 had been
an unusually poor year for hotels in Jakarta. On
the other hand, the Tribunal has no way of knowing
what the profit levels would have been during 1980

under Amco management.

Whatever the level of profitability, Amco take the
view that as of April 1, 1980, de facto they were
unable to secure their entitlement to their share
of profits; and read paragraph 257 of the First
Award as affirming this. Put differently, Amco
contends that the loss of their rights under the
Profit-Sharing contract of 1978 occurred on April
1, 1980. In Amco's view April 1 marked the date of
taking their profit-sharing rights and was thus the
date at which those rights were to be valued for

compensation purposes.

53.

54.

37

Indonesia insists that, notwithstanding unlawful
action by the military and police, there was no
taking of PT Amco's profit share rights on April 1,
for two reasons. First, the events of March 31-
April 1 dispossessed PT Amco of its right to manage,
but did not at all touch upon its right to a share
of profits under the Profit-Sharing Agreement.
Second, any difficulty PT aAmco might have
experienced in securing these profits was a matter
between PT Wisma and PT Amco. Even if PT Wisma had
refused to allow PT Amco its share of the profits,
such act should not be attributed to the Government
of Indonesia, PT Wisma being a legally distinct

body.

On this last point the Tribunal notes that PT Amco's
current management rights were held under the 1978
Profit Sharing Agreement with PT Wisma and notice
of their termination was issued by PT Wisma, and not
the Government of Indonesia. Nonetheless, the First
Tribunal found Indonesia responsible for acts which
led to the dispossession of PT Amco from its rights.
By the same token, if PT Amco's entitlement to
participation in the profits was taken from it at

the same moment, it cannot be precluded that in

55.

56.

38

principle Indonesia could be held responsible.

However, it still remains to be determined whether
PT Amco did at that juncture lose, de facto or

otherwise, its right to a share of the profits.

There has been no evidence before the Tribunal to
indicate that PT Amco made a demand for its share
of the profits during the period April-July 1980.
However, the Tribunal was informed by Indonesia (and
it was not contested by Amco) that settling of the
profit share would normally have occurred only on
an annual basis. (See Previously Filed Documents,
Vol.I, Tab.41.) It is the case that the Central
Jakarta District Court, when ruling on May 28, 1980
on PT Wisma's claim for an interlocutory decree
entitling it to manage the Hotel Kartika pending
further legal proceedings, ordered that PT Wisma
render a monthly account and justification of the
management. (Indonesia Factual Appendix B, Tab.2).
This order, while a normal protection in an
interlocutory order where the final issues remain
to be determined, necessarily envisaged the
possibility that the Profit Sharing Agreement was

still operational at that point.

57.

58.

39

The present controversy as to whether the events of
April 1, 1980 impinged upon PT Amco's entitlement
to participation in the profits occurred against a
background described in the First Award as "a kind
of Cold War" (para.104). Each side had taken
certain actions and issued certain orders to try to
secure its position. PT Amco kept its offices in
the building until October 1980 (for details of
these various actions and events, see First Award,
paras.102-109). It was suggested to the Tribunal
that meetings were in fact continuing throughout
this period between PT Amco and PT Wisma, though
there is no evidence that anything was discussed at
such meetings save PT Wisma's demands for the full

implementation of the transfer of management.

The Tribunal finds that although PT Amco was
prevented from exercising its right to management
and control due to the events of March 31-April 1
1980, it has not been shown that at this time it

also lost its entitlement to its share of profits.

59.

60.

40
Management rights are generally considered in the
hotel industry to be a valuable and sought-after
commodity. No quantification for this loss per se
has been offered by PT Amco. Two issues have
arisen, however, in relation to loss of management
rights. First, the Tribunal must consider whether
the taking of PT Amco's management rights caused a
level of profits to be reached under PT Wisma that

was less than it would otherwise have been. It was

 

d by J ia in oral ar that the
profit levels secured under PT Wisma management were
in fact higher than those secured in the period
under PT Amco management. Be that as it may, it
cannot be shown what PT Amco might have achieved,
had it continued to manage, compared with the profit
levels that were actually achieved under PT Amco's
management. This comparison is necessarily
hypothetical. No figures were directed by PT Amco
to the Tribunal on this point, nor was any specific
portion of the US$15,000,000 claimed said to be

attributable to this element of loss.

Amco further claimed that the undoubted loss of its
rights of management and control also entailed loss
of access to the daily cash flow of the hotel. This

loss too was not quantified by Amco, but the access

61.

4l
to the cash flow was said to be commercially
valuable in the property investment business. For
its part, Indonesia noted that nothing in the 1978
Profit Sharing Agreement (Indonesia Exh., Vol.II,
Tab.4) gave any specific contract right to PT Amco
for access to the cash flow. Indonesia further
contended that, whereas Amco might have lost control
over the daily cash flow, such right was in any
event fiduciary in nature, with Amco being
accountable for any surplus over hotel needs, and
any interest thereon. This surplus and interest
would be part of the profits to be shared under the
1978 Agreement, being part of the Net Income

referred to in paragraph 3 thereof.

It is res judicata that access to the cash flow was
lost to Amco by virtue of the actions of the army
and police (First Award, para.257, first sentence).
The First Tribunal did not, however, attempt to
address the character of this loss. Even though
Amco's entitlement to the cash flow appears to have
been as a matter of practice, rather than as any
express contract right, such access would be a
normal incidence of management. No evidence was put
before this Tribunal as to practice between the

parties in relation to the exercise of this access

62.

42
to the cash flow. Amco's access to the cash flow
appears, however, to have been accepted by both
parties. The Tribunal believes that control of the
daily cash flow was fiduciary in nature. Amco's
entitlement was to make disbursements from the cash
flow for the necessary expenditures of the hotel.
Insofar as any balance was interest bearing, that
interest was for the benefit of both parties. No
damages can therefore be awarded for the loss of

access to the cash flow.

None of the above is to be taken as condoning by the
Tribunal of military intervention as a method
unilaterally to resolve disputes concerning foreign
investment. If it was desired to remove Amco from
Management, appropriate Indonesian legal procedures
existed to examine this possibility. It is not
sufficient to have had recourse to these procedures
for related, but different, legal purposes after the
physical loss of management control by reason of the
army and police action. The Tribunal's task,
however, has been to identify the precise prejudice

caused by these undoubtedly unlawful acts.

63.

43
While its analysis does not lead to the award of
damages for the aspects of military intervention
thus far examined, a further matter remains. The
loss of the right to manage entailed a general
disturbance caused to Amco. Some details of this
disturbance are recalled at paras.101-108 of the
First Award; and this consequence of the de facto
loss of the right to manage on April 1 was also
referred to in oral argument. The Tribunal finds
that such harm was caused as a result of the illegal
police and army intervention, and continued at least
until Amco's licence was revoked on July 9, 1990.

A sum of damages will be awarded.

VI. THE BKPM REVOCATION OF PT AMCO'S LICENCE

(a)
64.

Cc: Nsj e i "
Amco claimed that the revocation was not
substantively justified because one of the grounds
on which it was said to be based has been held
invalid by the First Tribunal. It argued that a
decision unable to rely on that struck-down ground

was necessarily invalid.

65.

66.

44
The BKPM revocation decision (Indonesia Exh.,
Vol.II, Tab.63) contains several recitals of fact,
and two clauses that may properly he said to be
recitals of law which state reasons for the decision
to revoke. One such reason was the clause
rehearsing Amco's failure to invest the required sum
of foreign capital. The other was
"2. that based on the Sub Lease Agreement
dated October 15 1969 jo [sic] October 13,
1970, P.T. Amco Indonesia (Lessor) delivered
the management of Hotel Kartika Plaza to P.T.
Aeropacific Hotel Corp. (Lessee), therefore it
is not P.T. Amco Indonesia which fulfilled the
obligations as stipulated in the said Lease and
Management contract..."
The First Tribunal held (First Award, paras.206-219)
that the assigning of the sublease was not a
sufficient ground for revocation; and the present

Tribunal has determined that finding to be res

judicata (Decision on Jurisdiction, para.57).

Amco contends that as these are not stated to be
grounds in the alternative, the striking down of
the validity of the one (the assignment of the
sublease) leaves the other (insufficiency of
investment) as inadequate to sustain, alone, the

decision to revoke.

67.

68.

45

The matter is one of .construction. The parties
cited no authorities, whether of Indonesian or
international law, to support their positions.
Although the revocation decision does not, it is
true, say that the two grounds are grounds in the
alternative, it is equally true that it does not
state that they are cumulative. Looked at as a
whole, there is nothing in the wording or structure
of the decision that leads one to suppose that the
one ground is dependent on the other or insufficient
without the other. More particularly, there is
nothing in the wording or structure of the
revocation decision that would entitle this Tribunal
to conclude that BKPM would have been unable to
revoke by reference to insufficiency of investment

without also relying on the assignment of the lease.

This finding of construction is sustained by an
examination of the relevant Indonesian legislation.
Law No.1 of 1967 (Factual Appendix A to Counter-
Memorial, Tab.1) contains provisions on foreign
capital investment that stand separately from other
matters. The situation is not changed by the
Announcement of the Foreign Exchange Bureau (BLLD)

on July 25, 1967, elucidating Law No.1 of 1967

69.

(b)

70.

46
(Ibid., Tab.2). Paragraph 1 of this Announcement
emphasises that in foreign capital investment the
investor bears the risk. Decree No.63/1969
"Regulations and Procedures for Exercising Control
over Capital Investments" (Ibid., Tab.3) simply
provides for withdrawal of the licence "if the
capital investment plan is not implemented in
accordance with the approval that has been granted";
there is no suggestion that an alleged insufficiency
of investment would be an insufficient ground to
cause such sanction, if it was not also coupled
with, e.g., a failure by the investor to bear all

the risk.

Whether looked at from the perspective of the
specific BKPM revocation order, or the underlying
applicable Indonesian legislation, the BKPM decision
could in principle be valid notwithstanding the
striking down of the validity of the "second limb"

of the decision.

Proced: e! rities and the BKPM Decision

Amco's second cause of action lay in its claim that

its licence had been wrongfully revoked, entitling

47
it to full compensation therefor. There were many
interrelated threads to this cause of action. The
starting point was the finding of the first Tribunal
that, as a matter of Indonesian law and of
international law, the procedures leading to the
deprivation of PT Amco's licence had violated due
process. (First Award, paras.198, 201, 203.) The
first Tribunal's finding that the procedure of the
licence revocation was unlawful is res judicata.
(Decision on Jurisdiction, para.48). This starting
point was necessarily common to both parties.
However, they made different arguments and drew
different conclusions. Amco contended that the due
process violation of itself entitled it to
compensation and that this would be so even if -
which PT Amco denied - the revocation decision of
BKPM were substantively valid. Amco had contended
in its first cause of action that damages lay for
the army and police intervention on March 31-April
1, and that these damages should reflect a taking
of the right to management and control, access to
cash flow and PT Amco's inability to secure
participation in the profits. Amco contended that
the procedurally unlawful revocation of the licence
was not only incapable of operating to "cut off"
such damages running from April lst, but was itself

a further ground for the award of damages.

71.

72.

48

Indonesia claimed that procedural violations did
not per se give rise to damages, unless it could be
shown that it was the very lack of due process that
led to an unlawful substantive decision. Further,
rather as Indonesia had contended that the events
of March 31-April 1, while illegal, had caused no
significant damage, so it was contended that the
unlawful BKPM procedures occasioned no damage -
partly because the revocation would in any event
have occurred for proper substantive reasons, and
partly because PT Amco was in fact afforded later
opportunities to have the initial revocation

decision revised.

This last argument comes close, as Amco pointed out,
to a reopening of res judicata findings of
procedural illegality. However, the Tribunal was
prepared to countenance Indonesia's argument that
there was new evidence which could be properly put
before the Tribunal which, while it could not
overturn a res judicata finding of procedural
illegality, could still go to showing lack of damage
arising therefrom. It was on that basis that the

Tribunal was reminded that the Revocation Order

73.

49
itself (Indonesia Exh, Vol.II, Tab.63) contained the
possibility of rectification in the face of error;
and it was suggested that evidence showed that PT
Amco sought to have the Revocation Order reviewed
(Ibid., Vol.II, Tab.65 and Vol.VII, Tab.124). The
fribunal's attention was also drawn to certain
documentation which was not before the first
Tribunal, including representations made by
Washington lawyers acting on behalf of Amco Asia to
the Indonesian Embassy in Washington (Ibid.,
Vol.VII, Tab.112); representations made by
Indonesian lawyers to the Chairman of BKPM (Ibid.,
Vol.VII, Tab.113); and to PT Wisma (Ibid, Vol.VII,
Tab.124). It was put to the Tribunal that it was
the inability of PT Amco to satisfy the licence
criteria, rather than an inability to have BKPM
reconsider matters, that caused any harm suffered

by PT Amco.

Amco contended that damages due as a result of the
unlawful acts of the army and police of March
31/April 1, could not be "cut off" by a BKPM
decision that was procedurally unlawful. Further,
the fact that the BKPM decision was procedurally
unlawful, itself gave rise to damages. As has been

indicated, this Tribunal finds that the events of

74.

75.

50
March 31-April 1, while unlawful, occasioned damages
only in respect of disturbance to PT Amco. The
significance of the question of whether a
procedurally unlawful revocation of the licence by
BKPM could operate to "cut off" the flow of damages
thus in large part falls away. The other facet of
the second Amco cause of action - namely, whether
the violations of due process in the revocation of
the licence per se entitle Amco to recover damages ~
remains for consideration. Amco contended that even
were BKPM's decision substantively valid, damages

would be due for the procedural violations.

However, this last question, on which the Tribunal
heard much interesting argument on Indonesian and
on international law from both parties, is of
practical importance only (given that Amco has
offered no separate quantification for such head of
damage) if BKPM's revocation is found to be
substantively lawful. That issue will therefore be

addressed next.

The Tribunal believes that the relevant issue is not
whether (as Amco contends) procedural irregularities

generate compensation, even if the substantive

ot

76.

51
decision might be lawful; nor whether (as Indonesia
contends) compensation is only due for procedural
violations if these are themselves the cause of an
unlawful substantive decision. Rather, the issue
that must be determined is whether there exists a
generally tainted background that necessarily
renders a decision unlawful, even if substantive
grounds may exist for such a decision. This
background includes, but is not limited to, the

question of procedural irregularities.

In early 1980 there existed serious disagreements
between PT Amco and PT Wisma on a variety of
matters, including the sums due to each party under
the 1978 Profit-Sharing Agreement. By late March
Colonel Soetjipto, the Chief Executive Officer of
PT Wisma, Major Malonda, the Security Coordinator
of the hotel, General Soerjo, a Director of PT
Wisma, and others, were preparing for the takeover
of control on March 31. (See First Award, para.91).
The letter by which PT Wisma informed PT Amco that
it was taking back control of the Wisma Kartika
property dated March 31, 1980 (Indonesia Exh.,
Vol.II, Tab.55), was in fact signed by General
Soerjo on March 28, 1980 (First Award, para.91).

On March 31-April 1 1980 the army and police

77.

52
intervened and PT Amco, in spite of attempts to re-
secure its position (Ibid, paras.98-108),
effectively lost control of the management of Hotel
Kartika. Some members of the armed forces remained
in the hotel until October 1980 (Ibid, para.109).
The intervention of the army and police and their
presence are elements that cannot be ignored in the

ensuing events.

On April 12 1980, General Soerjo, a director of PT
Wisma and now Chairman of the PT Wisma-appointed
Management Council of the Kartika Hotel, accompanied
by Mr. Zoelkarnain Ali, a former employee of PT Amco
who was now employed by PT Wisma, visited the
offices of BKPM. The PT Wisma representatives
alleged certain irregularities with Amco's
investment in Indonesia (First Award, para.112).
A second meeting was held later that day between PT
Wisma (represented on this occasion by Mr.
Zoelkarnain Ali and Mr. Azwar Karim) and Mr. Ridho
Harun and Mr. Usman Mahmud for BKPM (Ibid,
para.113). The meeting was followed by a letter of
April 14, 1980, from PT Wisma to BKPM (Indonesia
Exh., Vol.II, Tab.57). Apparently there had been
an earlier letter of April 11, but this was not

Placed before the First Tribunal (First Award,

78.

53
para.114) or before this Tribunal. The allegations
in the April 14 letter were summarised by the First

Tribunal thus (ibid, para.117):-

"... (a) PT Amco had failed to meet its
investment obligations under the Investment
Licence and the 1968 Lease and Management
Agreement; (b) the accounting treatment in PT
Amco's financial statements of the US$1,000,000
1969 ABN Loan was misleading insofar as it
purported to represent 'fresh capital abroad';
(c) payments for imported goods came from
Indonesian operations and not from overseas
funds; (d) significant sums were transferred
abroad and 'never reported and without the
knowledge' of Bank Indonesia, BKPM and PT
Wisma; (e) PT Amco was ‘unwilling to submit
to PT Wisma its periodical reports concerning
the proceeds of lease of rooms and shops'; (f)
goods imported by PT Amco from Hong Kong were
inflated; (g) PT Amco in 1973 participated in
a fictitious loan from Pan American, and
treated same in PT Amco's books in such a way
as 'to deceive the Government’; (h) certain
payments by PT Amco to Yee On Hong, a Hong Kong
company, were really payments of debts due by
Pan American to Yee On Hong, and other
allegations of a similar nature ..."

PT Wisma identified PT Amco's investment obligation
by reference to the 1968 Lease and Management
Agreement. That Agreement required "up to" $US4m
to be invested, with US$3m as equity and US$1m in
loans. PT Wisma's letter of April 14, 1980 states
the obligation as $4m, omitting "up to". In any
event, the correct sum to be invested by PT Amco is
to be found in the official Investment Application

and approval (infra, paras.4). The capital of PT

79.

80.

54
Amco, as there set out, was to be US$3m, all of
which "represents foreign capital and was to be
deposited stage by stage and may take the form of
cash, capital goods or both." At the conclusion of
the PT Wisma letter of April 14, 1980, there is a
passing reference to capital investment relating to
"the capital structure which they had agreed with
PT Wisma Kartika or what have been stated in PT Amco
Indonesia's application to the Government"
(Indonesia Exh., Vol.II, Tab.57, XII(1)). But no
mention is made, here or elsewhere in the letter,
of the different sum of US $3m set out in the

Investment Application.

A one hour meeting took place on April 13 1980
between representatives of BKPM and of PT Amco.
(First Award, para.116; Washington Hearings,

p-1230, December 22, 1983).

Three days after the allegations were presented by
PT Wisma to BKPM for the first time, and one day
after receiving the detailed allegations in the

April 14, 1980 letter and enclosures” from PT Wisma,

 

The totality of which have not been produced

before this Tribunal.

81.

55
Mr. Usman of BKPM prepared a Summary for Mr. Ridho
Harun on the matter (First Award, paras.118 and 123;
Indonesia Exh., Vol.II, Tab.58). The summary was
sent to the Chairman of BKPM on April 26,1980 (Ibid,

Vol.II, Tab.59).

There are many disturbing aspects about the
preparation of this summary, all of which have been
pointed out by the First Tribunal and not alleviated
by any evidence that was put to this Tribunal. It
is the PT Wisma position on the Lease and Management
Contract and the Profit-Sharing Agreement that is
taken as the starting point. The First Tribunal put

it thus (First Award, paras.120-121):-

"120. Mr Usman then stated the 'problem' as he
saw it: 'The management of Hotel Kartika Plaza
Building was taken over by PT Wisma Kartika
because PT AMCO INDONESIA did not meet the
provisions in the Lease and Management Contract
of the year 1968, and the Agreement of 1979
(sic) (although by this, Mr Usman was obviously
referring to the 1978 Profit Sharing
Agreement), and also violations of Public Law'.
Which ‘Public Laws' were violated, Mr Usman at
this point, did not say. He then went on to
give a clarification of what took place in
regard to the AMCO group's investment in
Indonesia, basing himself entirely on '‘'the
meeting with representatives of P.T. Wisma
Kartika on the 12th day of April, 1980 at the
office of BKPM' at which 'the occurrence of the
above problem was explained ...'. In his
Summary Mr Usman did not say whether he spoke
with/or visited Bank of Indonesia and/or the
Indonesian tax authorities. His assessment of
the facts, according to his report, was based

82.

56

solely on the April 12th, 1980 'meetings' with
PT Wisma representatives. Furthermore, nothing
was said about PT AMCO's side of the story or
about his meeting with the PT AMCO
representatives on April 13, 1980.

"121. Mr Usman concluded: 'Based on the above
facts it can be concluded that PT AMCO
INDONESIA has committed violations towards the
administrative provisions of the capital
investment (law) in the form of: 1° - did not
fulfil the invest(ment) as had been agreed upon
by the Government; 2° - it has acknowledged a
loan as equity; 3° - it did not send report(s)
to Bank Indonesia concerning the transfer(s)
abroad; 4° - within 5 years, it did not forward
report(s) to BKPM on the realization of (its)
capital investment; 5° - it did not report on
the execution of the Sub-Lease Agreement by PT
AMCO INDONESIA to BKPM, and (in) this case it
also means that PT AMCO INDONESIA did not
manage the project by itself. Besides that,
PT AMCO INDONESIA has also committed violations
which have criminal characteristics in the form
of: 1°- committing tax manipulation in the
sense it did not pay tax as it should as had
been assessed; 2° - giving as guarantee the
assets owned by the Hotel, for obtaining (a)
loan, without the approval of the owner (PT
Wisma Kartika)."

Mr. Usman's Summary did not refer to the amount or
schedule of payment with regard to the foreign
capital obligations of Amco Asia (First Award,
para.118). Rather than correctly summarising the
amount that Amco Asia was required to invest, Mr.
Usman, like PT Wisma, referred to the 1968 Lease and
Management Agreement and repeated the (incorrect)
sums specified in the letter of April 14, 1980

(Ibid., para.119; Indonesia Exh., Vol.II, Tab.57).

83.

84.

57
Further, Mr. Usman, in reporting on PT Wisma's
allegations, not only reached his conclusions at
great speed but failed to visit the Bank of
Indonesia for talks and thorough examination of
relevant files (First Award, para.115; not refuted
in evidence before this Tribunal). And although Mr.
Usman testified to the First Tribunal that he
visited the tax office (Ibid., para.115), no
evidence placed before this Tribunal indicates that
any meeting was held with customs officials
regarding charges relevant to their

responsibilities.

The manner in which Mr Usman prepared his Summary
must be described as rushed, over-reliant on PT
Wisma's characterisations, factually careless, and
insufficiently based on detailed and independent
verification with the authorities concerned. This
is so whether or not any of the charges were in fact

sustainable.

These shortcomings were not rectified by BKPM's
handling of Mr Usman's Summary. Mr. Ridho, for whom
Mr Usman prepared his summary, repeated Mr. Usman's

statements in the brief memorandum that he sent to

85.

58
the Deputy Chairman of BKPM on May 10, 1980. He
added, however, additional information on the US$1n.
amount which BKPM regarded as a loan. (Indonesia
Exh., Vol.II, Tab.60). On May 12, 1980 the Chairman
of BKPM wrote to the President of the Republic of
Indonesia, requesting guidance as to whether
approval would be given to a decision to terminate
the licence. The First Tribunal has noted that this
communication repeats inaccurate references to the
1968 Lease and Management Agreement, omits mention
of Amco's investment obligations according to its
investment licence, reiterates the findings of
violations without any detailed evidence being
presented, rather repeating "allegations [that] were
a combination of those contained in the Usman and
Ridho Reports" (First Award, para.126; and see

Indonesia Exh., Vol.II, Tab.61).

The President of the Republic approved the
revocation of PT Amco's investment licence on May
30, 1980. (Indonesia Exh., Vol.II, Tab.63, para.6).
A further meeting took place between BKPM and PT
Amco on June 16, 1980 and correspondence ensued
(Indonesia Exh., vol.II, Tabs.62 and 65).
Representations were also made on July 3, 1980 by

Washington lawyers to the Indonesian Embassy in

86.

59
Washington (Indonesia Exh., Vol.VII, Tab.112). On
July 8, 1980, the Greater Jakarta Court granted PT
Amco's application for the postponement of the
implementation of the interlocutory decree ordered
by the Central Jakarta District Court on May 28,
1980. On July 9, 1980 BKPM issued Decision No.
07/VII/PMA/1980 revoking the said licence (ibid,
Tab.63). This Decision referred to failures of PT
Amco under both the 1968 Lease and Management
Contract and the Investment Licence, though BKPM
had no authority to revoke by reason of alleged
shortcomings under a private contract. The
Revocation Decision also refers to the Lease and
Management Contract and the Investment Licence in
terms which suggest that the investment sums in each
were identical. The reference to the Lease and
Management Contract was not only inapposite, but
incorrect. The Decision stated that PT Amco was
required “according to the Lease and Management
Contract and its Foreign Capital Application" to

invest $4m, $3m as its own equity.

Mr. Usman's Summary states that "based on the letter
from Bank Indonesia dated 1st of October 1971,
permanent registration of the entry of new capital

was only amounted to $US983,992.65". It was

 

87.

60
explained to the Tribunal (Counter-Memorial, p.76)
that in April 1980 BKPM received PT Amco's balance
sheet as of December 31, 1978, which had not
previously been available; and that BKPM was now in
a position to calculate that PT Amco had invested

even less in equity capital, namely, $399,000.

Indonesia contended in its Counter-Memorial, and
during oral argument, that "Under Indonesian law,
the calculation of a foreign investment must be made
by reference to Bank Indonesia regulations regarding
registration, and the kinds of evidence the Bank
requires" and that if a foreign investor were to
challenge the registration in an Indonesian Court,
"(t]he registration of capital by Bank Indonesia,
therefore, is dispositive, absent a showing that the
Bank did not respect its own regulations." (Counter-
Memorial, pp.70-71; supported by Opinion of Dr.
Komar Kantaatmadja ("the Komar Opinion"), Legal App.
Vol.I, Tab.B, pp.64-65. This was challenged in the
Opinion of Mrs Winita Kusnander, ("the Kusnander
Opinion"), New Legal Exhibits to Claimants' Reply,

Tab.140, pp.19-21.)

 

88.

61
The Tribunal is at this juncture not addressing the
substantive correctness or otherwise of BKPM's
decision, but rather the background to its decision
and the climate in which it was made. In that
context, the Tribunal observes that it is well
established that registration of investment and its
recognition as foreign capital is a matter for Bank
Indonesia. Prior to 1971, this task was given to
the Foreign Exchange Bureau (BLLD) (Fact. App. A to
the Counter-Memorial, Tab.2) and then to the Bank
of Indonesia for purposes of the administration of
foreign capital in the framework of Law No.1 of 1967
(Ibid, Tab.4). The Bank of Indonesia issued
detailed directives for administering and reporting
foreign capital investment (Ibid, Tab.7). It also
issued interpretative provisions on the
implementation of foreign capital investment within
the framework of the Law of 1967 (Ibid, Tab.9). It
is clear, especially from this last, that companies
operating under the Law of 1967 are required to
notify the Bank of Indonesia about the capital they
have invested. The Bank grants temporary
registration based on the quarterly report from the
company concerned, and permanent registration after

examination:

"The said examination among - others is
concerning the proper prices of goods/services,

89.

62

either in regard to payment of share capital
or as implementation of foreign loan in the
framework of fulfilling the intended investment
concerned, and to conform with the Financial
Statement and Summary on Foreign Capital
examined/verified by registered a Accountant
Office (sic).
"This registration is performed with the
obligation to submit the financial report with
the realisation of the capital investment
within the framework of PMA [Foreign Capital
Investment] to Bank Indonesia ..." (Ibid.,
Tab.9, para.2B).

This central role of Bank Indonesia, clearly
envisaged in the relevant decrees and instruments,
was confirmed in oral evidence. Ms. S. Pellaupessy
of Bank Indonesia told the Tribunal that it was for
the Bank of Indonesia to see that a licence
obligation is met, and that it was a duty against
the background of the terms of the licence. An
account had to be opened with Bank Indonesia,
precisely so that the Bank could monitor compliance.
Dr. Noer of BKPM affirmed that, where compliance
with the licence was under scrutiny, there would be
reliance on the Bank of Indonesia. He further

confirmed that in the only other case where a
licence had been revoked for a failure to make the
specified investment of foreign capital (Indonesia
Exh., Vol.VI, Tab.99, No.10), the figures produced
by Bank Indonesia were relied upon. Mrs. Kusnander

suggests in her Opinion that in the legal

90.

63
proceedings the Court was prepared to rely on BKPM's
figures rather than the Bank of Indonesia's. In the
interlocutory judgment (Previously Filed Claimants'
Documents, Volume I, Tab.22) no reference was made
to the BKPM figure. In the judgment of the Jakarta
Court (Ibid, Tab.27), referred to by Mrs. Kusnander,
the issue before the Court was, however, whether PT
Amco had defaulted on its contract with PT Wisma,
and not whether PT Amco had made the necessary
foreign capital investments. PT Wisma thus claimed
that PT Amco was obligated to pay "capital amounting
to US$4,000,000" and had only "paid-in an amount of
US$1,399,000". The Court agreed, rejecting PT
Amco's figures. However, as the case was not
concerned with foreign capital investment, the Court
was never put in the position of having to choose
between the Bank's figure of US$983,992.65 and

BKPM's figure of US$399,000.

It is clear to the Tribunal, in any event, that the
disparity between the Bank's figures and those of
BKPM was due to the fact that the former represented
capital of foreign origin; while the latter
represented equity capital shown in the 1978 audited
accounts (received by BKPM in 1980), less US$1m

which BKPM regarded as a loan improperly disguised

 

64 |
as equity. While BKPM was surely entitled to make
use of audited figures, these figures could not of
themselves reveal what was capital of foreign
origin. It would have been expected that the
figures be passed to Bank Indonesia whose central
role in the verification of foreign capital is
clear. BKPM could perhaps have taken the view that
the evidence in the 1978 accounts of shortfall of
equity investment was so clear that there was no
need to refer to the Bank for guidance as to the
foreign capital element. But the fact remains that
BKPM relied on 1978 figures, rather than ask the
Bank for any further information it might have in

1980.

(c) The Information Known to BKPM at the Time of its Decision

91.

In its written complaint of April 14, 1980 to BKPM,
PT Wisma made various allegations about matters
other than PT Amco's stated failure to meet its
investment obligations. These included allegations
of failure to make investment reports; of
misleading accounting treatment of the US$1,000,000
1965 ABN loan; unreported transfer of sums abroad;
inflation of prices indicated for goods imported by

PT Amco from Hong Kong; and participation by PT Amco

92.

93.

65
in 1973 in a fictitious loan from Pan American,
which was then misleadingly presented in PT Amco's

books. (See below, para.111).

These matters were repeated, in the form of findings
adverse to PT Amco, by Mr Usman in the report that
he prepared for BKPM. (See above, para.81); and
were repeated in further memoranda of BKPM,
including the request to the President of the
Republic for approval of a decision to terminate the
investment licence. (See above, para.84). The
violations of legal obligation said to entitle
revocation (other than shortfall of investment) are
elaborated in the Counter-Memorial, pp.87-92.
Indonesia contended before the Tribunal that even
if there had not been sufficient grounds for
revocation by virtue of the investment shortfall,

these other grounds would have entitled BKPM to

terminate the licence.

The Tribunal heard testimony from Mr. N. Hanafi that
the tax authorities became aware that the loan from
Pan American was fictitious only when they
discovered that there was, despite PT Amco's

previous denials, a set of audited accounts for

94.

95.

66
1973. Mr. Hanafi told the Tribunal that neither he
nor any other responsible officer of BKPM saw the
1973 audited accounts "before it became a case".
He also informed the Tribunal that he did not know
of any required second 'deficiency letter' being
sent for 1973, or for any year, and that he did not
check the records of payments kept in the collection

section.

The Tribunal notes that the evidence placed before
it at oral hearings in Washington (which appeared
to have been processed after 1980) tended to
indicate that sums in tax were still due for the
period 1974 to 1977. This fact was characterised
by Mr. Usman, and by the BKPM letter to the
President, as "tax manipulation" (Indonesia Exh.,
Vol.II, Tab.58, para.5; and ibid, Tab.60),
notwithstanding that no case for recovery of tax
under Indonesian law had been brought against PT

Amco by the date of the revocation of the licence.

So far as the allegations concerning inflating of
import prices were concerned, the Tribunal heard
from Mr. E. Abdurrachman about documents entitled

"Acknowledgement of Clearance for Use", which, when

96.

97.

98.

67
presented by the importer or his agent, and finally
signed by the Chief of the Customs Section at the
port, becomes authority for the release of the goods
("PPUD"). Mr. Abdurrachman informed the Tribunal
that he had been unable to find PT Amco's documents,
to review them, among the general filing held at the

port of entry.

Neither tax manipulation nor import irregularities
were in the event relied on when BKPM drew up its

formal revocation decision. (Ibid, Tab.63)

Finally, the Tribunal cannot but note that in a
letter of September 22, 1980, BKPM wrote to the
Ambassador of the Republic of Indonesia to the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, to inform him about
events concerning PT Amco and PT Wisma, and told him
"the take over of the management of Hotel Kartika
Plaza by PT Wisma Kartika was performed without the
involvement or assistance of the Indonesian Army".

(Indonesia Exh., Vol.VII, Tab.120, at para.9).

The Tribunal finds that the whole approach to the

issue of revocation of the licence was tainted by

99.

100.

68

bad faith, reflected in events and procedures.

At this juncture the Tribunal wishes to observe that
while it has for the First Tribunal been relatively
straightforward to perceive Indonesia as the
wrongdoer, and Amco as the aggrieved party, to the
present Tribunal matters in 1990 are less black and
white. That Indonesia acted unlawfully through the
police and army action is undeniable. But the
evidence also reflects discreditably on Amco. Amco
submitted apparently false statements concerning the
availability of audited accounts for certain years.
Accounts submitted to the tax authorities contained
deductions for interest on a loan never entered

into.

Amco's obligation to invest foreign capital was
established by the Minister of Public Works' final
approval of Amco's investment application given on
July 29, 1969 (Indonesia Exh. 8, Vol., Tab.8). In
the approval the Minister gave "permission to Amco
Asia Corp. to establish P.T. Amco Indonesia in
Jakarta, in accordance with its letter of request
to the Foreign Capital Investment Technical Team".

The letter of request referred to in the Minister's

 

!
i
|
i
1
1

101.

102.

69
decision is Amco Asia's application of May 6, 1968
to establish PT. Amco Indonesia (Amco_ Exh.,
Previously Filed Claimants Documents, Vol.I, Tab.5
and Indonesia Exh., Vol.I, Tab.4) as amended by Amco
Asia's letter of May 13, 1969 to the Foreign Capital

Investment Technical Team (Ibid., Tab.5).

In the application Amco Asia undertook to invest its
own assets in PT Amco Indonesia so that PT Amco
Indonesia's share capital would amount to US$3n,
divided into 30,000 shares with a nominal value of
US$100 per share. All of the company equity was to
be foreign equity. The application also provided
that capital would be deposited in stages and could
be in the form of cash, capital goods, or both. The
application indicated that a deposit schedule and
deposit form was attached. These documents have not

been produced by the parties.

The investment application shows that the equity
investment was not to be made at one time, but could
be made over a period of time. Due to lack of
evidence, it is not possible firmly to establish
within what time period the equity investment was

to be made. Indonesia's position has not been

103.

70
consistent in the matter (Indonesia's Counter-
Memorial, at footnote 253 states "It continues to
be Indonesia's position that the investment had to
be satisfied at the latest by 1972 to coincide with
the scheduled completion of the hotel". But
footnote 295 says that it is res judicata that the
Amco Group had ten years until the end of 1978 to
complete their investment. And Mr. Noer of BKPM
told the Tribunal that it was still open to Amco to

meet any shortfall even up to June 1980).

PT Wisma's letter of April 14, 1980 to BKPM
(Indonesia Exh., Vol.II, Tab.57) contains a
reference to the now missing document schedule
annexed to Amco's investment application. According
to PT Wisma the deposit schedule states that the
entire capital shall be remitted to Indonesia at the
latest within four years. PT Wisma does not state
from what time the period starts to run. The time
period stipulated in the Lease and Managment
Agreement of 1968 was approximately five years from
the authorities' approval of Amco's investment

application.

104.

105.

71
The construction of the hotel was completed in late

1971/early 1972 (First Award, para.74).

During the period from 1968 to 1971 Amco applied to
Bank Indonesia for the registration of a total of
US$2,156,559.13 in foreign investment. As of
October 1, 1971 Bank Indonesia had permanently
registered only an amount of US$983,992.65. Bank
Indonesia's refusal to make permanent registration
was in part due to lack of sufficient documentation
for the actual value of imported goods. Amco's
request in 1971 for registration of certain assets
as reinvested profits was denied by Bank Indonesia
because the amounts did not constitute reinvested
profits under the Foreign Investment Law. Ina
letter dated November 23, 1972 Bank Indonesia
requested Amco to report on the realisation of the
capital investment (Indonesia Exh., Vol.I, Tab.29).
It would seem that Amco did not reply to this letter
from Bank Indonesia and apparently Bank Indonesia
let nearly three years pass without taking any
action. With reference to the November 23, 1972
letter, Bank Indonesia requested in a letter of
October 29, 1975 that Amco submit the reports as
soon as possible. A copy of the letter was sent to

BKPM (Indonesia Exh., ibid.,Tab.30).

106.

107.

72

On January 10, 1976, BKPM wrote to Amco requesting
it to submit various reports to Bank Indonesia and
to file an investment report with BKPM (Indonesia
Exh. Ibid., Tab.31). In a letter dated August 10,
1977 Bank Indonesia requested PT Amco to forward
financial statements verified by a certified public
accountant to enable Bank Indonesia to consider
permanent registration of the foreign investment.
Additional requests from Bank Indonesia to PT Amco
for documents were made on February 27, 1978
(Indonesia Exh., jibid., Tab.35), May 31, 1978
(Ibid., Tab. 36) and September 3, 1979 (Ibid.,

Tab.37).

Bank Indonesia's request to PT Amco to forward its
audited financial statements was apparently never
met by the company. (The Tribunal notes that PT
Amco claims that certain of its documents had been
seized during the army and police action (First
Award, para.104). In a statement dated December 5,
1979, signed by Mr. E.M. Tomodok, Vice-Chairman of
PT Amco, PT Amco represented that its financial
reports for the years 1974 until 1977 had never been

audited (Indonesia Exh., Vol.I, Tab.39). This

108.

109.

110.

73
statement by Amco appears to be false. Before this
Tribunal the Republic of Indonesia produced 1977
audited accounts for PT Amco. The 1977 audited
accounts had been sent on March 27, 1978 by the
public accountants firm of Machjud Modofore to the
Board of Directors of Amco (Indonesia Exh., Vol.III,

Tab.125).

The Tribunal has no evidence that certified accounts
of PT Amco for the 1974 financial year and
subsequent years were given by PT Amco either to

Bank Indonesia or to BKPM.

On January 1, 1973 Pan American and PT Amco
Indonesia executed a document purporting to be a
loan from Pan American to PT Amco Indonesia in the
amount of Rp. 360m. The interest on the loan to be
paid by PT Amco to Pan American was 8.8 per cent per

year (Indonesia Exh., Vol.III, Tab.80).

PT Amco's unaudited accounts for 1973 (Indonesia
Exh., Vol.III, Tab.75) used for its tax assessment,
contain an expense item named "service rate etc."

amounting to Rp. 32,4000,000.00, a sum close to 8.8

(a)

111.

74

‘per cent of the purported loan from Pan American to

Amco. The unaudited 1973 accounts also contain an
amount of Rp. 362,194,889.00 named long range debt.
The 1973 audited accounts do not contain similar
amounts (Indonesia Exh., Vol.III, Tab.77). The 1973
audited accounts were apparently not submitted to

the tax authorities.

On September 20, 1989 in the afternoon session Mr.
Nono Hanafi being questioned by Mr. Badini testified
that he had learned from the transcripts from the
hearings of the First Tribunal that Mr. Tan had
"denied" the existence of said loan. Mr. Rand
intervened to state that "we are quite willing to

stipulate that such loan was never made".

112. While PT Amco's behaviour contained discreditable
features, that fact could not justify BKPM's
approach to the question of revocation.

The Application of the Law to These Findings

113. The Tribunal must now consider the legal

consequences of its findings. To do this it is

necessary to turn first to Indonesian law, and then

114.

75

to international law.

The Indonesian law adduced by Amco was in support
of the proposition that "Under Indonesian Law, a
procedurally unlawful administrative act is void".
(Memorial, p.28). It was also claimed that "Under
Indonesian law, due process violations are
compensable per se" (Reply, p.14). The position was
claimed to be the same under international law.
Both these related claims were advanced in oral
argument. Indonesia argued that under both
Indonesian and international law, an unlawful
procedure “cannot alone support an award of
compensation in this case. This is because of the
inseparability of the procedural aspects and the
substantive basis for the revocation." (Counter-
Memorial, p.123). The issue of "compensability per
se" was treated interchangeably with the question
of validity of procedurally unlawful acts (see,
e.g., Counter-Memorial, p.124). In Indonesia's
view, a procedurally unlawful act would be valid,
and would give rise to no compensation, unless the
“procedural defect is integrally related with the
substantive right such that compliance with the
procedure is a necessary condition to the exercise

of the substantive right". (Komar First Opinion,

115.

116.

76

Legal App. to Counter-Memorial, Tab.B, p.52).

Dr. Komar, in his First Legal Opinion, opined that
BKPM's right to revoke, being based on presidential
decree, existed independently of required procedural
formalities. He further contended that the
revocation was caused by PT Amco's repeated failure
to fulfil its obligations, and was not a necessary
consequence of the procedural defects. Dr. Komar
also wrote that under Indonesian law the validity
of an administrative act is tested by reference to
"substantial justice" (Ibid, p.42). In both the
written pleadings and oral argument, Indonesia
introduced evidence directed to show that, while it
was res judicata that Amco had not been afforded due
process, it had not, in the overall picture, been

denied "substantial justice".

Mrs. Kusnander offered a Legal Opinion which
rejected as incorrect Dr. Komar's analysis of
Indonesian law (Claimant's New Legal Documents,
Tab.140). A second Opinion was provided by Dr.
Komar (Legal App. to the Counter-Memorial, Vol.VIII,
Tab.RRR). These Opinions provide helpful analyses

of Indonesian law generally, going beyond the

117.

77
immediate point in issue, and have been carefully
studied by the Tribunal, along with the cases and
authorities to which it has been referred, and on
which it was addressed by counsel for both sides in

oral argument.

The Tribunal finds that most of the Indonesian cases
cited by Amco are irrelevant as to its claim (that
procedurally unlawful administrative acts are void,
and give rise to compensation); and to the issue
that the Tribunal believes must here be determined
(whether a generally tainted background necessarily

renders a decision unlawful, even if substantive

grounds may exist for such a decision). Thus the
case of Yayasan Tjie On Jie Jan (64/Perd. 1971/PT/-

Mdn., of 1973, New Legal Exhibits to Claimants'
Memorial, Tab.103), concerned wrongful procedure in
the sense of absence of jurisdiction, which want of
jurisdiction necessarily led to a revocation of the
decision and to compensation. Although there is
some reference at the outset to it having been
proved that "the form of cancellation is illegal
because it did not follow legal procedure", nothing
in the facts shows this as constituting a separate
head. Rather, it was because of the absence of

jurisdiction that the form of cancellation was

118.

78
illegal. The case of Soekartin v. Indonesia,
(No.772/1970-G. herregistrasei No.530/1961-G of
1972, (Ibid., Tab.107), concerns unlawful arrest,
detention and the sale of property, with the
appropriate legal consequences being drawn. It is
neither authority for the claim as formulated by
Amco nor of assistance in resolving the issue as
formulated by the Tribunal. In the case of John
Kong Seng _v. Head of Kabupaten et al. (Ibid,
Tab.108), the administrative acts of the defendants
were declared void as they were taken under the
wrong section of the relevant Decree. The case
provides no guidance on the legal effects of lack
of due process, still less on the legal consequences
of a generally tainted environment in which the
administrative decision operates. And the extract

with which the Tribunal was provided from R.M.

Suryodinigrat, S.H., Perikatan-Perikatan Bersumber
Undang-Undang (1980) (Ibid, Tab.118) is
unilluminating.

One case was more relevant. In P.T. Savoy Homan
Hotel, (No.353/1979/C/Bdg. of 1980, Ibid, Tab.116)
there was both a decision taken by an improperly
constituted Committee and an omission to make the

necessary request of the Government (and thus a

119.

79
failure of jurisdiction) and also a failure of due
process due to the absence of the plaintiff. All
grounds are equally relied on in annulling the
decision and ordering restitution. To the extent
that one could speculate that the same decision
would have been reached even if the Committee had
been properly constituted, and a request to the
Government had been made, so long as the plaintiff
was not present at the proceedings, this case may
show that a failure of due process may lead to

annulment. But this is necessarily hypothetical.

The attention of the Tribunal was also drawn to the
treatise by Prajudi Armosudirajo, Hukum Administrasi
Negara (Ibid, Tab.117). The author states that a
civil judge can declare an administrative directive
wrongful not only if it was taken arbitrarily, or
without following the law, or without authority, but
if it was taken "by misusing authority". The author
cites no specific authority for this view, though
reference is made to Article 1365 of the Civil Code
(which is in much more general terms).” The author
addresses only what may be done by a civil judge and

does not state that the act is automatically void.

 

* For text, see para.170 infra.

80

120. Two other cases were drawn to the attention of the

Tribunal in the Opinion on Indonesian law prepared
by Dr. Komar: the Josopandojo Case, Decision of the
Supreme Court, March 3, 1971; and the Eddy Hans
Case, Decision of the Supreme Court, November 11,
1976; (Legal Appendices to the Counter-Memorial,
Vol.I, Tab.3, pp.43-45). Mrs. Kusnander offered her
observations to the Tribunal on these cases. (New
Legal Exhibits to Claimants Reply, Tab.140). Dr.
Komar provided a second opinion (Legal Appendices
to the Counter-Memorial, Vol.VIII, Tab.RRR). It is
clear that, on the one hand, in the Josopandojo case
it was found that no tort had been committed; while
on the other hand the test for ascertaining a tort
by a public authority is by reference to "the Laws
and Regulations" and also, as a separate head
"kepatutan dalam masvarakat". (Text and translation
provided to the Tribunal, p.10). This phrase was
interpreted by Dr. Komar as ‘reasonableness (or
'‘propriety') in society' and by Mrs. Kusnander as
‘standards of fairness within society'. In the view
of the Tribunal nothing turns on this different
terminology. The Eddy Hans Case does not carry
matters forward, as the claim that a decision was

taken on the basis of a "one sided report" of a

121.

122.

81
public authority, made "without hearing, summoning
and investigating" (text and translation provided
to the Tribunal, p.2) was rejected by the Supreme
Court, apparently simply on the grounds that the
High Court was competent to affirm the District
Court's decision if it thought it correct. It would
seem that the Supreme Court did not regard itself
as competent to review the argument of "one-

sidedness" (ibid, p.8).

The Tribunal concludes that Indonesian law does not
clearly stipulate whether a procedurally unlawful
act per se generates compensation; or whether a
decision tainted by bad faith is necessarily
unlawful. There is, however, some slight authority
for the view that these last two questions might be
answered in the affirmative under Indonesian law.

(See paras.118 and 119 above).

The Tribunal now turns to the international law
authorities relied on by the parties. The writings
of Dr. F.A. Mann, Professor D. O'Connell, Professor
A. Freeman and Professor Borchard, while always
profitable to read, are not in the view of the

Tribunal directed to the issues in this case. Dr.

82
Mann ("The Consequences of an International Wrong
in International Law", 48 BYIL (1976-7), New Legal
Exhibit to Claimants' Memorial, Tab.109), is writing
generally on the consequences of illegality, but not
on the specific question of whether a procedurally
unlawful act, or a tainted background to a decision,
necessarily generates damages and/or invalidates the
substantive decision. The cases analysed by Dr.
Mann, at the pages cited in Amco's Memorial, p.30,
are clearly relevant to the question of the
consequences of substantive illegality in
international law. (New Legal Exhibits to
Claimants' Memorial, Tab.109). The extracts from
Professor O'Connell (International Law, Vol.II, at
ibid., Tab.110) are likewise inapposite. Professor
Freeman, (Ihe International Responsibility of States
for Denial of Justice, 1970, at Ibid., Tab.111)
refers in the passages cited by Amco, Memorial,
p.43, to the Martini Case and states that an
arbitral tribunal may annul certain obligations
imposed on a foreigner by a local decision which
violates international law; or more usually
monetary reparation will be awarded. This does not
address the problem before this Tribunal. Nor does
his analysis of the Fabiani Case, in which the
procedural delays led to tangible financial losses.

The case shows only that if the unjust procedure is

123.

83
the cause of the loss, damages will follow; but it
does not address the converse, namely, whether
damages are available for unjust procedure that is
not shown to be the cause of loss. The extracts
from Borchard, (The Diplomatic Protection of
Citizens Abroad, 1915, at ibid., Tab.114) are cited
in the Memorial, pp.53-4, 130, for the proposition
that acts in violation of international law will not
be given effect. Professor Borchard, clearly
writing of French administrative law, merely says
that to have an illegal administrative act annulled,

it is necessary to have recourse to the courts.

The Draft Convention on the International
Responsibility of States for Injuries to Aliens

(ibid., Tab.121) ~- of doubtful weight as persuasive

authority of international law - contains in Article

30 wording which is clearly too broad to be a
correct statement of international legal principle.
And the Restatement (Third) of the Foreign Relations
Law of the United States, s.712 and Comments, (ibid,
Tab.122), is equally undirected to the issue before

the Tribunal.

124.

125.

1965.

84

Some of the case law put before the Tribunal equally
lacks focus on the issues in these proceedings.
Naciona v. F , (383 Fed.Rep. 2d
Series, ibid., Tab.113) turns on the application of
the Hickenlooper Amendment” and is thus doubtful
authority for the proposition that "acts in
violation of international law will not be given
effect" (Memorial, p.30), even were that a correct
formulation of the issue before the Tribunal. The
case of McCurdy v. The United Mexican States, US-
Mexico Claims Commission, 1929 (Legal App. to the
Counter-Memorial, Vol.IV, Tab.JJ) indicates only
that some irregularities in proceedings will not

necessarily constitute a denial of justice.

Indonesia, in its written and oral pleadings, and
Professor D.W. Bowett QC, who prepared a legal
opinion (Legal App. to the Counter-Memorial,
Vol.VIII, Tab.TTT), relied on certain cases of the
European Court on Human Rights to contend that
procedural violations do not generate damages where
there remains the possibility that the substantive
decision might be the same. In the Sramek Case,
1984, (ibid., Tab.UUU) an application was brought

 

* i.e. an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of

126.

85
against Austria for violation of Article 6(1) of the
European Convention on Human Rights, which requires
that in the determination of one's civil rights and
obligations or of a criminal charge, “everyone is
entitled to a fair and public hearing within a
reasonable time by an independent and impartial
tribunal established by law". It was found that in
the circumstances of the case, there was a violation
of Article 6(1) (the tribunal having included a
person "in a subordinate position, in terms of his
duties and the organisation of his service, vis-a-
vis one of the parties": Judgment, para.42). The
Court refused, however, the claim of the applicant

for pecuniary loss.

It is true that the European Court said that "the
evidence in the file does not warrant the conclusion
that had it been differently composed [the tribunal]
would have arrived at a decision in Mrs. Sramek's
favour". It is against that background that
Indonesia argues that no compensation was paid for
a procedural violation, where there existed the
possibility that the same outcome might have
occurred even had there been no _ procedural

violation.

 

127.

128.

86

The present Tribunal makes the following
observations. First, cases under the European
Convention on Human Rights deal with compensation
not as a matter of general international law, but
by reference to the specific treaty requirements of
Article 50 of the Convention, which requires "just
satisfaction" to be given by the Court if the local
law allows of only partial reparation. Mrs.
Sramek's claim before the Austrian courts had been
not for compensation for the procedural wrong (which
in any event was a substantive wrong under the terms
of the European Convention, i.e. procedural
guarantees of fair trial are a substantive treaty
right) but rather for consequential pecuniary loss.
This she had failed to prove - and the European
Court, not being an Austrian Court of Appeal, could
not override the Austrian Court and award
compensation on this basis. The Tribunal therefore
finds that the Sramek Case does not support

Indonesia's claim.

The same underlying considerations apply to other
European Convention cases cited by Professor Bowett
in his Opinion (Legal App. to the Counter-Memorial,

Vol.VII, Tab.TTT). The Golder Case, ECHR, Ser.A.

129.

87
1975, is an indication that not every violation
(procedural or substantive) entitles an award of
"just satisfaction" under Article 50. But that does
not bear upon the present problem. Equally, all
that one may reasonably deduce from the European
Court of Justice (EEC) case of Bayerische HNL
Vermehrungsbetriebe GmbH and Co., 1978 E.Ct. Justice
1209, is that not all losses sustained in the face
of government economic policy entail compensation.
That is a far cry from the present issue. And as
Professor Bowett himself notes, in the other
European Convention of Human Rights case which he
cites, Engel, ECHR Ser.A 1977, no claim was made
for compensation for material damage. There is a
discrete jurisprudence relating to Article 50 of the
European Convention that has no applicability to the

issue in this case.

The de Sabla Case, US-Panama General Claims
Arbitration 1934 (New Legal Exhibits to Claimants'
Memorial, Tab.120), relied on by Amco, concerned
grants by Panama to third parties over de Sabla's
land. The Commission found that inadequate
possibility was given to de Sabla for opposition to
such grants. Damages were assessed, but these

cannot be said to represent compensation for

 

‘
1
i
:
|

conan

130.

88
procedural violations, which the Commission found
to have occurred without bad faith or
discrimination. Rather, damages were based on the
fact that the procedures resulted in the loss of
property. This would thus seem to be another case
where procedure and substance are inextricably

intertwined.

Three further cases cited by Amco remain for
consideration. The first of these is the Idler Case
U.S. v. Venezuela, 1898 (New Legal Exhibits to
Claimants' Memorial, Tab.112). Idler was a United
States citizen, who contracted with agents acting
for Venezuela, for the provision of military
equipment. Certain invoices for very large sums
remained substantially unpaid. After the Union of
Venezuela and New Grenada in 1819-1821, arguments
occurred as to whether it was the new Republic of
Colombia that was liable for the debt, or the
"Department of Venezuela". Without here entering
into the very complicated history of. Idler's
attempts to recover the sums owed, we note that
judgment was eventually entered for Idler, but the
Treasury refused to pay, contesting the jurisdiction
of the court concerned. This question, too, was

decided by the Venezuela Supreme Court in favour of

89
Idler. Still unable to secure payment, Idler
returned to the United States where he sought
diplomatic support for his clain. In 1836 the
Venezuelan Government applied to the Supreme Court
for an order to annul the judgment. This followed
two years' of written submissions by the Government
to the Supreme Court, of which Idler was never
notified. Idler was instructed by the Court to
appear before it, but learned of this only twelve
days before the commencement of proceedings, when
it was impossible to get to Venezuela in time. The
Supreme Court found it had no jurisdiction to annul
the earlier judgments in favour of Idler, and that
the action should have been brought in front of the
same judge who had given the original judgment. The
matter then reverted to the Superior Court of
Caracas, which did set aside the judgment in favour
of Idler, and indeed condemned him to pay "judicial
tax" and a portion of the costs. This was in turn

affirmed by the Supreme Court.

131. In the international arbitral proceedings brought
by the United States against Venezuela, the arbitral
commission stated that one of the key questions was
whether the general effect of the proceedings of

1836-1839 constituted a denial of justice. Idler

 

 

132.

90
received no notification of the proceedings in the
lower court, but rather, a notification to appear
in the Supreme Court in a suit instituted there;
and the Commission took the view that, as it was
the lower court that alone had jurisdiction, to
summon him before one tribunal, when the business
affecting his interests was to be done in another,
was misleading. Further, the Commission stated
that, even if no notification had been required, a
notification of the sort given would be misleading.
"... [WJe are inclined to think the act, from the
standpoint of justice, would vitiate the whole
proceedings". (Tab.112 at internal page 3515). The
Commission, emphasising that a foreign citizen
before the courts of a sovereign was entitled only
to "ordinary justice", found that Idler did not get
it and that therefore the proceedings against him
were "a nullity" (ibid, 3517). The Commission did
not consider whether, on substantive grounds, the
decisions annulling the earlier judgments might not
have been correct. Rather, it found that the denial

of justice rendered them a nullity.

The second remaining case relied on by Amco was the
Chattin Case, 1927 (Legal Exhibits to Claimants'

Memorial, Tab.119; Legal App. to the Counter-

133.

91
Memorial, Tab.KK). This arbitration between the
United States and Mexico also concerned
irregularities in judicial proceedings in criminal
proceedings. Acts of the judiciary, in the view of
presiding Commissioner Van Vollenhoven, alone could
constitute a denial of justice, executive and
legislative wrongs always being subject to judicial
redress. Such judicial acts would only amount to
a denial of justice if they constituted "an outrage,
bad faith, wilful neglect of duty, or insufficiency
of action apparent to any unbiased man" (Legal Exh.
to Claimant's Memorial, Tab.119, Internal p.287).
Commissioner Van Vollenhoven found, on the facts of
the case, that "the whole of the proceedings
discloses a most astonishing lack of seriousness on
the part of the Court" (ibid, p.292) and that the
proceedings were unjust. It matters not that in his
powerful dissent Commissioner MacGregor found that
local law had not been violated, and doubted too,
on his analysis of the facts, that international law
had been violated, for in the present case the
finding of the First Tribunal that there had been

procedural unlawfulness stands as res judicata.

It is relevant, too, that the Commission makes no

supposition about the guilt or otherwise of Chattin

134.

92
- indeed, it was not prepared to make a finding of
illegality of his arrest. Against the background
of a denial of justice, damages were nonetheless

awarded.

Finally, in the Walter Fletcher Smith Case, 1929
(Previously Filed Claimants' Documents, Vol.II,
Tab.0), an expropriation of a US citizen's property
was found to be neither consistent with the
constitutional requirements of Cuba nor with
international law. Whereas the property could
lawfully have been nationalised for a public
purpose, it was found that the purpose was
“amusement and private profit". The emphasis was
not so much on the requirement of public
international law that a taking of property be for
"public utility" purposes, as on the good faith

aspect:

"From a careful examination of the testimony
and of the records, the Arbitrator is impressed
that the attempted expropriation of the
claimant's property was not in compliance with
the constitution, nor with the laws of the
Republic; that the expropriation proceedings
were not, in good faith, for the purpose of
public utility. They do not present the
features of an orderly attempt by officers of
the law to carry out a formal order of

condemnation. The destruction of the
claimant's property was wanton, riotous,
oppressive. It was effected by about one

hundred and fifty men whose action appears to

135.

136.

93
have been of a most violent character. There
is some evidence that, before the expropriation
proceedings, certain persons, being unable to
purchase the property from the claimant,
threatened to destroy it..." (ibid, Internal
p.387).

The arbitration concluded that the property should
be restored to the claimant. "No reflection is to
be made upon the character of the courts of Cuba...
Under all the circumstances of the case it seems
clear that the action of those tribunals should not
be held to render valid the proceedings of attempted
expropriation." (Ibid, p.387). An award of damages

was made "if the land is not to be restored" (ibid).

One can see from these international cases that the
question in international law is not whether
procedural irregularities generate damages per se.
Rather, the international law test is whether there
has been a denial of justice. They show equally
that not every procedural irregularity constitutes
a denial of justice. To this effect, see also
Opinion of Professor Bowett (Legal App. to the
Counter-Memorial, Vol.VIII, Tab.TTT, at p.10). At
the same time, as Commissioner Nielson reminded in
the McCurdy Case (op.cit., supra, para.124, at

Internal page 150) even if no single act constitutes

137.

94
a denial of justice, such denial of justice can
result from "a combination of improper acts". In
the recent case of Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI)
(USA v. Italy), ICJ Reports, 1989, the International
Court of Justice drew a distinction between
unlawfulness in municipal law and arbitrariness
under international law. The distinction it drew
is, in the view of the Tribunal, equally germane to
the distinction between procedural unlawfulness and
a denial of justice. The Court stated that
arbitrariness "is not so much something opposed to
a rule of law, as something opposed to the rule of
law" (Ibid., para.128). The test, said the Court,
was "a wilful disregard of due process of law, an
act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of

judicial propriety" (Ibid).

It thus is necessary to decide whether the
procedural irregularities and other background
factors in this case amounted to a denial of
justice, that would taint the decision of BKPM,
regardless of whether BKPM might have had
substantive grounds for its action against Amco.
The first question is whether it is correct, as
Commissioner Van Vollenhoven contended in the

Chattin Case, that acts of the judiciary alone can

 

1
|
|
I
i

138.

95
constitute a denial of justice. Most arbitral
awards do not make this distinction in the context
of denial of justice. While all those cases cited
above happened to concern, at some phase, judicial
decisions, the Tribunal sees no provision of
international law that makes impossible a denial of
justice by an administrative body. BKPM was an
administrative, rather than a strictly judicial,
body. It has not been argued to us by Indonesia
that the acts of BKPM, taken in context, could not
themselves constitute a wrong in international law,
if unlawful, but that only a failure of the courts
to rectify them could constitute such a wrong. And
if one applies the test in the ELSI Case ("a wilful
disregard of due process of law"); or in the Idler
Case (the need for “ordinary justice"); or in the
Chattin Case ("bad faith, wilful neglect of duty,
or insufficiency of action apparent to any unbiased
man") it can be seen that the BKPM handling of PT
Wisma's complaint, which led in turn to the approval
of the President of the Republic to the proposal for

revocation, constituted a denial of justice.

There are thus indications, both as a matter of
Indonesian and international law, that the

circumstances surrounding BKPM's decision tainted

139.

140.

(e)
141.

96

the proceedings irrevocably.

The Tribunal therefore finds that, although certain
substantive grounds might have existed for the
revocation of the licence, the circumstances

surrounding BKPM's decision make it unlawful.

That being so, the Tribunal could at this point
conclude its findings on liability. However, other
claims have been advanced by the parties, and being
mindful of the requirements of Article 48(3) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes,

the Tribunal now deals with these.

! ‘°: erse ji enc.
In a letter of July 25, 1989, Amco made a submission
"that an adverse inference should be drawn against
Indonesia" with respect to certain PT Amco documents
seized during the army and police intervention of
April 1, 1980, some of which, it was alleged, were
never returned. This was advanced as a submission
relating to PT Amco's difficulties in proving
compliance with its investment obligation. The

Tribunal, not having to address the issue of whether

(f)

142.

97
Amco fulfilled its investment obligation, need not
decide whether certain such documents could have

helped Amco or not in establishing its case in that

regard.
wu: ' ecisio’ e) ie to
unds hal 9°) ity Investment

Indonesia argued that, even if the BKPM revocation
were unlawful by reference to the ground of
shortfall of equity investment and failure to import
the required amount of foreign equity capital, it
would still be lawful by reference to other grounds:
failure to make investment reports to Bank Indonesia
and BKPM; failure to report capital transfers to
Bank Indonesia; and tax fraud (Counter-Memorial,
pp.88-92; Reply, pp.16-17). Indonesia claimed that
Indonesian law required the licence revocation to
be considered in the light of the totality of the
circumstances existing at the time, including the
entire administrative record before BKPM (Counter-
Memorial, p.87). Amco replied that the revocation
could be justified, if at all, only on the
substantive grounds stated in the revocation
decision. It denied that the Indonesian law
requirement that an administrative act be evaluated

in the light of the totality of circumstances meant

VII.

143.

98
that grounds not cited in a revocation decision may
be used to determine whether such decree is
substantively justifiable (Reply, p.25). Oral
argument was addressed to the Tribunal on this
point, together with evidence showing the various
grounds on which BKPM was entitled to revoke
investment licences, and actual past practice in

this regard.

The Tribunal, in dealing with this question, does
not have to make findings of law because of its
determination that BKPM's substantive decision was
irrevocably tainted by bad faith. This necessarily
means that, even were a decision on grounds other
than those stated in the Decree in principle
sustainable, they could no more be lawful than the
decision made on grounds of shortfall of investment,
because of the general background that pervaded the

decision-making.

EURTHER CLAIMS AND ARGUMENTS

(a)

Estoppel

144. Two arguments of estoppel have arisen. Indonesia

has claimed that Amco should be estopped from

145.

99
arguing before this Tribunal that they directly
invested any amount higher than the sum they
represented in the Jakarta court proceedings in 1986
that they had directly invested (Counter-Memorial,
p.78). Amco contended that Indonesia never during
the period 1968 to 1980 notified Amco that it was
in danger of losing its licence due to under-
investment or non-registration of foreign equity
capital, and that it should be estopped from relying
on these matters as grounds for revocation

(Memorial, pp.52-55).

The Tribunal doubts that the international law
principle of estoppel would, on a proper
understanding of the facts and examination of the
evidence, be applicable in either of these cases.
In any event, because the level of Amco's investment
is not determinative of the issues as the Tribunal
has formulated them in dealing with this question,
it makes no formal findings of law on either of

these claims.

(b)

146.

147.

100

ion of April 3 85 0) 's Entit 2

Damages

Indonesia claimed that the Supreme Court decision
of April 30, 1985 cut off, as of January 12, 1982,
Amco's right to compensation. The First Tribunal
found that the lower court decisions did not operate
to cut off any entitlement to damage (First Award,
paras. 259-263). This finding is res ‘judicata.
(Decision on Jurisdiction, para.53)}. However, this
Tribunal has determined that as the Supreme Court
decision occurred after the First Award, the
question of whether it operated to terminate any
entitlement to damages could not be res judicata
(Ibid., para.54.)

Indonesia contended that the Supreme Court decision
declared that the earlier judgment of January 12,
1983 was enforceable; that that entailed rescission
of the managerial contract (rather than affirmation
of BKPM's decision to revoke the licence agreement) ;
and that therefore, as of that earlier date of
January 12, 1982, Amco no longer had a contractual
right to a share of profits (Counter-Memorial,

pp.154-5).

148.

149.

101

Amco argued that the Supreme Court decision was
merely an affirmation of the prior decisions of the
District and Appellate Courts; and as these had
been found by the First Tribunal not to terminate
any damages to which Amco was entitled, so a
decision merely affirming them could equally not
have that effect. Amco, unlike Indonesia, took the
view that the lower courts had based their judgments
essentially on the licence revocation. As the First
Tribunal had given this as a reason for its ruling
on the effect of these judgments, and as the Supreme
Court judgment merely affirmed them, it too could
not cut off the entitlement to compensation
(Memorial, p.32). Amco and Indonesia elaborated

their contentions in oral argument.

The Tribunal has considered the arguments and
studied the texts of each of the Indonesian court
decisions. The starting point of its analysis is
the finding of the First Tribunal on the lower court
judgments that
"It is also right that the decision of the
Jakarta courts to rescind was based on several
grounds ... However, among these grounds, the
revocation of the licence was obviously

fundamental and self-sufficient, as is shown
by the very wording of the District Court

 

150.

151.

152.

102

Decision in this respect ..." (First Award,
para.260) ~

Indonesia states that the Ad Hoc Committee correctly
found that the Supreme Court, when it came to deal
with the matter "approve[d] the rescission of the
management contract exclusively on grounds other
than those adduced in the [licence] revocation
order", (See Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee,

para.115; and Counter-Memorial, p.155).

The Tribunal notes that views on the basis of the
Supreme Court decision go beyond the jurisdiction
ratione materiae of the Ad Hoc Committee and are
necessarily obiter; and cannot determine the matter
for this Tribunal, which must decide the issue

itself.

The Tribunal observes that the Supreme Court
carefully laid out all the findings of the two lower
courts and the arguments that had been advanced by
the parties. The findings of the lower courts
included (but were not restricted to) the failure

to invest US$3m. And the stated ratio decidendi of

 

153.

(c)

154.

103
the Supreme Court (Indonesia, Factual Appendix B,
Tab.28) was simply that the lower courts' decisions
were not contrary to law. It might be said that
they thus were basing themselves on grounds other
than licence revocation - but in the Tribunal's view
the Supreme Court was affirming the grounds on which
the lower courts based themselves. And central
among these was the revocation of the licence. The
Supreme Court did not find (because it was not asked
to) that the revocation was invalid, but that PT
Wisma still succeeded in having the management
contract rescinded; nor did it find that the
revocation was relevant, but that PT Wisma succeeded
on other grounds. It essentially affirmed the

earlier decisions, as they stood.

The Supreme Court judgment is thus not to be
regarded as novus actus interveniens; and therefore
does not operate to terminate the damages due to

Amco.

Unjust Enrichment
Amco advanced as its third cause of action the claim
that Indonesia would be unjustly enriched if

permitted to retain both the benefits of Amco's

 

1
i
!
'
i
i
i
i

155.

104
investment and the earnings which Amco could have
obtained from such investment. Amco contended that
the concept of unjust enrichment was recognised in
the law of Indonesia and also in international law

(Memorial, pp.58-62).

Indonesia denied the applicability of the concept
to the facts of the case as any beneficiary would
have been PT Wisma. Indonesia further offered a
legal opinion of Professor S. Gautama (Indonesia,
Legal App. Vol.II, Tab.P) that there was no
recognised right of unjust enrichment in Indonesian
law. It was further argued, by reference to diverse
authorities, that the concept of unjust enrichment
was not a sufficiently specific principle of
international law to sustain a claim by Amco (see
Counter-Memorial, pp.180-183); and, by reference
to a legal opinion of Professor C. Schreuer, that
no international law tribunal had ever allowed a
claim of unjust enrichment where the applicant was
in breach of its obligations under the contract in
issue (Indonesia, Legal App. Vol.VIII, Tab.XXx).
For its part, Amco contended that international
authority acknowledged the principle of unjust
enrichment even if the investor's loss did not arise

out of an internationally unlawful act (Reply,

105

Ppp.28-30).

156. The Tribunal notes that the beneficiary of any
unjust enrichment (whether or not caused by illegal
acts and whether or not Amco was itself in default)
would have been PT Wisma and not Indonesia. It was
PT Wisma that secured the benefit of the termination
of PT Amco's entitlement to the share of the
profits, once the Hotel had been built and was
operational. Any advantage to the Indonesian
government was too indeterminate to be identified
as an unjust enrichment to the State without
pronouncing upon whether the factual circumstances
for the application of the concept existed, the
existence of the concept in Indonesian law or its
scope in international law. The Tribunal finds that

on this ground Amco's third cause of action fails.

VIII. COUNTERCLAIM
157. In its Counter-Memorial, p.177, Indonesia claimed
as follows:

"Under Indonesian law the failure of a foreign
investor to fulfil its obligations under a
license and to comply with the foreign
investment law will result not only in the
revocation of the license, but also in the
‘withdrawal of all facilities that have been
granted commencing from the date on which
approval was granted'. Indonesian law thus

106

provides for the restitution of all monies
which would have been paid by the foreign
investor, e.g. as taxes and import duties, but
for the tax holiday granted by the license."

158. At the oral hearings the Tribunal was shown all the

Indonesian law said to support this clain.

159. Decree 63/1969 (Indonesia, Fact. App. A., Tab.3)
provides in Article 4 that

"If the capital investment plan is not
implemented in accordance with the approval
that has been granted, this may result in the
withdrawal of the business license that has
been issued and/or the withdrawal of all
facilities that have been granted commencing
from the date on which approval was granted,
unless it can be proven that the default
occurred for reason beyond the control of the
applicant."

160. In his Legal Opinion (Indonesia, Legal App. Vol.I,
Tab.B) Dr. Komar also makes reference to decree
54/1977. Article 6 of this provides:

"In case the execution of the investment of
capital is not in accordance with the agreement
and stipulations determined by the Government
and/or the capital investor does not fulfil
his obligations to submit reports on the
execution of the capital investment as
stipulated in Article 4, sanction shall be
applied to the capital investor in accordance
with the laws and regulations in force,
including the revocation of his permit to
establish a business enterprise and/or the
facilities/relief of fiscal duties already

161.

162.

107

granted."

It is thus clear that a lawful revocation by BKPM
could have included a decision to end the facilities
and relief granted and to require the return of
moneys represented by them. The revocation by BKPM
(Indonesia Exh. Vol.II, Tab.63, at p.5) did include
such provisions; but the Tribunal has already held
it not to be a lawful revocation. It is also clear
that BKPM could, even without terminating the
licence, have decided that PT Amco was in violation
of its obligations, that facilities would be
withdrawn, and that moneys representing them were
to be returned. But no such decision, separate from

the revocation decisions, was ever made.

The Tribunal thus finds that, as Indonesia has not
succeeded in its primary claims, it fails in its

counterclain.

Ix.

DAMAGES:

163.

(1)

164.

165.

The issue of damages has to be addressed in relation
to two different periods: (1) the period between
April 1st (the army and police intervention) and
July 9, 1980 (the BKPM decision); (2) the period

subsequent to July 9, 1980.

The Pe: between il 1 an 0
It is res judicata that there is an obligation to

compensate for any damage caused by unlawful
intervention of the army and police (Decision on

Jurisdiction, para.48).

The present Tribunal has concluded that the events
of April 1 1980 did not cause PT Amco loss of right
to a share of the profits under the 1978 Profit-
Sharing Agreement (which could at that moment still
be legally claimed from PT Wisma). The Tribunal
further held that access to the Hotel cash flow was
fiduciary in nature and, whatever the practice may
have been between the parties before April 1, 1980,
PT Amco was accountable to PT Wisma for the use of
those funds. Financial loss due to diminution of

the profit level there might otherwise have been,

108

166.

(2)
(a)
167.

109
under PT Amco's own management, is unproven. No
other financial loss due to loss of management has

been evidenced before the Tribunal.

The illegal army and police intervention of April
1, 1980 undoubtedly caused disturbance and burdens
for Amco. The Tribunal's best assessment of the loss
entailed by such disturbance and burdens over this
period is US$10,000. This is awarded with interest
at 6% from the date of this Award to the date of

effective payment.

The Period Subsequent to July 9, 1980

Mitigation

BKPM's decision of July 9, 1980 caused PT Amco to
lose its licence to engage in business ventures in
Indonesia. It did not in terms cause PT Amco to
lose all its rights under the Profit-Sharing
Agreement of October 6, 1978 or the earlier Lease
and Management Contract of April 22, 1968. It was
contended by Indonesia before the Tribunal that PT
Amco could still have sold its interests in these
contracts to a third party and should indeed have
done so, to mitigate any loss sustained by BKPM's

decision to terminate its licence. It was said that

168.

110
both Indonesian and international law pointed to
such a duty to mitigate damages. (Indonesia
Counter-Memorial, pp.102, 106 and Komar Opinion,
Indonesia Legal App., Vol.I, Tab.B, p.68). Amco
did not contest that Indonesian law and
international law both acknowledge the principle of
mitigation, but claimed that there was no realistic

prospect of it being able to mitigate its loss.

The Tribunal notes that the 1968 Lease and
Management Contract provided in clause 9(4) that
"the shares shall only be possessed by the LOCAL
PARTNER and the OVERSEAS PARTNER and shall not be
transferred to a third (3rd) party under whatever
name or reason", The Company envisaged under the
1968 contract was never established as the parties
decided to proceed on the basis of a simple joint
venture. The Tribunal notes that when PT Amco
entered into a subcontract on August 22, 1969, and
a sublease with Aeropacific Hotel Association on
October 13, 1970, the concurrence of PT Wisma was
formally provided. This indicates that transfer of
PT Amco's rights could only take place with the
consent of PT Wisma. Nothing in the 1978 Profit-
Sharing Agreement changed the situation. Further,

even had PT Amco been entitled to assign its

TT en

169.

(b)

170.

111
interests the events that had occurred since the
beginning of April 1980 would have made it virtually
impossible to find interested purchasers. The
Tribunal finds that there was no failure on PT

Amco's part to mitigate damages.

That being so, the Tribunal will now proceed to
assess the loss suffered by PT Amco as a result of

the revocation of the licence by BKPM.

inci) Ke)
To seek the relevant principles of compensation the
Tribunal has examined both Indonesian law and
international law. Amco claimed that Indonesian law
requires "compensation for proximately caused and
foreseeable injury, including lost earnings, arising
from a tortious act". (Memorial, p.23). Indonesia
emphasised that damages would not be awarded for
uncertain or speculative loss. (Counter-Memorial,
p.102). These arguments were expanded and
elaborated in Amco's Reply, p.5 and Indonesia's
Rejoinder, p.36; and in oral argument. The
Tribunal has carefully considered the relevant
provisions of the Indonesian Civil Code, especially

Articles 1246 and 1365, as well as the treatises and

171.

112
cases cited by the parties, and the analyses thereon
provided in the legal opinions of-Dr. Komar and Mrs.
Kusnander. Article 1365 of the Indonesian Civil
Code provides: “Persons responsible for any act in
violation of the law which results in a loss to
another person are obliged to replace-such loss"
(Previously Filed Claimants' Documents, Vol.II,
Tab.R). Article 1246 of the Indonesian Civil Code
further provides: "Cost, losses and interest which
a claimant may claim shall consist of, in general,
losses already suffered and profit which he would
otherwise enjoy, subject to the exceptions and
qualifications set forth below." (Ibid.) None of
the exceptions and qualifications are applicable in

this case.

The following principles are to be found in the
Indonesian law: damage and loss caused by illegal
acts shall be compensated by the wrongdoer. Injury
must have been caused by the wrongful act and have
been foreseeable. Loss must be proved and there
shall be no compensation for losses that are
speculative. Lost profits (including forfeited
earnings) are compensable to the extent they are not
speculative: Said Wachdin v. Perseroan Terbatan
N.V. Aniem, cited in the Opinion of Dr. Komar

172.

173.

174.

113
(Indonesia, Legal App.B, at p.70); and Article 1246

of the Indonesian Civil Code.

So far as international law is concerned, it is
clear that ‘damages are due for harm caused by
wrongful acts. The Tribunal has characterised the
BKPM revocation as a denial of justice. As with
Indonesian law, the loss must be attributable to the
wrongful act and foreseeable. And non-speculative

loss may be recovered.

Indonesia contended that the damage to Amco was
caused neither by the army and police action, nor
by BKPM's procedural irregularities, nor by its
revocation of the licence, but rather by Amco's own
wrongful actions which entitled BKPM to terminate
the licence. Indonesia further claimed that, if
damages were due, they could only be in respect of
profit levels that were foreseeable. Indonesia also
contended that PT Amco should not recover any lost
profits beyond the date of this Award. The Tribunal

addresses each of the arguments in turn.

The Tribunal has found that the general background

175.

114
to the BKPM decision constituted a denial of
justice, and led to a decision which was indeed the
cause of harm to Amco. To argue, as did Indonesia,
that although there had been procedural
irregularities, a "fair BKPM" would still have
revoked the licence, because of Amco's own
shortcomings, is to misaddress causality. The
Tribunal cannot pronounce upon what a "fair BKPM"
would have done. This is both speculative, and not
the issue before it. Rather, it is required to
characterise the acts that BKPM did engage in and
to see if those acts, if unlawful, caused damage to
Amco. It is not required to see if, had it acted
fairly, harm might then have rather been attributed

to Amco's own fault.

As to foreseeability, it appeared to be Indonesia's
contention that, if compensation was due at all,
only those foregone profits that could be foreseen
in 1980 were compensable. But foreseeability goes
to causation and damages, and normally not to the
quantum of profit. That the revocation of the
licence would cause Amco to be unable to secure its
share of the profits under the Profit-Sharing
Agreement was undoubtedly foreseeable. The

principle of foreseeability does not require that

176.

115
the party causing the loss is at that moment of time
able to foresee the precise quantum of the loss

actually sustained.

The Tribunal now turns from causation and
foreseeability to the issue of whether compensation
allows recovery of future profits. There is one
school of thought in contemporary international law
that suggests that future profits (lucrum cessans)
is not available in the case of a lawful taking,
where only damage actually sustained (damnum
emergens) is recoverable: see Amoco International

ic ve i i , (US-Iran
Tribunal Reports 247, Indonesia, Legal App. Vol.VII,
Tab.FFF); and Liamco v. Libyan Arab Republic, (62
ILR 140, Indonesia Legal App., Vol.V, Tab.RR); per
Judge Ameli in INA Corp. v. Islamic Republic of
Iran, (8 Iran-US Claims Tribunal Reports at 411,
Indonesia Legal App., Vol.V, Tab.00). Another
school holds that lucrum cessans is available for
lawful as well as unlawful takings. For cases

awarding an element for future lost profits although

the taking was lawful, see American International
Group Inc. v. Iran, (4 Iran-US Claims Tribunal

Reports 96, Indonesia, Legal App. Vol.VI, Tab.DDD);

and Kuwait v. Aminoil, (ILM (1982) 977, Indonesia,

177.

178.

116

Legal App. Vol.V, Tab.SS). See also Judge Brower

in Sedco Inc. v. NIOC, (10 Iran-US Claims Tribunal
at 197, ibid., Vol.V, Tab.QQ).- For useful

commentary on this issue, see Gray, Judicial

Remedies _in International Law (1987), esp. Ch.5,
(Ibid., Vol.V, Tab.TT).

But neither Indonesia (which proclaimed the BKPM
action lawful) nor Amco contested that profits could
in principle be recovered. The dispute was rather
as to what profits could be reasonably certain, and
what speculative. In any event, the Tribunal has

found the BKPM action unlawful.

The Tribunal finds that, where there has been an
unlawful taking of contract rights, lost profits are
in principle recoverable. No position is here

taken, or need to taken, on the situation in a

lawful taking. As it was put in the Shufeldt Claim
(USA v. Guatemala) "The damnum emergens is always

recoverable, but the lucrum _cessans must be the
direct fruit of the contract and not too remote or
speculative." (Indonesia Legal App., Vol.VI, Tab. VV
at p.1069). It is equally clear from the May Case

(Guatemala v. USA), (Ibid., Tab.WW, at p.72) that

179.

117
recovery was to be allowed for profits that would
have been over the remaining period of the contract.
The arbitrator stated that he could not lay down the
law on damages more clearly than it had been put by
Guatemala: "that whoever concludes a contract is
bound not only to fulfil it but also to recoup or
compensate (the other party) for damages and
prejudice which result directly or indirectly from
the non-fulfilment or infringement by default or
fraud of the party concerned and that’ such
compensation includes both damage suffered and
profits lost: da mergens et ym sSans."
(Ibid., p.73). The Tribunal concludes that BKPM's
action was a denial of justice which effectively
deprived Amco of its contract rights, and that non-
speculative profits under that contract are

recoverable.

Indonesia advanced the claim (Counter-Memorial,
p.156) that PT Amco "should not recover expected
lost profits beyond the date of judgment". Cited
in support of this was a dictum in the Chorzow
Factory Case that the compensation due was the loss
from the time of dispossession "to the date of the
present judgment" (Amco, New Legal Exhibits,

Tab.105; Indonesia, Legal App., Vol.I, Tab.AA; PCIJ

180.

181.

118
(1928) Series A, No.17). This dictum is taken quite
out of context, as the Permanent Court was
considering restitution for an unlawful taking under
an international treaty, and, on the particular
facts, simply did not address the question of the
future profit-generating capacity of the factory
(still less of a property right that was only that
of a stream of future profits) under general

international law.

Nor is the reference in Indonesia's Counter-
Memorial, p.157, footnote 425 to para.205 of Amoco

Finance v. Islamic Republic o ran,
op.cit., supra, at all convincing. The Chamber of
the US-Iran Tribunal in that case was examining the
Chorzow Factory Case (which we have already
distinguished), and in terms with which this

Tribunal would not necessarily agree.

Indonesia further argues that this claim is
supported by reference to the relief of the investor
from risk “once the investment arrangement is
terminated" (Counter-Memorial, p.158). The
Tribunal's view on how risk is to be dealt with are

offered below, paras.255 and 279-282. It is nota

182.

183.

. 119
determinative factor in an argument as to whether
iucrum_cessans as well as damnum _emergens is

available.

It was urged on the Tribunal by Indonesia that, even
allowing for non-speculative profits, the methods
of valuation must reflect the value of the contract
rights as they were perceived in 1980. Thus
according to Indonesia, the valuation techniques
should include no event or factor that was unknown

or unascertainable in 1980.

However, neither the concept of foreseeability
(which has been discussed above) nor that of non-
speculation necessarily lead to this conclusion.
The Tribunal believes that the key lies in focusing
on the objectives of compensation where there has
been an unlawful interference with contract rights.
In Sapphire International Petroleum v. NIOC (35 ILR
136), a case of an unlawful taking, the arbitrator
said:
"According to the generally held view the
object is to place the party to whom they are
awarded in the same pecuniary position they
would have been in if the contract had been

performed in the manner provided for by the
parties at the time of its conclusion."

184.

185.

120

The Permanent Court of Justice in the Chorzow
Factory Case held that, in an unlawful
nationalisation, there must be restitution to
establish the situation that would otherwise have
existed, or, "if this is not possible, payment of
a sum corresponding to the value which restitution
in kind would bear" (PCIJ Series A, No.17, at 47).
Commenting on this principle as it applies today,

Judge Holtzmann wrote: "While the TOPCO Award [17

ILM (1978) 3] directs restitutio in integrum, it
emphasises, as did the Chorzow Factory Case, that

awards of damages are intended to place the claimant
in the same position as would restitutio in
integrum": Separate Opinion, INA Corp. v. Islamic
Republic of Iran, 8 Iran-US Claims Tribunal Reports
373 at 395.

This principle is well supported. Thus in the same
case Judge Lagergren wrote: "[I]t is well settled
that the measure of compensation ought to be such
as to approximate as closely as possible in monetary
terms to the principle of restitutio in integrum..."
(INA_Corp. Case, op.cit. supra, p.385). And Judge

Ameli of Iran, in the same case, said; "Where the

186.

121
conduct of a party is held to be unlawful, in terms

of its contractual obligations, then the concept of

restitutio_in integrum may perhaps properly be
invoked." (Ibid, p.411).

If the purpose of compensation is to put Amco in the
position it would have been in had it received the
benefits of the Profit-Sharing Agreement, then there
is no reason of logic that requires that to be done
by reference only to data that would have been known
to a prudent businessman in 1980. It may, on one
view, be the case that in a lawful taking, Amco
would have been entitled to the fair market value
of the contract at the moment of dispossession. In
making such a valuation, a Tribunal in 1990 would
necessarily exclude factors subsequent to 1980. But
if Amco is to be placed as if the contract had
remained in effect, then subsequent known factors

bearing on that performance are to be reflected in

the valuation technique. (cf. American
ati Gro’ v. Iran, op.cit., supra:

but this was a lawful taking.) Foreseeability not
only bears on causation rather than on quantum, but
it would anyway be an inappropriate test for damages

that approximate to restitutio in integrum. The

only subsequent known factors relevant to value

187.

(c)
188.

189.

122
which are not to be relied on are those attributable

to the illegality itself.

While subsequent known events of a general nature,
unrelated to the Kartika Plaza problems, may
appropriately be an element in the valuation
process, the effects of the taking itself must be
excluded. It is well established in international
law that the value of property or contract rights
must not be affected by the unlawful act that
removed those rights. (For recent affirmation, see
Starrett Housing Corporation _v. Iran, (4 Iran-US
Claims Tribunal Reports, Vol.3, 176 at 202;

Indonesia, Legal App. VIII, Tab.22Z).

The Method of Valuation
It is the Tribunal's intention that its decisions
on the method of valuation, and its reasons

therefore, should be fully transparent.

Indonesia has argued that, if damages were to be
awarded to PT Amco, they should be established as
"the 'book value' of PT Amco's investment or, at

most, the value of PT Amco's contract rights less

 

190.

191.

192.

123
any diminution in their value due to PT Amco's
failure to sell promptly to a willing buyer in order
to minimise its losses." (Indonesia Counter-

Memorial, p.138).

The question of Amco's alleged duty to mitigate its
losses has been dealt with above. The
appropriateness of the net book value method remains

for consideration.

Net book value has been described as "assets minus
liability without consequential damages". (American
International Group Inc. v. Iran, 4 Iran-US Claims
Tribunal Reports, 96 at 104). It can immediately
be seen that it is a method unsuited to placing a
party in the position of his contract having been

performed.

Indonesia argues that PT Amco should be entitled at
most to only part of the Hotel's entire net book
value of $585,000, and, in any event, to no more
than PT Amco's total investment in the project
determined by Bank Indonesia to be $933,992.65

(Indonesia Counter-Memorial, p.139).

124

193. While it is true that the value of the assets has

been used as the measure of damages in a number of
international claims, it is by no means the
prevailing method of valuation of damages (see
"L'évaluation des dommages dans les arbitrages
transnationaux", Ignaz Seidl-Hohenveldern, Annuaire
francais de droit international, XXXIII - 1987,
Ppp.7-31). Net book value was rejected, inter alia,
in the American International Group Case, (op.cit.
supra; Kuwait v. Aminoil, (op.cit., supra; and in
jamco_v. L: n ublic, (op.cit., supra,
para.176). In fact, the book value basis of
valuation seems to have been only used where
compensation for prospective earnings was excluded
for some reason (Indonesia Counter-Memorial, pp.139-
140), either “in the absence of other evidence"
(Claim of Horst, Award of July 24, 1968, U.S.
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission, No Cu-1418,
p-3, Indonesia, Legal App. Vol.vV, Tab.LL), or
because a claim for prospective profits was "not
compensable under the Act" (Claims of Aris Gloves
Inc., Award of Jan.31, 1962, U.S. Foreign Claims

Settlement Commission No. CZ-3035, p.240, ibid.,

 

Tab.MM), or because the claimant himself had

requested as damages the reimbursement of his

194.

195.

125

invested capital (INA Corp. v. Islamic Republic of
Iran (op.cit., supra), or the liquidation value of
its equity interest (Sedco Inc. v. National Iranian
Qil_cCo., 10 Iran-US Claims Tribunal Reports 180,
op.cit., supra), or again because the claimant's
property had never become a "going concern" before
the claim for damages arose (Phelps Dodge v. Islamic
Republic of Iran, 10 Iran-US Claims Tribunal Reports

121, Indonesia Legal App., Vol.V, Tab.PP).

None of the above arguments would appear to apply
in the present case. Indonesian law specifically
recognises the possibility of a claim for lost
profits (Article 1246 of the Indonesian Civil Code,
cited above, para.170) which envisages recovery for
“profit which he would otherwise enjoy" if it is
non-speculative and direct. See also Said Wachdin

Case, op.cit., supra, para.

Finally, the particular nature of PT Amco's rights
does not make the book value method of valuation an
appropriate technique. PT Amco was not the owner
of the Hotel Kartika Plaza. In exchange for its
investment in the Hotel, PT Amco obtained long-term

contractual rights which consisted of the Lease and

196.

126
Management Contract of 1968 with PT Wisma with its
various amendments, and the Profit-Sharing Agreement
of 1978. These were not the type of assets to which

the book value concept would be applicable.

Taking all the above factors into consideration, the
Tribunal will adopt the following methods for
valuation of the stream of profits. The assessment
will be divided into two periods, from July 9, 1980
until the end of 1989; and from 1990 until 1999.
For both of the periods there are some matters of
law and some of judgment that the Tribunal must
address. But as to valuation techniques, for 1980-
1989 the Tribunal will not use the perspective of
what the reasonable businessman in 1980 could
foresee, because for this period it can use known
data for relevant factors, including the year-by-
year inflation rate, as provided to the Tribunal by
the World Bank, from Laporangan Minggu, Bank
Indonesia, as well as actual exchange and taxation
rates. For 1980-1989 the Tribunal will increase the
value of the base year by the yearly inflation rate

(infra, paras.201-203), in order to maintain the

 

real value of that base year over the period.
Interest on the annual sums due will serve to bring

them to present day values. However, from January

 

197.

127
1, 1990 (1989 being the last full year for which
known factors are available) and forwards, the
Tribunal finds the DCF method appropriate to
establish the net present value of PT Amco's rights
for the remaining period of the lease, by
capitalising earnings and expenditures which would
otherwise have been spread over the future years of
the life of the 1978 Profit Sharing Agreement. In
applying these two techniques to each of these
periods, the Tribunal is mindful that PT Amco's
rights were 65% of the stream of profits until
September 30, 1984; and 50% thereafter until

September 30, 1999.

The Tribunal has also considered whether the
applicable law permits the use of these methods of
valuation. As to DCF, it is neither prescribed nor
prohibited (nor would one expect it to be) in the
Indonesian Civil Code. The DCF method has been used
in appropriate international awards: e.g. Starrett
Housing Corporation v. Iran (op.cit., supra) and
Phillips Petroleum Company Iran v. Iran, 21 Iran-US
Claims Tribunal Reports 79. As to the first method
to be applied to the period July 9, 1980 until
December 31, 1989, it is one that is logically

indicated by the finding that the purpose of

198.

128
compensation is to put Amco in the position of
having received the benefits of the contract during
this period. The Tribunal finds it a method that
is entirely consistent with Indonesian law and

international law.

The Tribunal notes also that both parties in the
present case have acknowledged the appropriateness
of the DCF method for the entire valuation, even
though there have been contested views as to the
application of the component elements, and even
though Indonesia has constantly emphasised that the
method should not be used in such a way as to allow
the inclusion of speculative profit. The several
reports by accounting experts introduced by each
party before the First Tribunal, as well as before
the present Tribunal, all used the discounted cash
flow method of valuation. See for Amco: the Arthur
Young and Company report of 1982 (Previously Filed
Claimants' Documents, Vol.I, Tab.28); the Pannell
Kerr Foster reports of 1983 (Ibid, Vol.II, Tab.137),
and of 1988 (New Factual Exh., Tab.156). See for
Indonesia: the Horwath and Horwath (UK) Ltd.
reports of 1984 (Previously Filed Respondent's Exh.,
Tab.240); of September 10, 1988 (Indonesia Exh.,

Vol.V, Tab.90); and of November 11, 1988 (Ibid.,

199.

200.

Vol.VI, Tab.103).

While adopting this technique in respect of the
period after December 31, 1989, the Tribunal calls
attention to the fact that it is not a mechanistic
device. The method itself relies on the application
of assumptions which are necessarily judgmental.
The DCF method is at once a flexible tool, that
allows for an application of factors and elements
judged as relevant. At the same time, it allows for
the application of these judgmental elements to be

articulated.

This being said, the Tribunal has to examine the
assumptions upon which the future income of the
Hotel could be forecast, that Hotel being the only
source of income of PT Amco. On that subject, PT
Amco and Indonesia presented divergent views on
several issues; these will be addressed seriatim,

in relation to the two valuation periods.

(qa)

(i)

201.

202.

203.

130

elati to Valuatio: its:
1980-1989
The base period

The Pannell Kerr Foster report of 1983 (op.cit.,
supra), upon which PT Amco relies, was based on a
market research on the hotel industry in Jakarta,
including the Kartika Plaza Hotel, for years 1978-
1983. It also assumed that a loan of US$3 million,
which had been undertaken by PT Amco under the 1978
Profit-Sharing Agreement would be made and used for
renovations and that the investment would upgrade

the Hotel to a four-star status.

The Horwath and Horwath reports (op.cit., supra)
were based on the average monthly net profit of the
Hotel for the fifteen month period beginning January

1, 1979 and ending March 31, 1980.

The Tribunal believes that the base period adopted
by Horwath and Horwath is the sounder, reflecting
the period when Amco actually was managing the
Hotel. This base period will be used to arrive at
an annualised figure which will constitute the base
year. The base period suggested by Pannell Kerr

Foster would include elements that would be too

205.

131
speculative and would rely substantially on PT
Wisma's management period, brought about by the

unlawful acts of the army and police.

The office and store rental income

In their pleadings before the first Tribunal, Amco
and Indonesia both used the base year office and
store rental derived from the 1982 Arthur Young

Report and which was set at Rp. 149 million

(op.cit., supra).

Before this Tribunal, Amco argued that, based on
newly available audited statements of PT Wisma, that
figure was too low by at least 50 per cent. Upward
adjustments were requested on the basis that (a)
1981 should be used as a base year instead of the
15 month 1979-1980 period; (b) a portion of the
store rental income was included on PT Wisma's books
rather than the Hotel's books; (c) actual rental
performance after 1980 would justify an increase in
Horwath and Horwath's projections; and (d) Horwath
and Horwath had double counted the expenses which
Arthur Young charged against gross revenue by
including them in the expense portion of the 15-

month accounts used to determine base~year Hotel

132

profits.

206. The Tribunal cannot accept the arguments raised
under points (a), (b) and (c) above as they are
predicated on events occurring under PT Wisma
management. PT Wisma management was the consequence
of the intervention of the army and police on April
1, 1980 and of the BKPM decision of July 9, 1980.
Financial results obtained by this management are
not to be relied on in seeking to identify what
would have happened had PT Amco's contract rights
remained intact. The same base period should be
used as for hotel profits. As for (d), double-
counting, no evidence has been adduced before the
Tribunal demonstrating that store expenses had been
included in the management accounts as part of the
expenses of the Hotel operation. The Tribunal finds

it too speculative to assume such a possibility.

207. The Tribunal therefore accepts the Arthur Young estimate
of Rp. 149 million (at 1980 values) for office and store

store rental income as a reasonable base figure.

(iid)

208.

209.

210.

In their reports prepared for the first Tribunal,
Pannell Kerr Foster used a 2% while Horwath and
Horwath used a 4% replacement reserve of gross
revenue from Hotel and office rental, to cover the
replacement cost of unserviceable furniture,
fixtures and equipment. In both cases, the reserve

was expensed in the year it was taken.

In their 1988 reports and in their testimony before
this Tribunal, Horwath and Horwath argued that a 5%
charge should be retained as the replacement reserve
and that it should be capitalised and depreciated
over five years. It was argued, inter alia, that
the actual expenditure between 1981 and 1987 was
considerably higher than the amount produced by a
4% reserve. For their part, Pannell Kerr Foster
argued in their 1988 report that the replacement
reserve should be depreciated over a seven year
period and should be based on 4% of hotel and

commercial revenues.

Excluding those subsequent events directly related

to the unlawful act, the Tribunal finds it

211.

134
inappropriate to rely on the level of expenditure
incurred by PT Wisma between 1981 and 1987 to
establish the replacement reserve rate. Taking into
account the various reports produced by the parties
and the evidence adduced, the Tribunal finds a four
per cent (4%) rate to be adequate in the

circumstances.

As to the depreciation period, the Tribunal believes
that, taking account of the type of assets
(equipment, furniture, etc) that the reserve was
intended to cover, a five year depreciation period
is appropriate. It was also argued by Amco that
the reserve should be decreased during the last few
years of the Profit-Sharing Agreement, since PT Amco
would not have allocated the same sum as a
replacement reserve when the expiry of the Agreement
was in sight. The Tribunal does not share that
view. Being responsible for the management of the
hotel, PT Amco was expected to keep it in good
running condition for the whole of the Profit-
Sharing Agreement, and this was expected in the
Ramada Licence Agreement (Previously Filed
Claimants' Documents, Vol.I, Tab.16). The Tribunal
concludes that the same rate of replacement reserve

should be maintained until the end of the Agreement.

oo eee te at!

(iv)

212.

213.

135
Finally, Amco argued that depreciation should not
be extended over the term of the Agreement, on the
principle that depreciation belonged to PT Amco.
As will be seen below, the Tribunal does not believe
that, under the Profit-Sharing Agreement, PT Amco
could appropriate depreciation to itself, but rather
that it should be deducted from hotel profits before
distribution in the appropriate shares between PT
Amco and PT Wisma. In these circumstances, there
appears no valid reason to decrease replacement in
the last few years of the Agreement. The Tribunal
has also concluded that the maintenance reserve
should be calculated on the combined gross revenue
of hotel and office rental. The base year figures
for office rental did not appear to have included

a deduction for such figures.

em to _depre ti
Strong disagreement was expressed by the parties as

to the way depreciation should be treated.

PT Amco argued, first, that it was entitled to the
depreciation of the capital assets of the Hotel
(Reply, pp.43-45) and, second, that PT Aeropacific's

asset contributions to the Hotel should be included

214.

215.

136
in the Hotel depreciation from the effective date
of the transfer of rights between PT Aeropacific and

PT Amco in 1980.

As to Indonesia, it argued that, under the 1978
Profit-Sharing Agreement, PT Amco was not entitled
to depreciation (see especially Counter-Memorial,
p.171, f£n.461 and Rejoinder, pp.66-9). While
Horwath and Horwath had in its 1984 Report added
depreciation to PT Amco's income anticipated under
its contract, it changed its interpretation of the
1978 Profit-Sharing Agreement in its 1988 reports
and concluded that PT Amco was only entitled to a
share of the net profit after tax of the Hotel.
Depreciation was deducted, as normally done, in
arriving at the net profit. (See Indonesia, Exh.,
Vol.V, Tab.90, p.4; Amco, New Factual Exh.,

Tab.156, pp.37-8).

The Tribunal heard evidence that, between 1968 and
1978, the practice followed between the parties was
for PT Amco to keep the depreciation. In the
Tribunal's opinion clause 5(a) of the Lease and
Management Contract, when read together with clause

5(b), leaves it unclear that PT Amco was entitled

 

i
i
!

216.

to do this.

However, it is to the 1978 Profit~-Sharing Agreement
that the Tribunal must refer, that Agreement
changing and adding to the 1968 Lease and Management
Contract and declaring null and void all previous
provisions "contrary and/or not in accordance with
THIS AGREEMENT" (Indonesia Exh., Vol.II, Tab.47,
clause 2B(1) and clause 3.3). The 1978 Agreement
stipulates that one of its purposes is "the best
possible implementation of the elements" of the 1968
Contract (Ibid., clause 2(a)). The Tribunal is of
the view that the 1978 Agreement created a new
regime between PT Wisma and PT Amco. Clause 2(b) (1)
states specifically that "the Lease and Management
Contract shall be replaced and understood as the
PROFIT-SHARING AGREEMENT FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF THE
KARTIKA PLAZA LAND AND BUILDING...)". PT Amco
assumed the management responsibility for the whole
complex and a profit-sharing scheme was established
whereby between October 1, 1978 and September 30,
1984, PT Amco would receive 65% of the net income
of the venture and 50% thereafter until September

30, 1999.

217.

218.

219.

In clause 2(3)(b) it is provided:
What is meant and intended by Net Income is:
"Income which is received by the SECOND PARTY
(PT AMCO] from all parties and rent or service
for the use of Kartika Plaza land and buildings
with its contents"
less (minus)
"all sorts of expenditures or costs which are
needed for the Hotel Kartika's promotion, sales
and after-sale routine maintenance (operating
expenses and instandhouding) for the Kartika
Plaza land and building, including corporate
tax and insurance, IREDA (Regional
Rehabilitation Contribution), and other
state/regional contributions..."

While a detailed list of items to be deducted from
gross income is enumerated, depreciation is not
specifically mentioned. It might perhaps be thought
that the reference to expenditures and costs needed
for routine maintenance (including "instanthouding"
- "preservation") is a reference to depreciation.
However, deduction for routine maintenance does not
cover depreciation of the hotel itself. The 1978
Agreement contains no provision for any payment of

depreciation to PT Amco.

There is no evidence that, subsequent to 1978, PT
Wisma accepted PT Amco's previous practice of

keeping the depreciation. PT Amco's 1978 and 1979

ae

220.

221.

139
financial reports were contested by PT Wisma, both

before and after the events of April 1, 1980.

The Tribunal believes that a reading of the terms
of the 1978 Profit-Sharing Agreement and reference
to the customary accounting definition of net income
(i.e. income subsequent to deduction of
depreciation) leads to the view that hotel
depreciation was to be deducted from gross income
before arriving at the net income to be shared
between the parties. PT Amco was thus not entitled
to retain depreciation before proceeding to any

distribution of the profits.

A further depreciation issue arose in relation to
the treatment of the depreciation for the Rp.
421,451,054 (US$1,015,000) net book value of
additional fixed assets in the Hotel carried on the
books of Aeropacific and transferred to Amco under
the Amco/Aeropacific Settlement Agreement of March
29, 1980 (Previously Filed Claimants' Documents,
Tab.18). Amco argued that Horwath and Horwath were
wrong in their 1984 report not to include any
depreciation for those assets and that it should be

entitled to the whole of that depreciation

222.

140
(Memorial, p.80; and Reply, p.49). Indonesia
contested this, emphazising that Aeropacific held
no title to the capital assets of the Kartika Plaza
Hotel (Counter-Memorial, p.140; and Rejoinder,
p.69). In its November 1988 Report, Horwath and
Horwath agreed to include an element for that
depreciation in the profit and loss account of the
Hotel but, in accordance with Indonesia's view of
the matter, allocated it to PT Wisma as Hotel owner,
and not to PT Amco. This reduced Amco's projected

net income.

Some Rp. 421,451,054 (US$1,015,000) was on the books
of Aeropacific for the construction it had done, and
was then assigned to PT Amco under the PT
Amco/Aeropacific Settlement Agreement (op.cit.,
supra). This situation was not changed, in the
Tribunal's view, by the formal provision in Clause
9(1)(4) of the Sub-Lease of October 13, 1970
(approved by PT Wisma) that all alterations or
improvements passed forthwith to PT Amco (Indonesia
Exh., Vol.II, Tab.42). The reality remained that
Aeropacific acted for PT Amco and the assets
transferred back to PT Amco under the 1980
Settlement Agreement should be included in the hotel

assets subject to depreciation. In the light of the

(v)
223.

224.

(vi)

225.

141
Tribunal's findings (above, para.220) on
depreciation, such depreciation should be deducted
before arriving at net income for the purpose of the

1978 Profit-Sharing Agreement.

Entitlement to cash flow
Amco argued (Reply, p.43) that it was entitled to
the Hotel cash flow, less PT Wisma's profit share.
The arguments advanced by each of the parties on
this issue essentially mirrored the arguments

deployed on entitlement to depreciation.

The Tribunal cannot agree with Amco's claim under
this head. As indicated above, para.61, PT Amco as
manager had access to the Hotel cash flow and could
decide on its use for hotel purposes. But this
access was of a fiduciary nature. PT Amco did not

have proprietary rights over the cash flow.

The impact of the Ramada Contracts

On July 4, 1979, PT Amco entered into two contracts:
a Licence Agreement with Ramada Inns Inc. (op.cit.,
supra) and a Management Agreement with Ramada

International Inc. (Previously Filed Claimants'

 

226.

227.

142
Documents, Vol.I, Tab.17). Under those agreements,
Ramada licensed the use of its name by the Hotel,
agreed to link it to Ramada's international booking
system and to provide it with top quality managers.
These agreements were approved in writing by PT
Wisma (Ibid., Tabs. 16 and 17). The Ramada fees
were paid by PT Amco and an experienced Ramada
Manager, Mr. A.S. Shussel, was appointed by Ramada
at the end of 1979. He had been in charge for a
little over three (3) months when the army and the

police actions occurred on April 1, 1980.

In their 1984 report, Horwath and Horwath included
some Rp. 178 million of expenses attributable to PT
Amco's affiliation with Ramada, but did not include
any incremental profit that could be reasonably
expected to result from such affiliation. Amco has
contended before this Tribunal that such profit
element should be included in compensation due to

it.

Amco has contended (Memorial, p.89) that it would
have been reasonable to assume that the Ramada
Management combined with the Ramada name and

sophisticated booking system would have added at

228.

143
least 25 per cent to gross revenues, and that at
least fifty per cent of this increase would have
represented profit, from which Ramada's fees would
be deducted. This factor was claimed by Amco to
represent an upward adjustment of US$301,000.000 to

the present value of Amco's share of the profits.

Clearly Amco entered into the Ramada agreements in
the belief that they would secure significant
benefits. At the same time, the Ramada Licence
Agreement was subject to stringent covenants and
conditions. The agreements were to run for ten
years with two additional five year options. PT
Amco covenanted:

"To maintain a high moral and ethical standard
and atmosphere at LICENSEE'S Hotel; to comply
with all local, state and federal laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations ...; to
maintain its premises and accommodations in a
clean, attractive, safe and orderly manner, and
to provide efficient, courteous and high
quality service to the public, and to furnish
hotel accommodations, services and conveniences
of the same high quality and distinguishing
characteristics as provided at Ramada Inns in
and around the United States and elsewhere so
that the Hotel operated by the LICENSEE
hereunder shall help to create and maintain
goodwill among the public for the system as a
whole."

229.

230.

. 144
PT Amco's ability to benefit from the Ramada
“connection thus depended upon its own ability to
comply with the Covenants. Further, the fees to be
paid under the Licence Agreement and the Management
Agreement were substantial. These fees were
unrelated to the ascertainability of benefits

deriving from Ramada.

Under the Licence Agreement a royalty fee in the
amount of 3 per cent of gross room sales was to be
paid. In addition Amco was to pay a sum equal to
US$0.17 per currently available and sellable room
per night or 1.2 per cent of gross room sales,
whichever was greater, or such additional sum or
sums as would from time to time be required by
Ramada Inns upon recommendation of Ramada Inns
Association. Under the Management Agreement Amco
was to pay a management fee of 25 per cent of gross
operating profit defined as the amount remaining
after deducting all "expenses of operation" from all
"gross revenues". Gross revenues consisted of
revenues or income or sale of any kind. Operating
expenses did not include payments (whether principal
or interest) relating to financing of capital
improvements or incumbering the hotel, depreciation,

insurance premiums, etc.

 

231.

232.

(vii)

145

During the oral hearings evidence was given as to
the way the Ramada contracts were working in the

early phase of their life.

Taking all of these factors into account, the
Tribunal has come to the conclusion that any
projections as to whether these contracts would have
been beneficial cannot meet the test of being non-
speculative. The elements of uncertainty are simply
too great. The Ramada factor should be treated as
a neutral element. The Tribunal therefore adopts
the alternative approach adopted by Horwath and
Horwath in its 1988 reports, which excluded the
Ramada fees from the results for the period to March
31, 1980 but which also excluded any future
enhancement of earnings resulting from the Ramada

contracts (op.cit., supra, pp.21, 22, 26).

otel market in Jak: a 1983

233. Applying the principle that it is appropriate to

give effect to known factors unrelated to the
licence revocation or unlawful takeover of the

hotel, the Tribunal has considered the evidence as

234.

235.

236.

146
to the state of the hotel market. This evidence has
only been provided for the period 1980-1983. The
issue was addressed by the parties in their briefs,
see Amco Memorial, p.68; Indonesia Counter-
Memorial, pp.162-166; Amco Reply, p.65; and

Indonesia Rejoinder, pp.54-57.

Pannell Kerr Foster made extensive market research
for the period 1978-1983 (Previously Filed
Claimants' Documents, Vol.II, Tab.137). Section III

contains information on the historical growth in

supply.

Jones Lang Wootton prepared a report dated February
28, 1984 (Indonesia Exh. Vol.IV, Tab.81). The
report contains information on available hotel rooms
and planned investments in the hotel industry in

Jakarta.

Having examined the argument and evidence presented,
including the fragmentary data on historical growth
and the projections of the experts, the Tribunal has
concluded that the state of the hotel market does

not fall into the category of facts of sufficient

i
{
i
|
4
1

 

147
certainty to have had an impact on profit levels to
be compensated. No element for this is thus

reflected in the calculations.

(viii) The treatment of corporate taxes

237.

238.

239.

In their September 1988 report, Horwath and Horwath
contended that, under the 1978 Profit-Sharing
Agreement, Amco's profit share should be calculated
after, rather than before, income taxes (op.cit.,
Supra, p.4). This point of view was different from
the one adopted by the same experts in their 1984

report.

Pannell Kerr Foster, in their October 1988 report,
stated that this was a matter of legal
interpretation, not of accounting, and that Horwath
and Horwath's first interpretation was the right

one.

While the financial impact of one option versus the
other does not appear to be major, the issue
generated considerable argument between Amco and
Indonesia at the Washington hearings, PT Amco

contending that the only taxes which were deductible

240.

148
were the property and business taxes relative to the
Hotel and Indonesia contending that all taxes,
including corporate taxes, should be deducted. Much

of the debate had to do with the translation to be

given to the words pajak perusahaan in clause 3(b)
of the 1978 Profit-Sharing Agreement. At the

request of the Tribunal, additional written
information was provided by the parties, after the
Washington hearings, concerning the proper

translation of those terms.

The Hotel Kartika Plaza was at no time incorporated
as an entity separate from PT Amco and PT Wisma.
It would have been normal business practice for the
parties to pay separately the corporate tax after
the distribution of hotel profits rather than having
such a charge deducted from hotel profits before
distribution. This procedure would have been all
the more logical given that clause 3(b) of the 1978
Agreement provides for the deduction of "all kinds
of expenditures or costs required for promotion,
sales and after sales service or routine (operation
and maintenance costs) of Hotel Kartika Plaza for
the land and buildings of Kartika Plaza (...)"
(Previously Filed Claimants' Documents, Vol.I,

Tab.15, para.2(b), 3(b)). In common accounting

241.

242.

149
procedure corporate taxes would not be interpreted
as being included in the above-mentioned types of

deductible expenses.

Amco referred to the Corporate Tax Act of 1925 where
the words "pajak pierseroan" are used to describe
the corporate tax. It also refers to the
Indonesian-English Dictionary by Echols and Shadily
which defines "perusahaan" as "business, enterprise,

undertaking, concern".

In practice, the word "perusahaan" seems to be given
a rather broad meaning which could include a
business as a corporate as well as a physical
entity. Thus, PT Amco's investment application of
May 6, 1968 (Previously Filed Claimants' Documents,
Vol.I, Tab.5) refers to PI Amco as a "perusahaan"
in Articles 1 and 9. In addition, the translation
ef the 1978 Profit-Sharing Agreement produced by
Amco uses the expression "company tax" for the words
"pajak perusahaan". The words following those
quoted above in para.2(b) 3(b) of the Agreement
read: "(...) including insurance and company tax"
("assuransi dan pajak perusahaan" in the Indonesian

text).

243.

244.

245.

150

In the Tribunal's opinion, the words "pajak
perusahaan" could be translated by "company (or
corporate) tax". The practice followed by PT Amco
and PT Wisma should help determine whether, in this
instance, the parties meant corporate tax to be
deducted before profit distribution under the 1978

Agreement.

Evidence produced before the Tribunal indicates that
this was the interpretation adopted by PT Amco in
its relationship with PT Wisma. In a letter of
March 19, 1980, addressed by Mr. E.M. Tomodok, Vice-
Chairman of PT Amco, to Mr. H. Soltpipto, principal
director of PT Wisma (Indonesia Exh., Vol.I, Tab.53,
p-3), it is stated:
"Because in the 'Profit-Sharing Agreement’
dated 6 October 1978, company taxes and also
‘investment expenses' are deducted from the
calculation for distribution of net income, we
hereby would also like your assessment
concerning these costs.

Company taxes are estimated at Rp. 20,000,000
and investment costs are Rp. 54, 878, 741.00".

The Rp. 20,000,000 amount appears consistent with

the amount that would have to be paid by the Hotel

‘
1
i
t
{
|
i
|

 

246.

(ix)

247.

248.

151
on the basis of the corporate tax rates in effect

at the time.

On the basis of all the above, the Tribunal
concludes that Amco's share of profits should be
calculated after, rather than before, corporate

income taxes.

ates to be ied
In its September 1988 report, Horwath and Horwath
stated that the 1984 rather than the 1980 tax rates
should be applied to post-1983 earnings (op.cit.,
supra, p.7). In its report of February 28, 1984,
Horwath and Horwath had applied uniformly the 1980
rates. Before this Tribunal, Indonesia argued that
the 1984 tax rates should apply to post~1983
earnings and stated that the use of the 1984 tax
rates probably lead to a lower tax burden than the
1980 rate because of a new configuration of tax

rates and the elimination of a 20% dividend tax.

For its part, PT Amco argued that, while the impact
of the 1984 tax rates would not have been

necessarily negative, it was preferable to abide by

249.

(x)
250.

152
what was reasonably foreseeable in 1980 and that,
if one were to accept the 1984 rates, one should
include a provision for the periodic indexation of
tax rates over the whole period covered by the

Award.

The changes in taxation rates are known facts which
would have been relevant to Amco had its contract
remained in effect. Further, these changes in rates
were unconnected with events surrounding the Kartika
Plaza controversy. The 1980 taxation rates remained
unchanged until 1984 and will therefore be applied
for the period 1980-1983. A new taxation rate,
which is still in existence, was established in
1984, and will be applied for the period 1984-1989.
Applying known facts to put Amco in the position it
would have been in had its contract been
implemented, equally makes an element for indexation

inappropriate.

The exchange rate

In order to "minimise current value changes", and
since hotel rates are quoted in US dollars, Pannell
Kerr Foster in its 1983 report estimated all figures

in US dollars, after having converted the base

251.

252.

253.

153
period into such dollars at the 1980 exchange rate
(op.cit., supra, section 1, p.11).

By contrast, Horwath and Horwath converted PT Amco's
profit in a given year between 1981 and 1988 at the
then applicable exchange rate and then discounted
such dollar amount to present value. For years
after 1988, the 1988 exchange rate (Rp. 1663.1 per
dollar) was used (Indonesia Exh., Vol.V, Tab.90,

p.6).

Although no definitive evidence to that effect was
introduced before the Tribunal, it would appear that
most of the Hotel income was earned in rupiahs.
However, the currency in which the income was earned
does not bear on whether the estimated Hotel profits
between 1980 and 1999 should be converted on the
basis of the current exchange rates of the year the
income is earned or on the basis of the 1980

exchange rate.

The objective is to put Amco in the position it
would have been in had its contract been performed.

Profits would have been converted year by year, and

(xi)

254.

154
the differences in exchange rates year by year were
known facts unrelated to the unlawful acts that
prevented the contract being performed. It follows
that the rupiah earnings should be converted each

year at the appropriate exchange rate:

Rp
1980 629.99
1981 631.76
1982 661.42
1983 909.26
1984 1,025.94
1985 1,110.58
1986 1,282.56
1987 1,643.85
1988 1,685.70
1989 1,770.06

(Source: IMF International Financial Statistics,

Vol.XL (1987) and Vol.XLIII (1990)).

The inflati
The actual year by year average inflation rate
between 1980 and 1990 will be applied to the hotel
and office store rental profits. The figures to be
applied, as provided to the Tribunal by the World

Bank from Laporangan Minggu Bank Indonesia, are:

155

1980" 15.9
1981 12.2
1982 9.5
1983 11.8
1984 10.5
1985 4.7
1986 5.8
1987 9.3
1988 8.0
1989 6.3

(xii) Risk factor

255. As the valuation method employed for 1980-89 does
not entail putting oneself in the position of a
reasonable businessman in 1980, and thus including
an element for unknown risks that might occur, no
such factor is reflected in the figures for this

first period.

(xiii) Discount rate
256. Because of the valuation method to be applied to the

period 1980-1989, the use of a discount rate does

 

* The average figure for 1980 is based on only ten
months of data for 1979, the series beginning only in
March 1979. The figure for 1989 is the provisional
figure available at the date of the Award.

156

not arise.

(xiv) Interest rate
257. The Tribunal finds that the distinction advanced by
Amco in its Memorial (see para. 31 above) that the
Indonesian statutory rate of 6% per annum was
inapplicable to monetary awards for wrongful acts
to be untenable. It is res judicata that interest
will be due at 6% per annum on the profits due year
by year to Amco, until the time of payment. The
First Tribunal, however, decided that interest was
due at 6% per annum from January 15, 1981 (the date
upon which ICSID proceedings commenced). There has
been no finding by this Tribunal as to whether the
date from which interest runs is res judicata, nor
has the matter been raised by the parties. Although
the amount of damages upon which the interest
accrues has been annulled, the view of the Tribunal
is that the date from which the 6% (itself
unannulled) runs is not annulled. In view of the
valuation method used for the period 1980-1989,
interest would in principle have run from January
1, 1981. However, due to this res judicata, it will

be treated as running from January 15, 1981.

258.

(e)

259.

(4)

260.

157
The Award ‘of the First Tribunal does not
specifically state if the interest was to be simple
or compound, but the absence of any directive that
it be compounded on a yearly basis leads to the view
that simple interest was awarded. The Tribunal has
noted that in Amco's Memorial, p.192, they claim
simple interest (while arguing for the Singapore

rate). This Tribunal awards 6% simple interest per

annum.
229071999

The damages due up to 1990 are US$1,679,890.00.
Interest up to May 31, 1990, the date of the Award,
makes the damages due $US1,711,830.00. The Tribunal
has now to consider the evaluation of damages over
the remaining years of the lease. The discounted
cash flow (DCF) method will be applied for the

reasons given in paras.197-198 above.

The ba: eriod

The base period for calculations for 1990-1999 will
be 1989, as it is the last year for which there are
available figures that correspond in real terms to

the 1980 profits.

158

(ii) Dhe office and store rental income
261. The Tribunal will rely on the 1989 figures, which
best reflect the value in real terms of the base

period relevant to 1990-1999.

(iii) e vi id ed eciatio’ a e
replacement reserve

262. Issues relating to depreciation will be treated for
this period identically to their treatment for the

period 1980-89.

(iv) Entitl i «ope
263. This will be treated as for the period 1980-89

(v) Entitlement to cash flow
264. This will be treated as for the period 1980-1989.

(vi) The impact of the Ramada contracts

265. This will be treated as for the period 1980-1989.

159

(vii) The hotel market in Jakarta
266. As no evidence that is reasonably certain has been

put to the Tribunal in relation to the period 1990-

1999, no assumptions relating to this factor will

be made.

(viii) The treatment of corporate taxes

267. This will be treated as for the period 1980-1989.

(ix) Tax rates

268. The 1984 tax rate, which is currently effective,
will be applied, as it appears to the Tribunal to
be the best non-speculative rate available.

(x) xcha!

269. Rupiah earnings will be converted at the 1989
exchange rate of 1,770.06 Rp., as it appears to the
Tribunal to be the best non-speculative rate
available.

(xi) (xii) (xiii) iscoun’ includi i tion
rate and risk factor)

270. The issue of the discount rate to be used in order

1
{

 

271.

272.

160
to arrive at net present value led to growingly
divergent views between Amco and Indonesia as well

as their experts.

Before the First Tribunal, they all agreed to use
a discount rate of 15%, being 3% above the estimated

annual inflation factor of 12%.

In their September 10, 1988 Report, Horwath and
Horwath used two discount rates: the 15% rate which
they had used in their 1984 report, or alternatively
a 17% rate "to reflect inherent business risk".
Then, on the basis of a report prepared by Professor
David 0.Dapice and dated November 14, 1988
(Indonesia Exh., Vol.VI, Tab.105), Horwath and
Horwath submitted a new report dated November 11,
1988, recalculating the previously submitted models
on the basis of a 30% discount rate for an income
stream generated in rupiahs and repatriated annually
into dollars and a 34% discount rate for a rupiah
income stream discounted to 1980 and converted into
dollars at the 1980 exchange rate (Indonesia Exh.,

Vol.VI, Tab.103, pp.16-17).

273.

274.

275.

161
Amco also argued that a discount rate lower than 15%
should apply if a below-market statutory interest
rate of 6% were applicable for measuring the value

of the loss of money.

The Tribunal does not accept Amco's argument that
a relationship should be established between the
Indonesian statutory interest rate and the
appropriate discount rate that should apply to any
income stream. The purpose of the discount rate is
to establish the value of future income in present
terms. A limited number of factors are taken into
account to arrive at an appropriate discount rate,
but the statutory rate of interest is not one of

then.

As to the discount rates of 30% and 34% proposed by
Indonesia, they arose from Professor Dapice's report
of November 4, 1988. A central argument was that
real rates of return of 20% were obtained from the
Government of Indonesia during the eighties for the
development of long-term projects; taking inflation
into account, nominal rates were about 30%. Union
Oil's development of a geothermal field in Indonesia

was relied upon by Professor Dapice as a case in

276.

162

point.

Professor Dapice's analysis appears essentially
valid in principle but largely irrelevant to the

present situation.

(1) While reference to large long-term investments
such as the Union Oil project are interesting, it
is pertinent to note that no evidence was produced
of the kinds of rate of return expected in the
service industry, and the hotel industry in
particular, in the early eighties, still less the

nineties.

(2) If one were to accept Professor Dapice's
figures, one would have to expect a similar analysis
by the investor as to his expected rate of return
in the future. One would therefore have to apply
a similar rate of escalation for the Hotel's profits
after 1980, assuming a rational investment decision.
Instead, both Pannell Kerr Foster (for the period
post-1983) and Horwath and Horwath (for the period
post-1980) used a 12% escalation factor which
corresponded to the average inflation rate between
1980 and 1983 and constituted their estimated annual

rate up to 1999.

277.

278.

279.

163

The Tribunal has noted that in their report ‘of
November 1988, Horwath and Horwath refrain from any
endorsement of Professor Dapice's conclusion. They
merely state: "We understand that Indonesia has
been advised by economist Professor David Dapice of
the appropriate discount rates to be applied (...).
(..-.) We have used the discount rates provided by
Professor Dapice and applied these to all the models

(...)™" (Indonesia Exh. 103, pp.127).

Howarth and Howarth and Pannell Kerr Foster used a
12% inflation figure representing the average
inflation rates for the years 1980-1983. The
Tribunal has noted that a significant decline in the
rate of inflation has occurred in Indonesia in the
decade 1980-90. It appears reasonable in the
circumstances to use the average rate of inflation
of the last five years (1985-1989) as a projection
for the remaining period. The average rate of

inflation of 1985-1989 is 6.82 per cent.

As to the risk factor, the Tribunal has noted with

interest the analysis of Howarth and Howarth in

wingers

164
their 1984 report, where they state:

"The estimated net cash flow of the Hotel (...)
has been discounted to arrive at an estimated
value at April 1980 at the rate of 15 per cent,
being 3 per cent above the estimated annual
inflation factor.

We have applied this relatively low margin over
the assumed rate of inflation because the
earnings have been based on known, historic
results. If the earnings had been based on
future projections of the Hotel's possible
performance (taking into account the benefits
of revised facilities, as in the case of the
PKF report) we would have adopted a
considerably higher margin over the rate of
inflation in order to reflect the risks and
uncertainties attached to such a projection."
(Previously Filed Resp. Exh., Tab.240,
para.3.1(g)).

280. The level of the risk factor at which the Tribunal

arrives is heavily influenced by the fact that the
level of assumed profit has been kept steady in real
terms. The particular level of the risk factor is
a matter of judgment. Pannell Kerr Foster set it
at 3% (Previously Filed Claimants Documents, Vol.II,
Tab.137; and New Fact. Exh., Tab.156) and Horwath
and Horwath in 1984 set it originally at 3%
(Previously Filed Resp. Exh. Tab.240, para.3(1) (g))
and in September 1988 at 5% (Indonesia Exh. Vol.V,

Tab.90, p.6).

281. After studying all the factors involved and in

particular the fact that the projected hotel

 

|
J
|
\
|
i
‘
i
{
|

282.

(f)
283.

165
earnings have been based on known historic results,
the trend in the US dollar and rupiah exchange rate,
and given that “amco will receive in 1990
compensation paid in United States dollars, the
Tribunal is of the view that a 4% risk factor should
be adopted.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that a discount
factor of 10.82% (4% risk factor plus 6.82% average
inflation rate for 1985-1989) should be used to
arrive at the 1980 net present value of the Hotel

earnings for the period 1990-1999.

Final Calculation of Damages

The figures reached on the basis of these principles
have not been revised to reflect matters alluded to
in paras.99-112 above. The Tribunal believes it is
not for it to reflect those matters in the
valuation, which should be objectively arrived at;
but notes again that appropriate procedures existed
in Indonesian law for the authorities to have
addressed these matters, once the dispute between

PT Wisma and PT Amco had focussed attention on them.

166

284. The final calculation of damages in the amount of

US$2,696,330.00 with interest up to May 31, 1990 is
shown below, at pp.169-170. The Tribunal has, in
making the final calculation of damages, relied on
the following (the reasoning for each of which has

been elaborated above):

Base oO

15 month period ending March 31, 1980. The hotel
profit for the period was Rp. 181.2 million
(Previously Filed Respondent's Exhibits Cited in
Claimants' Memorial, Tab.240, para.3.l.a.; and
Indonesia Exh., Vol.IV, Tab.82). The Ramada fee of
Rp. 17.8 million, having been treated in the 1979-
80 management accounts as an expense, is added back
to the figures representing the 15 month base
period. Thus the annualised base year results

(12/15) are Rp. 159.2 million.

Office and store rental profits
Rp. 149.17 million.

a ermi i ate

From July 9, 1980 to September 30, 1999.

4.

7.

167

Escalation rate

Yearly average inflation rate for the period July
9, 1980 to December 31, 1989. Average of the last
five years (1985-1989) for the period January 1,

1990 to September 30, 1999, being 6.82%.

oun
Projected inflation rate (average of 1985-1989:
6.82%), plus 4%, for the period of January 1, 1990
to September 30, 1999. The net present value is
arrived at by discounting back to the date of the

Award (May 31, 1990).

Exchange rate

Amco's profits to be converted into US dollars at
the prevailing yearly rates for the period July 9,
1980 to December 31, 1989; and at the 1989 rate
for the period January 1, 1990 to September 30,

1999.

Depreciation

Hotel profit is net profit after depreciation,

10.

11.

168
including Aeropacific depreciation. Depreciation
ison a straight-line method, over a useful life of

20 years, with no salvage value.

Replacement reserve and depreciation

4% capitalised and depreciated over 5 years.

nil.

Corporate taxes
Amco's share of profits to be calculated after

deduction of corporate income taxes.

Taxation rate

Actual annual prevailing tax rates, for the period
1980-1983. Rates established in 1984 and still in
existence on the date of the Award, for the period
1984 to December 31, 1989. The current rate for
1989 for the period January 1, 1990 to September

30, 1999.

12.

13.

169
Share of profits to Amco
According to Profit-Sharing Agreement.
July 9, 1980 to September 30, 1984: 65%

October 1, 1984 to September 30, 1999: 50%

Interest rate

Non-compounded 6%, running from January 15, 1981.

vamages for the period July 9, 1980 to December 31, 1989

Year

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
487

388

189

")

uy
Repla~
cement

26.78

829.03

am)
Hotel
Profit

88.97
207 .02
226.69

2,754.14

Inflation adjusted

(*)
Offices
Store
Rental
Profit

Tt.
167.
183,

93
37

Depre- Aero-~
elation pacific
of 4g Depre- Depre-
Replacement ciation ciation

5.36 16.03 28.83

609.67 315.19 566.94

Profit
Before
Tax

110.68
263.54
285.46

159.75
172.05

1,096.20

Profit
After
Tax

87.48
194.48
209,82
233.00
233.40
240.88
256.84

2,392.73

AMCO
Profit.
Share

56.86
126.41
136.38
151.45
142.89
120.44
128.42
143.17
156.91
168.34

1,331.27

“") To May 31, 1990, the date of the Award, the amount of interest is $425.17 for a final total of $1,711.83

 

Non-
U.S. dollar compounded
Conversion Cumulative 64
($000) Total Interest
90.69 90.69 -
200.09 290.78 5.22
206.19 496.97 17.45
166.56 663.53 29.82
139.28 802.81 39.81
108.45 911,26 48.17
100.13 1,011.39 54.68
87.09 1,098.48 60.68
93.08 1,191.56 65.91
95.10 1,286.66 TAY,
1,286.66

 

Total

147.77
158.99
166.59

393.23(**) 1,679.89

Samages for the period January 1, 1990 to September 30, 1999

(*) (Mey
Office/ Depre- Aero- (U.S. $000)
ug (*) Store ciation pacific Profit Profit AMCO Present
Repla- Hotel Rental of 44 Depre- Depre- Before Total After Profit Value of
fear cement Profit Profit Replacement ciation ciation Tax Tax Tax Share Profits
1990 125.16 415.81 336. 16 109.60 33.24 59.79 549. 34 186.27 363.07 181.54 102.56
1991 133.70 44h 17 359,09 117.66 - - 685.60 233.96 451.64 225 .82 115.12
1992 142.81 474 NG 383.58 125.81 - - 732.23 250.28 481.95 240.97 110.85
1993 152.56 506 .82 409.74 134.28 - - 782.28 267.80 514.48 257.24 106.78
1994 162.96 541.39 437.68 143 44 - - 835.63 286.47 549,16 274 .58 102.85
1995 174.07 578.31 467.53 153.22 - - 892.62 306.42 586.20 293.10 99.07
1996 185.94 617.75 499,42 163.67 - - 953.50 327.72 625.78 312.89 95.43
1997 198.63 659.88 533.48 174.83 - - 1,018.53 350.49 668.04 334.02 91.93
1998 212.17 704.89 569.86 186.75 - - 1,088.00 374.80 713.20 356.60 88.56

1999 169.98 564.72 __456.5 188.16 "933.10 __ 285.59 _5U7.51 __ 273.75 61.35

1,657.98 5,508.20 4,453.08 1,497.42 33.24 59.79 8,370.83 2,869.80 5,501.03 2,750.51 974.50

(*) Inflation adjusted

(*#) Present value to May 31, 1990

x.

285.

286.

287.

172

costs

Article 61 of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes requires that the Tribunal
shall decide how and by whom expenses incurred by
the parties in connection with the proceedings, as
well as fees and expenses of the members of the
Tribunal, and charges for the Centre, shall be

paid.

The Tribunal decides that Amco and Indonesia shall
each bear the costs they have incurred in the
preparation and presention of their cases; and
that the arbitrators' fees and expenses and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre

shall be shared equally.

An issue has arisen which requires the Tribunal to
decide if an adjustment should be made to this
finding. On May 31, 1989 Amco wrote to the
Tribunal, making certain allegations and attaching
certain affidavit evidence. Amco claimed that
certain of its documents had been taken by PT Wisma
and not returned to it; Indonesia was responsible

for this; and that Indonesia's counsel had had

288.

289.

173
access to these documents. Amco asked that "the
Tribunal enter a preliminary award compensating
Amco for the avoidable costs incurred over the
years litigating a case while wrongfully deprived
of its own files". The sum sought was "not less
than $500,000". Amco later (letter of July 25)
appeared to think a preliminary hearing no longer
necessary. On August 8, 1989 the Tribunal issued
an Interlocutory Decision stating that it made no

order for a separate preliminary hearing.

Amco's request for "compensation ... for the
avoidable costs" was not made as a substantive
claim in the Memorials, but rather as a separate
request by letter in the period before the oral
hearings. In the Tribunal's view, it therefore
falls to be considered as an element in that part

of its Award which deals with costs.

The matter of allegedly stolen documents (going
beyond the aspect of "avoidable costs" in relation
thereto) was mentioned in the written pleadings,
and in oral argument, and was dealt with in detail
in the correspondence sent by the parties to the

Tribunal (letters of Amco of May 31, June 16, July

290.

291.

174
25 and August 2; letters of Indonesia of June 15,

July 14 and July 28).

The Tribunal believes that the evidence shows that
certain Amco documents were taken by PT Wisma; and
that not all of these were returned or otherwise
made available to Amco. The Tribunal further
believes that this was done in consequence of the
army and police intervention, and that it cannot be
said that any such acts were those of PT Wisma
alone, for which Indonesia bears no _ legal
responsibility. However, the evidence (both in the
correspondence and in the oral hearings) leaves the
dimensions of this problem very unclear. For the
most part, the Tribunal is not in a position to
know what documents, unlawfully taken, were or were
not returned. Moreover, aS most of Amco's
documents relevant to this case would have been
expected to exist outside of Indonesia, it is also
unclear what additional costs Amco had incurred in

the preparation of this case.

The Tribunal therefore makes no adjustment in this
regard to its determination at para.286 above

regarding costs.

xI.

292.

293.

294.

175

SET-OFF_OF ANNULMENT COSTS

As applicant in the annulment proceedings,
Indonesia was required under ICSID Financial
Regulation 14(3)(e) to make advance deposits to
cover all costs. In paragraph 125 of its Decision
of May 16, 1986, the Ad Hoc Committee held that
Amco should pay Indonesia one half of the cost of
the annulment proceedings. The portion of the
costs attributed to Amco remained unpaid at the

outset of these proceedings.

The Republic of Indonesia on October 22, 1987
requested that the present Tribunal determine that
advance payments for these proceedings should be
apportioned in their entirety to Amco until the
outstanding award, and interest claimed to be due
on it had been met thereform. Certain written

communications from the parties ensued.

The parties agreed to a proposal by the President
of the present Tribunal of December 1, 1987 that
advance costs for a period of six months should be

made on an equal basis, to allow the work of the

 

 

i
|
4

295.

Tribunal to commence.

On February 1, 1988 the Tribunal heard oral
submissions of the parties on this matter. on
February 8, 1988 the Tribunal issued a reasoned
Ruling rejecting Indonesia's application for the
allocation of advance costs solely to Amco.
Paragraph 15 of that Ruling stated:
"The Tribunal, without taking any present
position itself, notes for the record that
Amco, in its communication of January 20,
1988, “concede[s] that, as a matter of
fairness, the present Tribunal should be
permitted to set off against any award that it
makes in [Amco's] favour any costs then owing
by [Amco] to Indonesia relating to the
annulment Decision."
Basing itself on this concession, the Tribunal now
decides that the sum of US$128,363.80 which
includes interest of 6% from May 16, 1986, will be
set off against the sum of US$2,696,330.00 it has

awarded to Amco as damages.

For the above stated reasons;

THE TRIBUNAL DECIDES AS FOLLOWS:

(2)

the Republic of Indonesia shall pay to Amco Asia

Corporation, Pan American Development Limited and

(2)

(3)

(4)

177
P.T. Amco Indonesia, jointly ("The Claimants"), the
sum of two million five hundred and sixty-seven
thousand and nine hundred and sixty-six US dollars
and twenty cents (US$2,567,966.20) with interest on
this amount at the rate of six per cent (6%) per
annum from the date of the Award until the date of
effective payment. The above sum includes a set
off of one hundred and twenty-eight thousand and
three hundred and sixty-three US dollars and eighty
cents (US$128,363.80) for the amount including
interest owed by the Claimants for their share of
the costs of the Annulment Proceedings referred to

in paragraph 295.

The amounts due from the Republic of Indonesia
shall be paid to the Claimants outside of

Indonesia.

The Republic of Indonesia's counterclaims are

rejected.

Each party shall bear the fees and expenses it
incurred for the preparation and presentation of

its case.

178
(5) Each party shall bear one half of the arbitrators'
fees and expenses and of the charges for the use of

the facilities of the Centre.

Done in Copenhagen, and dated this thirty-first day of

 

 

May 1990
|
j
[evetyn ALR
: Professor Rosalyfi Higgins, Q.c.
‘ ,
: me Loong Py M > a

? The Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.c., Q.c. Per Magid

