@ICSID

By email

Amec Foster Wheeler USA Corporation,
Process Consultants, Inc., and
Joint Venture Foster Wheeler USA

Corporation and Process Consultants, Inc.

c/o Mr. Robert L. Sills

Mr. Ari M. Berman

Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP
31 West 52nd Street

New York, NY 10019, USA

and

Mr. Charles C. Conrad

Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP
Two Houston Center

909 Fannin, Suite 2000

Houston, TX 77010, USA

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

1818 H STREET, NW | WASHINGTON, DC 20433 | USA
TELEPHONE +1 (202) 458 1534 | FACSIMILE +1 (202) 522 2615
WWW.WORLDBANK.ORGIICSID

October 25, 2021

Republic of Colombia

c/o Ms. Ana Maria Ordonez Puentes
Ms. Elizabeth Prado

Mr. Giovanny Vega-Barbosa
Direccion General de Defensa Juridica
Internacional

Carrera 7 No. 75-66 Pisos 2 y 3
Bogota, Colombia

and

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Ms. Elisa Botero

Mr. Fernando Tupa

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20006, USA

Re: Amec Foster Wheeler USA Corporation, Process Consultants, Inc., and Joint Venture
Foster Wheeler USA Corporation and Process Consultants, Inc. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/19/34)

Dear Mesdames and Sirs,

I write to you on instructions from the President of the Tribunal.

On September 2, 2021, Claimants submitted an Application for Provisional Measures and
Emergency Temporary Relief (the “Application”). On September 7, 2021, the Tribunal established a
calendar for Respondent’s separate Responses to (a) the Request for Temporary Relief and (b) the
Request for Provisional Measures. The Procedural Calendar was modified on September 20, 2021 and
October 8, 2021. This Decision concerns Claimants’ Application for Emergency Temporary Relief.

(i) Claimants’ Position

In their Application and related communications, Claimants refer to the Auto 749 issued on
April 26, 2021 by the Contraloria General de la Republica de Colombia (the “CGR Decision’)
following fiscal liability proceedings in which damages in the amount of US$811 million were awarded
against Joint Venture Foster Wheeler USA Corporation and Process Consultants, Inc. (“FPJVC”),
along with others. Claimants allege that the CGR Decision is the result of a proceeding improperly
initiated by the CGR against FPJVC “in a transparent attempt to shift blame for alleged acts of

mismanagement from those who actually managed a project involving the modernization and
expansion of a State-owned oil refinery located in Cartagena, Colombia.”

Claimants explain that they seek an emergency order preventing Colombia from disrupting the
status quo by enforcing the CGR Decision pending the Tribunal’s determination of their Application
for Provisional Measures. Claimants submit that the Tribunal has the authority to grant the requested
emergency relief under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Article 10.20.8 of the US-Colombia
TPA as their Application does not seek to enjoin the application of a measure alleged to constitute a
breach under Article 10.16 of the US-Colombia TPA.

As to the urgency of the relief requested, Claimants refer to the Respondent’s confirmation that
the proceedings to enforce the CGR Decision are underway and argue that this “worldwide campaign
of litigation by Colombia while the CGR Decision is being challenged in this arbitration would
aggravate this dispute, upset the status quo and threaten the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the dispute.” ?

(ii) Respondent’s Position

According to Respondent, the limitation in Article 10.20.8 of the US-Colombia TPA to a
tribunal’s authority to recommend provisional measures under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention
would prevent this Tribunal from issuing the emergency temporary relief requested by the Claimants.
Respondent submits, inter alia, that here Claimants are seeking to enjoin the application of the same
measure they allege is a violation of the US-Colombia TPA. Respondent contends that the enforcement
of the CGR Decision is the “ultimate consequence” of the fiscal liability proceeding which the
Claimants argue was initiated in breach of the US-Colombia TPA. Accordingly, enjoining the
enforcement of the CGR Decision “would necessarily mean enjoining the ‘application’ or
‘implementation’ of the ‘measure’ alleged to constitute a breach of the Treaty, which is prohibited by
Article 10.20(8).” 4

Respondent also argues that Claimants have failed to meet the “heightened level of urgency”
required to issue temporary emergency relief pending a decision on an application for provisional
measures. Respondent submits that the fact that the CGR is initiating proceedings to enforce the CGR
decision does not entail an imminent threat to Claimants’ assets. On this point, Respondent notes that
the CGR (i) “has not located any assets owned by Foster Wheeler or Process Consultants, either in
Colombia or abroad” and that, for that reason, it has not decreed any precautionary measures against
the Claimants’ assets.> Respondent further explains that, as of the date of its Answer to the Emergency

' Application, 4 2.

2 Claimants’ Reply of October 18, 2021, 4 8.

3 Claimants’ Reply of October 18, 2021, 4 9.

+ Respondent’s Response of September 30, 2021, 23.

5 Respondent’s Response of September 30, 2021, 4 34-36.

Application (i.e. September 30, 2021), the CGR official in charge of the enforcement proceeding of
the CGR Decision is in the process of reviewing such decision. If this official determines that the CGR
Decision meets all legal requirements, it may initiate a voluntary collection phase seeking payment
from the Claimants. Upon conclusion of that stage, the CGR may proceed with the forced collection
stage. Any assets attached during the forced collection proceeding can only be auctioned off when all
pending judicial reviews have concluded, so even at that stage, Claimants may initiate an annulment
action against the Ruling with Fiscal Liability and may request a stay of enforcement.

(iii) = Tribunal’s Decision

The Tribunal has carefully reviewed and considered the Parties’ submissions, including
Claimants’ communications of September 2, 15 and October 12, 2021 and Respondent’s
communications of September 30 and October 18, 2021 as regards Claimants’ Application for
Emergency Temporary Relief. The fact that the Tribunal does not specifically mention a given
argument does not mean that it has not taken it into account.

The Tribunal considers that Claimants have failed to make a showing of the heightened level
of urgency required to grant the emergency temporary relief that they have requested. In particular,
Claimants have not provided evidence that any of their assets are currently under threat of harm. The
Tribunal wishes to stress that this decision is without prejudice to the Tribunal’s consideration of the
Parties’ arguments regarding the urgency of the Provisional Measures that Claimants have requested
be issued until this arbitration is concluded, and its authority to order Provisional Measures in this
arbitration in light of Article 10.20(8) of the US-Colombia TPA.

The Tribunal considers that its analysis of these matters would be further assisted by
Respondent’s Answer to the Request for Provisional Measures (due by October 28, 2021) and by the
Parties’ oral presentations on the Request for Provisional Measures. Accordingly, the Tribunal
confirms that the Hearing on Provisional Measures will take place at the date tentatively scheduled,
i.e, November 4, 2021. The final schedule for the Hearing will be established by the Tribunal upon
consultation with the Parties.

Accordingly, the Tribunal unanimously decides as follows:
(a) Claimants’ Request for Emergency Temporary relief is denied;
(b) The Tribunal confirms that it will hear the Parties’ oral arguments on Claimants’
Request for Provisional Measures during the Hearing that will take place virtually on

November 4, 2021.

(c) Either Party may bring to the Tribunal’s attention any new, relevant, facts that
fundamentally change the current circumstances;

(d) The Tribunal reserves its decision on costs for a later stage.

Sincerely yours,

[signed]

Marisa Planells-Valero
Secretary of the Tribunal

cc: Members of the Tribunal

