INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR §

 

{TTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

AMPAL-AMERICAN ISRAEL CORP., EGI-FUND (08-10) INVESTORS LLC, EGI-
SERIES INVESTMENTS LLC, BSS-EMG INVESTORS LLC,
AND MR. DAVID FISCHER

 

Claimants

and

ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
The Honorable L. Yves Fortier, CC, OQ, QC, President
Professor Campbell McLachlan, QC
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Aissatou Diop

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Annie Lespérance

Date of the dispatch to the Parties: | February 2016

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Ampal-American Israel
Corporation, EGI-Fund (08-10) Investors,
LLC,EGI-Series Investments, LLC,
BSS-EMG Investors, LLC, and Mr. David
Fischer

Ms. Lucy Reed

Mr. Robert Kirkness

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
10 Collyer Quay 42-01

Ocean Financial Centre

Singapore 049315

and

Mr. Noah Rubins

Dr. Ben Juratowitch

Mr. Tunde Oyewole

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
2, rue Paul Cézanne

75008 Paris

France

and

Mr. Ben Love

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
601 Lexington Avenue

31st Floor

New York, NY

10022

and

Mr. Niv Sever

M. Firon & Co. Advocates
16 Abba Hillel Silver St.
Ramat Gan 52506

Israel

Representing the Arab Republic of Egypt

HLE. Mr. Ezzat Ouda

Mr. Mahmoud Elkhrashy

Mr. Amr Arafa

Ms. Fatma Khalifa

Ms. Reem Hendy

Ms. Lela Kassem

Egyptian State Lawsuits Authority
10th Floor, Mogamaa Building
Tahrir Square

Cairo, Egypt

and

Professor Emmanuel Gaillard
Dr. Yas Banifatemi

Mr. Alexander Uff

Dr. Mohamed Shelbaya
Shearman & Sterling LLP
114 ave. des Champs-Elysées
75008 Paris

France

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 1
A. The Parties 1
B. Background of the dispute...

C. Parallel P: di
D. Scope of the Present Decision 6
PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 

 

 

|. RELIEF REQUESTED 17

 

A. Claimants’ Request for Relief.
B. Respondent’s Request for Relief...

 

 

. THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND

 

 

 

 

 

 

ADMISSIBILITY 19
A. Ratione Personae Comp over Ampal 20
1. R dent’s Position 20
2. Claimants’ Position 28
3. Tribunal’s Analysi: 33
B. Ratione Personae Competence over EG]-Fund Investors and EGI-Series...............46
1. Respondent’s Position.
2. Claii ” Position

 

3. Tribunal’s Analysi
. Ratione Personae Competence over Mr. David Fischer.

1. Respondent’s Position.

2. Clait ’ Position.

3. Tribunal’s Analysi:
. Ratione Materiae Competence over the Claimants’ Gas Supply Claims..

1. Respondent’s Position.

2. Claimants’ Position

3. Tribunal’s Analysi:

Ratione Materiae C over the Tax Claim:

a

 

 

 

o

 

 

 

m

 

1. Respondent’s Position
2. Claimants’ Position
3. Tribunal’s Analysi:

 

 

 

F, Alleged Ilegality of the GSPA
1. pondent’s Position
2. Clai s’ Position

 

 

3. Tribunal’s Analysi
. Alleged Abuse of the Arbitral Process .......ccccccceeressiesereeeneeene

1. Respondent’s Position.

2. Claimants’ Position

3. Tribunal’s Analysi:

Q

 

 

 

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/]
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Vv. DECISION

98

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

I INTRODUCTION

A. THE PARTIES
1. The Claimants in this arbitration are:
(i) Ampal-American Israel Corp. (“Ampal”), a corporation incorporated under the
laws of the State of New York, is a public company that was listed on the

NASDAQ but filed for reorganization under Chapter 1] of the United States

Bankruptcy Code following the destruction of its investment in EMG;!

(ii) EGI-FUND (08-10) Investors LLC, a limited liability company incorporated under
the laws of the State of Delaware (“EGI-Fund Investors”);

(iii) EGI-Series Investments LLC, a limited liability company incorporated under the
laws of the State of Delaware (“EGI-Series”);

(iv) BSS-EMG Investors LLC, a limited liability company incorporated under the laws
of Delaware (“BSS-EMG Investors”); and

(v) Mr. David Fischer, a national of Germany.

2. The Claimants aver that they own, directly or indirectly, together and with other
entities, the East Mediterranean Gas (“EMG”), a company incorporated under the laws
of Egypt. The Claimants’ investment structure is attached as Annex I to the present
Decision.

3. The Respondent is the Arab Republic of Egypt (“Egypt” or the “Respondent”).

B. BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

4. A dispute has arisen between the Claimants and the Respondent in respect of which the

Claimants filed a request for arbitration (the “Request”) on 2 May 2012 pursuant to:

' Claimants’ Memorial (the “Memorial”), ! March 2013, para. 65.
1

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

(i) Article VII of the Treaty Between the United States of America and the Arab

Republic of Egypt Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of
Investments (the “US Treaty” or the “Egypt-US BIT”);

(ii) Article 9 of the Agreement between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Federal
Republic of Germany concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of

Investments (the “Germany Treaty”)? (together, the “Treaties”); and

(iii)Article 36 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States, which entered into force on October 14, 1966
(the “ICSID Convention”).

5. The dispute relates to the Claimants’ investment in EMG. EMG was formed on 19
April 2000 for the dual purposes of purchasing natural gas from Egypt and exporting it
to Israel as well as building and operating a pipeline that runs from Al Arish in Egypt to
Ashkelon in Israel (the “Al Arish-Ashkelon pipeline” or “EMG Pipeline”). For these
purposes, EMG signed on 13 June 2005 a General Sale and Purchase Agreement (the
“Source GSPA”) with the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation (“EGPC”) and
Egyptian Natural Gas Holding Company (“EGAS”).

6. EMG proceeded to sign subsequent agreements, among them, On-Sale Agreements
with various customers in Israel, including the State-owned Israel Electric Corporation
(“IEC”). EMG completed the construction of the pipeline in December 2007 and

deliveries commenced in January 2008.

7, The Claimants contend that before the delivery of commercial quantities of natural gas
began, Egypt forced renegotiations of the GSPA, revoked EMG’s tax-exempt status,
failed to ensure delivery of the contracted quantities, restricted EMG’s access to funds,

and purported to terminate the GSPA.

2 C-7. The US Treaty was executed in two languages — English and Arabic — both texts being equally
authentic, See Request, para. 2.

3 C-8. The Germany Treaty was executed in three languages ~ German, Arabic, and English — all texts being
equally authentic with the English text prevailing in case of divergent interpretation. See Request, para. 2.

2

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

On the basis of these acts and omissions, the Claimants allege that Egypt breached a
number of protections afforded to the Claimants under the US-Egypt BIT and the
Germany-Egypt BIT.

‘The Claimants have quantified their claims as follows‘:

Summary of. losses to the Claimants i interest and value leakage

US$ million) — Impact of the First Amendment assessed as at Date of the First

Amendment

 

Impact of

Claimants Impact of Tax Exemption Impact of the Impact of the Total losses

Revocation First Amend- Delivery

Tax Exemption & ovond

Revocation Ment Failures

 

EGI Fund 37.9 8.0 87.6 76.2 209.7

 

EGI Series 0.0 0.0 95.6 83.2 178.7

 

BSS

6.3 1.3 15.9 13.9 37.5

 

David Fischer 9.5 2.0 23.9 20.7 56.1

 

Ampal 95.4 20.2 240.5 208.3 564.4

 

Total

149.1 31.6 375.9 326.1 882.6

 

“See Li

Cc PARALLEL PROCEEDINGS

In addition to the present proceeding, four other related arbitrations have been

launched:

(i) EMG is engaged in three parallel contractual arbitrations involving EGPC, EGAS,
and EMG’s main downstream customer, IEC. EMG initiated an ICC arbitration
(seated in Geneva) against IEC to obtain declaratory relief in relation to the dispute
that had arisen between them under their On-Sale Agreement as a result of
EGPC/EGAS’s supply failures. To ensure that liability for the resulting harm was
properly allocated to EGPC/EGAS, EMG then launched another ICC arbitration>
(again seated in Geneva) against both IEC and EGPC/EGAS pursuant to the

etter from FTI Consulting dated 11 August 2014 (“FTI Letter”), Appendix 4 (revised).

ICC Case 18215/GZ/MHM.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Source GSPA and the Tripartite Agreement. EGPC/EGAS immediately contested
the jurisdiction of the ICC tribunal, and initiated arbitration against EMG at
CRCICA in Cairo, which it contends is the only proper contractual forum.” There

are thus three inter-related commercial arbitrations.*

(ii) There is also a parallel investment treaty arbitration against Egypt, initiated under
the UNCITRAL Rules and Egypt’s investment treaty with Poland.? In that
proceeding, the claimants are Polish-Israeli national Yosef Maiman and three
companies of the Merhav group of companies that he allegedly controls, including

Ampal’s subsidiary, Merhav Ampal Group Ltd.'°

11. The remedies sought in each of these arbitrations is provided at Annex II of the present

Decision.
12. As to the status of the above-mentioned arbitrations, the Tribunal notes the following.

(i) In respect of the first ICC arbitration in which EMG seeks declaratory relief against
IEC, the parties in the present arbitration indicated at the evidentiary hearing that
that arbitration had been suspended by EMG and IEC and that EMG and IEC have

now brought coordinated claims against EGAS in the second ICC arbitration"!

(ii) The tribunal in the second ICC arbitration issued its Final Award on 4 December
2015. In respect of jurisdictional matters, the ICC tribunal declared (i) that it lacked
jurisdiction to adjudicate EMG’s GSPA Claims, (ii) that it had jurisdiction to
adjudicate EMG’s Tripartite Agreement Claims and (iii) that EMG’s Tripartite

Agreement Claims were admissible.

© For purposes of this Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal will refrain from defining terms which are not
pertinent to the present Decision. Those terms will be defined in the Tribunal’s decision on the merits.

? Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation and Egyptian Natural Gas Holding Company v. East Mediterranean
Gas S.A.E. (“EGPC and EGAS v. EMG”) , CRCICA Case 829/2012.

5 Memorial, para. 323.

° PCA Case 2012/26.

"© Memorial, para. 324.

"Tr, Day 9, 73:20-74:3. Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, footnote 8.
4

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

(iii)In respect of the CRCICA arbitration, the Tribunal notes that the Award on
Jurisdiction was issued on 11 November 2013! and that the hearing on the merits
occurred on 15-26 June 2015. In its Award on Jurisdiction, the CRCICA tribunal

declared it had jurisdiction over the dispute.

(iv)In respect of the Maiman arbitration, by letter of 18 November 2015, the Maiman
tribunal communicated to the parties in that arbitration the following: “the Tribunal
has now decided that it has jurisdiction ratione personae. The Tribunal will
provide the reasons for this decision subsequently, in its award. Consequently, the
Tribunal declares the proceedings closed in respect of these issues in accordance

with Article 31(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.”

13. The Claimants submit that Egypt is responsible for the many proceedings related to the

present dispute. They aver, in this connection:

(i) while EMG proposed to lidate all three ial arbitration p di
under any rules and in any arbitral seat outside Egypt and IEC consented to this
proposal, EGPC/EGAS declined; '?

(ii) while the claimants in the UNCITRAL BIT proceeding sought to appoint Professor
Reisman as co-arbitrator, whom EMG had already selected to serve on the
CRCICA tribunal, with a view for a commonality between the tribunals, Egypt

challenged Professor Reisman on that very basis; 14 and

(iii) while the Claimants and other EMG shareholders offered to consolidate the two
treaty arbitrations on 10 May 2013 before this Tribunal because the ICSID
Claimants were unwilling to forego the protection of the ICSID Convention'®,
Egypt insisted that consolidation could occur only before the UNCITRAL

tribunal.'° At the hearing, Egypt confirmed that this position was based on no

"2 Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation and Egyptian Natural Gas Holding Company v. East
Mediterranean Gas S.A.E., CRCICA Case 829/2012, Partial Award on Jurisdiction and Procedural Ruling on
Stay Application, 11 November 2013 (“CRCICA Partial Award”), R-813.

‘3 Memorial, paras. 325-326, C-313.
4 Memorial, paras, 325-326.

‘5 C-402.

'6 C-407.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

reason other than “just testing” to see if the Claimants would agree.'? The

Claimants remain unwilling to forego the protections of the ICSID Convention.'®

(iv)It thus became clear, the Claimants aver, that consolidation, whether formal or

informal, was not possible. '?

14. In response, the Respondent contends that it is the Claimants who refused to accept

consolidation other than on their unilaterally imposed conditions.”°

15. The relevance of these parallel proceedings in respect of the Respondent’s jurisdictional

objections is discussed below.

D. SCOPE OF THE PRESENT DECISION
16. The Tribunal recalls that, by Procedural Order No. 2 of 29 April 2013, it decided to join
all of the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction and admissibility to the merits,
thereby denying the Respondent’s request for a bifurcation of the proceedings.*! The
proceedings therefore continued on this basis and the Tribunal received written
submissions of the parties on jurisdiction, merits and quantum and heard the parties’

oral submissions on those issues during the evidentiary hearing.

17. In view of the complexity of the case and the real risk of contradictions between the
four parallel arbitrations, the Tribunal has decided to issue now a decision on
jurisdiction only. The present decision will be followed by an award on the merits and,
if necessary, on quantum. The Tribunal considers that it is in its power to proceed in

this way pursuant to Rule 41(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.”

‘7 Tr, Day 1, 23:19-20: “I was just testing the proposition that they want to pick the tribunal”. See also Day 1,
178:1-179:1; C-409, p.2.

18 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 18. C-408.
'? Memorial, paras. 325-326.

2 Respondent’s Rejoinder (the “Rejoinder”), 16 July 2015, paras. 273-274. Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief,
footnote 6.

 

 

2 The Tribunal also decided in Procedural Order No. 2 to deny the Respondent's request for a stay of the
arbitration pending the outcome of the State-to-State consultation procedure in relation to Egypt’s denial of the
Treaty’s benefits to Ampal.

 JCSID Arbitration Rule 41 (2) provides the following :

The Tribunal may on its own initiative consider, at any stage of the proceeding, whether the dispute or any
ancillary claim before it is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and within its own competence.

6

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/IL

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

Accordingly, the scope of the present decision is limited to the Tribunal’s decisions in
respect of the Respondent’s objections to its jurisdiction and the admissibility of the

Claimants’ claims.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 4 May 2012, ICSID received the Claimants’ request for arbitration dated 2 May
2012 against Egypt (the “Request”).

On 23 May 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in accordance
with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. In the Notice of Registration of same
date, the Secretary-General invited the parties to proceed to constitute a Tribunal as
soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of the Centre’s Rules of Procedure for

the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

On 24 July 2012, the Respondent informed the Centre that the parties were unable to
reach an agreement on the constitution of the Tribunal and requested that the Tribunal
be constituted in accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. The next
day, ICSID informed the Claimants, pursuant to Rule 2(3) of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), that the Tribunal
would be constituted pursuant to the procedure foreseen at Article 37(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention.

On 21 August 2012, the Claimants appointed Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, a
national of Chile, as arbitrator and the Respondent appointed Professor Campbell

McLachlan QC, a national of New Zealand, as arbitrator.

On 22 August 2012, the parties agreed, pursuant to Article 37(2)(a) of the ICSID

Convention, that the party-appointed arbitrators would appoint the presiding arbitrator.

On 4 September 2012, ICSID informed the parties that Professor Orrego Vicufia and

Professor McLachlan had both accepted their appointments.

On 6 September 2012, the Claimants disclosed that Freshfields would be named as
counsel of record for Chile in a case before the International Court of Justice where

Professor Orrego Vicufia was appointed Judge Ad-Hoc upon nomination of the

26.

27.

28.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

government of Chile. The Claimants indicated that the disclosure was made merely for

transparency purposes. The Respondent did not react to this disclosure.

On 19 September 2012, the Centre informed the parties that the party-appointed
arbitrators had decided to appoint the Honorable L. Yves Fortier CC, OQ, QC, a
national of Canada, as President of the Tribunal. By the same letter, ICSID informed
the parties of Mr. Fortier’s disclosure in relation to his appointment by the claimant as
arbitrator in the case of National Gas S.A.E. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case
No. ARB/11/17). By letters of 20 September 2013, both parties confirmed that they had

no objection to the appointment of Mr. Fortier as President of the Tribunal in this case.

On 15 October 2012, the Acting Secretary-General, in accordance with Arbitration
Rule 6(1), notified the parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments
and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms.
Natali Sequeira, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the
Tribunal. The parties were later informed that Ms. Aissatou Diop, ICSID Legal

Counsel, would replace Ms. Sequeira as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 27 October 2013, the Respondent addressed a letter to Mr. Fortier in response to his
statement of acceptance to serve as President of the Tribunal. The Respondent raised a
concern relating to a parallel proceeding brought before the ICC against Egypt by
EMG, the company in which the Claimants in the present proceeding are investors.
The concern was that the claimant in the ICC proceeding was represented by the
London office of Norton Rose, a law firm which had been merged with Ogilvy Renault
LLP where Mr. Fortier used to be a partner. The Respondent also noted that Mr.
Fortier and Professor Orrego Vicufia were both members of the same set of chambers in
London. The Respondent invited Mr. Fortier to provide any comments in relation to

these concerns.

On 28 October 2012, Mr. Fortier replied, stating that he had not been aware of the
existence of the ICC proceeding until he received and read the Respondent’s letter, and
he failed to see how his membership in 20 Essex Street alongside Professor Orrego
Vicufia affected in any way his or Professor Orrego Vicufia’s impartiality and
independence in the present matter. No other issue was raised by either Party further to

Mr. Fortier’s response.

30.

31.

32.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

On 29 November 2012, the Tribunal held a first session by telephone conference with

the parties. Participating in the first session were:
Members of the Tribunal

- The Hon. L. Yves Fortier, CC, OQ, QC, President; Professor Francisco Orrego
Vicufla, Arbitrator; and Professor Campbell McLachlan, QC, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat
- Ms. Natali Sequeira, Secretary of the Tribunal

Participating on behalf of the Claimants

- Mr. Noah D. Rubins, Dr. Ben Juratowitch, and Mr. Ben Love of the law firm of
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer; and Mr. Niv Sever of the law firm of M. Firon &

Co. Advocates

Participating on behalf of the Respondent

- Mr. Mohamed El Sheikh, Mr. Mahmoud El Kharashy, Mr. Mohamed Khalaf, Mr.
Amr Arafa, Ms. Fatma Khalifa, Ms. Reem Hendy, Ms. Lela Kassem, Mr.
Mohamed Shehata, and Mr. Abdelrahman Hassanien of ESLA; and Professor
Emmanuel Gaillard, Dr. Yas Banifatemi, and Mr. Alexander Uff of the law firm
of Shearman & Sterling LLP

During the first session, the parties confirmed that the Tribunal had been validly
constituted. It was agreed inter alia that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be
those in effect as of 10 April 2006, the procedural language would be English, and the

place of proceeding would be Paris, France.

The agreement of the parties and decisions of the Tribunal on issues raised at the first
session were recorded in Procedural Order No. 1 dated 20 December 2012. In
particular, the Respondent having indicated its intention to file objections to jurisdiction
and to request bifurcation, the Tribunal fixed two alternative calendars for the written
phase of the proceeding. The first calendar outlined the sequence of submissions in the

event the Tribunal decided to join jurisdiction to the merits (“scenario 1”). The second

9

35.

36.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

calendar provided for a of issions in case the pr ding were bifi d

(“scenario 2”).

On 14 January 2013, the Respondent filed a request to amend the procedural calendar.
The Tribunal denied the Respondent’s request on 22 January 2013 after having given

the Claimants an opportunity to comment on the Respondent’s request.

On 1 March 2013, the Claimants filed their Memorial pursuant to paragraph 13.1 of
Procedural Order No. 1.

On | April 2013, the Respondent filed a request for bifurcation of its jurisdictional
objections and for the suspension of the proceeding pending the outcome of the State-
to-State consultation procedure in relation to Egypt’s denial of the benefits of the
Egypt-US BIT to Claimant Ampal. On 15 April 2013, the Claimants filed their
response to the Respondent’s request. On 29 April 2013, the Tribunal issued

Procedural Order No. 2, whereby it decided to join all of the Respondent’s

jurisdictional objections to the merits; reject the Respondent’s request for a stay of the

proceeding; and continue the proceeding in accordance with the unified calendar

(scenario 1) set out in Procedural Order No. 1.

On 8 May 2013, the Respondent requested an amendment to the procedural calendar in
view of the political unrest in Egypt. On 17 May 2013, the Claimants opposed the
Respondent’s request. Following an additional round of comments from the parties, the
Tribunal decided to grant the Respondent’s request in part as recorded in Procedural

Order No. 3 issued on 11 June 2013.

On 10 May 2013, the Claimants made a proposal to the Respondent to consolidate the
present case and the UNCITRAL case of Yosef Maiman and others v. The Arab
Republic of Egypt (PCA Case No. 2012/26) before this ICSID Tribunal.

On 14 May 2013, the Respondent replied with a set of conditions under which it would
agree to consolidation. The conditions included the constitution of a new tribunal and
the parties’ agreement on the application of a new set of procedural rules. The parties
exchanged further correspondence on the procedural implementation of a consolidation

but failed to reach a mutually agreed solution.

10

40.

41.

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

On 16 July 2013, the Respondent requested a suspension of the procedural calendar in
view of escalated political unrest in Egypt. On 22 July 2013, the Claimants filed a
response to the Respondent’s request, and on 23 July 2013, the Respondent filed a reply
to the Claimants’ response. On 25 July 2013, the Tribunal issued its decision, denying

the Respondent’s request.

On 16 August 2013, the Respondent filed a renewed request for the suspension of the
procedural calendar. Following two rounds of comments from the parties on the
Respondent’s request, the Tribunal decided on 22 August 2013 to grant the

Respondent’s Renewed Request and amend the procedural calendar.

In accordance with the amended procedural calendar, the Respondent filed its Counter-

Memorial (the “Counter-Memorial”) on 28 September 2013.

On 9 December 2013, the Claimants informed the Tribunal of the parties’ agreement to
further amend the procedural calendar. On 2 January 2014, the Respondent confirmed

the parties’ agreement which the Tribunal endorsed the same day.

The parties submitted their document production requests to the Tribunal on 19
December 2013. The Tribunal’s decisions in respect of the document production

requests are recorded in Procedural Order No. 4 dated 9 January 2014.

Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 4, the Claimants filed their privilege log and
submitted a draft confidentiality agreement to the Respondent on 31 January 2014. The
Respondent responded the same day, indicating that, thus far, it had not identified
documents over which it wished to assert privilege. The Respondent also submitted its

own draft confidentiality agreement.

On 4 February 2014, the Claimants requested the Tribunal to issue an Order on
confidentiality. On 5 February 2014, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to reject
the Claimants’ proposed confidentiality agreement and direct the parties to conclude a
confidentiality agreement in the terms proposed by the Respondent. On 12 February
2014, the Tribunal granted the Respondent’s request.

On 5 March 2014, Ms. Annie Lespérance was appointed as Assistant to the Tribunal

with the agreement of the parties.

47.

48.

49.

53.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

The parties made additional submissions on redaction, privilege and confidentiality in
February and March 2014. The Tribunal issued its decision on confidentiality,
redaction, and privilege on 20 March 2014.

On 24 March 2014, the Respondent notified the Tribunal of the parties’ agreement to
further amend the procedural calendar. On 25 March 2014, the Claimants confirmed

the parties’ agreement which the Tribunal endorsed.

On 31 March 2014, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that, on the basis of
Egyptian law, it was impossible for the Respondent to comply with the Tribunal’s
decision of 20 March 2014, directing it to submit a log of documents covered by
defence secrecy or whose disclosure would be prejudicial to Egyptian national security.
On 4 April 2014, the Claimants submitted observations on the Respondent’s letter,
requesting the Tribunal to draw an appropriate adverse inference as contemplated in
Procedural Order No. 4. On 7 April 2014, the Tribunal informed the parties that, at the
appropriate time, it may decide to take the Respondent’s refusal to produce in camera a
privilege log into account in its evaluation of the respective factual allegations and

evidence including a possible inference against the Respondent.

Pursuant to the amended procedural calendar, the Claimants filed their Reply (the
“Reply”) on 14 April 2014.

The Respondent filed its Rejoinder on 17 July 2014 after having been granted a two-

week extension.

On 29 August 2014, the Claimants requested leave from the Tribunal to file additional
documents in the record. On 3 September 2014, the Respondent opposed the

Claimants’ request. Further rounds of comments ensued in September 2014.

On 26 September 2014, the Claimants submitted a further request seeking leave to file a
limited number of additional factual exhibits and legal authorities to which they wished
to refer at the evidentiary hearing. On 1 October 2014, the Respondent addressed the

Claimants’ further request.

54,

55.

56.

58.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
J February 2016

On | October 2014, the President of the Tribunal held, on behalf of the Tribunal, a pre-
hearing organizational meeting with the parties by telephone conference. The minutes

of the meeting were circulated to the parties on 3 October 2014.

On 7 October 2014, the Tribunal granted for the most part the Claimants’ requests of 29
August and 26 September 2014.

On 15 October 2014, the Respondent requested leave to introduce into the record
documents from the final hearing in the Maiman arbitration, documents responsive to
the Claimants’ newly admitted documents, and a limited number of additional
documents. On 16 October, the Claimants sought leave to introduce into the record a
limited number of further factual exhibits and legal authorities. On 17 October, the
Claimants stated that they had no objection to the Respondent submitting into the
record the documents indicated in its request of 15 October, subject to the principle of
equality of arms, i.e. that the Respondent accept the admission into the record of the
unadmitted documents that the Claimants sought to introduce by their requests of 29
August and 26 September. By letter of 17 October 2014, the Respondent requested the
Tribunal to deny the Claimants’ request of 16 October. By the same letter, the
Respondent characterized as inappropriate the Claimants’ proposal contained in their

letter of 17 October.

On 20 October 2014, the Tribunal granted the Respondent’s request of 15 October,
noting that the request was unopposed by the Claimants. The Tribunal also granted the
Claimants’ request of 16 October with respect to the legal authorities but denied it as to

the factual exhibits.

On 22 October 2014, the Respondent sought leave to introduce five newly published
documents into the record. On 24 October 2014, the Claimants confirmed that they had

no objection to the Respondent’s request.

A hearing on jurisdiction and the merits took place from 27 October to 6 November
2014 at the World Bank European Headquarters in Paris for the first week and, further
to an agreement of the parties, as approved by the Tribunal, at the Paris office of

Shearman & Sterling for the second week. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal,

60.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

the Secretary of the Tribunal, and the Assistant to the Tribunal, present at the hearing

were:
For the Claimants

- Mr. Jon Wasserman of Equity Group Investments; Mr. Alex Spizz, Chapter 7
Trustee of Ampal-American; Mr. Niv Sever of the law firm of M. Firon & Co.
Advocates; Counselor Sarwat Abd El-Shahid, Mr. Girgis Abd El-Shahid, and Mr.
César R. Ternieden of the Sarwat A. Shahid Law Firm; Ms. Lucy Reed, Mr. Noah
D. Rubins, Mr. Ben Juratowitch, Mr. Ben Love, Mr. Robert Kirkness, Ms. Calista
Harris, Mr. Yuri Mantilla, Mr. Kevin Clement of the law firm of Freshfields
Bruckhaus Deringer LLP.

For the Respondent

- Counselor Mahmoud El Kharashy and Counselor Fatma Khalifa of the Egyptian
State Lawsuits Authority; Professor Emmanuel Gaillard, Dr. Yas Banifatemi, Dr.
Mohamed Shelbaya, Mr. Alexander Uff, Ms. Margaret Ryan, Mr. Youssef Daoud,
Mr. Dimitrios Katsikis, Mr. Tsegaye Lanrendeau, Mr. Edward Taylor, Ms. Yasmine
El Maghraby, Ms. Yael Ribco Borman, Ms. Alia El Sadda, Mr. Omar El-Sada, Ms.
Victoria Cadiz of the law firm of Shearman & Sterling LLP.

The following witnesses were examined:

On behalf of the Claimants

Fact witnesses: Mr. Sam Zell, Mr. David Fischer, Mr. Abdel Hamid Ahmed Hamdy,
Mr. Maamoun AI Sakka.

- Expert witnesses: Professor Sir Bernard Rix, Mr. Charles C. Freeny, Mr. Benjamin
F. Schrader, Major General (ret.) Giora Eiland, Mr. Daniel Muthmann, Dr. Boaz

Moselle, and Mr. James Nicholson.

On behalf of the Respondent

61.

62.

63.

64,

65.

66.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

- Expert witnesses: Professor Ahmed Belal, Lord Leonard Hoffmann, Major General
(ret.) Warren Whiting, Mr. Nicolas Pelham, Professor Kenneth J. Vandevelde, Mr.
John Wood-Collins, and Mr. Tim Giles.

On 19 November 2014, the Tribunal wrote to the parties with respect to a translation
issue which arose during the evidentiary hearing between the Claimants’ and the
Respondent’s respective certified translations of the minutes of the EGPC’s board
meeting of 24 April 2012 (see C-635 and R-872). The Tribunal informed the parties
that, pursuant to the agreement they had reached at the hearing, the Tribunal would

retain and instruct, through the Centre, its own translator.

On 22 December 2014, the Tribunal shared with the parties the authoritative translation
of the disputed Arabic word “Agar”, provided by a World Bank certified translator, Mr.
Mahmoud Ibrahim.

On 9 January 2015, the parties submitted simultaneously their comments in respect of

the authoritative translation.
The parties filed simultaneous post-hearing briefs on 14 February 2015.

On 12 February 2015, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to order the Claimants to
produce a document that they had filed in the CRCICA arbitration containing
information that “is essential to th[is] Tribunal’s determination.” On 13 February 2015,
the Claimants responded that the document requested had not been sufficiently
identified by the Respondent and asked for additional time to address the Respondent’s
request. Following comments from the parties, the Tribunal decided on 2 March 2015
to grant the Respondent’s application, allowing the document in question, identified as
ECOM Memo # 62, to be part of the record. On 5 March 2015, the Respondent filed

the same as its own exhibit.

On 12 March 2015, the Claimants wrote to the Tribunal that the Respondent was
advancing a new case on coercion and misrepresentation through this new exhibit and,
if the Tribunal was minded to consider the Respondent’s new position, then the
Claimants would request an opportunity to respond and submit additional documentary
and witness evidence. The Respondent commented on the Claimants’ application on 18

March 2015. The Tribunal invited the Claimants to provide it with a summary of the
15

67.

68.

69.

71.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

new documentary and/or witness evidence they wished to submit. The Claimants did so

on 25 March 2015.

Recalling that ECOM Memo 62 (Exhibit R-964) was admitted into the record on 2
March 2015, the Tribunal decided, on 6 April 2015, that the Memo would be taken into
account in the course of its continuing deliberations as necessary and in the light of the
parties’ submissions and arguments up to and including the parties’ respective post-
hearing briefs. Therefore, the Tribunal decided that the Claimants’ application of 12

March 2015 was moot.

On 27 May 27 2015, the Respondent submitted an application to the Tribunal for leave
to reexamine two of the Claimants’ fact witnesses, Mr. Hamdy and Mr. Sakka, and to
make written and oral submissions on the impact of the alleged false evidence provided
by Mr. Hamdy and the alleged forgery of a document described as “the minutes of the
meeting of EMG’s Board of Directors, which was held 2 November 2009”. The
Respondent annexed to its letter two documents identified as “the Authentic Minutes”

and “the Forged Minutes”.

Having considered the Claimants’ comments on the Respondent’s request and
deliberated, the Tribunal ordered the parties on 12 June 2015 to submit, after the
conclusion of the hearing before the CRCICA tribunal, an agreed transcript relevant to
the Respondent’s request, provided that the parties before the CRCICA Tribunal
agreed,

In compliance with the Tribunal’s order of 12 June 2015, the parties submitted on 14
September 2015 agreed excerpts of the CRCICA hearing transcript. On 5 October
2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, admitting the excerpts into the
record and inviting each party to make submissions on the impact, if any, of the two

versions of EMG’s November 2009 Board meeting minutes on the Claimants’ claims.

On 9 October 2015, the Respondent filed a request asking the Tribunal to admit further
evidence into the record of this arbitration emanating from the transcript of the
CRCICA hearing. Following further rounds of comments, the Tribunal issued

Procedural Order No. 6 on 29 October 2015 denying the Respondent’s request.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

72. On 7 December 2015, the Tribunal directed the parties to produce an agreed
compendium of documents pertinent to liability in chronological order as requested by

the Tribunal in its e-mail to the parties of 28 April 2015 and at the hearing in Paris on

29 October 2014.

73. In compliance with the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 5, the Respondent filed its
submission on the impact of the alleged forgery on 2 November 2015. On 30
November 2015, the Claimants filed their reply. At the Tribunal’s invitation, the
Respondent confirmed on 9 December 2015 that it did not oppose the admission into
the record of the documents attached to the Claimants’ submission of 30 November
2015. On 15 December 2015, the Tribunal admitted the Claimants’ documents into the

record.”

Il. RELIEF REQUESTED

A. CLAIMANTS?’ REQUEST FOR RELIEF

74. The Claimants request that the Tribunal grant the following relief:

(i) DISMISS all of Egypt's objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the

admissibility of the claims;
(ii) DECLARE:

a) that Egypt violated Article II(4) of the US Treaty (or Article 2(2) of the UK
Treaty, applicable to the US Claimants through Article II(1) of the US
Treaty), Article 2(2) of the Germany Treaty, and customary international
law by failing to accord the Claimants’ investments fair and equitable
treatment and impairing their investments through the adoption of

unreasonable measures;

5) that Egypt violated Article II(4) of the US Treaty (or Article 2(2) of the UK
Treaty, applicable to the US Claimants through Article II(1) of the US

Treaty), Article 2(3) of the Germany Treaty, and customary international

2 In its application of 2 November 2015, the Respondent addressed various requests to the Tribunal, At the time
of the issuance of the present Decision, the Tribunal remains seized of the Respondent’s application which it
will deal with in the course of its continuing deliberations.

17

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

law by engaging in arbitrary and discriminatory measures against the

Claimants’ investment because it was selling natural gas to Jews in Israel;

c) that Egypt has violated Article 2(2) of the UK Treaty (applicable to the US
Claimants through Article H(1) of the US Treaty), Article 7(2) of the
Germany Treaty, and customary international law by failing to observe

obligations it has entered into with regard to the Claimants’ investments;

@) that Egypt has violated Article 2(2) of the UK Treaty (applicable to the US
Claimants through Article II(1) of the US Treaty), Article 4(1) of the
Germany Treaty, and customary international law by failing to provide the

Claimants and their investments with full protection and security; and

e) that Egypt expropriated the Claimants’ investments without payment of
adequate and effective compensation, a public purpose, or due process of
law in violation of Article HI(1) of the US Treaty, Article 4(2) of the

Germany Treaty, and customary international law.

(iii) ORDER Egypt to pay compensation to the Claimants of no less than US$ 882.6
million and, to the extent applicable, DECLARE that the sum awarded has been

calculated net of Egyptian taxes;

(iv) ORDER Egypt to pay pre- and post-award interest at Egypt's sovereign borrowing

rate (as updated), compounded annually, accruing until payment is made in full;

(v) ORDER Egypt to indemnify the Claimants in full with respect to any Egyptian taxes
imposed on the compensation awarded to the extent that such compensation has

been calculated net of Egyptian taxes;

(vi) ORDER Egypt to pay all of the costs and expenses of this arbitration, including the
Claimants’ reasonable legal and expert fees, and the fees and expenses of the

Tribunal; and

75.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

(vii) AWARD such other relief to the Claimants as the Tribunal considers

appropriate.**

B. —_ RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR RELIEF

The Respondent requests the Tribunal to :

(i) Stay this proceeding pending the issuance of Awards in each of CRCICA Case No.
829/2012 and ICC Case No, 18215/GZ/MHM, dismissing the claims made by EMG

or awarding damages in respect of such claims;

(ii) Alternatively, dismiss the Claimants’ claims in their entirety for lack of jurisdiction

and/or as inadmissible;
(iii) Alternatively, dismiss the Claimants’ claims on the merits;

(iv) In the event that the Tribunal finds that the Respondent is liable to the Claimants as
a matter of principle, stay any decision on quantum pending the issuance of
Awards in each of CRCICA Case No. 829/2012, ICC Case No.18215/GZ and PCA
Case No. 2012-26, dismissing the claims made by EMG or its shareholders (as

applicable) or awarding damages in respect of such claims;

(v) In any event, order the Claimants jointly and severally to pay all of the costs of this
arbitration as well as the Respondent's legal costs and expenses in connection with
this arbitration, including but not limited to its counsel's fees and expenses and the

fees and expenses of its experts; and

(vi) Grant the Respondent such further relief as the Arbitral Tribunal considers

appropriate.”
THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION AND
ADMISSIBILITY

The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has advanced the following seven objections to

the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the admissibility of the Claimants’ claims: (A) objection

24 Reply, para. 637.

25 Rejoinder, para. 1163.

77.

28.

79.

80.

81.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

ratione personae in respect of Ampal; (B) objection ratione personae in respect of
EGI-Fund and EGI-Series; (C) objection ratione personae in respect of Mr. David
Fischer; (D) objection ratione materiae in respect of the Claimants’ Gas Supply
Claims; (E) objection ratione materiae in respect of the Claimants’ Tax Claims; (F)
inadmissibility of the Claimants’ claims in view of the illegality of the GSPA; and (G)

inadmissibility of the Claimants’ claims for abuse of the arbitral process.

The Tribunal will now consider each one of these objections in turn.

A. RATIONE PERSONAE COMPETENCE OVER AMPAL.

1 Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks ratione personae competence over
Ampal because (i) nationals of United States do not have a substantial interest in that
company pursuant to the US Treaty, and (ii) in any event, in light of the control
exercised by Mr. Maiman over Ampal, the Respondent has denied Ampal the benefits
of the US Treaty pursuant to Paragraph 1 of the Protocol thereto, including the
Respondent’s consent to arbitration at Article VII. In its Post-Hearing Brief, the

Respondent also submitted that Ampal has failed to establish its interest in EMG.

7) Substantial US Interest in Ampal

The Respondent submits that the State Parties to the US Treaty agreed that its benefits

should be extended only to “nationals” and “companies of the other Party”.
Article I(1)(b) of the US Treaty defines “company of a Party” as:

a company duly incorporated, constituted or otherwise duly
organized under the applicable laws and regulations of a Party
or its political subdivisions in which

() natural persons who are nationals of such Party, or

(ii) such Party or its subdivision or its agencies or
instrumentalities have a substantial interest.

The Respondent thus avers that Article I(1)(b) contains two cumulative requirements

for a company to benefit from the Treaty: (i) a company must be duly incorporated in

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

one of the Contracting States, and (ii) natural persons who are nationals of that State (or

the State of incorporation itself) must “have a substantial interest” in the company.?°

82. It is common ground between the parties that Ampal is incorporated in the US?7 and
that whether the substantial interest requirement is fulfilled in relation to Ampal falls to

be determined by the Tribunal.?8

83. The Respondent submits that it is undisputed between the parties that Mr. Maiman and
his family, who are not nationals of the United States, own the majority of the
outstanding shares in Ampal and exercise decisive control over that company’. This is
supported, avers the Respondent, by Ampal’s filings at the United States Security and
Exchange Commission*’ which confirm that Mr. Maiman owned over 60% of Ampal’s
shares in 2008 and in 2012. These documents further show that Mr. Maiman and his
immediate family, in virtue of their substantial ownership of Ampal’s voting stock,
were “able to control [the company’s] affairs and to influence the election of the

members of [its] board of directors.”?!

84. The Respondent thus concludes that “[i]n light of Mr. Maiman’s ownership of the
majority of Ampal’s outstanding shares, and control over the company, it is clear that
U.S. citizens do not ‘have a substantial interest’ in Ampal, and that Ampal does not
meet the ratione personae jurisdictional requirements of Article I(1)(b) of the Egypt-
U.S. BIT?

85. In addition, the Respondent asserts that Ampal’s business activities and debts are in

Israel and that Ampal is managed by non-US nationals.**

2 Counter-Memorial, para. 107.
71
28 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 16. Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 4. See Tr. Day 1, 99:7-9.

2 See Memorial, para. 106 (“Mr. Maiman, who is not a citizen of the United States, controls approximately 60%
of the shares in Ampal...”).

* See C- 222 and C-223,

31 See C- 222, p. 2 and C-223, p.4. Counter-Memorial, para. 108,

32 Counter-Memorial, para. 109.

* Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 17. See R-404 (Ampal SEC 10-K for 2006 — while Ampal was not
required to disclose the nationality of its management to the SEC, its filing indicates that the directors of the
company live and work in Israel avers the Respondent) and R-391 (Ampal owed US$ 234.5 million to
bondholders in Israel and US$ 115 million to Israeli banks avers the Respondent).

 

87.

88.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

In response to the Claimants’ allegation that the “principal issue” in determining a
substantial U.S. interest is “ownership of equity”*4, the Respondent contends that the
Claimants have failed to adduce any evidence that even a single share of Ampal was
owned by US nationals.*° The Claimants ask the Tribunal to infer, based on the Iran-US
Claims Tribunal decision in Flexi-Van Leasing, Inc. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran
(“Flexi-Van”)°°, that a sufficient portion of Ampal’s shares not owned by Mr. Maiman
is US-owned. However, argues the Respondent, the purported US ownership of
Ampal’s shares could not amount to a substantial interest in view of its undisputed
majority ownership and control by non-US nationals. The Respondent further argues
that, in any event, even if it were otherwise appropriate or had gained any broader
acceptance, the Iran-US Claims Tribunal’s approach in Flexi-Van is expressly
inapplicable to companies such as Ampal, which are controlled by a single (non-US)

shareholder.*”

In response to the Claimants’ argument that the US itself has a substantial interest in
Ampal, the Respondent contends that (i) the listing of Ampal on a US stock exchange is
insufficient to create jurisdiction, (ii) Mr. Maiman’s decision to place Ampal in
bankruptcy after initiating this arbitration cannot create jurisdiction, and (iii) Ampal’s
alleged debt to the US tax authorities pales in comparison to the US$ 240 million owed
to its Israeli debenture holders.**

db) Denial of Benefits

Even if Ampal did meet the corporate nationality requirements of the US Treaty, the

Respondent submits that it has exercised its right to deny Ampal the benefits of the

Tr, Day 1, 197:16-17

% Tr, Day 1, 202:14-25. The Claimants have only produced spread sheets of Ampal’s shareholders between
2008 and 2012, which list the purported residence of those individuals, See C-128.

36 Flexi-Van Leasing, Inc. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, | Wran-U.S.C.T.R. 455, Iran Order No. 36, Order, 15
December 1982, CLA-224.

» Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 18. See Flexi-Van v. Iran, CLA-224, p. 458; Tr. Day 9, 260:23-261:2;
Rejoinder para, 94.

8 Respondent’s Opening Slide 167.

89.

90.

91.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Egypt-U.S. BIT pursuant to Paragraph 1 of the Protocol thereto.°? Paragraph 1 of the

Protocol provides:

Each Party reserves the right to deny the benefits of this Treaty

to any company of either Party, or its affiliates or subsidiaries,

if nationals of any third country control such company, affiliate

or subsidiary; provided that, whenever one Party concludes

that the benefits of this Treaty should not be extended for this

reason, it shall promptly consult with the other Party to seek a

mutually satisfactory resolution of this matter.”
Pursuant to Paragraph 2 of the Protocol to the Egypt-U.S. BIT, “control” means “to
have a substantial share of ownership rights and the ability to exercise decisive

influence”.‘!

The Respondent submits that, as Professor Vandevelde*? explained at the evidentiary
hearing, the State Parties’ explicit reservation of rights to deny benefits is subject to
objective conditions set out in the Protocol, namely, the requirement of third-country
control and of prompt consultations, and whether those conditions have been met is
fully reviewable by the Tribunal.*? This Tribunal is also empowered to determine the
effect of Egypt’s denial of benefits on its jurisdiction over Ampal’s claims avers the

Respondent.*+

The R d ds that the requii of P; hs 1 and 2 of the Protocol

P

 

have been met in the present case and that, consequently, the Respondent has

effectively denied Ampal the benefits of the US Treaty:

(i) By letter dated 27 January 2013, Egypt informed Ampal that it had exercised its
right under Paragraph | of the Egypt-U.S. BIT to deny the benefits of that Treaty to

Ampal in light of the control of that company by Mr. Maiman and his immediate

* Counter-Memorial, para, 113.

C7,
0.7,

# Respondent’s expert.

“ Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para, 22. See Tr. Day 7, 235:3-236:21.
“Tr. Day 7, 172:9-12, 176:4-8.

23

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

family.4° Egypt separately contacted the United States to inform it of its denial of
benefits to Ampal.*°

(ii) The Claimants do not contest that the substantive requirement for a denial of
benefits is present in this case, namely, that Ampal is controlled by third party
nationals within the meaning of Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Protocol to the Egypt-
U.S. BIT.47

(iii)In response to the Respondent’s notification, the United States agreed by

Diplomatic Note dated 19 March 2013 to hold consultations with Egypt.*®

(iv) The State Parties met in Washington, D.C. on 30 September 2013 and 9 December
2013 to consult in relation to Egypt’s denial of benefits to Ampal.*?

(v) By Diplomatic Note dated 6 March 2014, the United States wrote to Egypt
concluding that:

good faith consultations, and the absence of any expressed
disagreement, between the United States of America and the
Arab Republic of Egypt constitute a mutually satisfactory
resolution of this matter, in accordance with Paragraph I of
the Supplementary Protocol to the Treaty.°
(vi)In response to the United States’ communication, Egypt confirmed by Diplomatic
Note dated 17 April 2014 its understanding that, given the absence of any
disagreement between the two Governments in relation to its denial to Ampal of
the benefits of the Treaty, the consultations had resulted in a “mutually satisfactory

resolution of the matter” within the meaning of Paragraph 1 of the Protocol.*!

* See Letter from Embassy of Egypt in Tel Aviv (M. El-Kouny) to Ampal dated 27 January 2013, C-224.
* See R-24.

“7 Counter-Memorial, para. 118. See Memorial, para. 106: “Mr. Maiman, who is not a citizen of the United

States, controls approximately 60% of the shares in Ampal...”.
*R21

© Rejoinder, para. 112.

© R-888

5! Rejoinder, para. 115. See R-891. At the hearing, Egypt completed the record with further correspondence
between Egypt and the USA (see R-941-R-946).

24

92.

93.

94.

95.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

The Respondent submits that the effect of the Respondent’s denial of benefits to Ampal
is to deprive Ampal of any right to invoke or rely on the US Treaty, including the right

to submit disputes to ICSID arbitration.

In this respect, the Respondent argues that in its consultations, it provided the United
States with the full details of the circumstances having justified its denial of benefits to
Ampal in the context of this proceeding. Had the US considered that the Protocol
required Egypt to initiate consultations before denying benefits to Ampal, or that
benefits could not be denied after Ampal had submitted claims to arbitration, such
disagreement would have been raised during the consultations.** Instead, the US
confirmed by Diplomatic Note dated 6 March 2014 that Egypt had satisfied the
requirements of the Protocol and that the consultations between the State Parties had
resulted in a “mutually satisfactory resolution”. The State Parties’ interpretation is the

most authoritative interpretation of the Treaty’s text, avers the Respondent.**

In response to the Claimants’ argument that Egypt was required to consult the United
States before denying benefits to Ampal,°> the Respondent contends that the plain
language of the Protocol requires the parties to “promptly” consult. Professor
Vandevelde testified at the hearing that the State Parties agreed to depart from the
requirement under the original version of the Treaty that a State must “first” consult

before exercising the right to deny benefits.*°

In addition, the Respondent argues that the Claimants’ interpretation of paragraph 1 of
the Protocol would allow a company to foreclose a State Party’s right to deny benefits
by simply submitting a claim to arbitration. According to the Claimants, this would
undermine the object and purpose of denial of benefits provisions, which is to prevent

third-country investors from gaining treaty protection in situations in which the host

52 Counter-Memorial, para, 119

*§ Rejoinder, paras. 120-121.

5 Counter-Memorial, para. 122.
55 See Tr. Day 1, 223:10-14.

8 Ty, Day 7, 177:9-178:11. The original version of the Treaty provided that: Each Party reserves the right to
deny to any of its own companies or to a company of the other Party the advantages of this Treaty, if nationals
of any third country own or control such company; provided that whenever one Party believes that the benefits
of this Treaty should not be extended to a company of the other Party for this reason, it shall first consult with
the other Party to seek a mutually satisfactory resolution of this matter. See Expert Opinion of Professor
Kenneth J. Vandevelde (“Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion”), para. 53.

25

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

State did not wish to extend such benefits to them as explained in Professor
Vandevelde’s written and oral testimony’. In its submission as a non-disputing party in
Pac Rim Cayman LLC vy. Republic of El Salvador (“Pac Rim v. El Salvador’), the
United States confirmed that its “long-standing policy” to include denial of benefits
provisions in its treaties is aimed at “safeguard[ing] against the potential problem of
{free rider’ investors, i.e., third-party entities that may only as a matter of formality be
entitled to the benefits of a particular agreement”.*® The United States further
submitted that any requirement to invoke the denial of benefits provision before an
investor submits its claim to arbitration “would place an untenable burden on [the

denying] Party”, because it would:

require the respondent, in effect, to monitor the ever-changing
business activities of all enterprises... that attempt to make,
are making, or have made investments in the territory of the
respondent. This would include conducting, on a continuing
basis, factual research, for all such enterprises, on their
respective corporate structures and the extent of their business
activities in those countries.*”

96. The Respondent argues that an “unbroken line” of arbitral awards interpreting denial of

benefits provisions in US treaties also confirm this policy.

97. In respect of the Claimants’ argument that the Respondent’s denial of benefits cannot
deprive Ampal of any Treaty protection, the Respondent argues that its offer to arbitrate
is subject to its right to deny benefits. As Professor Vandevelde opines in his Expert

Legal Opinion, a company controlled by third-country nationals “never has an

57 Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion, para. 35. Rejoinder, para. 127.

%® Pac Rim Cayman LLC v. Republic of El Salvador, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/12, Submission of the United
States of America, 20 May 2011 (Appendix 2 to Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion), para. 3, The United States
specified that the denial of benefits provision in the CAFTA had the same object and purpose as the denial of
benefits provisions in its other investment agreements, See also Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion, para. 79,

°° Pac Rim y. El Salvador, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/12, Submission of the United States of America, 20 May
2011, Appendix 2 to Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion, para. 6. See also Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion,
para, 35,

© See Respondent's Opening, Slide 186; Pac Rim Cayman LLC y. Republic of El Salvador, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/09/12, RLA-I1; Guaracachi America, Inc. and Rurelec PLC v. The Plurinational State of Bolivia
(“Guaracachi and Rurelee v. Bolivia”), UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2011-17, Award, 31 January 2014, CLA-
213; Ulysseas, Inc. v. The Republic of Ecuador (“Ulysseas v. Ecuador”), UNCITRAL, Interim Award, 28
September 2010, RLA-32; Empresa Eléctrica del Ecuador, Inc. (EMELEC) v. Republic of Ecuador (*EMELEC
v. Eeuador”), ICSID Case No. ARB/05/9, Award, 2 June 2009, RLA-26.

26

99.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

unconditional, or vested, right to treaty protection”.6' Accordingly, a State that invokes
a denial of benefits provision after a claim has been submitted to arbitration does not
withdraw consent to arbitration that was previously given, but rather exercises a right to
deny benefits which was reserved within that consent. To hold otherwise would defeat
the purpose of the denial of benefits provision in the Treaty opines Professor
Vandevelde. The Respondent submits that tribunals interpreting similar provisions in
US treaties have uniformly reached this conclusion® and that the Energy Charter
Treaty decisions on which the Claimants rely are inapposite since Article 17(1) of the

ECT does not condition a State’s consent to arbitration.

Finally, in respect of the Claimants’ argument that jurisdiction of an international
tribunal is to be assessed at the time of that jurisdiction being invoked, the Respondent
contends that this argument is irrelevant to the question of denial of benefits and has not
been considered by any other tribunal in deciding that issue. While the Claimants
alleged that “ten cases” supporting this principle could call into question the effect of
Egypt’s denial of benefits, these cases concern the effect on jurisdiction of extrinsic
events that bear no relation to denial of benefits, and are thus irrelevant to the effect of a
denial of benefits under the US BIT.

o Ampal has failed to establish its interest in EMG

In its Post-Hearing Brief, the Respondent raised the following new objection to the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction:

The highly convoluted and opaque structure through which
Ampal holds its interest in EMG involves not only numerous
related intermediary companies, the corporate and financial
relationships (including intercompany debts) of which have
never been established or explained, but also entirely fails to
take account of intervening third party rights including loans,
the terms of which are nowhere in the record of this
arbitration.... All these matters potentially seriously impair the

! Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion, para. 121.

© Rejoinder, para. 137. See Guaracachi and Rurelec v. Bolivia, CLA-213, para. 376.

® See R-960, summarizing Pac Rim v. El Salvador, RLA-11; Guaracachi and Rurelec v. Bolivia, CLA-213;
Ulysseas v. Ecuador, RLA-32; EMELEC v. Ecuador, RLA-26; Tr. Day 9, 263:13-23.

 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 27. See Tr. Day 7, 187:10-22.

© Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 28. See Respondent’s Demonstrative Exhibit R-959.

27

100.

101.

102.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

flow of funds up the corporate chain from EMG to Ampal,
contrary to the premise of Ampal’s claim.

2. Claimants’ Position
a) Substantial US Interest in Ampal

The Claimants argue that Ampal satisfies both criteria of Article I(1)(b) of the US
Treaty.

It is common ground between the parties that whether the substantial interest

requirement is fulfilled in relation to Ampal falls to be determined by the Tribunal.°”

In respect of the first criterion, the Claimants argue that US nationals have a

“substantial interest” in Ampal:

(i) The fact that Mr. Maiman owns a majority of Ampal and controls the company does
not preclude US nationals from having a “substantial interest” in the company aver
the Claimants. According to the Claimants, “substantial interest” does not mean
majority interest nor does it mean a controlling interest, otherwise it would have

been stated explicitly in the Treaty.

(ii) The Claimants allege that based on a list dated 1 January 2008, the addresses of
1125 of the 1199 registered owners of voting shares are within the United States,
with the US-registered owners holding 38.18% of Ampal’s voting share capital.®
Similarly, in a list dated 1 January 2012, 1145 of the 1215 registered owners of
voting shares have addresses within the United States, representing 41.42% of

Ampal’s voting share capital.”°

(iii) The Claimants are, however, not in a position to produce direct evidence that these

US residents are in fact US nationals: nationalities of shareholders in companies

6 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 36.

°7 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 16. Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 4. See Tr. Day 1, 99:7-9.

6 Reply, para, 152.
© C-128(b).
% C-128(H).

28

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

publicly-listed in the United States are not recorded.’! The Claimants nevertheless
argue that the Tribunal should follow the Iran-US Claims Tribunal precedent
whereby the Iran-US Claims Tribunal accepted evidence from which it drew a
reasonable inference regarding shareholder nationality.”” The process used by the
Iran-US Claims Tribunal can be used to estimate the percentage of shares in Ampal

held by US nationals assert the Claimants:

The relevant Ampal SEC filing from 2008, discloses that Ampal was 59.7%

beneficially owned by a non-US national, Mr. Maiman.7?

- Based on US Department of the Treasury data, in 2008, 10.3% of portfolio

investment in equity in US companies was foreign owned.”

It is thus reasonable to infer that, when a claim first arose, approximately

36.15% of Ampal was owned by US nationals.”

- If the same calculation is undertaken for 2012, when the Request for

Arbitration was filed, the percentage is 27.95%.

(iv) These numbers are estimates, not precise calculations. Nonetheless, the evidence
provided by the Claimants is sufficient to establish prima facie that US nationals

have a “substantial interest” in Ampal.”°

103. In response to Egypt’s argument that the F/exi-Van test cannot be applied to Ampal

because one shareholder controls it, the Claimants contend the following:

The fact that a company is controlled by one individual is only
relevant because it increases the percentage of a company’s
share capital in respect of which the nationality of the
beneficial owner needs to be proven by direct evidence, and
therefore reduces the percentage of shares for which an
inference may be drawn. Here, there is direct evidence that a

7 Reply, para. 157.
% Reply paras. 158-160. See Flexi-Van v. Iran, CLA-224.
3.222.
74 C448.
75 Reply, para. 161
% Reply, para. 161. See C-223, C-380, and C-448,
29

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

majority of the share capital of Ampal-American is beneficially
owned by non-US nationals. The question for the Tribunal,
unaddressed by Egypt’s argument, concerns the use of indirect
evidence to reach a conclusion about the ownership of the
remaining shares.””

104. In respect of the second criterion, the Claimants submit that the United States has a
“substantial” interest in Ampal. The Claimants aver that “substantial interest” is not
only concerned with equity interests. As Professor Vandevelde explains: “a stock
ownership test would have overlooked other forms of interest, such as debt securities,

that U.S. nationals might have in the company.”®

105,

a

In the present case, the Claimants argue that:

a company incorporated in the United States and listed on a US
stock exchange is one in which the United States has a
substantial interest. The substantial interest that the United
States has in such a company is highlighted by the bankruptcy
proceedings pending before the US courts in connection with
Ampal.... A US federal court (an organ of the United States)
has appointed a trustee in bankruptcy, himself a US citizen,
who now controls the company for the benefit of its creditors.
One of those creditors is the New York State Department of
Taxation and Finance...”

b) Denial of Benefits

106.

&

In respect of the Respondent’s alternative defence, the Claimants agree with the
Respondent that it falls to the Tribunal to determine whether the requirements of third-
country control and of prompt consultations have been met, as well as the effect of

Egypt’s denial of benefits on its jurisdiction over Ampal’s claims.

107. The Claimants submit that Egypt’s attempt to deny Ampal the benefits of the US Treaty

is ineffective.

108. Firstly, the Claimants argue that Egypt cannot unilaterally terminate the jurisdiction of

eS

the Tribunal. They explain that on Egypt’s case, and leaving aside its jurisdictional

7 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 5.

8 Kenneth J. Vandevelde, U.S. International Investment Agreements, Oxford University Press, 2009, RLA-25,
pp. 150-151, 418, 578-584.

® Reply, para, 166

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

objections, the Centre was validly seized when Ampal filed its Request for Arbitration
in May 2012, and had jurisdiction over the dispute for the next eight months until
January 2013, when by its unilateral act, Egypt “terminated” the jurisdiction of the
Centre and of this Tribunal.8° However, the Claimants assert that (i) it is well-
established that jurisdiction is to be determined in light of the situation that exists on the
date the arbitral proceedings are instituted, not by subsequent events;*! and (ii) Egypt
must confront Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention which states that “When the
parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally”.
Egypt is therefore prevented by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention from
unilaterally withdrawing its consent by way of a purported denial of benefits after
Ampal had already accepted Egypt’s offer to arbitrate and so perfected the arbitration
agreement aver the Claimants.*? A contrary result would retroactively eliminate a right

to arbitration that had already been exercised say the Claimants. **

109.

S

Secondly, the Claimants submit that Egypt cannot retroactively nullify substantive
treaty protection enjoyed by Ampal at the time of Egypt’s challenged measures. They
assert that:

[w]hether Egypt is seeking to deny a protection already
obtained or subject that protection to later cancellation, its
position involves retroactivity. Either approach requires Egypt
to establish that the denial of benefits provision entitles it to
avoid responsibility for internationally wrongful acts where
that responsibility had already crystalized at the time of the
purported denial. On either approach, Egypt deems [sic]
Treaty breaches that did in fact occur not to have occurred.
For the Tribunal to find such a retroactive effect, the Tribunal
would need to be satisfied that the US Treaty provision
concerning denial of benefits rebuts the presumption against
retroactivity.*°

8° Reply, para. 171.

8! Reply, para, 173. See Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (“Aguas del Aconquija v. Argentina”), \CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14
November 2005, CLA-140, paras. 61, 63.

® Reply, para. 174.
® Reply, para. 174.
* Repy, para. 179.
® Reply, para. 185.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/I1L

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

110. The Claimants assert that under cross-examination Professor Vandevelde agreed that a
denial of the benefits of the US Treaty only has a prospective effect.®° Egypt accepts

that a denial of the right to submit disputes to arbitration has effect from the time of the
denial onwards. According to the Claimants, Egypt must therefore equally accept that

the benefits of the substantive protections of the US Treaty are denied only from the
point of denial onwards and that Ampal therefore was protected by the substantive
protections of the Treaty when the events in dispute occurred. This is also the position

that was taken in decisions based on the ECT.*”

lil.

Thirdly, the Claimants contend that the jurisdiction of an international tribunal is to be
assessed at the time of that jurisdiction being invoked. In other words, consent is only
necessary to initiate an arbitration, and conduct occurring thereafter is irrelevant to
jurisdiction.’ The Claimants rely on ten cases*? in this respect which confirmed that
any condition that can be invoked to defeat jurisdiction must be invoked prior to the
seisin to have any effect. The Claimants rely in particular on the Right of Passage

case.°° They submit:

the Rights of Passage case concerned the effect of a condition
embedded in Portugal’s consent to the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. By that condition, Portugal
purported to ‘reserve[] the right to exclude from the scope of

% Ty, Day 7, 212:5-16.
87 Tr, Day 1, 97:4-17. Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 7.
88 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 11.

8 Nottebohm case (Liechtenstein v. Guatemala), Preliminary Objections, Judgment of 18 November 1953, \CJ
Reports 1953, CLA-234, p. 123; Case Concerning the Arrest Warrant of 1] April 2000 (Democratic Republic of
the Congo v. Belgium), Judgement of 14 February, \C) Reports 2002, CLA-127, pp. 12-13, para. 26; Case
Concerning Questions of Interpretation and Application of the 1971 Montreal Convention arising from the
Aerial Incident at Lockerbie (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya v. United Kingdom), Preliminary Objections, Judgment
of 27 February 1998, IC} Reports 1998, p. 9, CLA-235, 23-24, para. 38; Case Concerning Questions of
Interpretation and Application of the 1971 Montreal Convention arising from the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya v. United States of America), Preliminary Objections, Judgment of 27 February 1998,
ICI Reports 1998, p. 115, CLA-236, 129, para, 37; Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. v. The Slovak
Republic, Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999, CLA-237, para. 31; Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. ¥.

Argentine Republic (“Enron v. Argentina”), CSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Award, 22 May 2007, CLA-147, paras.
192 and 198; Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/01, Decision on Jurisdiction, 21 December 2012, CLA-149, paras. 255;
Case Concerning the Right of Passage over Indian Territory (Portugal v. India) (“Portugal v. India”),
Preliminary Objections, Judgment of 26 November 1957, \CJ Reports 1957, p. 125, CLA-214, 142; Bayindir
Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, CLA-30, para. 178; Aguas del Aconquija v.
Argentina, CLA-140.

°° Portugal v. India, CLA-214.

 

112.

113.

oS

114.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

the present declaration, at any time during its validity, any

given category or categories of disputes, by notifying the

Secretary-General of the United Nations and with effect from

the moment of such notification.’ The court held that: ‘It is a

rule of law generally accepted, as well as one acted upon in the

past by the Court, that, once the Court has been validly seised

of a dispute, unilateral action by the respondent State in

terminating its Declaration, in whole or in part, cannot divest

the Court of jurisdiction.’ None of the cases relied on by Egypt

took account of this rule. The alternative position advanced by

Egypt — that benefits can be unilaterally denied at any time ~ is

so obviously contrary both to this rule and to the object and

purpose of the US Treaty that it could only be countenanced by

this Tribunal if explicit treaty terms left it no choice.?!
Fourthly, the Claimants argue that the object and purpose of the US Treaty as a whole
pursuant to Article 31 of the Vienna Convention (as opposed to the object and purpose
of the denial of benefits provision alone) militate against the retroactive removal of

substantive treaty protection existing at the time of breaches of the US Treaty.°?

Finally, the Claimants argue that even if the Tribunal were to find that benefits can be
denied retroactively, Egypt’s denial of benefits would still be ineffective in the present
case because Egypt failed to fulfil the mandatory condition of consulting with the US
Government promptly after deciding that benefits to Ampal should be denied. Indeed,
in the present case, Egypt only consulted with the US Government after it had decided

to deny them.

3. Tribunal’s Analysis
The Tribunal notes at the outset that, should it decide to uphold the Respondent’s
objection ratione personae in respect of Ampal, this would be dispositive of Ampal’s

claims only.

°! Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 11

Reply, para. 188. The object and purpose of the US Treaty as a whole includes “the pursuit of policies and
practices which foster bilateral trade and investment” in order to “contribute substantially to the long-term
benefit and welfare of the peoples of each Party,” the “encouragement and nondiscriminatory treatment of
investments” and the “reciprocal encouragement and protection of investments.” See the Preamble to the US
Treaty, C-7.

® Reply, para. 206. According to para. 1 of the Protocol (C-7), the condition is that “whenever one Party
concludes that the benefits of this Treaty should not be extended for this reason, it shall consult with the other
Party to seek a mutually satisfactory resolution of this matter.”

33

115.

116.

a

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

There are two issues before the Tribunal: (a) whether Ampal is a protected “company
of a Party”, and (b) whether Egypt’s denial of benefits is effective. A third issue which
has arisen in the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief is whether Ampal has established its

interest in EMG. The Tribunal will consider each of these arguments in turn below.

a Substantial US Interest in Ampal
Article 1(1)(b) of the US Treaty defines “company of a Party” as:

A company duly incorporated, constituted or otherwise duly
organized under the applicable laws and regulations of a Party
or its political subdivisions in which

(i) natural persons who are nationals of such Party, or

(ii) such Party or its subdivision or its agencies or
instrumentalities have a substantial interest.

It is common ground between the parties that Ampal is incorporated in the United
States and that whether the substantial interest requirement is fulfilled in relation to

Ampal is to be determined by the Tribunal.

It is also undisputed between the parties that Mr. Maiman and his family, who are not
nationals of the United States, own the majority of the outstanding shares in Ampal and

exercise control over that company.

It now remains for the Tribunal to decide whether the Claimants have proven to its

satisfaction that nationals of the United States have a substantial interest in Ampal.

The Tribunal starts from the premise that the Treaty does not require that a substantial

interest be a controlling or a majority interest.

The Claimants have submitted evidence that, as of | January 2008, the addresses of
1125 of the 1199 registered owners of voting shares were in the United States and the
US-registered owners of shares held 38.18% of Ampal’s voting share capital. As of |
January 2012, 1145 out of the 1215 registered owners have addresses in the United

States and they represent 41.42% of Ampal’s voting share capital.

While the Claimants have not produced direct evidence that these US residents are in

fact US nationals, the Tribunal adopts the reasoning of the Iran-US tribunal in the
34

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/IL

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

Flexi-Van case and draws a reasonable inference on the basis of the evidence proffered
that the percentage of shares in Ampal held by US nationals as of 1 January 2008 and 1

January 2012 amounts to a substantial interest in that company.°*

123. Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction over Ampal

based on this ground.

b) Denial of Benefits

124. By letter dated 27 January 20139, the Respondent informed Claimant Ampal that it had
exercised its right to deny to it the benefits of the Egypt-US Treaty pursuant to
Paragraph 1 of the Protocol to the BIT.

125. Denial-of-benefits clauses in investment treaties are generally designed to exclude from
Treaty protections nationals of third States which claim rights through so-called
“mailbox” or “shell” companies that have no economic connection to the state whose

nationality is invoked.

126. In recent years, there have been a number of awards and decisions which have
interpreted denial-of-benefits clauses. The parties have referred the Tribunal to these

awards and decisions and the Tribunal has reviewed them all very carefully.°°

4 Flexi-Van v. Iran, CLA-224, pp. 2-3:

“[I]t is neither possible nor necessary to require submission ... of detailed evidence such as either passports,
birth certificates or certified copies of naturalization documents for each of the thousands of individuals who
collectively own, directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the capital stock of [the claimant].

[J]

Any such requirement... would impose excessive burdens on the parties and the Tribunal.

[J

Other Tribunals which have adjudicated international claims in the past... have required what they considered
to be sufficient evidence and from that have drawn reasonable inferences,” (Emphasis added).

9% Flexi-Van v. Iran, C-224.

% See, inter alia, Pac Rim v. El Salvador, RLA-11; Guaracachi and Rurelec v, Bolivia, CLA-213; Ulysseas v.
Ecuador, RLA-32; EMELEC y. Ecuador, RLA-26; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005, RLA-22, paras, 159-165; Yukos Universal Ltd.
v. Russian Federation, PCA Case No. AA 227, Interim Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 30 November
2009, CLA-I, paras, 456-459; Hulley Enterprises Ltd, v. Russian Federation, PCA Case No. AA 226, Interim
Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 30 November 2009, RLA-27, paras. 455-458; Anatolie Stati et, al. v.
The Republic of Kazakhstan, SCC Case No. V (116/2010), Award, 19 December 2013, CLA-194, para. 717;
Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award, 28 September 2007,
RLA-159, para. 386.

   

35

127.

xu

128.

&

129.

130.

131.

132.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

The Tribunal’s review reveals that different tribunals have reached diverging decisions

as to when, how and with what effect such clauses can be invoked.

Using a broad brush, the Tribunal notes that there are two principal categories of
decisions: those where jurisdiction was based on the Energy Charter Treaty (ECT) and
those where the basis of jurisdiction was a clause in US bilateral investment treaties or
in the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement
(CAFTA).

For purposes of its present decision, the Tribunal need not consider those decisions
interpreting Article 17(1) of the ECT as the wording of that provision is significantly
different from the wording of denial-of-benefits clauses in US BITs and CAFTA. These
latter clauses have more in common with the denial-of-benefits clause in the Protocol to
the US-Egypt Treaty.

With respect to the four principal decisions where tribunals interpreted denial-of-
benefits clauses in US BITs and CAFTA”, the Tribunal has noted that the procedural
requirements applicable to a State’s exercise of its right of denial are determined in
each case on the basis of the distinct factual matrix of the case and an analysis of the

particular governing Treaty.

Accordingly, the Tribunal will now review the factual matrix of the present case in
relation to the issue of the denial of benefits as well as the relevant provisions of the
US-Egypt BIT and its Protocol in order to determine whether the denial by Egypt to
Ampal of the benefits of the Treaty on 27 January 2013 was a valid exercise of the right

reserved to it under the Treaty.
Paragraph | of the Protocol to the Treaty, prior to 1986, read as follows:

Each Party reserves the right to deny the benefits of this Treaty
to any company of either Party, or its affiliates or subsidiaries,
if nationals of any third country control such company, affiliate
or subsidiary; provided that, whenever one Party concludes
that the benefits of this Treaty should not be extended for this
reason, it shall first consult with the other Party to seek a

° See Pac Rim v. El Salvador, RLA-11; Guaracachi and Rurelec v, Bolivia, CLA-213; Ulysseas v. Ecuador,
RLA-32; EMELEC v. Ecuador, RLA-26.

36

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

mutually satisfactory resolution of this matter.%% (Tribunal’s
emphasis)

133. On 11 March 1986, Paragraph 1 of the Protocol was amended and it now reads as

follows:

Each Party reserves the right to deny the benefits of this Treaty
to any company of either Party, or its affiliates or subsidiaries,
if nationals of any third country control such company, affiliate
or subsidiary; provided that, whenever one Party concludes
that the benefits of this Treaty should not be extended for this
reason, it shall promptly consult with the other Party to seek a
mutually satisfactory resolution of this matter.” (Tribunal’s
emphasis)

134. Article VII of the Treaty provides, in relevant part:

2. the parties shall initially seek to resolve the dispute by
consultation and negotiation...

3 (a) In the event that the legal investment dispute is not
resolved under procedures specified above, the national or
company concerned may choose to submit the dispute to the
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
("Centre") for settlement by conciliation or binding arbitration,
if, within six (6) months of the date upon which it arose: (i) the
dispute has not been settled through consultation and
negotiation.... (Tribunal’s emphasis)

135. On 18 May 2011, Ampal (and EGI-Fund Investors) sent Egypt a letter informing it of
the existence of a legal dispute under the Egypt-US Treaty and the object of the dispute
and requesting consultations with Egypt pursuant to the terms of Article VII(2) of the

Treaty. !°° The letter reads in relevant part as follows:

We hereby advise you of the existence of a legal investment
dispute under the Treaty Between the United States of America
and The Arab Republic of Egypt Concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investments (“U.S.-Egypt
BIT” or “Treaty”). As U.S. companies, we control shares in
East Mediterranean Gas S.A.E. (“EMG”), the owner and
operator of the “Peace Pipeline” between Al-Arish, Egypt and
Ashkelon, Israel.

8 C-7.
?C-7.
1 See C-101.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

[J

Pursuant to the terms of Article VII(2) of the Treaty, we hereby
request consultations with your ministries in the interest of
resolving this dispute. In the event that we are not able to
resolve this dispute through consultations, we intend to submit
the dispute to the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Dispute (“ICSID”) for settlement and binding
arbitration. In such event, we will also encourage the other
EMG shareholders to file for ICSID arbitration, and to pursue
all other remedies available to such other EMG shareholders.
We will also encourage EMG to pursue all of its remedies
pursuant to all applicable contracts and laws.

136. One year later, on 2 May 2012, the Request for Arbitration was filed by the Claimants
(including Ampal) and registered by ICSID on 23 May 2012.

137, On 27 January 2013, Egypt wrote to Ampal. The relevant extracts of that letter provide:

In that arbitration, Ampal-American Israel Corporation
(‘Ampal-American”) claims to be entitled to benefit from
rights contained in the Treaty. However, based on the facts,
albeit limited, which you have disclosed, we understand that
Ampal-American, a company incorporated in New York, USA,
is controlled by nationals of a country other than the United
States of America. Indeed, it appears that Mr. Yosef Maiman
and his family own approximately 62% of the voting shares of
Ampal-American and control the company. The Arab Republic
of Egypt understands that Mr. Maiman and his family are
nationals of the State of Israel.

[J]

Pursuant to this provision [Paragraph I of the Protocol to the
Treaty], the Arab Republic of Egypt hereby exercises its right
to_deny Ampal-American the benefits of the Treaty. For the
avoidance of doubt, such denial of benefits includes each and
every right under the Treaty, including Article VII thereof, and
is effective as of the date on which Ampal-American became
controlled by nationals of a country other than the United
States of America.’°! (Tribunal’s emphasis)

138. The Tribunal has seen and considered the many letters/notes exchanged between Egypt

and the United States after 27 January 2013.1?

11 6.224.
12 See, inter alia, R-20, R-21, R-26 to R-30, R-880, R-882, R-888, R-891, R-941 to R-946.
38

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

139. The first letter from Egypt to the United States is dated 28 January 2013 and refers to

Egypt’s notification sent the previous day to Ampal. Egypt concludes in that letter that

“it remains available to promptly consult with the Government of the United States of

America pursuant to Paragraph 1 of the Protocol.”

140. The Tribunal observes that, in its Note of 10 October 2013, Egypt affirmed that the

purpose of the consultations contemplated by Paragraph 1 of the Protocol “[was] to

resolve any doubts concerning whether the company is, in fact, controlled within the

meaning of the Protocol.”!4

141. In its last Note, dated 8 March 2014, the United States wrote:

During the consultations, the United States expressed its view
that the tribunal formed under Article VII may properly resolve
any disputed factual issues of ownership or control. The United
States has expressed no views on those or other factual issues
in that arbitration.

The Department of State further acknowledges that the good-

faith consultations, and the absence of any expressed

disagreement, between the United States of America and the
Arab Republic of Egypt constitute a mutually satisfactory
resolution of this matter, in accordance with Paragraph 1 of
the Supplementary Protocol to the Treaty.

The Department of State would appreciate the Arab Republic of
Egypt confirming this understanding by return diplomatic note.

142, The exchange between the two State Parties ended with a Note from

United States on 17 April 2014 which concluded as follows:

193 R-20.
104 R-880.

We note the Department of State’s acknowledgement of the
good faith consultations that took place between the
Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt pursuant to
Paragraph 1 of the Supplementary Protocol of the Treaty. We
also note the Department of State’s observation that, in the
absence of any expressed disagreement between the two
Governments, such consultations have resulted in a mutually
satisfactory resolution of the matter.

Egypt to the

143.

144,

145.

146,

147.

148.

oe

149,

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

In response to the Department of State's invitation to the Arab
Republic of Egypt to confirm this understanding, the Arab
Republic of Egypt hereby confirms that the two Governments
have conducted good faith consultations following its denial of
the benefits of the Treaty to Ampal-American pursuant to
Paragraph 1 of the Supplemental Protocol of the Treaty, and
that a mutually satisfactory resolution of the matter has been
achieved through these consultations. !

As it is common ground between the parties that Mr. Maiman is a national “of a third
country” and that he controls Ampal, the question which the Tribunal must now answer
is whether, in the circumstances, Egypt has effectively denied Ampal the benefits of the

Treaty.

The Tribunal, in order to determine this jurisdictional issue, must interpret the text of
the Treaty including its Protocol, in accordance with the relevant principles for treaty
interpretation under international law as codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law

of Treaties.

It is significant to note, as expressly stated in Paragraph | of the Protocol, that when a
Party concludes that it intends to exercise its right to deny the benefits of the Treaty to a
company such as Ampal “it shall promptly consult with the other Party to seek a

mutually satisfactory resolution of this matter”. (Tribunal’s emphasis)
The ordinary meaning of these terms of the Protocol is very clear to the Tribunal.

The Party wishing to invoke the denial-of-benefits provision of the Treaty has the
obligation to consult with the other Party in order to search for a mutually satisfactory

resolution of the matter and such consultations must be held promptly.

In the present case, the Tribunal finds that these mandatory requirements have not been

met.

As the Tribunal recorded above, after it had reached a decision to deny the benefits of
the Treaty to Ampal, Egypt conveyed its decision to the United States on 23 January

2013. The United States was thus presented with a “fait accompli” rather than invited to

15 R-891.

150.

151.

152.

153.

154,

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

engage in a process of consultation in order to seek a mutually satisfactory resolution of

the issue raised by Egypt.

There is no evidence in the correspondence between the two State Parties which
followed Egypt’s notice to Ampal of any consultations such as clearly envisaged in the

Protocol.

In the view of the Tribunal, Egypt, by taking a decision and then inviting the United
States to engage in a process of consultation, did not act in conformity with the clear

terms of the Protocol. Its denial of benefits to Ampal was thus ineffective.

The Tribunal noted earlier that, in 1986, after negotiations between the United States
and Egypt with respect to changes to the Treaty which each country wished to
introduce, a Supplementary Protocol was signed which, inter alia, required that a Party
should “promptly”, rather than “first” consult with the other Party to seek a mutually

satisfactory resolution of this matter.

The Respondent’s expert, Professor Vandevelde, has opined that by replacing the word
“first” with the word “promptly”, the parties “[had] made clear that the consultations
could occur “after” the denial of benefits” and that “the Treaty did not require

consultations prior to a denial of benefits.” !°

The Tribunal cannot accept Professor Vandevelde’s opinion. Again, the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the Paragraph 1 of the Protocol, as amended, in
their context, is evident. The Party who has concluded that the benefits of the Treaty
should not be extended to the national of a third country has the obligation to consult
with the other Party in order to seek a mutually satisfactory resolution. The object and
purpose of the mandatory consultation is to find a satisfactory resolution, not to discuss
whether a decision previously taken by one Party should be endorsed and accepted by
the other Party. In this respect, the Tribunal finds that the State Parties’ final statements
in their correspondence fall short of an acceptance on the part of the United States that

Egypt was entitled to deny Ampal the benefits of the Treaty.

16 Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion, para. 62 at page 17.

41

155,

156.

157,

158.

159,

160.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

The Tribunal is aware of the decision of the tribunal in Pac-Rim Cayman LLC vy.
Republic of El Salvador'®” that the denial of benefits pursuant to a clause nearly
identical to that in Paragraph 1 of the Protocol in the present case was held to be

effective.

However, there is a very significant difference in the Treaty language of that case and
the Treaty language in the present case. In CAFTA (the governing Treaty in the Pac-
Rim decision), the consultations between the two State parties according to Article
20.4.1 of the Agreement were only discretionary'°*, whereas, in the present case, as

noted above, the consultations are mandatory.

Having concluded that consultations mandated by the Protocol did not take place, the
Tribunal will now seek to determine when valid and effective consultations should have

been held in this case.

The Tribunal recalls that on 18 May 2011'%, Ampal (and EGI-Fund Investors) notified
Egypt pursuant to Article VII (2) of the Treaty of the existence of a legal investment

dispute under the Treaty.

Egypt was then aware that, under the terms of Paragraph | of the Protocol to the Treaty,
it could deny the benefits of the Treaty to Ampal, a publicly listed company controlled
by Mr. Maiman, a national of a third country, but only after having initiated

consultations with the United States, the other Contracting State to the Treaty.

According to Article VII(2) and (3) of the Treaty, Egypt had a window of six (6)
months after 18 May 2011 to seek to resolve the dispute by consultation and
negotiation with Ampal. In the opinion of the Tribunal, it was during that six (6) month
period that Egypt could also have initiated consultations with the United States
pursuant to Paragraph 1 of the Protocol. There is no evidence in the record that such

consultations took place during that period.

107 RLA-I1.
1°8 Pac Rim v. El Salvador, RLA-11, para. 4.57.

199 See supra at para. 135

2

161.

162.

163.

8

164.

165.

166.

167.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

If it had done so during the window, it would have acted “promptly”. By waiting until
January 2013, more than 20 months later, it is obvious to the Tribunal that Egypt did

not act promptly.

Although not strictly necessary in view of the decision which it has reached that
Egypt’s notification to Ampal of 23 January 2013 was defective and invalid, the
Tribunal will now address nevertheless the scope and effect of Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention since the parties have submitted detailed and extensive arguments

on this issue.

The central argument of the Respondent with respect to that jurisdictional issue is that
its offer to arbitrate in the Treaty is always subject to its right, enshrined in the Protocol
to the Treaty, to deny the benefits of the Treaty to “mailbox” or “shell” companies
which, in the words of its expert, Professor Vandevelde, “never [have] an

unconditional, or vested, right to treaty protection”.!!°

The Respondent submits that by invoking the denial-of-benefits provision in the
Protocol to the Treaty after Ampal had submitted its claim to ICSID arbitration, it did
not withdraw its previously given consent to arbitration but rather exercised its right to

deny benefits which was reserved within that consent.

On the other hand, the central argument of the Claimants is that the jurisdiction of the
Centre is to be assessed at the time that jurisdiction is invoked, to wit when the Request
for Arbitration is registered and that, as clearly set out in Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention, “no Party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.” In short, say the
Claimants, a denial of benefits such as the present one cannot have retroactive effect. It

can only be effective prospectively.

The Claimants’ interpretation, says the Respondent, would give no “effet utile” to the

denial of benefits provision in the Protocol.

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that the jurisdiction of the Centre must be

determined at the time that the Request for Arbitration is registered.

4" Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion, para, 121 at p. 40.

4B

s

ad

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is very clear. The jurisdiction of the Centre is to
be assessed at the time that jurisdiction is invoked, which is when the investor’s
Request for Arbitration is registered by the Centre. When jurisdiction has crystallized,

“no Party may withdraw its consent unilaterally”, says plainly Article 25(1).

As the Egypt-US Treaty and its Protocol must be read in the light of the ICSID
Convention, the Tribunal finds that there cannot be an embedded conditionality in the

Treaty which could be triggered after the submission of the dispute to arbitration.

The Tribunal cannot accept the opinion of Professor Vandevelde that Egypt could deny
the benefits of the Treaty to a Claimant such as Ampal “at any time” after the Request
for Arbitration has been filed.!!! Such denial, to be effective, must be made prior to the
filing and registration of the Request for Arbitration. In fact, the Tribunal recalls that
Professor Vandevelde agreed in cross-examination during the hearing that a denial of

the benefits of the US Treaty only has a prospective effect.!!2

The Tribunal observes that its conclusion that the jurisdiction of the Centre must be
determined at the time it is seized of the dispute is in conformity with the rule of the
International Court of Justice with respect to the time when jurisdiction is vested in the
Court. That rule and its effect are well set out by the Court in the Right of Passage

decision where it held:

It is a rule of law generally accepted, as well as one acted upon
in the past by the Court, that, once the Court has been validly
seized of a dispute, unilateral action by the Respondent State in
terminating its Declaration, in whole or in part, cannot divest
the Court of jurisdiction.!"?

This conclusion of the Tribunal is also in conformity with the Tribunal’s interpretation

of the Protocol and the Treaty that for the denial of benefits to be effective, there must

"! Vandevelde Expert Legal Opinion, para. 121 at p. 40.

12. Tr, Day 7 Day 7, 212:5-16 (Counsel for the Claimants and Professor Vandevelde): “Q. Prior to that time [of a
denial of benefits], the jurisdiction that the tribunal did have will be left untouched; is that correct? A. That
would be my understanding, yes. Q. So the denial does not erase jurisdiction that existed prior to the denial? A.
The word that I used was ‘terminates’ the jurisdiction: that the benefits have been denied as of a certain
moment, and as of that moment the investor is no longer able to avail itself of any of the benefits of the treaty.
Q. But it doesn’t seek to change the past? A. That’s correct.”

"3 Portugal v. India, CLA-214, p. 142.

44

173.

174,

17.

17

177.

3

=

5.

6.

a

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

be consultations as mandated by the Treaty and such consultations must be made

promptly.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s denial of benefits to
Ampal of 27 January 2013 is not effective and the Respondent’s objection to

jurisdiction resting on this ground is dismissed.

o) Ampal’s interest in EMG

The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has made the following objection to the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction in its Post-Hearing Brief:

The highly convoluted and opaque structure through which

Ampal holds its interest in EMG involves not only numerous

related intermediary companies, the corporate and financial

relationships (including intercompany debts) of which have

never been established or explained, but also entirely fails to

take account of intervening third party rights including loans,

the terms of which are nowhere in the record of this

arbitration.... All these matters potentially seriously impair the

flow of funds up the corporate chain from EMG to Ampal,

contrary to the premise of Ampal’s claim.!!*
The Tribunal notes that the issue of the flow of funds was indeed raised by the
Respondent in its written submissions prior to the evidentiary hearing. However, the
issue was raised in relation to quantum. The Respondent only made an objection to

jurisdiction on this basis in its Post-Hearing Brief.

According to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1), this objection should have been made “no
later than the expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of the counter-memorial,

or, if the objection relates to an ancillary claim, for the filing of the rejoinder”.

Accordingly, the Tribunal denies the Respondent’s belated objection which has been

made for the first time in its Post-Hearing Brief.

"4 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para, 36,

178.

2

179.

180,

s

181.

182,

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016
B. RATIONE PERSONAE COMPETENCE OVER EGI-FUND INVESTORS
AND EGI-SERIES

1. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that it is a basic principle of international investment law that
a claimant bears the burden of showing that it has met the jurisdictional requirements of

atreaty.!!5

The Respondent argues that the Claimants have failed to demonstrate their contention
that United States nationals have a “substantial interest” in EGJ-Fund Investors and
EGI-Series as required in the US Treaty, and thus the Tribunal lacks the ratione

personae competence over these two entities.

In respect of EGI-Fund Investors, the Claimants argued for the first time in their Reply
Memorial that the “only one part” of the ownership structure of EGI-Fund Investors
that is relevant to their allegation that US nationals have a “substantial interest” in the
company is the three Irrevocable Trusts created in 2004 by the children of Mr. Zell (the
“Zell Children Trusts”).'!!© According to the Respondent, this is contrary to the
Claimants’ previous allegation that “92% of [EGI-Fund Investors] is held by trusts
established for the benefit of Mr. Samuel Zell, his children, and their children, all of

 

whom are US nationals”(emphasis added by the Tribunal).!!7

According to the Respondent, this new argument confirms that the Claimants’
allegations concerning the interests in EGI-Fund Investors should not be taken at face
value, especially in light of the correction which they bring to the Certificate of

Managing Member of EGI-Fund Investors. |!

The Respondent avers that the Claimants have failed to provide any evidence to

substantiate the alleged US nationality of Mr. Zell’s grandchildren!!? in violation of the

"5 Counter-Memorial, para. 164. See Pac Rim v. El Salvador, RLA-I1, para. 2.9: “[AJIl relevant facts
supporting [the Tribunal’s] jurisdiction must be established by the Claimant at this jurisdictional stage and not
merely assumed in the Claimant's favour.”

"6 Reply, para. 210.

"7 Memorial, para. 168.
' Rejoinder, para. 160. See C-226.
9 Rejoinder, para. 159. Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 33.

46

183.

185,

S

a

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

Tribunal’s order to disclose: “/fJor any interest in EGI-Fund Investors held in trust

from 2007 to the present.... Nationality certificates, passports or equivalent Documents
of all beneficiaries that are natural persons.”'?°

The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ addition to the record of extracts of the

US Code of Federal Regulations!*! is part of a series of inappropriate attempts by

which they now ask the Tribunal to infer, as a legal matter, the very fact of the Zell

grandchildren’s nationalities, in relation to which they refuse to provide evidence. '2?
The Respondent further argues that, in a similar vein, during the hearing, the Claimants

attempted to show birth certificates of the Zell grandchildren
on a restricted basis to the Tribunal and Egypt's international
counsel, without allowing Egypt or its representatives ESLA to
view or independently verify them. These documents do not
form part of the evidentiary record and thus cannot be relied
on; moreover, this cannot remedy the Claimants’ procedural
and due process violations, which have deprived Egypt of the
opportunity to verify, assess and respond to the EGI Claimants’
alleged U.S. nationality.!?5

In addition, the Respondent contends that the Claimants have withheld all information
concerning the identity or nationality of the next-in-line beneficiaries of the Zell

Children Trusts, who are presumably the spouses of Mr. Zell’s children, '4

186. In any event, avers the Respondent,

[t]he Claimants have . . . still failed to prove a substantial U.S.
interest in the EGI Claimants at the relevant dates for the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae, i.e. between 2008,
from when their cause of action allegedly arose, and 2012,
when they initiated this arbitration. To do so, they would have
had to produce ‘{nJationality certificates, passports or
equivalent Documents’ covering the material period, in

'20 See Procedural Order No. 4 granting the Respondent’s Request No. 42; Tr. Day 9, 28:38-29:12.

121 C.655.

'22 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 34.

' Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 34. See also Tr. Day 1, 28:38-29:12; Tr. Day 9, 270:14-273:1.
24 C.454-C-456.

47

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016
accordance with Egypt’s document request, which they have
consistently refused to do.!°
187. On the basis of these unsubstantiated and contradictory allegations, the Respondent
argues that it cannot be expected to accept the standing of EGI-Fund Investors which

brings claims for over US$ 200 million in this arbitration, '76

188.

eS

In respect of EGI-Series, the Respondent submits the following:

 

(i) The Claimants assert that EGI-Series meets the treaty’s national requirements
because EGI-Fund Investors has held a 91.67% interest in that company since
August 2008.!27 The Claimants’ failure to demonstrate that EGI-Fund Investors
meets the Treaty’s nationality requirements therefore applies mutatis mutandis to

EGI-Series says the Respondent. !78

(ii) In any event, the selective and incomplete disclosure of evidence concerning the
corporate structure of EGI-Series does not confirm the portion of that company
alleged to be owned by EGI-Fund Investors asserts the Respondent. The Certificate
of Formation of EGI-Series indicates that it is a “series limited liability company”.
The Claimants allege in their Reply that “EGI-Series Investment is composed of
two series”, the “EGI-EMG Series” and the “EGI-SSE I Series”!?°. The evidence
produced to support this contention is a “Supplement to EGI-Series Investments,
L.L.C.” dated 29 February 2009, pursuant to which the “EGI-SEE I Series” was
created'3°, The Respondent argues that this document is dated and that the
Claimants have provided no evidence as to whether or not any further “series” of
EGI-Series were established before 2012. In the event that EGI-Series is also

composed of other “series”, this could result in a dilution of EGI-Fund Investors’

'25 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 35.

'26 Rejoinder, para. 164.

 

eries Investments by EGI- Fund Investors, the
ies Investments LLC, C-42, and a “Contribution

"27 Memorial, para. 86. In support of the ownership of EGL
Claimants have produced a Certificate of Secretary of EGI-S
Agreement” dated 15 August 2008, C-149.

"8 Counter-Memorial, para. 169 (i).

    

29 Reply, para, 214.
39.379,

189.

190.

191.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

ownership of that company’s capital and, consequently, any substantial interest in

EGI-Series Investments by US nationals says the Respondent. !3!

(iii)The Respondent contends that the Claimants have produced no evidence explaining
the nature of EGI-Fund Investor’s ownership interest in EGI-Series. According to a
“Contribution Agreement” signed between those parties on 18 August 2008,'?
EGI-Fund Investors was allocated a 100% “Series Percentage Interest” of the EGI-
EMG Series of the LLC, as defined in a separate contract, a “Series Limited
Liability Company Agreement” dated 14 March 2008, which the Claimants have
chosen not to disclose. EGI-Fund Investors’ ownership of the “EGI-EMG Series”
of EGI-Series cannot be assumed to result in the same proportion of ownership of

the company’s entire capital says the Respondent. '%?

2. Claimants’ Position

The Claimants assert that the Tribunal has ratione personae competence over EGI-
Fund Investors and EGI-Series since US nationals hold a substantial interest in both

entities.

In respect of EGI-Fund Investors, the Claimants argue that they have provided a
Certificate of Managing Member of EGI-Fund Investors which (i) states that, since 17
April 2007, 92% of the membership interest in the company has been indirectly held by
trusts established for the benefit of Samuel Zell, his three children and his minor
grandchildren; and (ii) includes copies of the US passports of Samuel Zell and his three
children,'*4 According to the Claimants, this is sufficient to establish that US nationals

have a substantial interest in EGI-Fund Investors.

The Claimants explain that the trust structure through which the Zell family members
hold their interests in EGI-Fund Investors is complex. However, if the Tribunal
considers that evidence beyond the Certificate of Managing Member is necessary to

establish the “substantial interest” held by the Zell family, only one part of that

'31 Rejoinder, para. 168.
12.C-149,

"33 Counter-Memorial, para. 169 (iii).

134 C226, For evidence of the Managing Member’s appointment and its powers, see C-451 and C-452.

49

JCSID Case No. ARB/I2/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

structure need be examined aver the Claimants. That part is three Irrevocable Trusts
(the JoAnn Zell Irrevocable Trust, the Kellie Zell Irrevocable Trust, and the Matthew
Zell Irrevocable Trust) that hold interests in EGI-Fund Investors. The Claimants submit
that those trusts made original capital commitments to EGI-Fund Investors totalling
US$432 million! a “substantial” interest — corresponding to 43.2% of the capital of
EGI-Fund Investors.°° On 31 December 2008, the membership interest of the
Irrevocable Trusts in EGI-Fund Investors increased to more than 90%.!37 The entire
beneficial mterest in those trusts is held by the grandchildren of Mr. Zell, a US

citizen.'38 The structure is illustrated in the following diagram. 9°

| AU17 April 2007

 

 

=e [ae]

 

 

Zeta Kamen] [Sek zener
} dscns |

 

  
  
 
 

  
 

   

Imestnogie Ec,
BE

   

errs |

192. The Claimants concede that one correction needs to be made to the Certificate of
Managing member of EG1-Fund Investors. The 92% interest held by the Zell family in
EGI-Fund Investers is not only held by Mr. Zell, his three children, and his

4140

grandchildren, but also by the spouses of two of Mr. Zell's children!*°, who are also US

nationals, But neither Mr. Zell’s children, nor their spouses, hold an interest in the

Irrevocable Trusts, which represent 90.3% of the interest in EGI-Fund Investors.’4'. All

85.€.231 —C-233.
16 0.452,

157 0.453,

198 C454 — C-457.
13° Reply, para. 210.
140 C458

141 Reply, para, 212.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

of that interest is held by Mr. Zell’s grandchildren. The Claimants have already
provided passports showing that Mr. Zell and his three children are US citizens and
were born in the US.'4? According to the Claimants, it follows from the US citizenship

of Mr. Zell’s children that his grandchildren are US citizens. !43

193. In response to the Respondent’s allegation that the Claimants have not met their burden
of proof in relation to the nationality of Mr. Zell’s grandchildren, the Claimants assert

the following: '44

(i) At the hearing, the Tribunal accepted the Claimants’ proposal that a copy of the
birth certificates of Mr. Zell’s grandchildren be kept available and under seal with
the ICSID Secretariat;'4>

(ii) Mr. Zell’s grandchildren were born in Illinois, Colorado and California; !4°

(iii) There is only one reason why a person born in the US, to known parents, would fail
to acquire US nationality at birth. That is if the person was not “subject to the
jurisdiction” of the United States at that time.!*” The only basis for that would be if
he or she was born to a foreign diplomatic officer.'48 There is no ground to think
that any of the parents of the grandchildren was a foreign diplomatic officer. The
US passports of Mr. Zell’s three children are on the record'*? and their spouses

were all born in the United States. !%°

(iv) If Egypt had a genuine objection to the evidence presented by the Claimants, it
could have explored it in cross-examination of Mr. Zell. Egypt did not ask him a

single question regarding his children or his grandchildren.

2 C226.

48. CLA-131.

“44 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 15

4% Tr, Day 9, 276:10-20, See also Tr. Day 5, 208:20-209:5.

M46-Ty, Day 3, 2:1-4.

47 See CLA-131. United States Code, 8 USC section 1401, para. (a)

148 See C-655. United States Code of Federal Regulations, 8 CFR section 101.3 para. (b).
9 226, pp 4-6.

'8° They were born in California, Minnesota, Texas, and Illinois, as shown in the copies of the birth certificates
of the grandchildren of Mr. Zell held under seal with the ICSID Secretary.

Sl

ICSID Case No. ARB/I2/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

 

194. In respect of EGI-Series, the Claimants assert that a series limited liability company

  

under Delaware law may be composed of multiple series, each of which assumes its
own rights and obligations, which cannot be enforced by or against any other series of
the company or against the company as a whole.!>! EGI-Series is composed of two

series, the EGI-EMG Series (the series which holds an indirect interest in EMG) and
the EGI-SSE I Series'*?:

ENG

rr:
ae

| EGEENG. |

1.3866)

36
LP

d

 
     

  
    

EGLEMG Seties

EGhBeries
investments, LLC.

 

 

a

| ect-Properties Fund }
} 908-40), LLC.

 

  

 

al tamnily
‘rusts

195. The Claimants submit that EG]-Fund Investors bold a 91.67% interest in the EGI-EMG

Series of EGI-Series Investments, *? EGI-Fund Investors holds a 78.22% direct interest
in the EGJ-SSE J Series, and trusts established for the benefit of the Zell family hold
more than 90% of the interest in the Series as a whole.!>4 Thus, even if the EGI-SSE I

Series is taken into consideration, there is no diluting of the indirect interest held by
members of the Zell family.'*>

‘51 Reply, para, 213.

'S2 Reply, para. 214, See Contribution Agreement, C-149
53 C42.

154 C523 and C-379. See diagram above.

+5 Reply, para. 214.

196,

197.

Ss

198.

2

199,

200.

202.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

3. Tribunal’s Analysis

With respect to this objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the Respondent essentially
alleges that the Claimants have failed to discharge their burden of proving that US

nationals had a “substantial interest” in EGI-Fund Investors and EGI-Series.
a) EGI-Fund Investors

While the Claimants only filed the pertinent evidence with their Reply, the record now
reveals that there are three Irrevocable Trusts that hold more than a 90% interest in
EGI-Fund Investors. The entire beneficial interest in those trusts is held by the minor

grandchildren of Mr. Samuel Zell.

The Tribunal notes that Mr. Zell and his three children are US nationals. The only
outstanding question which the Tribunal has to answer is whether the beneficiaries of
these three Irrevocable Trusts, to wit Mr. Zell’s grandchildren, are US nationals. If the
Tribunal finds that they are US nationals, it will necessarily follow that US nationals
have a “substantial interest” in EGI-Fund Investors since they hold a 90.3% interest in

this Claimant.

For personal security reasons invoked by Mr. Zell, the Claimants’ counsel have only
allowed members of the Tribunal and the Respondent’s international counsel to sight
the Zell grandchildren’s birth certificates which are kept under seal by the ICSID

Secretariat.

As the Respondent objects to this belated in camera production of the Zell
grandchildren’s birth certificates, the Tribunal has decided that it will not decide the

Respondent’s objection to its jurisdiction on the basis of these birth certificates.

. Having reviewed and considered the other evidence adduced by the Claimants on the

issue of the US nationality of the Zell grandchildren, the Tribunal finds that the

beneficiaries of the Irrevocable Trusts, the Zell grandchildren, are US nationals.

Firstly, according to the representation of counsel for the Claimants as instructed by

their client Mr. Zell, all his grandchildren were born in the United States.

203.

S

204.

205,

&

206.

a

207.

208.

209,

210.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/II
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Secondly, their grandfather, Samuel Zell, and their parents are US nationals. !%
Thirdly, the uncontradicted evidence of the Claimants is that, in such circumstances,

there is only one situation in which a person born in the United States would not

acquire US nationality at birth and this situation does not apply in the present case. !5”

Thus, the Tribunal concludes that US nationals have a “substantial interest” in Claimant

EGI-Fund Investors and this objection to jurisdiction of the Respondent is dismissed.
b) EGiI-Series
EGI-Fund Investors own a 91.67% interest in the EGI-EMG Series of EGI-Series.

Since the Tribunal has declared itself satisfied that US nationals have a substantial
interest in EGI-Fund Investors, it follows that it is equally satisfied that US nationals

have a substantial interest in EGI-Series and the Tribunal so finds.

This objection of Respondent to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is accordingly dismissed.

Cc RATIONE PERSONAE COMPETENCE OVER MR, DAVID FISCHER

1 Respondent’s Position
The Respondent contends that Mr. Fischer has not proved his alleged US$ 15 million
investment through Prudence Energy Ltd, a vehicle through which (as well as through
several other intermediary companies and trusts) he claims to hold a 1.24% indirect
interest in EMG.'58 The only further investment Mr. Fischer made was a minimal US$

20,000 equity interest in a holding company, DF Holdings Investment Ltd. !*°°

The Respondent submits that, in cross-examination during the evidentiary hearing, the

Claimants’ quantum expert, Mr. Nicholson of FTI:

156 See a copy of the passports of Samuel Zell and his children at C-226.

'57 If he or she was born to a foreign diplomatic officer. See C-655. United States Code of Federal Regulations,
8 CER section 101.3 para. (b).

+58 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 32.

59 See C-41 (c) and (b).

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

(i) admitted that he had not “seen the terms of any loans” from Mr. Fischer to
Prudence Energy Ltd., nor any other reliable evidence of that loan despite claiming

that Mr. Fischer’s investment took the form of a loan;'® and

(ii) Confirmed that there is no evidence that Mr. Fischer still owned the alleged loan to

Prudence Energy Ltd when he initiated this arbitration. '°!

211. Accordingly, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal does not have ratione personae

competence over Mr. David Fischer.

2. Claimants’ Position

212. The Claimants argue that Mr. David Fischer’s investment has been proved :

Exhibit C-41[b] is a Declaration of Trust issued by Line
Holdings Limited (Gibraltar) in favor of DF Holdings
Investments Limited. The property held in trust by Line
Holdings Limited for the absolute benefit of DF Holdings
Investments Limited is 15,000 shares (75%) in Prudence
Energy Limited.

Exhibit C-41[d] is a Declaration of Trust issued by the same
Line Holdings Limited, in favor of Mr. David Fischer. The
property held in trust by Line Holdings Limited for the absolute
benefit of Mr. Fischer is 20,000 shares (100%) in DF Holdings
Investments Limited.

By these two trusts Mr. Fischer is the beneficial owner of 75%
of Prudence Energy Ltd. Prudence Energy Ltd in turn owns
13.79% of EGI-EMG LP, the corporate vehicle created by the

EGI group of investors to make their investment in EMG.....

[J

The Declarations of Trust in question recite that they were
executed “on the 2nd May 2012.” Exhibit C-41[b] recites that
although signed in 2012 it has “effect from the 26th June
2007,” and Exhibit C-41[d] recites that it has “effect from the
25th June 2007.” Egypt says in its Submission that this
amounts to a claim of “retroactive effect” and adds that: “such
allegations, however, is [sic] ineffective to overcome Mr.
Fischer's evident lack of standing in this arbitration.”

 

 

169 Tr. Day 8 145:17-21, 135:16-17; 134:4-140:20.
'! Tr. Day 8, 136:2-6.

ww
a

213.

214.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction

The evidence that the Claimants have filed is sufficient proof of
Mr. Fischer’s uninterrupted beneficial ownership of Prudence
Energy Ltd from 26 June 2007 until 2 May 2012. The
Declarations signed in May 2012 attest that the interests have
been held since June 2007.

There were also equivalent Declarations of Trust issued by the
same trustee to each of the same beneficiaries concerning the
same trust property on 26 and 25 June 2007 respectively, These
two Declarations signed in 2007 are provided... as Exhibits
C-317 and C-318. When these were replaced on 2 May 2012 by
the two new Declarations of Trust filed with the Request for
Arbitration, they had to be cancelled; this is evidenced by the
copies of the cancelled 2007 Declarations provided . . . as
Exhibits C-319 and C-320.

As demonstrated by Exhibits C-41[e], C-41[f] and C-41[g] ...
. the company created as Barolo Enterprises Limited ultimately
changed its name to DF Holdings Investments Limited. This
explains the difference in the name of the beneficiary entity
listed in the Declaration of Trust of June 2007 (Exhibit C-317)
(Barolo Enterprises Limited) and that listed in the Declaration
dated 2 May 2012 (Exhibit C-41[b]) (DF Holdings Investments
Limited). This change in name had no effect on the legal
personality of the entity now named DF Holdings Investments
Limited.

There cannot be any reasonable dispute about Mr. Fischer's
ownership of the investment at all relevant times....!

measure of his loss.!°

over Mr. David Fischer.

162 Claimants’ Response to the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, paras. 13-20.

163 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 17.

56

1 February 2016

The Claimants argue that whether the funds that Mr. Fischer provided to Prudence
Energy Ltd for investment in EMG were structured as a loan has no bearing on
whether Mr. Fischer holds an equity interest in Prudence Energy, and therefore, in

EMG. That equity interest constitutes an investment, and its diminution in value is the

Accordingly, the Claimants submit that the Tribunal has ratione personae competence

215.

216.

217.

218.

219,

220.

164 g,

 

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016
3. Tribunal’s Analysis

In contrast to the Tribunal’s earlier conclusion vis-a-vis the objections of the
Respondent to its jurisdiction over EGI-Fund Investors and EGI-Series, in the case of
the Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over Mr. David Fischer the

Tribunal is not satisfied that the Claimants have discharged their burden of proof.

It is trite to say that the party who makes an assertion has the burden of proving it.
Accordingly, the burden of proof to establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over, in this
instance, the Claimant David Fischer rests upon David Fischer. The proposition that he

who asserts must prove is applicable in investment treaty arbitration.'°

At the jurisdictional stage of this case, Mr. Fischer has the burden of proving that he
beneficially owns 75% of Prudence Energy Ltd which in turn owns 13.79% of EGI-
EMG L.P., the corporate vehicle through which all Claimants other than Ampal hold
their interests in EMG.

The Tribunal has heard the evidence of Mr. Fischer and has considered the submissions
of Claimants which, they aver, demonstrate “Mr. Fischer’s ownership of [his]

investment at all relevant times”. '®

The Tribunal now turns to determine whether Mr. Fischer has satisfied his jurisdictional
burden. On this point, it is important to keep in mind that the burden of proof is not
necessarily satisfied by simply producing evidence. As Professor Bin Cheng has neatly
stated: “a party having the burden of proof must not only bring evidence in support of
his allegations, but must also convince the Tribunal of their truth, lest they be

disregarded for want, or insufficiency of proof.”'6*

The definition of an investment under Article 1(1) of the Germany/Egypt Treaty
requires that “[the] asset [be] established or acquired by an investor of one Contracting
State in the territory of the other Contracting State...” The Claimant, a German

national, is attempting to prove beneficial ownership over what he asserts is an

‘aipem S.p.A. v. People's Republic of Bangladesh, CSID Case No. ARB/05/7, Decision on Jurisdiction

and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, 21 March 2007, para. 83.

65 See supra at para, 212 and Claimants’ Response to the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, paras, 13-20.

16 Bin Cheng, GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW AS APPLIED BY INTERNATIONAL COURTS AND TRIBUNALS (, 1953, p.
329, CLA-153

S7

221.

222.

223.

3

224,

225.

on

226.

227.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

investment covered by the Treaty through his alleged beneficial ownership of Prudence

Energy Ltd.

It is not an unusual feature of international corporate business that companies and
individuals make their investments through a number of offshore vehicles, often with
the view to avoid fiscal liabilities in the home territory of the ultimate owner.
Frequently, this involves transferring the title to shares to third parties who may hold

them on such terms as may be agreed.

In this case, Mr. Fischer admitted that the structure of his investment was deliberately
disguised to protect him from tax exposure in Germany and to ensure that he could not

be identified as the investor in the event that his investment was successful.

The only evidence submitted in respect of Mr. Fischer’s beneficial ownership is a one
line statement in one of the exhibits (C-318) that the shares in DF Holdings Investments
Limited are beneficially owned by Mr. Fischer. No trust deed evidencing the double
blind trust has been submitted to the Tribunal. This appears to be consistent with an
intention to ensure that Mr. Fischer could not be identified as the investor, should his

investment be successful.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal has no clear evidence before it relating to the terms

of such trust or beneficial ownership.

In addition, the Tribunal notes that many of the documents produced by the Claimants
in support of Mr. Fischer’s alleged investment are executed on 2 May 2012 but,
conveniently, they are said to take effect retroactively on 25 June 2007, five years

earlier.

In view of the many missing evidentiary links, the Tribunal concludes that Mr. Fischer
has not discharged his burden of proving that he made an investment that is protected

under the German/Egypt BIT. Accordingly, Mr. Fischer is not a protected investor.

The Tribunal finds that it has no jurisdiction over Claimant, David Fischer, and this

objection of Respondent is therefore sustained.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

D. RATIONE MATERIAE COMPETENCE OVER THE CLAIMANTS’ GAS SUPPLY
CLAIMS

228. In view of the Tribunal’s decision to uphold the Respondent’s objection ratione

personae over Mr. David Fischer, the Tribunal needs not summarize the parties’

arguments specific to the Germany Treaty.

1. Respondent’s Position

229, The Respondent reminds the Tribunal that out of the US$ 882.6 million which the

Claimants claim in total,'®? approximately US$ 700 million concern alleged damages
which the Claimants suffered due to EGPC and EGAS’s alleged failure to supply EMG
with gas under the GSPA (the “Gas Supply Dispute”).'°

230, The Respondent argues that the Gas Supply Dispute is purely contractual in nature, and

thus falls outside the scope of the arbitration clauses in Article VII of the US Treaty,
with the result that this Tribunal has no jurisdiction over these claims. In any event,
because a necessary element of the Claimants’ claims pertaining to the Gas Supply
Dispute is a breach of the GSPA, the Respondent avers that the essential basis of the

claims is contractual in nature and, as such, falls outside this Tribunal’s jurisdiction. '©

231. However, the Respondent acknowledges that, if the Tribunal agrees that the Gas Supply

Dispute is contractual in nature, it would still need to decide the Claimants’ tax claims,

subject to the Respondent’s separate objection in that respect. !”°

232. In support of its argument, the Respondent submits that all of the Claimants’ claims

concerning the Gas Supply Dispute are claims for alleged breaches of the GSPA. Those

claims include!7!:

(i) The claim concerning renegotiations in the midst of non-deliveries — the

Respondent argues that the framework governing EGPC and EGAS’s obligation to

'67 See FTI Letter, Appendix 4 (revised).

468 Counter-Memorial, para, 172. Respondent’s Opening Slide 221.

‘6° Counter-Memorial, para. 173.

7 Respondent’s Opening Slide 219.

'| They exclude the claim concerning the revocation of EGM’s tax-free status which is discussed in the

following section of the present Decision.
59

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

deliver gas to EMG is set out at Articles 2.1, 6, 7 and 16 of Annex | to the

GSPA;!72

(ii) The claim that gas was withheld to compel renegotiation — the Respondent argues

that this claim is the same as the previous one;!73

(iii)The claim concerning the First Amendment to the GSPA - the Respondent argues
that any claims concerning the First Amendment, or the performance of the GSPA

as amended, are entirely contractual in nature; !74

(iv) The claim concerning the failure to secure continuous gas supply - the Respondent
argues that this is simply a different label for the Claimants’ claim that EGPC and
EGAS allegedly failed to perform the GSPA;!7°

(v) The claim concerning severe supply shortfalls and failure to protect the pipeline -
the Respondent argues that these contentions are exclusively determined by the
GSPA: no other instrument makes provisions for On-Sale Notices (Article 6 of
Annex | to the GSPA), for force majeure (Section 16.3 of Annex | to the GSPA),
for contractual termination rights (Section 2.5.2 of the GSPA) or for the
circumstances under which EMG may have been legally entitled to receive gas
(Articles 2.1, 6, 7 and 16 of Annex 1 to the GSPA);!76 and

(vi)The claim concerning the repudiation of gas supply obligations - the Respondent
argues that EGPC and EGAS’s contractual termination rights are set forth at
Section 2.5 of Annex 1 to the GSPA.!7”

233.

3

In view of the fact that the Gas Supply Dispute is purely contractual in nature, the
Respondent submits that it thus falls outside the scope of the arbitration clauses in the
Treaties. According to the Respondent, this is evidenced by the Claimants’ elaborate

submissions on the GSPA’s construction under English law.

1? Counter-Memorial, paras. 179-186.
‘7 Counter-Memorial, paras. 188-191.
' Counter-Memorial, para. 192.
‘75 Counter-Memorial, paras. 193-196.
176 Counter-Memorial, paras. 197-201
” Counter-Memorial, paras. 202-203.
60

234,

235.

236.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

In respect of the US Treaty, Article VII applies to the resolution of disputes “involving
(i) the interpretation or application of an investment agreement between a Party and a
national or company of the other Party; or (ii) an alleged breach of any right conferred

or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment”.

The Respondent argues that none of the claims which the Claimants raise in the Gas
Supply Dispute concern a right “conferred or created by this Treaty” because those
claims are all contractual in nature as shown above and arise from the GSPA, an
independent legal instrument to which neither the Claimants nor the Respondent are

party. 178

In any event, the Respondent avers that an arbitral tribunal constituted pursuant to a
Treaty lacks jurisdiction over purely contractual claims. In support of its argument the

Respondent cites the following ICSID decisions:

(i) Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of Ghana (“Hamester v.
Ghana”) —

As noted earlier in this Award, almost all of the allegations
which make up Hamester’s claim of breach of the BIT, whether
relating to allegations of arbitrary or discriminatory treatment;
unfair and inequitable treatment; or expropriation, concern the
conduct of Cocobod, in relation to Article 7 of the JVA. This
conduct was contractual and not sovereign in nature. It is the
Tribunal’s view that Hamester’s so-called ‘treaty claims,’
however skilfully repackaged, are inextricably linked to the
JVA and are in reality contract claims. To use the language of
the award in the Vivendi Annulment case, ‘the essential basis’
of Hamester’s claims is purely contractual.!”°

(ii) Malicorp Limited v. The Arab Republic of Egypt (“Malicorp v. Egypt”) '°°— the
Respondent recalls that the Claimants seek to distinguish this case on the basis that
the claimant in that case was a party to the contract and, in contrast, the Claimants
are not parties to the GSPA. The Respondent argues that whether the Claimants are

parties to the GSPA or not is irrelevant to the issue of whether, by resolving the

178 Counter-Memorial, para. 21.

17° Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of Ghana, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/24, Award, 18 June
2010, RLA-9, para. 329. Respondent's Opening Slide 201. See also slides 202-204

189 Malicorp Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/18, Award, 7 February 2011, RLA-
10.

61

237,

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

contractual dispute concerning the performance and termination of the GSPA, one
also resolves the Gas Supply Dispute and vice versa. On that issue, the tribunal in
Malicorp was clear: a breach of contract may only amount to a violation of the
treaty when the breach “could not be resolved by using the ordinary procedure”'®!.
Because the Gas Supply Dispute before this Tribunal falls under the exclusive
jurisdiction of the CRCICA tribunal says the Respondent, it “enables all
submissions and arguments to be exhausted’, with the conclusion that this ICSID

Tribunal cannot have jurisdiction over the same dispute. !**

(i) Iberdrola Energia S.A. v. Republic of Guatemala (“Iberdrola v. Guatemala”)'*>—
the Respondent recalls that the Claimants seek to distinguish that award by asserting
that the tribunal concluded that it had no jurisdiction because the claimant based its
treaty claims on breaches of Guatemalan law, not breach of contract. The Respondent
argues that this distinction is irrelevant: “the point remains that if the legal source of
the obligation is not the treaty itself, a tribunal constituted pursuant to that treaty does

not enjoy jurisdiction over a dispute concerning the obligation’s breach” .\84

(ii) Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian, & Ellen Baca v. The United Mexican States
(“Azinian v. Mexico”)'*°— the Respondent recalls that the tribunal in Azinian rejected
the claimants’ claim for expropriation, finding that it was a disguised attempt to claim
for wrongful termination of the concession contract which was pending before the
courts of the host State. The Respondent argues that this decision applies mutatis
mutandis to the present case as the Claimants’ claims are based on allegations of breach
of contract and the dispute concerning the termination of the GSPA is pending before

the appropriate forum under the GSPA, namely the CRCICA Tribunal.'8°

The Respondent further argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the Gas

Supply Dispute falls exclusively within the jurisdiction of the CRCICA Tribunal, a

'81 Malicorp v. Egypt, RLA-10, para. 103(c).
2 Counter-Memorial, paras. 222-226.

183 Therdrola Energia, S.A. v. Republic of Guatemala, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/5, Award, 17 August 2012
(Unofficial English Translation), RLA-12.

84 Counter-Memorial, para. 228.
185 Azinian v. Mexico , ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, Award, 1 November 1999, RLA-I.

‘86 Counter-Memorial, paras. 229-231.

62

238.

oe

239.

%S

240.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

tribunal constituted pursuant to the GSPA, and which has upheld its jurisdiction'’’, The
Respondent submits that the CRCICA Tribunal is considering, inter alia, the same
issues which the Claimants seek to disguise as violations of the Treaties in these
proceedings'*’, The Respondent avers that both the commercial and investment fora

could not have jurisdiction over the same claims. '8°

Finally, the Respondent submits that should the Tribunal decide that it has jurisdiction

 

over the Gas Supply Dispute, it should not exercise its jurisdiction since all of the
Claimants’ claims concerning the Gas Supply Dispute would be inadmissible as they

require a prior finding that the GSPA itself has been breached.!°

In this respect, the Respondent submits that should the Tribunal decide that it has
jurisdiction to determine the Claimants’ claims concerning the Gas Supply Dispute, the
Tribunal would only be able to exercise its jurisdiction once a determination by the
CRCICA Tribunal has been made that EGPC and EGAS breached the GSPA by failing
to perform or by terminating the GSPA unlawfully. !9!

The Respondent contends that, for this Tribunal to hold the Respondent liable, it must
be satisfied, as a matter of law, that EGPC and EGAS were under an obligation to

supply gas at all material times under the circumstances or that EGPC and EGAS were

'87 CRCICA Partial Award, R-813.

188 Namely :

w)

Gi)

(iii)

(iv)

EGPC and EGAS’s exercise of their right to terminate the GSPA due to EMG’s continued failure to
pay for gas delivered to it;

EGPC and EGAS’s consistent delivery of gas to EMG and EMG’s persistent failure to pay for the gas
it received;

EGPC and EGAS’s entitlement to reduce or stop the delivery of gas when under force majeure due to
terrorist attacks to the pipeline; and

EMG’s failure to provide On-Sale Notices as required by the GSPA before being entitled to receive
further gas by EGPC and EGAS.

See EGPC and EGAS’s Notice for Arbitration in CRCICA Case No. 829/2012 dated 30 Aprils 2012, Exhibit R-

Al4.

18 Counter-Memorial, paras, 235-236.

199 Counter-Memorial, para. 174.

‘1 Counter-Memorial, paras. 286 and 287

iS}
=

242.

243,

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

not legally justified in informing EMG that should it persist to pay for gas it received

and sold onwards, they would terminate the GSPA.!9?

The Respondent argues that this prior determination does not fall to be made by this
Tribunal but rather by the CRCICA Tribunal, the appropriate forum under the GSPA.

Therefore, the Respondent avers that

until the dispute concerning the performance and the
determination of the GSPA is resolves by the appropriate
forum, the Claimants’ claims in this arbitration are
inadmissible due to them being premature. At the very least, the
Tribunal cannot exercise its jurisdiction over such claims
because to do so could lead to conflicting decisions by the
investment and commercial arbitral tribunals over what is
essentially the same dispute and, even if it does not lead to
conflicting decisions, may pave the way for the Claimants and
EMG to recover twice for what is the same wrong and,
correspondingly, the same loss.!?

2. Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the Tribunal has ratione materiae competence over the
Claimants’ claims. They assert that all of their claims in this arbitration are based on the
contention that Egypt has breached the Treaties and international law. There can be no
doubt that the Tribunal has subject-matter jurisdiction over claims that Egypt has

breached the Treaties aver the Claimants. !*4

The Claimants argue that Egypt’s objection depends entirely on the accusation that the
Claimants have submitted contract claims disguised as treaty claims, which is untrue.
The Claimants are not and do not pretend to be party to the Source GSPA or any other
contractual instrument to which EMG is a party, but since shares in EMG are a
protected investment held by the Claimants, breach of EMG’s contractual rights by
Egypt is a fact relevant to whether Egypt has breached its treaty obligations. !°5 As the
annulment committee in Vivendi v. Argentina observed when annulling the tribunal’s

award for refusing to interpret an underlying contract when assessing whether

‘2 Counter-Memorial, para. 289.

‘83 Counter-Memorial, paras. 294-295,

1% Reply, para. 220.
'9 Reply, para. 221 and 226.

244,

&

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Argentina had breached its treaty obligations, “i/t is one thing to exercise contractual

jurisdiction... and another to take into account the terms of a contract in determining

whether there has been a breach of a distinct standard of international law.”'%

In response to (i) the Respondent’s argument that tribunals established under
investment treaties do not have jurisdiction over claims that, at their essence, are
contractual in nature, and (ii) the cases which the Respondent cites in support of its

argument, the Claimants submit the following:

(i) Malicorp v. Egypt'?’”—

the Claimants argue that this decision does not support
Egypt’s jurisdictional objection since the tribunal in that case took jurisdiction over
the dispute and proceeded to decide whether Egypt had breached the applicable

investment treaty. '°8

(ii) Iberdrola y. Guatemala!””—

the Claimants argue that unlike the claimant in
Iberdrola, the Claimants’ case does not depend on breach of contractual
obligations. Rather, even if entities under the instruction and control of the
Egyptian State complied with all of their contractual obligations, Egypt breached
the Treaties by, among other conduct, failing to uphold the sovereign assurances
and commitments on which the Claimants relied to invest and failing to protect the

Claimants’ investment as required by the Treaties.*°

(iii) Azinian v. Mexico?®'— the Claimants argue that this case is not relevant for the

same reasons in respect of Jberdrola and Malicorp, mutatis mutandis.?°

245. The Claimants also submit that the Source GSPA’s dispute resolution clause has no

bearing on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

1% Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (“Aguas del
Aconquija v. Argentina”), 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, CLA-85, para. 105.
See also Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction, 15 November 2005, RLA-150, para. 215.

"7 Malicorp v. Egypt, RLA-10.

198 Reply, para. 228.

18 Therdrola v. Guatemala, RLA-12

200 Reply, para, 230.

281 ICSID Case No. ARB (AFY/97/2, Award, 1 November 1999, RLA-I

282 Reply, para. 231.

65

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

246, In this respect, the Claimants argue that a contractual forum-selection clause cannot
bind non-signatories such as the Claimants. 7° This is supported by the decision in EDF

y, Argentina.204

247. The Claimants aver that a contractual forum-selection clause cannot deprive the
Tribunal of jurisdiction over claims that Egypt has breached the Treaties. As the
tribunal in Total v. Argentina observed, the distinction between treaty and contract
claims “would not prevent the Tribunal when dealing with the merits, from examining
incidenter tantum whether there have been [contractual] breaches,” should this be
relevant to ascertain whether the State in question has committed the treaty breaches
that the claimant alleged.”°> In any event, the commitments that Egypt contravened,
although reflected in part in the Source GSPA, were enshrined elsewhere though

unilateral statements of government officials, government acts and the Treaties.?°

248. Finally, the Claimants submit that their treaty claims do no depend on any other
tribunal’s decision: as many cases have confirmed, the legality of an act under the
relevant contract is not dispositive of that act’s legality under international law.”°” The

Claimants submit that

[t]he only claim that relies on whether the Source GSPA has
been breached is the part of the Claimants’ umbrella clause
claim specifically relying on the Source GSPA as an obligation
binding on Egypt. For that claim, as in all others made by the
Claimants to which any contract may be relevant, whether the

203 Reply, para, 234,
20 EDF International S.A., SAUR International S.A. and Leén Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/23, Award, 11 June 2012, CLA-123, para. 930. Argentina objected to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the basis that the contract underlying the investment contained a forum-selection
clause that precluded jurisdiction over the Claimants’ treaty claims, including their claims for violation of
Argentina’s umbrella clause obligations. The Tribunal rejected Argentina’s objection, citing among other
reasons that the “Claimants were not party to” the agreement containing the forum-selection clause.

25 Total S.A, v. Argentine Republic (“Total S.A. v. Argentina”), ICSID Case No. ARB/04/1, Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction, 25 August 2006, CLA-125, para. 85 (footnote 50). See also Stephen M. Schwebel,
“On Whether the Breach by a State of a Contract with an Alien is a Breach of International Law”, Justice in
International Law: Selected Writings of Judge Stephen M. Schwebel, Cambridge University Press, 1994, p.425,
CLA-IS1.

26 Reply, para, 238.

27 Reply, para. 320. See for example, Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID Case No.
Arb/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005, CLA-122, para, 26. See also Occidental Petroleum
Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No.
ARB/O6/I1, Award, 5 October 2012, CLA-80, para. 450.

66

249.

250.

Ss

251.

252.

253.

254.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

contract has been breached under its governing English law is
a question of fact for this Tribunal, which it has jurisdiction to
decide as a fact. The question of international law is whether
such a fact would then give rise to a breach of the umbrella
clause.

3. Tribunal’s Analysis

Essentially, as was seen above, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction because the Gas Supply Dispute falls exclusively within the jurisdiction of
the CRCICA Tribunal which has upheld its jurisdiction.

The CRCICA Tribunal, avers the Respondent, is considering the same issues “which

the Claimants seek to disguise as violations of the Treaties in these proceedings.”

Since the Gas Supply Dispute “is purely contractual in nature”, the Respondent
concludes that it falls outside the scope of the arbitration clause in Article VII of the

US-Egypt Treaty.

In response, as noted above, the Claimants assert that all of their claims in the present
arbitration are based on their contention that Egypt has breached the US-Egypt Treaty

and international law.

Quoting from the Decision on Annulment of the Vivendi Committee, the Claimants say
“ijt is one thing to exercise contractual jurisdiction ... and another to take into
account the terms of a contract in determining whether there has been a breach of a

distinct standard of international law.”?°?

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimants claim breaches of various standards under the
Treaty in relation to the Gas Supply Dispute, including fair and equitable treatment,
unlawful expropriation and breach of the umbrella clause. As to the first two standards,
the Tribunal accepts that, in order for it to find that there has been a breach of those
standards in relation to the Gas Supply Dispute, it will need to determine as an

incidental question whether the Source GSPA was validly terminated. However, this

288 Reply, para. 318.

28 Aguas del Aconguija v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, CLA-85, para. 105.

67

256.

257.

a

258.

2

259,

S

260.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

does not change the fact that the key issue under the Treaty in respect of a claim for
unlawful expropriation or breach of the fair and equitable treatment is whether there has
been a loss of property right constituted by the contract or whether legitimate

expectations arose under the contract.

As to the umbrella clause, the Tribunal notes that there is no umbrella clause in the US
Treaty and that it is invoked by the Claimants as having been introduced on the basis of
the MFN clause in the Treaty. For purposes of its present decision on jurisdiction, the
Tribunal need not determine today whether it has jurisdiction over such a clause. In due

course, the question may become otiose.

Accordingly, the Respondent’s objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over the
Claimants’ Gas Supply claims based on the alleged breach of the standards of fair and
equitable treatment and unlawful expropriation is dismissed. The Tribunal remains
seized of the Respondent’s objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over the

Claimants’ Gas Supply claims based on the alleged breach of the umbrella clause.

E. RATIONE MATERIAE COMPETENCE OVER THE TAX CLAIMS
In view of the Tribunal’s decision to uphold the Respondent’s objection ratione
personae over Mr. David Fischer, the Tribunal need not summarize the parties’

arguments specific to the Germany Treaty.

1. Respondent’s Position
The Respondent recalls that the Claimants claim compensation in the amount of US$
180.7 million for purported losses resulting from a taxation measure enacted by Egypt
in 2008 (the “Tax Claims”).*!°

The Tax Claims can be summarized as follows:

(i) In 1997, the Egyptian Parliament passed the Investment Guarantees and Incentives
Law No. 8/1997?!!. The Investment Law contains in its Chapter 3 a sub-statute

establishing the so-called free-zones regime (the “Free Zones Regime”). In

OPT] Letter, 11 August 2014, Appendix 4.
21) RLA-257.

261.

262.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

accordance with the Free Zones Regime, companies benefiting from the free-zone
status are treated as “offshore” for taxation and customs purposes, i.e. they are

exempt from almost all taxes and customs duties. ?!?

(ii) EMG was formed on 19 April 2000 as a Free Zones company and, therefore, was

not subject to most taxes or customs.?!3

(iii)Subsequently, in light of the economic conditions prevailing at the time, the
Egyptian Parliament adopted Law No. 114/2008 (“Law No. 114/2008”)?!4 which
amended the Investment Law by excluding companies such as EMG operating in
certain sectors, including petroleum production and transportation, from the Free

Zones privileges.?!>

(iv)In their Memorial, the Claimants allege that, by enacting Law No. 114/2008, the
Respondent breached the obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to their
alleged investment, and the applicable umbrella clauses, and constituted an

unlawful expropriation under the Treaties.?'®

The Respondent argues that the Tax Claims were a matter specifically excluded from
the scope of standards of protection, and the arbitration agreement, in the US Treaty. As
such, avers the Respondent, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the Claimants’ Tax

claims.?!7
In this respect, the Respondent argues the following:
(i) Article XI of the US Treaty provides that:

With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to
accord fairness and equity in the treatment of investments of
nationals or companies of the other Party. Nevertheless, all
matters relating to the taxation of nati or ofa
Party, or their ii in the territories of the other Party

 

22 Counter-Memorial, para, 239.

213 Counter-Memorial, para, 240.

24 C61

215 Counter-Memorial, para. 241.

216 Memorial, paras. 97-99, 215, 242 and 277.

2!” Counter-Memorial, para. 243.

69

263.

264.

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

or_a subdivision thereof shall be luded from this Treaty,
except with regard to measures covered by Article III and the

specific_provisions of Article V.2!* (Emphasis added by the
Respondent)

(ii) The Respondent contends that that Article XI is clear: it carves out of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction “all matters relating to taxation”, with the exception of measures

relating to Article II] (Expropriation) and Article V (Transfers) of that Treaty. ?!°

(iii)Accordingly, the Respondent argues that the claims of Ampal, EGI-Fund Investors,
EGI-Series and BSS-EMG that Egypt’s promulgation of Law No. 114/2008 is
contrary to its commitments under the US Treaty to accord fair and equitable

to i and i an a and discriminatory
measure which is contrary to Egypt’s obligation entered in regard to investments in
its territory, are clearly excluded from the scope of that Treaty and are not subject

to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.2°

(iv) The Respondent however concedes that the only tax claims that could fall within
the scope of the US Treaty would be the Claimants’ claim concerning “measures
covered by Article III”, ie. a measure the effect of which is tantamount to an

unlawful expropriation or nationalisation.27!

2. Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the tax claims under the

US Treaty.

The Claimants note that the Respondent agrees that Article XI of the Treaty does not
carve out measures covered by Article III on expropriation. However, the Claimants
argue that the Tribunal does not only have jurisdiction to determine whether Egypt’s

revocation of EMG’s Free-Zone License violated Article III:

It also has jurisdiction to determine whether that conduct
violated any of the other provisions of the US Treaty. Article XI

2827,

219 Counter-Memorial, para, 250

220 Counter-Memorial, para. 250.

22! Counter-Memorial, para. 251

70

s

se

2

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

of the US Treaty provides that ‘all matters relating to taxation .

. shall be excluded from this Treaty, except with regard to
measures covered by Article Ill.’ To the extent a measure
relating to taxation is covered by Article III — that is,
constitutes an expropriation ~ the measure is not excluded from
the Treaty. It is included within the scope of the Treaty, and all
of the substantive protections in the treaty are applicable to
it.

3. Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal does not need to consider the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction in
respect of the Claimants’ tax claims under the Germany-Egypt BIT as the Tribunal has

found earlier that it lacked jurisdiction over Claimant David Fischer.

Article XI of the US-Egypt BIT is crystal clear. It says what it says that “all matters
relating to the taxation of nationals or companies of a Party, or their investment in the
territories of the other Party or a submission thereof shall be excluded from this treaty,

except with regard to measures covered by Article II ....” (Tribunal’s emphasis).

The Respondent says that this Article is a specific carve-out but recognizes that taxation
measures tantamount to an unlawful expropriation are clawed back and are not
excluded from the Treaty. The Tribunal agrees and therefore finds that it has
jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claim that the Respondent’s taxation measure was
tantamount to an expropriation of the Claimants’ investment insofar as deprivation of

property or rights might have occurred.

Whether or not the scope to the exception to the carve out for measures relating to
expropriation encompasses other obligations in the Treaty in virtue of the so-called
“Gateway Theory” invoked by the Claimants is not an issue which the Tribunal needs

to determine today.

The Tribunal need not determine either today whether, when Egypt enacted Law 114 in
200873 revoking EMG’s free-zone status, it did so in the exercise of its regulatory

powers. This is a matter which may arise during the liability phase of this arbitration

22 Reply, para, 243. See Enron v. Argentina, RLA-142, paras. 65-66, where the tribunal interpreted a provision
similar to Article XI of the US Treaty.

23 C61,

71

270.

271.

272.

273.

274.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

having regard, in particular, to Decree No. 1020 of 2000 which granted EMG a tax

exemption until 2025.

Accordingly, the Tribunal dismisses this objection by the Respondent to the jurisdiction

of the Tribunal.

BR ALLEGED ILLEGALITY OF THE GSPA.

In view of the Tribunal’s decision to uphold the Respondent’s objection ratione
personae over Mr. David Fischer, the Tribunal need not summarize the parties”

arguments specific to the Germany Treaty.

1. Respondent’s Position

The Claimants describe their alleged “investment” as “the Peace Pipeline project,
including the physical pipeline and the business concerned with buying Egyptian
natural gas, transporting it through the pipeline to Israel, and on-selling it to Israeli

customers.”274

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal cannot assume jurisdiction over the
Claimants’ purported investment, as it was borne out of and procured in conditions of
illegality and corruption, in contravention of Egyptian laws and regulations as well as

basic principles of international public policy.

The Respondent argues that the requirement of legality is a condition for the
jurisdiction of any tribunal constituted on the basis of an investment treaty. The
Respondent avers that this was accepted by the Claimants.?° In support of its

argument, the Respondent refers the Tribunal to:

(i) ICSID decisions which confirm the general requirement of international law that

investments be procured legally and in good faith; 22° and

24 Memorial, para. 179.
25 See Tr. Day 1, 146:23-147:2. Respondents’ Post-Hearing Brief, para, 38,

26 Counter-Memorial, paras. 74-79. See Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (“Inceysa
Vallisoletana y. El Salvador”), \CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006, RLA-6, paras. 247-248;
Phoenix Action Ltd v. Czech Republic (“Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic”), \CSID Case No. ARB/06/5,
Award, 15 April 2009, RLA-8, para. 100; Hamester v. Ghana, RLA-9, paras. 123-124; Alasdair Ross

275.

276.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

(ii) the expert legal opinion of Professor Hervé Ascencio concerning the consequences
of the Claimants’ illegal acts on the protection of their alleged investment under the
applicable Treaties. Professor Ascencio remarks that the US Treaty contains a
requirement that an investment be made in accordance with the host State’s laws
and regulations.”” This requirement is found implicitly at Article II(2).?** In any
event, Professor Ascencio underlines that the absence of any express legality
requirement in a treaty does not bar the prohibition, under general international

law, against protecting investments obtained illegally.2”°

The Respondent alleges that the Claimants’ purported investment is illegal since it was
procured through connivance between the principal founders of EMG, Hussein Salem

and Yosef Maiman, and certain Egyptian Government officials.

The Respondent recalls that in October 1999, Mr. Sameh Fahmy left his position as
Vice-Chairman of the company MIDOR founded by Messrs. Salem and Maiman, to
become Egypt’s Minister of Petroleum. The Respondent argues that Messrs. Salem and
Maiman used their connection with Mr. Fahmy to have their newly founded company
EMG directly selected in April 2000 to purchase gas from EGPC for resale to
customers in Israel without any competitive tender process being organised. In this
regard, Mr. Salem’s long-standing relationship with Mr. Mubarak, then Egypt’s
President, could only have been of assistance. In other proceedings, Mr. Mohamed
Tawila, who signed the GSPA as Chairman of EGAS, testified that the “friendship”
between Mr. Fahmy and Mr. Salem enabled the selection of EMG, and that “as soon as

Engineer Sameh Fahmy joined [the Ministry of Petroleum], he considered exports and,

 

Anderson et al v. Republic of Costa Rica, \CSID Case No. Arb.(AFY/07/3, Award, 19 May 2010, RLA-171,
para. 58.

27 Counter-Memorial, para. 80.

®8 Article II(2) contains a general condition for legality of investments made prior to the Treaty’s entry into
force: “This Treaty shall also apply to investments by nationals or companies of either Party, made prior to the
entering into force of this Treaty and accepted in accordance with the respective prevailing legislation of
either party.” Professor Ascencio remarks at para. 25 of his opinion that “such a provision could be interpreted
a fortiori: since past investments must comply with the legality requirement, so must subsequent investments.”

29 Counter-Memorial, para. 88. Expert Legal Opinion of Hervé Ascensio, 26 September 2013, para, 29

73

277.

278.

279.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

less than a year thereafter, Hussein Salem was informed that it is him who will export

[gas]”?.

According to the Respondent, at the hearing, the Claimants sought to deny Mr.
Fahmy’s role in the direct selection of EMG for the GSPA in April 2000 arguing that
the GSPA was a “sui generis project” approved “at the highest levels” of the Egyptian
Government.*! The Respondent argues that this argument merely reinforces the
improper relationships between EMG and key players in the former Egyptian

Government.?%?

In addition, the Respondent submits that EMG’s forgery of the Minutes of the Meeting
of EMG dated 2 November 20097 clearly shows that the GSPA was procured and

concluded through corruption.

The Respondent highlights the major differences between the two versions of the

minutes as shown in track changes below:

Mr. Abdel Hamid Hamdy thanked the Board and stated that
without the good relation between-the-shareholders and the full
Support © -ahvays-supporting Us

-the-road-in-order with the shareholders which led
that our negotiation with the Government is fruitful and that he
was they were always brainstorming ideas to us which
concluded all the amendment we achieved and as well Mr.
Abdel Hamid Hamdy thanked Merhav Group for their support
during such period and thanked Ms. Ellen Havdala for all her
support as well.

 

 

 

 

 

Mr-—Hamdy-thanked-the- Board for-their-initiath ling-th
b ion—b hieh-is he b
PB
Mr—Hussein—Sal EM feom—hi I
i P
hieh- I d_(My—H d
ss very PP iad iy press
hat-the-b hey-reeeive-from-—Mr--Salem-i: be h
s they. 2 sway
id—b d- ine—sweh—to—elimii any

 

misunderstanding-in-the-future).?**

230 Minutes of the questioning of Mohamed Ibrahim Youssef Tawila (R-852). Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief,
para. 39.
25! See Tr. Day 1, 150:2-10, 142:8-16.

232 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 39.

23 See R-965 (the original minutes) and R-966 (the alleged forged minutes).

24 Respondent’s submission of 2 November 2015, para. 12

74

280.

281.

282.

283.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1]
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

According to the Respondent, this forgery was made to conceal the fact that (i) Hussein
Salem was directly involved in the operation and management of EMG until at Jeast
2009 and played a key role “supporting [EMG] and paving the road” for EMG to
facilitate its negotiation of the First Amendment; and that (ii) Hussein Salem paid “a
generous bonus” to EMG’s personnel, Messrs Hamdy and Sakka, “from his personal

account”, following the conclusion of the First Amendment.?>

The Respondent contends that “EMG’s alteration of the Minutes to remove all
references to Hussein Salem’s continuing close involvement in EMG and to the
significant bonuses he paid to Mr. Hamdy and Mr. Al Sakka demonstrates EMG’s

efforts to conceal the web of corruption that surrounds the GSPA.”2°6

The Respondent avers that the selection of EMG for the purchase of Egyptian gas from
EGPC and its exportation, as well as the subsequent conclusion of the GSPA without

the organisation of any public tender process was in violation of:
(i) Article 4 of EGPC’s Commercial Activity Regulation; 9” and
(ii) Article 115 of the Egyptian Criminal Code.?8

The Respondent submits that, as explained by Professor Ahmed Belal in his expert
legal opinion, Mr. Fahmy’s involvement in his capacity as Minister of Petroleum in the
selection of EMG for the conclusion of the GSPA constituted a crime of “profiteering”
under Article 115 of the Egyptian Criminal Code. He opines that Mr. Fahmy obtained
for EMG an undue benefit by selecting it for the conclusion of the GSPA (i) despite
EMG’s complete lack of expertise in the transportation of gas, (ii) at a price that was

highly imbalanced compared to EMG’s profit from the sale of gas to IEC, its main

235 Respondent’s submission of 2 November 2015, para. 26.

256 Respondent’s submission of 2 November 2015, para. 27.

237 See R-II. Article provides that : “Exportation of crude oil, petroleum products, petrochemicals and natural
and liquefied gas cannot be carried out by direct agreement except in case of necessity, at appropriate prices
and based on a recommendation by the Deciding Committee and the approval of the Minister of Petroleum and
Mineral Resources.” The Respondent argues that those cumulative conditions were not met in the present case.

238 See RLA-98. Article 115 provides that : “Temporary hard labour shall be the punishment inflicted on each
public official who obtains or tries to obtain for himself, or for a third party, without due right, a profit or
benefit from an act of office.”

75

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Israeli On-Sale Customer°, and (iii) without organising a tender process, in order to

preclude any more lucrative bids from more experienced competitors.”

284. The Respondent also recalls that, at the time of the conclusion of the GSPA, Mr.
Ibrahim Tawila*“! was Chairman of EGAS. Mr. Tawila signed the GSPA on 13 June
2005 barely a month before departing EGAS to join EMG”?, where, inter alia, he
would be paid a salary several times higher than at EGAS** and would receive a large

bonus.?44

285. The Respondent contends that Mr. Hamdy’s statement at the hearing that EMG offered
to engage Mr. Tawila in July 2005, after he signed the GSPA on behalf of EGAS*®,
does not withstand scrutiny: Mr. Hamdy admitted that he was not involved in EMG’s

decision to engage Mr. Tawila”“° and he did not know when or through whom EMG
approached Mr. Tawila.?4”

286. In respect of Mr. Tawila’s salary, the Respondent contends that the Claimants failed
without explanation to produce any evidence of the amounts EMG paid to Mr. Tawila
between 2005 and 2008, in violation of the Tribunal’s order that they be produced. At
the hearing, Mr. Hamdy was unable to confirm how much or by whom Mr. Tawila was

paid between 2005 and 2008”** but speculated that he might have been paid by one of

29 The Respondent submits that under the Source GSPA, EGPC and EGAS, whose relevant costs included
the exploration, production, development, processing and transport of natural gas to the Delivery Point close
to the Egyptian-Israeli border in Al-Arish, were to receive a price ranging between US$ 0.75 and 1.50 per
MMBTU (See Annex 5 to the GSPA (non-consolidated version), C-99). EMG, by comparison, was to
receive US$ 1.25 per MMBTU merely for transporting the gas from Al-Arish to its Israeli customers, that is,
simply for acting as an intermediary (see JEC On-Sale Agreement (Exhibit 23 to FTI Expert Report), Annex
4, paragraph 1).

2 Counter-Memorial, paras. 97-98. Expert Legal Opinion of Professor Ahmed Awad Belal (“Belal Expert
Legal Opinion”), 26 September 2013, Part 1.

241 According to the Claimants, Mr. Tawila is now imprisoned in Egypt based on politically-motivated charges
related to the EMG project. See footnote 35 of the Claimants’ Memorial in fine.

2 See C-10 and R-403.

243 Counter-Memorial, para. 99. Mr. Tawila received at EGM a monthly salary amounting to US$ 20,830, an
amount that is undoubtedly much higher than that which an EGAS official would receive. See R-896.

24 Rejoinder, para. 33. See R-403.
245 See Tr. Day 5, 4:11-5:8.
246 See Tr. Day 5, 32:6-23
2 See Tr. Day 5, 34:14-20. See Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 40.
248 See Tr. Day 5, 39:20-40:3; 52:2-5
16

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

EMG?’s shareholders to an account outside of Egypt and in foreign currency.249 The
Respondent argues that EMG’s financial statement however make no mention of any
payments to Mr. Tawila by EMG or its shareholders, as would be expected if the

payments were legitimate.

287. The Respondent also argues that the Claimants’ reliance on EMG’s 7 August 2005
Extraordinary General Assembly Minutes?*? as well as the 1 August 2005 letter from
Mediterranean Gas Pipeline Company (“MGPC”) to EMG”*! to establish that MGPC, a
shareholder of EMG, paid the salaries of a number of EMG employees, including
Chairman Tawila, and reclaimed these amounts from EMG is unavailing. The
Respondent contends that the Minutes refer to “pre-operation expenses” and do not
mention salaries or other payments to personnel. As to the letter, it generally refers to
“salaries & compensations” totalling US$ 1.8 million “which has been paid and will be
paid to various employees”, and does not evidence any salary paid to Mr. Tawila.?5?

288. The Respondent therefore requests that the Tribunal draw adverse inferences that Mr.

Tawila joined EMG for a substantial benefit that he did not receive at EGAS.?°

289. The Respondent argues that, as confirmed by Professor Belal?*4, this can only be
explained as a reward to Mr. Tawila for having signed the GSPA with an inexperienced
company such as EMG, at a highly imbalanced price and without any tender process
having been organised. Mr. Tawila’s actions and their reward thus fall under the
purview of the crime of bribery as defined by Article 103 of the Egyptian Criminal

Code. 255

290. In conclusion, the Respondent submits that:

24° See Tr. Day 5, 49:18-25.

280 C653

251 C654.

252 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 41.
252 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 41.
254 Belal Expert Legal Opinion, Part 2.

255 Counter-Memorial, para, 100. Article 103 provides as follows: “Any public official who asks for himself or

for a third party, or accepts or takes a promise or a donation in order to perform any of his acts of office shall
be considered a bribe-taker and shall be punished by life imprisonment and a fine of not less than one thousand
pounds and not exceeding the donation or the promise he was given.”

77

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

(i) Given that the above-mentioned violations of Egyptian law were committed in
relation to the conclusion of the GSPA, they render the Claimants’ alleged

investment illegal and outside of the Treaties’ scope of protection.?°°

(ii) This illegality affects all Claimants: “if the alleged investment was not lawful at the
outset and thus was not protected under the Treaties when it was made, it cannot
benefit from this protection simply because it was acquired by other entities later

in time”.?°7

(iii) The Tribunal therefore has no jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims.*°*

291.

In response to the Claimants’ argument that allegations of corruption or bribery require
clear and convincing evidence and that the Respondent has therefore not met its burden
of proof, the Respondent answers that there exists no uniform standard of proof
regarding allegations of corruption in international arbitration.” Rather, tribunals have
tailored the standard of proof to the particular circumstances of each case” and have
accepted circumstantial evidence as a means of proving allegations of corruption and
bribery."

292. In response to the Claimants’ reliance on Egyptian court proceedings, the Respondent
argues that this reliance in unavailing. The Tribunal has the inherent power to
determine for itself whether the Claimants’ alleged investment meets the requirements

of legality for the purposes of the US Treaty, regardless of the findings of any Egyptian

256 Counter-Memorial, para. 101
257 Counter-Memorial, para. 102.
258 Counter-Memorial, para. 103.

2 See e.g. Metal-Tech Ltd, v. Republic of Uzbekistan (“Metal-Tech v. Uzbekistan”), ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/3, Award, 4 October 2013, RLA-304, paras. 238-239.

260 In Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (“Fraport v.
Phillipines”), for instance, the tribunal rejected the investor’s arguments that, with respect to the respondent's
allegation of illegality, “the ‘preponderance of evidence’ test which applies in civil law must yield in the instant
case to ‘beyond reasonable doubt”. Fraport v. Phillipines, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25, Award, 16 August
2007, CLA-155, para. 399. Similarly, the Tribunal in Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey
(“Libananco Holdings v. Turkey”) rejected the “contention that there should be a heightened standard of proof
for allegations of ‘fraud or other serious wrongdoing”, finding that the serious nature of these allegations “does
not necessarily entail a higher standard of proof”. Arbitral tribunals have also accepted circumstantial evidence
as a means of providing allegations of corruption and bribery. Libananco Holdings v. Turkey, \CSID Case No.
ARB/06/8, Award, 2 September 2011, RLA-34, para. 125.

5! Rejoinder, para. 46
78

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/I]
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

court.”® This is confirmed by arbitral case law submits the Respondent.” In any event,
the report prepared by the Committee of Five appointed by the Cairo Court in separate
criminal proceedings against Mr. Mubarak is irrelevant to the Respondent’s case

concerning the illegality of the Claimants’ alleged investment.”

293. In response to the Claimants’ argument that the Respondent is precluded from invoking

the illegality of the Claimants’ alleged investment, the Respondent argues that:

the Claimants’ allegations overlook the fact that acts of
corruption normally involve acts of State officials. Therefore,
whether members of the former Egyptian government, among
others, may have facilitated the procurement of the Claimants’
alleged investment cannot preclude the Respondent from
invoking Messrs Salem and Maiman’s illicit acts. The relevant
issues are: who is responsible for soliciting the corrupt acts,
and who benefits from them. It was Messrs Salem and Maiman
in both cases. If States were estopped from raising corruption
defences in such circumstances, acts of corruption would never
be sanctioned.*&

2. Claimants’ Position

294. The Claimants submit that the Respondent’s allegations of criminal wrongdoing by Mr.
Fahmy and Mr. Tawila are not supported by any evidence. Such allegations say the
Claimants require clear and convincing evidence. To the contrary, the documentary

record demonstrates that they are false.

295. In respect of Mr. Fahmy, the Claimants explain that, in October 2013, a Committee of
Five was formed at the order of the Cairo Criminal Court in connection with the trial of

Hosni Mubarak to scrutinize the negotiation and conclusion of the Source GSPA,

262 Rejoinder, para. 52.

263 Inceysa Vallisoletana v. El Salvador, RLA-6, paras, 209-210. See also Fraport v. Phillipines, CLA-155,
paras, 390-391,

24 Rejoinder, para, 53.
285 Rejoinder, para, 64.

266 Reply, para. 250. EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award, 8 October 2009,
para, 221: “[t]he seriousness of the accusation of corruption ... demands clear and convincing evidence”. See
also African Holding Company of America, Inc. and Société Africaine de Construction au Congo S.A.R.L. v.
Democratic Republic of the Congo (“African Holding Company v. DRC”), ICSID Case No. ARB/0S/21,
Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 29 July 2008, CLA-152, para. 55: “[t]he governments of many
respondents involved in international arbitration resort to allegations of corruption to prevent the Tribunal
holding that it has jurisdiction or to influence its decision on the merits, which constitutes an additional reason
why the standard of proof must, in this regard, be particularly high”.

79

296.

297.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

including the circumstances surrounding the selection of EMG.67 The Committee
confirmed that Mr. Fahmy was not responsible for the selection of EMG — a central
element of Egypt’s accusation of profiteering. Rather, the decision to select EMG to
transport Egyptian gas to Israel was made at the highest levels of the Egyptian

government, and communicated to Mr. Fahmy as a fait accompli to be implemented.

In respect of Mr. Tawila, the Claimants recall that Mr. Hamdy and Mr. Al Sakka both
testified that they recommended to EMG’s Board that it appoint Mr. Tawila after the
Source GSPA had been signed.°* Therefore, the Claimants aver that Mr. Tawila could
not have known that he would later be offered a position as Chairman of EMG when he
signed the Source GSPA in June 2005.2 In addition, the Claimants explain that: (i)
according to a decree of 29 May 2005, Mr. Tawila signed the Source GSPA because he
was directed to do so by the Ministry of Petroleum in his capacity as EGAS Chairman

and that he had no discretion in the matter.?7°

In respect of the Respondent’s contention that its allegations of forgery of the Minutes
of the Meeting of EMG dated 2 November 200977! are directly relevant to the
Respondent’s claim that the GSPA was procured and concluded through corruption, the

Claimants argue the following:

This is obviously wrong. The Source GSPA was concluded on
13 June 2005, more than four years before EMG’s Board
Meeting of 2 November 2009 took place and neither R-965 nor
R-966 records anything about the procurement or conclusion of
the Source GSPA. Even if Egypt’s version of events were to be
accepted, the alleged facilitation of the 2009 First Amendment
and the alleged payment of bonuses to EMG’s management in
relation to the conclusion of those negotiations cannot be
“directly relevant” to the negotiation and conclusion of the
underlying agreement four years earlier, let alone the
lawfulness of the Claimants’ investments in the EMG project,
all of which had been made by the time of the First Amendment
negotiations.

267 Reply, para. 254. See C-326

268 See Second Witness Statement of Abdel Hamid Ahmed Hamdy, 9 April 2014, paras. 58-59 and Second
Witness Statement of Maamoun Al-Sakka, 9 April 2014, para. 118.

26 Reply, para, 257.
27 Reply, para. 258. C-29.
2” See R-965 (the original minutes) and R-966 (the alleged forged minutes).

80

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/II
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Egypt's attempt to link its allegations of forgery to a ‘web of
corruption’ surrounding the Source GSPA is inconsistent with
decisions by its own courts.?”?

298. Finally, in response to the Respondent’s allegation that the Claimants’ investment was
illegal because EMG was selected without a public tender, allegedly in contravention of
EGPC’s internal “Commercial Activity Regulation”, the Claimants argue that this
position is “incredible” given that (i) EGPC/EGAS were specifically authorized and
instructed by the Egyptian Council of Ministers and the Ministry of Petroleum to enter
into the Source GSPA,?” (ii) these authorizations were incorporated into the contract,
(iii) Egypt’s Supreme Administrative Court sanctioned these decisions as “an act of
sovereignty and a matter of Egyptian national security”,?”* and (iv) this conclusion was

confirmed by the Committee of Five. In addition, the Claimants aver that this argument

was never put forward until the present dispute was well underway.?75

299. In any event, the Claimants argue that (i) the Respondent cannot rely on the conduct of
its own officials to deprive the Claimants of protection under the Treaties?”®, and (ii)

Egypt represented that the Claimants” investment was valid. 277

2? Claimants’ submission of 30 November 2015, paras. 31 and 32. See North Cairo Criminal Court, 4th Circuit,
in Public Prosecution Case No. 1061 of 2011, New Cairo I Criminal Court (and No. 342 of 2011, East Cairo
Plenary Prosecution) v. Amin Sameh Samir Amin Fahmy & Ors, 21 February 2015, C-662, p. 21. See also North
Cairo Criminal Court, 2nd Circuit, in Public Prosecution Case No. 3642 of 2011, Kasr El-Nil Felonies,
recorded under No. 157 of 2011, Cairo Downtown, Grand Instance v. Mohamed Hosni El-Sayed Mubarak &
Ors, 29 November 2014, C-663.

23 Source GSPA, R-225(A), Preamble.
24 See C-386.
275 Reply, paras. 259 and 260.

26 Reply, paras. 262-265. The Claimants submit that Egypt has made no accusation of any kind against any of
the Claimants. In view of Joannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/0S/18, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 6 July 2007, CLA-4, para, 179, Egypt's contentions about the misconduct of its own officials
would have no effect on the Claimants’ case say the Claimants.

277 Reply, paras. 266-273. The Claimants submit that the Egyptian authorities issued all the permits necessary
for the construction of the Claimants’ pipeline. Even when EGPC/EGAS sought to terminate the Source GSPA
in April 2012, they did not suggest any illegality. As a result of this conduct, the Claimants aver that Egypt is
now estopped from asserting that the Claimants’ investment was illegal since representations that a contract is
valid by entities empowered to exercise governmental authority create a legitimate expectation on the part of the
investor that those agreements are valid. See Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab
Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No. ARB/84/3, Award on the Merits, 20 May 1992, CLA-189, para. 81, where
the tribunal rejected Egypt’s argument that the acts of Egyptian officials upon which the investor had relied
were in fact “legally non-existent or absolutely null and void” under Egyptian law.

81

300.

301.

302.

303.

304.

305.

306.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016
3. Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal notes that, if it accepts the Respondent’s argument in respect of the

alleged illegality of the GSPA, the Claimants’ entire case would fall.

It is a well-established principle of international law that a tribunal constituted on the
basis of an investment treaty has no jurisdiction over a claimant’s investment which

was made illegally in violation of the laws and regulations of the Contracting State.

As set out above, in the instant case, the Respondent avers, inter alia, that Messrs
Fahmy and Tawila who were instrumental in the selection of EMG for the GSPA in
April 2000, were guilty, respectively, of “profiteering” and “bribery” in contravention
of provisions of the Egyptian Criminal Code and since Messrs Salem and Maiman
benefited from these “corrupt acts”, the Claimants’ investment was thus procured

illegally.

The Tribunal notes the Respondent’s submission that, where there are allegations of
corruption, fraud or other such serious wrongdoing in arbitration proceedings, arbitral
tribunals should not apply a higher standard of proof than the preponderance of

evidence standard, and that circumstantial evidence may be taken into consideration.

The Tribunal also notes the Claimants’ submission that the Tribunal should apply a
higher standard of proof to those types of allegations, namely clear and convincing

evidence.

In the view of the Tribunal, this is a complex question which has seen different
investment tribunals apply different standards of evidence in such cases.?”* However,
whatever standard is applied, in all cases, the tribunals have concluded that they needed
to be satisfied that, after having taken into account all of the evidence presented, the

burden of proof had been met.

In the present case, whether the Tribunal applies a high standard of clear and

convincing evidence or even a less demanding one or a combination thereof, in the

278 See inter alia, EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania, \CSID Case No, ARB/05/13, Award, 8 October 2009,
RLA-170, para, 221; African Holding Company v. DRC, CLA-152, pata, 55; and Fraport v. Phillipines, CLA-
155, para. 399; Libananco Holdings v. Turkey, RLA-34, para. 125; Metal-Tech v. Uzbekistan, RLA-304, paras.
238-239,

82

307.

S

308.

309.

310.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

circumstances, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the Claimants’ investment was
procured illegally. The Respondent’s allegations are all based on innuendos. In sum, the

Respondent has failed to discharge its burden of proof.

In dismissing this facet of Respondent’s objection to its jurisdiction, the Tribunal has
taken into consideration the evidence in the record that the decision in Egypt to select
EMG to sell and transport gas to Israel was made at the highest level of the Egyptian
government and that, pursuant to that decision: (i) EGPC/EGAS were specifically
authorized and instructed by the Egyptian Council of Ministers and the Ministry of

Petroleum to enter into the Source GSPA, (ii) these authorizations were incorporated

 

into the contract, (iii) Egypt’s Si Admini ive Court ioned these d

s “an act of sovereignty and a matter of Egyptian national security”, and (iv) this
conclusion was confirmed by the Committee of Five. Moreover, the Cairo Criminal
Court has also examined the contractual and factual matrix of the alleged illegality of
the GSPA in the light of the Egyptian Criminal Code and concluded that there was no

evidence of corruption.?”?

In its submission of 2 November 2015 on what the Respondent avers is “the impact on
the Claimants’ claims in this Arbitration” of “the forgery of the Minutes of EMG’s 2
November 2009 Board Meeting”, the Respondent alleges that this evidence “is directly
relevant to [Egypt’s] claim that the GSPA was procured and concluded through

corruption.?®°

The Claimants deny this submission of the Respondent. They say “that obviously
cannot be the case, when the Source GSPA was concluded more than four years before
the EMG Board Meeting of 2 November 2009 took place and neither R-965 nor R-966

makes any reference to the procurement or conclusion of the Source GSPA”.?8!

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants. The two versions of the minutes of the EMG 2
November 2009 Board meeting have no impact whatsoever on the procurement and

execution of the Source GSPA.

29 C-662 and C-663.
28° Respondent's Post-Hearing Submissions on Alleged Forgery of 2 November 2015 at paras. 25 and 57(v).

8! Claimants’ submission of 30 November 2015 at para. 11.

83

311.

312.

313.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Accordingly, the Respondent’s objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal resting on

this ground is denied.

G. ALLEGED ABUSE OF THE ARBITRAL PROCESS

1. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that it is widely acknowledged that (i) investment treaty
tribunals have the inherent power to find that claims are inadmissible for abuses of
process”®?, and (ii) that parties to a proceeding are bound by the principle of good
faith.?®° The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ claims have been designed and

submitted in bad faith and in complete abuse of the arbitral process. 284

a) Whether _the Claimants_improperly seek to multiply their
chances of recovery

The Respondent submits that EMG’s shareholders are using multiple arbitrations to

advance duplicative claims in respect of the same interest:

(i) Mr. Maiman, the CEO of Ampal, the lead Claimant in these proceedings, confirmed
his objective of maximising his chances of recovery, publicly announcing his

intention to seek damages up to US$ 8 billion says the Respondent.?8>

(ii) The Respondent contends that Mr. Maiman, a non-US national, restructured his
interest in EMG to seek the protection of the US Treaty. The Respondent argues
that following the signature of the GSPA on 13 June 2005, Mr. Maiman embarked
on a strategic restructuring of his interest in EMG, which at the time was held
entirely through his wholly-owned Israeli company, Merhav (mnf) Ltd. Based on
the available evidence produced by the Claimants, this involved a series of
coordinated transactions between Mr. Maiman’s wholly-owned Merhav (mnf) Ltd.

and two other Israeli companies under his control: Merhav-Ampal Energy Ltd. (a

?8 See Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on

Preliminary Issues, 23 June 2008, RLA-161.

83 Cementownia "Nowa Huta" S.A. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/06/2, Award, 11
September 2009, RLA-169,

284 Counter-Memorial, paras. 254-256.

285 Counter-Memorial, para. 272. See R-4.

84

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

wholly owned subsidiary of Ampal, later called “Merhay-Ampal Group Ltd.”) and
Merhav Ampal Energy Holdings LP (a company formed in June 2007 as part of the
reorganisation of Mr. Maiman’s interest in EMG). According to the Respondent, as
a result of these transactions, Ampal would hold the majority of its interest in EMG
(amounting to a 12.5% indirect interest) through its Israeli subsidiaries Merhav-
Ampal Energy Ltd. and Merhav-Ampal Energy Holdings. With this restructuring,
Mr. Maiman sought the protection of his interest under the US Treaty, in view of
Ampal’s place of incorporation in New York, and notwithstanding that there was

no US substantial interest involved says the Respondent.”*°

(iii)The Respondent also contends that Mr. Maiman’s engaged in insider transactions

leading to Ampal’s bankruptcy. The Respondent argues that the documentary
record shows that Ampal was employed as a vehicle for Mr. Maiman’s personal
profit. Firstly, Mr. Maiman realised a personal gain of over US$25 million in
connection with the restructuring of his interest in EMG.?8’ Secondly, Ampal paid
to Mr. Maiman’s Merhav (mnf) Ltd. a total of 31.8% of its outstanding shares
without receiving any cash consideration in return.” Thirdly, through his position
as President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Ampal, Mr.
Maiman paid himself a salary of over US$ 3 million in 2010 and nearly US$2
million in 2011.28? Fourthly, Ampal’s debt is significant: when it filed for voluntary
bankruptcy before the Unites States Bankruptcy Court on the Southern District of
New York in August 2012, a few months after it started this arbitration, its
outstanding debt to its bondholders amounted to approximately $230 million.” As
Ampal’s CFO described in those proceedings, the company’s claims against the
Respondent “represent the only mechanism by which Ampal can recover

substantial funds that may be used to satisfy Ampal’s creditors”.?°! The bankruptcy

286 Counter-Memorial, paras. 257-260.

287 Counter-Memorial, para. 262. See also R-15, R-6 and R-9.
288 Counter-Memorial, para. 262. See C-139 - C-142; C-130, C-131 and C-135.
289 Counter-Memorial, para. 263. See C-233 and R-239.

29 Counter-Memorial, para. 265. Sec R-15.

2) R-382.

85

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

proceeding was converted into a liquidation proceeding under Chapter 7 of the

United States Bankruptcy Code says the Respondent.”

(iv) The Respondent argues that Ampal advances its claim in this arbitration in respect
of the exact same 12.5% indirect interest in EMG for which Ampal’s 100%
subsidiary, Merhav-Ampal Group Ltd and its 50% subsidiary, Merhav Ampal
Energy Holdings, claim in the parallel Maiman arbitration.”? According to the
Respondent, the Claimants’ quantum experts, FTI, confirmed at the hearing that
any compensation awarded to Ampal in this arbitration will be duplicative if any
compensation awarded to Merhav-Ampal Group Ltd in the Maiman arbitration."
The Respondent contends that the same is true of Ampal’s 50% interest in Merhav
Ampal Energy Holdings and that the Claimants’ strategy constitutes an abuse of

process.

(v) The Respondent avers that there is no basis under the relevant treaties or
international law to consider that Egypt has consented to be subject to multiple,
duplicative derivative claims brought by different levels of holding companies in
respect of the same alleged loss to the same underlying shareholding.2% Accepting
the duplicative use of derivative claims would require the most extreme caution as
it gives the Claimants duplicative chances to prevail and creates risks of treaty
shopping, double recovery and inconsistent outcomes says the Respondent.?%
Egypt cannot be considered to have consented to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over

the claim brought by Ampal in this arbitration concludes the Respondent.

282 Counter-Memorial, para. 269.
23 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 6.

294 Tr, Day 8, 59:19-24 (Counsel for the Respondent and Mr. Nicholson of FTI Consulting) (“Q. So it would be
fair to say that if the interests were compensated in the Maiman arbitration, then that would essentially be the
same compensation that Ampal is claimant in this arbitration; that’s correct isn't it? “A, (Mr. Nicholson) Yes.
It’s not a question we 've addressed explicitly, but yes, that seems correct, yes.”)

295 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 8. Tr. Day 9, 249:19-250-2, According to the Respondent, the terms
of the Egypt-US BIT provide that the contracting Parties did not consent to the same claim being brought before
multiple fora. See Egypt-US BIT (C-7), Art. VII(3)(a): “(a) In the event that the legal investment dispute is not
resolved under procedures specified above, the national or company concerned may choose to submit the
dispute to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes ("Centre") for settlement by
conciliation or binding arbitration, if, within six (6) months of the date upon which it arose: (i) the dispute has
not been settled through consultation and negotiation; or (ii) the dispute has not, for any good faith reason,
been submitted for resolution in accordance with any applicable dispute-settlement procedures previously
agreed to by the Parties to dispute: or (iii) the national or company, has not brought before the courts of justice
or administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction of the Party that is a Party to the dispute.”

 

26 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 9
86

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

(vi) The Respondent contends that Ampal’s decision to cause its subsidiaries Merhav-
Ampal Group Ltd and Merhav Ampal Energy Holdings to make claims under the
Egypt-Poland BIT in the Maiman arbitration — thus asserting that those interests
have Polish nationality for the purpose of the claim — constitutes a waiver of
Ampal’s right to assert that the same 12.5% interest in EMG simultaneously has
U.S. nationality and is protected, including being entitled to invoke arbitral

jurisdiction, under the Egypt-US BIT.?°”

(vii) The Respondent avers that in both this arbitration and in the Maiman arbitration,
the Claimants advance claims which directly concern the performance and
termination of the GSPA (“Gas Supply Claims”) as breaches of the Treaties, while
EMG is at the same time already engaged in two commercial arbitrations in which
it asserts the exact same claims. According to the Respondent, the Claimants thus
seek the same relief in relation to the Gas Supply Claims as that which EMG seeks
in the commercial arbitrations.2°° The Respondent argues that these contractual
claims are within the exclusive competence of the CRCICA Tribunal constituted
pursuant to the GSPA’s arbitration clause which has issued an Award upholding
jurisdiction.” In response to the Claimants’ argument that compensation granted
to EMG in the contractual arbitrations might not “ultimately find its way to the
shareholders” because “EMG has significant debts to NBE, the National Bank of
Egypt, and to the other creditors’, the Respondent argues that this contradicts
the premise of the Claimants’ damages claim, i.e. that EMG’s losses are sustained

by its shareholders in proportion to their interest in the company.2”!

(viii) According to the Respondent, EMG and its shareholders seek to multiply their

chances of recovery in respect of the same contractual dispute concerning the

performance and termination of the GSPA. They have created a situation in which

297 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 10. Tr. Day 1, 176:17-20; Tr. Day 9, 252:12-15.

2°8 The Respondent avers that this is further exacerbated by the Claimants’ quantum expert’s calculations which
show that almost 90% of the Claimants’ damages hinge on whether EGAS’s termination of the GSPA was
lawful. See Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para, 11 and Respondent’s Opening, v. I, Slide 222

2° Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para, 12. R-813, paras, 189 and 207, Respondent’s Opening Slides 199-
223.

50 Tr. Day 1, 182:25-183:21
°°1 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 13

314.

315.

316.

302 Respondent’s Pos

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

they need to persuade only 2 out of 12 arbitrators seized of the Gas Supply Claims.
The Respondent submits that the Claimants have improperly sought to
instrumentalise the system of international arbitration to achieve an unprecedented
abuse of process, which the Tribunal should decline to permit as lacking

jurisdiction and/or as inadmissible.*°?

b) Whether indirect minority shareholders can bring claims

The Respondent also submits that the Tribunal should decline to hear the claims
advanced in this arbitration because the Claimants have too remote a connection with
EMG, the company incorporated in Egypt against which the Respondent allegedly took

measures in contravention of the Treaties.°°

The Respondent explains that “tribunals have recognised that, while minority
shareholders in a locally-incorporated company may benefit from the protection of an
investment treaty, there is a need to set limits on such claims when they concern alleged
measures by the host State directed at the rights of a local company.”*** The
Respondent avers that the need to establish a cut-off point reflects the risk that
according unlimited protection to such investors could result in the proliferation of
multiple proceedings against a host State and facilitate treaty/forum shopping and
abuses of process.>°> The Respondent argues that “foreign investors who passively hold
shares through one or more intermediary entities incorporated in third States would
not fall within the class of specific investors with which the State parties foresaw they

would arbitrate investment disputes.”>°

In the present case, the Respondent submits that the claims advanced by the Claimants
are too remote from EMG as to fall within the scope of the Respondent’s consent to

arbitrate, in particular with respect to the following investors:

 

Hearing Brief, paras. 14-15.

363 Counter-Memorial, para. 296.

34 Counter-Memorial, para. 297. See Enron v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 January 2004, RLA-142,
para. 42. See also Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic, RLA-8, para. 122.

395 Counter-Memorial, para. 298.

396 Counter-Memorial, para. 299.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

(i) EGI-Fund — The Respondent argues that this company did not fund the Claimants’
purported investment, nor did it actively contribute to EMG: according to the
Claimants’ Memorial, this company merely acquired its indirect minority 4.55%
interest by purchasing a minority interest in EGI-EMG LP on 15 August 2008.°7
This passive, indirect and very small interest cannot enjoy any protection under the

Egypt-U.S. BIT.

(ii) BSS-EMG Investors — The Respondent argues that BSS-EMG only holds a 0.828%
indirect interest in EMG. In addition, this company did not have any involvement

in the local business of EMG, let alone the Egyptian gas sector.>°°

(iii)In view of the Tribunal’s decision to uphold the Respondent’s objection ratione
personae over Mr. David Fischer, the Tribunal need not summarize the

Respondent’s arguments specific to him in connection with the present submission.
317. The Respondent concludes that:

[it] cannot be taken to have consented to disputes with
investors who are so remotely connected to their alleged
investment in Egypt. Article VII of the Egypt-US BIT allows for
the submission to arbitration of a “legal investment dispute”,
defined in relevant part as “an alleged breach of any right
conferred or created by the Treaty with respect to an
investment. [...] The dispute resolution provision in the
[Treaty] thus confirm[s] that the Respondent consented only to
arbitrate disputes with investors having a meaningful and
active connection to an investment in its territory.°

2. Claimants’ Position

a Whether _the Claimants improperly seek to _multiply_their
chances oj recovery

318. The Claimants submit that even if Egypt could show that it is possible as a matter of

law for claims over which an ICSID tribunal has jurisdiction to be held “inadmissible

307 See Memorial, para. 88 and C-149.
208 Counter-Memorial, para. 300. See Memorial, para. 89.
50 Counter-Memorial, para. 301.

89

319,

320.

321.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

for abuses of process or other serious forms of misconduct”, which it has not, none of

the three specific bases of inadmissibility advanced by Egypt has any merit.

In respect of Ampal’s corporate restructuring, the Claimants argue that it is now well-
established that it is legitimate to restructure a company to gain the protection of an
investment treaty for future disputes.*!° According to the Claimants, the relevant
question therefore is whether Ampal acquired its interest in EMG before Egypt
breached the obligations it owed under the US Treaty. The Claimants aver that Ampal
had obtained its 12.5% interest in EMG by November 2006, before Egypt breached the
US Treaty?!". This is acknowledged by Egypt say the Claimants.>!?

In respect of Egypt’s allegation that Mr. Maiman’s insider transactions have led to
Ampal’s bankruptcy, the Claimants submit that this allegation is baseless since, with
respect to the restructuring, the independent consultant Houlihan Lokey confirmed that
the transactions were fair from a financial point of view.>!? In addition, those

were iated and app d by a Special C i of the Board of
Directors of Ampal, composed of independent directors.*!* When the Board of Ampal
subsequently voted on the transactions, Mr. Maiman recused himself.3!° Finally, profits
realized by Mr. Maiman in connection with these transactions are irrelevant to the

admissibility of the Ampal’s claims in the present arbitration.>"°

In respect of Egypt’s allegation that EMG and its shareholders have made abusive

claims, the Claimants argue that:

(i) It is not unusual or controversial for a company and its shareholders of different

nationalities to have recourse to different fora to vindicate their rights.°!7

3! Reply, para. 279. See Venezuela Holdings B.V. and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case

No. ARB/07/27, Decision on Jurisdiction, 10 June 2010, CLA-5.

31 Reply, para. 280.

>!2 Counter-Memorial, para. 259.
33 C.393 and C-395,

314 €.396 - C-400; C-394,

315: C399 - C-401.

316 Reply, para. 287.

3!7 Reply, para, 289. See Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic (“Lauder v. Czech Republic”), UNCITRAL,
Final Award, 3 September 2001, RLA-133, para. 174,

90

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

(ii) The Claimants have suggested ways in which double compensation could be
avoided?'8, and have made representations to that effect.*!? The Respondent’s
proposition that both treaty tribunals should stay their decisions on compensation is
unacceptable: if each Tribunal stayed its decision on compensation pending a full

award from the other tribunal, neither Tribunal would ever award compensation.>?°

(iii)According to the Claimants, Egypt has not referred to any authority to support
“waiver” as a basis to decline jurisdiction over or support the inadmissibility of

Ampal’s claims.22!

(iv) Dismissal of Ampal’s claims on the basis that its subsidiary is pursuing its own

claims would be unjust in circumstances where only Ampal is entitled to the

protection of the ICSID Convention say the Claimants.

(v) The Claimants contend that there is no basis for the assertion that Ampal’s claims
are beyond the scope of Egypt’s consent to arbitrate in the US Treaty.>?° In addition,

the possibility of overlapping claims was considered and explicitly addressed in the

318 Tr, Day 9, 16:6 ~ 17:8, Dr Juratowitch: “We accept that there is this overlap in this case. The Claimants have
made a representation that they are not seeking double recovery. That is something that enforcement courts and
any agreement as to payment of an award, absent the use of enforcement proceedings, would no doubt take
account of. And in those circumstances, the abuse is taken care of as much as the Claimants are able to, absent
the Respondent’s consent to consolidation. For the purposes of your Tribunal, the question before you is harm
caused to Ampal, the entity before you, by wrongful conduct, In the Claimants’ submission, your jurisdiction,
and jurisdictional responsibility, is to decide how much harm that is, and to issue an award accordingly. If, in the
fullness of time, an amount is paid to subsidiaries of Ampal that would result in a reflective gain to Ampal that
would compensate it for its loss, then Ampal’s representation would be invoked and it would not be entitled to
those funds. But | emphasise that that is a condition that would be fulfilled upon payment. So staying this
arbitration would not be a question of staying until the UNCITRAL tribunal had issued an award, because we
have seen from the very first point on the very first day of the UNCITRAL case that the Respondent has made
clear its intention with respect to the Dutch courts on that case. So it is payment that would be the relevant
feature, rather than an award.”

See also Tr. Day 9, 18:16-19; Day 1, 185:25-187:1. See also Quasar de Valores SICAV S.A. and Ors. v. The
Russian Federation, SCC, Award, 20 July 2012, CLA-160, para. 34.

39 Tr, Day 9, 14:5-7; Memorial, para. 331; Reply, para. 300.

 

520 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 20
%2) Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 21
22 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 23.

23 C-7, Art VII(3)(b): “Each Party hereby consents to the submission of an investment dispute to the Centre for
settlement by conciliation or binding arbitration.”

91

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

Poland Treaty?*4, which does not exclude these claims or those made before the
Maiman tribunal say the Claimants.*?°

(vi) According to the Claimants, a contractual forum selection clause cannot deprive a

tribunal of jurisdiction over treaty claims brought by a non-party to the contract,

even where those treaty claims involve consideration of the underlying contractual

rights.°2°

(vii) There can be no abuse of process where Egypt itself has obstructed consolidation
between the parallel arbitrations aver the Claimants.*?”

(viii) The Claimants submit that if “duplication of chances” were a genuine concern for
Egypt, it would not have: (1) commenced the CRCICA arbitration; (2) rejected any
consolidation of that arbitration with the two ICC arbitrations; (3) rejected
consolidation of the treaty arbitrations before this Tribunal; (4) challenged the
appointment of Professor Reisman to two tribunals; (5) refused to allow Jonathan
Fisher’s claim to be heard with his brother’s;>* or (6) refused to even engage with
the Tribunal*?° on how it might coordinate its deliberations with the UNCITRAL
Tribunal.53° In this respect, the Claimants recall that they outlined during the
evidentiary hearing a course of action that could be taken to minimize the risk of

contradiction, if all parties in both investment arbitrations so consented.**!

b) Whether indirect minority shareholders can bring claims

324 C648, Art 1(4): “If the investment is made by an investor through an entity not covered by paragraph (c)1 of
this Article, in which he holds an equity participation, such investor shall enjoy the benefits of this Agreement to
the extent of such indirect equity participation, provided, however, that such an investor shall not enjoy the
benefits of this Agreement if the investor invokes the dispute settlement mechanism under another foreign
investment protection agreement concluded by the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment is made.”
See also Tr. Day 2, 48:11-49:4,

35 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 24.

26 Reply, para. 292. SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay, \CSID Case No.
ARB/07/29, Decision on Jurisdiction, 12 February 2010, CLA-124, paras. 172-176; Total S.A. v. Argentina,
CLA-125, para, 85.

27 See para. 13 above. See also Reply para, 298, See Lauder v. Czech Republic, RLA-133, para. 178.
%8 C-409, p 2. See also Tr. Day 1, 179:2-24.

329 Tr, Day 9, 251:7-252:5.

39 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para, 27.

21 Tr, Day 9, 20:1-22:13,

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

322. In view of the Tribunal’s decision to uphold the Respondent’s objection ratione
personae over Mr. David Fischer, the Tribunal need not summarize the Claimants’

arguments specific to him in connection with the present submission.

323.

o

The Claimants submit that Egypt’s objection is based on its submission that the claims
are not within the scope of Egypt’s consent to arbitration, it is properly characterized as

an issue of jurisdiction rather than admissibility *9?

324, The Claimants argue that their investments in EMG are protected under the US Treaty.
Under the Treaty, “investment” is defined to mean “every kind of asset owned or
controlled,”333 and “own or control” include “ownership or control that is direct or

indirect, including ownership or control exercised through subsidiaries or affiliates.”>*4

The Claimants recall that BSS-EMG Investors and EGI-Fund Investors hold their

interests in EMG through one and two intermediate companies, respectively. The

325.

os

Claimants aver that interests held through up to six intermediaries have been held not to
be too remote.***In addition, although these entities hold minority interests, the
Claimants argue that the Treaty’s broad definition of “investment” do cover those

interests, as other tribunals have held.*3¢

326. In any event, the Claimants argue that even if there were a percentage limit, it would be
smaller than any of the percentage holdings at issue in this case, which are 4.552% for
EGI-Fund Investors and 0.828% for BSS-EMG Investors. For example, in Quiborax v.

Bolivia, the tribunal held that it had ratione personae jurisdiction over an investor who

brought claims in respect of a 0.005% shareholding. *°7

+82 Reply, para. 303.

335.7, Article I(1)(©)

34-7, Article 1(1)(d).

35 Reply, para. 306. See Société Générale In respect of DR Energy Holdings Limited and Empresa
Distribuidora de Electricidad del Este, S.A. v. The Dominican Republic, LCIA Case No. UN 7927, Award on

Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction, IIC 366 (2008), 19 September 2008, CLA-116, paras 49-51. For the
reasons behind the structure of David Fischer's investment, see DF Second Statement, para. 4.

336 Reply, para. 307. See for example, HOCHTIEF Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 October 2011, CLA-142, para. 115.

37 Reply, para. 309. Quiborax S.A. and Non-Metallic Minerals S.A. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID
Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 September 2012, RLA-80, paras. 192 and 196. The Tribunal
ultimately held that it had no ratione materiae jurisdiction as the investor had made no contribution of money or

93

ICSID Case No, ARB/L2/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
i February 2016

3 Tribunal’s Analysis

327. The Tribunal has set out above what the Respondent argues is a complete abuse by the

Claimants of the arbitral process.

a) Whether the Claimants improperly seek to multiply their

chances of recovery

328. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the four parallel arbitration with,
essentially, the same factual matrix, the same witnesses and many identical elaims may
look abusive. However, subject to one important qualification in paragraphs 330-333
below, having reviewed carefully all of the Respondent’s grounds invoked in support of
its submission that the Claimants are not acting in good faith, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that the four arbitral proceedings collectively or individually amount to an

abuse of process.

329, It is possible, as a jurisdictional matter, for different parties to pursue distinct claims in
different fora seeking redress for loss allegedly suffered by each of them arising out of
the same factual matrix. As a matter of general principle, contract claims are distinct
from treaty claims,?*8 Further, in the absence of an agreement to consolidation, two
treaty tribunals may each consider claims of separate investors, each of which holds
distinct tranches of the same investment. None of the four arbitrations at issue here is,

per se, an abuse. It may not be a desirable situation but it cannot be characterized | as

 

abusive especially when the Respondent has declined “the Claimants? _olfers “to

  

consolidate the proceedings.
=e Ss a

 

330. However, there is one important exception to this finding of the Tribunal. It concerns
the overlap of claims by Mr. Maiman in the present case and the UNCITRAL

arbitration (the two treaty cases) for the recovery of the same sum.

 

assets, bul was merely given a share so that a requirement under Bolivian law for a minimum of three
shareholders was complied with: ibid, paras. 232 and 237.
338 deuas del Aconquija v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, (2002) 6 ICSID Rep 327, 3 July, 2002, RLA-
136/ CLA-85,
°° The Tribunal’s finding in this respect is without prejudice to those measures that it proposes to take set out in
paras, 335-340 in the exercise of its powers of case management in order to mitigate the risk of inconsistent
decisions between it and the other tribunals currently seised of related aspects of the overall dispute at the merits
stage.

94

331.

332.

333.

334.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11

Decision on Jurisdiction

1 February 2016

Indeed, in the present arbitration, the Claimant Ampal, controlled by Mr. Yosef
Maiman, advances its claims in respect of the same 12.5% indirect interest in EMG for
which Ampal’s 100% subsidiary, Merhav-Ampal Group Ltd (MAGL) (and its 50%
subsidiary, Merhav-Ampal Energy Holdings) claim in the parallel] Maiman arbitration
(together the “MAGL portion”). This is tantamount to double pursuit of the same
claim in respect of the same interest.*#° In the Tribunal’s opinion, while the same party
in interest might reasonably seek to protect its claim in two fora where the jurisdiction
of each tribunal is unclear, once jurisdiction is otherwise confirmed, it would crystallize
in an abuse of process for in substance the same claim is to be pursued on the merits
before two tribunals. However, the Tribunal wishes to make it very clear that this
resulting abuse of process is in no way tainted by bad faith on the part of the Claimants
as alleged by the Respondent. It is merely the result of the factual situation that would
arise were two claims to be pursued before different investment tribunals in respect of

the same tranche of the same investment.

On 11 December 2015, the Tribunal was provided with a copy of a letter from the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Maiman arbitration, in which the Tribunal in
those proceedings informed the parties therein that “the Tribunal has now decided that
it has jurisdiction ratione personae. The Tribunal will provide reasons for this decision

subsequently, in its Award.”>4!

The consequence of this finding, together with the balance of the present Decision on
Jurisdiction, is that the abuse of process constituted by the double pursuit of the MAGL
portion of the claim in both proceedings must now be treated as having crystallised.
Both Tribunals have confirmed that they have jurisdiction. It follows from this
therefore that there is no risk of a denial of justice occasioned by the absence of a
tribunal competent to determine the MAGL portion of the claim. Both Tribunals are

seised of the merits and neither Tribunal has yet reached a decision on the merits.

It lies in the power of Ampal, as 100% owner of MAGL through Ampal Energy Ltd

(Israel) to cure the abuse here identified were Ampal and MAGL to elect, in light of the

40 RSM Production Corporation and others v. Grenada, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/6, Award, 10 December
2010, paras. 7.1.5 — 7.1.7; Apotex Holdings Ine. and Apotex Inc. v. United States of America, \CSID Case No.
ARB/(AF)/12/1, Award, 25 August 2014, para. 7.40.

+ Letter dated November 18, 2015 from Tribunal to Parties in PCA Case No. 2012-26.

95

335.

336.

33

338.

339.

a

a

7.

2

Sc

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

present Decision which has otherwise confirmed the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, to submit
the MAGL portion of the claim made in the Maiman arbitration to the exclusive
jurisdiction of the present Tribunal, relinquishing that part of the claim in the Maiman

arbitration, or conversely to pursue such claim only in the latter proceeding.

Article 26 of the ICSID Convention provides “Consent of the parties to arbitration
under this Convention shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such

arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy”.
The leading Commentary on the Convention observes.

Once consent to ICSID arbitration has been given, the parties have lost their right to
seek relief in another forum, national or international, and are restricted to pursuing
their claim through ICSID. This principle operates from the moment of valid consent.

3#2Decisions of ICSID tribunals and annulment committees are to like effect:

Article 26 represents one of the singular progressive
advantages of the ICSID Convention. It ‘create[s] a rule of
priority vis-a-vis other systems of adjudication in order to
avoid contradictory decisions and to preserve the principle of
ne bis in idem.’ Article 26 operates as a key element of the
parties’ agreement to arbitrate — confirming the exclusivity of
ICSID arbitration as the means of dispute resolution, where the
parties have agreed to such a forum for the resolution of their
dispute.3#

 

Such an election would secure to Ampal in the present arbitration the advantages of the
ICSID Convention, upon which it places special reliance, whilst removing the abuse
ea — ern

constituted by the double pursuit of the same claim.*44

In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal invites the Claimant Ampal to elect to pursue the

MAGL portion of the claim in the present proceedings alone by 11 March 2016, or
+ Aicrinicaahiiinn anes

make its choice known at that time. The Tribunal will then revisit the question of abuse

of process in relation to this portion of the claim in the light of its response.

342 Schreuer et al., THI! ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY (2nd ed., 2009), 351, RLA-14.

443 Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case no. ARB/05/19, Decision on
Annulment, 14 June 2010at para. 45.

4 Tr, Day 9, 11: 10-12.

96

340.

341,

342.

343.

344,

345,

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11
ision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

 

6) Whether indirect minority shareholders can bring claims

The Tribunal does not need to consider the parties’ arguments in relation to Mr. David

Fischer as the Tribunal has found earlier that it lacked jurisdiction over him.

Under the chapeau of its objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal based on an
abuse of process by the Claimants, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal should
decline to arbitrate the claims of Claimants EGI-Fund Investors and BSS-EMG
Investors because they each have such minute interests in and “too remote a

connection” with EMG and also because “there is a need to set limits on such claims”.

In the case of Claimants EGI-Fund Investors and BSS-EMG Investors whose claims are
based on the alleged breach of the US-Egypt Treaty, the answer to the Respondent’s
objection is found in Articles K(1}(c) and 1(1)(d) of the Treaty which provide as follows:

(c) “Investment” means every kind of asset owned or
controlled and includes but is not limited to.

ea

(a) “own or control” includes ownership or control that is
direct or indirect, including ownership or control exercised
through subsidiaries or affiliates. (Tribunal’s emphasis)

The Tribunal will not read into the Treaty restrictions such as those advanced by the
Respondent to the effect that “passive, indirect and very small” holdings cannot enjoy

any protection under the Egypt-US BIT.

Accordingly, the Respondent’s objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over EGI-

Fund Investors and BSS-EMG Investors are dismissed.

The Tribunal, accordingly, dismisses the Respondent’s objection to the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal based on an alleged abuse of process by the Claimants subject to Ampal’s,

cure of the abuse of process identified i

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/I1
Decision on Jurisdiction
1 February 2016

Vv. DECISION

346. Having carefully considered the parties’ arguments in their written pleadings and oral

submissions, and having deliberated, for the reasons stated above, the Arbitral Tribunal

unanimously decides as follows:

a)

b)

°)

d)

8)

h)

To deny the Respondent’s objections ratione personae in respect of Ampal, EGI-
Fund and EGI-Series;

To uphold the Respondent’s objection ratione personae in respect of Mr. David
Fischer;

To declare that both the Centre (ICSID) and the Tribunal have no jurisdiction
over Mr. David Fischer’s claims in this arbitration by virtue of Articles 25(1) and
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention;

To deny the Respondent’s objection over the Claimants’ Gas Supply claims based
on the alleged breach of the standards of fair and equitable treatment and
unlawful expropriation;

To remain seized of the Respondent’s objection over the Claimants’ Gas Supply

claims based on the alleged breach of the umbrella clause;

To deny the Respondent’s objection ratione materiae over the Claimants’ tax
claims;

To deny the Respondent’s objection in respect of the alleged illegality of the
GSPA;

To direct the Claimant Ampal to elect to pursue the MAGL portion of the claim
in the present proceedings alone by 11 March 2016 or opt at that time for the
pursuance of its claims in the alternative forum;

To deny the Respondent’s objection based on an alleged abuse of process by the

Claimants subject to Ampal’s compliance with para. (h) above; and

To reserve its decision as to costs.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/t1
Decision on Jurisdiction
\ February 2016

C.Q.Mfaskdan,)

 

Professor Campbell McLachlan, QC Professor Francisco Orrego Vicutia
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Vem Cowes?

The Honorable L. Yves Fortier, CC, OQ, QC
President

99

ANNEX |

 

 

   

Tnlerest in EMG is ndicated by the percentage Figure
inside each bos,

 

 

 

 

Aur entily’s percentage

 

the
entity one step closer DENG onthe chan ynien

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

Unielated
Tnvestor

 

 

     
    

 
 

2 a
nies

 
  

Hold

ee

David Fischer
(Germany)

 

   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ea

 

4198% 2.148%
DisRapallo
Holdings Lid Holdings Ltd
tact) Usrael)

 

 

 

A al

 

 

 

15.908

 

ef Maiman
Gsraet) (Poland)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

500

am I
c =e 125% 858%
: Mechav Ampa! Group Lid
nes ent paul Cp ss] Herne Aral rc Holds
¢Caymen Islands) Asraet) formerly Merhav Arnpal Energy [| aE ji
Limited) ca
a B es ist
ot, T 10%
. ms 50%
ute z peor
aa 135% *
Unrelated incest
ee ‘Ampal Enerey
invester if en nate
derael) Merhav-Ampal
LIF Generat
0985 Portner Lut
Unrelated {Israel}
invester

 

 

 

ema tot
Uncelated
Investor

 

10)

  

Unrelated
snvest

    

0)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Key

Relationship with EMG
1D) direct sharenoiser
LE] rere sharehotder
Coimants in treaty arbitratin
(J cso

CO vera
Country of nationality

[British Virgin Islands

 

[Ey coman ans

ED eset

 

Gibvaer
CO twee
LD Potana
EE tains

ED ter

 

 

Bus

 

 

ab

%
j

abi

 

aw

de!

to

 

 

 

12.5%

  

 

 

Based on the Claimants’

 

Maiman et. Al v Egypt
PCA Case Na. AAASS
Pofand-Eeyet BIT

Gonald McRae {Chairman}
Michael Reisman
J. Christopher Thomas

oe ogee een

|Ampal-Americar israel Corp. et. Aly
Eevet

U S-Bgypt BIT and Germamp-Eeypt
a

+ Yves Fortier (Chairman)
- Francisca Orrego-Vieuia
+ Campbell McLachlan

|

EMG v. EGPC, EGAS and IEC
IccCase No. 18215/62

Juan Ferndndez-Armesto
{Chairman}

John Marrin

- Ozman Berat Gliczumar

:

EGPCand EGAS ¥, EMG
GRCICA Case No. 829/2012

Lord Colins (Chairenan)
meyibaetate
= Gary fer

 

 

 

Memorial, Annex 4

 

ANNEX II

The Respondents Closing
Demonstrative Exhibit

ICSID Case No, ARB/12/11
Auipal et al. v, The Arab Republic of Egypt |

FOUR PARALLEL ARBITRATIONS FOR THE SAME INTERESTS

 

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i

EGPC and EGAS Mr Maiman, Methay Ampal-American, EGI-

(EGAS”} (mnf}, Merhay-Ampal Fund, EGI-Series, BSS-
Group, Merhav-Ampal EMG, Mr Fischer
Energy Holdings

EMG EGAS, IEC Arab Republic of Egypt Arab Republic of Egypt

CROICA Ice PCA ICSID

English law English law Tnternadonal law, English international law, English
law and Egyptian law nd Egyptian law

30 April 2012 6 October 2031 2 May 2012 May 2012

None 31 May 2012 21 February 2013 29 November 2012

Yes No No No

(Hearing 4 July {Separate written
2013, Award 11 phase)
November 2013)

 

Parties have filed | The Parties have The Parties have filed all ‘The Parties have filed all
written pleadings | filed all their their written pleadings with | their written pleadings,
on jurisdiction and | written pleadings the possible exception of with the possible exception
| Statements of costs submissions of Post-Hearing Briefs and
-| Claim and Defence cosis submissions
| only!

 

| 2 weeks 2 weeks 2 weeks 9 days 41 days of
| 15-26 Jun. 2015 13-24 Jan, 2014 | 31 Aug.-1} Sep. 2014 27 Oct.-6 Nov. 2014 hearings
Closings:

15-16 May 2014

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

EMG's Stutement of Defence and Counterclaim was filed on 18 hily 2014. GAS is scheduled (@ file i Reply on 12
Recember 2044, although the procednral calendar is currently being discussed

The Respondent's Closing
Demonstrative Exhibit

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

(CENTRE AMPAL Toray
Common Mr Al Sakka Mr Aj Sakka Mr Al Sakka Mr Al Sakka 3l
switesses Sree : : testimonies
presented by | Mr Hamdy Mr Hamdy Mr Hamdy Mr Hamdy earihetet
EM by its | Mr Mr Muth Mr Math Mr Muih issues
| anoles | Mr Schmader Mr Schrader Mr Schrader Mr Schrader
: | Mr Freeny Mr Freeny Mr Freeny Mr Freeny
1 GCA GCA GCA GCA
Th FTL FYL FTL
Maj. Gen. (ret.) Eiland | Maj. Gen. (ret) Kitand = | Maj. Gen. (ret. Eiland
(witness for EC)
Mr Wood-Colling | Mr Woed-Collins and Mr Wood-Collins and Mr Wood-Coiltins and 16
and Mr Giles Mr Giles Mr Giles Mr Giles testimonies
Mr Pelham Mr Petham Mz Pelham nn saree
| issues
Lord Hoffmann Lord Hoffmann Lord Hoffmann
Maj. Gen. (ret) Maj. Gen. (ret.) Whiting
ade Prof, Aseencio
Prof. Ascencio Prof. Belal
Prof. Belal
For IEC: Mr Maiman Mr Zell 18
MrBrokman, Mr Ronai, Mr Fischer ary
Ms Nudelman, . mae
Mr Gurevich, Mr Weiss, Prof, Sir Bernard Rix appear in
Mr Aimit, Mr Kay, one
Mr Zaid, Mr Etmakis, proceeding
Mr Aronovieh,
Brigadier Ling,
Me Shnuttleworth,
Dr Cook, Mr Dvir
Witnesses Andrews J Dr Pudsianowska Prof. Vandevelde 4 witnesses
presented by “anh that anty
EGAS or by Grant Thornton appear in
the Arab one
Republic of - proceeding
Egypt that only
Appear in one
arbitration

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ns

 

 

‘The Respondent’s Closing
Deionstrative Exhibit

 

 

  

~ The First
A

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

was
obtained through
coercion or
fraudulent
misrepresentation
and EGAS is liable
| in ton or,
aliematively, dat
the First
Amendment is
rescinded
| - EGAS breached
the GSPA by, inter
alia, failing to
deliver gas
- EGAS repudiated
the GSPA by
seeking to
terminate it
unlawfully

Claim:
US$ 3.561 billion’

 

GSPA by, infer alia,
failing to deliver gas

- EGAS repudiated the
GSPA by seeking lo
terminate it unlawfully
- EGAS breached the
Tripartite Agreement
by, inter alia, faiting to
deliver gas

- EGAS repudiated the
Tripartile Agreement by
the unlawfal
termination of the
GSPA

(- EMG makes no claim
against IEC)

Claim:
US$ 1.5 billion®

(excluding interest)

 

~ Egypt weated the
Claimants’ investment
unfairly and inequitably
by. infer alia,
withdrawing EMG's tax
benefit, coercing EMG
to conclude the First
Amendment, breaching
the GSPA and seeking
to unlawfully terminate
the GSPA

- Egypt took arbitrary
and discriminatory
measures because EMG
“was selling natural gas
to Jews in Israel”

- Egypt breached the

umbrella clause by,

inter alia, unlawfully

terminating the GSPA

and by breaching the
SPA

- Egypt failed to protect
the Claimants”
iavesument (EMG) by,
inter alia, failing to
protect and repair the
Trans-Sinai Pipeline
from which EMG
received gas

- Egyp! expropriated the
Claimants’ investment
{EMG) by, inter afia,
withdrawing EMG’s tax
benefit, coercing EMG
to conclude the First
Amendment breaching
the GSPA, failing to
project the Trans-Sinai
Pipeline and seeking to
unlawfully terminate
the GSPA

Claim:
USS 1.127 dillion™

 

- Egypt treated the
Claimants” investment
unfairly and inequitably
by, inter alia,
withdrawing EMG’s tax
benefit, coercing EMG to
conclude the First
Amendment, breaching
the GSPA and secking to
unlawfully terminate the
GSPA

~ Egypt took arbitrary and
discriminatory measures
because EMG “was
selling natural gas to
Jews in Israel”

 

~ Egypt breached the
umbreila clause by, inter
alia, unlawfully
terminating the GSPA
and by breaching the
GSPA
~ Egypt failed to protect
the Claimants”
investment (EMG) by,
inter alia, failing to
protect and repair the
rans-Sinai Pipeline from
which EMG received gas

ypl expropriated the
Claimants’ investment
(EMG) by, inter alia,
withdrawing EMG's tax
benefit, coercing EMG to
conchide the First
Amendment, breaching
the GSPA, failing to
protect the Trans-Sinai
Pipeline and seeking to
unfawfully terminate the
GSPA

 

 

Claim:
USS 882,6 million”

 

USS TOTL
billion

 

 

 

The Respondent’s Clo
Denionstrative Exhibit

  

 

 

        

 

 

 

-
Res | : :
| - BGAS terminated | - The Tribunal hag no - Stay all of the - Stay all of the
: the GSPA jurisdiction over Claimants’ claims Claimants’ claims
lawfully, due to EMG’s (or IEC’s} pending the issuance of | pending the issuance of
EMG’s persistent | claims awards in the 1CC and | awards in the ICC and
nofl-payment - Alternatively, EMG's CRCICA Arbitraiions CRCICA Arbifrations
_| - EMG breached (and IEC’s} claims are] ~ Dismiss the ~ Dismiss the Claimants*
the GSPA by, inter | inadmissible Claimanis’ claims for | claims for lack of
_| alia, failing to pay, : lack of jurisdiction and | jurisdiction and
contracting with : adinissibility admissibility
vptiutiorged Gp = Dismiss the «Dismiss the Claimants?
Sale Customers ‘ a
Claimants’ claims on claims on the merits
and failmg to i tha merits
provide EGAS
with essential !
| operational |
information
~ The GSPA was
unenforceable
because its
performance was
unlawful
Claim: USS 184 USS 184
million” million

(subject to review
and excluding
interest)

 

 

 

 

 

 

As siated i EMO’s Statement of Defence and Counterclaim, § 421 (0.

As stated in LMG’s Post-Hearing Submission, {] 178(¢).

  

 

As stated in F Appendi sessment af Losses REVISED”, sent by FT] with its letter dated 8 August 2014,
conceming corrections to FFI's calculations in its Second Report.

 

As stated in FTV’ Appendix 4 * sinent of Losses REVISED”, sent by FTI with its letter dated ] | August 204,
conceming corrections to FTT’s calculations in its Second Report

As stated in EGAS's Statement of Claim, # 303{iv).

Claimants’ amended version of

the Respondent's Closing
Demonstrative Exhibit

 

 

iCC

 

Iestp_ :

 

UNCITRAL

 

“CAIRO c

  

 

 

 

  

 

EMG requests that
| the tribunal:

- Dismiss EGPC and
| EGAS’s objections to
_| jurisdiction and
admissibility

~ Declare that the
tribunal has
jurisdiction over
EMG’s claims and
that those claims are
admissible

- Declare that EGPC
and EGAS breached
the Source GSPA

_| - Declare that EGPC
_|and EGAS repudiated
the Source GSPA

| - Declare that EGPC
{aod EGAS breached

Agreement

- Declare that EGPC

_| and EGAS repudiated
the Tripartite
Agreement

 

"| Claim: USS 1.5
_| billion’ (excluding
interest)

 

 

Ampal-. ‘atnérizan EGI-Fund.
EGIL Sere BSS-EMG,

 

- Dismiss Egypt’s objections
to jurisdiction and
admissibility

~ Declare that Egypt failed to
accord fair and equitable
treatment and impaired the
Claimants’ investments
through the adoption of
unreasonable measures, in
violation of Arts 11(4) or (11)
of the US Treaty, Art 2(2) of
the Germany Treaty, and
customary international law

- Declare that Egypt engaged
in arbitrary and
discriminatory measures, in
violation of Arts 11(4) or II)
of the US Treaty, Art 2(3) of
the Gerinany Treaty, and
customary international law

 

» Declare that Egypt failed to
observe obligations it has
entered into, in violation of
Art II{1) of the US Treaty,
Art 7(2) of the Germany
Treaty, and customary
intemational law

- Declare that Egypt failed to
provide filll protection and
secutity, in violation of Art
HC) of the US Treaty, Art
4(2) of the Germany Treaty,
and customary international
Taw

- Declare that Egypt
expropriated the Claimants’
investments, in violation of
Art HI) of the US Treaty,
Art 4(2) of the Germany
Treaty, and customary
international law

Claim: US$ 882.6 million“
(excluding interest)

 

Yosef Maiman, Merhay
(mn), Merhav Ampal
Group, Merhav Ampai
Energy Holdings request
that the tribunal;

- Dismiss Egypt’s
objectinns fo jurisdiction
and admissibility

 

- Declare that Egypt
failed to accord fair and
equitable treatment and
impaired the Claimants’
investments through the
adoption of unreasonable
measures, in violation of
Art 3(2) of the Poland
Treaty, and customary
intemational law

~ Declare that Egypt
engaged in arbitrary and
discriminatory measures,
in violation of Arts 3(1)
and 3(2) of the Poland
Treaty, and customary
intemational law

 

- Declare that Egypt
failed to observe
obtigations it has entered
into, in violatiou of Ar
3(2) of the Poland Treaty,
and customary
intemational law

~ Dectare that Egypt
failed to provide full
protection and security, in
violation of Arts 3(1) and
3(2) of the Poland Treaty,
and customary
international law

- Declare that Egypt
expropriated the
Claimants’ investments,
in violation of Arts 4(1)
and 3(2) of the Poland
Treaty, and customary
international faw

Claim: US$ 1.128 billion"

(exchiding interest)

 

EGPC and EGAS request
that the tribunal;

- Declare that the Source
GSPA is unenforceable

- Declare that EGAS
terminated the Source GSPA
lawfully

- Declare that EMG breached
the Source GSPA

- Declare that EMG is barred
from bringing its
counterclaims and/or that
they are inadmissible

- Dismiss EMG's
counterclaims on their merits
Claim: US$ 327 million
plus compensation “to be
quantified at a later
stage” (subject to review
and excluding interest)

 

 

 

   

| ic

   

 
 

 

 

 

EGPC and EGAS
west that the

tribunal:

 

 

 

 

   
 
  
  
   
 
 
  

 

 

_| - Declare that the
tribunal has no

_| jurisdiction over

EMG’s ot IEC’s

claims

~ Declare that EMG’s.
and IEC’s claims are
inadmissible and/or
premature and/or fail
fo state a cause of

_| action and/or are
unfounded

 

 

 

TEC requests that the
yuna:

+ Declare that

EGAS/EGPC are in

breach of the
tipartite Agreement

  

- Declare that [EC
lawfully terminated
the Tripartite
Agreement on account
_ | of EGPC/EGAS’s
repudiatory breaches
and/or breaches of the
_| conditions of that
agreement

Claim: US$ 3.849
billion’ (excluding
interest)

  
     
   
  

 

Egypt requests that the
uibunal:

- Stay the proceeding
pending the issuance of full
awards in each of the ICC
and CRCICA arbitrations

- Dismiss the Claimants’
claims for tack of
jurisdiction and/or as
inadinissible

 

- Dismiss the Claimants”
claims on the merits

- Stay any decision on
quantum pending the
issuance of full awards in
each of the ICC,
UNCITRAL and CRCICA
arbitrations

Egyplrequests that the
ibs

 

 

- Stay the proceeding
pending the issuance of
full awards in each of the
ICC and CRCICA
arbitrations

the Claimants’
lack of
Jurisdiction and/or as
inadmissible

 

- Dismiss the Claimants’
claims on the merits

+ Siay any decision on
quantum pending the
issuance of full awards in
each of the ICC, ICSID
and CRCICA arbitrations

 

 

EMG requests that the
gibunal:

 

 

- Dismiss EGPC and
EGAS’s requests for relief

+ Declare that the First
Amendment was induced by
coercion and fraudulent
misrepresentation

- Declare that EGPC and
EGAS are liable in tert in
connection with the
conclusion of the First
Amendment or that the First
Amendment is rescinded

~ Declare that EGPC and
EGAS breached the Source
GSPA

 

+ Declare that EGPC and
EGAS repudiated the Source
GSPA

- Declare that EGP
must indemnify EMG
any damage it sustains vis-d-
vis its downstream customers
and contractors arising out of
EGPC/EGAS’s breach and
repudiation of the Source

Gs

 
 

GAS

 

Claim: USS 3.561 billion”
(excluding interest)

 

 

 

Modifications made:

1) The relicf sought by EGPC and EGAS in the CRCICA arbitration has been updated to reflect what is stated in the request for

2)
3)
4)
5)

6)

relief in EGPC and EGAS’s Reply and Defence to the Counterclaim, filed on 23 January 2015.
The descriptions of the relief sought in each arbitration have been revised to reflect what is stated in the respective requests for
relief.

The four columns have been reordered based on the order in which the proceedings were commenced, although, as the Tribunal
is aware, the investment arbitrations were commenced on the same day

In each colunin, the relief sought by the claimant(s) before the relevant tribunal is now shown first, followed by the relict
sought by the relevant respondent(s), including IEC.

‘The arbitrations are now consistently identified (at the top of the columns) by the institutional rules under which each
arbitration is being conducted.

The column titled “Tota!” has been deleted as a consequence of the change described at puint (4), above

As stated in EMG’s Post-Hearing Submission, ¥ 178(c).

As stated in FTI"s Appendix 4 “Assessment of Losses REVISED”, sent by FTI with its letter dated 11 August 2014, concerning
corrections to FTI’s calculations in its Second Report.

As stated in FTI's Appendix 4 “Assessment of Losses REVISED”, sent by FTI with its letter dated 8 August 2014, concerning
corrections to FTI’s calculations in its Second Report

As stated in EGPC and EGAS’s Reply and Defence to the Counterclaim, § 769iv)-(vi).

As stated in IEC’s Post Hearing Submission, | 294(c)-(h).

As stated in EMG’s Statement of Defence and Counterelaim, 421 (0)

 

 

