UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION 1(30)

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION Matter No.
Department 05 17 June 2020 OA 7709-19
Division 0502 Stockholm

APPEALED DECISION

Nacka District Court’s final decision of 5 July 2019 in case no. A 6686-17, A 6620- 18,
A 6339-18, A 4354-18, A 4353-18, A 2544-18, A 1977-18, A 1976-18, A 1859-18, A
1857-18, A 1223-18, A 1222-18, A 1221-18 and A 2543-18, see appendix A

PARTIES

Appellants

1. The Republic of Kazakhstan
Ministry of Finance

11 Zhenis Avenue

010000, Nur-Sultan
Kazakhstan

Counsel: Advokat Alexander Foerster and advokat Ludwig Metz as well as jur. kand.
Julia Fermbick, Matilda Magnusson and Daniel Piran

P.O. Box 1711

111 87 Stockholm

2. The National Bank of Kazakhstan
21 "Koktem-3"

Almaty, 050040

Kazakhstan

Counsel: Advokat Marcus Axelryd, advokat Karl Guterstam and advokat Magnus
Nygren

P.O. Box 7099

103 87 Stockholm

Counterparties

1. Ascom Group S.A.
75 A. Mateevici Street
Chisinau, MD-2008
Moldova

2. Anatoile Stati

20 Dragomirna Street
Chisinau, MD-2008,
Moldova

3. Gabriel Stati

1A Ghioceilor Street
Chisinau MD-2008
Moldova

Document ID 1575312

 

Postal address Visiting address Telephone Opening hours
P.O. Box 2290 Birger Jarls Torg 16 08-561 670 00 Monday ~ Friday
103 17 Stockholm Telefax 9 am — 4:30 pm
08-561 675 09

i d2@dom.se

  

(1]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

2
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

4. Terra Raf Trans Traiding Ltd
Don House, Suite 31

30-38 Main Street

Gibraltar

Counsel to 1-4: Advokat Bo G. H. Nilsson, advokat Ginta Ahrel and advokat Therése
Isaksson as well as jur. kand. Kristian Goldsteins

P.O. Box 3101

103 62 Stockholm

MATTER
Attachment

DECISION OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

1. By reversal of the District Court’s decision, the Court of Appeal annuls the Enforcement

Agency’s following decisions on attachment

— of 1 November 2017, decision number 12174654207,
— of 1 November 2017, decision number 12174652920,
— of 14 November 2017, decision number 12174759568,
— of 19 February 2018, decision number 1218367322,

— of 12 April 2018, decision number 12181151692,

— of 12 April 2018, decision number 12181151544,

— of 12 April 2018, decision number 12181150496,

— of 12 June 2018, decision number 12183170427,

— of 18 June 2018, decision number 12183207427, and
— of 20 September 2018, decision number 12184059371.

2. The Republic of Kazakhstan and The National Bank of Kazakhstan are discharged
from the obligation to compensate the litigation costs of Ascom Group S.A, Anatoile

Stati, Gabriel Stati and Terra Raf Trans Traiding Ltd before the District Court.

3. Ascom Group S.A, Anatoile Stati, Gabriel Stati and Terra Raf Trans Traiding Ltd are

ordered to jointly and severally compensate

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

3

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

a)

b)

The Republic of Kazakhstan for its litigation costs before the District Court with
USD 1,446,116 and SEK 30,807, of which USD 1,108,490 comprises costs for
legal counsel. The amounts shall accrue interest pursuant to Section 6 of the
Interest Act as from 5 July 2019 until the day of payment.

The National Bank of Kazakhstan for its litigation costs before the District
Court with USD 1,428,897.50, GBP 8,039.92, KZT 8,473,175 and SEK
321,921, of which USD 1,118,897.50 comprises costs for legal counsel. The
amounts shall accrue interest pursuant to Section 6 of the Interest Act as from 5

July 2019 until the day of payment.

[4] 4. Ascom Group S.A, Anatoile Stati, Gabriel Stati and Terra Raf Trans Traiding Ltd

are further ordered to jointly and severally compensate

a)

b)

The Republic of Kazakhstan for its litigation costs before the Court of Appeal in
with USD 480,537 GBP 3,248 and SEK 19,061, of which USD 436,760
comprises costs for legal counsel. The amounts shall accrue interest pursuant to
Section 6 of the Interest Act as from the day of the Court of Appeal’s decision
until the day of payment.

The National Bank of Kazakhstan for its litigation costs before the Court of
Appeal with USD 874,849.16, GBP 3,248, and SEK 166,400, of which USD
629,152 comprises costs for legal counsel. The amounts shall accrue interest
pursuant to Section 6 of the Interest Act as from the day of the Court of

Appeal’s decision until the day of payment.

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

4
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

MOTIONS AND POSITIONS

The Republic of Kazakhstan (the Republic) and the National Bank of Kazakhstan (the
National Bank) have requested that the Court of Appeal annul the attachment decisions
falling within the scope of the appealed decision, discharge them from the liability to
compensate Ascom Group S.A, Anatolie Stati, Gabriel Stati and Terra Raf Trans
Traiding Ltd (the Investors) for their litigation costs before the District Court and

instead order that the Investors compensate their litigation costs before that Court.

The Investors have disputed the requests.

The parties have requested compensation for litigation costs before the Court of Appeal.

GROUNDS

The Republic and the National Bank

The Republic and the National Bank (hereinafter, where applicable, jointly referred to
as “Kazakhstan”) have objected that there are bars at hand to the attachment of the
property covered by the appealed decision. As grounds for the objection, they have in
the main argued that the property does not belong to the Republic in the sense set forth
in Chapter 4, section 17 of the Enforcement Code; as a first alternative and only with
respect to the securities — that they are not located in Sweden; and as a second
alternative that the property is covered by state immunity. In addition to the
aforementioned, the Republic has as a third and final alternative argued that

enforcement would violate ordre public.

The Investors

The Investors have disputed that any impediment to enforcement is at hand on any of

the grounds invoked by the Republic or the National Bank. In the event that the Court

of Appeal would find that the property is covered by state immunity, the Investors have

[10]

{11]

{12]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

5
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05
argued that the Republic and the National Bank have lost their right to claim immunity

due to so-called abuse of rights.

THE EVIDENCE PRESENTED

Through a decision dated 3 February 2020, the Court of Appeal dismissed new
evidence invoked by the Republic in support of its third alternative ground. The parties
have submitted new legal opinions before the Court of Appeal. Aside from this, the

evidence is largely the same as that before the District Court.

On the issue of state immunity, the Republic and the National Bank have invoked legal
opinions issued by Professors Pal Wrange, Said Mahmoudi and Chester Brown, and the
Investors have submitted legal opinions issued by Professors Ulf Linderfalk and Ingrid

Wuerth.

REASONS FOR THE COURT OF APPEAL’S DECISION

The starting points for the Court of Appeal’s review

By way of the decisions appealed to the District Court, the Enforcement Agency
decided on attachments of property in the form of securities in securities accounts in
Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken (SEB), claims for dividends on those securities as well
as funds deposited to a cash account in the same bank. Nothing has been established to
contradict that the claims for dividends and the funds deposited to the bank account are
located in Sweden under enforcement law. The basis for the measures of constraint was
an enforceable title in the form of a final and binding arbitral award rendered on 19
December 2013 by an arbitral tribunal at the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce in a
case between the Investors and the Republic, through which the Republic was ordered
to pay to the Investors a principal amount of just under USD 500 million plus interest
(the arbitral award). The Republic challenged the arbitral award and also requested that
the arbitral award be declared invalid. As legal ground for the request for invalidity, the

Republic argued, amongst other things, that the arbitral award and the manner in which

{13]

{14]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

it had arisen violated ordre public. Through its judgment of 9 December 2016 in case
no. T 2675-14, the Court of Appeal rejected the Republic’s requests. After the judgment
had become final and binding, the Republic challenged the judgment arguing that a
grave procedural error (Sw. domvilla) had occurred and applied for a new trial

(Sw. resning), which applications were rejected by the Supreme Court. The Republic
also filed a new request that the judgment be declared invalid and as a ground invoked,
amongst other things, that the manner in which the arbitral award had arisen violated
ordre public. In its decision of 9 March 2020 in case no. T 12462-19, the Court of
Appeal concluded that it was barred from hearing the case on its merits because the
subject matter of the dispute was the same as that in the earlier litigation, and so
dismissed the Republic’s case. That judgment may not be appealed. The attachment
decisions named the Republic as debtor. Also the National Bank has appealed the
attachment decisions and in its decision of 23 February 2018 in matter no. OA 11256-
17, the Court of Appeal held that the National Bank was able to appear as a party in a
court trial pursuant to Chapter 11, section 2, first paragraph, first sentence of the Code

of Judicial Procedure.

In order for the Republic and the National Bank to be successful in their appeals, it is
required that one of the invoked grounds create a bar to the attachment. Thus, if the
evidence in the matter establishes that the property does not belong to Kazakhstan or
that it is covered by state immunity, the attachments shall be lifted. The same applies if
the measures of constraint violate ordre public as argued by the Republic. Moreover, as
concerns the securities, the attachments shall be lifted if the evidence establishes that

they are not located in Sweden.

The Court of Appeal starts its review of the matter by determining whether the property
is covered by state immunity or not. In this review, the Court of Appeal makes the
assumptions that also the securities are located in Sweden and that all of the property at
issue belongs to Kazakhstan in the meaning set forth in Chapter 4, section 17 of the
Enforcement Code. It should be stressed, however, that these assumptions apply only to
the review of the issue of state immunity and do not imply any conclusions on the

questions of the location of the securities or to whom the property belongs.

[15]

[16]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

7
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

General observations on state immunity

State immunity is a principle of international law, which entails that a state is not under
an obligation to subject itself to the jurisdiction of other states’ courts or other judicial
or executive agencies. It is recognized as customary international law and emanates
from the most fundamental principle of international law — the principle of sovereignty
—under which states are sovereign, mutually equal and prohibited from exercising

power over each other (SOU 2008:2, p. 11 f.).

A state may dispose of its right to immunity and may thus refrain from invoking it. In
cases where the state does not refrain from invoking it, the right to immunity is, under
now applicable international law, nevertheless not unconditional. From having
comprised a virtually absolute right for states to immunity against the jurisdiction of
foreign courts until the 1930s, the principle of state immunity has in fact, in step with
increased engagement in commercial activity by states, developed in a more restrictive
direction (Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 34 ff.). Within the scope of this
development, customary international law has distinguished between sovereign acts by
states, which usually enjoy immunity, and their private law acts, which most often do
not. This distinction can be expressed through the so-called restrictive theory of
immunity, according to which a state’s commercial or private law acts are typically
exempt from the right to immunity (Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 45 and 56, cf. e.g.
Hazel Fox & Philippa Webb, The Law of State Immunity, 3" ed., 2013, p. 133 f., and
August Reinisch, European Court Practice Concerning State Immunity from
Enforcement Measures, in The European Journal of International Law, Vol 17 (2006),
p. 803 ff.). Thus, the application of the theory implies determining whether a certain act
is sovereign or falls under private law. A development in a more restrictive direction,
corresponding to that which has taken place in state practice as concerns immunity from
jurisdiction, appears, as concerns immunity from measures of constraint, to have been
limited to the countries in the Western hemisphere (Government Bill 2008/09:204,

p. 45). Joint state practice has previously been careful in not granting immunity to a

foreign state from measures of constraint, and traditionally, it has been deemed a

[17]

[18]

[19]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

8
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05
greater encroachment on state sovereignty to take measures of constraint against the

property of another state than to assume jurisdiction over that state (Government Bill

2008/09:204, p. 56).

Applicable international law on state immunity

There is no general and enacted international treaty in the field of state immunity. On
the international law level, state immunity is thus governed by customary international
law. It is often the national court, before which a claim against a state is made, who is
tasked with applying the rules of international law on state immunity. Despite the
restrictive theory of state immunity having been generally accepted, there is
consequently substantial variations in how it is applied in its details (Government Bill
2008/09:204, p. 35). Moreover, there is no uniform state practice on limitations on state
immunity from measures of constraint. Under the restrictive theory of state immunity,
as concerns jurisdiction, it is generally accepted that national courts are free not to grant
a foreign state immunity when the dispute concerns an act of private law, but, as
concerns measures of constraint, such are allowed only in property that is used or

intended for use for commercial purposes (Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 45).

At a global level — within the framework of the United Nations (UN) International Law
Commission (ILC) — the customary international law on state immunity has been the
subject of a comprehensive attempt at codification. During the work, which was
ongoing during the years 1978-1991, observations were gathered from the member
states of the UN, after which special rapporteurs prepared draft articles which were
reviewed by inter alia working groups as well as the UN General Assembly Sixth
Committee. Following several years of negotiations, in 2004, the UN Convention on

Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property was adopted (the convention).

The convention applies, if the court and the foreign state at issue fall under the
definitions of article 2, to all exercises of judicial, administrative or executive power
that has a connection to a legal proceeding — but not to criminal proceedings (cf.

article 1, see also Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 61). The convention covers state

(20]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

immunity from the jurisdiction of another state’s courts as well as immunity from
measures of constraint against the property of the state (Government Bill 2008/09:204,
p. 61). It takes as its starting point that state immunity applies, and that the immunity
may be pierced only when it follows from the provisions of the convention (article 5,
see also Tom Grant, Article 5, p. 103 f. in The United Nations Convention on
Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property: a commentary, Roger O’Keefe
et al. (ed.), 2013). A state may also explicitly or implicitly waive immunity (articles 7—
9). As concerns jurisdictional immunity, the convention is pervaded by the restrictive
theory of state immunity. In this section, the convention’s provisions list a number of
cases in which immunity may not be invoked and entail an explicit regulation of
immunity and non-immunity for several areas of law (articles 10-17, see also
Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 59 and Roseanne van Alebeek, Part III: Proceedings
in which state immunity cannot be invoked, p. 154 ff. in The United Nations
Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property: a commentary,
Roger O’Keefe er al. (ed.), 2013). The provisions on state immunity from measures of
constraint against a state’s property are, as opposed to the rules on state immunity from
jurisdiction, devised such that measures of constraint may in principle only be taken
following consent from the relevant state (articles 18-21, see also Government Bill
2008/09:204, p. 59). This restraint from the piercing of state immunity as regards
measures of constraint must be viewed in light of the fact that the restrictive theory of
state immunity for such measures has not had the same impact on customary

international law (cf. Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 45).

Because a sufficient number of states has not yet ratified or otherwise adequately
approved the convention it has not entered into force (cf. article 29). Despite the fact
that the convention has not yet entered into force, it may be considered to constitute the
at this point clearest expression of the states’ prevailing understanding as concerns state
immunity (Hazel Fox & Philippa Webb, The Law of State Immunity, 3“ ed., 2013, p.
294 f., see also Pal Wrange’s legal opinion of 10 October 2018, p. 2). Its provisions
have been drafted taking into account state practice on state immunity and to a large
extent it can even be considered to constitute a codification of applicable customary

international law on state immunity (Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 87, 113). In this

[21]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

context it should be noted that the convention was adopted by the General Assembly
without a vote, i.e. without any state objecting to its adoption (see Michael Wood
“Immunity from Jurisdiction and Immunity from measures of constraint”, p. 13 in The
United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property: a
commentary, Roger O’Keefe et al. (ed.), 2013). As concerns Sweden, the legislator has
assessed that the convention largely reflects applicable customary law. In 2009,
parliament approved the government’s proposal as set out in the Government Bill
(2008/09:204) Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property (Sw. Jmmunitet
for stater och deras egendom) that Sweden shall ratify the convention and that it shall
be incorporated into Swedish law by way of an act (the Act [2009:1514] on
Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property [Sw. lag om immunitet for stater
och deras egendom)). This act will enter into force when the convention does. Since the
ratification, the Supreme Court has, in two cases concerning state immunity, NJA 2009
p. 905 and NJA 2011 p. 475, referenced the convention’s provisions. However, since
the convention supplements customary international law where no clear customary
international law has been established and in several respects constitutes a compromise
between the views of different states, each separate provision cannot without further
consideration be accepted as applicable customary law (Government Bill 2008/09:204,
p. 102, cf. NJA 2011 p. 475 paragraph 14). As noted in the preamble of the convention,
the rules of customary international law will continue to govern matters not regulated

by the provisions of the convention (Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 85).

In view of the above background, the Court of Appeal finds that the convention shall
form the starting point for a Swedish court’s determination of a matter of state
immunity. In so doing, the court shall start at the wording of the convention texts. The
English original text is appended to the act which incorporates the convention. There is
no Swedish original text, and the not yet entered into force act sets out that the wording
of the original texts shall apply as Swedish law. As a reason for an incorporation, the
Government Bill states that the Swedish application of the convention shall be
consistent with that of other convention states and that an application based directly on
the original text ought to promote future uniform state practice (Government Bill

2008/09:204, p. 115). As a reason for Sweden’s ratification, the fact has also been noted

[22]

[23]

[24]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

11
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05
that Swedish courts gain access to a written set of rules on matters of state immunity

(Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 97).

As concerns the interpretation of the provisions of the convention, the court must, as is
the case when interpreting international treaties in general, in accordance with the
principles set out in articles 31 and 32 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, start from the ordinary meaning of the terms of the convention in their context
and in the light of the purpose and objective of the convention (see Gerhard Hafer
“Historical Background of the Convention”, p. 12 in The United Nations Convention on
Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property: a commentary, Roger O’Keefe
et al. (ed.), 2013, cf. Ulf Linderfalk’s legal opinion of 25 June 2018, p. 6 and Chester
Brown’s legal opinion of 13 February 2020, p. 4 and 5). In addition to the wording of
the convention, in this context also state practice and what article 32 of the Vienna
Convention refers to as supplementary means of interpretation, i.e. the preparatory
works to the convention, as well as legal literature on international law and other legal
sources, may be of relevance. As regards the preparatory works, inter alia the ILC

commentaries on the 1991 draft articles are of interest.

In sum, the Court of Appeal shall, when reviewing the issue of state immunity, apply
the applicable customary international law that is expressed in the provisions of the

convention.

The convention’s provisions on state immunity from post-judgment measures of

constraint

The review of whether certain property enjoys immunity from post-judgment measures
of constraint raises the issue of an application of the provisions in articles 19 and 21.

The articles are worded as follows in English.

Article 19

State immunity from post-judgment measures of constraint

No post-judgment measures of constraint, such as attachment, arrest or
execution, against property of a State may be taken in connection with a

[25]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

12

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19

Department 05

proceeding before a court of another State unless and except to the extent
that:

(a) the State has expressly consented to the taking of such measures as
indicated:

(i) by international agreement;

(ii) by an arbitration agreement or in a written contract; or

(iii) by a declaration before the court or by a written communication after a

dispute between the parties has arisen; or

(b) the State has allocated or earmarked property for the satisfaction of the

claim which is the object of that proceeding; or

(c) it has been established that the property is specifically in use or
intended for use by the State for other than government non-commercial
purposes and is in the territory of the State of the forum, provided that
post-judgment measures of constraint may only be taken against property
that has a connection with the entity against which the proceeding was
directed.

Article 21

Specific categories of property

1. The following categories, in particular, of property of a State shall not
be considered as property specifically in use or intended for use by the

State for other than government non-commercial purposes under article 19,

subparagraph (c):

(a) property, including any bank account, which is used or intended for use

in the performance of the functions of the diplomatic mission of the State
or its consular posts, special missions, missions to international
organizations or delegations to organs of international organizations or to
international conferences;

(b) property of a military character or used or intended for use in the
performance of military functions;

(c) property of the central bank or other monetary authority of the State;
(d) property forming part of the cultural heritage of the State or part of its
archives and not placed or intended to be placed on sale;

(e) property forming part of an exhibition of objects of scientific, cultural
or historical interest and not placed or intended to be placed on sale.

2. Paragraph | is without prejudice to article 18 and article 19,
subparagraphs (a) and (b).

Article 19 sets out as the main rule that no measures of constraint may be taken other

than to the extent set forth in the provision. In certain instances, post-judgment

measures of constraint may be taken even if the state has not consented in accordance

with (a) or allocated or earmarked property for satisfaction in accordance with (b). The

property which in such cases may become subject to post-judgment measures of

[26]

(27]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION
13
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05
constraint is described in the provision in subparagraph (c). For post-judgment
measures of constraint to be allowed under this part of the provision, it is required that
“it has been established that the property is specifically in use or intended for use by the
State for other than government non-commercial purposes and is in the territory of the
State of the forum, provided that post-judgment measures of constraint may only be
taken against property that has a connection with the entity against which the

proceeding was directed.”

Article 21.1 sets forth various kinds of state property that shall not be considered as
property specifically in use or intended for use by the state for other than government
non-commercial purposes under article 19 (c). The property enumerated in article 21
thus cannot become subject to measures of constraint on the basis of the provision in
article 19 (c). The structure of the convention means that the assessment of whether
property could become subject to post-judgment measures of constraint should be made
on the basis first of the special rules in article 21 and thereafter, only subsidiarily, on the
basis of the general rule expressed in article 19 (Chester Brown & Roger O’Keefe,
“Article 21”, p. 338 f. in The United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities
of States and Their Property: a commentary, Roger O’Keefe et al. (ed.) 2013, cf. Ulf
Linderfalk’s legal opinion of 25 June 2018, p. 5). Only if the relevant property is not
covered by immunity on the basis of article 21 or 19 can the property become subject to

post-judgment measures of constraint.

The International Court of Justice in the Hague (ICJ) has in the case Jurisdictional
Immunities of the State referred to the provision in article 19 (Germany v. Italy: Greece
intervening, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2012, p. 99) and legal literature on international
law is in agreement that the provision in chief reflects applicable customary
international law (see e.g. Chester Brown & Roger O’Keefe, “Article 21”, p. 327 f. in
The United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their
Property: a commentary, Roger O’Keefe et al. (ed.) 2013 and Ulf Linderfalk’s legal
opinion of 25 June 2018, p. 13). In the case NJA 2011 p. 475, the Supreme Court has
stated with respect to article 19 (c) that the convention may be viewed to express the

principle now recognized by many states that measures of constraint may be taken at

[28]

[29]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

least with respect to certain property of a state (paragraph 14). As concerns the
provision in article 21, there is ample support in inter alia state practice that at least
subparagraphs (1) (a) and (b) reflect applicable customary international law (see e.g.
Chester Brown & Roger O’Keefe, “Article 21”, p. 346 f. in The United Nations
Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property: a commentary,
Roger O’Keefe er al. (ed.) 2013). As regards subparagraph (c) of the provision, state
practice diverges between the views, on the one hand, that all property of a central bank
enjoys immunity because of its nature and, on the other hand, that the property of a
central bank shall, as regards state immunity, be viewed as any other type of state
property (see Chester Brown & Roger O’Keefe, “Article 21”, p. 327 in The United
Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property: a
commentary, Roger O’Keefe et al. (ed.) 2013, p. 346 and Said Mahmoudi’s legal
opinion of 20 April 2018, p. 8). In the application of the provision in article 21.1 (c), a

more detailed review of customary international law is thus required.

Review of the issue of state immunity on the basis of the rules of the convention

Starting points for the review

To start, the Court of Appeal notes that the Republic and the National Bank represent
the sovereign state Kazakhstan in the sense that the parties may invoke state immunity
in the present legal proceeding. It is undisputed — beyond what is set out in the section
on abuse of rights — that the parties have neither explicitly nor implicitly waived
immunity from the measures of constraint relevant in the matter at issue. Therefore,

there is no bar to reviewing the objection concerning state immunity on its merits.

In line with what has been described above, the Court of Appeal will first determine
whether the relevant property enjoys immunity on the basis of the provision in article
21. If immunity is not at hand on the basis of this article, the Court of Appeal will have
reason to review whether immunity is at hand by virtue of the provision in article 19. If

this is not the case, the property does not enjoy state immunity.

[30]

(31]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

The part of article 21 relevant in the present review is subparagraph (c), which concerns
immunity for property of a central bank and similar property. For immunity to be
granted, the wording of the provision stipulates that two conditions must be met. The
relevant institution must be a central bank or other monetary authority of the state and
the property shall belong to this entity. In legal literature on international law, it has
been discussed whether the provision shall be applied categorically or functionally. A
categorical application of the provision would mean that property belonging to a central
bank or other monetary authority of the state enjoys immunity already on the basis of
the nature of the property. Those who instead favor a functional interpretation of the
provision argue that it should be read in light of the definition of the term “State” in
article 2.1 (b) (iii). For the property of a central bank, this would mean that the property
would enjoy state immunity only to the extent that the relevant central bank is “entitled
to perform and [is] actually performing acts in the exercise of sovereign authority of the
State” (see e.g. Chester Brown & Roger O’Keefe, “Article 21”, p. 343 in The United
Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property: a

commentary, Roger O’Keefe et al. (ed.) 2013).

Therefore, in its review based on article 21.1 (c), the Court of Appeal must first decide
the questions of whether the National Bank is such a central bank as covered by the
provision and whether the property belongs to the National Bank in the sense intended
by the provision. If the answers to those questions are in the affirmative, the Court of
Appeal must also determine whether the provision shall be applied categorically or
functionally. If the provision shall be applied categorically, the relevant property enjoys
state immunity. If the provision shall be applied functionally, the Court of Appeal must
determine whether the National Bank is has a right to perform, and with respect to the
property actually performs, acts in the exercise of the sovereign authority of the state
Kazakhstan, and the outcome of this determination will be decisive as to whether state

immunity is at hand on the basis of this provision.

[32]

[33]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

16
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

Is the National Bank a central bank as envisioned by article 21.1 (c)?

The convention contains no definition of the term “central bank” and customary
international law has not produced a uniform meaning of the term. In legal literature on
international law, a central bank has been generally described as an institution set up by
the state that issues money and is in charge of the monetary policy. It has further been
noted that such a bank may also be tasked with supervising the national banking and
currency systems, providing banking services to the state, administering the state’s gold
and currency reserves and the like (see e.g. Hazel Fox & Philippa Webb, The Law of
State Immunity, 3" ed., 2013, p. 373 f. and Ingrid Wuerth, Immunity from Execution of
Central Bank Assets, p. 267 f. in The Cambridge Handbook of Immunities and
International Law, Tom Ruys et al. (ed.), 2019). In the book The Law of State
Immunity (2013), Hazel Fox and Philippa Webb argue that a particular characteristic of
central banks is that they also enjoy substantial autonomy from the states that
incorporated them (Hazel Fox & Philippa Webb, The Law of State Immunity, 3“ ed.,
2013, p. 374). The authors have, however, pointed to difficulties in generalizing on the
management of central banks and stressed that in some countries they are authorities
under the authority of the government, whereas in others they are separate legal entities
(Hazel Fox & Philippa Webb, The Law of State Immunity, 3" ed., 2013, p. 373 f.). In
this context, it should also be emphasized that state practice implies that there is a limit
on the extent of the autonomy of a central bank from the state before the right to
immunity for its property is called into question (see e.g. the case Trendtex Trading

Corpn v Central Bank of Nigeria [1977] 1 All ER 881;64 ILR111; [1977] QB 529).

The Court of Appeal finds that the determining factor for whether a certain institution is
a central bank in the sense of article 21.1 (c) ought, in view of the foregoing, be how the
institution is constituted and its functions. As concerns the issue of a central bank’s
autonomy from the state, also aspects of the governance and purpose of the central bank
should be taken into account (cf. e.g. Amsterdam District Court’s judgment of 5

January 2018 in case no. C/13/638381/KG ZA 17-1217 FB/MB).

[34]

[35]

[36]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

It is undisputed that the state of Kazakhstan has appointed the National Bank as its
central bank and that the operations of the National Bank are governed by Kazakhstani
law. The Kazakhstani Law on the National Bank stipulates that Kazakhstan has tasked
the National Bank with carrying out the state’s monetary policy, ensure the function of
the payment system, regulate the currency and supervise the financial system (articles 1
and 2). It is further clear from this Law that the National Bank is tasked with ensuring
price stability in the country, determining the official interest rate, carrying out currency
exchange transactions in the Kazakhstani currency tenge and managing, amongst other
things, the National Fund and the currency reserves (articles 7, 8, 29 and 39). That the
practical reality is such as stipulated in the legislation is strongly supported by the
testimony provided by Aliya Moldabekova and the other evidence invoked by the
Republic and the National Bank. The Court of Appeal finds that the National Bank has
been incorporated by the Kazakhstani state, fills such functions described in legal
literature on international law as typical for a central bank and that its mission is
statutory and clearly defined. This means that the Court of Appeal finds that the
National Bank, as regards its constitution and function, is such a central bank as

envisioned by the provision.

The question then is, as argued by the Investors, whether the autonomy of the National
Bank from the Kazakhstani state is so insufficient that the National Bank cannot be
viewed as a central bank. In this respect, the Court of Appeal must evaluate the
Kazakhstani regulations which govern the legal status and operations of the bank, as
well as the other evidence invoked by the Investors in support of their claim of
insufficient autonomy. The parties have submitted relevant regulations in English

translations.

As regards the legal status of the National Bank, the Law on the National Bank
stipulates that the National Bank is a state organ which shall represent the interests of
the state in relation to central banks of other states, international banks and other
financial and credit institutions (articles 1 and 2), that the National Bank shall be a
“legal entity in organizational legal form of a republican state institution” and that it, on

the state’s behalf, shall incorporate certain legal entities (article 6). Under article 6 of

[37]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

the Law on the National Bank, the National Bank shall be considered as a legal entity.
The Kazakhstani Civil Code stipulates that a legal entity must have its own balance
sheet or budget. The regulations on the central bank stipulate that the National Bank has
its own balance sheet. It is further clear from the regulations that the central bank may
enter into civil law relations in its own name (see articles 1.4 and 1.5). The fourth
paragraph of article 22 of the Law on the National Bank stipulates that the Kazakhstani
government shall not be liable for the obligations of the National Bank and that the
National Bank shall not be liable of the obligations of the government, unless it has
explicitly undertaken such liability. Thus, the National Bank is — according to

Kazakhstani law — a legal entity.

As regards the governance of the National Bank, Kazakhstani law stipulates, amongst
other things, the following. The Law on the National Bank stipulates that the National
Bank shall be subordinated to the President of Kazakhstan (article 3) and that its capital
is owned by the state (article 9). The same Law further stipulates that, following the
President’s approval of the National Bank’s annual report, the remainder of the
National Bank’s undistributed annual net profits shall be transferred to the state budget
within a certain period (article 11). The Law further stipulates that the President has
influence in the appointment and removal of the National Bank’s representatives and
that the President is represented on the National Bank’s Board of Directors (articles 13,
14, 16 and 18). As concerns the President’s statutory powers in these respects, the Law
authorizes the President to appoint and remove the chair as well as four of the nine
directors of the National Bank and that the President has authority to determine the
National Bank’s organization, the number of employees and their compensation. In this
context it should be mentioned that a report invoked by the Republic and the National
Bank — Issues in the Governance of Central Banks — issued by the biggest cooperation
entity for central banks, the Bank of International Settlements, clarifies that in the
majority out of the 47 countries described in the report, it is the head of state or
government that appoints the chair of the central bank and that in one third of the

countries, it is the government or the minister of finance who appoints the chair.

[38]

[39]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

According to the Investors, the governance of the National Fund is an expression of the
National Bank’s insufficient autonomy from the Kazakhstani state. Here, the Investors
have pointed out that article 8 of the Law on the National Bank stipulates a requirement
that the National Bank and the Republic be parties to the National Fund Agreement and
that Kazakhstan’s President may unilaterally terminate the Agreement (article 7.4 of the
National Fund Agreement). The Investors have further argued that Kazakhstan’s
President has a right to decide on the operations of the National Fund as long as the
decisions comply with Kazakhstani law (article 3.1.2 of the National Fund Agreement)
and may decide on the fund as regards “size and directions” (Presidential Decree no.
402). The Court of Appeal notes, however, that Presidential Decree no. 385 stipulates
that transfers of funds from the National Fund to Kazakhstan may be carried out only
for certain specific purposes and in accordance with a statutory procedure and that the
funds withdrawn must be used in accordance with the purposes of the National Fund.
From Aliya Moldabekova’s testimony it has further been clarified that the funds must
be paid in the currency tenge and that the transfer must be approved by Kazakhstan’s
parliament and be incorporated into the state budget. In addition, Kazakhstan’s Budget
Code stipulates that the funds of the National Fund may not be used for payments to
individuals or legal entities or as security for the performance of obligations (article

23.4).

The Investors have further stressed, amongst other things, that Kazakhstan’s President
during an expanded government meeting expressed discontent concerning the National
Bank’s performance of its mission, that the President in a statement in 2018 to the
Kazakhstani citizens encouraged the National Bank to act on the issue of loans in
foreign currency and that the President had removed several chairs of the National
Bank. The Investors have also pointed out that the National Bank in a report published
in an Asian financial magazine in 2015 had been ascribed “a low level of transparency
and independency [sic]” (Daniyar Nurbayev, Independence and Transparency of the
Central Bank of Kazakhstan, 26 August 2015, in the Journal of Asian Finance,
Economics and Business, Vol. 2, p. 31-38) and that an article published by the think-
tank Carnegie Endowment for International Peace clarifies that several officials of the

National Bank were dismissed in response to protests against a devaluation of the

[40]

{41]

[42]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION
20
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05
currency in August of 2015 (Paul Stronski, Kazakhstan at Twenty-Five: Stable but
Tense, Carnegie Endowment for Peace, 2016, p. 2). In addition, the Investors have
invoked a report by the Swedish Ministry for Foreign Affairs, which refers to a so-
called rule-of-law index devised by the World Justice Project and which covers 113

countries. Kazakhstan has been placed in the middle of this index.

In view of the considerable variation that, according to legal literature on international
law, exists on the issue of the legal status of central banks, the Court of Appeal finds
that what has otherwise been presented on the National Bank and its governance cannot

entail that it would not be a central bank in the sense of article 21.1 (c).

In sum, the evidence demonstrates that the National Bank has characteristics of a
central bank. The evidence does not support the assertion that the National Bank lacks
autonomy vis-d-vis the Kazakhstani state to such extent that it cannot be considered a
central bank. Therefore, the National Bank is a central bank as envisioned by the

provision.

Does the property belong to the National Bank in the sense intended by article 21.1 (c)?

The term “property” is also not defined in the convention. Guidance for the
interpretation of the term is most closely found in the convention’s appendix, named
“Understanding with respect to certain provisions of the Convention”, which according
to article 25 is an integrated part of the convention. The appendix states with respect to
article 19 inter alia that “The words ‘property that has a connection with the entity’ in
subparagraph (c) are to be understood as broader than ownership or possession.”
According to its wording, article 21 is directly linked to article 19 (c). It can therefore
be assumed that the statements on “property” in the appendix also apply when the term
is used in article 21. All legal opinions on state immunity invoked in the matter at issue
point to the same direction. The aforementioned leads to the conclusion that all assets
owned, managed, possessed or controlled by a central bank may be considered to fall

under the scope of the term “property of” in article 21.1 (c).

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

Article 2 of Presidential Decree no. 402 and article 21 of the Kazakhstani Budget Code
stipulate that the National Bank manages the assets of the National Fund and, according
to articles 1 and 2 of the National Fund Agreement, the National Bank is entitled to
possess, use and dispose of the funds in the Fund. This is evident also from the National
Bank’s annual report for the year 2017. It is undisputed that the National Bank has
transferred part of the assets in the National Fund to the third party Bank of New York
Mellon (BNYM) as global custodian, that this bank has retained SEB as sub-custodian
and that SEB has opened securities accounts and bank accounts in Sweden on BNYM’s
behalf. Under the Global Custody Agreement between the National Bank and BNYM,
the ownership to specific assets held by BNYM shall be registered in the National
Bank’s name in BNYM’s register. That BNYM manages the assets at SEB on the
National Bank’s behalf and acts solely upon the instructions of the National Bank
follows from a letter from BNYM of 13 October 2017 addressed to Frank Advokatbyra

AB and from the examination of Aliya Moldabekova.

In sum, against the background of the presented evidence there can be no doubt that the
property subject to attachment belongs to the National Bank in the manner intended by

article 21.1 (c).

Shall article 21.1 (c) be applied categorically or functionally?

The parties have presented different views on the correct interpretation of article 21.1
(c). The Republic and the National Bank have argued that the provision shall be applied
categorically, whereas the Investors have argued that it shall be applied functionally. To
the extent the article shall not be read in conjunction with article 2, the Investors have
argued that the phrase “other monetary authority of the state” in article 21.1 (c) at least
implies a requirement that the property of the central bank at issue shall be used for

monetary purposes in order to enjoy state immunity.

First, the Court of Appeal notes that the provision in article 21.1 (c) does not state that
the immunity is limited to property intended for use in any specific manner. Thus, the

wording of the provision supports a categorical application (see Hazel Fox & Philippa

{47]

[48]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

Webb, op. cit., p. 522 f. and Pal Wrange’s legal opinion of 10 October 2018, p. 7). The
wording of the other parts of article 21 also support a categorical application of its
subparagraph (c). In all subparagraphs of the article, except subparagraph (c), there are
requirements on certain use of the property in order for it to enjoy state immunity. The

fact that the corresponding limitation is missing in subparagraph (c) must reasonably

mean that there is no requirement that the property of a central bank shall be used in a

certain manner or for certain purposes in order to enjoy immunity (cf. Pal Wrange’s

legal opinion of 10 October 2018, p. 6).

Also other, supplementary, means of interpretation than the wording of the convention,
such as the structure of the convention concerning immunity from post-judgment
measures of constraint, support a categorical application of the provision in article

21.1 (c). The convention contains two provisions on state immunity from post-judgment
measures of constraint, of which one — article 19 (c) — makes state immunity
conditional upon certain use of the relevant property, whereas the other — article 21 —
exempts property of specific nature from the application of article 19 (c). If the
intention would have been that state immunity always should be conditional upon
certain use of the relevant property, then the provision in article 21 would have served
no purpose. The structure of the convention on these issues is also apparently in line
with the underlying purpose of article 21, which is to protect property of particularly
sensitive nature from measures of constraint (Chester Brown & Roger O’Keefe, Article
21, p. 334 in The United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and
Their Property: a commentary, Roger O’ Keefe et al. (ed.), 2013, see also e.g. Ulf
Linderfalk’s legal opinion of 25 June 2018, p. 9 and Said Mahmoudi’s legal opinion of
20 April 2018, p. 7).

In view of the convention’s objective and purpose, the wording of the provision, seen in
its context, clearly supports a categorical application. This means, on the basis for
interpretation of treaties provided in the Vienna Convention, that a review of so-called
supplementary means of interpretation is of limited interest. It can however be noted
that the question of whether a central bank’s property enjoys immunity due to its nature

or is conditional upon its use was dealt with on several occasions in the preparatory

[49]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION
23

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

works to the provision that became article 21.1 (c). At one stage of the negotiations,
several states objected to the then proposed wording, which corresponds to the now
applicable wording, arguing that it would mean that all property of a central bank or
other monetary authority of the state would unconditionally be considered as non-
commercial. In response thereto, ILC’s rapporteur on the issue proposed an addition
with the following wording “and used for monetary purpose” to be added in fine (see
Said Mahmoudi’s legal opinion of 20 April 2018, p. 7 f.). However, the proposal did
not receive sufficient support amongst the ILC delegates, and the addition was
removed. In his legal opinion, Prof. Mahmoudi has taken the aforementioned to mean
that the intention is that the property of central banks shall enjoy categorical immunity.
Professors Linderfalk and Wuerth have both in their legal opinions pointed out that the
explanation to the rejection of the addition could be that the majority of the ILC
delegates deemed it redundant, since it merely expressed what already followed from
the definition of state in article 2.1 (b) (iii). In the commentary to ILC’s final draft
provision, i.e. after the addition had been rejected, it was stated, however, that the
purpose of the provision was to grant certain categories of property a special protection
and that this was deemed necessary specifically against the background that court
practice in certain states contained granted motions for measures of constraint against
bank accounts or property of central banks of foreign states (Government Bill
2008/09:204, p. 82, see also Said Mahmoudi’s legal opinion of 20 April 2018, p. 7).
The Court of Appeal finds that the commentary to ILC’s final draft of the provision
strongly supports that the provision shall be applied categorically. Also the
circumstance that the question of whether central bank property should be granted
immunity based on its nature or not was discussed on several occasions during the
preparatory stages, without it leading to any adjustments of the proposed wording of the

convention supports this interpretation.

As concerns Swedish sources , the Government Bill underlying the act incorporating
the convention states that the provision in article 21 means that the property “By its
very nature ought to [...] be considered in use or intended for use by the state solely for
non-commercial purposes.” (Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 82). In the case NJA

2011 p. 475, the Supreme Court referenced article 21 when it reviewed the issue of

[50]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

24
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05
what should be deemed as property in use by the state for non-commercial purposes
under article 19 (c). The Supreme Court stated that “Impediment due to state immunity
[...] should, however, be deemed to be at hand if the purpose of the use of the property
is of a qualified nature [...] or when the property is of such specific nature as set forth
in article 21 of the 2004 UN convention.” Thus, the Swedish legislator and the Supreme
Court apparently adhere to the interpretation that article 21.1 (c) shall be applied

categorically.

State practice does, nevertheless, provide some support for a functional application of
the provision in article 21.1 (c) (see e.g. Ingrid Wuerth’s legal opinion of 15 January
2020, p. 4 and 5). There is also discussion in certain legal literature on international law
concerning such an application. Inter alia, Chester Brown and Roger O’Keefe argue in
chapter “Article 21” in The United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities for
States and Their Property: a commentary that article 21.1 (c), despite its appearance,
does not necessarily render immune all central bank property or the like, but only to the
extent a parallel application of article 2 allows it. According to the authors, this means
that the property of a central bank does not enjoy immunity for example when the
central bank engages in commercial activity, because then it does in fact not perform
acts in the exercise of the sovereign authority of the state as per the provision of article
2.1 (b) (iii). The authors do, however, stress that it is not clear whether, but unlikely
that, this potential consequence of the interaction between articles 21.1 (c) and 2.1 (b)
(iii) was intended. Prof. Wuerth, who even more clearly advocates a functional
interpretation, has in her legal opinion stated that the provisions of articles 2.1 (b) (iii),
19 (c) and 21.1 (c) are all based on the field of use of the property and the purpose of
the possession of the property. According to Prof. Wuerth, the functional requirement in
article 2.1 (b) (iii) is incorporated in the provision in article 19 (c) through the phrase
“property of a state” since the provision in article 21.1 (c) refers to “... or other
monetary authority”. However, Prof. Wuerth acknowledges that the interaction between
article 2 and articles 19 and 21 may have been unintentional. The Court of Appeal
concludes that it appears questionable, on the basis of the principles of the Vienna
Convention, to apply the provision in article 21.1 (c) functionally if an interaction

between the provisions was not intended in the preparatory works to the convention.

(51]

[52]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

25
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

In sum, the wording of the provision, seen in its context and in light of the objective and
purpose of the convention, strongly implies that it shall be applied categorically. A
categorical application is also supported by the preparatory works to the convention as
well as by what the Swedish legislator has stated in the Government Bill which
incorporates the convention, and also by the statements of the Supreme Court in NJA
2011 p. 475. The opposite view, which has been set forth in certain legal literature on
international law and which has support in certain state practice, does not deprive the
aforementioned reasons of their strength. Against this background, the Court of Appeal
finds that the provision shall be applied categorically. This means that property that
belongs to a central bank or other monetary authority of the state enjoys immunity

already on the basis of the nature of the property.

Irrespective of the assessment made by the Court of Appeal above, the Court wishes to
point out that it cannot be excluded that there may be instances when property, despite
belonging to a central bank, cannot enjoy immunity under the provision in article 21.1
(c). If, for example, a central bank in competition with other market actors would offer
banking services to consumers, it would be difficult to argue that property of the
commercial segment of the banking operations would enjoy immunity. It cannot be
excluded that there may be other situations where a categorical application of article
21.1 (c) would lead to unreasonable outcomes. There should consequently exist a
limited scope to apply article 21.1 (c) in conjunction with article 2.1 (b) (iii) with
respect to central bank property. This could mean that the relevant property would not
enjoy immunity if the sovereignty criterion is not met. Such an application should,
however, be limited to cases where it is obvious that the relevant property is held in
such manner as is fundamentally different from the regular operations of a central bank
and a categorical application would lead to an unreasonable outcome. However, the
Court of Appeal wishes to stress that this cannot be the case for property of a central
bank held within the framework of a national fund such as the one in the matter at issue.
Management of the state’s economy must be deemed as such an exercise of sovereign
authority as intended by article 2.1 (b) (iii) (cf. the case AIG Capital Partners, Inc &
Anr v. Kazakhstan (National Bank of Kazakhstan intervening), 2005, EWHC 2239

[53]

[54]

[55]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

26
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05
(Comm); [2006] 1 WLR 1420, [2006] 1 All ER (comm) 1 129 ILR 589, see also Ingrid
Wuerth, Immunity from Execution of Central Bank Assets, p. 280 in The Cambridge

Handbook of Immunities and International Law, Tom Ruys et al. (ed.), 2019).

The Court of Appeal’s conclusion means that the relevant property enjoys state
immunity. Accordingly, the Investors’ objection concerning abuse of rights remains to

be reviewed.

Has Kazakhstan by way of abuse of rights lost the right to invoke state immunity?

As grounds for their objection that Kazakhstan has lost the right to invoke immunity by
way of abuse of rights, the Investors have stated mainly the following. The arbitral
award in the case between the Investors and the Republic was rendered on the basis of
the intergovernmental treaty the Energy Charter Treaty, to which both Sweden and
Kazakhstan are parties. Article 26 of the treaty provides that an arbitral award is final
and binding on the parties and that all parties shall consent to the enforcement thereof.
In spite of this, payment has not been made. In the matter at issue, Kazakhstan invokes
immunity for the sole purpose of circumventing the obligation it has under the said

treaty.

As detailed above, the starting point of the convention is that state immunity applies
and that it may be pierced only to the extent that follows from the provisions of the
convention. The Court of Appeal notes that the convention does not contain a provision
entailing that a state is denied the right to invoke immunity by reference to abuse of
rights. It is true that the ICJ has held on several occasions that immunity may be pierced
when state representatives or diplomatic staff have violated international law (see e.g.
Ulf Linderfalk’s legal opinion of 25 June 2018 p. 14 ff.). As regards states, however,
the question has been answered in the negative, irrespective of the severity of the
violation of international law (Germany v. Italy: Greece intervening, Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports 2012, see also Pal Wrange’s legal opinion of 10 October 2018, p. 10). There is

no state practice that indicates that anything else would be the case. Thus, there is

[56]

[57]

[58]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

27
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL. DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05
nothing to support the Investors’ objection that a state could lose its right to invoke

immunity against measures of constraint on the grounds that it has abused its rights.

The Court of Appeal also wishes to stress that the purpose of state immunity is to
prevent that a foreign state is subjected to proceedings before another state’s courts
without consent (Government Bill 2008/09:204, p. 38). It is only logical that immunity
from post-judgment measures of constraint is invoked specifically on the ground that
the state does not consent to them, i.e. irrespective of the state’s position on the
proceeding that lead to the measure of constraint. The fact that state immunity from
measures of constraint is unrelated to the question of whether the state is required under
international law to fulfill an obligation has been held by the ICJ (Germany v. Italy:
Greece intervening, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2012, p. 100). The convention, with
separate rules on state immunity from jurisdiction and from measures of constraint, is
an expression of this distinction. The Court of Appeal notes that the doctrine on abuse

of rights advocated by the Investors is irreconcilable with the rules on state immunity.

In sum, the Court of Appeal finds that international law does not support the
proposition that a state would lose its right to invoke immunity from measures of

constraint on the grounds that it has abused its rights.

Summary of conclusions on the issue of state immunity

In reviewing a question of state immunity, Swedish courts shall apply the customary
international law expressed in the provisions of the convention. The assessment of
whether immunity from post-judgment measures of constraint is at hand shall be made
first on the basis of the provision in article 21 of the convention. The evidence in the
matter at issue demonstrates that the National Bank is a central bank and that the
relevant property is property of the National Bank in the sense set out in article 21.1 (c).
Because the provision shall be applied categorically, the present property enjoys state
immunity. A functional application of the provision, taking into account article 2 of the
convention, would not lead to any other conclusion. There is no support in international

law for deviating from the rules on state immunity due to abuse of rights. Because the

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

28
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05
property enjoys state immunity, it may not be subject to attachment. Therefore, the

attachments at issue in this matter shall be lifted.

With this outcome, the Court of Appeal lacks reason to review whether there is any bar
to the attachments on either of the other grounds argued by the Republic and the

National Bank.

Litigation costs

In view of the outcome in the matter at issue, the Republic and the National Bank shall
be discharged from the obligation to compensate the Investors for their litigation costs
before the District Court and the Investors shall be ordered to jointly and severally
compensate the Republic and the National Bank for their respective reasonable
litigation costs before the District Court as well as the Court of Appeal. The Court of
Appeal finds no reason to question that the work reported by counsel for the Republic
and the National Bank has been carried out nor that the parties have incurred the

reported expenses and costs.

The Investors have argued that they, irrespective of the outcome of the action at issue,
shall not be liable to compensate the USD 136,793 which relate to the ground argued
before the Court of Appeal that the enforcement would violate ordre public. As a
reason for this position, the Investors have mainly argued that the litigation costs
incurred to argue the Republic’s case on this issue, in view of the Court of Appeal’s
dismissal decision of 3 February 2020, cannot be reasonably justified to protect the
interests of the party. The Court of Appeal agrees with what the Investors have stated

concerning the allocation of the litigation costs for this portion of the case.

Otherwise, the Investors have not presented precise objections to any cost items, but
have left it to the Court of Appeal to determine the reasonableness of the claimed

amounts.

[63]

[64]

[65]

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

On this issue, the Court of Appeal finds as follows. The Republic and the National
Bank have claimed compensation for costs for legal counsel, expenses for legal
opinions and assistance by foreign counsel as well as costs for own time spent. The
matter has comprised several complex factual and legal issues. In addition to Swedish
and international law, also the application of English and Kazakhstani law has been
relevant. The scope of the documents of the case has been very extensive and all parties
have invoked substantial evidence. This is true in particular for the Republic and the
National Bank. As regards the costs for legal counsel, the Court of Appeal further notes
that the Republic and the National Bank have been appellants before the District Court
as well as the Court of Appeal and have made several objections to the attachments.
Since the matter has involved foreign legal systems and it has been necessary to
coordinate with other legal proceedings in which Kazakhstan is a party and which are
connected to the underlying attachments, the Court of Appeal finds no reason to
question the reasonableness of the expenses for foreign legal counsel. It is only logical
that a matter concerning measures of constraint concerning state property is of
particular importance to the foreign state. In addition, the Court of Appeal notes that the
amounts of the relevant attachments are substantial. The outcome could also impact the
other legal proceedings mentioned above. Against this background, the Court of Appeal
finds the Republic’s and the National Bank’s claims for compensation before the

District Court as well as the Court of Appeal reasonable.

In view of the nature and scope of the case at issue, there is no reason to question the
reasonableness of the other claims, which cover expenses for transcription,
interpretation and translation as well as travel costs for witnesses and party

representatives.

The above conclusions of the Court of Appeal mean that the Investors shall be ordered
to jointly and severally compensate the Republic and the National Bank for their
respective litigation costs before the District Court and the Court of Appeal in the

amounts set out in the Court of Appeal’s decision.

HOW TO APPEAL, see appendix B

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

30
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL DECISION OA 7709-19
Department 05

Appeals to be submitted by 8 July 2020

The decision has been made by Judges of Appeal Sven Jonson, Anne Mellqvist and

Katja Isberg Amnis as well as Deputy Associate Judge Henrik Starfelt, reporting judge.

