  

Neutral Citation Number: [2017] EWHC 1348 (Comm)

Case No: CL-2014-000070
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
COMMERCIAL COURT

Royal Courts of Justice
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL

 

Date: 06/06/2017

Before :

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES CBE

 

Between :

(1) ANATOLIE STATI Claimants
(2) GABRIEL STATI
(3) ASCOM GROUP S.A.
(4) TERRA RAF TRANS TRAIDING LTD

- and —

THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN Defendant

Thomas Sprange QC and Ruth Byrne (instructed by King & Spalding) for the Claimants
Ali Malek QC, Christopher Harris and Paul Choon Kiat Wee (instructed by Herbert Smith
Freehills) for the Defendant

Hearing dates: 6-7 February 2017
Approved Judgment
I direct that pursuant to CPR PD 39A para 6.1 no official shorthand note shall be taken of this
Judgment and that copies of this version as handed down may be treated as authentic.

 

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

Knowles J:

Introduction

1.

On 19 December 2013 in arbitral proceedings seated in Sweden (“the Arbitration”),
the Defendant (“the State”) was ordered to pay damages in excess of US$500 million
to the Claimants (“the Award”).

The Arbitration was instituted pursuant to the Energy Charter Treaty (“the ECT”).
The arbitral tribunal (“the Tribunal’) comprised Professor Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel,
Mr David R Haigh QC and Professor Sergei Lebedev.

The Award is within the New York Convention (the United Nations Convention on
the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards 1958). The Claimants
sought permission to enforce the Award in this jurisdiction and on 28 February 2014
permission was initially granted, on the Claimants’ ‘without notice’ application. On
30 September 2014 the Claimants also commenced proceedings in the United States
District Court for the District of Columbia (“the US Court”) to enforce the Award in
the United States.

Meanwhile in the country of the seat, the State applied to the Svea Court of Appeal
(‘the Swedish Court’), to set aside the Award.

On 7 April 2015 the State issued an application (“the English Application”) to set
aside the permission that had been granted to enforce the Award in this jurisdiction.
At that time, the State took three points. First that there was no valid arbitration
agreement. Second that the Tribunal was invalidly constituted. Third that there had
been a number of serious procedural errors which had the effect of preventing the
State from presenting its case to the Tribunal.

Shortly after the English Application was issued, the State was successful in an
application in the United States for judicial assistance (“the US Disclosure
Proceedings’’), an application that had been contested by the Claimants but resulted in
a subpoena against a third party compelling the production of documents. It is the
State’s case that the documents produced revealed fraud by the Claimants. On 27 or
28 August 2015 the State applied to amend the English Application to add the
contention that enforcement of the Award would contravene English public policy by
reason of fraud by the Claimants.

On 3 September 2015 Popplewell J stayed the English Application pending the
determination of the proceedings before the Swedish Court to set aside the Award.
The grounds before the Swedish Court were amended to add the contention that the
Award should be declared invalid on the basis that it would contravene Swedish
public policy by reason of fraud by the Claimants.

In due course on 9 December 2016 the Swedish Court decided the amended
application before it and dismissed that application. Meanwhile on 11 May 2016 the
US Court had refused a motion by the State to amend to add the alleged fraud to its
grounds.

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

The State accepts that the decision of the Swedish Court precludes it from pursuing
the three points it originally took in the English Application. The Claimants’ position
is that there is no sufficient basis for the State to pursue the allegation of fraud that
remains. Moreover, argue the Claimants, the decisions of the Swedish Court and of
the US Court preclude the State from pursuing the contention that enforcement would
contravene English public policy by reason of that alleged fraud.

On this hearing the Claimants request that I dismiss the English Application. The
State requests that I allow the English Application (duly amended) to proceed to a
trial.

Approach

11.

The following principles from the authorities cited by the parties sufficiently
summarise the approach to be taken:

(1) “Recognition or enforcement of a New York Convention award shall not be
refused except in the following cases ...if it would be contrary to public policy to
recognise or enforce the award”: section 103(1) and (3) Arbitration Act 1996.

(2) “[T]he public policy exception in section 103(3) is confined to the public policy of
England (as the country in which enforcement is sought) in maintaining the fair
and orderly administration of justice: Mustill & Boyd, at pp. 91-92.”; IPCO
Nigeria), Ltd_v Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation [2005] EWHC 726
(Comm); [2005] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 326 at [13] per Gross J.

(3) When addressing the question whether an award has been obtained by fraud or the
award or the way in which it was procured is contrary to public policy the Court
will normally look to see whether “‘some form of reprehensible or unconscionable
conduct has contributed in a substantial way to the obtaining of the award”: see
Double K Oil Products 1996 Limited v Neste Oil OYJ [2009] EWHC 3380
(Comm); [2010] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 141 at [33] per Blair J; and see Gater Assets Ltd v
Nak Naftogaz Ukrainiy [2008] 1 CLC 141 at [41] per Tomlinson J (“That means
conduct which we would be comfortable in describing as fraud, conduct
dishonestly intended to mislead”).

 

(4) It may be sufficient to show that a party “had deliberately and dishonestly failed to
disclose [material] in the arbitration and made submissions or called evidence
which deliberately and dishonestly continued that concealment and misled the
tribunal” and that the material would have had “an important influence on or
would probably have affected the result of the arbitration”: Chantiers de
l Atlantique SA v Gaztransport & Technigaz SAS [2011] EWHC 3383 (Comm) at
[58] and [311] per Flaux J.

(5) “[C]onsiderations of public policy, if relied upon to resist enforcement of an
award, should be approached with extreme caution”: IPCO (Nigeria), above, at
[13].

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

(6) “[T]here can be no realistic doubt that s. 103 of the [Arbitration] Act embodies a
pre-disposition to favour enforcement of New York Convention Awards,
reflecting the underlying purpose of the New York Convention itself’: IPCO
Nigeria), above, at [11].

(7) For the English Court to permit a party to pursue to a trial of the issues an
allegation that a New York Convention award was obtained by fraud, normally
two conditions will require to be fulfilled: Westacre Investments Inc _v
Jugoimport-SPDR Holding Co Ltd [2000] QB 288 (CA) at 309F per Waller LJ
(dissenting in the result).

(8) The first condition is “that the evidence to establish the fraud was not available to
the party alleging the fraud at the time of the hearing before the arbitrators”:
Westacre, above, at 309F, but noting the qualification at G-H.

(9) The second condition is that “there is a prima facie case of fraud which is
sufficient to overcome the extreme caution of the court when invited to set aside
an award on the grounds of public policy”: IPCO (Nigeria) Limited_v Nigerian
National Petroleum Corporation [2015] EWCA Civ 1144; [2016] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 5
at [191] per Christopher Clarke LJ.

(10)And “where perjury is the fraud alleged, ie., where the very issue before the
arbitrators was whether the witness or witnesses were lying, the evidence must be
so strong that it would reasonably be expected to be decisive at a hearing, and if
unanswered must have that result.”: Westacre, above, at 309G.

I add that as a Judge of this Court, I should accord the greatest respect to the Swedish
Court, as to the US Court. I do so willingly in both cases. If anything, the importance
of mutual respect between courts that have responsibilities in relation to commercial
arbitration that is of international reach — whether responsibilities in relation to
oversight or enforcement - is increasing all the time as commerce becomes more
globalised and interconnected.

The LPG Plant

13.

14.

The business subject matter of the Arbitration concerned the exploration and
extraction of hydrocarbons.

The damages awarded included damages for the value of a liquefied petroleum gas
plant (“the LPG Plant”). Tolkynneftegaz LLP (““TNG”) was the owner of the equity
interest in the LPG Plant. By 2002 the Claimants had acquired the whole of TNG.

On the question of the level of damages, the Claimants argued in the arbitration that
the LPG Plant should be valued as a going concern. The State argued that the LPG
Plant should be valued as scrap because, they contended, the project behind it had
failed.

Before the Tribunal, the Claimants claimed to have invested more than US$245
million in the development and construction of the LPG Plant. This was the evidence

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

of the first Claimant himself, and of Mr Artur Lungu called by the Claimants, each by
witness statement and in oral evidence before the Tribunal. It carried through into
expert reports and into statements from arbitration counsel. The figure was not broken
down, but did appear in audited or reviewed financial statements of TNG.

The Claimants also relied in the Arbitration on a number of indicative bids for the
acquisition of the LPG Plant, within a bidding process in 2008 known as Project
Zenith. One of the indicative bids had been submitted by a subsidiary of
KazMunaiGas (“KMG”), an oil and gas company controlled by the State, in
September 2008. For the LPG Plant the bid estimated a value of US$199 million (“the
KMG Indicative Bid”).

As shown below, the Tribunal decided to base its assessment of the valuation of the
LPG Plant on the KMG Indicative Bid, awarding damages of US$ 199 million in
respect of the LPG Plant.

The Award

19.

The essential parts of the Award are as follows:

“1743. First, in addition to an application of the Tribunal’s considerations in the
chapter on causation above in this Award, the Tribunal has no doubt that [the
State’s] actions found above to be in breach of the ECT, in particular were a
cause for the delay and then discontinuance of Claimants’ completion of the LPG
Plant.

1745. The Tribunal is not persuaded by [the State’s] and their experts’ conclusion
that the LPG is a failed project and must be considered to have a negative value
and no damages at all can be claimed by Claimants. If that were so, [the State]
would not have been ready to invest further expenses in the completion of the
Plant, after [the State] had taken control of the Plant. However, there were
obviously plans to complete it. Publicly available information indicates that [the
State] was in fact preparing to open the LPG Plant in 2012. In a document entitled
“List of Investment projects of the Mangistauskoi Region, which are being
supervised in 2011”, there is a specific reference to the LPG Plant under
“Regional Projects”. The project is identified as having a cost of USD 315 million
(47 billion Tenge) and it was expected to start up in the first half of 2012 with a
capacity of 7 mcm of gas per day (2™ FTI Report para 7.7 and fns. 138 and 139).
[The State’s] argument that it cannot be identified with this document is not
persuasive. The LPG Plant was also listed on website of [the State’s] Embassy in
Israel under the caption “Large Investment Projects in Kazakhstan through 2012”
with the same project costs (FTI 2" Report para 7.7 and fn 140).

1746. Regarding the value of damages caused by [the State’s] action, the Tribunal
has taken note of the various extensive arguments submitted by the Parties relying
on their respective experts’ reports. However, the Tribunal considers that it does
not have to evaluate these reports and the very different results they reach. In the

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

20.

view of the Tribunal, the relatively best source for the valuation in the period of
the valuation date accepted by the Tribunal are the contemporaneous bids that
were made for the LPG Plant by third parties after Claimants’ efforts to sell the
LPG Plant, both before and after October 14, 2008. Prospective purchasers bid on
the Plant, not as scrap but obviously as prospectively operational. This is reflected
in the undisputed indicative offers made by interested buyers in 2008, which
valued the LPG Plant at USD 150 million on average. In this context, the
Tribunal is not persuaded by [the State’s] argument that these offers did not
reflect the anticipated price bidders were ready to pay, but were only strategic
offers to gain access to the data room. In this context, the Tribunal attributes a
limited evidentiary value to the testimony of [the State’s] witnesses from KNOC
and Total E&P, since these foreign companies remain active investors in [the
State] and, thus, for understandable reasons, have an interest to maintain a good
relationship with the government of that country.

1747. On the other hand, the Tribunal considers it to be of particular relevance
that an offer was made for the LPG Plant by state-owned KMG at that time for
USD 199 million. The Tribunal considers that to be the relatively best source of
information for the valuation of the LPG Plant among the various sources of
information submitted by the Parties regarding the valuation for the LPG Plant
during the relevant period of the valuation date accepted by the Tribunal ...

1748. Therefore, this is the amount of damages the Tribunal accepts in this
context.”

Thus in the Tribunal’s view, (a) the LPG Plant project had not failed, (b) prospective
purchasers bid on the LPG Plant as prospectively operational, and (c) “the relatively
best source for the valuation” were contemporaneous bids by third parties, and within
those, the KMG Indicative Bid specifically.

The Alleged Fraud

21.

22.

23.

24.

Perkwood Investment Limited (“Perkwood”) features in the Award. At paragraph
1450 it is described as a “third company”, alleged by the State to have been involved
in returning advances paid on cancellation by the Claimants of “delivery for
equipment to the LPG Plant”.

The same paragraph of the Award also makes it very clear that the State felt able to
allege before the Tribunal that the Claimants had “likely siphoned off ... monies”, had
“likely pocketed” money, and “would ... divert cash ... such as by paying ... double
the market price”. At the same time the State was also clear that it was “impossible to
see” “[l]ikely ... other transactions”.

Later (Award paragraph 1712) the Award summarises the State’s case that the
Claimants had not proved that US$ 245 million had been spent on the LPG Plant.

The facts to which I now turn are derived from the evidence of Ms Patricia
Nacimiento, and in particular from her Fourth and Fifth Witness Statements dated 27
August 2015 and 13 January 2017 and the documents referred to in those statements.

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

The evidence concerns the make-up of the US$ 245 million said by the Claimants to
have been spent on the LPG Plant.

There has been no oral testimony, including cross examination, at this stage. Ms
Nacimiento is a partner formerly of Norton Rose Fulbright LLP and now of Herbert
Smith Freehills Germany LLP. She was involved as counsel in the Arbitration and
since. I proceed on the basis that Ms Nacimiento has taken every care in the written
evidence she gives, under a statement of truth. She is to be taken to know that this
Court will have high expectations in these respects, especially in a case of this nature
involving very serious allegations.

Ms Nacimiento states that in the proceedings before the Swedish Court the Claimants
conceded that Perkwood and the Claimants were related. The State has, since the
Award, also discovered that in a separate arbitration (known as the JOA Arbitration)
and two months before the Award in this Arbitration, evidence of Mr Lungu filed on
behalf of the third Claimant in these proceedings had stated that Perkwood was
related to the Claimants. That was not the Claimants’ position in the Arbitration.

Documents that the State has obtained through the US Disclosure Proceedings include
a contract between Perkwood and TNG dated 17 February 2006 (‘the Perkwood
Contract”). This shows TNG agreeing to buy equipment from Perkwood relating to
the construction of the LPG Plant for US$115 million (a figure later increased).

It is the State’s case that at least a large proportion of this equipment had already been
purchased, at a far lower cost. The State points to Perkwood selling equipment for
US$93 million to TNG that had already been supplied through an arm’s length
contract at EUR 28.4 million or EUR31 million, and then Perkwood in 2008 charging
TNG a further US$31 million for the same equipment. Thus equipment worth no
more than EUR 31 million was ascribed a cost of US$ 124 million.

In the Arbitration, the Tribunal had upheld a request that the Claimants disclose “in so
far as in the Claimants’ possession, custody or control”, “documents specifying the
cost of construction and assembly operations, start-up and adjustment works in
respect of basic facilities of [the LPG Plant]”. Despite this ruling from the Tribunal
the Perkwood Contract was not disclosed in the Arbitration by the Claimants.

TNG also paid US$44 million to Perkwood as a “management fee”. In the case of this
fee there is no contemporaneous record of what management was undertaken. It
transpires that Perkwood, incorporated in 2005, from 2006 to 2009 filed accounts that
showed it was dormant. In 2011 it was struck off the register of companies and
dissolved. The truth is, say the Claimants, that a cost of US$44 million was ascribed
in return for nothing.

The documents obtained in the United States Disclosure Proceedings also indicate
that US$ 72 million of the figure of US$ 245 million (the total that the Claimants had
said was spent on the LPG Plant) was ascribed to equipment delivered but not yet
incorporated into the LPG Plant. The State contends that there was nowhere at the
LPG Plant where equipment of this value could have been stored. It was common
ground that the LPG Plant was almost complete.

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

Interest on construction costs, in a sum of US$60 million, also formed part of the
alleged costs of the LPG Plant. The State makes the point that where costs themselves
had not in truth been incurred, interest could not have been incurred.

Ms Nacimiento states in her Fifth Witness Statement that in the proceedings before
the Swedish Court the Claimants were required for the first time to respond to a
number of the State’s allegations. In this regard she brings out the following points in
her account of the proceedings before the Swedish Court:

a. The Claimants sought to justify the price charged under the Perkwood Contract in
part on the basis of transportation costs but did not submit any evidence in support
of the alleged transportation cost.

b. The Claimants initially contended that the further US$ 31 million charged under
the Perkwood Contract referred not to the same equipment but to spare parts. On
the final day of the hearing the Claimants changed their position and submitted
that new equipment that would be used to increase the capacity of the LPG Plant
was involved, but did not submit any evidence in support of this.

c. The Claimants did not submit any corroborating evidence to support the
proposition that management services were actually performed by or on behalf of
Perkwood.

d. The Claimants did not offer any explanation for what equipment had been
purchased for US$ 72 million, where it was stored or how it related to the state of
completion of the LPG Plant

In these circumstances the State alleges that the claim by the Claimants in the
Arbitration that costs incurred on the LPG Plant were US$ 245 million was dishonest.
The Claimants concealed, says the State, the true position from the auditors of TNG,
the relevant bidder (KMG) and the Tribunal, as well as the State. The conduct
affected in turn the accounts of TNG, the KMG Indicative Bid, and the Award.

Mr Thomas Sprange QC (appearing with Ms Ruth Byrne for the Claimants) submits
that “all that is before the Court ... is evidence that a related entity charged a large
management fee by way of mark-up and acquired plant and equipment on behalf of
the Joint Venture that constructed the plant.” I recognise that is a submission made in
summary form but nonetheless I do not, with respect, consider that way of describing
things is complete.

A great deal of what Ms Nacimiento says is not (at least yet) answered in detailed
evidence by the Claimants. This is a course open to the Claimants at this stage in
these proceedings. I am moreover very conscious that Ms Nacimiento’s Fifth Witness
Statement was served relatively close to the hearing before me, limiting the time
available to the Claimants to respond.

Mr Sprange QC submits that there is no prima facie evidence of fraud, either on the
Tribunal or at all. As to fraud on the Tribunal, he supports the conclusions of the
Swedish Court and the US Court and I deal with those separately. As to fraud “at all”,
there is in my judgment sufficient prima facie evidence summarised in the paragraphs
above.

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

Effect of the alleged fraud

38.

39.

40.

If the Claimants did dishonestly state the costs so that they did not represent true costs
and for work actually done, it will be necessary to establish whether the KMG
Indicative Bid was in the sum of US$199 million as a result.

Mr Sprange QC submits that there is no evidence from KMG as to the circumstances
surrounding the KMG Indicative Bid, “‘or that the alleged false representations even
formed part of its considerations”; that there is no “probative evidence ... as to
KMG’s rationale for [the KMG Indicative Bid]’. I do not find it possible to accept
these submissions.

The KMG Indicative Bid itself included these passages:

“The primary rationale behind our interest ... is the strategy to continue
increasing our reserves of hydrocarbon resources and building oil production
through acquisitions of oil and gas producing assets in accordance with our
Corporate Development Strategy.

The Indicative Offer herein relates to the proposed acquisition of 100% of the
share capital of [Kazpolmunay LLP (“KPM”) and TNG, collectively, “the
Company’)].

On the basis of the information contained in the Information Memorandum and
publicly available information, subject to the conditions and assumptions set out
elsewhere in this Indicative Offer and contingent upon further due diligence at
Phase II of the sale process, we value the Company at US$754 million on a debt
free and cash free basis (the “Enterprise Value”) for expected completion of the
Proposed Transaction in January 2009.

We estimate the value of the Borankol field at US$100 million, the value of the
Tolkyn field at US$455 million, and the value of the LPG plant at US$199
million.

In formulating our Indicative Offer, we have relied upon the information
contained in the Information Memorandum and certain other publicly available
information. Our valuation depends upon this information and assumptions being
substantiated in the next round through due diligence materials and meetings.

Due to lack of sensitive input data, we used comparative (transaction and trading
multiples) method for valuation of Borankol and Tolkyn fields, whereas the LPG
[P]lant was valued using the combination of comparative and cost methods.

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

Al.

42.

43.

The value of the LPG [P]lant was calculated as an arithmetical average between
the matrix of comparative method value and cost method value. EV/EBITDA
multiple of 5.5x was used as a base for comparative method valuation. Historical
costs of US$193 million were used as a base for cost method valuation.

Inter alia, our estimates of the Company’s value and the present Indicative Offer
are based on the following key assumptions:

Historical production, revenues, costs and CAPEX were as reported in the
Information Memorandum;

[KMG’s subsidiary] and its advisors are prepared to begin reviewing the
electronic data room and the vendor due diligence reports immediately, and
would anticipate, at the very least, performing the following additional due
diligence ...”

The following is clear:

(1) The KMG Indicative Bid was based on the information contained in the
Information Memorandum and publicly available information.

(2) It was contingent upon further due diligence to be carried out at Phase II of the
sale process. The value of the LPG Plant at US$199 million depended (as did
other values) upon this information, and assumptions, being substantiated in the
next round through due diligence materials and meetings.

(3) The LPG Plant was valued using a combination of comparative and cost methods.
The value of the LPG Plant was calculated as an arithmetical average, one part of
which was the cost method.

(4) Historical costs of US$193 million were used as a base for cost method valuation.

The Information Memorandum, prepared in August 2008, was expressly based on the
information found in audited (and unaudited) financial statements of KPM and TNG
which in turn showed construction costs for the LPG Plant at the levels asserted by
the Claimants.

If construction costs were not US$245 million because that figure was fraudulently
inflated by the Claimants to the extent alleged by the State, then, because the KMG
Indicative Bid valued the LPG Plant using a calculation that brought costs of US$193
million into an arithmetical average there is the clearest argument that the KMG
Indicative Bid would have been lower. (An “LPG Plan Assessment” by KMG shows
the US$199 million KMG Indicative Bid to have been the midway point between
US$193 million “adopted balance sheet value of outstanding construction” and a
value of US$205 million based on assumed sales.)

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

The KMG Indicative Bid was contingent on further due diligence at Phase II of the
sale process. The Award records (at paragraph 365) that in January 2009 that phase
began and KMG’s subsidiary, with other potential bidders, was given access to the
data room. I have not been taken to any evidence that suggests that this brought to the
attention of the subsidiary the points about costs on which the State centres its
challenge.

The Claimants invited the Tribunal to have regard to the KMG Indicative Bid. At
paragraph 1696 of the Award the Tribunal quoted from the Claimants’ written
argument which had been in these terms:

“Indeed the offer made for the LPG plant by [KMG] at that time was US$199
million. While Claimants did not accept these offers because at the time they
deemed them too low and did not feel that they would lead to a sale, the Tribunal
should note that State-owned [KMG] itself offered almost US$200 million for the
Plant, more than six times the highest value assigned to the LPG Plant by Deloitte
of US$32 million. Little more is needed to demonstrate that Deloitte’s salvage
value assumptions and calculations are worthless.”

I draw particular attention to the Claimants’ phrase, addressed to and recorded by the
Tribunal, that “little more is needed”.

At paragraph 1707 of the Award the Tribunal summarised a further part of the
Claimants’ argument, in which again the Claimants asked the Tribunal to rely on the
KMG Indicative Bid, on this occasion to reject an argument by the State that a cost
basis was not a correct valuation method.

If the KMG Indicative Bid was in fact the result of the Claimants’ dishonest
misrepresentation then it seems to me, at this stage of scrutiny on the English
Application, there is the necessary strength of prima facie case that the Tribunal
would no longer (to use its words) consider it as taking a place of “particular
relevance” within “the relatively best source of information for the valuation of the
LPG Plant”; still less being the one offer from which they took the damages figure.
The Tribunal showed its interest in “undisputed indicative offers made by interested
buyers in 2008”. It looked at them critically, so as to assess whether these were
“strategic offers to gain access to the data room”, concluding that they were not.

Mr Sprange QC submits that “[I]t is absurd to suggest that the alleged fraud was a
fraud on the Tribunal ..., or would have made a difference to the Tribunal”. I do not
find it possible to accept that submission. In my judgment there is the necessary
strength of prima facie case that the alleged fraud would have made a difference to the
Tribunal. And that, in asking the Tribunal to rely on the KMG Indicative Bid in
circumstances (concealed from the Tribunal, as from the bidder) of the alleged fraud,
there was a fraud on the Tribunal.

Mr Sprange QC takes an additional point. He argues that the alleged fraud in relation
to costs could not have foreseen the KMG Indicative Bid, and the effect of the KMG
Indicative Bid on the Arbitration. I think this misunderstands the State’s case. The
original motives for the fraud are not all known but three are summarised by Ms
Nacimiento: defrauding investors, extraction of funds from the State without paying
taxes, and defrauding a joint venture partner. The conduct itself, and the concealment

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

of what had been done, had later consequences including for the audited or reviewed
financial statements and the KMG Indicative Bid, and in turn the Award.

The decision of the US Court

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

As mentioned above, on 11 May 2016 the US Court refused a motion by the State to
amend to add the alleged fraud to its grounds for opposing enforcement.

Mr Sprange QC draws particular attention to the following passage in the ruling of the
US Court:

“[I]t would not be in interest of justice to broaden the scope of this proceeding to
consider whether [the Claimants] did or did not mislead the foreign arbitration
panel when it presented evidence related to the value of the plant in question. The
Court has not come to any conclusions about the legitimacy of the evidence
presented to the arbitrators on this issue. But it has reviewed [the Award], and it
is clear that the arbitrators did not rely upon the allegedly fraudulent evidence in
reaching their decision, so [the State’s] proposed submissions would not be
germane to the petition to confirm [the Award] ... Under those circumstances,
and given the fact that the issue has already been presented to the Swedish
authorities, it will not be in the interest of justice to conduct a mini-trial on the
issue of fraud here when the arbitrators themselves expressly disavowed any
reliance on the allegedly fraudulent material.”

In my respectful view the statement of the US Court that on a review of the Award “it
is clear that the arbitrators did not rely upon the allegedly fraudulent evidence in
reaching their decision” must be read narrowly so as to refer simply to the Claimants’
evidence of the costs incurred on the LPG Plant. The statement that “the arbitrators
themselves expressly disavowed any reliance on the allegedly fraudulent material”
must in my respectful view be read in the same narrow way.

In the result, the decision of the US Court does not conclude the question of the
consequences of the Tribunal’s reliance on the KMG Indicative Bid. That includes the
question whether the Tribunal was misled because the KMG Indicative Bid was based
on the allegedly fraudulent material and the Claimants knew that when they
presented, not the fraudulent material, but the KMG Indicative Bid.

I should add that, on the evidence of Mr Matthew Kirtland, lead counsel for the State
before the US Court, by witness statement dated 3 February 2017, the State filed a
motion for reconsideration by the US Court. That motion was fully briefed by 3 June
2016, but has not been decided. Instead what happened is that the US Court ordered a
stay pending the decision of the Swedish Court. A joint status report was filed with
the US Court after the decision of the Swedish Court. On the information made
available to me the proceedings before the US Court remain stayed.

I add that, before the US Court in its motion for reconsideration, the State advances
the submission that in order to invoke the public policy defence under Article V(2)(b)
of the New York Convention the alleged fraud need not be relied upon by the arbitral
tribunal.

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

The decision of the Swedish Court

56.

57.

58.

59.

Each party offered its own translation of the decision of the Swedish Court but for
present purposes I find no material difference between the two translations offered. I
take the translation offered by the State, as that was referred to most often.

Thave felt able to examine the decision of the Swedish Court by reference to its terms
(albeit in translation). I nonetheless record my gratitude for the expert assistance
given by Dr Patrik Scholdstrom, Director for the Stockholm Centre for Commercial
Law) in his expert report dated 13 January 2017.

A great deal of evidence and material concerning the alleged fraud (including that
summarised above) was before the Swedish Court. Mr Sprange QC says the
Claimants’ case that the Award was obtained by fraud, was “fully ventilated”. In the
event with limited exceptions the Swedish Court did not form a view on the evidence
and material.

In the passage quoted below from the decision of the Swedish Court (in translation), I
add my own paragraph lettering for ease of reference:

“5.3 The issue of the invalidity or setting aside of [the Award]

5.3.1 Invalidity based on the fraudulent scheme, false evidence, misleading
information etc.

A. [The State] has argued that [the Award], and the manner in which it arose,
violates public policy, and invoked the detailed circumstances set forth in section
3.1.2.1.

The Court of Appeal makes the following assessment.

B. In the arbitration at hand [the Claimants] claimed that [the State] had breached
its obligations under the ECT by violating the investor protection provisions in
the ECT and that [the State] was thus liable to pay damages to [the Claimants],
inter alia with respect to what was referred to as the LPG [P]lant. It is undisputed
in the case that the plant exists and, based on the evidence presented here, it is
also clear that investments were made in it. [The Award] states that [the State]
contested [the Claimants’] claim, and consequently [the Tribunal] made a
substantive assessment of the claim. In light of the aforesaid, there is no reason to
call into question the existence of an underlying real legal relationship between
the parties ...

C. In the arbitration [the Claimants] invoked evidence in the form of witness
testimony, witness affidavits and expert reports to prove that the investment costs
in the LPG [P]lant had amounted to the alleged sum. However, [the Award] states
that [the Tribunal] based its assessment of the damages with respect to the LPG
[P]lant on the so-called indicative bid which had been submitted by KMG, see
paragraphs 1746-1748 in [the Award].

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

D. As the Court of Appeal has described above, the scope of application of the
public policy provision is very narrow and the legislature has also clearly decided
not to introduce into the [Swedish] Arbitration Act any provision corresponding
to the concept of new trial. Accordingly, in the Court of Appeal’s opinion there
can be no question of declaring an arbitral award invalid solely on the ground that
false evidence or untrue testimony has occurred, when it is not clear that such
have been directly decisive for the outcome .... However, situations are
conceivable in which the invocation of false evidence may have an indirect
impact on the arbitral tribunal in its assessment of the dispute. In light of the
narrow scope of application and the restrictive approach that should pertain as
regards opening up a new substantive assessment of the arbitrated dispute within
the scope of challenge proceedings, in the Court of Appeal’s opinion there should
be no question of allowing such an indirect impact on the arbitral tribunal to
result in the arbitral award being deemed invalid, except when it appears to be
obvious that such indirect influence has been of decisive significance for the
outcome in the case.

E. Since [the Tribunal] based its assessment on the indicative bid, the evidence
invoked by [the Claimants] in the form of witness testimony, witness affidavits
and expert reports regarding the size of the investment cost — which evidence [the
State] has claimed was false — has not been of immediate importance for the
outcome. In the Court of Appeal’s opinion, already in these circumstances, such
evidence per se, even if it were proven to be false — does not constitute sufficient
reason to consider [the Award] invalid. In the Court of Appeal’s opinion, it is also
not obvious that this evidence, through indirect influence of [the Tribunal], was
decisive for the outcome of the case.

F. Moving on to the question of whether the indicative bid per se constituted false
evidence, it is undisputed that, prior to the initiation of the arbitration, [KMG] had
submitted the relevant offer of USD 199 million for the LPG Plant. Thus, the
indicative bid per se is not to be regarded as false evidence, even if - through the
annual reports for Tristan Oil, KPM and TNG — possibly incorrect information
regarding the amount invested in the LPG [P]lant was among the factors that
KMG took into account when calculating the size of the offer. Accordingly, the
allegedly false information in the annual reports did not directly constitute any
basis for [the Tribunal’s] assessment of the value of the LPG [P]lant. Against this
background, the invocation of the indicative bid by [the Claimants] did not
constitute an invocation of false evidence.

G. Finally, with respect to [the State’s] allegation that, in the arbitration
proceedings, [the Claimants] withheld from [the Tribunal] and [the State] certain
information which might have influenced the outcome in the case, the Court of
Appeal notes that, in a procedure amenable to out-of-court settlement such as
arbitration, it cannot be demanded that a party provide the opposing party with
information which speaks against the party’s own case. There is no room to
regard [the Award] as invalid on this ground, particularly not in light of the very
narrow scope of application of the public policy rule.

H. To summarise, the Court of Appeal finds that none of the circumstances
argued by [the State] in this respect - neither separately nor together - are such

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

that [the Award], or the manner in which it arose are manifestly incompatible
with fundamental principles of Swedish law.”

Paragraph D makes clear that, in Swedish Law, to declare an arbitral award invalid on
the ground that there has been false evidence it must be clear either (a) that the false
evidence has been directly decisive for the outcome or (b) that the false evidence has
had an indirect impact on the arbitral tribunal in its assessment of the dispute such that
it “appears to be obvious that such indirect influence has been of decisive significance
for the outcome in the case”.

The Swedish Court’s reasoning at paragraphs E and F is that it was the KMG
Indicative Bid that was directly decisive, and it was not false. The reasoning identifies
the possibility that information that was false would affect the size of the KMG
Indicative Bid, but it raises this possibility only to show that the KMG Indicative Bid
was not false and that the false information was not directly decisive.

This leaves still open the question of the false information being of indirect decisive
impact. The final sentence of paragraph E reads that “it is not obvious that [the false
information], through indirect influence of [the Tribunal] was decisive for the
outcome of the case”. The only reason given by the Swedish Court for what is stated
in that final sentence of paragraph E is found in the first sentence of that paragraph,
i.e. the fact that the Tribunal based its assessment on the KMG Indicative Bid (i.e. that
the KMG Indicative Bid was directly decisive). That, with respect, does not deal with
the question of the false information being of indirect decisive impact.

Paragraph F does not say that that is the question it is dealing with. At one point there
is the phrase “the allegedly false information in the annual reports did not directly
constitute any basis for [the Tribunal’s] assessment of the value of the [L]PG Plant”.
The use of the word “directly” either implies that if there was false information it
indirectly constituted a basis for the Tribunal’s assessment of value, or at least that
question is left open.

In these circumstances I do not, with respect, believe that the Swedish Court has dealt
with the issue of indirect impact (i.e ground (b) under Swedish Law). I wish to add
two further points.

First, at paragraph G the Swedish Court expresses the view (as expressed in
translation) that “in a procedure amenable to out-of-court settlement such as
arbitration, it cannot be demanded that a party provide the opposing party with
information which speaks against the party’s own case”. The view is stated very
broadly, and I respectfully admit it troubles me. But for present purposes the view
cannot be an answer if the State is correct that the present case is one where the
Claimants encouraged the Tribunal to rely on an indicative offer that the Claimants
knew was misleading because it was based on false information that they had
provided. And further, in the present case the Tribunal expressly required the
disclosure of certain documents. Neither party has suggested that the requirement
would not include disclosure of adverse documents of the type described in the
Tribunal’s requirement (i.e. including the Perkwood Contract).

Second, as mentioned, the Swedish Court also reasoned that the KMG Indicative Bid
was not (itself) false evidence. That assessment holds at the time the KMG Indicative

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

Bid was made, but I respectfully question whether it still holds when the KMG
Indicative Bid is later deployed by a party who knows (but continues to conceal) that
it is the product of that party’s fraud.

Availability of evidence of the alleged fraud

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

Referring to the period before the Award, Mr Sprange QC argues that the State had
access to “all relevant evidence, including Perkwood’s involvement in the LPG Plant
construction”.

Yet on Ms Nacimiento’s evidence, even at the time of the hearing before the Swedish
Court the Claimants did not submit any evidence in support of the alleged
transportation cost said by them to justify in part the price charged by Perkwood, did
not submit any evidence to support their (new) case that the Perkwood Contract came
to include new equipment that would be used to increase the capacity of the LPG
Plant, did not submit any corroborating evidence to support the proposition that
management services were actually performed by or on behalf of Perkwood, and did
not offer any explanation for what equipment had been purchased for US$72 million,
where it was stored or how it related to the state of completion of the LPG Plant. If
this evidence is correct then Mr Sprange QC’s argument cannot be accepted without
more.

But more generally, what did the State know about Perkwood? Could the evidence of
the alleged fraud have been discovered before the Award had the State used
reasonable diligence?

A large part of the argument focussed on whether the State knew at the time of the
Award that Perkwood was related to the Claimants. A draft Vendor Due Diligence
report dated 29 August 2008 was disclosed by the Claimants in the arbitration. The
report was on the combined group of businesses of TNG, KPM and a third company,
Tristan Oil. In showing a summary financial position for the group it included in an
entry under “Net Working Capital” the sentence “Accounts payable and accounts
receivable mainly relate to settlements with related parties including General Affinity
and Statoil (crude oil customers), Kasco (performs construction work for the LPG
plant) and Perkwood (a supplier of equipment for the LPG plant).” In apparent
contrast, in a separate section presenting a “Business overview”, the report showed
General Affinity, Statoil and Kasco as “related parties” but Perkwood as one of a
number of “main third parties”.

This discrepancy is eclipsed by the evidence from the State to the effect that there is
no reference in the financial statements of TNG to Perkwood being a related party.
This gives rise to the strongest suggestion that even the auditors of TNG did not
know, with one consequence being that audit or review scrutiny of related-party
dealings was avoided.

Should the State have undertaken company searches on Perkwood at the time of the
arbitration? It did not trust the Claimants. It did not agree that the Claimants had spent
the costs they alleged. Mr Sprange QC goes further. He submits:

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

“Reasonable diligence would have plainly led to [the State] instructing its
quantum expert to investigate and assess the costs of the LPG Plant .... [The
State] made a series of allegations in the arbitration that the Claimants had
perpetrated a fraud or something akin to it. As noted above, [the State] alleged
that the Claimants had siphoned moneys from [the State] including via Perkwood,
that the Claimants had sought to mislead potential investors in the LPG Plant as
to its true value, and more generally to the effect that the Claimants’ witnesses
had lied in their testimony. ... It naturally follows from these allegations that
anything relating to the true costs of the LPG [P]lant would be tainted. ... [The
State] left no stone unturned in all other respects.”

These submissions involve a number of paraphrases that do not always capture the
precise position in the Arbitration. But putting that point to one side, the submissions
engage, in my view, the point observed by Burton J in HJ Heinz Co Ltd v EFL Inc
[2010] EWHC 1203 (Comm); [2010] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 727 at [33]: “in a case of
concealed fraud (concealed forgery) it may be, particularly where the source of the
evidence is contained in the opposite camp, that, upon analysis of the facts an
approach more favourable to the party defrauded in respect of what is due, or
reasonable diligence, may be adopted.” In the present case the Claimants, if dishonest,
are not to escape if the right stone was not turned over by the State.

The State says it obtained the documents which have allowed it to make the
allegations of fraud as a result of the US Discovery Proceedings in 2015. One of those
is the Perkwood Contract. The Claimants refer to the fact that the State had seized
many of its documents in the years before the Award (including contracts with third
parties, according to the Award at paragraph 358), but that is, for me, an over broad
response. Nor do I think it conclusive against the State that, according to the
Claimants, the Perkwood Contract was mentioned in a due diligence report (in one
extensive index of documents but not in another list of “material contracts”) submitted
by the State to the Tribunal on 14 March 2013, or in two spreadsheets disclosed by
the Claimants.

The Perkwood Contract was not produced in the Arbitration, and I am not satisfied
the Claimants have properly explained why. It fell within the description of
documents that the Tribunal required to be produced by the Claimants where in their
possession custody or control. It was a very significant document, as the Claimants
will have known. It transpired that a copy was later available in the United States, and
the Claimants there resisted access to it. Later still, before the Swedish Court the
Claimants gave changing explanations about what it showed.

The Claimants say that imported equipment for the LPG Plant was declared by
Perkwood and VAT and customs duties paid, and inspections by the State’s Ministry
of Energy and Natural Resources found substantial investment and employment by
the Claimants. Again these facts do not explain the failure to produce the Perkwood
Contract in the Arbitration, or why it should take until the hearing before the Swedish
Court to concede that Perkwood was a related company.

In written submissions Mr Sprange QC says (at para 51.11) that “inspections also
found the costs of the uninstalled equipment and materials in relation to the LPG
Plant” to be about US$60 million. But this is not, with respect, a helpful reference on
its own, for (on Ms Nacimiento’s evidence, at paragraph 27(3)(b) of her Fifth Witness

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

78.

79.

Statement): “While the Claimants initially asserted in the Swedish Proceedings that
the MEMR Report had been based on an actual inspection of the equipment (said to
be worth USD 72,000,345), they subsequently withdrew this assertion following [the
State’s] objections, and confirmed that the MEMR Report had not in fact been based
on a site visit after all.”

What of the fact, referenced by the Claimants, that the State’s oil and gas expert, in a
report dated 17 November 2011, considered that the estimated costs of constructing
the LPG Plant were reasonable “for the plant as designed”? In my view this takes one
little further forward. The Tribunal did not found its decision on this opinion. The
experts would no doubt have revised their opinion if the true figures are those shorn
of the effect of the fraud alleged by the Claimants.

I am satisfied that the State did not have access before the Award to the evidence of
the alleged fraud on which it now seeks to rely, and that the evidence of the alleged
fraud could not with reasonable diligence have been discovered before the Award had
the State used reasonable diligence.

Estoppel

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

No Court has decided the question whether there has been the fraud alleged. Neither
the Swedish Court nor the US Court nor English Court has, although material has
been put before those Courts that would allow them to decide that question.

But the Claimants say the US Court has decided “that the Tribunal had not relied
upon any of the allegedly fraudulent evidence in entering [the Award]”. And the
Claimants say that the decision of the Swedish Court has determined “whether the
alleged fraud would have made a significant difference to the outcome of the
proceedings”.

The short answer to the argument on estoppel on the basis of the decision of the US
Court is that, as I have said above, that decision of the US Court must in my view be
read narrowly and, read narrowly, is not to the effect for which the Claimants
contend.

The answer to the argument on estoppel on the basis of the decision of the Swedish
Court is also short. The Swedish Court did not decide the factual question of indirect
decisive impact on the Tribunal in its assessment of the dispute.

The New York Convention is addressed, at Article V(2)(b), to the public policy of the
country of enforcement. Relevant public policy can and does differ from country to
country. It is correct to say that the Swedish Court did not decide whether under
English law public policy required the application to enforce the Award in this
jurisdiction to be refused.

In oral submissions Mr Sprange QC focussed his estoppel argument on the facts.
However in written submissions it was submitted for the Claimants that there was
adduced “unchallenged evidence” that “the concepts of Swedish public policy and

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

86.

87.

88.

89.

English public policy are not materially different in the context of setting aside and
enforcement of arbitral awards”.

I limit myself to the present context alone, and do not believe this is ultimately a
matter of evidence in this case. If, as I should, I take the decision of the Swedish
Court as showing Swedish public policy in the context of this case then I find, as a
matter of law, that English public policy is not the same. Mr Ali Malek QC (appearing
with Mr Christopher Harris and Mr Paul Choon Kiat Wee for the State) puts it this
way, and I agree: “It is apparent from the outcome in Sweden alone that the content of
Swedish public policy must be different from that of its English counterpart”.

In these circumstances, albeit briefly expressed, I rule that no issue estoppel has
arisen. But even had the basis of an issue estoppel been made out, the English Court
would still have to decide whether enforcement of the Award should be permitted
because English public order must ultimately be a matter for the English Court: see
Yukos Capital Sarl v OJSC Rosneft Oil Co (No 2) [2012] EWCA Civ 855; [2014] QB
458 at [147] per Rix LJ. Mr Sprange QC submitted that the decision cited should be
confined to judgments and not applied to New York Convention arbitral awards. I
cannot accept that submission; there is no warrant for the suggested limitation where
the Convention is concerned expressly to respect the public policy of the enforcement
court.

Mr Sprange QC places reliance on the following passage from the decision of Colman
J in Minmetals Germany GmbH v Ferco Steel Ltd [1999] 1 All ER (Comm) 315 at
331:

“[iJn a case where a remedy for an alleged defect is applied for from the
supervisory court, but is refused, leaving a final award undisturbed , it will
therefore normally be a very strong policy consideration before the English courts
that it has been conclusively determined by the courts of the agreed supervisory
jurisdiction that the award should stand. Just as great weight must be attached to
the policy of sustaining the finality of international awards so also must great
weight be attached to the policy of sustaining the finality of the determination of
properly referred procedural issues by the courts of the supervisory jurisdiction. I
use the word ‘normally’ because there may be exceptional cases where the
powers of the supervisory court are so limited that they cannot intervene even
where there has been an obvious and serious disregard for basic principles of
justice by the arbitrators or where for unjust reasons, such as corruption, they
decline to do so. However, outside such exceptional cases, any suggestion that
under the guise of allegations of substantial injustice procedural defects in the
conduct of an arbitration which have already been considered by the supervisory
court should be reinvestigated by the English courts on an enforcement
application is to be most strongly deprecated.”

The emphasis given by Colman J to the importance of the policy of sustaining the
finality of international awards and of the determination of properly referred
procedural issues by the courts of the supervisory jurisdiction is plainly appropriate.
But as Colman J recognised there may be exceptional cases. The present case is one
where the issue is not just a procedural issue. Where the Swedish Court as the
supervisory court has held that its powers are limited so that it cannot intervene even
if the arbitrators were deliberately misled by the Claimants’ use of the KMG

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

Indicative Bid it is important to record that the powers of the English Court, and the
requirements of English public policy, are not so limited.

Abuse of process

90.

The Claimants rely on broadly the same arguments to support a contention that the
State’s resistance to the application to enforce the Award in this jurisdiction is an
abuse of process. This contention must fail for the same reasons.

Conclusion

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

I have gone into some matters further than might normally be the case at this stage.
This is because of the history of this dispute and the involvement of other courts.

T hold that the decision of the Swedish Court and the decision of the US Court do not
create an estoppel, that the State is entitled to rely on the evidence obtained since the
Award, and that there is a sufficient prima facie case that the Award was obtained by
fraud.

It will do nothing for the integrity of arbitration as a process or its supervision by the
Courts, or the New York Convention, or for the enforcement of arbitration awards in
various countries, if the fraud allegations in the present case are not examined at a
trial and decided on their merits, including the question of the effect of the fraud
where found. The interests of justice require that examination.

It is relevant to recognise that, on behalf of the Claimants, Mr Sprange QC asks
ultimately that the Award should be recognised “as a judgment of this Court”. Sir
John Donaldson MR, in Deutsche Schachtbau-und Tiefbor-Gesellschaft m.b.h.v Shell
International Petroleum Co Ltd [1990] 1 AC 295 at 316; [1987] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 246, at
254, highlighted that enforcement is one of “the powers of the state” and that these
powers are exercised on behalf of the public. These points reinforce the seriousness of
what is involved.

The State should have the permission it seeks to amend the English Application.
Subject to any development in the proceedings before the Swedish Court or the US
Court of which I am not aware, I propose to give directions for trial when handing
down this judgment.

Recognising the potential for further developments before the Swedish Court or the
US Court, there will also be a general liberty to apply. In this particular case the
parties should proceed on the basis that the liberty to apply is available, where
appropriate, as one means by which the parties may pass any communication
concerning the Arbitration, the Award and its enforcement between the Swedish
Court or the US Court and this Court.

MR JUSTICE KNOWLES STATI V KAZAKHSTAN
Approved Judgment

