In-house translation from Swedish

 

Page 1 (4)
SVEA COURT MINUTES File exhibit 180
OF APPEAL 2020-01-31 Case no T 12462-19
Division 02 Reported in
Rotel 020101 Stockholm
THE BENCH

Head of the division Per Carlson and judges Hanna Carysdotter, judge-rapporteur,
and Adrian Engman

RAPPORTEUR
Assistant judge Per Samuelsson

AT THE MINUTES
Judge-rapporteur

PARTIES

Claimant

Republic of Kazakhstan
Ministry of Justice

8 Mangilik El] Avenue

House of Ministries, 13 Entrance
010000, Nur-Sultan, Left Bank
Kazakhstan

Counsel: Attorneys at law Alexander Foerster, Fredrik Ringquist, Ludwig Metz and Malin
Berggren as well as jur. kand. Daniel Piran

Mannheimer Swartling Advokatbyra AB

Box 1711

111 87 Stockholm

Respondents

1. Ascom Group S.A.

75 A. Mateevici Street
Chisinau, MD-2009 Moldavien

2. Anatolie Stati
20 Dragomirna Street
Chisinau, MD-2008, Moldavien

3. Gabriel Stati
1A Ghioceilor Street
Chisinau, MD-2008, Moldavien

4. Terra Raf Trans Traiding Ltd.

Don House, Suite 31
30-38 Main Street, Gibraltar

Dok.Id 1569063

 

 

Postadress Beséksadress Telefon Telefax Expeditionstid

Box 2290 Birger Jarls Torg 16 08-561 670 00 mandag — fredag

103 17 Stockholm 08-561 675 00 09:00-16:30
E-post: svea.hovratt@dom.se

www.svea.se

In-house translation from Swedish
Page 2
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL MINUTES T 12462-19
Division 02

Declared as counsel for 1-4: Attorneys at law Bo G H Nilsson, Therese
Isaksson and Ginta Ahrel as well as jur. kand. Kristians Goldsteins
Westerberg & Partners Advokatbyra AB

Box 3101

103 62 Stockholm

THE MATTER
Invalidity of the award made in Stockholm on 19 December 2013 with correction on
17 January 2014; now question on dismissal of summons application

The Republic of Kazakhstan (Kazakhstan) has submitted its summons application and
requested that the Court of Appeal, in accordance with Section 33, paragraph 1| or 2 of
the Swedish Arbitration Act (1999:116) (the SAA), shall declare invalid the arbitral
award issued by the Arbitration Institute of Stockholm Chamber of Commerce in
Stockholm on 19 December 2013 (with correction of 17 January 2014) between
Kazakhstan and Anatolie Stati, Gabriel Stati, Ascom Group SA and Terra Raf Trans
Traiding Ltd. (the award). As a legal basis for its action, Kazakhstan contends that the
arbitration is invalid because it involves determination of an issue which under
Swedish law may not be decided by arbitrators and that the manner in which the award

arose is manifestly incompatible with the basic principles of the Swedish legal system.

A question has now arisen as to whether the summons application should be

rejected due to a procedural impediment (res judicata).

Svea Court of Appeal dismissed Kazakhstan’s action against the award by way of
judgment on 9 December 2016 in Case No. T 2675-14. The judgment has acquired
legal force. In that case, Kazakhstan’s primary request for relief was that the Court of
Appeal should declare the award invalid in its entirety or at least in those parts of the
award referred to the so-called LPG facility and, alternatively, that the Svea Court of
Appeal should set aside the award in its entirety or in part. Kazakhstan invoked as a
legal basis for its invalidity claim that the award and the manner in which it arose was
manifestly incompatible with the basic principles of the Swedish legal system, i.e.
that it contravenes ordre public and is therefore in whole or or in part invalid

according to Section 33, first paragraph, item 2 of the SAA.

In-house translation from Swedish
Page 3
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL MINUTES T 12462-19
Division 02

Kazakhstan and Anatolie Stati et al have pleaded their cases.

After presentation to the panel of judges, the Court of Appeal takes the following

DECISION (to be rendered on 9 March 2020)

The Court of Appeal rejects the summons application of the Republic of
Kazakhstan.

Reasons for the decision

Chapter 17, Section 11, paragraphs | and 3 of the Swedish Code of Judicial Procedure
provide that, upon the expiration of the time for appeal, a judgment acquires legal
force to the extent that it determines the matter at issue in respect of which the action
was instituted, and furthermore that a question thus determined may not be adjudicated
again. Legal force can, simply put, be described as that the case which has been
determined in a judgment shall not to be adjudicated again in a new trial. If a new
action is brought in respect of the same issue that was tried in trial number 1, the action
in trial number 2 must be rejected due to a procedural impediment. The rules for legal
force satisfy inter alia the winning party’s need for certainty that a final decision in a
dispute shall not be disrupted by a new trial. However, the fourth paragraph of the
provision provides that there are extraordinary remedies, including a relief for a

substantive defect, that pierce the legal force. The legal force is thus not absolute.

It is a widespread view in the doctrine that it is the requested legal consequence that
determines the scope of the legal force (see inter alia Ekeléf et al., Rattegang, 8 ed.,
pp. 140 ff.). The fact that the legal consequence is the starting point in assessing
whether a subsequent case relates to the same issue has also been confirmed by the
Supreme Court in its case law developed during the 1990s (see, e.g., NJA 1999 p. 520
and NJA 1999 p. 656, cf. NJA 1984 p. 783). According to the Court of Appeal, there is
no reason to apply the rules of legal force in other way when the case concerns an

action for invalidity against an arbitral award.

In-house translation from Swedish
Page 4
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL MINUTES T 12462-19
Division 02

On the contrary, the fact that the legislator did not impose any time limit for the
possibility of bringing an action for invalidity rather speaks for a strict application of
the rules of legal force. Unlike what usually applies to dispositive disputes where time
limits for challenge, notice of defect or statutory period of limitation apply, a person
who wishes to bring an action for invalidity against an arbitral award may bide his time
and make the necessary investigation before the action is brought. In this context,
according to the Court of Appeal, it should also be borne in mind that one of the
fundamental reasons behind the Swedish Arbitration Act is that a dispute should in

principle be finally settled with the arbitral award.

In the previous case, Kazakhstan requested that the Court of Appeal should declare the
award invalid in its entirety. In this case, Kazakhstan again requests that the award
shall be declared invalid. The award that is the subject of the invalidity action is the
same in both cases and the parties are also the same. The legal consequence in the
present case is thus identical to that sought in the previous case and determined by a
judgment that has acquired legal force. In addition, the information provided by
Kazakhstan shows that the action is based on circumstances which could have been

relied on in the previous case.

The Court of Appeal finds that, under these circumstances, it is clear that the issue is
the same in both cases and that there is a procedural impediment. Kazakhstan's

summons application must therefore be rejected.
Appeal
According to Section 43, paragraph 2 of the SAA, the decision of the Court of Appeal

may only be appealed if it is of importance as a matter of precedent that the appeal is

considered by the Supreme Court.

The Court of Appeal considers that there is no reason to allow the decision to be

appealed.

The decision of the Court of Appeal must not be appealed.
Hanna Carysdotter

Minutes shown/

