INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

(ADDITIONAL FACILITY)

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN
ANGLO AMERICAN PLC

(Claimant)

-and-

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA

(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/14/1

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. Yves Derains, President

Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil, Arbitrator
Dr. Raidl E. Vinuesa, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor

Date of dispatch to the Parties: January 18, 2019

Vi.

TABLE OF CONTEN
THE PARTIES 1
SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS
FACTS
PRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES’ PETITIONS
A. Claimant’s Petition:
B. ’s Petitions
INTRODUCTION TO THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS...
JURISDICTION
A. Respondent's position: The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the dispute ....
1) Anglo American has not made an investment in Venezuela protected under the BIT ..
i. The indirect shareholding of Anglo American in MLDN is not an investment protected by

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

the Treaty
ii, Anglo American’s alleged indirect shareholding interest in MLDN’s assets is not an
investment protected by the Treaty ....
2) The Reversion Claim must be decided by the Venezuelan court:
B. _ Claimant’s position: The Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute
1) The Treaty protects direct and indirect investments....

i. The indirect shareholding of Anglo American in MLDN constitutes an investment protected
under the Treaty

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
      

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

    
    
 

  
   

 

 

 

 
  

 

ii. The indirect participation of Anglo American in MLDN’s assets constitutes a protected
investment under the Treaty .... 35
2) The forum selection clause in the mining concessions does not deprive this Tribunal of
jurisdicti
Cc. Decision of the Tribunal
1) Analysis of the Respondent’s first objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal ..
a) ion of the definition of “i ” in the Treaty
b) _Isan indirect shareholding of Anglo American in MLDN an investment protected by
the Treaty?
c) Is the indirect participation of Anglo American in the assets of MLDN an investment
protected by the Treaty?
2) Analysis of the Respondent’s second objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
THE MERITS OF THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS...
A. Claims based on the alleged expropriation of the assets that Claimant considers to be non-
'y 49
1) Position of the Claimant 49
a) Arguments related to ownership of the assets
i Venezuela expropriated non-reversionary asset:
ii, The underlying logic of the concept of reversion: the relationship between the
reserved activity and the principle of reversion...
iii. The legal framework of the mining sector in Venezuela and MLDN’s
Remaining Concessions distinguish between activities that have been
reserved to the State and those that are not
iv. Processing Assets were not used for a reserved activity but for an ancillary
ing activity 52
v. Processing Assets do not become reversionary assets because processi
activ’ could form an integral part of the activity
vi. Processing was not the “object of the concessions”
vii. There is no “general reservation” of primary and related or ancillary mining
activities in the 1999 Mining Law . we
viii. Alternatively, even if the Processing Assets were reversionary assets, the
Claimant would still be entitled to compensation for the non-amortized value
of same 57
b) Arguments related to the existence of an expropriation...
c) Arguments related to the illegal nature of the expropriation.
i. No ion was paid
ii. Anglo American did not receive due proces

iii. The assets seizure was not for a public purpo:

VIII.

XL

2) Position of the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
   

a) Arguments related to ownership of the assets .
i The Mining Titles governed the contractual relationship between the State.
and the concessionaire, establishing that reversion would take place without
65
ii, Venezuelan legislation confirms that the Plant was not an asset susceptible to
expropriati
iii. The Claimant distorts and offers an incorrect interpretation of the 1999
Mining Law
iv. The subsidiary claim of the Claimant
b) Arguments regarding the non-existence of an expropriation
c) Arguments related to the legality of the alleged expropriation
i. There was no violation of due proces:

 

ii. Reversion had a public purpose ...

iii. The mere lack of compensation does not render an expropriation unlawful
3) Decision of the Tribunal 75
a) The Mining Titles 77

 

b) The effects of Venezuelan law applicable at this time on the Claimant’s property
rights at the date of expiry of the concessions. .. 84
i The 1999 Mining Law
ii. Investment Law....
B. Claims regarding the alleged breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment ..
1) Position of the Claimant
2) Position of the
3) Decision of the Tribunal
a) The standard of protection under the Treaty is an autonomous standard .
b) The alleged violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard by the Respondent
in not issuing the VAT CERTS and in not responding to the Claimant’s requests 106
i The alleged illegal nature of the deduction requirement...
ii, The alleged violation of the elements that make up fair and equitable
treatment
Cc. Claims for alleged violation of the full protection and security standard .....
1) Position of the Claimant
2) Position of the
3) Decision of the Tribunal
Dz. The alleged violation of the national treatment standar
1) Position of the Claimant
2) Position of the
3) Decision of the Tribunal
MONETARY DEMANDS OF THE CLAIMANT .
RESPONDENT’S COUNTER-CLAIM...

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Jurisdiction
Position of the Claimant
a) There is no consent to arbitrate counter-claims in Article 8 of the Treaty
b) Venezuela’s Counter-claim lacks a close connection with Anglo American’s claims
121
2) Position of the 122
3) Decision of the Tribunal 123
B. Position of the Parties in relation to the Merits of the Counter-claim -125
COSTS AND EXPENSES OF THE PROCEEDING.. -125
A. Position of the Claimant 125
B. Position of the d 126
c Costs of the P di 128
Dz. Decision of the Tribunal 128
DECISION 129

 

GLOSSARY OF DEFINED TERMS

 

AF Rules

Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the
Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
dated April 10, 2006.

 

Arbitration (AF) Rules

Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules of April 10, 2006.

 

 

 

 

AMSA Anglo American Corporation of South America S.A.
Claimant Anglo American ple

Cofeminas Corporaci6n Federal de Minas, S.A.

Costs Parties’ Submissions on Costs dated April 28, 2017

 

Counter-claim

Respondent’s Counter-claim together with its Counter-
Memorial dated November 13, 2015

 

Counter-Memorial

Memorial on Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela dated
November 13, 2015

 

Expropriation Law

Expropriation Law for Public and Social Use of July 1, 2002

 

First Concessions

Concessions were granted for the following sectors with ore
deposits in 1992: (i) el Tigre, (ii) San Onofre Nos. 1, 2, and 3;
(iii) Camedas Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5; and (iv) San Antonio No.
1.

 

Hearing on Jurisdiction and on the Merits held on December

 

 

 

Hearing 9, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16, 2016.

ICJ International Court of Justice

ICSID or the Centre International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Raw materials, spare parts and consumables associated with

Inventory the processing held by MLDN in inventory on the expiry of

MLDN’s Remaining Concessions.

 

Investment Law

Law on Promotion of Private Investment under the
Concession System of September 17, 1999

 

LDN deposit

Loma de Niquel ore deposit

 

 

 

 

 

LDNH Loma de Niquel Holdings Limited
LO Legal Opinion
Lo2 Supplemental Legal Opinion

 

 

 

Manual

Standards and Procedures Manual on Value Added Tax Credit
Refunds for Exporter Taxpayers of 2010

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Memorial Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits dated April 25, 2015
Mining Law 1945 Mining Law
1999 Mining Law 1999 Mining Law
MLDN Minera Loma de Niquel C.A.
Parties Claimant and Respondent
Post-Hearing Briefs dated March 31, 2017
PHBs
POL Procedural Order No. | dated December 2, 2014

 

Processing assets

Infrastructure, buildings and equipment used for the
processing of nickel laterite ore into ferronickel, including but
not limited to the metallurgical plant

 

Processing Plant or Plant

Processing facilities to process the extracted ore into
ferronickel

 

 

RPA Roscoe Postle Associates Inc.
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply to the
Rejoinder Counter-claim submitted by the Respondent, dated August 29,

2016

 

Remaining Concessions

The San Antonio 1, Camedas 1, and Camedas 3 concessions,
which were part of the first concessions, were revised on
January 7, 2000 and will expire on November 10, 2012.

 

Reply

Claimant’s Reply on the Merits and Response to the
Respondent’s Counter-claim dated May 14, 2016

 

 

Request for Arbitration dated March 13, 2014

 

Request for Bifurcation

Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation of the Proceedings
dated May15, 2015.

 

Respondent

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

 

Response to the Counter-
claim

Claimant’s Response to the Respondent’s Counter-claim,
dated September 26, 2016

 

Response to the Withdrawal
of Claims

Venezuela’s Response to the Withdrawal of Claims dated
November 11, 2016

 

 

SENIAT

 

National Integrated Service of Customs and Tax
Administration [Servicio Nacional Integrado de
Administracién Aduanera y Tributaria].

 

 

 

Second Concessions

Four other mining concessions were granted in 1995:
Cofemina 4, 5, 6, and 7.

 

Third Concessions

In 1999, the last two mining concessions on the LDN deposit
were granted in the Cofemina sectors Nos. | and 2.

 

Tr. Day #, Page #: Line #

Transcript of Hearing

 

Treaty or BIT

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
Venezuela and the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments dated March 15, 1995, which
entered into force of August 1, 1996

 

 

 

VAT CERTS VAT Credit Certificates
VAT Law VAT Law of 2002
Withdrawal of Claims Claimant’s Submission dated September 26, 2016 by which it

withdrew part of its claims

 

 

Vienna Convention

 

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

 

 

L THE PARTIES
1. The Parties to this arbitration are:
A. The Claimant

2. The Claimant is Anglo American plc. (“Anglo American” or the “Claimant”), a
company incorporated under the laws of the United Kingdom! and holding an
indirect participation of 91.37 percent of Minera Loma de Niquel CA.
(“MLDN”).2, MLDN is a Venezuelan company whose operations until November
2012 comprised the exploration and exploitation of the Loma de Niquel ore

deposit, the processing of the ore, and the marketing of the resulting ferronickel.?

3. Representing the Claimant:

Mr. Nigel Blackaby Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Ms. Sylvia Noury Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Mr. Jean-Paul Dechamps Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Mr. Michael Kotrly Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Ms. Katrina Woolcock Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Ms. Annie Pan Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Mr. Eugenio Hernandez Bret6n Baker & McKenzie

Mr. Ben Keisler Anglo American ple

Mr. Michael Schottler Anglo American ple

Mr. Alfonso Almenara Minera Loma de Niquel CA.

B. The Respondent

4. The Respondent is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (““Venezuela,” the

“Republic” or the “Respondent”).
5. Representing the Respondent:

Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Mufioz Pedroza
Attorney General of the Republic

Dr. Henry Rodriguez Facchinetti
Head of the Litigation Department
Office of the Attorney General of the Republic

' Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits of April 25, 2015 (“Memorial”), 1.
2 Memorial, 14.
3 Memorial, 3.

The following lawyers of the firm Foley Hoag LLP also represented the
Respondent:*

Ms. Mélida Hodgson
Mr. Kenneth Figueroa
Ms. Tafadzwa Pasipanodya
Mr. Diego Cadena
Ms. Analia Gonzélez
Ms. Erin Argueta
Ms. Patricia Cruz Trabanino
Ms. Anna Toubiana
Ms. Manuela de la Helguera
Ms. Carol Kim
Ms. Francheska Loza
Ms. Angélica Villagran
6. The Claimant and the Respondent are jointly called the “Parties” and

individually, as indicated above.
Il. SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS

7. This dispute arises from the supposed expropriation of the Claimant’s alleged
investments in MLDN through a variety of measures taken by the Government of

Venezuela.

8. On March 13, 2014, Anglo American filed a Request for Arbitration (“Request”)
with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”)
accompanied by Annexes C-1 to C-70 against Venezuela, based on the Agreement
signed on March 15, 1995 between the Government of the Republic of Venezuela
and the Government of the United Kingdom for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments, which entered into force on August 1, 1996 (the “Treaty” or “BIT”)
and the Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the Administration of
Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“AF Rules”) which entered into force on April 10, 2006.
Through the Request, the Secretary-General of ICSID was also asked to approve

access to the Additional Facility.

9. On April 10, 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request
pursuant to Articles 4 and 5 of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules

+ By letter of March 20, 2018, the Centre was informed that the representation of the Respondent by Foley Hoag
LLP had terminated on March 19, 2018.

(“Arbitration (AF) Rules”]. On that same date, the Secretary-General approved
access to the Additional Facility in accordance with Article 4 of the AF Rules.
Finally, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an

Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with Article 5(e) of the Arbitration (AF) Rules.

Subsequent to the registration of the Request, and in the absence of agreement
between the Parties, the Arbitral Tribunal was established in accordance with the

method provided in Article 9 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules.

On June 9, 2014, the Claimant appointed Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil, a national of

Argentina, as Arbitrator.

On July 28, 2014, the Respondent appointed Dr. Ratil E. Vinuesa, a national of

Argentina, as Arbitrator.

On September 30, 2014, the Parties notified ICSID of their agreement to appoint

Mr. Yves Derains, a national of France, as President of the Tribunal.

By letter dated October 2, 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the
Parties that Messrs. Yves Derains, Guido Santiago, and Raul E. Vinuesa had
accepted their appointments as Arbitrators. The Tribunal was therefore constituted
and the proceedings would start on that date in accordance with Article 13(1) of
the Arbitration (AF) Rules. In the same letter, ICSID also informed the Parties

that Mr. Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor would act as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On October 14, 2014, the Secretary on behalf of the Tribunal proposed to the
Parties the dates for the first session and provided them with the first draft of

Procedural Order No. | (“PO1”) with the agenda.

By letters dated November 4 and 5, 2014, the Parties accepted the appointment of
Ms. Aurore Descombes as Assistant to the President of the Tribunal in these

proceedings.

On November 7, 2014, the Parties transmitted the draft POI that they had
discussed to the Secretary of the Tribunal. The Parties agreed to send a joint
communication to the Tribunal on November 11, 2014, setting out their respective

positions on the points at issue of draft POL.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

On November 11, 2014, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they would not
make any new written submission regarding draft PO1 but would orally present
their respective positions during the first session by telephone conference on

November 26, 2014.

On November 26, 2014, the Tribunal and the Parties held the first session by

telephone conference in accordance with Article 21 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules.

On December 2, 2014, the Tribunal sent the Parties the final signed version of
PO1. POI established that the place of the arbitration proceeding was Paris, that
the procedural languages were English and Spanish, and that the Award would be

rendered in those two languages.

By letters dated December 4 and 5, 2014, the Parties and the Tribunal set the

procedural calendar (Annex A of POI).

On April 25, 2015, the Claimant submitted its Memorial on the Merits
(“Memorial”), accompanied by Exhibits C-71 to C-159; the witness statements
of Mr. Euler Piantino and Ms. Rebecca Charlton; the expert reports of TR
Consulting, Inc; RPA Inc., and FTI Consulting; the legal opinion of Dr. Allan R.
Brewer-Carias; and the legal authorities CLA-1 to CLA-106.

On April 28, 2015, the Claimant submitted an amended version of its Memorial.

On April 29, 2015, the Parties proposed dates for a possible hearing on jurisdiction
(with or without bifurcation of the proceedings) and for the hearing on the merits,

and requested that the time limits for the written phase be extended.

On May 15, 2015, the Respondent submitted its Request for Bifurcation
(“Request for Bifurcation”) accompanied by Annexes R-1 to R-2, and the legal
authorities RLA-1 to RLA-22.

On May 18, 2015, the Secretary of the Tribunal sent the Parties an amended
version of the procedural calendar in Annex A of POI. In addition, as agreed
between the Parties and the Tribunal, the Secretary of the Tribunal presented
proposed dates for a possible hearing on jurisdiction and for the hearing on the

merits.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

On May 29, 2015, the Claimant submitted its Response to the Respondent’s
Request for Bifurcation (“Response to Bifurcation”) accompanied by the legal

authorities CLA-107 to CLA-127.

On June 19, 2015, the Tribunal informed the Parties of Procedural Order No. 2
(“PO2”), which dismissed the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation.

On September 9, 2015, the Claimant provided the Tribunal with corrections to the

report prepared by its damages expert, TR Consulting, Inc.

On September 10, 2015, the Respondent acknowledged receipt of the revised

expert report.

On September 21, 2015, as a follow-up to its mail dated September 10, 2015, the
Respondent indicated that for the moment it had no comments on the revised
expert report and that any comments would be included in its submission of

November 13, 2015.

On November 13, 2015, the Respondent submitted a Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Counter-Memorial on the Merits (“Counter-Memorial”), accompanied by
documentary annexes R-3 to R-49; the witness statements of Mr. Freddy Angulo,
Ms. Erika Figueroa, Mr. Luis Gémez, Mr. Endes José Palencia Ortiz, Mr. José
Manuel Raposo, Mr. José Solano, Ms. Jhomnata Venegas Chacon, and Ms. Irene
Villasmil; the expert reports of Bara Consulting and Econ One Research, Inc.; the
legal opinion of Dr. Alejandro Canénico Sarabia; and the legal authorities RLA-
8 (bis) and RLA-28 to RLA-139. In its Counter-Memorial, the Respondent filed a
Counter-claim (“Counter-claim”) in accordance with Article 47 of the

Arbitration (AF) Rules.

On November 16, 2015, the Parties submitted to the Tribunal amendments to the

procedural calendar in relation to the production of documents.

On November 18, 2015, the Tribunal accepted the changes to the procedural

calendar proposed by the Parties.

On January 29, 2016, in accordance with POI and the revised calendar of

proceedings, the Parties submitted their respective Redfern Schedules. The

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

Respondent invoked attorney-client privilege in the case of 16 documents the

production of which the Claimant had requested.

On February 3, 2016, the Claimant submitted its comments on the list of
documents considered privileged by the Respondent. On the same day, the

Respondent sent a letter to the Tribunal responding to the Claimant’s comments.

On February 12, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 (“PO3”) with
its decisions regarding the production of documents requested in the Redfern
Schedules submitted by the Parties and described in Annexes | and 2 of such
schedules. The Tribunal ordered the production by the Respondent of 10
documents for which the Respondent had invoked attorney-client privilege, with
the clarification that, as requested by the Respondent, those documents would be

subject to a Protection Order.

On February 22, 2016, in compliance with the principle of equality between the
Parties, the Tribunal asked the Claimant if it wanted to submit a response to the

Respondent’s Counter-claim in its reply on the merits.

On February 25, 2016, the Claimant confirmed that it wanted to respond to the
Counter-claim in its reply on the merits. The Claimant added that, if the
Respondent presented other submissions about its Counter-claim in its Rejoinder
on the Merits, the Claimant should have the opportunity to reply to preserve the

principle of equality of the Parties.

On March 1, 2016, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that it had no objection
to the Claimant’s request, but it reserved the right of reply if the Response to the
Counter-claim went beyond its purpose. The Respondent also requested that the
number of pages for the Claimant’s Reply be fixed so that it is proportional to the
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, in order to ensure the principle of equality of

the Parties.

On March 2, 2016, the Claimant requested authorization from the Tribunal to

submit additional testimony along with its Reply on the Merits.

On March 3, 2016, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the Claimant’s letter of
March 2 and invited the Respondent to respond to the letter by March 9, 2016. On

6

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

the same day, the Tribunal invited the Claimant to send its comments on the
Respondent’s observations regarding its proposal to limit the number of pages of

its Reply.

On March 3, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 (“PO4”) including
the Protection Order regarding the production of privileged documents. As agreed
between the Parties, PO4 defined the concepts of “Protected Document” and
“Protected Information.” In addition, PO4 imposed rules of conduct on the
persons who would be in contact with said documents, and limited access to
above-mentioned documents to a restricted list of persons connected to the case.
Finally, the Procedural Order contemplated the issue of the destruction of said
documents once the arbitration proceedings were completed. According to the
procedural calendar amended by the Parties and accepted by the Tribunal, the
Respondent had to provide said Protected Documents to the Claimant on

March 4, 2016.

On March 4, 2016, the Claimant opposed the limitation on the number of pages
as requested by the Respondent since its Reply on the Merits, including its
Response to the Counter-claim, should be subject to the sole condition that it
answered the points highlighted in the Counter-Memorial (including the Counter-
claim). On that same day, the Respondent confirmed the production of the

documents requested by the Claimant.

On March 9, 2016, the Respondent objected to the Claimant’s request to present
a new witness and reserved its right to present new evidence in the event the

Claimant’s request was accepted.

On March 10, 2016, the Respondent explained that it considered that the Claimant
had misinterpreted its proposal in relation to the number of pages and reserved its

rights in relation to the number of pages for the second round of written pleadings.

On March 17, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 (“POS”), in
which it held that the principle of equality of the Parties does not rest on the
number of pages but on the opportunity accorded to each Party to answer the
claims of the other Party. In this regard, it was necessary that the Claimant, de

facto Respondent to the Respondent’s Counter-claim, should have the opportunity

7

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

to submit a Rejoinder on the Respondent’s Counter-claim, as the Respondent had
the opportunity to submit a Rejoinder on the Claimant’s claims. Also, the Tribunal
modified the arbitration calendar in order to incorporate the submission of a

Rejoinder on the Counter-claim on September 23, 2016.

On March 18, 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal authorized the Claimant to present a
new witness statement in order to respond to Ms. Villasmil’s witness statement.
At the same time, it authorized the Respondent to respond to said witness
statement by means of a new witness statement confined to the facts addressed in

the witness statement submitted by the Claimant.

On May 14, 2016, the Claimant filed its Reply on the Merits and Response to the
Respondent’s Counter-claim (“Reply”) one day after the deadline agreed between
the Parties. This document was accompanied by documentary annexes C-160 to
C-245; the witness statements of Mr. Oscar Pérez, Mr. Euler Piantino, and Ms.
Rebecca Charlton; the expert reports of FTI Consulting Inc., and RPA Inc.; the
legal opinion of Dr. Allan R. Brewer-Carias; and the legal authorities CLA-128 to
CLA-177.

On May 17, 2016, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal explaining that it reserved
its rights in relation to the Reply submitted on May 14 instead of May 13, 2016.
On the same day, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the emails from the

Parties.

On May 19, 2016, the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement for the
Respondent to submit a rejoinder on the merits no later than August 29, 2016
(instead of the original August 26, 2016 deadline). On May 20, 2016, the Tribunal

approved the agreement of the Parties.

On June 29, 2016, the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement that the
Claimant could submit a rejoinder on the Counter-claim on September 26, 2016
instead of September 23, 2016. The Tribunal approved this agreement on the same

day.

On August 29, 2016, the Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on the Merits and

Response to the Counter-claim (“Rejoinder”) accompanied by the documentary

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

annexes R-50 to R-79; the witness statements of Ms. Erika Figueroa, Mr. Luis
Gémez, Mr. Endes José Palencia Ortiz, Mr. José Manuel Raposo, Mr. José Solano,
Ms. Jhomnata Venegas Chacon, and Ms. Irene Villasmil; the expert reports of
Bara Consulting and Econ One Research, Inc.; the legal opinion of Dr. Alejandro
Can6nico Sarabia; and the legal authorities RLA-14 (bis), RLA-95 (bis), RLA-96
(bis), and RLA-140 to RLA-173.

On September 26, 2016, the Claimant submitted a rejoinder on the Counter-claim
(“Rejoinder on Counter-claim”) and a pleading in which it withdrew part of its
claims (“Withdrawal of Claims”). The Claimant proposed that the Respondent
submit a response to the Withdrawal of Claims within a month to preserve the

date of the hearing scheduled for December.

On September 30, 2016, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to comment on the
Claimant’s proposal regarding the deadline for responding to the Withdrawal of

Claims.

On October 5, 2016, the Respondent disagreed with this deadline and reserved
until October 26, 2016 the right to object to the hearing being held in December.

On October 11, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6 (“PO6”), in
which it set a deadline of October 24, 2016 for the Respondent to submit its
comments on the holding of a hearing in December; and set October 31, 2016 as
the deadline for the Claimant to submit its comments on the Respondent’s
comments. In addition, it ordered the Respondent to submit its Response to the
Withdrawal of Claims on November 11, 2016. Finally, it was agreed that a
telephone conference call would be held during the week of November 14, 2016

to specify the dates of the hearing and to prepare to organize it.

On October 26, 2016, the Respondent confirmed its availability for the hearing in
December. In addition, it requested that the Tribunal order the Claimant to present
revised versions of its Request for Arbitration, its Memorial, its Reply, as well as
its Rejoinder on the Counter-claim and the Withdrawal of Claims, deleting all the
factual and legal arguments associated with the Withdrawal of Claims, and to

remove from the record the testimonies of certain witnesses.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

On October 27, 2016, the Tribunal took note of the agreement of the Parties to
hold the hearing in December 2016. The Tribunal also invited the Claimant to
comment no later than October 31 on the Respondent’s request for a corrected
version of all its submissions to date, deleting any factual or legal reference to the

claims withdrawn.

On October 27, 2016, the Claimant wrote to the Tribunal to decline the
Respondent’s request regarding the obligation to submit revised submissions and
to confirm the Claimant’s counter-proposal that each Party identify the paragraphs
in the submission that were no longer relevant to the resolution of the claim and

the counter-claim.

On the same day, the Respondent maintained its position and indicated that it was

opposed to the alternative proposal of the Claimant.

On October 28, 2016, the Claimant wrote to the Tribunal to clarify that the Parties

did not agree with presenting closing arguments during the hearing.

On October 28, 2016, the Tribunal indicated that it did not consider it useful for
the Parties to undertake the laborious task of modifying their various submissions
as a result of the Withdrawal of Claims. The Tribunal explained that it was in a
position to disregard the facts and legal arguments related to the withdrawn
claims. Finally, the Tribunal asked the Parties to send it a list compiling all their

current claims.

On November 1, 2016, the Tribunal decided that brief closing arguments should

be made at the hearing.

On November 3, 2016, the Tribunal invited the Parties to reach agreements on the
sequence in which witnesses and experts would be examined, as well as on the
extent and scope of their examination, and asked them to communicate their
answer jointly. Also, in regard to a request from the Respondent, the Tribunal
decided that it did not intend to question witnesses or experts other than those

indicated by the Parties.

On November 10, 2016, the Tribunal received from the Parties the agreements

and positions of each of them regarding the organization of the hearing (“Joint

10

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

Hearing Procedure Proposal”). They proposed that the hearing be held from

December 9 to 16, 2016.

On November 11, 2016, the Parties sent an updated version of the “Joint Hearing

Procedure Proposal” to the Tribunal.

On the same day, the Respondent submitted a response to the Withdrawal of

Claims (“Response to Withdrawal of Claims”) to the Tribunal.

On November 15, 2016, a telephone conference was held to organize the hearing.
It was confirmed inter alia that the hearing would take place from December 9 to

16, 2016.

On November 18, 2016, the Tribunal sent out the final text of the “Joint Hearing
Procedure Proposal.” In addition, the President requested the consent of the
Parties to go ahead and replace Ms. Aurore Descombes with Ms. Marie Girardet

as Assistant to the President of the Tribunal.

By letters dated November 18 and 21, 2016, the Respondent and the Claimant
accepted, in turn, the appointment of Ms. Marie Girardet as Assistant to the

President of the Tribunal.

On November 28, 2016, the Claimant submitted an index of its new annexes and

legal authorities.

The hearing on jurisdiction and on the merits (“Hearing”) was held on December
9, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16, 2016. In addition to the members of the Tribunal, the
Secretary of the Tribunal and the Assistant to the President of the Tribunal, the

following persons attended the Hearing:

Representing the Claimant:

Mr. Nigel Blackaby (Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP)

Ms. Sylvia Noury (Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP)

Mr. Jean Paul Dechamps (Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP)

Mr. Michael Kotrly (Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP)

Ms. Katrina Woolcock (Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP)

Ms. Annie Pan (Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP)

Ms. Anne Marie Doernenburg (Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP)
Ms. Anushi Amin (Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP)

11

Ms
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Wi

Mr.
Mr.
Ms
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms
Mr.

. Stephanie Mbonu (Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP)
. Eugenio Hernandez Breton (Baker & McKenzie)

. Brian Thompson (Immersion Legal Graphics)

. Ben Keisler (Anglo American PLC)

. Michael Schottler (Anglo American PLC)

. Alfonso Almenara (Minera Loma de Niquel, CA)

tnesses and experts presented by the Claimant:

. Oscar Pérez (Witness)

. Euler Piantino (Witness)

. Rebecca Charlton (Witness)

. Howard Rosen (Expert)

. Chris Milburn (FTI Consulting)
. Alex Lee (FTI Consulting)

. Rick Lambert (Expert)

. Phillip Mackey (Expert)

. Brenna Scholey (RPA Inc)

. Allan Brewer-Carias (Expert)

Representing the Respondent:

Mr.

Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.
Ms.

Mi

5

Ms.

Mr.

Wi

Ms
Ms
Ms
Mr.
Ms
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

. Mélida Hodgson (Foley Hoag LLP)

Kenneth Figueroa (Foley Hoag LLP)

Tafadzwa Pasipanodya (Foley Hoag LLP)

Diego Cadena (Foley Hoag LLP)

Analia Gonzalez (Foley Hoag LLP)

Erin Argueta (Foley Hoag LLP)

Patricia Cruz Trabanino (Foley Hoag LLP)

Anna Toubiana (Foley Hoag LLP)

Manuela de la Helguera (Foley Hoag LLP)

Carol Kim (Foley Hoag LLP)

Francheska Loza (Foley Hoag LLP)

Angélica Villagran (Foley Hoag LLP)

. Reinaldo Mujfioz Pedroza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
Erika Fernéndez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)

. Roberto Mirabal Acosta (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)

tnesses and experts presented by the Respondent:

. Jennyfer Gordon (Petréleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA))
. Erika Figueroa (Witness)

. Lis G6mez (Witness)

. José Solano (Witness)

. Irene Villasmil (Witness)

. Alejandro Can6nico (Expert)

. Patrick Willis (Expert)

. Nicholas Barcza (Expert)

. Daniel Flores (Expert)

12

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

Mr. Ettore Comi (Econ One Research, Inc.)

Mr. Brendan Moore (Econ One Research, Inc.)

On February 2, 2017, the Parties requested that the Tribunal approve an extension
of the period established in the “Joint Hearing Procedure Proposal” in which to
present the agreed-upon transcript of the Hearing in English and Spanish. In
addition, the Parties highlighted the fact that they discovered discrepancies in the

translations of the transcripts.

On February 3, 2017, the Tribunal accepted the proposals of the Parties for
resolving the translation problems and extended the deadline for submitting the

transcript of the Hearing until February 10, 2017.

On February 10, 2017, the Parties submitted their corrected version of the

transcripts to the Tribunal.

On March 24, 2017, the Parties agreed to attach several legal authorities to their
post-hearing briefs. In sum, the Claimant stated that it had no objection to the

Respondent presenting an annex with its post-hearing brief.

On March 31, 2017, the Parties submitted their respective Post-Hearing Briefs
(“PHBs”).

On April 21, 2017, the Claimant submitted its translation into Spanish of its PHB.

On the same day, the Respondent submitted its translation into English of its PHB.

On April 28, 2017, the Parties submitted their respective Submissions on Costs
(“Costs”).

On May 8, 2017, the Respondent submitted its translation into English of its
Submission on Costs. Also, it sent a letter to the Tribunal calling attention to the

Claimant’s Submission on Costs.

On May 11, 2017, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the Respondent’s
communication and invited the Claimant to submit any observations it may have

on said communication no later than May 15, 2017.

On May 12, 2017, the Claimant replied to the Respondent’s communication.

13

84.

85.

86.

On May 28, 2017, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the Claimant’s letter
dated May 12, 2017 in response to the Respondent’s letter dated May 8, 2017.

On March 20, 2018, the Centre was notified that the representation of the
Respondent by Foley Hoag LLP had terminated on March 19, 2018.

The Tribunal declared the proceeding closed on August 1, 2018 in accordance

with Article 44 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules.

Il. FACTS

87.

88.

89.

90.

Anglo American initiated this arbitration in order to obtain full compensation for
the alleged damages caused by Venezuela’s supposed unlawful conduct with
regard to its alleged investments in MLDN, a company incorporated under the
laws in force in Venezuela. Until November 10, 2012, MLDN’s operations in
Venezuela comprised the exploration and exploitation of the Loma de Niquel ore
deposit (“LDN Deposit”), the processing of the ore and the marketing of the

resulting ferronickel.

In 1992, the Ministry of Mines granted the Corporacién Federal de Minas, S.A.
(“Cofeminas”) the first ten mining concessions (“First Concessions”) in the
following sectors of the LDN Deposit: (i) El Tigre; (ii) San Onofre Nos. 1, 2, and
3; (iii) Camedas Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5; and (iv) San Antonio No. 15

The Anglo American group invested in Venezuela for the first time in 1993, with
the acquisition of a ten percent indirect participation in Cofeminas, through its
Panamanian subsidiary Anglo American Corporation of South America S.A.

(“AMSA”).

In 1995, the Ministry of Mines granted Cofeminas another four mining
concessions on the LDN Deposit (“Second Concessions”) in the following

sectors: Cofemina Nos. 4, 5, 6, and 7.°

5 Concessions - El Tigre, San Onofre No. 1, 2, and 3, Camedas No. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, and San Antonio No. 1, the
“First Concessions” (C-3).
© Mining Titles - Cofemina Nos. 4, 5, 6, and 7, published in the Gaceta Oficial of March 1995 (C-5).

14

91. In 1996, the Anglo American group increased its indirect participation in
Cofeminas to 85 percent. The 85 percent participation of Anglo American in
MLDN was held at that time through Loma de Niquel Holdings Limited
(“LDNH”), which in turn was the owner of 94 percent of MLDN. LDNH itself
was owned by AMSA (84 percent) and other third parties (16 percent). AMSA
also held a direct minority participation of six percent in MLDN’ and changed

the name of the company, which was renamed MLDN.®

92. The First Concessions were renewed in 1997 and in 1998.° The expiry date of

these was scheduled for November 10, 2012.

93. In 1999, the Ministry of Mines granted MLDN the last two mining concessions

on the LDN Deposit in Cofemina sectors Nos. 1 and 2 (“Third Concessions”).!°

94. Anglo American ple was established in 1998 and, by 1999, it had become the
parent company of the Anglo American business group, including MLDN. In
2001, by a series of consecutive actions, Anglo American increased its indirect
participation in MLDN to 91.37 percent, a share it continues to maintain until

today.!!

95. In September 1999, the new mining legislation called the 1999 Mining Law
(“1999 Mining Law”)!? was enacted and replaced the 1945 Mining Law (“1945
Mining Law”).!

96. On January 7, 2000, the San Onofre 3, San Antonio 1, and Camedas 1, 2, 3, 4,

and 5 concessions were revisited.'4

7 See Annual Report Minorco S.A. (extract), 1996, p. 31 (C-8).

8 Structure chart of Anglo American’s investment in MLDN, 1996, C-9, Memorial, { 40; Counter-Memorial, J 19.
° Renewed Concessions - El Tigre and Camedas Nos. 1-5, in the Gaceta Oficial Extraordinaria No. 5,190,
December 11, 1997, C-13; Renewed Mining Concessions San Onofre No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 and San Antonio No.
1 (extract), January 13, 1998, (C-15).

10 Mining Titles - Cofemina Nos. | and 2, published in the Gaceta Oficial Extraordinario of February 1999)
(“Mining Titles - Cofemina Nos. 1 and 2”) (C-18).

"| Structure chart indicating the participation of Anglo American ple in MLDN from 2001 to date (C-68).

!2 1999 Mining Law (C-19).

'3 1945 Mining Law, (C-1).

44 San Onofre 3, p. 2: Camedas 1, page 5; Camedas 2 p.7; Camedas 3 p. 9; Camedas 4, p. 12, Camedas 5, p. 14;
San Antonio | p. 16. (C-20).

15

97. On entering into the concession agreements, the concessionaire undertook to
comply with the special provisions stipulated by the Ministry of Mines, as well
as to pay an exploitation tax related to the extraction of the mineral.!°

98. The concession agreements (so-called “Mining Titles”) provided that upon the
expiry or termination of the concessions, certain mining assets acquired by

MLDN would be transferred free of charge to the State (reversionary assets).'®

99. Construction of the MLDN processing plant (“Processing Plant” or “Plant”)

began in 1997 and production commenced in 2001.!7

100. MLDN operations involved the acquisition of goods and services in Venezuela.
As an exporter, MLDN could recover the VAT it paid for purchases of goods and
services in Venezuela, in accordance with the recovery procedure provided for
in Article 43 of the 2002 VAT Law (“WAT Law”). The recovery process was
achieved with the issuance of VAT credit certificates (“VAT CERTS”).

101. In December 2007 and January 2008, the Ministry of Mines published resolutions

declaring the caducidad of 13 of the 16 mining concessions.'*

102. After the caducidad of these 13 mining concessions, the three Remaining
Concessions were Camedas No. 1, Camedas No. 3, and San Antonio No. | (the
so-called “Remaining Concessions”) the expiry of which was provided for on

November 10, 2012 (the so-called “Expiry Date”).!°

15 Memorial, 44; Counter-Memorial, (25.

‘© Tn relation to the Remaining Concessions see Clause 18, C-20 “It is understood that the works and other
permanent improvements, in addition to the machinery, tools, equipment and materials, including the facilities,
accessories, and equipment and any other assets used for the purpose of the concession and that form an integral
part thereof, regardless of how they were acquired, shall become the full property of the State free of liens and
enc , without any ion, upon ination of the i ‘88 of the cause [...]”

17 Memorial {39 and Annex B; Counter-Memorial 946, 446.

'8 Gaceta Oficial Extraordinaria No. 5.869, December 28, 2007 (extract), pp. 7 to 35 (C25), whereby the expiry
of the Camedas 2, 4, and 5, El Tigre, and San Onofre 1 2, and 3 mining concessions was declared; see also Gaceta
Oficial No. 38,844 (extract), January 7, 2008 (C-26), pp. 358,809 to 358,824, which declared the expiry of the
Cofemina 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 7 mining concessions.

'9 See Renewed Mining Titles - El Tigre and Camedas Nos. 1-5, published in the Gaceta Oficial No. 5.190
(December 11, 1997) (“Renewed Mining Titles - El Tigre and Camedas Nos. 1-5”), (C-13); Renewed Mining
Titles San Onofre Nos. 1, 2, and 3 and San Antonio No. 1, in Gaceta Oficial No. 5.206 (January 13, 1998)
(“Renewed Mining Titles San Onofre Nos. 1, 2, and 3 and San Antonio No. 1”), (C-15).

16

103.

104.

105.

IV. PRESE

106.

107.

108.

On December 27, 2011, MLDN requested that the Remaining Concessions be

renewed for a further period of ten years.”°

On May 17, 2012, the Ministry of Mines formally rejected MLDN’s request for

an extension.”!

The Remaining Concessions expired according to their terms on November 10,
2012 and the procedure for handover of the MLDN project, including the ore
deposit, the Processing Plant, and other works and facilities, to the Republic
began.”? On November 11, 2012 the Certificate of Delivery of the MLDN Project

was signed.?>

  

TION OF THE PARTIES’ PETITIONS

After its Withdrawal of Claims, the Claimant’s pleadings are summarized below.
It has (i) withdrawn the claim for export prohibition in its entirety, (ii) partially
withdrawn its claim for VAT to the extent that it relates to the VAT refunds
earned from January 1, 2012 onwards, and (iii) made certain adjustments to its

claim for damages arising from the claim for non-reversionary assets.

The Claimant’s final requests relate to two actions of the Respondent about
which Anglo American complains, the first related to “the seizure of the assets,”
which the Claimant considers “non-reversionary,” and the second related to the

“VAT.”

In relation to the first action, the seizure of assets, Claimant alleges that the

following assets were expropriated:

- MLDN’s “Processing Assets”, that is, the infrastructure, buildings and
equipment used for the processing of nickel laterite ore into ferronickel,

including, but not limited to, the metallurgical plant; and

2” Ministry of Mines (“Request for Extension of Mining Concessions”), December 27, 2011, (C-27).

2! Letter from Ramirez Carrefio (Minister of Energy and Oil) to A. Nelson (MLDN) (May 17, 2012) (C-31).

22 Memorial, 120; Counter-Memorial, 11.

23 Ministry of People’s Power for Oil and Mining, Acceptance Certificate (November | 1, 2012) (C-58), Counter-
Memorial, (118.

17

- the “Inventory”, that is the raw material, spare parts and consumables
associated with the processing held by MLDN in inventory on the expiry of

MLDN’s Remaining Concession. +

109. It should be noted that in submitting its Withdrawal of Claims, Anglo American
withdrew any claim in relation to the processed ferronickel reserves
(“Reserves”), as part of the claim for non-reversionary assets”.

110. Asa result of the seizure of the assets by Venezuela, the Claimant alleges:

-  abreach of Article 5 of the Treaty (expropriation); and

- two breaches of Article 2(2) of the Treaty (violation of the standard of fair
and equitable treatment, as well as breach of the obligation of full protection

and security).

111.

In relation to the second action, i.e. the VAT, the Claimant alleges that as an
exporter, MLDN was entitled to reimbursement for VAT paid on its purchases
of Venezuelan goods and services. The Claimant applied for said VAT tax credits
but Venezuela did not approve its applications and consequently no tax credit

certificates (“CERTS”) were issued. 7°

112. Asa result of Venezuela’s actions in regards to the VAT, the Claimant alleges:

- two breaches of Article 2(2) of the Treaty (violation of the standard of fair
and equitable treatment, as well as breach of the obligation of full protection

and security); and

-  abreach of Article 3 of the Treaty (obligation of no less favorable treatment).

> Claimant’s PHB, { 25.

25 Withdrawal of Claims, § 25. See also Claimant’s PHB, 425, where Claimant ceased to include processed
ferronickel reserves in its definition of reversionary assets.

2 Tr, D2, p. 381, Examination of Mr. Oscar Perez (“through August 2010”).

18

113. The Respondent’s Counter-claim is based on the alleged breach by MLDN, the

indirect subsidiary of Anglo American, of its obligations as concessionaire with

respect to exploitation taxes and special advantages.

114. Both Parties object to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear the claims of the

other Party.

115. The Tribunal summarizes hereafter what in the respective submissions of the

Parties it considers relevant to decide the case that was submitted to it. From the

fact that all the arguments presented are not mentioned, it should not be inferred

that they were not taken into account. The Tribunal duly considered all the

Parties’ written and oral submissions of fact and of law.

A.  Claimant’s Petitions

116. The Claimant is asking the Tribunal to:

“(a) DECLARE that Venezuela has breached Articles 2(2), 3, and 5 of the

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Treaty;

ORDER that Venezuela pay the Claimant the sum of US$235.4 million for
its breaches of the Treaty or such other sum as the Tribunal determines

will ensure full reparation;

ORDER Venezuela to pay pre-award interest on (b) above in the sum of
US$157.2 million, calculated at a rate of eleven percent from the dates of
the actions of Venezuela that resulted in damages suffered by Anglo
American on 31 March 2017 until the date of the Tribunal’s award, or at
such other rate and compounding period as the Tribunal determines will

ensure full reparation;

ORDER Venezuela to pay post-award interest on the same basis as pre-
award interest accruing from the date of the award until payment is made

in full;

DECLARE that the award of damages and interest in (b), (c) and (d) shall

be net of applicable Venezuelan taxes and that Venezuela may not deduct

19

taxes in respect of the payment of the award of damages and interest from

(b), (c), and (d);

(f) DECLARE that it lacks jurisdiction to hear Venezuela’s counter-claim and
that, therefore, said claim is not admissible; or in the alternative, DISMISS

Venezuela’s counter-claim in its entirety;
(g) AWARD such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate; and

(h) ORDER Venezuela to pay all of the costs and expenses of this arbitration,
including the Claimant’s legal and expert fees, the fees and expenses of
any experts appointed by the Tribunal, the fees and expenses of the

Tribunal and ICSID’s Additional Facility costs.”*"
117. The Claimant states that:

- in relation to the alleged violation of Article 5 of the Treaty by the seizure
of the assets: “alternatively, if the Tribunal were to decide that the Non-
Reversionary Assets did revert to the State, the Claimant would still be
entitled to compensation for the non-amortized value of the Processing

Assets.”°8

-  inrelation to the alleged violation of Article 2(2) of the Treaty by the seizure
of assets: “Even if the Tribunal were to find that the Non-Reversionary
Assets were not MLDN’s assets when they were seized, because they were in
fact reversionary under Venezuelan law, Venezuela’s taking of those assets
without paying compensation for the non-amortized portion of the
Processing Assets (as per Anglo American’s alternative claim) would still

breach its fair and equitable treatment obligations.”??

118. Regarding the detail of its petition for damages, the Claimant stated:

“As compensation for Venezuela's breaches of the Treaty, Anglo American claims

damages (before interest) in respect of its ownership interest in:

2 Claimant’s PHB, 4276.
28 Claimant’s PHB, 189.
2° Claimant’s PHB, 4147.

20

(a) The fair market value (FMV) of the Processing Assets and the Inventory in
the primary Non-Reversionary Assets claim worth (i) US$202.6 million if
measured applying a DCF valuation or (ii) US$343.4 million if measured
by their NBV;, or, in the alternative should the Tribunal find these assets to
be reversionary, (iii) US$316.7 million for the non-amortized value of the

Processing Assets; as well as
(b) the VAT CERTS worth US$32.8 million.”*°

B. Respondent’s Petitions

119. The Respondent requests that the Tribunal:

“a) Declare that it lacks jurisdiction to hear the Claimant’s claims under the

Treaty and the Additional Facility;

b) — Should the Tribunal determine that it has jurisdiction to hear any of the
Claimant’s claims determine that it also has jurisdiction over the counter-

claim;

c) Dismiss in their entirety all the Claimant’s claims for failure to satisfv its

burden of proof and for lack of factual and legal merit;

d) Inthe event that the Tribunal were to determine that Venezuela has violated
any clause of the Treaty, or that Venezuela is otherwise legally liable,
dismiss Claimant’s claim for damages because of the Claimant's failure to
prove their existence, cause, or amount in accordance with the standards of
the Treaty and of International Law, and declare that Venezuela has no

obligation to pay compensation to the Claimant;

e) Determine that Venezuela is entitled to receive payment of compensation for
the damage suffered in accordance with Venezuela’s counter-claim and

order the Claimant to pay the damages requested in that counter-claim;

A Order the Claimant to pay the costs related to the administrative costs of

this arbitration, as well as Venezuela’s defense in the arbitration

3° Claimant’s PHB, 4152.

21

proceedings, as well as compensate the Republic for the expenses incurred

for its defense; and

g) — Grant Venezuela any other relief that the Tribunal deems appropriate. >!

120. The Respondent specifies the following in relation to its Counter-claim:

“For the foregoing reasons, if the Tribunal determines that it has jurisdiction
to hear the Claimant’s claims, it must decide that it also has jurisdiction to hear
Venezuela’s counter-claim. MLDN, the indirect subsidiary of Anglo American,
failed to comply with its obligations as a concessionaire in relation to the
exploitation taxes and special advantages, and it owes a total of 531,409,475
bolivares fuertes to the Republic or US$123,583,598.84, applying, as did the

Claimant, the 2012 exchange rate of 4.3—not including the applicable fines. ”*

Vv. INTRODUCTION TO THE PARTIES’ ARGUME

 

121. The Arbitral Tribunal will undertake the analysis of the case in the following
manner: first, it will study the jurisdictional objections raised by Venezuela (VI);
then, it will study the claims of the Claimant (VID) and, in the event these claims
are accepted, it will make a decision on the Claimants’ monetary claims (VIII).
The Tribunal will then rule on its jurisdiction over the Counter-claim submitted
by the Respondent, and, if deemed competent, on its merit (IX). Finally, the
Arbitral Tribunal will award the costs and expenses of the arbitration proceedings

(Xx).
VI. JURISDICTION

122. The Tribunal will present the positions of the Respondent (A) and of the
Claimant (B) in turn, before deciding on its jurisdiction with respect to the

Claimant’s claims (C).

3! Respondent’s PHB, §251.
* Respondent’s PHB, 92.

22

A

Respondent’s position: The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the
dispute

123. First of all, the Respondent argues that the Claimant failed to meet the burden of
proof to demonstrate that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear its claims. It is a
generally accepted principle of international law that the burden of proving
jurisdiction rests with the Claimant in application of the standard rule of evidence
actori incumbit probatio.** The Respondent considers that the Claimant violated
said rule by not demonstrating that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear its

claims.*4

124. In short, the Respondent’s defense is that there is no jurisdiction given that Anglo
American has not made a protected investment in Venezuela (1) and that in any

event a reversionary claim must be decided by the Venezuelan courts (2).

1) Anglo American has not made an investment in Venezuela protected under
the BIT

125. The Treaty defines the term “investment” as follows:

“(a) the term “investment” means every kind of asset and in particular, though

not exclusively, includes:

(i) — movable and immovable property and any other property rights, such

as mortgages, liens or pledges;

(ii) — shares in and stock and debentures of a company and any other form

of participation in a company;

(iii) claims to money or to any performance under contract having a

financial value;

(iv) _ intellectual property rights, goodwill, technical processes and know-

how;

3 Counter-Memorial, 4251.
§ Respondent’s PHB, 64.

23

126.

127.

128.

129.

(v) — business concessions conferred by law or under contract, including
concessions to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural

resources. ”*°

The Respondent notes that, according to Anglo American, its alleged investment
consists of two interests: (i) an indirect shareholding interest in MLDN, and (ii)
an indirect stake in MLDN’s assets. The Respondent considers that neither of

these two interests constitutes an investment for purposes of the Treaty.*°

i. The indirect shareholding of Anglo American in MLDN is not an
investment protected by the Treaty

Contrary to the Claimant’s arguments, its indirect shareholding in MLDN is not
an investment protected by the Treaty.*” First, the Claimant has not substantiated
its claims in an alleged investment but has merely presented an assessment of
certain assets of MLDN which cannot be equated to an assessment of the indirect

participation in that company.**

Second, even if Anglo American had based its claims on this alleged investment,
the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction over this dispute since the Treaty does not
protect indirect shareholdings. This is the conclusion that can be drawn from the
interpretation of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“Vienna
Convention”). This instrument calls for interpretation of the Treaty based on the
ordinary meaning of its terms, in light of its object and purpose, and, if necessary,
allows for an examination of the Contracting States’ intent to assign a particular
meaning to the terms used in the Treaty. However, at no time did Anglo American

attempt to interpret the Treaty in accordance with the Vienna Convention.”

Likewise, the Treaty does not protect shareholding interests such as those of
Anglo American in MLDN: the Contracting States chose to exclude any reference
to indirect shareholding interests. Contrary to what Anglo American advocated

during the Hearing, the silence of the Treaty to that effect cannot be interpreted in

55 Counter-Memorial, {251 also referring to the BIT between Venezuela and the United Kingdom, Art. | (a)
(English version available as C-6) (RLA-48).

36 Counter-Memorial, 219; Respondent’s PHB, 66.

37 Counter-Memorial, 221.

38 Counter-Memorial, 220.

>? Counter-Memorial, 4222.

24

130.

131.

132.

the sense that it did not intend to exclude protection. Anglo American wants the
phrase “every kind of asset” in the Treaty to be interpreted as “all types of assets
invested directly or indirectly” even though those words do not appear in the text
of the Treaty.*° The Respondent recalls that the Claimant itself urged the Tribunal
to reject invitations “to read into the silence of the BIT,” a statement with which

the Respondent agrees: silence is not tantamount to protection.*”

On the contrary, the exclusion of indirect interests from the definition of
“investment” in the Treaty is clearly deliberate: the practice followed by
Venezuela and the United Kingdom in drafting bilateral investment treaties shows
that when those States wish to extend the treaty’s protection to indirect interests
they do so explicitly. It cites examples from other treaties in which Venezuela and
the United Kingdom have specified that the definition of “investment” extends to
indirect interests through the use of constructions such as “every kind of asset
invested directly or indirectly,” “any kind of asset owned or controlled by an
investor of one Contracting Party either directly or indirectly, including through
an investor of a third State” and “every kind of economic asset, owned or
controlled directly or indirectly.” In contrast, the Venezuela-United Kingdom

Treaty did not include indirectly invested assets in its definition of “investment.

In support of its claim, the Respondent emphasizes that when the Treaty was
drafted: (i) there was no pattern of case law that interpreted “investment” so
expansively as to include indirect interests in that definition and (ii) it was the
common practice among sovereign States to explicitly distinguish between direct

and indirect investments.“

The Claimant relies heavily on the Guaracachi v. Bolivia case for its argument
that clear language is needed to exclude indirect investments from the Treaty. The
tribunal in Guaracachi endorsed that rule of interpretation based on the purpose
of the BIT to promote and protect foreign investment. The Respondent objects

that in the case of the Venezuela-United Kingdom Treaty the purpose was not only

*° Counter-Memorial, 222 Respondent’s PHB, {68.
4! Respondent’s PHB, (68; Counter-Memorial, (223.
* Respondent’s PHB, 68.

* Counter-Memorial, 224.

4 Counter-Memorial, 226.

25

133.

134,

135.

136.

137.

to promote foreign investment but also to strengthen bilateral ties and increase
prosperity in both States. The Respondent deduces from the foregoing that the
reasoning of the tribunal in Guaracachi cannot be extrapolated to the present case
since the Treaty does not have the sole objective of protecting foreign investment

and, if extrapolated, it would be contrary to the objectives of the Treaty.*°

Requiring explicit language in order to exclude indirect interests would render
meaningless the commitment to the “reciprocal protection” of investments under
the Treaty. This was the sense in which it was interpreted by the tribunal in the
Standard Chartered Bank v. Tanzania case. If the principle advocated by the
Claimant were to be accepted, the expansive definition of “investment” put
forward by Anglo American would allow it to assert claims on behalf of entities

whose States of nationality are not contracting parties to the Treaty.“

As revealed by the Claimant itself, there are seven levels of corporate ownership
between MLDN and Anglo American. Within these levels of ownership, six of
the intermediary entities have an indirect interest in MLDN, one of them is of

Dutch nationality and two others have Luxembourg nationality.*”

It follows from the foregoing that Anglo American’s claim, in effect, includes

claims of entities that are not protected under the Treaty.*®

In short, the fact of requiring an explicit language to exclude indirect interests is
also incompatible with the principle of legal personality: every legal entity has its
own property rights, such that the assets of other entities cannot be considered
assets belonging to Anglo American. The Claimant does not own a single share in
MLDN and has not explained why, despite this, it considers its indirect

shareholding in this company as an investment under the Treaty.*”

Given that the Claimant has not proven that the protection of the Treaty extends

to its indirect shareholding, jurisdiction must be denied.”

5 Counter-Memorial, {[227.
© Counter-Memorial, {[229.
7 Counter-Memorial, {[230.
#8 Counter-Memorial, 230.
#° Counter-Memorial, 232.
*° Counter-Memorial, 233.

26

ii. Anglo American’s alleged indirect shareholding interest_in MLDN’s
assets is not an investment protected by the Treaty

138. The Respondent objects to the Claimant’s assertion that its indirect participation
in the assets of MLDN is an investment protected by the Treaty. According to the
Respondent, international tribunals have acknowledged that a shareholder cannot
“ask for compensation for interference with [the] assets” belonging to the

company in which it has a stake.>!

139. Unless a treaty expressly allows it, which is not the situation in the present case,
a shareholder cannot be compensated “for interference with the assets belonging
to the company of which it is a shareholder, but rather it may only file a claim for
the effect of such interference on the value of its own shares.”*? In short, a
shareholder’s rights are limited to claiming the loss of value of its shares stemming
from interference with the assets of the company in which it directly or indirectly

owns shares when it is determined that the pertinent treaty so allows.

140. In the opinion of the Respondent, Anglo American misrepresents the decisions of
certain tribunals to attempt to challenge the fact that these principles are widely
recognized. Likewise, comparisons with the Azurix v. Argentina and Enron v.
Argentina cases are inappropriate since in the case at hand the Treaty does not
consider the interests in the assets of the companies controlled directly or
indirectly as a protected investment. Similarly, the reference to the Paushok v.
Mongolia case is inappropriate since that case endorsed a claim over the shares,
and not a claim directly over the assets of the subsidiary. However, in this case,
Anglo American has failed to base any of its claims on an alleged impact on the

value of its shares.*4

141.

In short, the Respondent complains that the Claimant misinterprets the cases

submitted in support of the Respondent’s argument.*>

142. In another vein, it cannot be stated that Article 5(2) of the Treaty extends the right

to compensation for expropriation of the assets of the locally incorporated

5! Counter-Memorial, 4234.

52 Respondent’s PHB, 66.

53 Counter-Memorial, ${{236, 237.
54 Counter-Memorial, 4238.

55 Counter-Memorial, {239 et seq.

27

143.

144.

145.

company (such as MLDN) owned by a foreign company (such as Anglo
American), directly to the foreign company. In fact, Article 5(2) does not have
such an effect. The guarantees provided by this rule only apply to nationals or
companies of the Contracting Party that own shares in the company whose assets
have been expropriated. Since the Claimant itself recognizes that it does not own
a single share in MLDN, Article 5(2) does not apply to it. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the purpose of said Article is to guarantee protection against the
expropriation of protected investments, not to grant jurisdiction when it does not

exist.

The Respondent concludes that the Claimant’s failure to show that either
international law or the Treaty allows a shareholder to present claims directly over
the assets of a company in which it holds shares means that the Claimant has not
met its burden of proving that this Tribunal has jurisdiction over the present

dispute.*”

2) The Reversion Claim must be decided by the Venezuelan courts

The mining concessions and the Mining Law contain exclusive forum selection
clauses that require that the disputes arising from the concession be “decided by
the competent courts of the Republic of Venezuela” and “may not for any reason
or cause “give rise to foreign claims.” ** By virtue of the foregoing, the
Respondent considers that the dispute over the reversion must be resolved by

Venezuelan courts and not before an international tribunal.

The position taken by the Claimant in relation to the argument regarding the
exclusive forum clauses does not convince the Respondent. It should also be noted
that the Claimant, in this regard, argued that: (i) the clauses are not binding on it

since MLDN and not Anglo American was the contracting party for the Mining

© Counter-Memorial, [242.

57 Counter-Memorial, [243.

°8 See, for example, Mining Titles - El Tigre, San Onofre Nos. 1, 2, and 3, Camedas Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, and
San Antonio No. | (C-3). According to the Respondent, all the Mining Titles under discussion in this case contain
similar language. See Mining Titles - Cofemina Nos. 4, 5, 6, and 7 (C-5); Renewed Mining Titles - El Tigre and
Camedas Nos. 1-5 (C-13); Renewed Mining Titles San Onofre Nos. 1, 2, and 3 and San Antonio No. | (C-15);
Mining Titles - Cofemina Nos. | and 2 (C-18).

28

146.

147.

Titles and (ii) its claims are not of a contractual nature, but rather based on the

Treaty so the dispute can be settled in an international tribunal.*?

With respect to the Claimant’s first argument, the Respondent contends that the
fact that MLDN and not Anglo American is the concessionaire does not invalidate
the application of the exclusive forum clause of the Mining Titles. Anglo
American’s indirect subsidiary, MLDN, accepted the language that limits
jurisdiction to the Venezuelan courts when it obtained or renewed the majority of
its mining concessions, including the three “Remaining Concessions” that it had
in 2012. Furthermore, the Claimant submitted claims directly over MLDN’s
assets, including its mining concessions. Anglo American cannot have it both
ways: it cannot assert claims that properly belong only to MLDN and at the same
time refuse to accept the terms concerning the jurisdiction of the Venezuelan
courts to which MLDN agreed. The Respondent refers to the principle of estoppel

and the concept of venire versus factum propium.®!

With respect to the precedents referred to by the Claimant to advocate that the
presence of a forum clause does not strip an ICSID tribunal of jurisdiction, the
Respondent is of the opinion that they cannot be compared with the present case.
In the Vivendi I v. Argentina case, the claims were not based on the concession
contract in which the forum clause was included. In contrast, the claims of Anglo
American are based on the concessions’ Mining Titles so they can in fact be
subject to the jurisdiction of the Venezuelan courts. It also discusses the
relevance of the Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia case contrasting it with the present
case where the forum clause clearly expresses the Parties’ intent to limit
jurisdiction to the Venezuelan courts and thus exclude ICSID jurisdiction, as well
as that of any other foreign forum.® Finally, it also rules out any possible
similarity with the Urbaser v. Argentina case since the present case is not a “treaty
claim with contractual elements, rather it is purely contractual.”™ It is for all

these reasons that the Respondent concludes that the Claimant has failed to meet

5° Respondent’s PHB, 470.

 Counter-Memorial, 4251.
61 Counter-Memorial, 4252.
© Counter-Memorial, 4255.
3 Counter-Memorial, {256
 Counter-Memorial, 4257.

29

its burden of proving that, even if its alleged investments were protected under the
Treaty, the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction over its claims despite the existence

of the exclusive forum selection clause.®>

148. With respect to the Claimant's second argument to contest the argument regarding
the exclusive forum selection clause, which is to allege that its claims are not
contractual, the Respondent objects that Anglo American labels Venezuela’s
“seizure of the non-reversionary assets” as a breach of Articles 2(2) and 5 of the
Treaty, but has formulated this claim purely in terms of compliance with the

provisions of the concessions’ Mining Titles and the Mining Law.°°

149. In short, the fundamental element of the Claimant’s claim is that certain MLDN
assets were erroneously designated as reversionary and Anglo American therefore
asks the Tribunal to determine the correct interpretation of the terms of the mining
concessions. It follows from the foregoing that when a claim has a breach of
contract as the fundamental element, it cannot be considered a Treaty claim. To
the contrary, the correct interpretation of the mining concessions is purely a

question of domestic law for the Venezuelan courts.

150. In support of its allegations, the Respondent expressly refers to the /berdrola v.
Guatemala case to deduce that, as in that case, Anglo American’s claim is not a
“dispute under the Treaty and international law” but rather deals with differences

in the interpretation of Venezuelan legal provisions.

151.

According to the Respondent, the Hearing left no doubt that the reversionary claim
is based purely on differences in the interpretation of Venezuelan legal provisions,
specifically, the Mining Titles and the Mining Law. It adds that the central issue
of the dispute is whether the Plant is integrated into the operation of the mine. In
fact, counsel for the Claimant in his opening stated that “the question of what
assets are reversionary and what assets are non-reversionary must primarily be
answered by reference to Venezuelan law” indicating that “the core question for
expropriation is who owns the processing assets and it is agreed between the
Parties that this question of ownership is a matter of Venezuelan law.”® It follows
5 Counter-Memorial, 258.

© Counter-Memorial, 248.

7 Respondent’s PHB, 71.

30

from the foregoing that Anglo American itself made it clear that it considers this
claim to be a matter of domestic law, thus confirming “the wisdom of the forum
selection clause, which channels disputes based on Venezuelan law to the

decision-maker with expertise to resolve such disputes: the Venezuelan courts.”

152. As a result, in accordance with the forum selection clause, therefore, it falls
squarely on the Venezuelan courts to resolve this dispute concerning the

interpretation of domestic law.

B. Claimant’s position: The Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute

153. The Claimant considers that it has met the burden of proof and demonstrated that

the Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide Anglo American’s claims.

154. The Claimant states that it has demonstrated that (i) Anglo American is a protected
UK company under the Treaty, (ii) Anglo American has made protected
investments in Venezuela under the Treaty, (iii) the Parties have consented to
resolve the present dispute by arbitration in accordance with the Arbitration (AF)
Rules, and (iv) the requirements for access to the Additional Facility have been

met.

155. It also emphasizes that the Respondent has not raised any objection to the
Claimant’s nationality, or to the specific jurisdiction requirements imposed by the
Additional Facility Rules, nor does it address the consent of the Parties to submit

the present dispute to arbitration in accordance with those Rules.”

156. In sum, the Respondent’s objections are limited to questions of knowing (1)
whether Anglo American’s indirect investments in MLDN shares and assets
constitute an investment protected by the Treaty, and (2) whether the forum
selection clause in MLDN’s concessions operates as a bar to this Tribunal

exercising jurisdiction over Anglo American’s claims.”!

6 Respondent’s PHB, 72.
Memorial, {ff 134-148.

7 Memorial, {| 133.

7 Respondent’s PHB, 126.

31

1) The Treaty protects direct and indirect investments

157. The Respondent bases its first objection to jurisdiction on the wording of Article
1(a) of the Treaty. However, there is no language in that Article limiting protection
of the Treaty to directly held investments. On the contrary, it uses the most
expansive form of language by referring to the protection of “every kind of asset””
before establishing a non-exclusive list of examples including “shares in and stock
and debentures of a company” or “any other form of participation in a
company.”

158. Contrary to Respondent’s assertion, for indirect investments to be included in the
definition of the concept of investment contained in the Treaty, it is not necessary
to have an express wording to that effect.”* The Respondent is not able to identify
decisions made under an investment treaty that supports its position. In contrast,
various tribunals have concluded that the ordinary meaning of the term “every
kind of asset” or “all assets” supports the interpretation that indirect investments
are included. In this regard, it cites the cases Siemens v. Argentina, Ioannis
Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, and Venezuela Holdings v. Venezuela. These cases
found that the literal reading of the definition of investments (being “every kind
of asset”) “does not support the allegation that the definition of investment

excludes indirect investments.’

159. In addition, and in relation to the Respondent’s argument that the Parties to the
Treaty have negotiated an express formula to include indirect investments in other
treaties signed with other Contracting States, the Claimant points to the reasoning
of the tribunal in the Conoco Phillips v. Venezuela case from which it follows that
if the ordinary meaning of the words contained in a given investment protection

treaty includes indirect investment in the notion of protected investments, that

” Translation of the expression “every kind of asset” from the original English version of the Treaty (C-6) as “toda
clase de bienes” in the Rejoinder and as “toda clase de activos” in the Claimant’s PHB, 127

3 Treaty, Article 1(a) (C-6), and Claimant’s PHB 127

74 Reply, 136, 137.

75 Siemens AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2004,
4137 (CLA-83); Ioannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/18), Decision on Jurisdiction, J
Wuly 6, 2007, 123-124 (CLA-46; Venezuela Holdings BV and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID
Case No. ARB/07/27), Decision on Jurisdiction, June 10, 2010, 1165 (CLA-58).

32

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

meaning is not affected by the fact that the Parties to that treaty may have

negotiated express wording to include indirect investments in other treaties.”

According to the Claimant, Anglo American’s holdings in MLDN’s shares and its
assets clearly fall under the concept of “every kind of asset.” Likewise, a literal
reading of Article 1(a) does not support the Respondent’s argument and, if
admitted, the Tribunal would be interpreting the Treaty at odds with prevailing

investment arbitration case law, as the Respondent itself recognizes.

Venezuela’s arguments to the contrary have all been roundly dismissed by other
investment tribunals, including those in Venezuela’s own cases. These cases
expressly rejected the reasoning of the Respondent when it argued: (i) that the
Contracting Parties would not have foreseen the need to specifically exclude
indirect investments, and (ii) that the extension of protection to indirect
investments would destroy the bilateral application of the Treaty, and its objective

of increasing prosperity in the two Contracting States.

In relation to the first argument, according to which it is not reasonable to consider
that the Parties could have foreseen the need to specifically exclude indirect
interests, the Claimant points out that half a decade before the Treaty was
concluded, the European American Investment Bank tribunal found that indirect
investments in a foreign country were already so commonplace that an
unrestricted reference in a BIT to investments as comprising “all assets” naturally

included indirect interests within its ordinary meaning.”

Regarding the second argument, the case law rejected it, considering that the
protection of indirect investments could be inferred from the object and purpose
of investment treaties given that the purpose of said instruments is precisely to

promote and protect foreign investment.’®

In the same vein, the Claimant objects to the argument that a broad interpretation
of the definition of investments in the Treaty would allow Anglo American to

assert claims on behalf of entities whose States of nationality are not contracting

7 Reply, (9138, 139.
7 Reply, 140, 141.

8 Reply, (142.

33

165.

166.

167.

168.

Reply, (142.
80 Reply, (143.
5! Reply, (143.
® Reply, (143.
83 Reply, (148.

parties to the Treaty.” It also argues that Anglo American is “the ultimate holder
of the investment (and the real source of capital and expertise invested in
Venezuela) even if for commercial reasons, the investment is held through a
number of subsidiaries (most of which would be protected by other bilateral
investment treaties anyway).”*° It follows from the foregoing that it cannot
seriously be denied that the protection of the ultimate holder of an investment and
thus the real party in interest is in accordance with the object and purpose of the

Treaty.*!

With respect to the Respondent’s argument that Anglo American’s position is
contrary to the principle of legal personality recognized by international law in the
Barcelona Traction case decided by the ICJ, the Claimant replies that tribunals
have constantly rejected the validity of this principle in the investment treaty
context where it is the investment treaty which provides the definition of protected
investment and defines it broadly. In this regard, it cites the CMS v. Argentina

case.*

During the Hearing, the Respondent did not counter the reasoning followed by

those tribunals to reject those arguments.

The Claimant considers that the conclusion of the discussion above is that Anglo
American’s indirect interest in MLDN shares constitutes a qualifying investment

protected under the Treaty.**

i. The indirect shareholding of Anglo American in MLDN constitutes an
investment protected under the Treaty

One of the examples of investment listed in Article 1(a) of the Treaty consists of
“shares in and stock and debentures of a company and any form of participation
in a company.” To this end, it can be affirmed that Anglo American’s indirect
shareholding in MLDN constitutes a form of participation in a company. That is

the conclusion reached by the tribunal in the Siemens v. Argentina case, without

34

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

“4 Reply, (150.
85 Reply, (152.
86 Reply, (156.

imposing a requirement that there be no interposed companies between the

investment and the ultimate owner of the company.**

Similarly, in the case of Venezuela Holdings v. Venezuela, the tribunal exercised
its jurisdiction over claims brought by Dutch claimants under the Netherlands-
Venezuela BIT despite the claimants holding their investments in Venezuela

through both US and Bahamas holding companies.*

Similar solutions were adopted in the Cemex v. Venezuela and the Teinver v.

Argentina cases.

Hence the ordinary meaning of the text of the Treaty confirms the jurisdiction of

the Tribunal over Anglo American’s shareholding in MLDN.

Finally, the Claimant objects to the argument put forward by the Respondent that
Anglo American’s quantification of damages somehow affects the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal. Anglo American submitted an assessment of the loss it suffered as a
result of Venezuela’s measures. This loss can be measured by either the
diminution in the value of Anglo American’s interest in MLDN’s shares, or the
loss of the value of MLDN’s assets, since they are the same. In any event, issues
of quantum, essential to the merits of the case, cannot affect the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction.®°

ii. The indirect_participation of Anglo American in MLDN’s assets
constitutes a protected investment under the Treaty

The same reasons espoused in support of the assertion that Anglo American’s
indirect shareholdings in MLDN constitutes an investment protected under the
Treaty are grounds for arguing that Anglo American’s indirect interest in MLDN’s

assets also constitutes a qualifying investment protected under the Treaty.

Without limiting the foregoing, the Claimant considers the position advocated by
the Respondent that Anglo American can claim for “the shares, all the shares but
only the shares” also referring to the El Paso v. Argentina, Postova Banka v.

Greece, and ST-AD y. Bulgaria cases to be wrong. Anglo American does not

35

175.

176.

177.

87 Reply, (160.
88 Reply, (162.
% Reply, (163.

dispute that certain tribunals have found that an investor has no standing to pursue
claims directly over the assets of a company in which it owns shares, but objects
that other tribunals have adopted the opposite interpretation. In this regard, it does
not consider the distinction made by the Respondent in order to rule out the
relevance of such cases to be meaningful, which is to underline that in those cases
the applicable treaty expressly provided that protected investments included
investments owned or controlled directly by a foreign investor, including interests

in the assets of those companies.*”

The Claimant emphasizes that where a treaty defines “investment” broadly as “all
assets” or “every kind of asset,” tribunals have found that the unrestricted scope
of these words naturally includes investments “owned or controlled directly or
indirectly.”*

Nor does Anglo American agree with the Respondent’s analysis of the tribunal’s
decision in the Paushok case, which makes no such definitive assertion as alleged
by the Respondent. While the tribunal in that case considered that the relevant
investment consisted of shares in a the local company, it went on to confirm that
the Claimants were entitled to make claims concerning alleged treaty breaches
resulting from actions affecting the assets of the local company and cited with
approval the reasoning of the ad hoc committee in Azurix affirming that indirectly
held assets of the subsidiary in that case qualified as investments protected by the

treaty.®?

In short, the Claimant argues that the assets fall specifically under the protection
of the Treaty under the provisions of Article 5(2), which grants investors a direct
claim over the expropriated assets of a local investment company in which they
own shares.” Contrary to Respondent’s arguments, Article 5(2) of the Treaty does
not only apply when the investor is the direct owner of shares of the company

whose assets were expropriated. In order to undercut this assertion, the Claimant

% Treaty, Article 5(2); Tr. D1, 64: 22-65: 23, Claimant’s Opening Submission, slides 85-86; Reply, {{164-167;
Claimant’s PHB, 128.

36

178.

179.

180.

refers to its reading of the Treaty which cannot be interpreted as distinguishing

investments directly owned from those indirectly owned.°!

It follows from the foregoing that Article 5(2) of the Treaty unquestionably
affirms the Claimant’s standing to assert a claim of expropriation of MLDN’s

assets.

Lastly, it defends the compatibility of its interpretation with the Vienna
Convention insofar as it establishes the rule of literal interpretation and insofar as
tribunals have clearly found that, under a literal interpretation, treaties that do not

expressly exclude indirect investments must be considered to include them.°”

Hence, Respondent’s objection on the basis of the indirect nature of Anglo

American’s investments must be rejected.

2) The forum selection clause in the mining concessions does not deprive this

181.

182.

°! Reply, (165.
° Reply, (168.

Tribunal of jurisdiction
Venezuela’s second objection is based on the existence of a forum selection clause
in the MLDN mining concessions (and a similar Article in the Mining Law). It
should be noted that such a clause cannot deprive the Tribunal of its jurisdiction
over Anglo American’s claims. This objection cannot affect the VAT claim and

must be rejected on the subject of the claim relating to the reversionary assets.*

Anglo American is not party to the MLDN Concessions so cannot be bound by
their dispute resolution clause. The Respondent claims that under the principle of
estoppel Anglo American must be bound by the terms of the same contracts if it
wants to assert claims belonging to MLDN under those contracts. This argument
fails to recognize that Anglo American not being a party to the concessions is
neither bound by their terms nor able to assert any direct contract claims for
breaches of the concessions. Contrary to the Respondent’s assertions, it is
neither unfair nor contradictory for Anglo American to be allowed to claim for
Treaty breaches arising out of MLDN’s rights yet not be held liable for MLDN’s

alleged breaches of its obligations. In fact, Anglo American’s non-reversionary

°$ Claimant’s PHB, 130; Rejoinder, 169.

°4 Reply, (171.

37

183.

184.

185.

assets claim is based on its own rights under the Treaty, “it does not claim in
respect of MLDN’s contractual rights under the concessions.”°> The Claimant

made its claims under the terms of the Treaty and international law.

In fact, nothing prevents the Respondent from filing complaints in the appropriate
domestic forum against the proper party, MLDN, for alleged breaches of the its
obligations. It should be noted in this regard that MLDN’s exploitation tax

obligations are currently the subject of domestic proceedings.

Notwithstanding that Anglo American is not party to the dispute resolution clause,
in any event, the non-reversionary assets claim based on expropriation and unfair
treatment is fundamentally a Treaty claim, not a contract claim and thus outside
the scope of the forum selection clause in the concessions. Venezuela’s assertion
that Anglo American’s claim cannot be a Treaty claim because it involves certain
contractual law or Venezuelan legal issues is therefore unsustainable.°” The
Claimant never claimed that the Respondent had violated the concessions as a
matter of contract law or that it had violated the Mining Law as a matter of

domestic law.°®

Furthermore, the fact that, to determine whether there has been a breach of the
treaty and whether Venezuela has complied with its obligations under
international law, the Tribunal must decide various points of Venezuelan law,
does not deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction.” For the Tribunal to exercise
jurisdiction, it suffices that “Anglo American’s invocation of the substantive
protections of the Treaty is not prima facie implausible.”' This is a solution
confirmed in the prevailing case law, while Venezuela’s attempt to impose a
higher standard is unsupported. In effect, the Respondent is trying to impose a
higher standard for the Claimant’s burden of proof in matters of jurisdiction by
stating that Anglo American did not offer clear and specific reasoning that
explains why the taking of assets allegedly in accordance with domestic law

constitutes a Treaty violation. The precedent proposed by the Respondent with the

°5 Claimant’s PHB, 4131.

° Reply, 4173.
97 Reply, 177.
°8 Reply, 4174.

°° Claimant’s PHB, 132; Tr., D1, 67:4-12; Claimant’s Opening Sub:

 

ion, slide 88; Reply, 174-177.

0 Claimant’s PHB, 132; Tr., D1, 67:4-12; Claimant’s Opening Submission, slide 89; Reply, 178-180.

38

Iberdrola v. Guatemala case is irrelevant since in that case the tribunal declined
jurisdiction because of the manner in which the Claimant had presented its
claims. '°! Finally, this solution was described as particularly stringent in the
pertinent decision on annulment, also bearing in mind that the prevailing case law
confirms that for the tribunal to exercise jurisdiction it suffices that the Claimants’
invocation of the substantive protections of the treaty is not prima facie

implausible.'?

186. By virtue of the foregoing, the second objection to jurisdiction raised by the

Respondent must be dismissed.
C. Decision of the Tribunal

187. The Respondent’s objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal have led the
Tribunal to analyze two issues. The first is in relation to the scope of the definition
of investments in the Treaty (1). The second is in relation to the existence of an

exclusive forum selection clause in the Mining Titles (2).

1) Analysis of the Respondent’s first objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal

188. With respect to the Respondent’s first objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal,
the Parties disagree as to whether or not the Treaty protects indirect investments.
The disagreement of the Parties affects the concept of indirect investment under
two different aspects: first, the question arises as to whether the indirect
shareholding of Anglo American in MLDN constitutes an investment protected
by the Treaty (b); second, the question arises as to whether Anglo American’s
indirect holding in MLDN’s assets constitutes an investment protected by the
Treaty (c). The answer to both questions is found in the definition of the concept

of “investment” in the Treaty (a).

'0l Tn its Counter-Memorial, Venezuela quoted Iberdrola v. Guatemala in support of this higher standard. In the
Reply, Anglo American explains that this decision was limited to the facts of that case and was only based on the
manner in which the Claimant had raised its claim. Counter-Memorial, footnote 480; Reply, {{{]178-179; Tr. Day
1, 212:1-213:2.
1 Reply, 1177.

39

a) Interpretation of the definition of “investment” in the Treaty

189. The intent of the Contracting States in relation to the definition of the concept of
“investment” protected by the Treaty is reflected in Article 1(a) of the Treaty

which provides that:

(a) “investment” means every kind of asset and in particular, though not

exclusively, includes:

movable and immovable property and any other property rights, such as

mortgages, liens or pledges;

shares in and stock and debentures of a company and any other form of

participation in a company;
claims to money or to performance under contract having a financial value;
intellectual property rights, goodwill, technical processes and know-how;

business concessions conferred by law or under contract, including

concessions to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources. 7103

190. The Tribunal finds the interpretation of such provision to be decisive insofar as
the majority of the arguments developed by the Respondent in support of its first
objection postulate that said definition purports to exclude indirect investments
from its scope. In effect, the Respondent starts from the premise that when the
Contracting States intend to exclude indirect investments from the scope of
protected investments, they simply do not mention them and when they want to

integrate them, they are stipulated.

191.

The Tribunal does not agree with this analysis. The language of the definition of
the term investment in the Treaty does not support a narrow interpretation of that
word. The expression “every kind of asset” is inclusive. In the same way, the fact

that the Parties have specified that the list of examples provided below is not

3 Treaty, Art. I(a).

40

192.

193.

19:

195.

-

exhaustive but merely indicative (“not exclusively”) makes the case for a non-

restrictive definition of the concept of protected “investment” under the Treaty.

The Tribunal considers that nothing in the wording of the relevant clause of the
bilateral Treaty confirms that it was the intention of the Contracting States to limit

the protection of the Treaty to direct investments.

Hence, the Tribunal agrees completely with the analysis of the tribunal in the
Siemens v. Argentina case deciding the same question when faced with a very
similar clause: “[the] Tribunal observes that there is no explicit reference to direct
or indirect investments as such in the Treaty. The definition of “investment” is
very broad. An investment is every kind of asset considered to be such under the
law of the Contracting Party where the investment has been made. The specific
categories of investment included in the definition are included as examples rather
than with the purpose of excluding those not listed. The drafters were careful to
use the words “not exclusively” before listing the categories of “particularly”
included investments. One of the categories consists of “shares, rights of
participation in companies and other types of participations in companies.” The
plain meaning of this provision is that shares held by a German shareholder are
protected by the Treaty and that provision imposed no requirement that there be
no interposed companies between the investment and the ultimate owner of the
company. Therefore, a literal reading of the Treaty does not support the allegation

that the definition of investment excludes indirect investments. ”'*

Other ICSID tribunals have adopted the same solution when faced with similar

clauses. !°5

The Respondent also suggests that if the Parties did not specify the exclusion of
indirect investments in the definition they drafted, it is only because, at the time
the Treaty was drafted, there was no pattern of case law that interpreted investment
so expansively as to include indirect interests in that definition. The existence or

not of such a judicial practice when the Treaty was signed is not a significant

104 Siemens AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB / 02/8), Award, February 6, 2007, (CLA-84).

"5 Venezuela Holdings BV and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB / 07/27),
Decision on Jurisdiction, June 10, 2010, 1165 CLA-58); loannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia - ICSID Case No.
ARB / 05/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, July 6, 2007), $M 123-124

41

196.

197.

factor. What matters is the economic reality to which the concept of investment
referred at the time. The Treaty was concluded in 1996, at which time investments
made through companies interposed between the investment and the ultimate
owner of the companies were already usual and commonplace. As noted by the
tribunal in the European American Investment Bank case,'” it was already half a
decade before the bilateral treaty between Venezuela and the United Kingdom was

concluded.

In any case, it is absurd to argue that since at that time the practice was to
distinguish indirect investments from direct investments, this means that the
absence of explicit reference to indirect investments necessarily means that it is
excluded, without admitting at the same time, given that the practice was to
distinguish, that if the Contracting States did not make the distinction when

drafting the Treaty it is because it was not their intent to do so.

A literal interpretation of Article 1(a) of the Treaty handed down by the Arbitral
Tribunal, in addition to being in accordance with the rules of interpretation of the
Vienna Convention, is not affected by the mere fact that, in other treaties, the
Contracting States have chosen to specify that indirect investments were
protected. No interpretative conclusion can be inferred from this circumstance for
purposes of this case. It could be interpreted to mean that this circumstance favors
the argument put forward by the Respondent that when the Contracting States
intend to include indirect investments, they specifically provide for it. On the other
hand, it could be interpreted in favor of the Claimant’s argument, considering that
in order to avoid silence being interpreted as an exclusion they have tried to
specify in more detail the scope of its definition of protected investment. In this
sense, the Tribunal fully shares the criterion of the tribunal in the Conoco Phillips

v. Venezuela case, according to which:

“[the] Tribunal remarks [in] respect of treaty practice that this
demonstrates that there is no single way of drafting definitions. Different
formulations may have precisely the same effect.”!°7

6 European American Investment Bank AG (Austria) v. Republic of Slovakia (Case CPA No. 2010-17), Award
on Jurisdiction, October 22, 2012, 321 (CLA-146).

°°" ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB / 07/30),
Decision on Jurisdiction and Merits, September 3, 2013, {282-285 (CLA-24).

42

198.

199.

200.

Nor is it relevant to assert that requiring explicit language to exclude indirect
interests makes the reciprocal nature of the protection granted by the Treaty null

and void.

In this regard, the Respondent suggests in substance that considering the definition
of the investments protected by the Treaty as including indirect investments would
imply that it would be possible to grant protection to entities whose states of

nationality do not allow them to enjoy the protection of the Treaty.

However, protecting indirect investments does not imply protecting entities who
are not allowed to enjoy the protection of the Treaty because of their nationality.
Quite the opposite. When considering the ultimate holder of the investment and
not the companies interposed between the investment and whoever is the ultimate
owner, reality is preferred and legal fiction is disregarded.'°* The companies
interposed between the UK company and the investment in Venezuela are merely
forms of investment by a company from one Contracting State in the other, so the
Respondent’s argument that the protection of indirect investments implies per se
a breach of reciprocity is incomprehensible. Reciprocity would be breached only
if one party were extending more protection than it should. This is precisely the
meaning of the tribunal’s analysis in the Standard Chartered Bank case'® in
support of which the Respondent formulates its allegation. In that case, as the
Claimant rightly emphasizes, the claimant had not actively controlled the assets
which formed the investment, it merely held such investment passively through a
subsidiary and thus could not have been considered to have invested in the
respondent State. To that end, the Tribunal notes that, as the Claimant emphasizes,
“Venezuela has not sought to argue to this effect,” so the reference to that case is
not relevant. In fact, in the Standard Chartered Bank y. Tanzania case, the
rejection of its jurisdiction by the tribunal was not due to the indirect nature of the

investment but the claimant’s lack of investment in Tanzania.

108 In this regard, the Tribunal shares the position of the tribunals in Siemens AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB / 02/8), Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2004, {137 Annex CLA-83, and Venezuela Holdings
BV and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB / 07/27), Decision on Jurisdiction, June
10, 2010, {1165 (CLA-58).

1 Standard Chartered Bank v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/12), Award, November 2,
2012, (RLA-123).

43

201.

The Tribunal therefore rejects the interpretation that the Treaty by including
protection for indirect investments violates the reciprocal nature of the agreement.
In the opinion of the Tribunal, Anglo American does not disguise the claims of
entities not protected by the Treaty as its own, but submits its claims in its capacity

as an effective investor and ultimate holder of the investment.

202. Also, the Tribunal does not consider that the interpretation of the Treaty advocated
by the Claimant, and accepted by the Tribunal, violates in any way the objective
of prosperity in both States. If this reasoning were accepted, one would reach the
absurd conclusion that when Contracting States have explicitly granted protection
to indirect investments they deliberately intended to renounce the objective of

reciprocal prosperity, which is always one of the objectives of this type of treaty.

203. The Tribunal also does not find the question of the compatibility of the
interpretation of the Treaty with the principle of personality as formulated by the
ICJ in the Barcelona Traction case relevant. Notwithstanding the fact that the
ICJ’s opinion regarding the principle of personality in that case does not bind this
Tribunal, the principle has not remained intact in subsequent decisions of the ICJ.
The present case does not concern diplomatic protection under customary
international law rather it concerns the scope of protection of investments under

an investment protection treaty.

204. In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that the Treaty protects indirect

investments as well as direct investments.

b) — Is.an indirect shareholding of Anglo American in MLDN an
investment protected by the Treaty?

205. In interpreting the Treaty to include indirect investments, the Tribunal considers
that Anglo America’s indirect shareholding in MLDN is an investment protected
by the Treaty and that it has jurisdiction to decide disputes on the alleged Treaty
violations. Indeed, in the examples of investment listed in Article 1(a) of the
Treaty, is the expression “shares in and stock and debentures of a company and

any other form of participation in a company.”''® Anglo American holds any

40 Treaty, Art. 1(a) (RLA-48).

44

206.

207.

208.

other form of participation in a company, specifically, an indirect shareholding in

MLDN.

The Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction based on the fact that, in any
event, the Claimant did not base its claim on said investment since none of the
damages claimed would be based on the alleged impact of State measures on the
value of the claim. However, this aspect of the dispute regarding alleged damages
is not relevant for purposes of deciding on jurisdiction. The question of the link
between the damage supposedly suffered by the investor and the protected or
unprotected nature of the investment that it claims has been violated must be
resolved in the merits phase. It should be noted that the Respondent’s objection to
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is that Anglo American’s indirect shareholding in
MLDN is not a protected investment. If it is true that Anglo American does not
claim damages related to such investment, it would not mean that it would not be
protected by the Treaty and that therefore the Court has no jurisdiction to decide

its claim.

In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal finds no reason to justify why Anglo
American’s indirect shareholding should not be considered an investment

protected by the Treaty.

c) Is the indirect participation of Anglo American in the assets of MLDN
an investment protected by the Treaty?

The aforementioned reasons confirm that the indirect participation of Anglo
American in MLDN’s assets also constitutes an investment protected by the
Treaty insofar as they result in equalizing the protection of the shareholder of the
local company to that of the indirect shareholder in the local company. However,
the Respondent, beyond the argument that the Treaty does not contemplate the
protection of indirect investments, refers to the decisions of several tribunals
which found that, although an investor can claim damages for its shareholding,

directly or indirectly, by measures affecting the company whose shares are held,

45

209.

210.

211.

the investor has no standing to make claims directly for the assets of that

subsidiary but only for “the shares, all the shares, but only the shares.”""'

In order to resolve the question thus raised, the Tribunal finds relevant the

reference made by the Claimant to Article 5(2) of the Treaty which provides that

“where the Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a company
which is incorporated or constituted under the laws in force in any part
of its own territory, and in which nationals or companies of the other
Contracting Party own shares, it shall ensure that the provisions of
paragraph (1) of this Article are applied to the extent necessary to
guarantee prompt, adequate, and effective compensation in respect of
their investment to such nationals or companies of the other Contracting
Party who are owners of those shares. ”!'?
This provision reflects that the Contracting States contemplated the possibility of
a shareholder of a local company being able to claim for the assets of the local
company in which it has a shareholding. Although this provision was introduced
in the Treaty to specify the compensation conditions of the expropriated investor,
it would not make sense if the assets of the company in which the investor has a
shareholding interest were not protected by the Treaty as well as the shares

themselves.

The Respondent considers that such protection only covers the direct shareholder
and not the indirect shareholder. However, as the Tribunal interpreted the Treaty
to mean that it protects an indirect shareholding investment, the Tribunal considers
that an investor with an indirect shareholding in the local company owns them in
accordance with the Treaty. Also, as stated by the tribunal in the Rurelec v. Bolivia

case:

“[if] one accepts that the ownership of shares can be direct or indirect
through the ownership of other shares in other companies, the fact that
Rurelec does not directly own the shares of EGSA does not mean that it
does not own those shares within the meaning of the BIT, indirectly
through intermediate companies, such as Birdsong, BIE, and GAIL"

'l! The Respondent further contends that the rights of a shareholder are limited to claiming the loss of the value of
its shares resulting from interference with the assets of the company in which it owns shares directly or indirectly,
when it is determined that the Treaty so requires. For this, it cites the cases E/ Paso v. Argentina, PoStova Banka
v. Greece and ST-AD v. Bulgaria. See Counter-Memorial, {| 234, 239-240.

'2 Treaty, Art. 5(2) (RLA-48).

"3 Guaracachi America Inc and Rurelec PLC y. Plurinational State of Bolivia (CPA Case No. 2011-17), Award,
January 31, 2014, #361 (CLA-43).

46

212. Inthe present case if it is accepted that indirect shareholding falls within the “other
form of participation” category provided for under the definition of investment in
Article 1(a) of the Treaty then it must be understood that Anglo American owns
the shares and therefore can claim for the assets of the company whose shares it
owns as provided for in Article 5(2) of the Treaty, not only in the case of
expropriation but more generally, when those assets are affected by a breach of

the State’s obligations under the Treaty.

213. Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal considers that both Anglo American’s
indirect shareholding in MLDN and its indirect participation in the assets of
MDLN are investments protected by the Treaty. Therefore, the first objection to

the jurisdiction of the Tribunal raised by the Respondent is dismissed.

2) Analysis of the Respondent’s second objection to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal

214. The Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in relation to Anglo
American’s reversion claim based on the existence of an exclusive forum-
selection clause in the mining concessions and the Mining Law!'* which requires
that disputes arising over the concession be “decided by the competent courts of

the Republic of Venezuela” and “without giving rise to foreign claims.” !5

215.

n

Specifically, the concessions’ Mining Titles include a clause with similar

language which states:

“Questions and disputes of any nature that may arise with regard to this
concession and that cannot be resolved amicably by the contracting
parties shall be decided by the competent Courts of the Republic of
Venezuela, in accordance with its legislation, and may not, for any
reason or cause, give rise to foreign claims."''6

 

216. Regarding the relevance of these clauses in this proceeding, the Parties mutually

agree that this depends on the nature of the Claimant’s claim.!!7 The Claimant

114 See for example, Mining Titles - El Tigre, San Onofre Nos. 1, 2, and 3, Camedas Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, and
San Antonio No. | (C-3). According to the Respondent, all the Mining Titles under discussion in this case contain
similar language. See Mining Titles - Cofemina Nos. 4, 5, 6, and 7 (C-5); Renewed Mining Titles - El Tigre and
Camedas Nos. 1-5 (C-13); Renewed Mining Titles - San Onofre Nos. 1, 2, and 3 and San Antonio No. 1 (C-15);
Mining Titles - Cofemina Nos. | and 2 (C-18).

15 Respondent’s PHB, 169.

"6 Counter-Memorial, 245.

117 See Reply, 172: “Venezuela does not deny the basic legal premise that a forum selection clause (absent an
express waiver of rights under the Treaty) cannot deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction under the Treaty. Nor does

47

217.

218.

219.

rightly underlined that, as it is not a party to the mining concessions, the exclusive
forum selection clause contained therein is not binding on it and cannot therefore
be interpreted as a waiver by the investor of its right to bring its claims under the
Treaty. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Tribunal admits, on the other hand,
that such reasoning is only acceptable under the premise that the Claimant has not
artificially disguised exclusively contractual claims as claims under the Treaty.
Therefore, the decisive question to resolve this objection is whether the claims

brought by the Claimant in relation to the reversion are claims based on the Treaty.

The Claimant reaffirms that its claims regarding the non-reversionary assets are:
the illegal expropriation of those assets without payment of prompt, adequate, and
effective compensation, in contravention of Article 5 of the Treaty, as well as
unfair, inequitable and arbitrary treatment, in violation of Article 2(2) of the
Treaty. Moreover, the Claimant does not deny that in order to decide whether such
violations occurred, it is necessary to resolve “a threshold question of Venezuelan
Jaw” but remember that at no time does it claim that “Venezuela has breached the
Concessions as a point of contract law or that Venezuela has breached the Mining

Law as a matter of domestic law.”''®

The Tribunal agrees with this analysis. It is true that the Claimant’s claims involve
interpreting domestic law, but that does not make its claims contractual, simply
because the interpretation of local law is very relevant to resolving its claims. This
question is only one stage in the reasoning of the Tribunal the aim of which is to

decide whether or not there has been a breach or breaches of the Treaty.

Applying to this case the criterion of the broadest trend in decided cases,'! the
Tribunal finds that there is no reason to believe that Anglo-American’s claims are

anything other than claims based on alleged breaches of the Treaty by Venezuela.

Venezuela also dispute “the simple fact that a claim under the Treaty may also involve matters of local law does
not strip a tribunal of jurisdiction.” See also Counter-Memorial, 257: “Anglo American's reference to the Urbaser
case is also mistaken. The excerpt of the award cited by Claimant explains that the simple fact that a claim under
the Treaty may also involve matters of local law does not strip a tribunal of jurisdiction. This is an uncontroversial
premise. That said, Urbaser has no bearing on this case. Anglo American’s claim is not a Treaty claim with
contractual elements; rather, it is purely contractual, and its contractual nature does not change simply because
the Claimant labels it otherwise.
18 Reply, 1174.

119 Therdrola Energia SA v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5), Decision on Annulment,
January 13, 2015, 9 91 and 94 (CLA-150).

48

220. By virtue of the foregoing, the Tribunal dismisses the Respondent’s second
objection to jurisdiction to hear the claim and declares that it is competent to

adjudicate all the claims brought by the Claimant.
VII. THE MERITS OF THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS

221. The Tribunal will first examine the merits of the claims based on the alleged
expropriation of the assets that the Claimant considers to be non-reversionary (A).
It will then examine its claims regarding the alleged violation of the standard of
fair and equitable treatment (B), the alleged violation of the standard of full
protection and security (C), and the alleged violation of the national treatment
standard (D).

A. Claims based on the alleged expropriation of the assets that Claimant
considers to be non-reversionary

222. The Tribunal will present in turn the positions of the Claimant (1) and of the

Respondent (2), before ruling on the existence of the expropriation alleged by the

Claimant (3).
1) Position of the Claimant

a) Arguments related to ownership of the assets

i. Venezuela expropriated non-reversionary assets

223. Venezuela’s taking ownership of the non-reversionary assets without
compensation, due process, or for a public purpose was an unlawful expropriation
of Anglo American’s investments in the shares and assets of MLDN contrary to

Article 5 of the Treaty.

224. According to the Claimant, it is not in dispute that the non-reversionary assets,
consisting of MLDN’s extensive Processing Assets (including the Plant) and the
Inventory were seized. Also, it is not in dispute that the takeover deprived MLDN
and its shares of their full value. The only question that can be asked in order to

determine whether an expropriation took place is whether MLDN had valid

49

225.

226.

227.

228.

ownership rights over the non-reversionary assets on the date they were taken.

This is a matter of Venezuelan law.!”°

The Claimant makes several arguments in support of its assertion that the
Processing Assets were non-reversionary and belonged to MLDN.

i. The underlying logic of the concept of reversion: the
relationship between the reserved activity and the principle of
reversion

The Claimant draws the Tribunal’s attention to the fact that in making its finding
on the issue of ownership of the non-reversionary assets, it is important that the
Tribunal bear in mind the policy that lies behind the concept of reversion. The
exploration and exploitation of natural resources is, and always has been, an
activity reserved for the sovereign, granted to investors strictly in accordance with

the terms of their concessions and domestic law.'?!

The purpose of the principle of reversion under Venezuelan law is to ensure that
assets used for activities that are reserved to the State, and that can therefore only
be carried out by private parties pursuant to a concession, revert to the State upon

the expiry or termination of the concession.!2?

iii. The legal framework of the mining sector in Venezuela and
MLDN’s Remaining Concessions distinguish between activities
that have been reserved to the State and those that are not

In Venezuelan law, the activity reserved to the State is defined as “exploration”
and “exploitation” and is distinguished from ancillary activities such as
processing, which do not require a concession. At the end of a concession, the
State can only recover the assets used for the activity granted in the concession.
As a result, assets that were not part of the concession activity, such as assets built
near a mine to process the material that MLDN had extracted in accordance with

its 16 mining concessions, do not revert.!23

20 Claimant’s PHB, (136.
"21 Claimant’s PHB, (3.
'2 Reply, 188.

50

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

"2 Reply, 188.

In the mining sector, and as regards MLDN, Article 102 of the 1999 Mining Law
and Clause 18 of the Remaining Concessions provide that the assets relating to
the reserved mining activities, that is, those used to carry out “the object of the

concession,” are reversionary.

Articles 24 and 25 of the 1999 Mining Law provide that there are only two
reserved (or primary) mining activities: exploration and exploitation. They further
provide that mining concessions can “only” be granted for exploration and
exploitation activities. “Exploitation” means the extraction of minerals from an
ore deposit with an economic purpose, as set out in Article 58 of the 1999 Mining

Law.

The Mining Law distinguishes reserved or primary mining activities (i.e.
exploration and exploitation activities) from activities that are “ancillary” or
“related” to those mining activities. These ancillary activities are listed in Article
86 of the Mining Law, namely “the storage, possession, preparation, transport,

distribution, and trade of the ores,” that is, “beneficiation”.

The term “beneficio” is a term of art in the mining industry which means
“processing.” While Article 86 in fine provides that such “ancillary” activities may
become reserved if so ordered through an executive decree, no such executive
decree has been issued in relation to the processing or stockpiling of nickel or

ferronickel.

Assets used for “ancillary” activities such as processing are not reversionary as
they are not reserved mining activities and they cannot be the “object” of a
concession, pursuant to the Mining Law Article 102 and Clause 18 of the

Remaining Concessions.

Only exploration and exploitation activities are reserved activities that form the
object of the Remaining Concessions, and, therefore, only the assets used for said

activities revert to the State upon the expiry or termination of the concession.!74

51

235.

231

a

237.

x

238.

oo

23)

2

240.

25 Reply, 190.
26 Reply, (191.

iv. Processing Assets were not used for a reserved activity but for
an ancillary processing activity

 

The Claimant notes that the Respondent alleges that exploitation means more than
extraction and can encompass processing. This is not tenable in view of the

unambiguous terms of Articles 58 and 86 of the Mining Law.!?°

In addition, the Respondent argues that the reserved mining activities include not
just exploration and exploitation but also aprovechamiento which Venezuela

interprets to means “processing.”

Venezuela argues that “in accordance with the Venezuelan mining law, MLDN
was granted the right to pursue the mining activity reserved to the State, which
includes not only exploitation but also utilization [...] i.e. the processing and

possibility of obtaining an economic benefit from it [...].”'?°

In the Claimant’s opinion, the logic of the Respondent is incorrect: Article 25 of
the Mining Law clearly establishes that concessions can “only” be granted for
exploration and exploitation activities. Moreover, Article 86 of the Mining Law
provides that processing activities (i.e. beneficio) can be reserved to the State by

executive decree. No such executive decree has been issued.

Nickel processing is not a “reserved activity,” since any private party can process
nickel in Venezuela without the need for a concession agreement. Moreover, the
term “aprovechamiento” in the Mining Law does not refer to a third primary or
reserved activity. Rather it is a reference to the economic or commercial purpose
that must drive any exploitation of minerals from mines. Indeed, Venezuela’s
translation of the term “aprovechamiento” as “utilisation” in English is itself

misleading. The translation of “aprovechamiento” is “exploitation.”!?’

In addition, Venezuela claims that processing is not an activity that is ancillary or
related to mining activities pursuant to Article 86 of the Mining Law, because

“beneficio” does not mean “processing.”

"27 Reply, W192, 193.

52

241. On the contrary, the Claimant considers that “beneficio” is a term of art in the
mining sector that means “processing” as shown by the definitions of the term

provided by the Claimant.

242. In this regard, it should be noted that Article 90 of the Mining Law refers to “una
planta de beneficio” meaning a processing plant. No provision of said law uses

the word “aprovechamiento” in the context of processing.'78

v. Processing Assets do not become reversionary assets because
processing activities could form an integral part of the activity

243. In this regard, the Claimant refers to the Respondent’s argument that even if
processing is not a reserved mining activity and is instead an ancillary or related
activity, the processing assets would be reversionary if processing activities
“formed an integral part of the [...] main purpose of the concession.” Venezuela
notes in this regard that the Project was established as a mining-metallurgical
project and the fact that Venezuelan law classifies mining activities as “primary”
or “related” does not necessarily mean that such related activities do not form an
integral part of the primary mining activities since they are essential to same. It
inferred that in these cases, the assets utilized in the related or ancillary activity
would also be reversionary because they are an essential to the mining activity.

Therefore, it concluded that this would be the case with the Processing Plant.!2°

244. In the Claimant’s opinion, this argument is circular and contradictory. It is based
on a deliberate obfuscation between Processing Assets being “integral to the
project,” as devised by MLDN, and the scope or purpose of the concession as

granted by the Government.!*?

245. Likewise, the Respondent acknowledges there is a distinction under Venezuelan
law between “primary” and “related” mining activities but then argues, without
any supporting evidence, that related activities can be conflated with primary

ones.

128 Reply, 194.
2 Reply, 195.
30 Claimant’s PHB, 76.

53

246.

247.

248.

249.

250.

‘31 Reply, 196.
32 Reply, 197.
33 Reply, 198.

The Mining Law clearly distinguishes between primary and related mining
activities, and provides that only those assets required for the “primary” activities
are reversionary. The assertion that the assets used for related activities are
reversionary because they may be labelled as “essential” to primary mining
activities is nonsensical and contradicts well-settled administrative law principles

governing the issue of the reversion of assets in concessions.

While it is agreed that the Claimant admits that the Project was established as a
mining-metallurgical project, the two activities (mining and metallurgy) are
separate. MLDN did not need to build a Processing Plant to explore for and extract
ore from the LDN deposit (i.e. conduct the primary mining activities). A
processing plant may have been necessary for the mine to be economically viable,
but MLDN could have extracted the ore and transported it outside the area of the
concessions for processing by a third party. In short, the fact that it chose to build
a plant and process the ore itself in the area of the concessions does not affect the

legal nature of the Processing Assets.!*!

Moreover, just because an asset is integral to the ultimate commercialization or
monetization of the ore extracted, such as offices in urban areas or vehicles at the
ports, does not mean that it is integral to the mining of that ore, the latter being the

primary activity which is the object of the concessions. !*?

It is noteworthy that Venezuela does not go so far as to assert that processing was
“the object of the concession.” Pursuant to Clause 18 of the Concessions, assets
are only reversionary if they are used for the “object of the concession.” The object
of a contract in civil law has a specific meaning that refers to the essential core

obligation or service under the contract.!*?

vi. Processing was not the “object of the concessions”

Processing was not the object of the concessions, because:

54

(i) Articles 24 and 25 of the Mining Law provide that “only” exploration and

exploitation can be the object of mining concessions.

(ii) MLDN was not obliged under the Remaining Concessions to itself build
a Processing Plant or conduct metallurgical processing of the ore extracted
from the LDN Deposit. The Concessions included processing activities as
special advantages separate from the mining activities that were the object of
the concessions. The processing activities thus cannot be argued to constitute

the “object” of the Concessions.

(iii) The fact that MLDN proposed in its feasibility study to itself build and
operate a processing facility within the area of one of the concessions does
not change matters. It is incorrect to say that the Plant was an integral part of
the Project from the outset. The Ministry of Mines granted MLDN 10 of its
mining concessions (the First Concessions) years before the company even
presented a pre-feasibility study providing for the construction of a processing
plant. No matter how much Anglo American recognizes that the Plant was
necessary for its economic viability, this does not affect the characterization
of the activities and Processing Assets under Venezuelan law or the
applicable legal principle. The principle cannot change depending on who
builds the plant or where they build it. In short, why would the concessionaire
invest hundreds of millions in doing so if it did not expect to get a full return

on that investment or compensation in lieu?!*+

vii. There is no “general reservation” of primary and related or
ancillary mining activities in the 1999 Mining Law

251. The Respondent, through its legal expert, also put forward the argument that the

' Reply, 198.

Mining Law establishes a “general reservation” arising out of the general
declaration of public use in Article 3 of the 1999 Mining Law. According to
Professor Can6nico, as a result of the foregoing, all mining activities are reserved
to the State in one form or another. There are several problems with this argument

according to the Claimant.!*°

135 Claimant’s PHB, 136.

55

252. First, a declaration of public purpose cannot be equated with a declaration of
reservation to the State. The “public purpose” declaration is a common feature in
legislation that involves areas of public interest (including on issues as diverse as
agricultural land and private home construction). Professor Canénico himself

eventually conceded this at the Hearing.'*°

253. Second, if the argument is true, it would mean that conducting the related activities
of the mining sector may only be done through a concession contract. However,

there are no concessions for related activities.!*7

254. Third, if the argument is true, it would render superfluous the power granted to
the State in Article 86 of the Mining Law to reserve to itself by separate decree

related or ancillary activities (including processing).'**

255. The Claimant also argues that the alternative legal arguments of the Respondent
on reversion are flawed. Likewise, it considers that the Respondent’s analysis
based on the use of the term “mining activities” in Article 102 of the Mining Law
as including both the primary and related mining activities is incorrect. In this
regard, it refers to the legal opinions of Professor Brewer-Carias who maintains
that the term “mining activities” in Article 102 refers exclusively to primary
mining activities. In sum, reading Article 102 of the Mining Law in conjunction
with Clause 18 of the Remaining Concessions which limits reversion to assets

used for the object of the concession confirms the Claimant’s position.'*?

256. It is also untrue that that MLDN agreed in its concessions contract that all of its
assets would revert to the State because contractually it only agreed to the

reversion of the assets used for the object of the concession.!#°

257. The Claimant also contests the Respondent’s argument regarding the special
advantages suggesting that processing is the object of the concession by virtue of
the special advantages which, according to the Respondent, contemplate an

obligation to perform processing activities. The Claimant objects to this argument

86 Claimant’s PHB, (38.
57 Claimant’s PHB, (39.
38 Claimant’s PHB, (40.
89 Claimant’s PHB, 66.
440 Claimant’s PHB, 67.

56

because the special advantages of Clause 5 of the Remaining Concessions cannot
be read either as a commitment to perform processing activities nor as an
obligation to build a Plant. Clause 5 of the Remaining Concessions contemplates

processing as merely an option.'4!

258. In short, the Claimant objects to the Respondent’s argument based on Article 60
of the Law on Promotion of Private Investment under the Concession System
(“Investment Law”), pointing out that said Article does not apply to the MLDN
concessions which were issued in 1992 under Article 63 of said Law, which
provides that it will not apply to concession contracts concluded before its entry
into force. In addition, Article 60 makes it clear that only concession assets are

reversionary.!*?

259. Finally, the Claimant considers the Respondent’s argument regarding tax
exemptions irrelevant for purposes of reversion. The Respondent contends that if
MLDN took advantage of the tax exemptions in relation to assets used for the
mining activity it is because it assumed that processing is a mining activity. The
Claimant objected to this, stating that under the Mining Law the relevant rule
relating to tax exemption covers all assets used for the mining activity in its
different phases and MLDN always interpreted the tax exemptions to apply in

respect of both its reversionary and non-reversionary assets. !47

260. By virtue of the foregoing, as long as the Tribunal accepts the premise that the
non-reversionary assets were effectively non-reversionary, the ownership of

MLDN over the assets is proven and, accordingly, expropriation established.'“*

vill. Alternatively, even if the Processing Assets were reversionary
assets, the Claimant would still be entitled to compensation for
the non-amortized value of same

261. The reversion of assets free of charge to the State only applies in respect of

reversionary assets when those assets have been fully amortized by the

concessionaire.

441 Claimant’s PHB,
“42 Claimant’s PHB,
43 Claimant’s PHB,
4 Claimant’s PHB,

(70.
[74.
89.
136.

57

262.

263.

264.

265.

266.

267.

This alternative argument is based on Article 48 of the Investment Law, which
provides that any reversionary assets that have not been fully amortized by the
concessionaire will revert to the State with payment of compensation for the non-

amortized portion of the investments.!4°

According to the Claimant: “If the processing assets did revert to Venezuela at the
end of the concession, then Venezuela has property rights by law, provided that it
compensates for the non-amortized portion of those assets. And in view of the fact
that the compensation was not paid, the formal property rights continue with

Minera and the confiscation is also an expropriation. ”!*°

The Claimant points out that, contrary to the Respondent’s assertion, the issue of
compensation for the non-amortized portion of the Processing Assets has been

raised in these proceedings since the Claimant’s Memorial.'4”

The Claimant emphasizes that the Respondent’s expert in his two reports cited the
Investment Law and referred to it as the “Jey de referencia” in respect of the 1999
Mining Law. In fact, he confirmed that the latter confirmed that the Investment
Law applies subsidiarily to issues not addressed in the Mining Law. Moreover, he
explicitly confirmed that the Mining Law is silent on the question of non-

amortized assets.!4

Contrary to the assertion of the Respondent’s legal expert, Article 48 expressly
provides for the possibility that the term of the concession may be insufficient to

fully amortize certain assets.!4?

The Claimant objects to the assertion that Anglo American has already recovered
and amortized its investments in the Processing Assets through its operations
between 2001 and 2012. That is not correct. Amortization is an accounting
concept that has little to do with the definition that the Respondent purports to

apply to it. In that sense, it emphasizes that the portion of an asset’s historical cost

445 Claimant’s PHB, 491.
46 Tr, D1, 1443,5-12, Claimant’s Opening Statement.
447 Claimant’s PHB, 492.
48 Claimant’s PHB, 492.
449 Claimant’s PHB, 494.

58

268.

269.

270.

271.

that is allocated over its expected useful life in amortization has no relationship

with the revenue it generates. !°°

Finally, Anglo American refers to the fact that the Respondent has suggested that
the reference to the concept of amortization in Article 48 is related to a noun in
the female gender which allows one to assume that it refers to the amortization of
investments (/a amortizacion de las inversiones) not of the reversionary assets (los
bienes reversibles). Anglo American objects that such a distinction does not have
the least relevance since the Processing Assets can be considered both as assets

and as investments.!*!

b) Arguments related to the existence of an expropriation

Venezuela does not dispute the well-established principle of international law that
an expropriation may occur (i) directly through the seizure or transfer of
investments to the State, or (ii) indirectly when the State’s measures in respect of
an investment have the same practical effect as a direct expropriation, namely the

substantial deprivation of the value, use, or economic benefit of property.

The Parties agree that the characterization of a particular measure as expropriatory
depends upon the actual effect of the measures on the investor’s property. If the
measures at stake have the effect of depriving an investor of the control,
ownership, or use and enjoyment of its investment, there is no need to enquire into
the motives, intention, or form of the measures in order to conclude that an

expropriation has occurred. Venezuela does not dispute this.!>?
In this case, all the requirements for an expropriation have been met:

(i) Anglo American has an indirect shareholding in MLDN, which is an
investment protected by the Treaty, being a “form of participation in a
company” under Article 1(a) of the Treaty. The non-reversionary assets
held by MLDN conferred significant value to Anglo American’s
shareholding. That value was destroyed when Venezuela took those assets

on the illegitimate basis that they were reversionary, without paying any

150 Claimant’s PHB, 95.
‘5! Claimant’s PHB, 97.

'S2 Reply, 204.

59

272.

273.

274.

275.

'S3 Reply, 1205.
'St Reply, 206.
155 Reply, 207.
'56 Reply, 1208.

compensation. Under the Treaty and international law, this constitutes an
indirect expropriation of Anglo American’s indirect shareholding in

MLDN; and

(ii) The expropriation can also be framed as a direct expropriation of Anglo
American’s interest in MLDN’s assets. This interest is also an investment
(a “kind of asset”) protected by the Treaty as it constitutes an interest in
“movable and immovable property” and a “claim to money [...] having a
financial value” in the sense of Article 1(a) of the Treaty. On the other
hand, Anglo American’s interest in MLDN’s assets was directly
expropriated when Venezuela took those assets on the illegitimate basis

that they were reversionary, without paying any compensation.'*?

Regardless of the approach adopted, the inevitable conclusion is that Anglo
American’s investments were expropriated when Venezuela illegitimately took

non-reversionary assets in November 2012.'*4

The Claimant objects that Venezuela, by blurring its arguments on the merits with
its arguments on jurisdiction, argues that Anglo American does not explain how
the Plant relates to the investment under the Treaty (acquired through its stake in

MLDN) and what value the Plant would have without the concessions. !>°.

Anglo American points out that the broad definition of investment in the Treaty
allows the Plant and other Processing Assets, as well as the Inventory, to be

included in that definition.

As noted by RPA, most of the funds invested in the Project were spent on the
Processing Assets, both from the perspective of capital and operational
expenditure. Further, the Plant is related to Anglo American’s investment because
the Plant is what conferred most value to its shareholding in MLDN once the
Concessions were terminated, and that shareholding is a protected investment

under the Treaty.!%°

60

276.

277.

278.

279.

'57 Reply, 208.

As regards the value of the Plant without the concessions, that value is explained

in FTI’s expert reports.'>7
The Claimant cites in support of its position, several cases in which:!*8

(i) Tribunals have awarded compensation equal to the value of all assets of the
local subsidiary that had been taken by the Government without seeking to
categorize each one as an individual “investment,” as the Respondent would
have the Tribunal do in this case;

(ii) Tribunals have determined that an expropriation can arise as a result of the
State’s misapplication of its domestic law which has the effect of depriving
the investor of the use or economic benefit of its investment; and

(iii) Tribunals have determined that the termination of certain mining concessions
without justification under domestic law constituted an indirect expropriation

of the Claimant’s shareholding in its local subsidiary.

The Claimant concludes that, as with the cases referred to above, the taking of
MLDN’s non-reversionary assets on expiry of the Concessions cannot be justified
by Venezuelan law, whether under the principle of reversion or otherwise. In the
absence of any justification under Venezuelan law, those assets remained the
property of MLDN, and their seizure constituted an expropriation by Venezuela,
an expropriation not only of MLDN’s assets but also of Anglo American’s indirect

investments in Venezuela, made through MLDN.

c) Arguments related to the illegal nature of the expropriation

The Respondent’s second argument that if the expropriation had taken place it
would have been lawful is erroneous. For an expropriation to be lawful under the
Treaty, it has to meet the four cumulative conditions contained in Article 5: the
expropriation has to be (i) for a public purpose, (ii) on a non-discriminatory basis,
(iii) in accordance with due process, and (iv) against prompt, adequate, and
effective compensation. The Claimant alleges that three of those cumulative

requirements were not met. The Parties agree that the Tribunal need not find that

58 Reply, $91208-214.

61

Venezuela violated any of these conditions in order to conclude that Venezuela’s

conduct was expropriatory.!°?
i. No compensation was paid

280. Venezuela did not pay prompt, adequate, and effective compensation. Venezuela
does not dispute in fact that it has not paid any compensation. Instead it argues
that a breach of this condition alone does not render the expropriation unlawful.
The cases cited in support of this contention basically state that when a State offers
compensation in good faith that has not been accepted, then, depending on the
terms of that offer, the mere fact of non-payment does not render the expropriation

unlawful.

281.

These cases stand in stark contrast to the present cases since Venezuela made no

offer of compensation.

282. When States have failed to offer or provide for compensation for a taking,
tribunals have concluded that this fact in itself makes the expropriation

unlawful.!

ii. Anglo American did not receive due process

283. Venezuela failed to accord Anglo American due process in carrying out the
expropriation. Venezuela ignored all attempts by the Claimant and MLDN to
engage with it regarding the classification of the reversionary and the non-
reversionary assets ahead of handover. It did not notify MLDN of its intention to
take all project assets on the handover date by forcing its representatives to sign
under protest a certificate of transfer without any opportunity to review or amend
and then ignored all of Anglo American’s and MLDN’s attempts to negotiate a
solution post-handover. Furthermore, the Respondent deprived MLDN of the
protection of the Law on Expropriation for Public Cause or Social Use of July 1,
2002 (“Expropriation Law”) by effecting its taking as a reversion rather than an

expropriation.!°!

'S9 Reply, 216.
‘6 Claimant’s PHB, (138.
‘61 Claimant’s PHB, (139.

62

284. The Respondent cannot be defended by arguing that the Treaty’s due process
requirement merely requires it to make available an ex post right to challenge the
expropriation. This argument cannot be sustained in light of the other case law

cited by Anglo American supporting a wider reading of due process.!°

285. Notwithstanding the foregoing, even on Venezuela’s own narrow reading, there
was no due process in this case. Although it is true that there is case law that
determined that the protections under the Expropriation Law were sufficient to
accord due process, in this case the Claimant was deprived of said protections
since the takeover of the assets was disguised as a reversion instead of an
expropriation. Nor is it welcome the Respondent’s argument suggesting that
Anglo American could have made use of the remedies available to make
constitutional amparo appeals to challenge the asset seizure. This type of
argument has recently been rejected in Tenaris v. Venezuela II, with the tribunal
dismissing Venezuela’s attempt to place the onus on the investor to initiate the

procedures the State was obliged to follow.!®
iii. The assets seizure was not for a public purpose

286. Venezuela’s expropriation was not undertaken for a public purpose. By taking
over the non-reversionary assets under the reversion regime, the Government had
not declared any public purpose for the taking. Venezuela does not deny this, yet
it asks the Tribunal to afford it deference and a broad margin of appreciation for,
in effect, all matters involving its natural resources. The Tribunal, however,
cannot give deference to a public purpose that did not exist or was not declared at
the time of the events. Neither can it accept that any Government action
concerning the mining sector automatically incorporates a public purpose.
Accepting this premise would render otiose the need to analyze whether the action
taken was for the declared public purpose. As for Venezuela’s attempt to shoehorn
the expropriation of the non-reversionary assets into its general policy of
recovering its natural resources and seeking new associative formulae, such
objectives do not justify the taking of the Processing Assets and Inventory without

compensation. Also, any public purpose is highly questionable when the State is

1 Reply, 1239-240.
‘6 Claimant’s PHB, (140.

63

considering allowing another private entity (such as Glencore International AG)

to use and profit from those assets.!

287. Anglo American thus asks the Tribunal to find that Venezuela unlawfully
expropriated its investments by taking the non-reversionary assets without

compensation, due process, or public purpose.

2) Position of the Respondent

288. The Claimant has not shown that Venezuela violated Article 5 of the Treaty.
Under international law, a measure is expropriatory if the claimant is substantially
or radically deprived of the use and economic enjoyment of its investments. The
Respondent draws the Tribunal’s attention to the fact that the Claimant at the
Hearing did not place great emphasis on the violation of Article 5 of the Treaty,

so much so that it did not even mention it during its closing arguments.!®

289. During this proceeding the Claimant had difficulty in defining what its investment
is, which was supposedly expropriated. It was in its Reply that the Claimant for
the first time put forward a theory based on the supposed indirect expropriation of
Anglo American’s indirect 91.37 percent shareholding in MLDN in addition to a
direct expropriation of Anglo American’s indirect interest in the non-reversionary
assets held by MLDN. During the Hearing, the Claimant seemed to abandon said
distinction but did not explain how the shares supposedly lost value due to the
taking of assets, or what the relationship was between the assets and its supposed
investment. It did not clarify what was the value of its shares before and after the

reversion, !©

290. International case law concurs that the nature and validity of rights and interests
that were supposedly expropriated must be analyzed pursuant to the laws and
regulations of the host country. In this sense, case law had determined that “for
there to have been an expropriation of an investment [...] the rights affected must
exist under the law which creates them.” It is local law that determines the

existence of property rights. In relation to the foregoing, and before examining the

‘64 Claimant’s PHB, (141.
‘65 Respondent’s PHB, {1 19.
166 Respondent’s PHB, 120.

64

elements of Article 5 of the Treaty, the Respondent considers it relevant to
determine whether the Claimant was entitled to the reversionary assets in

accordance with the Venezuelan law elements.!

a) Arguments related to ownership of the assets

291.

For the Respondent, “the reversion was contractually agreed without any
compensation upon expiration of the concession, with the assets used for the
purpose of the concession reverting to the State.”'®* Consequently, the assets used
for the purpose of the concession ceased to be owned by the concessionaire upon
expiration of the concession and could not be expropriated. It also maintains that
Venezuelan laws confirm that the Plant was not an asset that could be

expropriated.

i. The Mining Titles governed the contractual relationship
between the State and the concessionaire, establishing that
reversion would take place without compensation

292. The rights allegedly affected derive from the concession contracts, the so-called
Mining Titles, granted in 1992, 1995, and 1999, which have the legal nature of
administrative contract between the State and a concessionaire by which the State
granted the right to develop an activity reserved exclusively to the State, requiring
the concessionaire to comply with several obligations. It is an uncontested fact
among the respective legal experts that the Mining Titles have the legal status of
a contract. Specifically, under the Mining Titles owned by MDLN the State and

the concessionaire agreed that:

- The State grants “the exclusive right to extract and utilize the ore [...] as well
as the other rights determined by the Mining Law in favor of the

concessionaire” and

- when the concession is terminated for any reason, “the works and other
permanent improvements [...] including the facilities, accessories and

equipment, and any other assets used for the purpose of the concession and

‘51 Respondent’s PHB, 121, where it refers to EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador, (CAIL Case No.
UN3481), Award, February 3, 2006, | 184 (RLA-76).
‘68 Respondent’s PHB, {121.

65

which form an integral part thereof [...] shall become the full property of the

State, free of liens and encumbrances, without any compensation. ”!©

293. According to the Respondent, in accordance with the express terms of the
concessions, MLDN had the right to comprehensively extract and use the ore,
which is not limited to the extraction of the ore but also includes crushing,

enriching, preparation, transportation and commercialization activities.'””

294. The reversion was thus contractually agreed upon without any compensation upon
expiration of the concession, with the assets used for the purpose of the concession
reverting to the State. This was an offer of the concessionaire in the form of the
special advantages, which became a contractual clause of mandatory compliance
for the Parties. Upon expiration of the concessions, the provisions of the Mining
Titles were simply complied with. Therefore, there is no case here for an
expropriation claim.'7! The Mining Titles clearly establish a reversion obligation

of the Plant and this analysis should stop here.'””

i. Venezuelan legislation confirms that the Plant was not an asset
susceptible to expropriation

295. The Claimant decided to embark on a distorted analysis of Venezuelan legislation
to support its claim. Likewise, Anglo American incorrectly argues that the 1999
Mining Law must be applied (notwithstanding the fact that the Mining Titles were
issued under the 1945 Mining Law) and it incorrectly interprets Article 86 of said
Law, which, according to the Claimant, permits the absolute reservation of the
“related or similar activities” by means of a decree. Based on this interpretation,
the Claimant attempts to create a false distinction (which does not exist in the 1999
Law and certainly not in the 1945 Law) between assets subject to “mining
activities” which, according to Anglo American, are reversionary assets and assets
involved in “related or ancillary activities,” (including processing), which,

according to the Claimant, are not reversionary.!7

‘69 Mining Titles - El Tigre, San Onofre No. and San Antonio No. 1 (November 10, 1992 (C-3), Seventh Special
Advantage.

17 Respondent’s PHB, {122.

‘7! Respondent’s PHB, 30.

'? Respondent’s PHB, {122.

"73 Respondent’s PHB, {126.

66

296.

297.

Assuming for the sake of argument that the Mining Titles were not sufficiently
clear, it would be necessary to also analyse as a default supplement Venezuelan
legislation and its guiding principles to establish the context in which they were
signed.'™ To that end, the Respondent emphasizes that the Mining Titles were
granted while the 1945 Mining Law was in force and it is under this Law that the
State made a declaration of public purpose of the entire mining activity, which
established a general State reserve over the entire sector, independently of the fact
that the Law did not expressly do so.'’> With regard to the “preparation” activity,
the law inextricably linked it to the exploitation of the mine or, to put it more
precisely, it included it in the mining exploitation right, as can be seen in Articles
63, 64, and 270 of the 1945 Mining Law.!”° In addition, the 1945 Mining Law did
not distinguish between primary mining activities and activities related to or
ancillary to the primary mining activity, thus making reference to mining rights in
general. Therefore, the mining rights granted through the mining exploration and
exploitation concessions encompassed the right of extraction, utilization,
processing, enrichment and preparation, by virtue of the declaration of public use
of all the material and given that the legislation did not establish differentiated

regimes for the different activities.!””

With the passing of the 1999 Mining Law, from a practical point of view, the
scope of the rights granted and obligations assumed originally by then
concessionaire, Cofeminas, under the regime of 1945, which MLDN inherited,
was not altered, and thus, the interpretation of the Mining Titles in relation to the
terms and scope of the rights granted in the Mining Titles must be made under the
1945 Mining Law. This is so by express provision of the 1999 Mining Law, whose
Article 129 stipulated that the effective concessions granted prior to the entry into
force of the Law would conserve their exploitation right as they were granted in
the respective Titles, including the special advantages stipulated in favor of the

Republic offered by the concessionaire, which would remain in force.'*

"4 Respondent’s PHB, 127.
"75 Respondent’s PHB, 127.
"6 Tr, Day 4, 841:6-17 (Canénico).
"77 Respondent’s PHB, 130.
78 Respondent’s PHB, {131.

67

298. Therefore, the 1999 Mining Law did not alter the special advantages originally

offered by the concessionaire in the Mining Titles.

299. Therefore, the only Article of the 1999 Mining Law applicable or relevant for
purposes of resolving the dispute is Article 102 regarding the reversion of assets
without any compensation upon expiration of the concessions, given that said Law
was in force upon expiration of the concessions. According to said Article and
consistent with what was offered by the concessionaire in the respective Mining
Titles, upon expiration of the concessions, the assets used for the purpose of the
concession (“extracting and utilization”) would revert to the State without any

compensation.!”

iii. The Claimant distorts and offers an incorrect interpretation of the
1999 Mining Law

300. Claimant embarked on an unnecessary analysis of different provisions of the 1999
Mining Law which are not applicable to this dispute. Be that as it may, the
distinction made by the 1999 Mining Law regarding primary and ancillary mining
activities is irrelevant since the 1945 Mining Law made no such distinction. It is
not even made in the Regulations of the 1999 Mining Law. In any event, in
accordance with the 1999 Mining Law, there are three primary activities:
exploration, exploitation, and utilization, which may be carried out in five
different methods, one of which is “exploration and subsequent exploitation
concessions.” When reference is made to exploration and exploitation
concessions, it necessarily includes the concept of utilization. In other words, there
is no doubt that the 1999 Mining Law contemplates a global vision of mining
activity and there is no intention to create the distinctions invented by the Claimant

and its expert.'®°

301.

In addition, there are two possible levels in the reserve of an activity. First, Article
302 of the Constitution of Venezuela establishes that the State reserve of activities
must be carried out by legislation, and never by means of a statutory provision of
a lower legal rank, such as a decree. In concordance with Article 302 of the

Constitution, the 1999 Mining Law declared all mining activity to be of public

"79 Respondent’s PHB, 133.
'89 Respondent’s PHB, 137.

68

use, determining a general reserve over the entire activity. The reserve regime laid
down in Articles 23 and 86 of the 1999 Mining Law stipulates a level of
subsequent, absolute reserve of the State on minerals and activities, reserving both
the management and activity in order to be developed by the public body itself
and thus eliminating the possibility of granting concessions. This second level of
reserve, “absolute,” is what is referred to by such Articles in the Mining Law and
can be carried out by means of a Decree. Therefore, even if an absolute reserve of
the ancillary or related activities is not made, said activities are already reserved,

but to a lesser degree.'*!

302. Furthermore, even if the Processing Plant and other assets used for the mining
activity were deemed to be part of the ancillary or related activities—a distinction
we have already seen to be irrelevant for purposes of this dispute—they would
also be assets subject to reversion if the processing activities were an integral part
of the mining activity. To that end, the Claimant demonstrated that the mining
project would not have been economically viable without the construction of a

plant.'§?

303. Therefore, based on the reversion stipulated in the Mining Titles, all assets
intended for the purpose of the mining activity must be reverted to the State
without any compensation. The Plant was an asset subject to reversion under the
Mining Titles and under Venezuelan law. Consequently, “in this case, the
concessionaire whose assets are subject to reversion is not allowed any
compensation whatsoever because when the prerequisites for reversion of the
identified assets are met, the concessionaire loses the property rights to them,

which means that even expropriation would not be in order.”!®°

iv. The subsidiary claim of the Claimant

304. Finally, the Respondent refers to the claim the Claimant has referred to as
“subsidiary” to the expropriation claim based on Article 48 of the Investment Law.
According to the Claimant, if the Processing Assets and the Inventory are deemed

reversionary, based on said Article 48, the reversionary assets that have not been

'8! Respondent’s PHB, 139.
'82 Respondent’s PHB, 1140.
83 Canénico’s LO, 459.

69

fully amortized should be compensated. However, this thesis is based on a gross

distortion of said Article and should be rejected outright.'**

305. The Investment Law is supplementary to the Mining Law, the special law that
regulates mining concessions. As the Claimant admits, the Mining Law regulates
the concept of reversion and clearly states that the reversion under the Mining Law
is “without compensation.” Therefore, Article 48 turns out to be entirely

inapplicable.!*>

306. Second, even if the Investment Law were applicable, the Claimant’s interpretation
of Article 48 is erroneous and its approach to the concept of amortization is

erroneous.

307. The concept of amortization has a general economic sense that has nothing to do
with accounting: it is defined as the recovery of an investment. This interpretation
is also consistent with the definition of the concept of concession in the Investment
Law which the legislator refers to as the right to exploit the work or the service
during a certain period of time sufficient “to recover the investment, the costs of

exploitation incurred and obtain a reasonable rate of return on the investment. ”'8

308. Based on the foregoing, it is therefore clear that the purpose of Article 48 of the
Investment Law was to guarantee the “recovery of the investment and the expenses
incurred.” This is something very different from an artificial accounting

amount.!87

309. The Respondent emphasizes that Anglo American did not dispute that it recovered
its initial investment in the Plant several years ago. The total cost of the investment
for 100 percent of the project (i.e. the Plant and the Mine) was US$550 million.
The Claimant recovered this cost and much more and therefore would have

nothing to claim even if the Investment Law were applicable.!**

'S Respondent’s PHB, (141.
'85 Respondent’s PHB, 1239.
'86 Respondent’s PHB, 1240.
'87 Respondent’s PHB, 1242.
'88 Respondent’s PHB, 1243.

70

310. In sum, the Respondent also emphasizes that this Tribunal has as its objective the
determination of compliance or non-compliance with the Treaty and, if necessary,
of the respective compensation. Its objective is not to execute the domestic laws
of Venezuela. Even if Article 48 of the Investment Law required compensation
for some unamortized amount, the lack of payment of unamortized accounting

amounts does not constitute an expropriation under the Treaty.'*?

311.

The Claimant has not explained the reason why an alleged right to an accounting
amount under local law constitutes a violation of the Treaty under international
law. Neither has it established that there was a violation of due process, since
neither MLDN nor the Claimant attempted to assert their supposed rights through

the domestic judicial system.!*°

312. In fact, there is no evidence that MLDN even mentioned this supposed right in its
communications with the Republic with respect to the reversionary nature of the

Plant.

313. Therefore, the Claimant has not established its ownership right over the assets that

it claims have been expropriated.
b) = Arguments regarding the non-existence of an expropriation

314. Under international law, expropriation can only be carried out with respect to the
property of the Claimant that constitutes its “investment” under the Treaty. In turn,
Venezuelan law determines whether private assets or rights are property rights
granted to the Claimant. The Processing Plant and related assets, regardless of
their purchase title, did not represent property rights conferred on Anglo

American.

315. Quite the contrary, as essential assets for the enforcement of the objective of
MLDN’s mining concessions, these should automatically revert to the State upon
expiration of the concessions. Anglo American’s claim is based on its own

classification of the assets as non-reversionary assets.!?!

'89 Respondent’s PHB, 1244.
90 Respondent’s PHB, 1244.
‘9! Counter-Memorial, 1260.

71

316.

317.

318.

319.

320.

321.

Under Article 5(1) of the Treaty, expropriation can only occur with respect to
Claimant’s investment. While the Treaty defines the term “investment,” it does
not define the term “expropriation.” In its relevant part, under applicable
customary international law, a direct expropriation occurs when an investment is
nationalized or otherwise directly expropriated through formal transfer of title or

physical seizure.'°*

A direct expropriation is readily apparent: there is an open, deliberate, and
acknowledged taking of property, such as outright seizure, or formal or obligatory

transfer of the title in favor of the host State.!93

The text of Article 5 of the Treaty establishes that the question of whether a
particular measure amounts to an expropriation must be answered before
determining whether the conditions necessary to constitute a lawful expropriation

have been met.

The onus is also on the Claimant to first demonstrate that its alleged investment—
not merely its alleged property rights or other interests—was expropriated. Only if
it can establish expropriation can it then attempt to demonstrate that this

expropriation was carried out unlawfully.'°*

c) Arguments related to the legality of the alleged expropriation

According to the Respondent, there is no expropriation given that Anglo American
did not succeed in demonstrating non-compliance with the requirements set out in
Article 5 of the Treaty, i.e. (i) there was no violation of due process, (ii) reversion
had a public purpose, and (iii) the mere lack of compensation does not render an
expropriation unlawful. Therefore, the conduct of the State can in no way be

deemed unlawful.

i. There was no violation of due process

The standard applicable to due process requires that the existence of grave

procedural irregularities be demonstrated. Due process requires a fair procedure

‘2 Counter-Memorial, 262.

13 Idem.

‘4 Counter-Memorial, 263.

72

322.

323.

324.

“that grants an affected investor a reasonable chance, within a reasonable time
to claim its legitimate rights and have its claims heard.”!* In addition, the due
process standard should offer the possibility of judicial review. Likewise, an

expropriatory process must be free of arbitrariness.!°°

The Claimant alleged that the Respondent ignored all Anglo American’s and
MLDN’s attempts to engage with it in relation to the classification of assets before
the handover. This allegation was contradicted by the testimony of Anglo
American’s witness, Mr. Euder Piantino, who recognized that the so-called “joint
minutes” or “draft minutes” precisely contained both positions (that of the State
and that of MLDN) with respect to their understanding regarding the classification

of assets.'97

Therefore, the allegation that the Claimant was not heard regarding the

classification of assets is false and must be rejected.

Likewise, the Claimant alleged that the Respondent denied MLDN all of the
protections and procedures in the Expropriation Law of Venezuela by disguising
its taking as a reversion rather than an expropriation and that by seizing the assets
without any formal administrative act it further denied MLDN the ability to file
any administrative appeal. The Respondent maintains that the Expropriation Law
is not applicable in the present case, but rather the Mining Law. In addition, as
explained by Professor Canénico, the Claimant had several appeals available that
it could have filed in Venezuela. The Claimant chose not to file any kind of appeal.
Therefore, this cannot constitute a violation of due process, given that, as
confirmed by case law, in cases where the Claimant had access to the courts, but
chose not to make use of these opportunities, there was no violation of due
process. Moreover, the right to contest a supposedly expropriatory measure, after
the fact, is sufficient to render nonexistent a violation of due process. Therefore,

it is clear that, in the case at hand, there was no violation of due process.!°8

"5 DF y, Hungary, 1435 (CLA-1) (translation of the lawyers: original text in English: “reasonable advance notice,
a fair hearing and an unbiased and impartial adjudicator to assess the actions in dispute, are expected to be
readily available and accessible to the investor”).

'%6 Respondent’s PHB, {144.

"7 Respondent’s PHB, {145.

'8 Respondent’s PHB, {147.

73

ii. Reversion had a public purpose
325. States have broad discretion to determine whether an expropriation serves a public
purpose. In this case there is no need to declare the existence of a public interest,
given that the Mining Titles and the Mining Law clearly stipulate what should
occur upon termination of the concessions. The Mining Law declares the public
utility of all mining material according to a strategically defined policy that the
Venezuelan Government makes regarding its mineral resources. The State had the
right to protect the sector and assume control of its natural resources, which was
known and, more importantly, agreed to by the concessionaire, safeguarding the
general interest. Therefore, the Tribunal must reject the unnecessary analysis
regarding what occurred with the Plant and its levels of production after it reverted
to the State in order to determine whether there was a public purpose. Case law
concurs that, in any event, the determination of the existence of a public purpose

must be carried out at the date of expropriation, and not subsequently.!°°

326. Itis for all of the foregoing that the Respondent considers that there was no breach

of this requirement of Article 5 of the BIT.

iii. The mere lack of compensation does not render an expropriation
unlawful
327. The Claimant merely states that there was no compensation without demonstrating
why the mere lack of payment makes an expropriation unlawful. The right to
compensation originates with expropriation and without expropriation there is no
right to compensation. Given that the Respondent has already demonstrated that
there was no expropriation in this case, the discussion about non-payment is

irrelevant.?

328. The Claimant’s argument that the only exception to the requirement of
compensation is when there has been an offer by the State that has been rejected
by the concessionaire is not valid here. In effect, in this case, the Mining Titles
and the Mining Law did not require the offer of compensation, given that the Plant

would revert to the State upon termination of the concession.2"!

'°9 Respondent’s PHB, 1149.
20 Respondent’s PHB, 150.
20! Respondent’s PHB, (152.

74

329.

330.

331.

332.

333.

334.

For all of the above, there was no violation of Article 5 of the Treaty given that,
in accordance with the Mining Titles and the Mining Law, the Plant and other
reversionary assets were subject to a reversion. The concessionaire contractually

promised that the Plant would be reverted without the right to compensation.7°
3) Decision of the Tribunal

The Claimant has brought a main claim and a secondary claim in relation to the

alleged expropriation of assets.

The main claim of Anglo American is that the seizure of the non-reversionary
assets by Venezuela has led to an expropriation of Anglo American’s investment

in MLDN under the terms of Article 5(1) of the Treaty.?°

Anglo American’s secondary claim is that Venezuela’s seizure of the assets, even
assuming them to be reversionary, has led to an expropriation under the terms of
Article 5(1) of the non-amortized portion of MLDN’s assets in which Anglo

American has an indirect participation.2°

In order to resolve the Claimant’s claims in relation to the alleged expropriation
of the so-called Processing Assets and the Inventory, the Parties are unanimous in
raising the question of the reversionary status of said assets as decisive. In effect,
the indispensable premise to expropriation, before evaluating whether the
requirements of said legal concept are met, is that the assets are owned by the
Party alleging the expropriation. If, as claimed by the Respondent, the ownership
of all the assets of the Plant was transferred to the State when the concessions

expired, the issue of the expropriation of those assets does not arise.

The Respondent’s first line of defense is based on the content of the Mining Titles,
which, in its opinion, contractually transferred to the State ownership of all the

assets used for the purpose of the concession. It considers that the analysis should

202 Respondent’s PHB, 153.

2° The main claim of Anglo American is that the Processing Assets should not have been returned to the State and
so the claim for them should be quantified on that basis. Reply, 471.

2 Tr. D6, p. 1443: “If the ing assets revert to \ la at the end of the then Venezuela has
property rights by law, provided it compensates for the non-amortized portion of those assets. Since compensation
has not been
expropriation. And its indirect interest under Article 1 and its right to claim for losses under Article 5.2, and that
is in respect to the non-amortized portion of the processing assets.”

 

paid, the formal property rights remain with Minera and the seizure of the assets is also an

75

stop here” and that it is only if the agreement of the Parties in the Mining Titles
does not have this consequence that it would be appropriate to analyze Venezuelan

legislation and its guiding principles as a secondary claim.?°

335. The Respondent’s approach is logical, but it cannot be accepted in its simplicity.
It is true that if through the Mining Titles the ownership of the entire Plant was
contractually transferred to the State without compensation when the concessions
expired it would not be necessary to look into Venezuelan legislation, nor into
what are the non-reversionary assets in order to decide if they were expropriated,
nor to rule on the Claimant’s secondary claim on whether there is an obligation
on the part of the State to pay compensation corresponding to the valuation of the
unamortized reversionary assets. However, the Mining Titles are not found in a
legal vacuum but within the Venezuelan legal system, from the date on which they
were consented to until the date on which they expired. Therefore, it is necessary
to analyze Venezuelan legislation to assess the effects of the obligations consented
to by the Claimant in the Mining Titles, on the ownership of the assets upon expiry
of the concessions and on any rights of the Claimant in cases of reversion. Once
this analysis has been made, the Tribunal may decide whether it is true that the
entire ownership of the Plant was contractually transferred to the Venezuelan State

upon the expiration of the concessions.

336. It is only in case the Tribunal concludes that all the assets of the Plant were not
contractually transferred to the State as a result of the Mining Titles that the
Tribunal would have to examine the Claimant’s arguments regarding any
expropriation by the Respondent of assets of the Plant that would not be
reversionary under Venezuelan law or, if reversionary, had not been amortized,

which would have justified compensation.

337. In this first and necessary phase of its analysis, the Tribunal will first examine the
content of the Mining Titles (a) and then examine their effects on the Claimant’s
property right at the expiry date of the concessions, in light of the Venezuelan

legislation applicable at this time (b).

205 Respondent’s PHB, 122.
206 Respondent’s PHB, 127.

76

a) The Mining Titles

338. Each of the Mining Titles awarded to the Claimant contains the following

eighteenth clause:

“The concessionaire is obliged, within its possibilities, to cooperate with
entities of a social nature engaged in mining, which will be indicated by the
Ministry. Likewise, it will offer to supply these entities with technology, as
long as they do not disturb mining development. It is understood that the
works and other permanent improvements, in addition to the machinery,
tools, equipment and materials, including the facilities, accessories, and
equipment and any other assets used for the purpose of the concession and
that form an integral part thereof, regardless of how they were acquired,

shall become the full property of the State, free of liens and encumbrances,

 

without any 1p ion, upon termination of the ion r dl

of the cause, without the concessionaire being able to make the withdrawals
referred to in the Sole Paragraph of Article 61 of the Mining Law,
consequently, it is obliged to conserve and maintain said assets in proven
conditions of integrity and proper functioning according to the advances
and applicable technical principles. For the purposes of compliance with this
obligation, the concessionaire shall inform the Ministry in good time about
the acquisition of assets to be used for the concession, within thirty (30) days
following the date of each acquisition. It shall also refrain from acts of
disposal, deactivation, or withdrawal of any of the assets included in the
reversion, without prior written authorization from this Ministry and duly
justified request, before the Ministry, for authorization to use third party

property assets in the concession works.” 7° (emphasis added)

This clause, described by the Parties as a special advantages clause, is found in the

so-called Remaining Concessions the assets of which would have been partially

207 Revised Mining titles of the Remaining Concessions: San Antonio 1, Camedas | and Camedas 3 concessions
(C-20). These rights were revised by Resolution of the Minister of Energy and Mines on December 29, 1999, to
correct material errors made in the Mining Titles granted in 1996. There are small differences between the revised
text and the first text, with no implications for its interpretation. For example, Clause 18 of the revised text was
Clause 17 in the first text, with an identical wording.

77

339.

o

340.

341.

342.

343.

expropriated according to the Claimant. It is not in dispute between the Parties that

this clause establishes a contractual obligation for the concessionaire.2°°

According to the Claimant, “/the] Special Advantages are special contractual
arrangements between a concessionaire and the Government concerning
environmental and other social obligations. Special Advantages are agreed and
set out separately from the object of the concession.”?°? For the Respondent,
“reversion was not a process arbitrarily imposed by the State upon Anglo
American. Reversion is simply a contractual mechanism provided for in the

Mining Titles since 1992.”?'°

The eighteenth special advantages clause of the Mining Titles establishes two
cumulative criteria for an asset to pass in full ownership to the State without

compensation:

(i) The asset is intended for the purpose of the concession; and

(ii) The asset forms an integral part of the concession.

With respect to the first of these criteria, the Parties disagree on whether the
Processing Assets and the associated Inventory can be considered as assets

intended for the purpose of the concession.

The Claimant holds the position that the Processing Assets are not used for the
purpose of the concession, since it considers that the purpose of the concession is
exclusively exploration and exploitation and that processing is not part of those

activities.

The Respondent for its part contends that through the Mining Titles which MLDN
owned, the State and the concessionaire agreed to the exclusive right to extract
and utilize the mineral, which is not restricted to the extraction of the ore, but also

includes crushing, enrichment, processing, transportation and commercialization

208 Claimant’s PHB, 69: “As Professor Brewer-Carias explains, the Special Advantages are special contractual

since 1992.”

between a ionaire and the Ge Land other social
's PHB, 24: “ ion is simply a I mechanism provided for in Mining Titles

20 Claimant’s PHB, 69.
210 Claimant’s PHB, 24.

78

activities. Therefore, the Processing Assets were intended for the purpose of the

concession.

344. Before discussing this issue, it is necessary to define the legal framework in which
it is proposed. The concession contracts involved in this litigation were entered
into when the 1945 Mining Law was in force.”"! It is to this Law that the Clause
18 of the Mining Titles refers when it mentions Article 61 of the Mining Law. It
is this Law therefore that defines the purpose of the concession. In addition to the
wording of the Mining Titles, it is also in light of the provisions of the 1945

212 that it must

Mining Law and the principles of interpretation of Venezuelan law’
be decided whether the Processing Assets can be assets intended for purpose of

the concession as mentioned in Clause 18 of the Mining Titles.

345. The content of the 1945 Mining Law is even more significant than the contractual
obligation of reversion in Clause 18 of the Mining Titles which corresponds in
part to Article 61 of the 1945 Mining Law that also includes an obligation of

reversion on the part of the concessionaire. This Article provides that:

“The concession that reverts to State’s possession passes to it free of all
encumbrances, and with all such other works and all other permanent
betterments as exist therein, in addition to the abandoned machinery,

implements, tools, and materials found within the perimeter of the concession.

Sole paragraph. - For purposes of this Article and Article 53, the

abandonment of said elements will be considered effective:
1) If they are not withdrawn before the concession is relinquished;

2) If they are not withdrawn before the expiry of the term because the

concession is granted; and

211 Claimant’s PHB, 54; Brewer-Carias’ LO, 51; Respondent’s PHB, 4130; Canénico’s LO, 416.

212 See Article 4 of the Venezuelan Civil Code, which states: “Statutes must be given the sense that appears obvious
from the meaning of the words, according to the connection between them and the intent of the legislator. When
the provision of the Statute is not precise, the provisions governing similar cases or matters shall be taken into
consideration; and, if there is still doubt, the general principles of law shall be applied.”

79

3) If they are not withdrawn before the expiry referred to in Article 55 is

declared.”

346. If the contractual reversion envisaged in Clause 18 of the Mining Titles
corresponds to the legal reversion of Article 61 of the 1945 Mining Law, it is only
in part. The essential difference is that, under the Law the concessionaire can avoid
reversion if it withdraws what is within the perimeter of the concession before the
expiry of that concession. In the Mining Titles, the concessionaire has waived this
power to withdraw. Upon the termination of the concession, it was forced to
transfer to the State, without compensation, the ownership of “the works and other
permanent improvements, in addition to the machinery, tools, equipment and
materials, including the facilities, accessories and equipment, and any other
assets used for the purpose of the concession and which form an integral part
thereof...” Consequently, the concessionaire cannot dispose of what it agrees to
leave in the scope of the concession on the grounds that it would become the
property of the State. Everything that was used for the purpose of the concession
and that was an integral part thereof must remain and only assets that do not fall

within this definition can be withdrawn.

347. It follows both from the wording agreed upon by the Parties to the Mining Titles
and from the 1945 Mining Law that even if the purpose of the concession is
defined as exploration followed by exploitation of the mine, all activity, even after
extraction, that has the consequence of profiting or benefiting from the mine, has

to be considered as the purpose of the concession.

348. The Claimant alleges that the purpose of the concession is limited to the
exploration and extraction of the minerals.?!* The Tribunal notes, however, that,
as underscored by the Respondent, the Mining Titles confer on the concessionaire
“the exclusive right to extract and utilize the ore indicated above for twenty (20)
years, as well as the other rights determined by the Mining Law in favor of the

concessionaire ...” According to Dr. Brewer-Carias, the legal expert witness for

 

the Claimant, the notion of utilization includes the “storage, possession,

preparation, transport, distribution and trade of the ores.”?'* Consequently, the

213 Claimant’s PHB, 28.
24 Brewer-Carias’ LO, {27 note 16.

80

subject matter of the concessions discussed in this arbitration is not limited to

exploration and extraction, but also includes the utilization of the mineral, which

includes processing, which is how the Claimant has rendered the word

“beneficio.”*'°

349. This conclusion is confirmed by several clauses of the Mining Titles. For example,
Clause 5 states that “The concessionaire offers the inclusion of the national added
value for metallurgy, refining, manufacturing or industrialization if deemed
possible or convenient; otherwise, it shall inform the Ministry of the reasons for
the impossibility or inconvenience.” The Claimant interprets this clause as if the
processing activities it describes were optional, by reason of the mention of “if
deemed possible or convenient.” However, it is enough to read the wording to
understand that the only optional thing is the incorporation of added value and not

the activities themselves.?!®

350. The eighteenth?!’ and twelfth clauses ?!® of the Mining Titles are precise
indications that processing is part of the purpose of the concession. None of the
obligations of the concessionaire according to these clauses could be fulfilled

without processing ore.

351.

The wording of the 1945 Mining Law in light of which the Mining Titles should
be interpreted confirms this conclusion. Its Article 94 states that the

concessionaires are obliged:

  

25 The Claimant explains that the term “beneficio” or “beneficiation” is a technical term of art in the mining sector
which is used as a synonym of “processing,” Reply, {188 e); “Beneficio” or beneficiation is a technical (mining)
term meaning processing.” Claimant’s PHB, 33.

216 In this regard, see the statement of Dr. Candnico, legal expert presented by the Respondent, Tr. D4, 847:5-21.
217 Clause 11: “The concessic 5 to sell to the industry at i ional market price
currencies, up to ten percent (10%) of its final production (ferronickel) during the first ten (10) years, from the
beginning of the production of said alloy and up to fifteen percent (15%) in the same terms from the eleventh (11)
year until production ends. To this end, the Ministry of Energy and Mines will inform the concessionaire, within
the first quarter of each year, of the amount required by the national industry and after that period without
obtaining the information, the concessionaire will be able to commit one hundred percent (100%) of its production.
It is understood that the percentages indicated will result from the total production of ferronickel obtained from
the mineral extracted from the concessions granted to the company Minera Loma de Niquel, C.A.”

218 Clause 12: “The concessionaire is committed to continue the development of activities of industrial application
of the mineral, through the provision of appropriate technology and the timely creation of the corresponding
industrial establishments in fields not yet existing in the country.”

 

  

81

1) To carry out all operations of exploration, exploitation, preparation and
transportation of the minerals, subject to the principles and scientific mining
practices in each case;

7) To submit to the Ministry of Development, within the month of January
each year, a General Report in triplicate on the activities of the company in

the previous year. In this Report, the following data shall always be given:

b) Industrial technical procedures used to extract and prepare the ore;

d) The amount of ore exploited per concession in the year, specifying the
amount utilized and processed by the company, the amount sold in the country
and the amount exported, as well as the number of tons and grade of the

proven reserves:

352. As an additional indication that the 1945 Mining Law incorporates processing

within the purpose of the concession, its Article 96 which reads as follows should

also be mentioned:

“Engines, machinery, instruments, utensils, accessories, spare parts,
materials, chemical products, lubricants and other work elements that,
in the judgment of the Federal Executive, are required in the development
and operation of the mines and their facilities, as well as in
establishments for the preparation, enrichment and processing of the
minerals, shall be exempt from import duties.”

353. By virtue of the foregoing, the first criterion provided by Clause 18 of the Mining

354.

Titles to consider an asset as reversionary is met with respect to the Processing

Assets.

Regarding the second criterion of Clause 18 of the Mining Titles on the asset
forming an integral part of the concession, it is much less controversial than the
first, since the Claimant stated in its Post-Hearing Brief: “MLDN’s Processing

Assets may have formed an integral part of the Project, but were not part of the

82

355.

356.

357.

358.

359.

360.

361.

reserved exploration or exploitation activities under the Remaining

Concessions.”?!?

This criterion remains controversial to the extent that the Claimant considers, as
its legal expert, Dr. Brewer Carias, that it is a fact that the Plant is “included in the
MLDN mining-industrial project” but that “this did not make it integral to the
concession from a legal point of view.”??°

The Tribunal considers that it is the first criterion that requires that the asset be
connected with the activity that is the purpose of the concession or intended for
the activity of the concession. On the other hand, it considers that the second
criterion, being “integral” to the concession, should be interpreted with reference
to the situation of the asset within the concession understood as a physically
tangible project. If it were a legal criterion, it would be redundant with the

requirement that the asset be used for the purpose of the concession.

In short, Clause 18 of the Mining Titles should be interpreted as subjecting to
reversion the assets that are allocated to the concession by intended use and by

appurtenance.

Therefore, the Tribunal considers that the Processing Assets have to be considered
as integral to the concession, regardless of whether the project contemplated the

construction of the processing plant from the beginning or not.

Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that the Processing Assets were assets that

were to revert to the Venezuelan State as a result of Clause 18 of the Mining Titles.

The Tribunal reaches the same conclusion for the same reasons as regards the
Inventory, since it was not suggested that the Inventory consisting of several raw
materials, spare parts and consumables associated with the processing, have any

other regime for purposes of reversion.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the Parties agreed in the Mining Titles,

interpreted in light of the 1945 Mining Law, that, upon the expiry of the

29 Claimant’s PHB, 5.
220 Brewer-Carias’ LO2, 153.

83

concessions, ownership of the Processing Assets and the Inventory would pass to

the State without compensation.

b) The effects of Venezuelan law applicable at this time on the
Claimant's property rights at the date of expiry of the concessions
362. The 1945 Mining Law, applicable when the Mining Titles were granted, was
followed by the 1999 Mining Law, which entered into force on September 29,
1999. (i) On September 17, 1999, the Investment Law was adopted. (ii) Both Laws
were in force when the Remaining Concessions expired on November 10, 2012.
Claimant’s main lawsuit on expropriation is essentially based on the 1999 Mining
Law, while its subsidiary lawsuit is based on the Investment Law. Below the
Tribunal will proceed to analyse (i) the 1999 Mining Law and (ii) the Investment

Law.
i. The 1999 Mining Law

363. The Parties disagree as to the effects of the new Law on the concessions and the

Mining Titles granted under the former 1945 Law.

364. According to the Claimant, “... Article 136 of the 1999 Mining Law derogated the
1945 Mining Law. However, Article 129 of the 1999 Mining Law provided for a
number of specific exceptions to the immediate application of the new Law. In
particular, in respect of pre-existing concessions (such as MLDN’s Remaining
Concessions), Article 129(e) established that their terms would remain in force
and that the 1999 Mining Law (including its provisions for reversion of assets)
would become fully applicable to them one year after its entry into force (i.e. on
29 September 2000).”??! The Claimant adds. “It is therefore uncontroversial that
the 1945 Mining Law was derogated by the 1999 Mining Law and that the latter
and the Remaining Concessions were in full effect on 12 November 2012 when the
Venezuelan Government took over MLDN’s Remaining Concessions. As a
consequence, the provisions of the 1999 Mining Law and the Remaining
Concessions govern the termination of MLDN’s Remaining Concessions and the

issue of the reversion of MLDN’s assets.”

221 Claimant’s PHB, 55.
222 Claimant’s PHB, 56.

84

365.

366.

367.

However, the dispute denied by the Claimant exists. According to the Respondent,
“... the 1999 Mining Law by no means affects the reversion obligation contained
in the Mining Titles granted under the Mining Law of 1945. As shown in Article
129(f) of the Mining Law of 1999, said Law expressly protects the special
advantages already offered in concessions that were granted in accordance with
the previous Law. Consequently, the Mining Titles and their special advantages,
as well as the rights and obligations contained therein, must be interpreted under
the Mining Law of 1945.” It adds that “... the only Article of the Mining Law of
1999 applicable or relevant to the effects of the resolution of this dispute is Article
102 regarding the reversion of assets without any compensation upon expiration
of the concessions, given that said Law was in force upon expiration of the

concessions.”

In fact, this position adopted by the Respondent appeared late in this proceeding,

226 and does not

first during the Hearing?’ and then in its Post-Hearing Brief,
correspond to its previous position, based on the legal opinion of Professor
Canénico, who declared without hesitation that the 1999 Mining Law was
“[a]pplicable to the concessions of this dispute according to the provisions of
Article 129 of the 1999 Mining Law.”??" In fact, this legal opinion of Professor
Can6nico is essentially based on the 1999 Mining Law, although it refers to the
1945 Mining Law “in effect when the concession was granted, for purposes of
understanding the scope of the concession.”°8

The Tribunal agrees with the position of Professor Canénico set forth in his Legal
Opinion regarding the interrelationship between the 1945 and the 1999 Laws
which is essentially the analysis of the Claimant. The 1999 Mining Law is
applicable in a major way to the dispute on reversion, as a result of Article 129(e),
which, after having listed several exceptions to the application of the Mining Law

to concessions granted before its entry into force, states: “the other provisions of

223 Respondent’s PHB, 28.

224 Respondent’s PHB, 133.

25 Tr, D6, 1507:8-9 and 1505:22-1506:4.
226 Can6nico’s LO, § 17, note 14.

7 As mentioned in the previous paragraph.
28 Canonico’s LO, 429.

85

368.

this Law shall apply after a period of one (1) year from the date of its publication
in the Gaceta Oficial of the Republic of Venezuela”).

However, the exceptions to the application to concessions granted before the entry
into force of the 1999 Mining Law are not without significance. This is provided

for in Article 129, which states:

“The concessions in force granted prior to the entry into force of this Law,

shall be subject to its provisions in the following terms:

(a) They shall retain their right of exploitation only over the minerals and in

the form of presentation, as they were granted in the respective right.”

(f) The special advantages stipulated in favor of the Republic offered by the

concessionaire shall continue in force.”

369. Accordingly, Clause 18 of the Mining Titles continues to apply, with its effects

370.

371.

on the reversion of the Processing Assets and the Inventory, as analyzed by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal does not need to enter into an analysis of the 1999 Mining
Law to confirm that both the Processing Assets and the Inventory became the
property of the State when the concessions expired. Clause 18 is a contractual
agreement the scope of which cannot be modified by a subsequent Law that

expressly confirms that this clause continues in force.

However, even if Clause 18 of the Mining Titles would not continue in force after

the entry into force of the 1999 Mining Law, the solution would be no different.

To conclude that under the 1999 Mining Law the Processing Assets and the
Inventory are not reversionary, the Claimant places special emphasis on the close
relationship between the reversionary principle and the reserved nature of the
activities used to carry out the object of the concessions. It goes on to explain that
the reversionary assets are the assets used for activities reserved to the State and
that can therefore only “be carried out by private parties pursuant to a

concession, ” therefore, it states that they “revert to the State upon the expiry or

86

termination of the concession.””° Anglo American is not limited to the reversion
/reserved activity/activity of the concession, but adds to the equation the primary
mining activities. Specifically, it argues that, in the legal framework of the
Venezuelan mining activity, the primary mining activities are reserved activities
and therefore the assets used within the framework of said activities are
reversionary assets. The related activities are activities that are not reserved by
nature and the assets used to carry out said activities do not revert to the State. It
is on the basis of this distinction that the Claimant advocates that the assets related
to processing, an activity that it describes as a related activity unlike the primary
activities of exploration and exploitation, and therefore a non-reserved activity,
are non-reversionary assets. In the same vein, the Claimant argues that since the
Mining Titles provide that the reversionary assets are those intended for “the
purpose of the concession,” this implies that the assets intended for an activity
that, because it is not reserved, does not require the granting of a concession, do

not revert.

372. The starting point of the Respondent is different. Remember that the Mining Titles
which are by nature administrative contracts expressly provided for a reversion to
the State of the assets used for the object of the concession without distinguishing
if said assets were involved in carrying out the primary or the related activities
thereby forcing the Tribunal to resolve the question of the reversionary or non-
reversionary nature of the assets based on analysis, and even limiting this analysis

to the Mining Titles and their reversion clause.

373. Notwithstanding that the Tribunal has already indicated that it agrees with the
Respondent’s position that the analysis should start with the Mining Titles which
are the instruments that regulate ownership of the assets involved in the
concession granted to MDLN, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to express why
it has not considered the distinction between primary mining activity and related
activities—carried out by the Claimant on the basis of the 1999 Mining Law—

relevant for purposes of deciding whether an asset is reversionary or not.

29 Reply, [188 (a).

87

374.

375.

376.

377.

378.

 

The Claimant has introduced into the reversion debate the issue of the distinction
made by the 1999 Mining Law between primary mining activities and related
activities, stressing that if the former are activities reserved to the State, the latter
are not. In the opinion of the Claimant, the purpose of a concession is limited to

its primary activity, which is what warranted the granting of a concession.

The Claimant and its expert, Professor Brewer-Carias, consider this circumstance
decisive because they suggest that the underlying logic for the concept of
reversion in the concession contracts is that they permit the activities to be

reserved.

This analysis, however, does not convince the Tribunal, for the following reasons.

First, regarding the logic underlying the concept of reversion, the Tribunal does
not share the Claimant’s opinion. From the writings of legal scholars provided
with Professor Brewer-Carias’ legal opinion, it is clear that it is not the carrying
out of an activity reserved to the State that accounts for the assets reverting to the
State at the end of the contractual relationship but rather the “compensation for

the e ic benefits obtained by the ionaire” and “ inuity in the

 

provision of the service, because through reversion the granting Administration
can continue exploiting the concession, directly or indirectly with the reverted

assets.” The Tribunal understands this last aspect to be extremely important.

Second, the distinction between primary activity and related activity is not
contemplated in the 1999 Mining Law as a criterion for deciding whether an asset
is reversionary or not. Article 102 of the 1999 Mining Law, relevant to this
discussion according to both Parties,”*! on the topic of reversion of assets makes
reference to the reversion of assets “acquired for use in mining activities.” This
definition does not cover the Claimant’s position at all since it does not refer to
the primary/related distinction laid down in Article 86 of said text, the implication

being that Article 102 does not intend to exclude related activities linked to

230 Reversion of assets in the concession contract, Carlos Soto “The purpose of the reversion of assets is, first, it is
a technique that serves as compensation for the economic benefits obtained by the concessionaire during the
execution of the concession contract (...) Second, it ensures continuity in the provision of the service, because
through the reversion the granting Authority can continue to exploit the concession, directly or indirectly with the
reverted assets.” (BC-26) [unofficial translation].

231 Reply, 963

; Respondent’s PHB, 1133.

88

primary activities from the scope of mining activities. The Claimant’s own legal
expert when referring to related activities still describes them as “mining
activities.”*>* MLDN itself, when requesting tax exemptions for imports for the
purchase of Processing Assets, acknowledged by its own acts that processing
activity is a mining activity since the legal framework only allowed such
exemptions when the Processing Assets had as its purpose elements indispensable
for “mining activity.”?°? It does not matter that an activity is considered as
ancillary to a primary activity, it does not cease to belong to the category of mining
activity. Otherwise, said activities would not be regulated by a legal text with

provisions concerning mining activity.

379. Third, the distinction made by the 1999 Mining Law between primary mining
activities and related activities did not exist within the legal framework of the
mining sector at the time the Mining Titles were signed and they do not make the
slightest reference to assets intended for a reserved activity nor to assets intended
for the primary activity of the concession. The Tribunal is of the opinion that if
the 1999 Mining Law is effectively applicable to the dispute on the reversion
under the provisions of Article 129(e) thereof (“The other provisions of this Law
shall apply after a period of one (1) year from the date of its publication in the
Gaceta Oficial of the Republic of Venezuela”), the Mining Titles’ clause on
reversion cannot be interpreted in light of a text that did not exist when the Mining
Titles were awarded. It is a fact that the 1945 Mining Law did not contemplate the

distinction between primary mining activities and related mining activities.

380. On the contrary, as indicated, the Mining Titles refer to the assets used for the
object of the concession, also allowing for a much broader scope of interpretation
than the restrictive interpretation that the Claimant seeks to impose on the basis of

mere conjectures about of the link between (i) the reserved nature of an activity

282 “Primary and related mining activities in mining legislation,” Brewer-Carias’ LO2, p.24. However, later,
Professor Brewer-Carias describes the related activities as activities related or ancillary to mining [by suggesting
the use of the conjunction “a”] which do not incorporate mining. The Tribunal understands that Professor Brewer-
Carias distinguishes the mining activities under concession from other mining activities and considers that Article
103, when referring to mining activities, refers to the mining activities under concession. However, the fact is that
in his opinions the legal expert does not go so far as to affirm that the related activities are not mining activities.
At the same time, the Tribunal notes that the legal text does not refer to the mining activities under concession but
to mining activities.

233 Article 92 of the 1999 Mining Law, (C-19).

  

 

89

381.

382.

383.

384.

385.

24 Reply, (198.

and the reversion of the assets of a concession, and (ii) the primary nature of an

activity and the object of the concession.

To summarize, the fact that the 1999 Mining Law establishes a distinction
between primary activities and related activities is irrelevant for purposes of
determining whether or not the assets are reversionary. The only thing that it does
is allow one to determine whether an activity is reserved or not, a point which, as

previously explained, is of no interest here.

By virtue of the foregoing, the criteria considered by the Tribunal to be decisive
for considering an asset as reversionary are the criteria set out in Clause 18 of the
Mining Titles, which led the Tribunal to conclude that both the Processing Assets
and the Inventory were reversionary. The entry into force of the 1999 Mining Law

does not alter that decision.

This conclusion is also consistent with the criterion in Article 102 of the 1999
Mining Law, which refers to the reversion of “assets acquired for the object of

mining activities.”

Furthermore, even if it were considered, as the Claimant alleges, that processing
is an activity related to the exploitation activity, the same conclusion would be
reached. Indeed, the mere fact that an asset is not intended for the primary activity
of the concession, but for the related activity, does not make it an activity outside

the object of the concession.

The Tribunal does not share the restrictive position of the Claimant in relation to
the expression “used for the object of the concession” in the sense of equating it
with the object of a contract in civil law.?*4 There is nothing in the wording to
confirm that the word “ object” has to be considered as the purpose of the contract
according to its meaning in civil law. On the contrary, the use of the expression
“assets acquired for the object of mining activities” in the Mining Law confirms
that the concept of reversion in Venezuelan mining activity is related to the assets
intended for mining activities and not to the object of the concession contract

understood as the essential core obligation or service under the contract.

90

386. The Tribunal therefore categorically rejects the Claimant’s postulate that only the
assets intended for the primary activity of the concession contract understood as

corresponding to the reserved activity should revert.
ii. Investment Law

387. In the alternative, the Claimant requests the application of Article 48 of the

Investment Law, which provides as follows:

“The contract will establish the term of the concession, the investments that must

be made by the conc

 

ssionaire and the assets that, due to being used for the works
or the service, will revert to the granting entity, unless they could not be fully

amortized during the aforementioned term.

The contract will also indicate the works, facilities or assets implemented by the
concessionaire that are not subject to reversion, which, if deemed to be of public
use or public interest, may be subject to reversion after payment of their price to

the concessionaire.”

 

388. The Claimant alleges that if the Processing Assets were considered to be
reversionary, they were nevertheless expropriated from the portion of the

processing assets the value of which has not been amortized.?>

389. The Parties have admitted the Investment Law applies subsidiarily to issues not

addressed in the Mining Law.?** This is the result of the wording of Article 4 of

235 Anglo American presents no alternative claim relating to the value of the Inventory should it be considered a
reversionary rather than a non-reversionary asset: see footnote No. 653 of the Claimant’s PHB.

236 Claimant’s PHB, §{93: “Professor Canénico has confirmed that the Private Investment Law applies on a
supplementary basis to matters not addressed in the Mining Law;” Canonico’s LO2, {62 “As I indicated in my
first opinion, a reference law in these cases, applicable on a supplementary basis, is the Law on Promotion of
Private Investment under the Concession System of 1999 (Concessions Act), which is aimed at regulating the
public works and services concessions in Venezuela but, as Dr. Brewer-Carias agrees, applies to all other
concessions on a supplementary basis when their respective legal provisions do not provide specific regulations.
The fact that it is applicable on a basis to i 's in general in Venezuela can be
seen from Article 4” Examination of Dr. Brewer-Carias,: “{On] the reversion of assets in the concessions, it must
be taken into account, pursuant to Article 48 of the Investment Law through the 1999 Concessions, that it is also
applicable in mining matters and I understand there is no discrepancy between the experts on this,” Tr. D4, 757:
18-758: 18; Respondent’s PHB, 4239: “First, the Claimant and its Venezuelan law expert, Prof. Brewer-Carias,
admit that the Law of Concessions, which has as its original purpose the regulation of concessions for public
works and infrastructure, is supplementary to the Mining Law, the special law that regulates mining concessions.”

 

91

the Investment Law, which provides that it should be applied subsidiarily to

contracts governed by a lex specialis:

“The concession contracts whose granting, administration or processing is
regulated by special laws will be preferably governed by said laws in addition

to the provisions of this Decree-Law in such cases.”
390. Article 63 of the Investment Law, set out below, is also relevant to the discussion:

“Concession contracts concluded before the entry into force of this Decree-
Law shall be executed in accordance with the terms and conditions originally
agreed upon. However, the Parties may adapt them to the provisions of this

Decree-Law.

The content of the Mining Titles was never adapted to the provisions of the

Investment Law.

391.

This means that the Investment Law reserves the application of the provisions of
the Mining Titles to the contracts prior to its entry into force, confirming in this
regard the transitional provisions of the 1999 Mining Law, in particular
paragraphs (a) and (f) of its Article 129 which, with respect to contracts entered

into before its entry into force, provide respectively:

(a) they shall retain their right of exploitation only over the minerals and in

the form of presentation, as they were granted in the relevant title.

(f) The special advantages stipulated in favor of the Republic offered by the

concessionaire shall continue in force.

392. Thus, Article 129(e) of the Mining Law and Article 63 of the Investment Law
require the implementation of Clause 18 of the Mining Titles, already analyzed by

the Tribunal, which states:

“Tt is understood that the works and other permanent improvements, in
addition to the machinery, tools, equipment and materials, including the
facilities, accessories, and equipment and any other assets used for the
purpose of the concession and that form an integral part thereof,
regardless of how they were acquired, shall become the full property of

92

the State, free of liens and encumbrances, without any compensation,
upon termination of the concession regardless of the cause.””*”

393. For the Claimant’s property to be deemed to have been expropriated from the part
of the Processing Assets that had not been amortized when the concessions
expired, it would have been necessary, given the non-amortization, for it to have
opposed their becoming the property of the Respondent as did the other

reversionary assets.

394. The Respondent objects that the Investment Law has a merely supplementary
application and since the Mining Law regulates the reversion of reversionary
assets without compensation, it must be concluded that Article 48 of that Law is

not applicable.
395. Article 102 of the 1999 Mining Law provides as follows:

“The lands, permanent works, including facilities, accessories and
equipment that are an integral part thereof, as well as any other movable
or real property, tangible and intangible, acquired for the purpose of
mining activities must be maintained and preserved by the respective
owner in good operating condition according to the latest technology and
applicable technical principles throughout the term of the mining rights
and any possible extension thereof, and shall become fully owned by the
Republic, free of liens and encumbrances, without any compensation,
upon the extinction of such rights, whatever the grounds for the
extinction.”

396. It is clear that when Article 102 of the 1999 Mining Law declares that the
reversionary assets shall pass in full ownership to the Republic, it does not
introduce any distinction between those that were amortized and those that were
not. According to the Claimant, the silence in this regard would justify the
intervention of the Investment Law as a subsidiary measure and the application of
its Article 48, which, indeed, makes the distinction.?°8 This silence could also
mean, however, that the Mining Law did not mention the non-amortized
reversionary assets as they were considered to pass in full ownership to the

Republic without compensation, just as those that were amortized.

237 Revised Mining Titles of the Remaining Concessions (C-20).
238 Claimant’s PHB, 93.

93

397. Both positions are not credible for the Tribunal. If the 1999 Mining Law had
contemplated the particular case of non-amortized reversionary assets, it would
have mentioned them. Another explanation as regards the Investment Law could
be the one suggested by the Respondent’s expert witness, Professor Canénico, that
“the concept of assets that could not be totally amortized during the term of the
concession is inadmissible, because the concessionaire should have foreseen that
the assets needed for the operation of the concession must be amortized over the
course of its term, and that is why Article 2 of the Concessions Law provides that
the concession will have a sufficient duration so that the contractor is able to
recover its investment.”° This last interpretation is also unconvincing: if the
Investment Law, dated September 17, 1999, i.e. 12 days before the entry into force
of the Mining Law of September 29, 1999, expressly contemplated the situation
of assets that were not amortized in the case of reversion at the end of the
concession it is because the legislators considered that the problem actually

existed and needed a solution.

398. In light of these considerations, the Tribunal concludes that the Investment Law
introduced a solution to the particular problem of non-amortized reversionary
assets with which the 1999 Mining Law did not deal. As a supplementary law, the
Investment Law makes the 1999 Mining Law whole in this regard. Therefore, if
there is an unamortized portion of a reversionary asset, the ownership of said
unamortized part of the reversionary asset remains the property of the
concessionaire, as the Claimant rightly argues. This would be the solution if the
Tribunal’s analysis ignored the value that Venezuelan legislation assigns to what

was agreed upon by the Parties.

399. However, both the 1999 Mining Law (Article 129(a) and (f)) and the Investment
Law (Article 63) reserve the application, that is, the full validity, of the provisions
of contracts prior to their respective entry into force. This means that the
interpretation of the Investment Law and its link with the 1999 Mining Law is not
sufficient to determine whether, in the present case, the non-amortized portion of

the reversionary assets became the property of the Respondent.

29 Canonico’s LO2, 167.

94

400. As emphasized by Professor Canénico, “... the Mining Law establishes a
regulation, the concession permit establishes a regulation and neither the Mining
Law nor the concession permit speak of the period of amortization in this
aspect.”**° Either way, when the laws themselves favor contractual agreements
and when these agreements contained in the Mining Titles were reached at a time
when the solutions contemplated by the new Law did not exist, the intent of the
Parties is unfailingly the applicable law between the Parties. But there is more.
Admitting that by application of the Investment Law the Claimant had the right to
be compensated for the non-amortized portion of the Processing Assets would
directly contradict Clause 18 of the Mining Titles which emphasizes that reversion
will take place “without any compensation.” The agreement of the Parties could

not be clearer and the Investment Law requires that it be respected.

401. By virtue of the foregoing analysis, the Tribunal concludes that, as a result of the
contractual agreement contained in Clause 18 of the Mining Titles, the ownership
of the Processing Assets and the Inventory passed to the State without the
Claimant having the right to be compensated. The entry into force of the 1999
Mining Law and the Investment Law, which preserve the validity of previous

agreements, did not oppose this transfer of ownership.

402. As the owner of the Processing Assets and the Inventory, the Respondent could
not expropriate them. It took possession of assets that it owned by virtue of a
contractual obligation with which the Claimant had to comply. Consequently, the
Claimant’s claims regarding expropriation are dismissed, both with respect to its

main claim and its subsidiary claim.

B. Claims regarding the alleged breach of the standard of fair and equitable
treatment

403. The Claimant invokes a breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment in
relation to what it calls the claim for the seizure of the reversionary assets and also

in relation to the claim for non-issuance of VAT CERTS.

404. Considering that the Tribunal reached the conclusion that the Respondent took

assets that it owned by virtue of a contractual obligation with which the Claimant

240 Tr. D4, p. 962.

95

had to comply, no breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment could
occur in relation to said claim. Consequently, the claim of violation of the standard
of fair and equitable treatment in relation to the seizure of the assets must be

dismissed.

405. Only the claim relating to the alleged breach of the standard of fair and equitable
treatment in relation to the non-issuance of VAT CERTS will be examined by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal will present in turn the respective arguments of the
Claimant (1) and of the Respondent (2), before ruling on the existence of the

breach of fair and equitable treatment alleged by the Claimant (3).
1) Position of the Claimant

406. The Claimant notes that Venezuela denies that its action has fallen below the
standard of treatment required by the Treaty, which it contends is limited to the
minimum standard of treatment required by customary international law. While
Anglo American disagrees as a matter of treaty interpretation, it argues that this
debate is dogmatic given that modern tribunals recognize that the minimum
standard of fair and equitable treatment under customary international law has
evolved to require a level of protection equivalent to the autonomous treaty-based

fair and equitable treatment standard.”*!

407. Regarding the actual content of the fair and equitable treatment standard, the
specific components have been articulated in numerous ways. Anglo American
focuses on four core elements of the standard - legitimate expectations,
consistency and stability, transparency and due process, and non-arbitrariness—
which it considers the Respondent to have breached. It emphasizes that since these
elements are independent, breach of any one is sufficient to found a breach of the

fair and equitable treatment standard.?4?

408. As an exporter, MLDN was entitled to reimbursement for VAT paid on its
purchase of Venezuelan goods and services related to its operations in the form of

VAT tax credits (“VAT CERTS”) pursuant to a recovery procedure set out in

241 Claimant’s PHB, 144.
242 Claimant’s PHB, 145.

96

Article 43 of the VAT Law and in Partial Regulation No. 1. Save for the deduction

requirement, the procedure is not in dispute.7°

409. For a period of some 10 years from 2001, MLDN applied for and received VAT
CERTS corresponding to tax periods between June 2001 and September 2007, in
accordance with the VAT Law and Regulations. However, as from January 2009,
Venezuela failed to issue any VAT CERTS or even formally respond to MLDN’s
Requests for VAT tax credit refunds (“WAT Requests”) relating to tax periods
from October 2007 through May 2012. While Venezuela ignored MLDN’s
Requests, it continued to grant them to other exporters. Venezuela has not denied
this. Its only contention is that despite numerous (oral) requests from the National
Integrated Service of Customs and Tax Administration (“SENIAT”), MLDN
refused to deduct from its monthly VAT returns the VAT credits being requested
(rather than those granted) as prescribed in an internal manual entitled Standards
and Procedures Manual on Value Added Tax Credit Refunds for Exporter

Taxpayers (“Manual”).

410. The Claimant describes how the factual and expert evidence before and at the
Hearing demonstrates how SENIAT’s deduction requirement in the Manual was
arbitrary and inconsistent with SENIAT’s consistent practice for almost a decade,
the VAT Law, and its Regulations. Furthermore, this confirms that SENIAT
breached its obligation to formally decide on or respond to MLDN’s Requests,
including the obligation to formally notify its change of policy. In short, the
evidence provided does not show that other exporters complied with the deduction

requirement.”*

411. The Respondent flouted Anglo American’s legitimate expectations that SENIAT
would grant the requested VAT CERTS to MLDN so long as it satisfied the
requirements in the VAT Law and Regulations, as per the common practice
between SENIAT and MLDN over a period of nearly a decade. As demonstrated
at the Hearing, making the deduction Venezuela relies on to justify its non-

issuance of the requisite VAT CERTS was not a true legal requirement. No such

43 Claimant’s PHB, 198.
24 Claimant’s PHB, 99.
45 Claimant’s PHB, 1100.

97

requirement appeared in the VAT Law or Regulations. Moreover, for almost a
decade prior to 2009, MLDN submitted its VAT requests without applying any
deduction and SENIAT accepted this practice, issuing the required VAT CERTS
without complaint. No change in the VAT Law or in the Regulations took place
in 2009 (or, indeed, at any time since 2003). The Respondent had not formally
notified MLDN of any change in interpretation of the Law. MLDN was thus
legitimately entitled to expect that SENIAT would continue to abide by its
common practices unless it was duly notified in writing otherwise. This principle

is enshrined in Venezuelan law under the concept of “confianza legitima.”?*°

412.

N

Venezuela also breached its obligation to accord a consistent, stable, and
predictable legal framework by suddenly requiring MLDN to comply with a
deduction rule that went against both the existing VAT Law and Regulations, as
well as both Parties’ consistent past practice. In relation to the foregoing, the
Claimant emphasizes that the Manual on which the deduction requirement was
based was never published in the Gaceta Oficial nor shown to MLDN. SENIAT
also never formally notified MLDN of the reasons for the change in interpretation

of the Law.?47

413. The Respondent’s conduct further suffered from lack of transparency and due
process. As confirmed at the Hearing, SENIAT was required under Venezuelan
law to issue a formal response to each of MLDN’s VAT Requests within 30
business days. The only thing MLDN received, however, were three Actas de
Requerimiento pertaining to three out of its dozens of pending requests. These
Actas de Requerimiento did not mention the Manual or explain the deduction
requirement; they were not even formulated in mandatory terms. MLDN
nevertheless responded to them but then never heard back. Ms. Villasmil, the
Respondent’s witness at the Hearing, could not point to any formal
communication by SENIAT to MLDN informing it of the change in interpretation,
despite MLDN’s requests that it do so, which in turn prevented MLDN from

making the requested deduction. All this amounts to serious administrative

246 Claimant’s PHB, {1149(a).
47 Claimant’s PHB, {1149(b).

98

414,

415.

416.

negligence and inconsistency in that entity arising to a level sufficient to breach

the fair and equitable treatment standard.4*

Finally, Venezuela’s conduct was arbitrary, given that SENIAT’s request that
MLDN comply with the deduction requirement of its Manual was, in effect, a
request for MLDN to breach the VAT Law. The Claimant adds that, compounded
with SENIAT’s refusal to provide MLDN with anything in writing that it could
rely on, Venezuela’s reliance on a deduction requirement set out in an internal
Manual to refuse MLDN the VAT CERTS cannot be anything but “a wilful
disregard of due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense

of juridical propriety.”

2) Position of the Respondent

First, the Respondent defends its understanding of the fair and equitable treatment
standard. To that end, the Respondent asserts that the Treaty expressly alludes to
treatment “in accordance with international law” and adds that the Tribunal must
take into account this choice of words, limiting the standard to the customary
international law minimum standard of treatment of foreigners and their assets. It
emphasizes that in order for there to be a violation of the minimum standard of
treatment, it is necessary to demonstrate that the State has acted with a gross or
flagrant disregard for the basic principles of fairness, consistency, even-
handedness, due process, or natural justice expected by and of all States under
customary international law. The lack or denial must be gross, manifest, complete,

or such as to offend judicial propriety.”°°

The Respondent objects to the Claimant’s position that it has not, however,
justified, which is one that presumes that the United Kingdom and Venezuela
intended to agree to a broader standard than the then known minimum standard of

treatment under customary international law.?*!

48 Claimant’s PHB, {1149(c).
4 Claimant’s PHB, {149(d).
250 Respondent’s PHB, 94; Counter-Memorial, (1323-33, where the Respondent refers inter alia to the Neer

se.
25! Respondent’s PHB, 95.

99

417. Even considering the components the Claimant seeks to apply, if a tribunal were
to consider the investor’s expectations relevant, it would have to assess whether
the State gave the investor any specific guarantee or made a promise to induce the
expectation. However, the Claimant does not identify any specific promise or
commitment. On the contrary, its entire argument is based on its disagreement
with the interpretation and application of Venezuelan law by different officials.
None of these complaints, either individually or as a whole, amount to a violation

of the Treaty.?°?

418. Regarding the problem of non-issuance of the VAT CERTS, the Respondent notes
that it requires a little gall to claim compensation for a benefit to which one was
never entitled, and particularly when the lack of a right is due to the deliberate,
continued and obstinate stance of refusing to comply with the requirements to
obtain such benefit.2° The reason for the lack of approval of MLDN’s VAT
Requests (the step prior to the issuance of VAT CERTS) was MLDN’s repeated

refusal to deduct the refund amounts requested in the VAT return.?4

419. The Respondent asserts that Mr. Pérez, a witness for the Claimant, acknowledged
that SENIAT notified MLDN on numerous occasions, verbally and in writing,
what were the requirements for its tax credits to be approved, but MLDN refused
to comply with them. SENIAT even postponed the closing of MLDN applications
files in order to give it time to correct its non-compliance, but MLDN rejected the

opportunity.?°°

420. The Respondent adds that Mr. Pérez confirmed that SENIAT communicated this
requirement to MLDN at no fewer than three different meetings between February
and March 2012. MLDN refused to comply with a written notice. SENIAT sent
three Actas de Requerimiento in July 2012 requesting that the requested refund
amount be deducted.” Both MLDN and Anglo American in London knew that
this requirement existed and that it was not a mere whim on the part of SENIAT:

the VAT return mentioned it expressly in line No. 21, as of 2005 and line No. 22

22 Respondent’s PHB, 96.
253 Respondent’s PHB, 43.
254 Respondent’s PHB, 46.
255 Respondent’s PHB, 44.
256 Respondent’s PHB, 47.

100

421.

422.

423.

424.

in recent years. Mr. Pérez even acknowledged that the box corresponding to the

deduction requirement on the VAT return “has always been there.”?>”

Further, the Respondent emphasizes that the witness could not identify even one
taxpayer whose refund applications were approved who had not made the

. 2.
deductions.?°*

Anglo American justifies the repeated refusal of MLDN to comply with the
deduction on the grounds that it was contrary to law. The Claimant relies on
Article 38 of the VAT Law that would oblige MLDN to carry forward the tax
credits to the following month or months until the total deduction is reached, and
the total deduction is the moment when the benefit accrues, and for that reason
they could not make the deduction before receiving the corresponding CERT.
Nevertheless, the Respondent objects that Article 38 is used to determine the
credits and debits in the VAT return - a process that is prior to and separate from
the process of VAT refunds to exporters - which is governed by Articles 43 and
44. The separation of these two different regimes is reflected in the fact that Article
38 is found in chapter # “Determination of Tax Credits and Liabilities” while

Articles 43 and 44 are found in Chapter VI “Tax Credit Recovery Regimes.”??

Anglo American claims that the deduction requirement was contrary to the VAT
Law and came from an illegitimate Manual. The Claimant further contends that
the Manual has not been published as required by Article 131 of the Organic Tax
Code. The Respondent opposes this argument on the ground that there is no
contradiction between the VAT Law and the Manual and that the Manual should

only be published if it is going to be applied to individuals.?©

In any case, the question of the consistency of the requirement with the VAT Law
is a matter of Venezuelan law. Even MLDN seems to have believed that this is a
matter of domestic law that must be resolved in Venezuelan courts, which is why

it filed an administrative tax appeal against SENIAT in February 2015.75!

257 Respondent’s PHB, 50.
258 Respondent’s PHB, {
259 Respondent’s PHB,
I
I

Si
58.
61.
3,

260 Respondent’s PHB, 222.
26! Respondent’s PHB, (63.

101

425. A difference in interpretation of domestic law or of administrative practice could
only have consequences for the Treaty if Venezuela had denied access to national
courts, thus denying the possibility of obtaining redress for the damage suffered
or if said difference led to an action by the State that was flagrant and scandalous,
manifestly unfair or arbitrary, beyond a simple contradictory or questionable
application of administrative policy or procedures. But that was not what

happened here.?6

426. The Respondent denies that the application of the Manual by the officials changed
the Republic’s consistent practice, as alleged by the Claimant. It explains that the
previous practice was not consistent, since the previous Manual allowed too much
discretion. It was precisely for this reason that the new manual eliminated that
discretion to ensure that the requirements were always met, and not only when the
official decided that those requirements had to be met. The Claimant interprets
this as an arbitrary change in the practice of SENIAT, but in reality, this was
simply a faithful implementation of the law, the regulations, and the standards of

SENIAT.7®

427. The Treaty imposes the minimum standard of treatment of foreigners and their
property under customary international law while Anglo American proposed that
instead a standard be applied that includes respect for legitimate expectations,
consistency and stability of the legal framework, transparency and due process,
and the absence of discrimination and arbitrariness. However, a claim under the
Treaty can have no grounds when the requirements for receiving the benefit that

is being claimed were not met.“

428. At the Hearing, the Claimant argued that Venezuela flouted Anglo American’s
legitimate expectations that the Government would grant VAT CERTS to MLDN
as long as it complied with the requirements of the VAT Law and regulations, and
would not change the manner in which the Law was being applied, as it had done

consistently for a period of ten years. The Claimant also alleged that failure to

22 Respondent’s PHB, 228.
263 Respondent’s PHB, 223.
264 Respondent’s PHB, 4221.

102

429.

430.

431.

432.

433.

respond to points of disagreement and ignoring VAT Requests constitute serious

administrative negligence and inconsistency.

The Respondent objects to both assertions. First, it alleges that MLDN did not
comply with the requirements of the VAT Law and its regulations so it cannot
claim breach of its legitimate expectations under the erroneous premise that it
complied with the requirements of the VAT Law. In addition, the Claimant should
not have had the expectation of being able to ignore an improved application of
the Law through clearer guidance to officials.2°° As for the Venezuelan law
principle of legitimate expectations invoked by the Claimant, it is inapplicable in
this case where the taxpayer was always informed of its non-compliance and of

the necessary steps to remedy it, and it chose not to comply.97

In relation to the Claimant’s second assertion, the Respondent emphasizes that
there was no silence or inconsistency in the responses from SENIAT. In fact, the
Claimant itself accepts that SENIAT’s officials explained the requirement to the

MLDN representatives, and MLDN simply refused to comply.7°*

The requirement in question to deduct the refund amounts in the VAT return was
not a “change” as clarified by Anglo American’s own witness, Mr. Oscar Pérez,
in answer to a question put by the Tribunal. The witness also admitted that the
requirement had been explained to them. However, MLDN refused to comply

with the requirement because this was done verbally.7©

The Respondent emphasizes that it is incorrect to assert that the requirement was
only explained verbally. SENIAT also sent Actas de Requerimiento to MLDN.
The Actas de Requerimiento informed MLDN of the deficiency in its VAT
Requests and how to remedy it. MLDN responded to the Actas de Requerimiento,

but it did not comply with the indicated requirement.?””

Regarding the alleged delay of the Administration in answering, Mr. Pérez also

confirmed that in practice the Administration used to take more than 30 days to

265 Respondent’s PHB, (101.
266 Respondent’s PHB, 103.

26) Respondent’s PHB, 4

103.

2 Respondent’s PHB, (105.
2” Respondent’s PHB, (108.

I
I
I
268 Respondent’s PHB, (104.
I
I

103

answer. Therefore, MLDN should never have expected to receive the response in

30 working days.?”!

434. In this case, the 30-day period starts to run only once the Administration has
received all the supporting documentation and information required. The term

never began to run because MLDN did not deduct the requested amount.”””

435. The Respondent concludes that there was no breach of fair and equitable treatment

in relation to the non-issuance of the VAT CERTS.
3) Decision of the Tribunal

436. According to the Claimant, the non-issuance of VAT CERTS constitutes a
violation of Article 2(2) of the Treaty. Also, Anglo American argues the fact that
Venezuela’s failure to take decisions on MLDN’s Requests for the issuance of
VAT CERTS was arbitrary, unreasonable, discriminatory, lacking in transparency
and was contrary to the requirements of due process. It adds that it frustrated the

legitimate expectations of MLDN.

437. In relation to this claim, it is first necessary to resolve the debate regarding the
level of protection granted by the Treaty (a) before deciding whether the
Respondent’s conduct in relation to VAT CERTS can be analyzed as a breach of

that standard of protection (b).

a) Thes lard of protection under the Treaty is an
standard

 

438. The Respondent deduces from the wording of Article 2(2) of the Treaty referring
to the standard of “fair and equitable treatment in accordance with international

99273

law’”*"> that fair and equitable treatment under the Treaty is the minimum standard

of treatment under international law.

27! Respondent’s PHB, 109.
272 Respondent’s PHB, {110.
?? Treaty, Art. 2(2).

104

439. The Tribunal does not share the Respondent’s position and considers instead that
the formula “in accordance with international law” is not synonymous with the
“minimum standard of treatment under international law.”?"4

440. The Tribunal emphasizes that several tribunals have interpreted clauses similar to
the one in dispute, suggesting that its wording is viewed as synonymous with the
minimum standard of treatment.2”>

441. The Tribunal fully shares and endorses the words of the tribunal in Vivendi v.

Argentina, when it emphasizes that:

“fair and equitable treatment conform to the principles of international
law, but this requirement for conformity can just as readily set a floor as
a ceiling on the Treaty’s fair and equitable treatment standard. Third,
the language of the provision suggests that one should also look to
contemporary principles of international law, not only to principles from
almost a century ago.”?"®

442. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Tribunal shares the Claimant’s position that
today such a debate is somewhat sterile since it is equally true that the minimum
standard of treatment under customary international law has evolved since the

definition of the standard in the 1926 Neer case.2”7

443. In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the criteria for the
standard of fair and equitable treatment advocated by the Claimant, that is, respect
for legitimate expectations, transparency, reasonableness, and due process, as well
as the absence of discrimination and arbitrariness are criteria that fall within the

protection afforded by the Venezuela-United Kingdom Treaty.

24 Counter-Memorial, 327.

25 In this regard see Crystallex ional Ci i livarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB (AF)/11/2), Award, April 4, 2016, 4530-531 (CLA- 140): Compania de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi
Universal SA v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Second Presentation of the Case, Award, August
20, 2007, 17.4.7 (CLA-22); Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, (ICSID Case No. ARB /11/23), Award,
April 8, 2013, 1529 (RLA-125).

2 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal SA v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB
/ 97/3), Second Presentation of the Case, Award, August 20, 2007, 7.4.7 (CLA-22).

2” Reply, | 260.

 

105

b) The alleged violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard by
the R lent in not issuing the VAT CERTS and in not r ding to
the Claimant's requests

444. As an exporter, MLDN was entitled to a refund for VAT paid for its purchase of
Venezuelan goods and services related to its operations in the form of VAT tax
credits in accordance with the recovery procedure established in Article 43 of the
VAT Law and Regulations. Although the Claimant requested and received the
VAT CERTS for a period of 10 years from 2001, as of August 2010 the VAT

Requests were not approved and, consequently, the CERTS were not issued.?”*

445. The Respondent justifies that the reason for the Claimant not receiving the VAT
CERTS was because MLDN refused to deduct the VAT credits that were
requested from its monthly VAT returns. The Claimant alleges that said
requirement is a requirement stemming from the Manual that was not published.
The Claimant considers that this requirement was inconsistent with the previous

practice of SENIAT, in addition to being contrary to the terms of the VAT Law.

446. Anglo American’s claim therefore requires an examination of the alleged illegality

of the deduction requirement that led to the non-issuance of the VAT CERTS.
i. The alleged illegal nature of the deduction requirement

447. The Tribunal’s opinion in relation to the alleged conflict between the deduction
requirement and the VAT Law is that although the VAT Law does not contemplate
that the amount of tax credits requested has to be deducted in the VAT tax return,
the mere fact that the Law does not specify it does not ipso facto turn this

requirement into a violation of the Law.

448. The Claimant also argued that the deduction criterion breached Article 38 of the
VAT Law which “requires that VAT credits for a particular tax period be carried
forward until the applicable VAT CERTS are issued and the credits can be
deducted.”

449. However, this claim is not confirmed by the terms of Article 38 of the VAT Law

which stipulates that: “Jf the amount of the credits that are deductible under this

28 Tr. D2, p. 381, Examination of Oscar Pérez (“up to August 2010”).

106

Law is greater than the total duly adjusted tax liability, the resulting difference
shall be a tax credit in favor of the ordinary taxpayer which shall be transferred
to the following tax period or subsequent periods and added to the tax credits of

those new tax periods until it is fully deducted.”

450. Article 38 relating to the VAT return could not refer to the VAT CERTS since
CERTS were only recognized for exporters and the relevant Articles of the Law
relating to the procedure for recovery of VAT for exporters are Articles 43 and

44.

451.

As noted by a witness for the Respondent, the reference to Article 38 is not
relevant since, although it is true that it is in the VAT return that the exporter has
to deduct the amounts of tax credits requested, the provisions of Article 38 do not
contemplate recovery of the VAT for exporters but contemplates the amount of
VAT that “is in the next return” or that “may lead to new returns” but “never

arises from a return.”?”

452. In support of the Claimant’s position, its legal expert states: “/as] is evident, when
the particular taxpayer makes the Request, the tax obligation is not affected, so
there is no legal basis whatsoever at that time to justify making a deduction of the
corresponding amount in the respective return. In fact, the tax credit is only made
deductible from the affirmative decision made by the Tax Administration

regarding the Request.”*®°

453. The Tribunal does not consider this premise to be true. The opinion of the Tribunal

is that a credit is deductible when it satisfies the criteria to be deducted.

454. Likewise, the Tribunal has not been convinced by the Claimant’s argument that
Line 22 of the VAT returns would have to be interpreted as requiring the taxpayer
to deduct the amounts once the refund had been received, emphasizing the fact
that the word reimbursement implies an action subsequent to the issuance of the

CERTS.

2” Tr. D3 p.532, Cross-examination of Ms. Villasmil.
280 Brewer-Carias’s LO2, 169.

107

455. The Tribunal finds that line 22 (or previously 21) required the exporter taxpayer
to deduct the amount of the reimbursement requested (or refund requested).
Likewise, the Tribunal finds that the common denominator of the terms
reimbursement and refund is that they are used together with the word
“requested,” words that leave no doubt as to the outstanding nature of the request.
The Tribunal, therefore, considers that line 22 (or 21 where appropriate) of the
VAT Return form, either when referring to the word reimbursement or to the word

refund, clearly refers to a benefit not yet agreed upon.

456. In the Tribunal’s opinion, requiring exporters to deduct from their VAT Return
the refund or reimbursement amounts requested as recovery of export tax credits

is not a requirement contrary to the Law.

457. The Tribunal cannot, therefore, agree with the Claimant’s premise that the refusal
to issue the VAT CERTS was “unjustified.” The fact of waiting for a taxpayer to
comply with a criterion that the Administration considers essential is not
tantamount to the absence of justification. The reason for the Administration
imposing this requirement is not unreasonable since it was intended to prevent

double counting of credits.

458. However, the examination of Anglo American’s claim does not stop here. The fact
that imposing the deduction requirement is not contrary to law does not in itself

exclude the existence of a violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment.

i. The alleged violation of the elements that make up fair and
equitable treatment

459. The evidence presented during the Hearing made it clear that since 2005 the VAT
return forms already required exporters to deduct VAT credits in line 21 “refund
requested”**! or similarly for more recent VAT returns in line 22 “reimbursement
requested.”?* The Claimant’s witness confirmed that “that line has always been
there.”?*> This means that the credit deduction was already contemplated by the
Venezuelan Administration even before the introduction of the Manual. Then,

when MDLN refused to deduct the requested VAT credits in its returns, it is not

28! See Annex IV-8 to Ms. Villasmil’s testimony: VAT return, December 2005.
282 See Annex III to Ms. Villasmil’s testimony.
283 Tr. D2, p. 436, Examination of Oscar Pérez.

108

460.

461.

462.

simply that it refused to comply with a requirement of an internal Manual, but that
it refused to fill out the return form in the manner in which the document itself

demanded.

The Claimant points out that “it is obvious that neither a VAT Return form nor the
Manual can modify the rules in the VAT Law and in the Regulations.”*** Although
it is true that the VAT Law does not include this requirement, the fact that the
VAT Return form always contemplated this requirement confirms that what really
changed in the process of recovering tax credits from exporters is the
administrative practice. The Venezuelan Administration did not change its return
template without warning, but changed its administrative practice by requiring
officials to check taxpayers’ compliance with this rule whereas before it simply

did not.

The Tribunal is of the opinion that the argument pursued by the Claimant that if a
State can change its Tax Administration practice the taxpayers have to be
informed is correct. In this regard, the Claimant’s reference to the predictable legal

framework, transparency and due process is relevant.

In the present case, it has been demonstrated that, at first, the Claimant was not
informed of the change in the Administration’s practice or the reason for the non-
issuance of the CERTS. Ms. Villasmil, a Tax Administration official, refused to
formally notify the change in administrative practice. In the opinion of the
Tribunal, it is not the change of administrative practice that creates problems but
the official’s lack of transparency that prevented the Claimant from knowing the
reason for the rejection of its VAT Requests until 2012.75 In fact, from the
evidence taken it turns out that the Claimant was informed of the reason for the

286

rejection of its requests only in March 2012, verbally~*® and then in writing in July

284 Claimant’s PHB, 104.

285 Ms. Villasmil states that it was around January 2011, but since there is no convincing evidence of this, the
Tribunal considers that it is the date on which the Claimant acknowledged having obtained the information that
should be considered. See Testimony of Oscar Perez, 21.

286 Tr, D2, p. 426: “My question is: this March or April 2012 meeting (...)A: Yes, indeed; When Mr. Bianco
informed us of this new requirement, we requested a meeting with Mrs. Villasmil and I was present, together with
Yovanny, and that is when we were told about this discount for the first time.” Since Memories of witnesses do not
agree, the Tribunal is of the opinion that one can only believe that in 2012 MLDN was informed of the requirement
verbally. (Tr. D3, p. 570 “Do you know that Mr. Pérez in his statement says that they were not informed about the
requirement in the manual not in [March] 2011 but in 2012.” A: “He says that in his statement, but I do not agree
with that statement.” Q: “You do not agree.”)

109

2012 through the Actas de Requerimiento. *7 The Tribunal has assessed
SENIAT’s silence and delay in relation to the outstanding requests and the lack of
transparency revealed by the attitude of the official, taking into consideration two

elements that it considers very relevant.

463. First, the Tribunal took into consideration the fact that once Claimant was
informed of the deduction requirement and was offered the opportunity to
regularize the status of its claims in respect of previous tax periods it chose not to
do so.788

464. Second, the lack of transparency on the part of an official is not a violation of the

obligation of fair and equitable treatment. MLDN could have gone to the
hierarchical superior but it did not do so. Even if there is no obligation to exhaust
the local State remedies, the investor does have to make sure that the attitude of
an isolated official is representative of the State’s position. The apathy of MLDN
which waited until February 2015?*° to lodge an appeal against SENIAT’s silence
limits its legitimacy to complain about a violation of fair and equitable treatment
as a consequence of the Administration’s delay and silence. The Tribunal agrees
with the Respondent’s position that there is no doubt that the Claimant “had access
to Venezuelan courts to challenge the actions it now alleges as the basis for its
claims under the Treaty.” The fact that MLDN has filed “administrative and

judicial appeals before the relevant Venezuelan authorities and courts in respect

287 Tr, D3, p. 430: “Q: In addition to these meetings that I mentioned, SENIAT also sent Minera at least three
Records of Request in July 2012, correct? A: Indeed. The record that is on the screen is the only written document
that we have and it is referring to three tax periods of the 61 that are pending. It only referred to October,
November and December. Q: I just wanted to mention that it is on tab number 7 and it is one of the three records
referred to. The content of the three is very similar. Mr. Pérez: is it correct that the three records, or at least the
one in front of you, indicate that Minera must submit -and I quote- “a copy of the VAT return form where the tax
credits requested were discounted?” A: Yes, indeed [...]”

288 Oscar Pérez witness statement, 24: “Jn response to what was requested by Ms. Villasmil, we expressed our
disagreement and rejection. The requirement of the SENIAT was not only contrary to the practice that both
SENIAT and MLDN had followed for more than ten years in the processing of the Requests, but it went against
the provisions of Articles 38 and 43.8 of the VAT Law and Article 16 of its Regulations.” See also Hearing Day
2, Questioning of Oscar Pérez, page 428: “Q: Did Ms. Villasmil mention that she had draft orders ready to be
signed if the discount was made? A: Yes, in that first meeting we were told that as soon as the discount was made,
which is what they were orally requesting, they even had already accepted or signed orders that would be issued
or notified as soon as the discount was made.. (...) Q: Despite this being told to you by Ms. Villasmil, Minera
once again refused to apply the discount?: A. Yes, because we were told that this was done orally and we simply
did not agree, so this is why the discount was not made.”

28° Tr, D2, p. 436, Examination of Oscar Pérez: “So Minera filed an appeal in February 2015 A: Yes, it did so in
2015.”

2% Rejoinder, 439.

 

 

110

of all the disputed exploitation tax liabilities,”?>!

as the Claimant emphasized in
relation to the Respondent’s Counter-claim, confirms that circumstance.
Therefore, not only could the Claimant have appealed SENIAT’s silence long
before February 2015, but it also could have challenged the application of the

disputed requirement.

465. The Tribunal therefore considers that in light of the above considerations, it is not
the lack of transparency of the Venezuelan Administration or the lack of
predictability of the Venezuelan legal framework that prevented the Claimant
from obtaining the VAT CERTS but its obstinacy in considering the deduction
requirement to be improper and its refusal to comply with it. The Tribunal does
not consider Claimant’s attitude proper because since 2012 it had the option of
complying with the requirement or of objecting to the legality of the tax deduction
criterion before the competent courts and opted instead not to comply and not to
contest its legality. The only thing it did was to wait three years to question
SENIAT’s delay and silence by taking the appropriate procedural measures. In
addition, the Tribunal considers that the Claimant cannot allege a violation by the
Respondent of its obligation of transparency and predictability of its legal

framework.

466. Similarly, the Claimant cannot allege a violation of due process since it adopted a
passive position itself in relation to the non-issuance of VAT CERTS and did not
seek recourse against SENIAT’s silence until very late. Nor does the Claimant
mention that the Venezuelan court has treated unjustly its administrative law claim

that is still ongoing.

467. Also, the Claimant alleges that the Respondent violated Anglo American’s
legitimate expectations that SENIAT would grant the VAT CERTS. The Tribunal,
however, shares the approach of the tribunal in the Crystallex case that the
protection of legitimate expectations occurs within “well-defined limits” and is

relative to a “promise or representation to an investor as to a substantive benefit

29! Claimant’s PHB, 258.

111

on which the investor has relied in making its investment, and which later was

frustrated by the conduct of the Administration.”?”

468. The Claimant has not identified precisely the origin of such expectation and the
Tribunal considers that the mere practice prior to 2010 cannot be interpreted as a
promise to the Claimant that neither the law nor the administrative practice would
change. In the words of the Parkerings tribunal “Save for the existence of an
agreement, in the form of a stabilization clause or otherwise, there is nothing
objectionable about the amendment brought to the regulatory framework existing

at the time an investor made its investment.”?°

469.

©

Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that the Respondent has not violated the

legitimate expectations of the Claimant.

470. The Tribunal does not consider that the conduct of Venezuela can be described as
arbitrary. As the Claimant itself recognizes when referring to due process to

demonstrate the existence of arbitrary conduct, 294

arbitrary conduct implies
conduct that cannot be controlled. The Claimant, however, cannot state that the
conduct of the Administration could not be limited or censored if it cannot
demonstrate that the Venezuelan State prevented it from making an appeal against
the conduct of the Tax Administration. MLDN filed a tax appeal against SENIAT
before an administrative court, which is still ongoing. Therefore, and even though
the conduct of the Venezuelan Administration is not free from criticism, such
conduct does not constitute arbitrary conduct as long as the Claimant by its
passivity did not prove that the silence of the Respondent was attributable to bad

management of its Administration or to a “whim” of the Respondent.

471.

Therefore, the Tribunal considers that neither the refusal to issue the CERTS nor
the conduct of the Respondent in relation to MLDN’s VAT Requests constituted

a violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment.

22 Crystallex v. Venezuela, | 547 (RLA-172).

283 Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Republic of Lithuania, (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/8, Award September 11, 2007
(“Parkerings-Compagniet v. Lithuania”), § 306 (translation of the Respondent’s lawyers) (RLA-86).

24 Claimant’s PHB, 149(d).

112

472. The Claimant’s claim for violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment

is dismissed.

C. Claims for alleged violation of the full protection and security standard

473. The Tribunal will present in turn the respective arguments of the Claimant (1) and
of the Respondent (2), before ruling on whether there has been a violation of the

standard of full protection and security as alleged by the Claimant (3).
1) Position of the Claimant

474. The Claimant asserts that the same measures that give rise to a breach of
Venezuela’s obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment also give rise to a

violation of its obligation to ensure full protection and security.?°

475. Contrary to the Respondent’s allegations, such a standard does not apply only in
the context of the physical security of investments but also comprises a duty to
afford legal security to investments. Venezuela’s argument is not supported by the
text of the Treaty or in decided cases, many of which, on the contrary, have held

that treaty provisions drafted in similar terms should be interpreted broadly.”°°

476. In these cases, tribunals have held that, in the absence of any express limitation in
the Treaty, this obligation to grant full protection and security is not limited to
physical security, but also comprises a duty to afford legal security to

investments.”””

2) Position of the Respondent

477. The Respondent contends that the Claimant made no effort to demonstrate a
violation of the full protection and security standard. The Claimant has the burden

of proving a Treaty violation and it failed to do so.?°*

478. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Respondent argues that the case law concurs

that the standard pursuant to customary international law is to limit the obligation

285 Claimant’s PHB, 160.
286 Reply, | 335.

27 Reply, | 336.

288 Respondent’s PHB, 112.

113

479.

480.

481.

482.

483.

of full protection and security to protection from physical damage. Moreover, the
Claimant’s lack of effort to comply with its burden requires that the Tribunal

dismiss its claim.2”
3) Decision of the Tribunal

The Claimant invokes a violation of the full protection and security standard in
relation to two claims: first, the so-called seizure of the reversionary assets and

second, the non-issuance of VAT CERTS.

Given that the Tribunal reached the conclusion that the Respondent took property
that was its own by virtue of a contractual obligation with which the Claimant had
to comply, no violation of the full protection and security standard could occur in
relation to the first claim. Accordingly, the Claimant’s allegations in this regard

must be dismissed.

Therefore, the alleged violation of the obligation of full protection and security
will be analyzed only in relation to the second claim - conduct of Venezuela in

relation to the VAT CERTS.

Article 2(2) of the Treaty requires that Venezuela grant Anglo American and its
investments “full protection and security.” The Tribunal shares the Claimant’s
position that, if there are no express limits in the Treaty, this obligation is not
limited to physical security, but also comprises a duty to afford legal security to

investments. This interpretation has been confirmed by various tribunals.*°°

The Claimant reasons that the “same measures” that give rise to a breach of fair
and equitable treatment also give rise to a breach of the full protection and security
standard for the same reason. It also states that “/t/he failure by Venezuela to

ensure legal stability and predictability, as well as the lack of transparency and

29 Respondent’s PHB, 113.

30 Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB / 01/12), Award, July 14, 2006, CLA-9, 111 406,
408: Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, Award, February 6, 2007, | 303 (CLA-84); National Grid P.L.C. v.
Argentine Republic (UNCITRAL), Award, November 3, 2008, | 187 (CLA-62),; Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd.
v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB / 05/22), Award, July 24, 2008, i 729-730 (CLA-16);
CME Czech Republic B.V. (The Netherlands) v. Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Partial Award, September 13,
2001, 4 613 (CLA-19).

114

484.

485.

D.

486.

487.

488.

3°! Memorial,
transparency and due process in its procedures, constitutes a breach of its obligation to accord full protection and
security to Anglo American’s investment in Venezuela.”).

302 Claimant’s PHB, 151.

due process in its procedures, constitute a breach of its obligation to accord full

protection and security to Anglo American’s investment in Venezuela.”?"!

The Tribunal has assessed in the previous section the measures relating to the VAT
CERTS identified by the Claimant as having caused a violation of fair and
equitable treatment and has ruled out the possibility that such measures involved

a lack of transparency, due process, stability, and legal predictability.

Whenever the Claimant based the violation of the obligation to grant full
protection and security to Anglo American’s investment on the Respondent’s
alleged lack of transparency, due process, stability, and legal predictability, the
Tribunal had rejected arguments that the Respondent had violated any of those
obligations under the Treaty, and it also rejects arguments that the Respondent
violated its obligation to grant full protection and security to the Claimant’s

investment.

The alleged violation of the national treatment standard

The Tribunal will in turn present the respective arguments of the Claimant (1) and
of the Respondent (2), before ruling on whether there has been a violation of the

national treatment standard as alleged by the Claimant (3).
1) Position of the Claimant

The Claimant alleges that Venezuela’s refusal to issue the VAT CERTS to which
MLDN was entitled breached its obligation to accord Anglo American’s
investment no less favorable treatment than that accorded to its own investors or
to investors from another State. There is no doubt that this is what happened in
this case. The Respondent continued to issue VAT CERTS to other exporters
while the MLDN’s VAT Requests went unanswered.*

Venezuela justifies its position on the basis that the other exporters complied with

the deduction requirement, but was able to produce just two examples of taxpayers

4276. (“The failure by Venezuela to ensure legal stability and predictability, as well as the lack of

115

who did so, out of the hundreds of taxpayers it issued VAT CERTS to during the
same period. Anglo American therefore asks the Tribunal to draw the appropriate
inferences and conclude that the Respondent breached Article 3 of the Treaty in

relation to its VAT claim2°3

2) Position of the Respondent

489. Article 3 of the Treaty on the national treatment standard requires proof that there
was conduct of the State in (i) similar cases, where (ii) the cases are treated

differently (iii) without reasonable justification. >

490. Venezuela emphasizes that first, this claim was filed as a claim related to the
alleged export ban, which the Claimant has not pursued due to the “irregularities”
that occurred in November 2011. Now, what remains of the claim on the violation
of the national treatment standard is an allegation related to the lack of approval
of VAT refunds, while SENIAT supposedly approved other taxpayers’ refunds.
Again, Anglo American has not demonstrated any element of a national treatment
violation, nor has it attempted to demonstrate that a national investor in similar

circumstances unjustifiably received more favorable treatment.°°

491.

At the Hearing, it was confirmed that other companies that received CERTS
complied with the requirements while MLDN simply chose not to follow the

process to receive the CERTS.*°

492. It adds that Mr. Pérez, a witness presented by the Claimant, could not identify any
taxpayer that received better treatment when he had to answer this question posed

by the Tribunal.?°”

493. Venezuela confirms that the requirements were explained to all taxpayers, and all

complied, except for MLDN. The Claimant was also unable to identify third

30 Claimant’s PHB, (151.

304 Respondent’s PHB, {1 14.
305 Respondent’s PHB, {1 15.
306 Respondent’s PHB, {1 16.
307 Respondent’s PHB, {1 17.

116

parties in similar circumstances that were treated differently, much less show that

any different treatment was unjustified.*°

494. The Respondent concludes that the Claimant did not attempt, either in its
pleadings or at the Hearing, to prove that any third party received more favorable
treatment, let alone a national, and that it is thus clear that it did not substantiate

any claimed violation of Article 3 of the Treaty.
3) Decision of the Tribunal
495. Article 3 of the Treaty provides:

(i) “Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investments
or returns of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party
to treatment less favorable than that which it accords to investments
or returns of its own nationals or companies or to investments or

returns of nationals or companies of any third State.

(ii

Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party, as regards their
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their
investments, to treatment less favorable than that which it accords to
its own ionals or companies or to nationals or companies of any

third State.

(iii) The treatment provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall

apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agreement.”

496. In relation to the alleged violation of the obligation to accord treatment no less
favorable than that accorded to the investments of its own investors or to investors
of another State, the Claimant asks the Tribunal to “draw the appropriate
inferences” from the fact that the Respondent “was able to produce just two

99309

examples of taxpayers that complied with the deduction requirement.

308 Respondent’s PHB, 118.
3 Claimant’s PHB, 151.

117

497.

498.

500.

S01.

The Tribunal calls to mind that the burden of proof rests with the Claimant to
demonstrate that Venezuela issued CERTS for the benefit of exporters that did not

meet the deduction requirement.

The Claimant requested in document production that Venezuela “produce

evidence of the fact that other exporters complied with the Manual.”3!°

. Although the Respondent has not produced documentation pertaining to

“hundreds of other exporters,” the fact is that the Respondent has produced

documents that demonstrate that:

- it rejected the request of a taxpayer for not having complied with the
deduction requirement and required that it do so by means of an Acta de

Requerimiento similar to the one received by the Claimant;*!!
- one taxpayer met the deduction criterion.?!

The Respondent has shown that it treated exporting taxpayers in similar situations
equally and that taxpayers in a different situation (different in so far as they met
the requirement) were treated differently. On the other hand, the Claimant’s
opposing view, that is, that the Respondent did issue CERTS to exporters that did
not comply with the requirement, has not been proven. The witness presented by
the Claimant in relation to the VAT CERTS admitted not knowing if other

taxpayers received better treatment:

“CO-ARBITRATOR TAWIL: Did you receive any certification whether the

prior procedure continued being applied to third persons.

R: That I don’t know. I won’t be able to answer that question.”?"°

In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant has not

demonstrated its premise that Venezuela has issued VAT CERTS to exporters that

310 Claimant’s PHB, { 125.

31! See C-219.
32 See C-221.

383 Tr, D2, 448:17-449:9.

118

did not comply with the deduction requirement and dismisses Anglo American’s

claim based on the violation of Article 3 of the Treaty.
Vill. MONETARY DEMANDS OF THE CLAIMANT

502. Since all of Anglo American’s claims for violation of the Treaty were dismissed,
its claims for compensation relating to such violations do not have to be

examined.
Ix. RESPONDENT’S COUNTER-CLAIM

503. The Respondent alleges that the Claimant breached its obligations as a
concessionaire with respect to exploitation taxes and special advantages and
requests in its Counter-claim that the Claimant be ordered to pay a total of

531,049,475 bolivares fuertes or US$123,583,598.84 to the Republic.
504. The Claimant objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to consider the Counter-claim.

505. The Tribunal will rule first on its jurisdiction (A) and only if it reaches the
conclusion that it has jurisdiction, will it address the merits of the Counter-claim

(B).
A. Jurisdiction

506. The Tribunal will in turn present the respective positions of the Claimant (1) and
of the Respondent (2), before ruling on its jurisdiction regarding the Counter-

claim (3).
1) Position of the Claimant

507. Anglo American raises two objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to decide
on the Respondent’s Counter-claim. First, it alleges the lack of consent in Article
8 of the Treaty to arbitrate counter-claims (a). Second, it alleges that the
Respondent’s Counter-claim is not sufficiently related to the claims of Anglo

American (b).

119

a) There is no consent to arbitrate counter-claims in Article 8 of the
Treaty

508. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal derives from its jurisdiction under the arbitration
agreement between the Parties and that agreement is established in Article 8 of
the Treaty. The two provisions of Article 8 that are key to this analysis are the

following:

(a) The first provision of Article 8 provides for the submission to arbitration of
“disputes [....] concerning an obligation of (one of the Contracting Parties)
under (the Treaty) in relation to an investment (of an investor of the other

Contracting Party).”

(b

The third provision of Article 8 stipulates that “the jurisdiction of the arbitral
tribunal shall be limited to determining whether there has been a breach by
the Contracting Party concerned of any of its obligations (under the Treaty)”

and “whether such breach [... ] has caused damage to the [investor].>"*

509. It follows that Article 8 narrowly circumscribes the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to the
adjudication of disputes concerning Venezuela’s Treaty’s obligations and
expressly forecloses the possibility of counter-claims by a host state against an

investor!5

510. At the Hearing, the Respondent steadfastly refused to discuss the scope of Article
8 as it had in its written submissions. By contrast, the Claimant relied on cases
where the tribunals indicated that State counter-claims might be within their
jurisdiction. The Claimant specifies that, in those cases, the tribunals were faced
with broadly-drafted treaty clauses contemplating the arbitration of disputes
concerning investments in general. On the other hand, in every case with a
narrowly circumscribed clause limiting the arbitration agreement to disputes
concerning host state treaty obligations or treaty breaches, the tribunal declined
jurisdiction over State counter-claims. Venezuela has not been able to point to a

single case showing otherwise.>!©

314 Claimant’s PHB, 1253.
315 Claimant’s PHB, 9254.
36 Claimant’s PHB, 1255.

120

511. The Respondent continues to focus its position on Article 47(1) of the Arbitration
(AF) Rules. In fact, it maintains that Article 47(1)’s reference to the possibility of
a counter-claim must be taken as implied consent to arbitrate counter-claims. But
Article 47(1) does not provide an independent basis of jurisdiction. Rather, it
conditions the admission of any counter-claim on it being within the scope of the
Parties’ arbitration agreement and the Parties not agreeing otherwise. Article 8(1)
of the Treaty provides no scope for the arbitration of counter-claims and Article
8(3) constitutes an express agreement otherwise. This is dispositive. Despite the
assertion to the contrary, Article 47(1) of the Arbitration (AF) Rules cannot
override an express exclusion of counter-claims by the Treaty itself.7!”

512. Venezuela’s argument that the Tribunal should hear the exploitation tax claim
since MLDN is avoiding the domestic resolution of this dispute is false. MLDN
has filed administrative and judicial appeals before the relevant Venezuelan

authorities and courts in respect to all the disputed exploitation tax liabilities.>!*

513. In bringing its Counter-claim for exploitation tax before this Tribunal, the
Respondent is attempting to re-litigate before this international tribunal under

international law, an entirely domestic law dispute.

b) Ve la’s Counter-claim lacks a close connection with Anglo
‘an’s claims

  

514. Not only does the Respondent fail the jurisdictional hurdle of consent, it also fails
to establish that its Counter-claim has the requisite “close connection” to Anglo

American’s claims.3'°

515. Aside from forming part of the factual background of Venezuela’s measures
against Anglo American’s investment in the years leading up to the takeover of
the assets, the exploitation tax dispute has no incidence whatsoever on Anglo

American’s non-reversionary assets claim or VAT claim.

516. The decision in Paushok v. Mongolia is instructive in the sense of requiring that

the issues raised by the counter-claim can be considered as an “indivisible part”

317 Claimant’s PHB, 256.
318 Claimant’s PHB, 258.
3!° Claimant’s PHB, 259.

121

of the parent company’s claims for breach of treaty or as creating a reasonable

nexus with the parent company’s claims.?”°

517. In view of the above, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain the Counter-

claim.

2) Position of the Respondent

518. The right to a counter-claim is an integral part of the arbitration system under the
Additional Facility Rules. Therefore, when Anglo American accepted the
arbitration offer in the Treaty between the United Kingdom and the then Republic
of Venezuela, it agreed to arbitration under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules,

including the provisions allowing counter-claims.*?!

519. Venezuela objects to Anglo American’s argument that Article 8 of the Treaty
completely excludes jurisdiction for the Tribunal to resolve any counter-claims by
a host State against the investor and the Treaty contains “an express exclusion of
counter-claims.” But, this is not true, there is no express exclusion. The Treaty
must be interpreted in harmony with the ICSID system and the fact that the right
to a counter-claim is not mentioned in the context of rights granted to investors
does not constitute an exclusion, much less an express exclusion. As expressly
explained by the tribunal in the Antoine Goetz & others and S.A. Affinage des
Metaux v. Republic of Burundi case, the Respondent argues that, since the
arbitration rules include the right, “it does not matter that the BIT does not contain

any provisions granting the Tribunal jurisdiction to hear counter-claims.”?”

520. Venezuela’s right to file the Counter-claim is inextricably linked to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims: if the Claimant is permitted to base its
claims on a disagreement about Venezuelan law, the Tribunal must also decide
the Counter-claim. The Claimant brought this dispute to arbitration and, to the
extent that jurisdiction exists, it is an exclusive jurisdiction over the dispute
between the Claimant and the State. Therefore, the same jurisdiction to hear Anglo

American’s claims based on the relationship between MLDN and Venezuela must

32 Paushok v. Mongolia.
321 Respondent’s PHB, 73.
322 Respondent’s PHB, 74.

122

extend to Venezuela’s Counter-claim based on the same relationship, facts and

mining rights.*?>

521.

In short, the Claimant’s refusal to pay its taxes and comply with the special
advantage in the concessions is closely related to the dispute submitted by Anglo
American at the commencement of this arbitration. The Claimant submitted its
dispute with Venezuela to this Tribunal and implied that the exploitation tax issue
was part of the unfair treatment to which it was allegedly subjected. The
Respondent considers that the Counter-claim is part of the response to that
allegation: to charge the obligation accepted as a special advantage in accordance
with the 1999 Mining Law is not unfair treatment. What is unfair is that the
Claimant seeks compensation of hundreds of millions of dollars from Venezuela
based on its disagreement with the application of Venezuelan laws to MLDN,

while at the same MLDN has refused to pay its debts to the State since 2002.74

522. The Claimant also attempts to avoid the Counter-claim, referring to the decision
in Paushok and affirming that this Tribunal is not empowered to act as
Venezuela’s tax collector in this arbitration. But this is not Venezuela’s position
either: what the Respondent alleges is that the Tribunal, having agreed to hear the
related allegations of Anglo American, can consider the fact that the Claimant’s
indirect subsidiary has to pay all its debts as concessionaire. It emphasizes the fact
that said debt was due to the contractual obligation offered as a special advantage

to obtain the mining rights.*?°

  

3) Decision of the Tribunal

523. The Tribunal has assessed the completeness of the Parties’ arguments on this

important issue.

524. The Respondent justifies its right to make counter-claims in these proceedings
based on the provisions of Article 47(1) of the Arbitration (AF) Rules, which

provide:

323 Respondent’s PHB, 75.
324 Respondent’s PHB, 76.
35 Respondent’s PHB, 77.

123

525.

526.

527.

528.

529.

530.

“[e]xcept as the parties otherwise agree, a party may present an
incidental or additional claim or counter-claim, provided that such
ancillary claim is within the scope of the arbitration agreement of the
parties.”
It is clear from said Article that, under the Arbitration (AF) Rules, a counter-claim
can be raised under two conditions: (i) the parties have not expressly excluded it

and (ii) the counter-claim falls within the scope of the arbitration agreement of the

parties.

In relation to the first condition, the arbitration clause, in this case, Article 8 of the
Treaty providing for submission to arbitration, must be interpreted in the sense of

excluding counter-claims from the State, since Article 8, paragraph 3 provides:

“The jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal shall be limited to determining
whether there has been a breach by the Contracting Party concerned of
any of its obligations under this Agreement, whether such breach of its
obligations has caused damage to the national or company concerned,
and, if such is the case, the amount of compensation.”

  

The terms chosen by the Contracting States leave no doubt that they intended to
draft a clause of a restrictive and precisely limited scope. The use of the expression
“shall be limited” reflects such a clear intention. In the same way, as the Claimant
rightly emphasized, Article 8(3) not only excludes claims from the host State, but

also limits jurisdiction to disputes related to obligations of that State.

Therefore, the wording of the arbitration offer itself excludes the possibility that

the Counter-claim is “within the scope of the arbitration agreement of the parties.”

In addition, contrary to Respondent’s contention, Anglo American’s claims that
involve the examination of the problems of Venezuelan law cannot be equated
with its Counter-claim. Anglo American’s claims are based on alleged violations
of the Treaty and it is only to rule on these alleged violations that the Tribunal
must first examine issues of Venezuelan law. The Counter-claim is not based on
a violation of the Treaty or on a violation of international law, only on Venezuelan

law.

Accordingly, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to adjudicate the Counter-

claim submitted by the Respondent.

124

B.

531.

Position of the Parties in relation to the Merits of the Counter-claim

Given that it has no jurisdiction over Respondent’s Counter-claim, the Tribunal

will not address its respective positions on the merits of the Counter-claim.

COSTS AND EXPENSES OF THE PROCEEDING

532.

A.

533.

534.

535.

536.

The Tribunal will in turn present the respective arguments of the Claimant (A) and
of the Respondent (B), and will summarize the costs of the proceeding (C), before

adjudicating the costs and expenses of the proceeding (D).

Position of the Claimant

The Claimant requests that the Tribunal order the Respondent to bear the
Claimant’s costs in their entirety plus interest for the entire period of this

proceeding.*”°

The Claimant asserts that under Article 58 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules, the

Tribunal has the power to decide how to allocate the costs of the arbitration.*?”

The Claimant refers to the loser-pays principle and that principle should only be
displaced when the winning Party has committed some wrongdoing of a
substantive or procedural nature during the proceedings. Anglo American has not
committed any such wrongdoing, but the Respondent has obstructed and caused

delays to these proceedings.**

Applying legal standards to the present proceedings, the Claimant emphasizes that
the Respondent has pursued meritless jurisdictional objections and a frivolous
Counter-claim, has introduced new issues in an untimely manner in its Rejoinder

and during the Hearing, and has misrepresented the facts.*??

326 Claimant’s Costs, {[3.

327 Claimant’s Costs, 33.
3°8 Claimant’s Costs, 110.
%° Claimant’s Costs, 117.

125

537.

538.

539.

540.

541.

542.

B.

543.

544.

545.

The Claimant insists that the withdrawal of its claims should not detract from its
entitlement to compensation for costs. It claims that by withdrawing part of its

claims, it ultimately reduced the cost of the proceedings.**°

The Claimant’s costs are divided into three categories: (i) fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal and ICSID’s administrative fees, (ii) the costs of legal
representation, experts and consultants, and (iii) costs and expenses of the

Claimant’s witness.**!

In relation to the first category, the Claimant has incurred Tribunal fees and

expenses and ICSID administrative costs in the amount of US$425,000.00.

In relation to the costs of legal representation, experts and consultants, the
Claimant claims the amount of £8,260,682.50 (the Claimant’s international

lawyers), and US$1,583,197.51 and £1,025,434.41 and CAD $971,737.14.3

As regards the expenses of its witness Ms. Rebecca Charlton, the Claimant claims

the amount of US$46,075.00.

The Claimant asks the Tribunal to order the Respondent to pay all of these costs
plus interest on a compound basis at the rate of 11 percent annually, and this

should run from the date of the Submission on Costs to the date of payment.

Position of the Respondent

The Respondent requests that the Claimant be ordered to pay all of the costs

incurred throughout these arbitration proceedings.

The Respondent asserts that under Article 58 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules, the

Tribunal has the power to decide how to allocate the costs of the arbitration 3

Arbitral awards show that tribunals have used their discretion to allocate costs

based on the parties’ conduct, in particular when one party’s conduct, such as that

330 Claimant’s Costs, 118.

33! Claimant’s Costs, 20.

332 See Appendices | and 2 of Claimant’s Costs.
333 Respondent’s Costs, 4.

126

546.

547.

548.

549.

550.

S51.

552.

553.

of the Claimant in this case, has caused the arbitration to be longer, more

complicated, and therefore more expensive than necessary.**+

The Respondent considers that Anglo American’s claims are claims under
Venezuelan law and not international law, and therefore should not have been

presented to this Tribunal.**°

In addition, the claims presented by the Claimant lacked crucial facts, which
forced the Respondent to present a Counter-claim to provide the missing context

of the dispute.**°

Finally, the costs related to the Republic’s defense against the claims regarding

the temporary suspension of exports should never have been incurred.

By virtue of the criterion of the Parties’ relative success, the Tribunal must order
the Claimant to cover the expenses incurred by the Republic and take into account
the reduction in the scope of Anglo American’s claims. It should also be noted
that the Claimant suggested at the beginning of the proceedings that it would
submit a secondary claim regarding the expiry of the concessions, but never
presented it. It also emphasizes that the Claimant proceeded to withdraw and

modify several of its claims.>*”

The costs of the Respondent are broken down into four categories (legal fees,

expert fees and expenses, administrative costs and expenses).
The Respondent's total costs amount to US$9,420,462.77*

The Respondent also presents the amount of the legal fees related to its defense to
the withdrawn claim for temporary suspension of exports amounting to

US$848,570.3

The Respondent requests that the Claimant be ordered to reimburse all costs

incurred plus interest and, in the alternative, to reimburse the costs incurred as a

54 Respondent’s Costs, 15.

35 Respondent’s Costs, 18.

336 Respondent’s Costs, (11.

337 Respondent’s Costs, (15-16.
338 Respondent’s Costs, 24.

3° Respondent’s Costs, 25.

127

result of the filing of its unfounded and belatedly withdrawn claim, plus interest

as of the date on which those costs were incurred.*4°

C. Costs of the Proceeding

554. The costs of the proceeding, including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses, ICSID’s

administrative fees, and the direct expenses, are as follows:

Tribunal’s fees and expenses

Mr. Yves Derains USD 143,706.47
Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil USD 206,568.50.
Dr. Ratil E. Vinuesa USD 202,011.85
ICSID’s administrative fees USD 180,000.00
Direct expenses™! USD 184,918.03
Total USD 917,204.85

D. Decision of the Tribunal

555. Both Parties request that costs be awarded with respect to attorneys’ fees and
expenses, as well as the costs incurred in connection with the proceedings, and

have made submissions in which they quantify their fees and costs.

556. Article 58 of the Arbitration (AF) Rules provides that the Tribunal has the

authority to decide the division of costs of this arbitration.

557. Both Parties refer to the principle that the losing party pays. In this case, the
Tribunal holds that all of the Respondent’s objections to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal to hear the Claimant’s claims were dismissed and that the Claimant’s
objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear the Respondent’s Counter-claim
was admitted. However, all of Claimant’s claims on the merits were dismissed. In
addition, the Claimant withdrew its claim regarding the suspension of exports,

causing the Respondent to incur expenses that were found to be unnecessary.

340 Respondent’s Costs, 26.
+4! This amount includes expenses related to meetings, stenographic and translation services, and expenses
related with courier services of this Award (courier, printing, among others).

128

558. The Tribunal also notes that the Respondent objected by a long and inexplicable

silence to ICSID’s repeated requests to contribute to the financing of the last phase

of the proceeding, which can be equated to obstructive conduct.

559. In light of these various elements, the Tribunal sees no reason to justify why one

Party should assume the costs and expenses of the other.

560. The Tribunal rules, therefore, that each Party shall bear its own costs and

expenses.

XI. DECISION

561. For the reasons set out in the Award, the Tribunal decides as follows:

a)
b)

c)
d)

e)

8)
h)

The Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the claims brought by the Claimant;
The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear the claims filed in a counter-
claim by the Respondent;

The Claimant’s claims for breach of Article 5 of the Treaty are dismissed;
The Claimant’s claims for breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard
under Article 2(2) of the Treaty are dismissed;

The Claimant’s claims for breach of the full protection and security standard
under Article 2(2) of the Treaty are dismissed;

The Claimant’s claim for breach of the national treatment standard under
Article 3 of the Treaty is dismissed;

Each Party shall bear the costs and expenses it incurred;

All other petitions and claims are dismissed.

129

Done in the city of Paris, France

 

as) #f40-F7

Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil Dr. Raul E. Vinuesa

Arbitrator Arbitrator

Subject to the attached dissenting opinion 1a)
[P-JaerlF 1] |

 

130

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

(ADDITIONAL FACILITY)
IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
ANGLO AMERICAN PLC

(Claimant)

-and-

THE BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA

(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/14/1

 

Dissenting Opinion of
Prof. Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil

 

1. | agree with the findings of my distinguished colleagues with respect to the jurisdiction of
the Arbitral Tribunal to decide the claims submitted by the Parties in this arbitration

2. With regard to the decision on the merits, | cannot, unfortunately, concur with the
majority on the alleged breach by the Respondent of Article 5 of the Treaty and the
standard of fair and equitable treatment under Article 2(2) of the Treaty.

3. First, | do not share the view developed in paragraphs 347 to 353 of the Award that the
“Processing Assets” formed part of the object of the concession granted to the Claimant.
Although | agree that the Mining Titles shall be constructed in light of the provisions of
the 1945 Mining Law,’ it cannot be concluded from the Mining Titles or the
aforementioned law that the activity related to the benefit or processing of the mineral
extracted was included in the object of the concession.

4. In accordance with the Mining Titles, the object of the concession was the “exploitation

2

of niquel de manto”* and granted the holder thereof “the exclusive right to extract and

take advantage of the mineral indicated above for a period of twenty years, as well as
the other rights set forth in the Mining Law.”* In light of the 1945 Mining Law, the terms
‘take advantage of (“aprovechar” in Spanish) contained in the Mining Titles do not refer
to the processing or benefit of the mineral, but to the legal requirement that mining

exploitation be conducted for an economic purpose.

5. This is indicated in Articles 11, 13, 174, and 179 of the 1945 Mining Law* (which set
forth, as the object of the concessions regulated therein, the exploration and exploitation

‘award, Mf 344 and 351.

? As set forth in the mining titles attached under Annexes C-3 and C-18. Similarly, the mining titles, attached as
Annex C-5, stipulated the granting of a “concession for exploration and subsequent exploitation of niquel de
manto.”

* See Annexes C-3 and C-18. The mining titles, attached under Annex C-5, stipulated that these rights conferred
“[on the concessionaire] the exclusive right to exploration of the lot for which the concession was granted and to
exploitation of the parcels chosen and demarcated by it within the lot, pursuant to Article 180 of the Mining Law.”

‘ Articles 11, 13, 174, and 179 of the 1945 Mining Law (Annex C-1) set forth the following: Article 11: “The
Federal Executive may reserve, by means of Decree (...) the exploration and exploitation of any or all the
substances mentioned in Article 2 throughout national territory or in the zone(s) to be determined in the respective
Decree (...);” Article 13: “The right to exploit the minerals referred to in this Law can be acquired only through
concessions granted by the Federal Executive in the manner set forth therein,” Article 174: “The concessions for
the substances mentioned in Article 11 of this Law (...) shall cover the following categories: First: - For the

of lots by precise (...), with the having the right to the
exploitation of the parcels subsequently chosen and demarcated by it (...) Second.- For the exploitation of parcels
or lots determined by precise demarcations in the concession permit itself (.. ) ee For the exploitation of the
residual national reserves resulting from the and
exploitation mentioned in numbered paragraph 1 of this article," Article 179: “The concession sone on the
concessionaire (...) the exclusive right to exploration of the lot for which the concession was granted, and the right
to obtain, for the purpose of its exploitation, the parcels chosen by it (...)" (underlining added by author).

of the minerals), Article 1 of Decree No. 2039 on the Reservation with regard to the
Exploration and Exploitation of the Minerals on Venezuelan National Territory® (in which
the Venezuelan State reserved the right to the exploration and exploitation of all the
minerals on national territory), and the scope granted to the concept of exploitation by
the Venezuelan Ministry of Mining and Hydrocarbons at the time of passage of the 1945
Mining Law.® Based on a unified interpretation of these elements, it can be sustained
that the concessions granted under the 1945 Mining Law limited their object to the
exploration and exploitation of minerals, and that the terms ‘take advantage of
mentioned in the mining titles refer to the need for exploitation to take place for
economic rather than merely research purposes (as. indicated in the aforementioned

opinion).

6. In my opinion, neither the fifth, eleventh, and twelfth clauses of the Mining Titles nor
Articles 94 and 96 of the 1945 Mining Law (cited in paragraphs 351 and 352 of the
Award) preclude this conclusion. The clauses of the abovementioned Mining Titles
establish special advantages under Article 91 of the 1945 Mining Law but do not form
part of the object of the concession. Similarly, none of the obligations set forth in those
clauses lead to the conclusion that the processing or benefit of the minerals formed part
of the object of the concession granted to the Claimant.

7. The Mining Titles did not prevent MLDN from processing the mineral through a third
party or from carrying out this activity outside the concession zone. It does not seem to
be in dispute that, in such situations, the processing or benefit of the mineral would not
have formed part of the concession and, consequently, upon its expiry, the assets
dedicated to that activity would not have reverted to the Respondent without
compensation. If in such cases the assets linked to the processing or benefit of the
mineral did not revert because they did not form part of the object of the concession, |

° Article 1 of Decree No. 2039 on the Reservation of the Exploration and Exploitation of all the Minerals on
Venezuelan National Territory (Annex BC-10) establishes “the reservation with respect to the exploration and
exploitation on national territory of all the minerals mentioned in Article 2 of the Mining Law that may not have
been previously reserved’ (underlining added by author).

® See Annex BC-40, which states that the Ministry of Mining and Hydrocarbons maintained that “if mineral
extraction is to constitute the exploitation required by the Law, extraction must be for the clear purpose of
economic utilization, present or future, which has already largely moved past the research phase of the substance
or deposit and must be proportional to the nature and size thereof.” This requirement was later included in Article
58 of the 1999 Mining Law (Annex C-19), which states: “/t is understood that a concession is in the exploitation
phase when the substances covered by the concession are being extracted from the mines or the necessary
action is being taken to do so, for the clear purpose of their economic utilization and in proportion to the nature of
the substance and size of the deposit.”

fail to see the reason for a finding to the contrary in a situation where the Claimant
conducted that activity on its own within the concession zone, as happened in this case.

In addition, Article 94 of the 1945 Mining Law (cited in paragraph 351 of the Award) does
not impose an obligation on the concessionaire that supports the view that the
processing of the mineral was included in the object of the concession, and Article 96 of
the 1945 Mining Law (cited in paragraph 352 of the Award) only refers to import duty
exemptions and is thus not relevant to the matter at hand.

The foregoing leads me to conclude that the Processing Assets were non-reversionary
assets and, as such, that Respondent should have compensated the Claimant for their
value if it was attempting to take control of them. A similar conclusion can be reached, in
my opinion, with respect to the assets included in the Inventory, as they involved raw
materials, spare parts, and consumables associated with the processing of minerals.
However, the assets used for mining tasks that formed part of the object of the
concession should revert to the State with no compensation to the Claimant.

Second, | do not share the position taken by my distinguished colleagues with respect to
the alleged violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment related to non-
issuance of the VAT CERTS.’ Based on the provisions of Articles 38 and 43 of the VAT
Law, it is not clear that the requirement imposed by SENIAT to deduct from the VAT
return the amounts requested by way of tax credit recovery for exports is in line with the

law.®

. However, my disagreement with the majority does not lie there but on the way of

assessing the factual circumstances specific to the case in that regard.

. It was demonstrated that for almost ten years, SENIAT did not require the deduction

from the VAT return of the refund amounts requested to recover tax credits for exports;°

7 Award, 1] 459-472.

a According to Article 43 of the VAT Law (Annex C-21), the tax refund is provided at the time of issuance of the
VAT CERTS, which can take place only when the appropriate request for the refund has been settled. Article 38
of the VAT Law states that the tax credit obtained from the difference between tax credits and tax debits must be
carried over to the next tax period until the final deduction is made. These provisions, taken collectively, led to the
reasonable conclusion that in the requests for VAT refunds, only the inclusion of officially recognized tax credits
could be required and not those for which a decision was pending.

° See Annex C-236 and hearing, day 3, pages 560, 571, and 572, in which Ms. Villasmil (witness for the
Respondent) confirmed that for almost 10 years, SENIAT accepted VAT recovery requests from MLDN and that
the requirement imposed by SENIAT marked a change in the way SENIAT and MLDN had operated with respect
to the recovery of tax credits.

that the change in position by SENIAT was based on an internal manual that was not
published in the Official Gazette or communicated contemporaneously to the Claimant;"°
and that the Respondent did not provide a proper response to the formal requests from

MLDN for the recovery of the VAT credits.

13. MLDN submitted more than 50 VAT recovery requests for periods dating back to
October 2007,"' of which the Respondent failed to expressly inform it of the reason for
the change in the tax authorities conduct, and limited its actions to three written
communications in July 2012," in which it instructed MLDN to resubmit the VAT returns
with the required deduction or explain, as applicable, why this deduction was not
appropriate. MLDN responded to these communications explaining why, in its view, the
deduction required by SENIAT should not be made,"* but did not obtain a response from
the authorities.

14. Under those circumstances, the conduct of the Respondent was not consistent, free
from ambiguity, and transparent, as required by the standard of fair and equitable
treatment guaranteed under Article 2 (2) of the Treaty.'® The authorities had the
obligation to communicate properly to the taxpayer the change in the position held for
almost ten years, and it would be expected that the Respondent would have settled the
requests submitted by MLDN either contemporaneously or at the time of escalation of
the conflict. Despite the repeated formal requests from MLDN, the Respondent decided
to remain silent and did not communicate its position to the Claimant." This leads me to

' See the second witness statement of Ms. Villasmil, paragraph 11; hearing, day 3, page 575 (in which witness
Villasmil confirmed that a copy of the manual in question was not provided to MLDN) and the second legal opinion
of Canénico, paragraph 135.

"' See the witness statement of Oscar Pérez, paragraph 18, and hearing, day 3, page 570.
” See Annexes R-36, C-198, and C-199 and hearing, day 3, page 576.
"8 See Annexes R-37, C-200, and C-201 and hearing, day 3, page 580.

‘4 Witness Villasmil stated during the hearing that SENIAT did not provide a copy of the internal manual to MLON,
did not notify it of the change in administrative procedure, and did not respond to its communications sent in
connection with the actas de requerimiento [records of request] (hearing, day 3, pages 575, and 582 to 584).

© The requirement to act in a consistent manner, free from ambiguity, and with transparency derived from the
standard of fair and equitable treatment has been cited repeatedly in several cases. In this regard, see: Técnicas
Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. The United Mexican States, Award, Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2, May 29, 2003,
154 (Annex CLA-90); Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, Case No.
ARB/06/18, January 14, 2010, {| 284 (Annex CLA-49); and Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v. The
Czech Republic, (UNCITRAL), Partial Award, March 17, 2006, If] 307-308 (Annex CLA-79).

% Despite stating that SENIAT had an obligation to issue well-founded, written decisions within 30 working days in
order to respond to a request for [tax] recovery, witness Villasmil stated during the hearing that SENIAT did not
respond to the communications sent by MLDN in connection with the actas de requerimiento because this was
not the usual practice of the Venezuelan tax authorities (hearing, day 3, pages 549 to 551 and 582).

conclude that the Respondent did not demonstrate the consistency and transparency
required by the standard of fair and equitable treatment set forth in the Treaty.

15. The fact that officials of the Respondent later verbally informed MLDN of the reasons for
non-issuance of the VAT CERTS does not modify the abovementioned conclusion."”
Given that the issue was subject to opinion -and that the tax authorities acted to the
contrary for almost ten years- the change in position should be clear, well founded, and
duly communicated to the taxpayer.

16. It was not the responsibility of MLDN to go to other officials or the local courts to seek
confirmation that the position verbally communicated to it by an official represented the
position of the Venezuelan State in this regard.’® The principle is exactly the opposite.
As MLDN repeatedly submitted formal requests to SENIAT, it was SENIAT the one that
had the obligation to provide a proper response to those requests. '°

17. In my opinion, the fact that the Claimant decided to challenge the silence of SENIAT in
February 2015 does not change the Respondent's failure to act with due consistency
and transparency.”° As the legal experts of both Parties have agreed, under Venezuelan
law, the authorities have an obligation to respond to the requests of individuals.”" In
systems such as Venezuela's, administrative silence does not constitute a tacit decision
of the authorities; instead it is merely a legal fiction or presumption in favor of individuals
intended to allow them to access other administrative bodies or courts (as applicable),
should a citizen decide to invoke the silence for such purpose.” The mere fact that time
periods elapsed without a decision does not relieve the authorities of their duty to
respond—something that logically flows from the principle of publicity of State acts and

award 9 463.
"8 award 9] 464.

*® During the hearing, witness Villasmil further explained that she sent the communications from MLDN in
connection with the actas de requerimiento to her superiors, but did not know whether they had responded to
them (hearing, day 3, page 584).

* award 7] 464.

2" Second legal opinion of Brewer-Carias, {If] 174 to 178; second legal opinion of Canénico, {| 149. Both experts
agree that in the Venezuelan legal system, administrative silence has been designed to benefit citizens and that
this right or guarantee applicable to individuals is derived from Article 51 of the Venezuelan Constitution.

% In this regard, systems such as Venezuela’s (or Argentina's) differ from others where denial by means of
silence is automatic and could be construed as a decision by the authorities. For this reason, it is said that in the
former group “silence benefits citizens and not the authorities.” | have addressed, on numerous occasions since
1988 onwards, the issue of administrative inaction and the techniques used to remedy this in comparative law. In
this regard, see for example, Tawil, Guido Santiago, “Administracién y Justicia,” Vol. |, Depalma, Buenos Aires,
1993, pages 288 et seq., among many others.

@

the republican form of government— and the alleged delay in challenging it —which, as
explained, was not such in the case as it is only a legal fiction aimed at providing
citizens with additional options for such challenges— could not justify or mitigate the
Respondent's failure to act.

. Given the decision reached by the majority on the Arbitral Tribunal, it is not appropriate

for me to render an opinion on the damage alleged, the valuation method used, or the

a

Prof. Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil
Arbitrator
Date: /f-/2—-IF

quantum of compensation requested.

