INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR CASE No. ARB(AF)/04/05
SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
(ADDITIONAL FACILITY)

BETWEEN:

ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY
and

TATE & LYLE INGREDIENTS AMERICAS, INC.
Claimants

v.

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES
Respondent

 

Decision on the Requests for Correction,
Supplementary Decision and Interpretation

 

Before the Arbitral Tribunal constituted
under Chapter Eleven of the North
American Free Trade Agreement, and
comprised of:

Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades, President
Mr. Arthur W. Rovine
Mr. Eduardo Siqueiros T.

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Date of dispatch to the parties: July 10, 2008

THE TRIBUNAL
Composed as above,

After deliberation,

Makes the following Decision:

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 21 November 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal rendered an Award ordering the
Respondent to pay to the Claimants the amount of US$33,510,091,.in damages for
lost profits, as well as interest at the simple interest rate paid on U.S. Treasury
Bills. On 8 January 2008 the Arbitral Tribunal issued a Rectification of Award,
correcting a typographical error in the expression of the amount awarded to the
Claimants in item 4 of paragraph 304 of the Award.

On 7 January 2008, the Respondent requested correction of the Award, “under
Article 57” of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules (the “AF Rules”),
to state that the damages awarded are payable to ALMEX rather than the
Claimants. On the same date, the Claimants submitted a request for a
supplementary decision pursuant to Article 57 of the AF Rules, and for
interpretation of the Award pursuant to Article 55 of the AF Rules.

By letter dated 10 January 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal advised the Parties: (i) that
the Tribunal granted the Claimants a period of 30 days to file a detailed written
submission regarding their requests; (ii) that the Respondent would subsequently
have a period of 30 days to reply to the Claimants’ written submissions; and (iii)
that after receiving the submissions of both parties, the Arbitral Tribunal would
issue a decision on the Parties’ requests.

In accordance with the procedural timetable, on 11 February 2008 the Claimants
filed a Detailed Submission Supporting their Request for a Supplementary
Decision (the “Claimants’ Submission”).

On 11 March 2008, the Respondent requested an extension for the filing of its
Reply to the Claimants’ Submission. Further, and in light of proceedings relative to

9.-

the Award in Canada, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal reject any
request by Claimants to redact the Award and to order immediately its disclosure.

On 14 March 2008, the Claimants consented to the Respondent’s requested
extension of time to submit a reply, and asked the Tribunal to reject the
Respondent’s request for immediate publication of the Award.

On 25 March 2008, the Respondent filed a ‘Response to the Request of the
Claimant for a Supplementary Decision’ (the “Respondent’s Response”).

On 7 April 2008, the Claimants presented their “Reply to Mexico’s Response to
Claimants’ Request for a Supplementary Decision.’ On 8 April 2008 the
Respondent objected to the admission of this document. On 8 April 2008, the
Tribunal advised the Parties that it would accept the Claimants’ Reply while
allowing the Respondent a right of response. On 21 April 2008, the Respondent
submitted its comments to the Claimants’ Reply.

IL. APPLICABLE RULES

Chapter IX of the AF Rules is entitled ‘The Award’ and consists of six Articles
(Articles 52 to 57). Article 52 sets forth the mandatory requirements of the Award.
Article 53 provides for authentication of the Award and related matters, and Article
54 addresses Applicable Law. There then follow three provisions relating to the
powers of the Tribunal in relation to its award after the award is rendered. There are
three distinct powers: the power to interpret, the power to correct, and the power to
supplement:

Article 55
Interpretation of the Award

(1) Within 45 days after the date of the award either party, with notice to the
other party, may request that the Secretary-General obtain from the
Tribunal an interpretation of the award.

(2) The Tribunal shall determine the procedure to be followed.

(3) The interpretation shall form part of the award, and the provisions of
Articles 52 and 53 of these Rules shall apply.

Article 56
Correction of the Award

(1) Within 45 days after the date of the award either party, with notice to the
other party, may request the Secretary-General to obtain from the Tribunal
a correction in the award of any clerical, arithmetical or similar errors. The

|
|

 

 

Tribunal may within the same period make such corrections on its own
initiative.

(2) The provisions of Articles 52 and 53 of these Rules shall apply to such
corrections.

Article 57
Supplementary Decisions

(1) Within 45 days after the date of the award either party, with notice to the
other party may request the Tribunal, through the Secretary-General, to
decide any question which it had omitted to decide in the award.

(2) The Tribunal shall determine the procedure to be followed.

(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall become part of the award and the
provisions of Articles 52 and 53 of these Rules shall apply thereto.

These three powers address distinct potential defects in the award. The power to
interpret anticipates an interpretative difference arising from the award requiring
clarification. The power to correct addresses ‘clerical, arithmetical or similar
errors’. The power to supplement addresses the omission to decide ‘any question’
in the Award.

The distinction between these three powers is clear at a conceptual level although,
as the present applications demonstrate, the Parties might differ in their perception
of the nature of the power required to remedy an alleged defect. Accordingly, the
Claimants seek to confirm through an interpretation pursuant to Article 55 that the
order in the Award that damages be paid to “the Claimants” means the Claimants
as defined in the Award. The Respondent considers the reference to “the
Claimants” in the order is an error, and accordingly seeks its correction pursuant to
Article 56.

In relation to Article 57, the power to supplement is limited to the situation in
which the Tribunal omitted ‘to decide any question’. Article 57 does not empower
a Tribunal to issue a supplementary decision as a means to consider new evidence,
to hear new arguments, to rehear an issue, or to modify or supplement its original
reasoning. In short, Article 57 does not empower the Arbitral Tribunal to make a
new decision, or to modify its existing decision, or even to supplement the
reasoning of its existing decision. The applicant under Article 57 must clearly
identify a ‘question’ that the award had failed to decide.

The Claimants’ submissions in the present case link the reference to a ‘question’ in
Article 57 to the requirement in Article 52(1)(i) that the Award contains “the
decision of the Tribunal on every question submitted to it.’ ‘Question’ can be

 

 

 

presumed to have the same meaning in both contexts. The meaning of ‘question’,
and particularly the level of abstraction at which a ‘question’ should be conceived,
are matters that the Tribunal is required to address in the present Decision.

14.- Article 52(1)(i) also requires a Tribunal in its Award to provide ‘the reasons upon

which the decision is based’. The Claimants relate the requirement of reasons in
Article 52(1)() to the power to make a supplementary decision in Article 57,
suggesting that a decision on any question and the requirement of reasons are
inextricably linked. This is true in Article 52, but not in Article 57. The Claimants
argue, in effect, that the requirement for reasons for a decision on a question in
Article 52(1)(i) means that a failure to give reasons, or to give sufficient reasons,
ipso facto means the Tribunal has omitted to decide a question. This is not
necessarily so. The Claimants in their original request for a supplementary decision
of 7 January 2008 state:

AF Article 52(1)(i) provides that each award shall contain “the decision of
the Tribunal on every question submitted to it, together with the reasons
upon which the decision is based.” Thus, an Article 57 request is
appropriate if a tribunal “omitted to decide in the award” any question that
a party submitted to it or failed to provide an adequate statement of the
reasons for its decision on a particular question. (emphasis added)

The final part of this statement is a non sequitur. The failure to provide an adequate
statement of reasons does not necessarily mean that the Tribunal has omitted to
decide a question (the only basis of an Article 57 application). Article 57 empowers
the Tribunal to “decide a question which it had omitted to decide in the award,” but
not to modify or supplement its reasoning on a question it did in fact decide.

Additionally, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that the present numbering of Chapter IX
dates from the amendment to the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules that
entered into force on January 1, 2003. Prior to this date the provisions corresponding
to the present Articles 52 to 57 were numbered 53 to 58 respectively. The Tribunal
mentions this point because the Respondent in its application of January 7, 2008
applied pursuant to ‘Article 57(1)’ to ‘correct an error’ (“rectifique un error”)
relating to the payment of damages. The Respondent in its Response makes clear its
reliance on the Decision on the Correction and Interpretation of the Award dated 13
June 2003, rendered in Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican States (Case
No. ARB(AF)/99/1) which involved an application for correction of an error under
Article 57(1) AF Rules in force at that time, but corresponding to the present Article
56(1). Accordingly, the Arbitral Tribunal has considered the substance of the
Respondent’s submission, which is clearly an application for correction pursuant to
Article 56(1), and has treated its reference in its original letter to Article 57(1) as a
typographical error.

If{. THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR INTERPRETATION AND THE RESPONDENT’S

17.-

20.-

REQUEST FOR CORRECTION OF THE AWARD

ADM and TLIA, defined in the Request for Arbitration as “the Claimants”
requested the institution of arbitration proceedings “...under NAFTA Article 1117
on behalf of ALMEX, as well as on their own behalf under Article 1116...” They
thus argued that ADM and TLIA were eligible to contest the Respondent’s tax
measures, “...0n their own behalf and on behalf of their investment, ALMEX,
pursuant to NAFTA Article 1116 and 1117, respectively” (Claimants’ Request for
Arbitration dated 4 August 2004, paragraphs 7 and 20).

The Respondent alleges that payment under the Award should be made to ALMEX
and not to ADM and TLIA, as the Claimants submitted the dispute to arbitration
not only on their own behalf (under Article 1116 of the NAFTA) but on behalf of
ALMEX (pursuant to Article 1117 of the NAFTA). The Respondent contends that
the amounts awarded were calculated on the basis of the damages ALMEX
suffered during the imposition of the Tax, and not damages suffered by ADM and
TLIA in relation to the sale of HFCS in Mexico. The Respondent states that the
damages awarded were necessarily based on Article 1117 NAFTA, and that Article
1135(2)(b) NAFTA requires payment to be made to ALMEX. The Respondent
requests correction of the Award pursuant to Article 56 AF Rules (wrongly
described, as explained above, as Article 57).

The Claimants consider that as “the Claimants” in the arbitration were defined in
Section I of the Award, paragraph 6, as ADM and TLIA, payment should be made
to ADM and TLIA —under Article 1116 of the NAFTA-— and not to ALMEX under
Article 1117. They request an interpretation of the Award under Article 55 of the
AF Rules, confirming the Tribunal’s order in items 4 and 5 of paragraph 304 to
make payment to “the Claimants” under Article 1116, and not to ALMEX under
Article 1117 of the NAFTA.

Articles 1116 and 1117 of the NAFTA were designed to broaden the standing of
private individuals against the Member States, in relation to breaches of by the host
State of its obligations of Chapter XI. In particular, Article 1116 allows an investor
to bring a claim on its own behalf, and the focus of Article 1116 is on the loss or
damage suffered by the investor as a result of a breach of Chapter XI by the host
State. Article 1117, on the other hand, allows the same investor to bring its claim
on behalf of an enterprise that the investor owns or controls, where the enterprise
has suffered loss or damage as a result of a breach of Chapter XI by the host State.
In claims brought under Article 1117, the focus is on the damage suffered directly
by the enterprise.

21.-

22.-

23.-

24.-

Accordingly, the structure of NAFTA Chapter XI anticipates that an investor might
seek damages both for losses it suffered as well as for losses suffered by an
enterprise owned by the investor. The two separate bases for claims in Articles
1116 and 1117 do not justify two arbitrations or double recovery for the same loss.
If the investor claims damages for its own losses and the losses of the enterprise in
separate arbitrations, then Article 1117(3) creates a presumption that the
arbitrations should be consolidated in accordance with NAFTA Article 1126. If the
loss claimed under Article 1116 is the same as the loss claimed under Article 1117
then there is a single measure of compensation. This is not contested in the present
case; what is in question is to whom the damages should be paid, the investor
under Article 1116 or the enterprise under Article 1117.

Article 1135(2)(b) provides that if the damages are awarded pursuant to Article
1117 then the damages must be paid to the enterprise. The Claimants in their
pleadings did not distinguish between Article 1116 and Article 1117 in claiming
damages for ALMEX’s lost profits. However, the methodology proposed by the
Claimants concentrated on the loss of profits suffered by ALMEX, and not the loss
or damage to the Claimants. The inquiry was as to the direct loss suffered by the
enterprise in the terms of Article 1117, and not the loss indirectly suffered by the
investors pursuant to Article 1116 by measuring the decline in value of their
investment.

Accordingly, the damages awarded by the Arbitral Tribunal in the Award,
following the approach first proposed by the Claimants and accepted by the
Respondent, measured damages in accordance with Article 1117. As mentioned,
Article 1135(2)(b) requires these damages to be paid to the enterprise, that is
ALMEX. The dispositive section of the Award therefore contains a clerical or
similar error in failing to distinguish the successful party making the claim (that is,
the Claimants) from the proper recipient of the damages in accordance with the
mandatory provisions of NAFTA. On this basis, the Tribunal accepts the
application by the Respondent for a correction to the Award pursuant to Article 56
AF Rules, and rejects the Claimants’ application for interpretation pursuant to
Article 55 AF Rules.

Accordingly, in subparagraphs 4 and 5 of the dispositive part of the Award
(paragraph 304) the expression “ the Claimants” shall be deleted and substituted by
the word “ALMEX”. These subparagraphs shall therefore read as follows:

4. Orders the Respondent to pay to ALMEX the sum of US333,510,091 dollars
(Thirty Three Million Five Hundred and Ten Thousand and Ninety One
dollars of the United States of America) as principal;

J. Orders the Respondent to pay to ALMEX interest on the sum referred to in
paragraph 4 above, for each month of the period from the date the damage

 

 

25.-

26.-

27.-

28.-

was calculated (December 31, 2005, and for the damages claimed for 2006
as from the end of such year), until the payment is effectively made, at a
rate equivalent to the yield for the month, at the simple interest rate paid on
U.S Treasury Bills;

IV. THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUESTS FOR SUPPLEMENTARY DECISIONS
The Claimants submit that the Award requires supplementation in respect to:

(a) its determination of ALMEX’s lost profits. In particular, the Claimants state
that the Tribunal failed to reach a reasoned decision regarding their damages
calculation, as the Award fails to: (i) accurately and adequately summarize and
weigh the evidence offered by each party; (ii) decide every question after the
weighing process; and (iii) provide a statement of the reasons upon which it is
based;

(b) its determination that the Claimants are not entitled to recover lost profits on
U.S.-origin high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) that the Claimants distributed
using their investment in distribution facilities in Mexico; and

(c) its determination that the Claimants are not entitled to recover compound
interest on the lost profits award.

The Respondent argues that through their request for supplementary decisions the
Claimants intend to reargue their claim for damages, requesting the Tribunal to
reconsider the factual and legal questions of the case fully dealt with in the Award,
and requesting the Tribunal to reach in a supplementary decision different
conclusions as to the amounts of damages granted to the Claimants. The
Respondent contends that the scope of the Claimants’ requests is beyond the
authority of Article 57 and that the Tribunal would be acting in excess of its
powers if it acted as the Claimants requested.

The Respondent considers that the Tribunal rendered a reasonable award, based on
all evidence provided by the Parties and preferring the conclusions of the
Respondent’s expert reports as reasonable and more realistic. The Respondent
alleges that it was Claimants’ burden to prove their alleged quantum of damages,
which they did not. Therefore, the Award is sufficiently reasoned by determining
that the Respondent’s evaluation on the loss of profits was more realistic.

The Respondent also states that by rejecting the decision of the Tribunal that it
does not have jurisdiction to award damages to the Claimants (rather than
ALMEX) in connection with HFCS manufactured in the United States, the
Claimants are asking the Tribunal to revise legal determinations of the Award. The

29.-

30.-

suggestion that there are factual issues that were not resolved in the Award, which
would have otherwise resulted in a different conclusion by the Arbitral Tribunal,
has no grounds whatsoever.

As regards the Tribunal’s decision on interest, the Respondent contends that there
is no legal basis to justify the Claimants’ request for additional reasoning.

Having considered the Parties’ submissions, and after deliberation among the
members of the Tribunal, the Tribunal unanimously decides that the Claimants’
requests for supplementary decisions must be denied, for the reasons explained
below.

The Determination of ALMEX’s lost profits:

The Claimants’ submissions relate to three inputs or variables relevant to the
calculation of ALMEX’s damages. The Claimants state (paragraphs 13-16 of the
Claimants’ Submission dated February 11, 2008, footnotes omitted):

lost
ion

13. Mr. Maniatis determined that Almex suffered (aa)
profits during the agreed upon 2002-2006 damages p
estimated Almex’s lost profit damages at a maximum 9;

during this five year 5 The Tribunal accepted Mr. Rion’s

     

calculation

14. At issue between the parties, and critical to the outcome of the
damages analysis, were three of the key inputs into that model.

   

15. In adopting Mr. Ridn’s damages calculation, the Tribunal
necessarily adopted each of Mr. Rién’s three input values. However,
as to each of Mr. Rién’s inputs, the Award omits: an accurate and
complete statement of the Claimants’ evidence and arguments;
reasoned findings of fact in light of that evidence; and an adequate
and complete statement of reasons for the conclusions that
necessarily depended on those findings of fact...

16. Claimants believe that, upon conducting the required supplementary
analysis, the Tribunal will conclude that it cannot maintain its prior
adoption of the three Ridn input values identified above. In that
event, the Tribunal will need to issue reasoned factual findings and a
new statement of its reasons as to the damages properly awardable
to Claimants.

 

32.-

33.-

34.-

The Tribunal notes that the Claimants’ submission does not precisely identify the
questions that the Tribunal has omitted to decide within the meaning of Article 57.
The Claimants conflate Article 52 and 57 in the manner referred to earlier, and in
fact seek further reasons under the guise of an application for a supplementary
decision.

The indeterminacy of the term ‘question’ in Article 57 (and Article 52) encourages
argumentation based upon the adequacy of the degree of abstraction that a tribunal
chooses to express its reasoning. In the present case, if the ‘question’ was the
calculation of damages to which ALMEX was entitled then, as the Claimants
acknowledge, this question was decided in the Award. If, at the other extreme, the
‘questions’ to be decided in this case were the precise mathematical weight to be
accorded to every factor affecting the calculation of damages, then few awards
would be immune from allegations of infra petita.

The Respondent referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court of British
Columbia in United Mexican States v. Metalclad Corporation (2001 B.C.S.C. 664)
that distinguishes (in the context of what is now Article 52(1)(i)) a ‘question’ or a
‘basic issue’ from an ‘argument’ submitted to the arbitral tribunal. The Court
stated that ‘every question’ submitted to the tribunal was not synonymous with
‘every argument which could have changed the outcome of the award’, and
continued:

[122] The Tribunal must answer the questions that have been submitted to
it and give its reasons for its answers. In other words, the tribunal must
deal fully with the dispute between the parties and give reasons for its
decision. It is not reasonable to require the tribunal to answer each and
every argument which is made in connection with the questions which the
tribunal must decide.

The questions cumulatively describe the dispute, and the subject matter of the
decision, and might require consideration of a range of lesser issues. The
obligation of the Tribunal under Article 52 is to decide the questions, and to
provide the reasons for its decisions, and although this task may require the
Tribunal to evaluate many lesser issues, there is no obligation for the tribunal to
exhaustively enumerate them in the Award and decide and reason each
individually. The distinction between a ‘question’ or ‘basic issue’ and a ‘lesser
issue’ (argument, point, proof, or submission) might be of degree rather than kind,
and might itself be contested, but the distinction does exist, is presumed by the
drafting of Articles 52 and 57, and is fundamental to the efficiency and finality of
arbitral proceedings. Indeed, the coherence of the expression of a tribunal’s
reasons for its decision could be fatally injured by a formalistic atomisation of
reasoning so that any argument or piece of testimony that might have some effect
on the outcome of the arbitration has to be dealt with individually.

35.-

37.-

38.-

39.-

The identification of the questions for decision cannot be divorced from the
instrument on which the arbitration is based, and the nature of the Tribunal’s
inquiry arising from the pleadings and evidence. The present application concerns
an inquiry into damages pursuant to NAFTA and therefore the applicable rules of
international law (Article 1131(1) NAFTA). The legal principles applicable to the
calculation of damages are considered in paragraphs 275 to 286 of the Award. The
Tribunal noted its discretion in establishing the methodology to determine damages
(Award, paragraph 279). In light of the Claimants’ submissions, it is useful to
elaborate on the nature of the discretion of an arbitral tribunal in the determination
of damages, and its exercise in the present case.

The discretion of an arbitral tribunal in the calculation of damages arises from the
uncertainty of the inquiry into lost profits. Many tribunals have emphasised that
the assessment of damages for lost profits is not a precise science. In the present
arbitration the determination of lost profits involved an inquiry with a
counterfactual premise, namely the consideration of the profits that would have
been made if an illegal act -which did in fact occur- had not occurred. This
uncertainty may be reduced or exacerbated, depending on the convergence or
divergence of the expert evidence of the Parties.

There are recognised principles to guide the arbitral tribunal in the exercise of its
discretion. These principles do not eliminate the uncertainty inherent in the
inquiry, or produce a mathematical exactness where this is not possible. However,
they guide the arbitral tribunal in the exercise of its discretion so as to ensure that
the process for the determination of damages is fair and reasonable for both parties.

Firstly, the claimant has the burden of proving the quantum of damages.
Nevertheless, the failure of a claimant to prove its damages with certainty, or to
establish its right to the full damages claimed, does not relieve the tribunal of its
duty to assess damages as best it can on the evidence available, as“...it is well
settled that the fact that damages cannot be assessed with certainty is no reason
not to award damages when a loss has been incurred.’’ (Southern Pacific
Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No.
ARB/84/3), Award, 20 May 1992, (1993) 32 LL.M. 933-1038 at paragraph 215).

Secondly, the tribunal must avoid speculative benefits in its damages calculation.
This principle is sometimes expressed as a limitation imposed by causation or
remoteness of damages (Award, paragraph 282 and 285). The avoidance of
speculative benefits has been a particular concern in relation to the Discounted
Cash Flow (“DCF”) methodology. For example, in Amoco International Finance
Corp. v. Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran-US Claims Tribunal,
Award N° 310-56-3, 14 July 1987) the Tribunal commented:

 

40.-

4l-

244. In the words of the Claimant's expert, ‘there necessarily will be room
for some variations in detail and the exercise of expert judgment in
applying the [DCF] analysis in a specific instance.’ It appears that ‘the
exercise of expert judgment’ is at a peak for the determination of the
adjustment of the reference discount rate. With all respect for the
undoubted experience of such a distinguished expert, it remains true that
expert judgement means subjective judgment...

245. In addition, some comment is appropriate concerning the Claimant's
general approach to evaluation of specific risks. Not all of these risks relate
only to economics and, in the words of one of the Claimant’s experts, the
assessment of some of them was given by him ‘just as a common-sense
layman’

Similarly in Himpurna Cal. Energy Ltd. v. PT. (Persero) Perusahaan Listruik
Negara, Final Award of 4 May 1999, 25 Yearbook Commercial Arbitration 13
(2000), the Tribunal states (at paragraphs 375-376):

The present Arbitral Tribunal wishes to be transparent in both its reasoning
and its computations, fully recognising the limitations of an exercise where
risks, costs, and revenues are conjectural, controversial, and imperfectly
synchronised. The Arbitral Tribunal has followed three lodestars: (i) the
DCF method is adopted in accordance with the understanding articulated
above...(ii) the claimant must bear the burden of demonstrating the validity
of its hypotheses; (iii) the infirmities perceived by the Arbitral Tribunal with
respect to those hypotheses have resulted in a recomputation which the
arbitrators fully realise is imprecise, but which seeks to avoid arbitrariness
by compelling a thorough consideration of all relevant factors, all the while
being conscious of erring, whenever imprecision is inevitable, in favour of
PLN. Thus doubts have been resolved equitably in favour of the debtor.

There is no reason to apologise for the fact that this approach involves
approximations; they are inherent and inevitable. Nor can it be criticised as
unrealistic or unbusiness like; it is precisely how business executives must,
and do, proceed when they evaluate a going concern. The fact that they use
ranges and estimates does not imply abandonment of the discipline of
economic analysis; nor, when adopted by the arbitrators, does this method
imply abandonment of the discipline of assessing the evidence before
them. (emphasis added)

Third, and as recognised in the foregoing quotation, an arbitral tribunal should not
seek a mathematical exactness where this is not possible. The experts may propose
more than one methodology. The variables within the methodology may require
subjective judgement. The subjective judgment, even if an expert, may be of a
range rather than an exact figure for a particular variable. Experts might differ
widely in the ranges proposed. The tribunal must be guided by the expert
evidence, but the decision remains with the tribunal. The tribunal may, within its
discretion, form on overall impression rather than assign a precise value to specific
variables.

42.-

43.-

Tribunals have adopted different approaches when faced with the problem of
applying a particular methodology, perhaps requiring complex calculations, to their
own variables. In Phillips Petroleum Co. Iran v. Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Award No. 425-39-2 (29 June 1989) the Iran-US Claims Tribunal
(at paragraph 114) stated that “the Tribunal does not intend to make its own DCF
analysis with revised components, but rather to determine and identify the extent to
which it agrees or disagrees with the estimates of both Parties and their experts
concerning all these elements of valuation” and that in particular it would not
‘substitute the claimant’s discount rate with its own’. If the arbitral tribunal cannot
accept the variables proposed by the parties then the question is whether there is
sufficient evidence on which to base an estimate of damages, evaluating the
evidence in its totality and notwithstanding the doubts relating to specific
variables.

The Claimants’ analysis of the Award in its application for a supplementary
decision often assumes a mathematical exactness at odds with the reality of the
inquiry, and the above principles. In particular the Claimants assume that because
the Tribunal adopted a damages figure proposed by Mr. Pablo Rién, the Tribunal
therefore accepted all variables proposed by Mr. Ridn in reaching this figure. The
statement (paragraph 31 above) that “Jn adopting Mr. Rién’s damages calculation
the Tribunal necessarily adopted each of Mr. Rién’s three input values” is
fallacious as it assumes a mathematical calculation without any discretion. The
Tribunal accepted Mr. Rién’s variables only to the extent expressly so stated in the
Award.

   

However, the precise quantification of these variables was not a question for
decision within the meaning of Article 57 because of the discretionary nature of
the damages inquiry, as already described. The quantification of these variables
was not a question that the Tribunal was obliged to decide. Rather these variables
were considered by the Tribunal in deciding questions relating to the calculation of
the Claimants’ damages, the burden of proof, the reliability of the proposed
methodology, the avoidance of speculative damages, and the proper exercise of its
discretion.

45.-

46.-

47.-

48

For these reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that the Claimants have not
identified any questions that the Arbitral Tribunal omitted to decide within the
meaning of Article 57. Accordingly, the application for a supplementary decision
is dismissed.

Nevertheless, and in light of the Claimants’ extensive submissions on this matter,
the Arbitral Tribunal makes the following observations. The Claimants maintained
throughout the arbitration the correctness of its evidence on three variables. The
Arbitral Tribunal considered the probative value of the Claimants’ evidence (cf.
Article 41 AF Rules) and found, as stated in the Award, that it did not substantiate
the variables proposed. Once it rejected the Claimants’ calculation, the Tribunal
did not attempt to assign a precise figure for each of these variables. The Tribunal
formed an impression of these variables based on the range of possibilities
presented and the totality of the evidence. Indeed, a feature of the expert evidence
of Mr. Pablo Rién was his resistance to assigning a precise value to counterfactual
variables that involved judgment, not measurement (“some of these things are not
entirely precise” (Transcript, 944)), and might be best conceived in terms of a
range rather than a single figure (Award, paragraph 267; Transcript 913, 948).

The Tribunal was impressed by the uncertainties attached to much of the evidence
affecting these three variables, and particularly by the Respondent’s important and

    

 

The Tribunal preferred Mr. Rion’s assessment of the variables affecting the
assessment of lost profits, notwithstanding his admitted imprecision and ranges of
figures, to the Claimants’ speculative claims. The Tribunal was not obliged to
perform its own calculation using exact variables where the testimony so clearly
demonstrated that precision was illusory, and still less to look for some ‘middle
way’ between the positions of the Parties’ experts. In the exercise of its discretion,
and recognising Mr. Ridn’s own reservations regarding certain elements of his
calculation, the Tribunal was nevertheless satisfied that he had made a careful and
expert assessment of these variables. The Tribunal must, in the final analysis,
award an exact figure even if it considers that the damages would be better

14

 

49.-

6)

50.-

51.-

52.-

53.-

conceived as a range of probabilities, and the Tribunal decided that the most
justified single figure on the evidence for the profits that might reasonably have
been anticipated in the absence of the Tax, and therefore the amount reasonably
required to compensate for Mexico’s breach of NAFTA, was US$ 33,510,091.

For all the above reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal denies the Claimants’ request for a
supplementary decision with respect to the determination of ALMEX’s lost profits.

Lost Profits on U.S.-origin HFCS:

The Claimants contend that the Award contains material omissions and factual
errors in its determination that the Claimants (rather than ALMEX) are not entitled
to recover lost profits on U.S.-origin HFCS that ALMEX distributed using the
Claimants’ investment in distribution facilities in Mexico. In particular, the
Claimants allege that the quotations from other awards referred to in the Award do
not support the Tribunal’s jurisdictional decision regarding U.S.-origin HFCS.
Furthermore, the Claimants consider that the Award omitted reasons for
disregarding the fact that the value of the investment included its value in allowing
the Claimants to distribute U.S.-origin HFCS in Mexico.

The Respondent contends that the Claimants seek to reargue the merits of the case
regarding the Tribunal’s determination as to its lack of jurisdiction to award
damages in connection with HFCS originating from the Claimants’ plants in the
United States. The Claimants seek in reality to reverse the Tribunal’s decision on a
question of law.

The Claimants suggest various ‘questions’ that the Tribunal failed to decide which
in fact are points relating to the evidence or the interpretation of other NAFTA
awards. The question considered in paragraphs 270-274 of the Award was whether
the Claimants ADM ad TLIA could recover the lost profits on the HFCS that they
would have produced in the United States and sold in Mexico ‘but for’ the Tax.
The Award addressed and decided this question in the negative, and clearly
explained its reasons. When the Claimants manufactured HFCS in the United
States for sale in Mexico, the investment of the Claimants responsible for
generating the profits is the investment in plant and other facilities in the United
States. These losses did not relate to an investment in Mexican territory, and
therefore the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction over these alleged losses.

The Claimants’ Submission (paragraphs 79-82) raises various points relating to the
position of the Member States in S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada and
Bayview Irrigation District, et al. vs. the United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB (AF)/05/01). The Claimants complain of the lack of explanation of the

15

54.-

55.-

©
56.-

57.-

factual differences of these cases with the facts in issue in this arbitration. The
Claimants’ Submission misunderstands the scope of a supplementary decision
under Article 57, and demonstrates the dangers of attempting to justify a
supplementary decision on the basis of allegedly inadequate reasoning. An
application under Article 57 requires the Tribunal to be satisfied that there is in fact
a question that the Tribunal has omitted to decide, and to proceed to modify an
award on the basis proposed by the Claimants would call into question the finality
of awards and undermine the juridical security of investment arbitration.

The Claimants also refer to their investment in ALMEX’s Mexican distribution
facilities as a justification for their right to recover lost profits on US manufactured
fructose that would have been distributed through these facilities. The Claimants
here confuse the losses of their investment in Mexico (ALMEX) with their losses
from their U.S. operations. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to award compensation
for losses of the Claimants in respect of their investment in Mexico in their
capacity as investors (paragraph 274). Therefore the award of damages includes
the lost profits suffered by ALMEX arising from: (i) the sale and distribution of
HFCS manufactured by ALMEX in Mexico; and (ii) the resale and distribution by
ALMEX of HFCS produced in the United States. However, the damages do not
include the profits ADM and TLIA would have earned from HFCS manufactured
in the United States and subsequently exported to Mexico for resale by ALMEX.

For all the above reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal denies the Claimants’ request for a
supplementary decision with respect to the Award’s jurisdictional decision
concerning lost profits on U.S. origin HFCS.

Interest:

The Claimants further contend that the Award fails to address key questions in its
determination that Claimants were not entitled to recover compound interest on the
damages for their lost profits. In particular, the Claimants complain that “the
Award omits to state reasons...for the implicit determination that a simple interest
rate is commercially reasonable....”. Later in the same paragraph the Claimants
refer to their opinion that “to Claimants knowledge, no commercial investment
vehicles offer simple interest” (paragraph 88, emphasis original).

In this section of the Award (paragraphs 294-300) the Tribunal considered the
questions of whether interest should be awarded, the applicable rate of interest,
whether the interest should be simple or compound, and the period of interest.
These questions were all decided in the Award, and the reasons for the decisions
explained.

58.-

59.-

60.-

61-

62.-

The Claimants are not satisfied with the Tribunal’s decision, or at least the
explanation of its decision, to award simple rather than compound interest.
However, as explained, it is not a proper use of Article 57 to seek additional
reasons for a question that was decided in the Award. Indeed, considered in its
totality the Claimants’ submission on this question lacks all merit. Its premise is to
ignore the express wording of Article 57 and to read Article 57 to require reasons,
then to analyse the Tribunal’s reasons to identify a doubt, then to present this doubt
either as a question not decided or a decision not reasoned. At best, the
methodology demonstrates the scale of the Claimants’ misapprehension of the
Article 57 power. Its possible consequence in costs is considered later.

The Tribunal awarded simple interest and rejected the claim for compound interest,
and gave its reasons for this decision. There is no outstanding question and
accordingly the Claimants’ request for a supplementary decision on this ground is
also rejected.

V. DISCLOSURE OF AWARD

The Respondent requests the Tribunal to reject any request by Claimants to redact
the Award and to order immediately its publication, as the Claimants have initiated
annulment proceedings before the Superior Court of Ontario, which are open to the
public. The Claimants allege that through the application to set aside a part of the
Award, they have not indirectly publicized certain confidential information; and if
the Claimants decide to continue with the proceedings in Canada they will seek a
procedural order of the court to protect any confidential information contained in
the record, or seek an agreement with Mexico, prior to filing any evidence which
may compromise any confidential information addressed in the Award.

On 24 January 2006, the Parties advised the Tribunal that they had agreed on the
terms of an order to protect confidential information in this arbitration and
requested the Tribunal to issue an order recording the Parties’ agreement. On 21
July 2006, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 ‘Concerning Confidential
Information’ formalising the Parties agreement in an order of the Tribunal.

The Claimants’ application to the Superior Court of Ontario, and the material
provided to date in support of its application, has not been shown to require the
disclosure of the Award or otherwise to breach the terms of the Parties’ agreement
as recorded in Procedural Order N° 1. Nor has the Respondent demonstrated any
inevitable disclosure of confidential information. Further, the Superior Court of
Ontario has the power to decide in the annulment proceedings the degree of
protection or disclosure of confidential information required according to the law
of Ontario, and will no doubt take into consideration the Parties’ agreement and
any further submissions on this issue. Finally, the possibility of some disclosure in

17

 

63.-

64.-

65.-

66.-

67.-

the Ontario proceedings, even if established, does not necessarily justify the
complete and immediate publication of the Award as sought by the Respondent.

For these reasons, the Respondent’s application to reject any request by Claimants
to redact the Award and to order immediately its publication is rejected.

V. Costs

The Respondent’s Response requests that the Claimants “be ordered to pay the
expenses and costs incurred by Mexico for the preparation of this brief, in addition
to paying the fees of the tribunal.” In its letter of 3 April 2008 the Respondent
quantified its costs for February and March 2008 at US$54,753.00. This figure
includes only the costs of external advisers, and not the costs incurred by the
Secretaria de Economia internally.

The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to make a decision as to the costs of these
post-Award applications. Decisions pursuant to Articles 55, 56 and 57 AF Rules
are subject to the provisions of Articles 52 and 53 and form part of the original
award. Article 52(1)(j) states that the Award shall contain any decision of the
Tribunal regarding the cost of the proceeding, and the content of this decision and
related powers is further elaborated in Article 58.

The Claimants requests for supplementary decisions have proved to be without
foundation and have been rejected in their entirety. The Claimants’ application for
an interpretation has also been rejected, and the Respondent’s application for a
correction to the Award has been accepted. The Respondent’s application relating
to the disclosure of the Award was rejected, but this application has formed a small
part of the overall submissions. In light of the above, it is evident that the
Respondent is the successful party in relation to these post-Award applications.

The Claimants have sought to use Article 57 AF Rules to open and re-argue
questions that were decided in the Award. Without any foundation in the text of
Article 57, the Claimants have argued that Article 57 justifies an application for
further reasons. The Claimants’ many allegations of the Tribunal’s failure
adequately to reason its decisions have formed the most significant and time
consuming element of these post-Award applications. In many instances the
Claimants’ real complaint has appeared to be that the Tribunal did not accept its
evidence at the hearing. The Respondent has been required to respond in detail to
unjustified and on occasion reckless argumentation of the Claimants. The
Respondent has incurred substantial costs and in the circumstances a costs order in
its favour is justified.

18

68.-

69.-

Accordingly, the Claimants shall pay the fees and expenses of the members of the
Arbitral Tribunal and the expenses and charges of the Secretariat in relation to
these post-Award proceedings. The Respondent is also entitled to recover certain
legal costs associated with responding to the Claimants’ applications for
supplementary decisions. The Tribunal considers that the external legal costs
associated with the preparation of the Respondent’s Response amounting to
US$54,753.00 is a reasonable figure for this item.

VI. DECISION
For the foregoing reasons, this Arbitral Tribunal hereby:
1. Dismisses the Claimants’ requests to supplement the Award;

2. Allows the Respondent’s request for the correction of the Award, and orders by
way of correction pursuant to Article 56 AF Rules that in subparagraphs 4 and 5 of
the dispositive part of the Award (paragraph 304) the word “Claimants” shall be
deleted and replaced by the name “ALMEX”.

3. Dismisses the Claimants’ request for the interpretation of the Award;

4, Dismisses the Respondent’s request in respect of redaction and disclosure of the
Award.

5. Orders that the Claimants shall pay the fees and expenses of the members of the
Arbitral Tribunal and the expenses and charges of the Secretariat in relation to
these post-Award proceedings, and shall pay to the Respondent the sum of
US$54,753.00 (FIFTY-FOUR THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY THREE UNITED
STATES DOLLARS) in respect of its legal costs.

Made as at Toronto, Canada, in English and Spanish, both versions being equally
authentic.

 

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
[signature] [signature] {signature}
Mr. Arthur W. Rovine Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades — Mr. Eduardo Siqueiros
Arbitrator Presiding Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 17 June 2008: Date: 9 June 2008 Date: 12 June 2008

20

