INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
AS PNB BANKA AND OTHERS

Claimants

and

REPUBLIC OF LATVIA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/17/47

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSALS TO DISQUALIFY MESSRS. JAMES SPIGELMAN,
PETER TOMKA AND JOHN M. TOWNSEND

 

Chair of the Administrative Council
Mr. David Malpass

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Francisco Abriani

Date of dispatch: June 16, 2020

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. THE PARTIES 1

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1

Ill. BACKGROUND 12
A. Former Managers’ Alleged Right to Propose the Disqualification of the Members of

the Tribunal 12

(1) Former M ? Ar 12

(2) Shareholder Claimants’ Ar; 16

(3) Respondent’s Arguments 18

(4) Administrator’s Argument .0..... cece eens cece eeeeseeeseeaeseeeesesessesassieetseeeneeenees 20

B. Former Managers’ Alleged Right to Access the File .........c.cccccsesesseseeseseeteseeesnenees 20

(1) Former M ? Ar 20

(2) Respondent’s Arguments 21

(3) Administrator’s Argument ..........cccccccccccesestsseeseseeseseeseseeseseesesnesesnessatesesnensaeneas 21

C. Former Managers’ and Shareholder Claimants’ Disqualification Proposals............... 21

(1) Former M ? Ar 21

(2) Shareholder Claimants’ Ar; 26

a. Merits of the Shareholder Claimants’ application.........0.0.0cccec eee 26

(i) Due process violation: 27

(ii) Transparency Violations 0.0.0.0... cece eee ee ee este ee eeeeeseseeseeteteteteneeeteeees 30

(iii)Prejudgment violation 31

(iv) Tribunal’s reaction to the disqualification proposals ...........0ccce eee 33

b. Mr. Behrends’ Further Proposal for Disqualification «0.0.0.0... 33

(3) Respondent’s Arguments 33

a. Admissibility 33

b. The Legal Standard 35

c. Shareholder Claimants’ Disqualification Proposal ...........0.0cceeeeeeeee 36

d. Mr. Behrends’ Disqualification Proposal ...........cccceeeeeeseeeeeee cette 4l

(4) Administrator’s Argument ..........ccccccccccccseseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesesneseaeensatessaeesesenees 42

(5) Tribunal’s Observations 44

IV. ANALYSIS 44

 

 

(1) Former Managers’ Disqualification Proposal...

a. The Requirements to Propose the Disqualification of Tribunal Members.... 44

 

b. The Power to Decide on the Representation of the Bank.

c. The Scope of the Tribunal’s Decision on the Representation of the Bank ... 47

 

 

 

d. Conclusion 49

(2) Former Managers’ Request to Access the File .........c.ccccccssesssseeseseetesteeseeesnenees 50
(3) Shareholder Claimants’ Disqualification Proposal ...........:0c:scsesesseseeeseeeeeeiees 50
a. The Applicable Legal Standard ...........cccccce eee ee neneeneeetceteneeeeeeeees 50

b. The Disqualification Proposal 0.0.0.0... cece eee eeeeseseeeseeteeeteteeeneneeneneee 52

(i) Due process allegations 20.0.0... eee eee es cece teeeeeeeeseeeeeseeteteteteneeeeees 52

(ii) Transparency allegations... cece eee ee cece ee eeeeeeeseeeeeeteteteneteneeees 55
(iii)Prejudgment allegation 60
(iv) Tribunal’s observations on the disqualification proposals ............0eee 61

(v) Other arguments 6l

VY. DECISION 65

 

THE PARTIES

The Claimants are AS PNB Banka (formerly AS Norvik Banka) (the “Bank’”), Mr. Grigory
Guselnikov, Mrs. Yulia Guselnikova, Mr. Alexander Guselnikov, Miss Aglaya
Guselnikova and Master Pyotr Guselnikov (collectively referred to as the “Claimants”).
The Bank is a joint stock company incorporated under the laws of Latvia, whereas
Mr. Grigory Guselnikov, Mrs. Yulia Guselnikova, Mr. Alexander Guselnikov, Miss

Aglaya Guselnikova and Master Pyotr Guselnikov are nationals of the United Kingdom.
The Respondent is the Republic of Latvia.

The Claimants and the Respondent shall be referred to together as the “parties”.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On December 14, 2017, the Claimants submitted their Request for Arbitration to the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes in accordance with the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of

Other States, dated March 18, 1965 (“ICSID Convention”).

On December 28, 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the RFA in accordance
with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the parties of the registration.

On July 5, 2018, a Tribunal composed of James Spigelman, President, appointed by
agreement of the parties; Stanimir Alexandrov, Arbitrator, appointed by the Claimants; and
Peter Tomka, Arbitrator, appointed by the Respondent, was constituted. Francisco Abriani,
Legal Counsel, ICSID, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. Professor
Alexandrov subsequently resigned on September 26, 2018 and was replaced by John M.
Townsend on September 29, 2018, appointed by the Claimants in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 11(1).

On August 14, 2018, the Respondent filed a Request for Bifurcation.

On August 24, 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1. The schedule for

submissions was later modified by the reconstituted Tribunal on October 2, 2018.

On September 29, 2018, the Tribunal was reconstituted. The Tribunal is composed of The
Honorable James Spigelman QC, a national of Australia, President, appointed by
agreement of the parties; Mr. John M. Townsend, a US national, appointed by the
Claimants; and H.E. Judge Peter Tomka, a national of Slovakia, appointed by the

Respondent.

On October 10, 2018, the Claimants filed their Response to the Request for Bifurcation.

On November 16, 2018, the Respondent submitted its Reply on Bifurcation.

On December 3, 2018, the Claimants submitted their Rejoinder on Bifurcation.

From December 12 to 14, 2018, the Tribunal held a hearing on the application for
provisional measures, bifurcation and the disqualification of the Respondent’s counsel in

The Hague.

On January 31, 2019, the parties filed their respective post-hearing briefs on Bifurcation.

On March 1, 2019, the Tribunal rendered its Decision on the Request for Bifurcation,

deciding as follows:

Now, therefore, the Tribunal:

(i) decides to bifurcate the proceedings and deal with the Respondent’s
objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction based on the alleged unavailability
of the investor-State arbitration mechanism under the UK-Latvia BIT as a
preliminary matter;

(ii) asks that the Parties confer and attempt to reach agreement on the dates on
which the above submissions will be made;

(iii) directs the Parties to submit agreed dates to the Tribunal within two weeks
of the date of this Decision and if the Parties are unable to reach agreement
on such dates, each side should submit proposed dates by the same time.

20.

21.

22.

On March 15, 2019, the Respondent provided its proposed dates to brief the bifurcated
issue to the Tribunal and requested the suspension of the proceeding on the merits pursuant

to the ICSID Arbitration Rules, including Rule 41(3).

On March 16, 2019, the Claimants confirmed the parties’ agreement on a schedule for
submissions on the bifurcated issue and their intention to submit their Memorial on the
Merits on May 17, 2019. The Claimants also requested that the Tribunal reject the
Respondent’s request for suspension of the proceeding under ICSID Arbitration Rule

41(3).
On March 21, 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, ordering as follows:

(i) The schedule for submissions on the bifurcated issue, as agreed by the
parties, is confirmed. [...]

(iv) The Claimants shall file their Memorial on the Merits by Friday 17 May
2019.

(v) The Tribunal defers any decision on the application to suspend the
proceeding on the merits for the period following the filing of the
Memorial on the Merits by the Claimants.

On May 19, 2019, the Respondent submitted its Memorial on the Bifurcated Objection.
On May 22, 2019, the Claimants submitted their Memorial on the Merits.

On May 30, 2019, the Claimants filed an application requesting that the Tribunal reverse
its Decision on Bifurcation and join the Respondent’s EU Law Objection to the merits

(“Application to Reconsider Bifurcation’).

After the parties’ respective submissions on the Application to Reconsider Bifurcation, the
Tribunal issued its Decision on the Claimants’ Application on July 2, 2019, deciding to
maintain its “decision to address as a preliminary matter the Respondent’s objection to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction based on the alleged unavailability of the investor-State arbitration
mechanism under the UK-Latvia BIT.” The Tribunal also confirmed that it would hold a

hearing on the bifurcated issue on September 19-21, 2019.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

On July 29, 2019, the Claimants filed their Counter-Memorial on the Bifurcated Objection.
On August 19, 2019, the Respondent submitted its Reply on the Bifurcated Objection.

On September 4, 2019, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal suspend the proceeding
on the merits while the decision on the bifurcated issue was pending. By letter of the same

date, the Claimants requested that the Tribunal reject the Respondent’s request.

On September 9, 2019, the Claimants submitted their Rejoinder on the Bifurcated

Objection.

On September 10, 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6 on the Respondent’s

second request to suspend the proceeding on the merits, ordering the suspension.

On September 18, 2019, the Respondent submitted a translated copy of the judgement of
the Riga City Vidzeme District Court of September 12, 2019 (the “Insolvency
Judgement’). In its letter accompanying the judgment, the Respondent informed the
Tribunal “that on 12 September 2019, the [District Court] declared AS PNB Banka
insolvent and appointed an insolvency administrator.” In the Insolvency Judgment, Mr.
Vigo Krastin’ was identified as the appointed Administrator of the insolvency proceedings

of the Bank (the “Administrator”).
The Hearing on the Bifurcated Objection was held in Paris on September 19 and 20, 2019.

On September 23, 2019, the Tribunal gave directions to the parties for their Post-Hearing

briefs and invited them to agree on a schedule for submissions.

On October 22, 2019, Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan, the then representative of all

the Claimants, requested that Mr. Krastins be added to the distribution list as “a courtesy”.

By email of December 9, 2019, Mr. KrastinS requested access to the case materials and
informed that the power of attorney of Maris Vainovskis, a former counsel for the

Claimants in this arbitration, had been withdrawn.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

On December 10, 2019, Mr. Okko Hendrik Behrends informed the Tribunal that he was
writing “as the lawyer representing PNB Banka [...] based on the instructions by the
Bank’s management.” Mr. Behrends attached a power of attorney dated August 29, 2019
signed by two members of the Bank’s Board. According to this power of attorney,
Mr. Behrends was authorized “[t]o represent the interests of the Grantor in the courts and

judicial institutions of the Republic of Latvia and of the European Union”.

By letter of December 11, 2019, the Tribunal invited Mr. Behrends to explain how his
appearance in this arbitration falls within the scope of the power of attorney dated August

29, 2019.

By separate letter of the same date, the Tribunal invited Mr. KrastinS to comment on
Mr. Behrends’ application to be added to the distribution list and to provide an explanation
regarding Mr. Krastins’ December 9, 2019 request that Mr. Vainovskis be excluded from

further correspondence on the matter.

By separate letter of the same date, the Tribunal invited Quinn Emanuel Urquhart &
Sullivan to comment on Mr. Krastin8’ email of December 9, 2019 and Mr. Behrends’ email

of December 10, 2019.

By letter of December 17, 2019, Mr. KrastinS submitted a letter to the Tribunal, providing
an explanation regarding the revocation of Mr. Vainovskis’ power of attorney, and
informing the Tribunal (i) that he had become the sole representative of the Bank on the
date of the Insolvency Judgement, September 12, 2019, and (ii) that “the Bank’s former
management board lost its authority to act on behalf of the Bank at the moment [he] was
approved as administrator by the Vidzeme Suburb Court of the City of Riga on 12
September 2019.” He also informed the Tribunal that on December 16, 2019, the Bank had
notified its counsel Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan of the termination of its power of
attorney. In addition, he rejected Mr. Behrends’ alleged authority to represent the Bank
claiming that he had “no valid authorization to act on behalf of the Bank in the ICSID
Arbitration proceedings ARB/17/47 and that any actions or decision professed to be taken

on behalf of the Bank by him are of no force or effect.”

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

On December 17, 2019, Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan informed the Tribunal that it
was no longer representing the Bank, but that it continued representing the other Claimants
(“Second to Sixth Claimants” or the “Shareholder Claimants”). It further noted that the
dispute as to who is authorized to represent the Bank should be resolved before the

proceeding could continue.

Also on December 17, 2019, Mr. Behrends submitted a new power of attorney signed by
three members of the board of PNB Banka (the “Former Managers” or the “Board”) on
the same date, authorizing him to represent PNB Banka “‘in any and all matters for which
the board of the Bank is the appropriate representative of the Bank,” including the
representation before international tribunals. In the same email, Mr. Behrends argued that
it was important that the Administrator does not represent the Bank and noted that the
Board did not have access to the proceeding or to the documents, systems and other

resources of the Bank.

On December 20, 2019, the Tribunal invited the Administrator, the Shareholder Claimants,
the Respondent and Mr. Behrends to file submissions on the issue of the representation of
the Bank. In the same letter, the Tribunal indicated that Mr. Behrends “will be included in
the distribution list for correspondence on this issue.” The Tribunal also granted
Mr. Krastin’ provisional access to the file, subject to reconsideration after receiving the
submissions of the parties and on the condition that Mr. KrastinS provide an undertaking
that he would return or destroy anything he downloads if his access was withdrawn. Mr.
Krastins provided an undertaking on the same date, which the Tribunal asked him to
clarify. Mr. Krastin’ provided the requested clarification on January 2, 2020. The
submissions on the representation issue were filed on January 10, 2020, and reply

submissions were filed on January 24, 2020.

On January 8, 2020, the Shareholder Claimants notified the Tribunal that they “wish and
intend” to file an ancillary claim arising from the “conduct of Latvia’s Financial and

Capital Market Commission (FCMC)” and the declaration of insolvency of the Bank.

On January 24, 2020, in their reply submission on the representation issue, the Shareholder

Claimants further elaborated on the ancillary claim. They argued, inter alia, that “it is now

6

43.

apparent from the Administrator’s submission that the administrator opposes the
Shareholder Claimants’ ancillary claims submitted to the Tribunal on 8 January 2020,
thereby effectively seeking to undermine the Shareholder Claimants’ claims before this

Tribunal.”

On January 30, 2020, following submissions on the issue of representation by Mr. Krastin’,
Mr. Behrends, the Shareholder Claimants and the Respondent, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 8, deciding on the representation of the Bank (“Representation

Decision” or “PO 8”) as follows:

Having considered the submissions made by Mr. Krastins, the Shareholder
Claimants, the Respondent, and Mr. Behrends, and having regard to the
following considerations:

e The Tribunal stayed proceedings on the merits of these proceedings on 10
September 2019, pending determination of the Bifurcated Issue.

e In the interests of fairness and efficiency it is desirable that the Tribunal
determines as soon as practicable the issue raised by the Bifurcated Issue
as to whether it has jurisdiction to decide the case brought by the
Claimants.

e The Tribunal received full submissions on the Bifurcated Issue, including
on behalf of the Bank.

e The Tribunal subsequently asked some questions on the Bifurcated Issue
and proposes to add to those questions.

e The answers to these questions are the only matters outstanding before the
Tribunal.

e It appears to the Tribunal that the submissions on the Bank Representation
issue overlap with merits issues, upon which the Tribunal should not
adjudicate before it has determined whether it has jurisdiction.

e Counsel for the Shareholder Claimants will answer the Tribunal’s
questions, having previously made submissions on behalf of all
Claimants, including the Bank.

e Nothing in the submissions made by Mr. Behrends on behalf of the former
Directors suggests that the former Directors have any interest which
diverges from that of the Shareholder Claimants.

e Mr. Krastins has authority to represent the Bank, subject to allegations of
a conflict of interest or other disentitling circumstances.

e The Tribunal is of the view that that alleged conflict does not have any
material effect for the resolution of the jurisdictional question presented
by the Bifurcated Issue which it has to determine, particularly where
another party has the same interest, and is represented by counsel who
represented the Bank on the submissions now sought to be supplemented.

e The authorities on conflicts to which our attention has been drawn have
no such comparable facts. The challenge to Mr Krastin3’ right to represent
the Bank does not need to be finally determined at this stage of the
proceedings.

 

e The Tribunal accepts that, should it find that it has jurisdiction to continue
the proceedings, it would be desirable to receive submissions from both
the Administrator of the Bank and from those representing the residual
interests of the holders of equity in the Bank.

e The Tribunal reserves for consideration at that time whether those
interests should be represented by the pre-insolvency Directors, as distinct
from the new shareholders of the Bank.

e By whom, and in what capacity, such interests should be represented does
not need to be determined until the Tribunal has decided the jurisdictional
issue.

e The Tribunal notes that the Shareholder Claimants and the Board
Members challenge as alleged breaches of the BIT the declaration of the
insolvency of the Bank and the conduct of the insolvency procedure. This
Procedural Order must not be seen as pre-judging either any application
to raise such issues by way of an ancillary claim or the allegations on
which the challenge to Mr. Krastin’ is based.

Accordingly, the Tribunal orders as follows:

a. The Tribunal recognises Mr. Krastiné as the representative of the Bank for
the purposes of completing submissions on the Bifurcated Issue in answer
to the Tribunal questions.

b. Mr. Krastins will be given access to the submissions on the Bifurcated
Issue.

c. Until further order, the Tribunal rejects Mr. Behrends’ application to be
accepted as the representative of the Bank. The parties are directed to
continue to copy Mr. Behrends on any communication relating to the
representation of the Bank.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

d. The Tribunal accepts that both Mr. Krastin$, in the exercise of his statutory
powers, and the former Directors or the current shareholders, reflecting the
separate legal personality of the Bank, are entitled to be heard if the
Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s jurisdictional challenge on the
Bifurcated Issue.

e. If that occurs, further submissions will be sought at that time.

Also on January 30, 2020, by separate letter the Tribunal informed the parties that it was
taking note of the Shareholder Claimants’ request for leave to make an ancillary claim, and
that it would hold the Shareholder Claimants’ application for leave until it had made its

decision on the Bifurcated Issue.

On February 17, 2020, Mr. Behrends’ filed a proposal for the disqualification of James
Spiegelman, Peter Tomka and John Townsend, “initiated on behalf of AS PNB Banka (the
“Bank”) by counsel appointed by the Bank’s board” (the “Former Managers’
disqualification proposal’). The proposal was signed by Mr. Behrends and was
accompanied by a letter signed by three members of the former board of the Bank “acting
on behalf of AS PNB Banka”. In the letter, the former managers stated that they were
submitting the attached proposal for disqualification, that they fully endorsed it and that

they requested the disqualification of the arbitrators and access to the full arbitral record.

Also on February 17, 2020, the Shareholder Claimants sent a letter to the Tribunal
requesting that it “clarify that its statement in the letter dated January 30, 2020 was not
intended to mean that the Shareholder Claimants’ Insolvency Ancillary Claim is not
properly brought before the Tribunal and that any permission to admit such a claim is
required.” On the same date, the Tribunal sent a letter to the parties stating that “it takes

note of the content of the Shareholder Claimants’ letter.”

On February 18, 2020, the Shareholder Claimants filed a proposal to disqualify each
Member of the Tribunal, “pursuant to Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention and
Rule 9 of the Arbitration Rules, on the basis that a reasonable observer would have
reasonable doubts as to the impartiality of the Tribunal” (“Shareholder Claimants’

disqualification proposal’).

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

On February 20, 2020, the Secretary-General informed the parties that the proceeding was
suspended in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6). The Administrator, the
Respondent and the three members of the Tribunal were invited to file submissions on the

Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal.

By separate letter of the same date, the Secretary-General noted that “the Tribunal has
decided that Mr. Behrends does not represent AS PNB Banka in this proceeding”, and
informed the parties that “the [disqualification proposal] filed by Mr. Behrends cannot be
considered a submission by ‘a party’ to the proceeding and, as such, does not meet the
requirement for submission to the Chair of the Administrative Council under Article 57 of

the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.”

By letter of February 27, 2020, the Shareholder Claimants’ requested “that the Secretary-
General: (a) transmit the PNB Banka Proposal to the Chairman; and (b) inform the
Chairman of this request by the Shareholder Claimants that he determine, as a preliminary
matter, based on submissions by all the affected parties, whether: (i) the PNB Banka
Proposal was filed in accordance with the requirements of Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9; and (ii) the Former Board is entitled to submit

observations on the Shareholder Claimants’ Proposal.”

On February 28, 2020, Mr. Behrends’ submitted a letter to the Secretary-General
requesting that: (a) “the Board’s proposal for disqualification be transmitted to the
Chairman”; and (b) “the Board ... be included in the procedure with respect to the

Shareholder-Claimants’ proposal for disqualification.”

On March 5, 2020, the Secretary-General informed the parties that she would transmit “the
proposal for disqualification filed on February 17, 2020 by Mr. Behrends on behalf of AS
PNB Banka to the Chairman, together with the proposal for disqualification filed on
February 18, 2020 by counsel for the Second to Sixth Claimants.” The Administrator, Mr.
Behrends, the Second to Sixth Claimants, the Respondent and the members of the Tribunal
were invited to file observations on the disqualification proposals according to a revised

schedule.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

On March 12, 2020, the Administrator and the Respondent filed observations on both
proposals for disqualification. On the same date, Mr. Behrends on behalf of AS PNB Banka

filed observations on the Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal.

On March 17, 2020, the Members of the Tribunal furnished explanations on both proposals

for disqualification.

By letter of the same date, Mr. Behrends requested: (a) that the Administrator be instructed
to notify the Secretary-General of the name of his counsel pursuant to Article 18(1) of the
Arbitration Rules; (b) that the Bank’s board and its counsel be provided with access to the
file (the arbitral record); and (c) that the timetable for submissions be extended so as to

permit counsel appointed by the Bank’s board to review the file (the arbitral record).

On March 24, 2020, ICSID reminded the parties of Arbitration Rule 18, informed them
that the letter submitted by Mr. Behrends would be transmitted to the Chair of the
Administrative Council and invited them to submit any comment “that they may have on
the issues raised in Mr. Behrends’ letter (other than Arbitration Rule 18) together with their

final observations on the proposals for disqualification”.

On March 26, 2020, the Administrator, Mr. Behrends, the Shareholder Claimants and the

Respondent filed final observations on the disqualification proposals.

On March 29, 2020, Mr. Behrends submitted a further disqualification proposal, along with
additional arguments on his request for access to the file and the disclosure of counsel’s

name by the Administrator.

On March 30, 2020, the Secretary-General invited the Members of the Tribunal to furnish
any explanations they wish to provide on Mr. Behrends’ further disqualification proposal
by April 2, 2020. In the same letter, the Secretary-General invited the Shareholder
Claimants, the Administrator and the Respondent to submit any final comments on Mr.

Behrends’ letter of March 29, 2020 by April 6, 2020.

On April 2, 2020, the Members of the Tribunal informed the Secretary-General that the

Tribunal had no further comments to make on the disqualification proposals.

11

61.

62.

63.

64.

On April 6, 2020, the Shareholder Claimants, the Administrator and the Respondent filed
their observations on Mr. Behrends’ letter of March 29, 2020. On the same date,

Mr. Behrends commented on the Tribunal’s communication of April 2, 2020.

BACKGROUND

The Former Managers, the Shareholder Claimants, the Respondent and the Administrator
have made submissions on the Former Managers’ and the Shareholder Claimants’

disqualification proposals. These arguments are summarized below.

FORMER MANAGERS’ ALLEGED RIGHT TO PROPOSE THE DISQUALIFICATION OF THE
MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL

(dd) Former Managers’ Arguments

In his letter of February 28, 2020, Mr. Behrends contends that he has represented the Bank
before European institutions such as the European Central Bank, the Single Resolution
Board and the General Court of the European Union based on an authorization by the
Board. He notes that the Respondent could have contested the Board’s ability to represent

the Bank before those institutions but has not done so.!

He mentions that the issue of the representation of Latvian banks in liquidation has been
examined by the European Courts in the case of another Latvian bank (the Trasta
Komercbanka case). Mr. Behrends asserts that the view of the European Court of Justice
is that “an administrator cannot represent the bank vis-a-vis the state and the European
institutions”. He adds that this view “is not based on any such concrete facts but expressly
on the systematic dependence of an administrator [...] pursuant to applicable Latvian law”,
which provides that the administrator is selected by the Latvian authorities and may at any

time be removed by the Latvian authorities.”

' Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 2.

2 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, paras. 4-7. Also, Letter from the Former Managers dated
March 26, 2020, paras. 21-22.

12

65.

66.

67.

68.

In his view, the position of the European Court of Justice confirms case law by the
European Court of Human Rights, which “did not merely hold that the alleged sole
representation of the bank was not in accordance with applicable law.” In his view, “[t]hey
decided that it violates the most fundamental due process guarantees under the European
Convention on Human Rights, under the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union and the common constitutional traditions of the member states of the European
Union.”? He asserts that the same position is confirmed by the courts of the Member States
of the European Union and by the decision rendered in Carnegie Minerals (Gambia)

Limited v. Republic of The Gambia (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/19).*

Mr. Behrends argues that “[a]ny decision in ICSID proceedings necessarily involves a
determination as to the proper representation of the parties”, and that the Chair has to

determine who represents the Bank for the purposes of his decision.>

Mr. Behrends contends that PO8 “does not decide who the proper representative of the

Bank is in the present proceedings.” He adds that:

The Tribunal does not deny that this issue is capable of being determined based on
a determination of the applicable law, any factual issues which may be relevant
and then the application of the law to the facts. The Procedural Order accepts that
a genuine issue as to the proper representative of the Bank has arisen which will
have to be decided and on which the Tribunal proposes to obtain further
submissions by the parties and the potential representatives of the Bank.”
Mr. Behrends also argues that PO8 does not claim that the above-cited case law is incorrect
or irrelevant. In his view, the Tribunal believes that there are specific circumstances that
allow it to postpone the determination of the proper representative of the Bank, namely the
fact that it currently focuses on the jurisdictional challenge, that it merely requires answers
to certain limited questions to resolve this issue, that the proceedings on the merits have

been suspended, and that the Bank’s former counsel continues to represent the Shareholder

3 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, paras. 8-9.

4+ Carnegie Minerals (Gambia) Limited v. Republic of The Gambia (“Carnegie Minerals v. Gambia”), ICSID Case
No. ARB/09/19, Decision on Representation (Annulment Proceeding), October 8, 2016.

5 Letter from the Former Managers dated March 12, 2020, paras. 7 and 11.
© Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 14 (emphasis in the original). See also para. 31.

Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 14.

13

69.

70.

71.

Claimants and is expected to submit any arguments as to why the Respondent’s
jurisdictional objection should be rejected.* According to Mr. Behrends, the Tribunal
“suggests that the adverse effect of postponing the determination of the proper
representative of the Bank may be mitigated by strictly limiting the acts for which the
Administrator is provisionally recognized as the Bank’s representative [...] and by
ensuring that the Board’s counsel will remain included in the further discussion of the issue

as to the proper representation of the Bank.”?

Mr. Behrends further contends that “the Tribunal [...] formally decides as part of the
operative part of the Procedural Order that the Bank is entitled to a right to be heard either
through its Board or the New Shareholders.” !

Mr. Behrends also criticizes PO8 on the basis that the Tribunal did not determine the
applicable law or make any relevant factual determinations, despite having received

detailed submissions from the parties. !!

In relation to the Former Managers’ right to file a proposal for disqualification of the

Members of the Tribunal, Mr. Behrend’s position can be summarized as follows:

a. Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 do not provide

requirements that must be met for a proposal to be submitted to the Chair. '?

b. The “Challenged Arbitrators have no decision-making power with respect to the
proposals for disqualification, including with respect to the question of whether a

valid proposal for disqualification was submitted by an appropriately authorized

representative.” !

* Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 15.

° Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 16.

‘0 Letter from the Former Manag.
'! Letter from the Former Managers

 

rs dated February 28, 2020, para. 17.
ated February 28, 2020, para. 19.

 

2 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 21.

5 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 29. Also, Letter from the Former Managers dated
March 12, 2020, para. 6.

14

c. PO8 recognizes “the Bank’s right to be heard through representatives other than the
Administrator (namely the Board or the New Shareholders).” The Tribunal
considered the provisional recognition of the Administrator as the Bank’s
representative to be justifiable only because it is limited to answering outstanding
questions on the jurisdictional objection. The question as to whether the
Administrator may appropriately represent the Bank in connection with a proposal

for disqualification is not answered by PO8.!4

d. If one were to assume that a representative may be admitted (potentially
provisionally) for certain limited purposes, that such a decision was binding as
regards the treatment of proposals for disqualification of arbitrators, and that no
representation of the Bank other than the one already recognized by the Tribunal
can be admitted, then the Bank is not represented at all with respect to proposals
for disqualification. A tacit expansion of the Administrator’s admission as a

representative of the Bank by the Tribunal would thus be inappropriate. '°

e. The Challenged Arbitrators’ approach is based on a recognition that the Bank is
entitled to due process as regards the determination of its proper representatives.
The ability of a party to propose the disqualification of arbitrators is a fundamental

due process right.!°

f. The provisional nature of PO8 means that a rejection of the Board’s proposal for
disqualification will also remain provisional. As a result, a subsequent recognition
of the Board as the proper representative of the Bank will lead to the Board’s

proposal for disqualification having to be treated as a valid proposal.!”

4 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 33.
'5 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 34.
'6 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 35.
"” Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 38.

15

72.

73.

74.

75.

g. If the jurisdictional objection is upheld, “the representation issue will not be
addressed at all”, and such an award “could not be recognized as having been made

in proceedings involving the Bank as a party.”!®

Mr. Behrends adds that the Challenged Arbitrators’ view that issues regarding the
representation of a party may not have to be addressed immediately is unprecedented. The
same is true for the idea that the powers of representation may be provisionally or
temporarily limited. He insists that PO8 “does not conclude that the Administrator is the
Bank’s proper representative for present purposes”, and that it involves limitations being

imposed on the Administrators’ potential actions with respect to these proceedings. '°

According to Mr. Behrends, if the Bank is deprived of its ability to act through its Board
the practical effect would be comparable to the views which the European Court of Justice
and the European Court of Human Rights have rejected. Such an interpretation of the
ICSID Rules would fail to ensure the minimum due process required under European

human rights law.?°

In his letter of March 26, 2020, Mr. Behrends explains that his email of December 10, 2019
to the Tribunal was a reaction to the news that the Administrator had requested access to
the file and appeared to be keen on taking over the representation of the Bank.”! In the
same letter, Mr. Behrends also rejects the Administrators’ arguments regarding his power

of attorney.”?

2 Shareholder Claimants’ Arguments
4

The Shareholder Claimants consider the Former Board, and not the Administrator, to be
the proper representative of the Bank, including for the purposes of filing the proposal for

disqualification on behalf of the Bank.” On this basis, they request the Chair to “determine,

'S Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, paras. 39-40.
"© Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, paras. 43-44. Similarly, Letter from the Former

Managers dated March 12, 2020, paras. 8-9.

 

2 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, paras. 45-46.
2! Letter from the Former Management dated March 26, 2020, para. 23.

% Letter from the Former Management dated March 26, 2020, paras. 29-31.
3 Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 6.

16

as a preliminary matter, based on submissions by all of the affected parties, whether: (i)
the PNB Banka Proposal was filed in accordance with the requirements of Article 57 of
the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9; and (ii) the Former Board is entitled

to submit observations on the Shareholder Claimants’ Proposal.”?4

76. According to the Shareholder Claimants, as part of his power to decide whether to uphold
a proposal for disqualification under Article 58 of the Convention, the Chair has
competence to determine whether a putative representative is entitled to file a proposal for

disqualification. They also argue that:

the Chairman effectively stands in the shoes of a tribunal for the purposes of
deciding a disqualification proposal where it relates to a majority of a tribunal
instead of a sole arbitrator, and there can be no question that a tribunal has
competence to decide the representation of a party under Article 41 of the ICSID
Convention. Thus, if arbitrators have competence to decide the representation
question in circumstances where a sole arbitrator is challenged, which they do, it
follows that the Chairman has such competence where a majority is challenged.”°

77. The Shareholder Claimants reject any reliance on PO8 as a justification for refusing to hear

the Board’s disqualification proposal. They advance, inter alia, the following reasons:?”

a. The grounds for the Board’s and the Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification

proposals arise directly out of PO8.

b. It defies common sense to use PO8, which is impugned by the Board’s
disqualification proposal, as the basis to reject the Board’s disqualification

proposal.

% Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 6.

25 Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 9, citing ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V. &
Ors v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a
Majority of the Tribunal, May 5, 2014, para. 43: “Under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the
Chairman has discretion to determine the procedure that will be followed in deciding a disqualification proposal. The
sole procedural guidance in the Rules is that the Chairman shall use his best efforts to make the decision within thirty
days after he has received the proposal.”

26 Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 10.

2’ Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, paras. 11-12.

17

c. To allow the Tribunal to immunize itself against the Board’s disqualification

proposal by its own decision undermines the integrity of the ICSID proceedings.

d. The Tribunal in PO8 did not hold that the Administrator was the representative of
the Bank for all purposes in these proceedings, let alone for the specific purpose of
filing a proposal for disqualification under Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9. The Tribunal recognized the
Administrator as the representative of the Bank “for the purposes of completing

submissions on the Bifurcated Issue in answer to the Tribunal questions”.

e. The Tribunal did not hold that the Board (through Mr. Behrends) does not represent
the Bank in these proceedings. Nor did it decide who the representative is for
purposes other than addressing certain questions on the Bifurcated Issue. The
Tribunal did not decide who the representative of the Bank is for the purposes of

filing a disqualification proposal.

f. Allof the affected parties must be entitled to an independent, reasoned decision and
de novo decision on the matter from the relevant decision-maker (which is the
Chairman), following proper briefing from the parties and in light of prevailing

ICSID practice.?*

(3) Respondent’s Arguments

78. The Respondent argues that Mr. Behrends’ challenge is outside the Chair’s jurisdiction

and/or inadmissible as:7°

a. It requires a determination of whether Mr. Behrends is a “party” or represents a
“party” in this arbitration, which: (a) has already been determined by the Tribunal
in PO8; and (b) is a pre-requisite for challenging an ICSID tribunal under the ICSID

Convention and Arbitration Rules;

28 Citing the decision rendered by the Annulment Committee in Carnegie Minerals (Gambia) Limited v. Republic of
The Gambia, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/19, Decision on Representation (Annulment Proceeding), October 7, 2016,
paras. 39 and 42-45.

2 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 26-28.

18

b. A determination by the Chair as to whether Mr. Behrends is a party would consist
of an inappropriate infringement on the powers of an ICSID Tribunal in the context

of the balance of powers created by the Convention;

c. The Chair’s power is restricted by the powers given to him by the Member States
through the ICSID Convention as well as the architecture of the ICSID Convention.
While Article 46 of the ICSID Convention expressly provides that “the Tribunal
shall, if requested by a party, determine any incidental or additional claims or
counterclaims arising directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute”, no similar
provision exists for the Chair in the context of disqualification proposals creating

jurisdiction regarding ancillary issues.

d. “Mr. Behrends’ challenge is not really a challenge of the Tribunal but really an
appeal of the Tribunal’s decision not to consider him a party or party representative

at this time.”

e. Should the Chair find that Mr. Behrends represents a party but that the challenge is
unfounded, the Chair would be acting as a second Tribunal or some kind of
appellate body. This is not how the Convention and the Arbitration Rules were

meant to function with respect to challenges or more generally.

f. According to Art. 57 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 9, the Chair
was only given jurisdiction to decide upon requests for the disqualification of a

majority of the members of arbitral tribunals.

79. The Respondent also rejects the arguments advanced by the Shareholder Claimants, which
assimilate the Chair’s role to the Tribunal’s. The Respondent says: (i) this is “incorrect in
light of the much more extensive powers of the Tribunal”; (ii) it fails to see the Chairman’s
role as one set up in the context of an international organization which must be interpreted
strictly; and (iii) is incompatible with how ICSID arbitration is conceived and functions,

as it “would allow for appeals of Tribunal decisions through the backdoor”.*”

3 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 28.

19

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

The Respondent asserts that, in any event, the Tribunal has decided that Mr. Behrends is
not the representative of the Bank until it has decided on the bifurcation objection, which

should make his challenge at least inadmissible.*!

(4) Administrator’s Arguments

The Administrator first refers to a letter from Oleksei Kutiavin, Dmitrii Kalmykov and
Anna Verbicka, accompanied by Mr. Behrends, where they “[...] refer to themselves as
‘the former board of AS PNB Banka’”, and notes that Mr. Kalmykov’s signature “looks
different from the signature of Mr. Kalmykov that the Bank has in its files.” On this basis,

the Administrator sees a need to investigate further and reserves his rights in this respect.”

The Administrator asserts that Mr. Behrends’ statements suggesting that he was accepted
as the Bank’s sole representative by the ECB is false. He explains that the ECB, in a
decision of February 17, 2020, indicated that the Administrator represents the Bank
judicially and extra-judicially, and that Mr. Behrends does not represent the Bank for
regulatory purposes but for the purposes of bringing a legal challenge against a withdrawal

decision.*?

FORMER MANAGERS’ ALLEGED RIGHT TO ACCESS THE FILE
(dd) Former Managers’ Arguments

Mr. Behrends requests full access to the record of this arbitration,* stating that without

access, his clients’ procedural rights cannot be exercised properly.*°

Mr. Behrends further contends that his disqualification proposal “is not limited to the
representation issue” and that “[t]here are two further grounds for the Proposal on which
the Bank’s counsel cannot comment without access to the file.”*° In his March 29, 2020

letter, Mr. Behrends argues that access to the file is important to address the Challenged

3! Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 28.

® Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, para. 48.

33 Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, paras. 49-50.
Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 51.
35 Letter from the Former Managers dated March 29, 2020, paras. 18-19.
% Letter from the Former Managers dated March 12, 2020, para. 3.

20

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

Arbitrators’ references to undisclosed parts of the file, and in particular the Challenged

Arbitrators’ comments on the ancillary claims.*”

(2) Respondent’s Arguments

The Respondent argues that Mr. Behrends cannot have access to the file because he is not
a party or does not represent a party to the case.** While noting that the ICSID Convention
and Arbitration Rules are silent on access to the file by third parties, the Respondent draws
an analogy with similar requests for access to the file in the context of non-disputing party
applications. It notes that tribunals have only granted access to the record to third parties
if: (i) it was required for them to discharge their task, i.e. to provide useful information to
the tribunal; and (ii) it would not disrupt the proceeding or unduly burden or unfairly

prejudice either party.*?

In this case, Mr. Behrends does not need access to the record to supplement his challenge,

as it stems from PO 8.

Additionally, granting access to Mr. Behrends would significantly disrupt the proceeding,
as he would likely need several months to review the file.*°
(3) | Administrator’s Arguments

The Administrator contends that the question of Mr. Behrends’ access to the file has

already been decided and rejected.*!

FORMER MANAGERS’ AND SHAREHOLDER CLAIMANTS’ DISQUALIFICATION
PROPOSALS

(dd) Former Managers’ Arguments

Mr. Behrends argues that PO8 shows a lack of impartiality by the Challenged Arbitrators.

He says that: (i) the Tribunal “purports to exclude all or virtually all procedural rights of

37 Letter from the Former Managers dated March 29, 2020, paras. 18 and 20-22;
38 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 32.

»° Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 33.

4° Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 33.

4! Letter from the Administrator dated March 26, 2020, para. 9.

21

the Bank [...] by provisionally limiting the powers of representation of potential
representatives of the Bank”;*” and (ii) “tribunals do not have the power to admit or reject
representatives of the parties [...] provisionally or subject to restrictions or conditions or
by admitting them only for certain limited purposes”, and the task of satisfying themselves

that each party is appropriately represented may never be postponed.*?
90. Mr. Behrends criticizes the Challenged Arbitrators, inter alia, for the following reasons:

a. The Challenged Arbitrators do not claim that it is impossible to resolve the
representation issue immediately, but they propose to do this at a later stage of the
procedure. They thus “confirm that the limitations on the Bank’s representation are
not necessary”.*4

b. The parties and the potential representatives of the Bank agreed that the
representation issue may be resolved before any further procedural step is
undertaken. While PO8 suggests that “other persons may be the appropriate
representatives [...], this does not justify the decision because the other potential
representatives were not contacted and the Challenged Arbitrators do not suggest
that they assume an intention not to represent the Bank’s case” within the meaning

of Article 45 of the ICSID Convention.**

c. No party or potential representative of a party has suggested that a limitation of the
powers of representation is possible or permissible. A party cannot agree to a

limitation of its rights of representation.*°

d. It is not possible to determine that the appropriate representation of a party is less

relevant in certain parts of the proceeding.”

*? Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 4; see also para. 10.

3 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 6-8. See also, Letter from the Former Managers
dated March 12, 2020, paras. 15-16.

“4 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 14.
+5 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 15.
“© Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 16.
+” Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 17.

22

e.

A tribunal cannot speculate about the interests of a party and dispense with its
representation, or limit it, on the grounds that the relevant representatives are
unlikely to make any contributions which the Tribunal regards as important. Any

such speculation is in itself an indication of impermissible bias.**

The unrestricted representation of a party with similar interests does not justify
limitations on the representation of a party. The Bank has undoubtedly specific
interests which are different from those of the shareholders. A Bank would breach
its fiduciary and regulatory duties, and could be exposed to criminal sanctions, if it

pursued interests of the shareholders rather than those of the bank.”?

The Tribunal’s approach is similar to the Respondent's since it refers to the interests
of the Board or the interests of the New Shareholders, as opposed to the interests

of the Bank.*°

Legal issues regarding the representation of a party, or an overlap of representation
issues and merits issues, do not justify a limitation of the powers of representation

of a party.>!

PO8 is not justified because Mr. Behrends acts on the basis of a valid power of
attorney predating the appointment of the Administrator which the Administrator

has not attempted to revoke.*?

A tribunal cannot compartmentalize different issues and thereby create sub-
proceedings that run consecutively or simultaneously with different representations

by the parties. Nor is it possible for a tribunal to treat a specific person as a “passive”

*8 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para.18.
*° Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 19-22.
50 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 23-24.
5! Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 25-26.
5? Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 27.

23

91.

92.

93.

94.

representative for purposes of specific circumstances such as the representation

issue.>?

k. A tribunal cannot identify different representatives of a party for purposes of

representing different interests in connection with a party.**

Mr. Behrends notes that “[t]he underlying motivation of the Challenged Arbitrators is
irrelevant” and that “[i]t is sufficient that they demonstrate an intention not to treat the

Bank equally.”*> In his view, any such intention requires their disqualification.

In his view, PO8 “suggests that the Challenged Arbitrators have come to the realization
that it has become increasingly unrealistic and questionable legal fiction that the Bank is a
legal person and a party to the present proceedings because the Bank is now actually solely
an object of various interests.” Therefore, Mr. Behrends says, the Challenged Arbitrators
“see it as their duty to identify interests in connection with the Bank which they regard as

legitimate and therefore deserving ‘representation’ in the present proceedings.”*°

In his view, “the Challenged Arbitrators regard as legitimate only the ‘residual interests of
the holders of equity in the Bank’.” Indeed, Mr. Behrends argues that the Challenged
Arbitrators “suggest that they will identify legitimate interests and then identify

representatives of such interests”.*”

Mr. Behrends further argues that any objective and reasonable observer would be

concerned about the following:

a. That the motivation behind PO8 may be that the Challenged Arbitrators “are
compromised by the fact that the Respondent has successfully installed the
Administrator as the de facto representative of the Bank and that [PO8] is primarily

a response to the Board’s open statements that the present proceedings may have

53 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 28-29.
54 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 30-32.

55 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 33; also, para. 37. See also Letter from the Former
Managers dated March 12, 2020, para. 22.

56 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 34.
5) Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 35-36.

24

been fundamentally undermined”. Mr. Behrends also notes that the Board has also
strongly criticized the Tribunal for the circular logic on which the de facto

admission of the Administrator as representative of the Bank was based.**

The Tribunal’s “primarily defensive” reaction to the Board’s complaint about
Latvia’s interference with the representation of the Bank and, in particular, the
alleged failure to provide him with a submission filed by the Administrator on

December 17, 2019 in spite of him allegedly having been informed otherwise.*?

The “discrepancy between the procedural assumptions on which [PO8] is based”,
i.e. that a representative must apply for admission and that no such admission was
considered necessary in order to consider the Administrator as the de facto

representative of the Bank.”

The alleged lack of due process and impartiality regarding the representation issue,
given that the Administrator was granted access to the record and the Board was
not, and the Administrator was allegedly initially allowed to have ex parte

communications with the Tribunal on the representation issue.°!

The Tribunal’s inability “to deal with the representation issue and [its] view that
the jurisdictional phase does not require any resolution of the representation issue”,
which “will create a strong illegitimate incentive to uphold the Respondent’s
jurisdictional challenge in order to avoid the need to deal with the representation

issue.”°

The Tribunal’s “reluctance to address the illegitimate collusion between the

Respondent’s counsel and the Administrator,” who admit that they met physically,

58 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras, 38-39 (emphasis in the original).
’° Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 41.
© Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 42.
©! Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 43.
© Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 44.

25

95.

96.

97.

and its acceptance of this alleged collusion as not being problematic for the

jurisdictional phase.

Mr. Behrends also refers to a decision by the Tribunal, in the context of the organization
of the hearing on jurisdiction, to the effect that any discussion of the representation of the
Bank would have to be deducted from the time of the Respondent. In Mr. Behrends’ view,
this “underlined the Tribunal’s recognition that it was Latvia which was interested in the
Board being replaced by the Administrator”, and highlights that “it is highly unusual and
problematic if a party is allowed to adopt an active role (let alone a dominant role) as

regards the representation of the opposing party.”

On March 29, 2020, Mr. Behrends filed a “further proposal for disqualification.” He argued
that, as noted by the Shareholder Claimants, the Challenged Arbitrators omitted the main
statement of an authority they cite in their observations on the disqualification proposals
and mischaracterized other statements from the same authority, thereby suggesting that
their conduct and POS8 do not need to be examined.° Mr. Behrends says that this conduct
is reprehensible, and that the arbitrators must therefore resign or be removed from their

positions.°°
(2) Shareholder Claimants’ Arguments

a. Merits of the Shareholder Claimants’ application

The Shareholder Claimants advance the following three grounds for disqualification: (i)
due process violations; (ii) transparency violations; and (iii) prejudgment violation. The
Shareholder Claimants state that an additional ground arises from the Tribunal’s

observations on the disqualification proposals.

©} Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 46.

© Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 40.

65 Letter from the Former Managers dated March 29, 2020, paras. 6 and 13.

66 Letter from the Former Managers dated March 29, 2020, para. 14. Mr. Behrends also criticized the Tribunal’s
explanations in his letter of March 26, 2020 (paras. 5-12), arguing, inter alia, that: (i) it was inappropriate for the
challenged arbitrators to submit a collective statement; and that (ii) it was inappropriate to avoid any substantive
comment on the criticism which has been made and instead launch a formal counterattack against the parties proposing
the disqualification.

26

98.

99.

©? Shareholder Claimants

(i) Due process violations

According to the Shareholder Claimants, “the Representation Decision violates the Bank’s

fundamental due process rights, such as its right to effective legal representation and the

right to be heard.”®’ They hold that their disqualification proposal, therefore, goes to the

basic integrity and fairness of these proceedings.

In support of this ground, the Shareholder Claimants advance the following reasons:

a.

The Tribunal assumed that it was the Former Management who had to apply to be
recognised as representative of the Bank by the Tribunal, despite the fact that they
were recognised in this proceeding from the outset. The Tribunal did not consider

that the one who needed to make such an application was the Administrator.*

The Tribunal appears to have implicitly applied domestic law to the representation
issue, contrary to established practice. In any event, the fact that the Tribunal does
not identify “the correct applicable law is highly anomalous in circumstances where

the point was argued vigorously.”

The Tribunal’s putative application of Latvian law was incorrect because it
disregarded EU law, which is part of Latvian law and provides that insolvency
administrators cannot represent banks in legal proceedings where the acts of the
authority that nominated or appointed them are being challenged. This rule of EU
law does not depend on the identification of an actual conflict of interest.’° In the
Shareholder Claimants’ view, the faults in the Tribunal’s approach to the law

applicable to the representation issue are such that “a reasonable observer would,

disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 39.

 

8 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 41. Also, Shareholder Claimants’
letter of March 26, 2020, para. 21.

© Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 42. Also, Shareholder Claimants’
letter of March 26, 2020, para. 23.

7 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 43.

27

even on this ground alone, have reasonable doubts as to the Tribunal’s
oT

impartiality.
d. The Tribunal does not explain in PO8 why the resolution of the bifurcated issue
should be prioritised over the resolution of the representation issue. In any event,
expediency “does not afford a proper basis for the Tribunal to deprive the Bank of

its due process rights, including its right to be heard.”

e. The Tribunal held that the Administrator “has authority to represent the Bank,
subject to allegations of conflict of interest or other disentitling circumstances”;
however, the Tribunal deferred the issue of conflicts of interest.’? The Shareholder
Claimants state that: (i) the Tribunal fails to explain why the Administrator has
authority to represent the Bank, even in the absence of conflict of interest; (ii) the
Tribunal’s assertion that the “alleged conflict does not have any material effect for
the resolution of the jurisdictional question presented by the Bifurcated Issue” is
“based on no evidence and is simply speculative and implausible”, as there is no

evidence in the record as to the Administrator’s position on the bifurcated issue;

 

it cannot be acceptable for a person with a conflict of interest to represent a
party in ICSID proceedings merely because that conflict is assessed to have no
immediate “material effect’ on the proceeding; (iv) the fact that the Tribunal
considers the Shareholder Claimants and the Bank to have the same interest is
irrelevant because they do not speak for the Bank, and because this would not
“cure” a violation of the Bank’s right to due process. Moreover, the Former
Management was responsible for making previous submissions on the bifurcated
issue and should be permitted to supplement the submissions over which they had

conduct for the Bank.”*

f. The Tribunal held that the “challenge to Mr. Krastins right to represent the Bank

does not need to be finally determined at this stage of the proceedings” even though

7! Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 44.
% Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 45.
3 Sharehol

4 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 47.

der Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 46.

28

it accepted that his authority was subject to allegations of a conflict of interest. The
Tribunal was not allowed to defer its “final” decision. If a person who is alleged to
have a conflict of interest represents the Bank, this amounts to a violation of the
Bank’s fundamental due process rights caused by the Tribunal’s failure to resolve
the issue. Moreover, the Tribunal left the door open to find that the Former
Management should represent the Bank in the merits phase; it is unclear whether
the Former Management would be bound by what has been said or done by the

Administrator purportedly on behalf of the Bank.’

The Administrator has “obvious and incurable conflicts of interest.” He has: (i) a
personal conflict of interest, “in that he has a profit motive in ensuring that the
Ancillary Claim does not undermine the legal basis of his appointment as
Insolvency Administrator”; and (ii) “has a conflict of interest between his loyalty
to the FCMC and his loyalty to the Bank.””° The fact that the Tribunal ignored these
conflicts after receiving substantive submissions on the matter raises reasonable

doubts about its impartiality.

The Tribunal mischaracterised the representation issue by referring to the
representation of the “residual interests of the holders of equity in the Bank.””” The
Shareholder Claimants note that: (i) the representation issue concerns the authority
to represent the Bank, not who has the authority to represent the “residual interests
of the holders of equity in the Bank.” This pejorative characterization minimizes
the extent of the Former Management’s interest in representing the Bank in this
proceeding and presumes the Bank is insolvent rather than a fully competent legal
person; (ii) the Bank cannot be represented simultaneously by different parties who
are likely to have divergent interests, and the Tribunal cannot decide on an ad hoc
basis which person it wishes to regard as the Bank’s representative for any

particular decision; (iii) the Tribunal has indicated that it may decide that the

5 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 48.

% Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, paras. 49-50, referring to circumstances
already cited above. Also, Shareholder Claimants’ letter of March 26, 2020, paras. 3-5, 16, 20 and 29-35.

7 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 53. Also, Shareholder Claimants”
letter of March 26, 2020, para. 36.

29

100.

Former Management are not the proper representatives of the “residual interests of
the holders of equity in the Bank” and that this rests with the “new shareholders”,

who have at no time sought to be represented in these proceedings. *

(ii) Transparency violations

The Shareholder Claimants further hold that PO8 was based on adverse assumptions,

indicated prejudgment and failed to address ICSID authorities. This implies that PO8 was

“pretextual and designed to achieve a pre-determined outcome”. They argue that the

“transparency violations” further strengthen the appearance of bias and give rise to

reasonable doubts as to the impartiality of the members of the Tribunal.” In support of this

ground, the Shareholder Claimants allege, inter alia, the following:

a.

The Tribunal stated that “the Shareholder Claimants will answer the Tribunal’s
questions, having made submissions on behalf of all Claimants, including the
Bank” and that “[n]othing in the submissions made by Mr. Behrends on behalf of
the former Directors suggests that the former Directors have any interest that
diverges from that of the Shareholder Claimants.” The Shareholder Claimants say
that: (i) this is irrelevant; (ii) the Bank cannot be deprived of it right to be heard
based on the Tribunal’s assumption that its “interest” is the same as that of the
Shareholder Claimants; and (iii) there is no basis to assume that the Former
Management’s submissions will be identical as those made by the Shareholder

Claimants.*°

The Tribunal purported to justify its failure to “finally” decide the representation
issue on the basis that it overlapped with merits issues which the Tribunal could not
adjudicate before it has jurisdiction. This reasoning, which suggests that the
Tribunal cannot decide the representation issue until it has formed a position on the

merits, is incorrect and does not reflect ICSID practice. The Tribunal can only

8 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 53.

79 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, paras. 55 and 68.

* Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 56. Also, Shareholder Claimants”
letter of March 26, 2020, para. 39.

30

decide the merits at the conclusion of the merits phase, while the representation

issue is a preliminary one.*!

 

c. The Tribunal provided no justification as to why it recognized the Administrator as
the Bank’s representative and appears to have disregarded the Carnegie Minerals

decision and other arguments advanced by the Shareholder Claimants.*?

d. The Tribunal appears to have treated the ancillary claim not as admitted but as an
application for leave to admit the ancillary claim, while there is no requirement
under the ICSID Convention or the Arbitration Rules to seek the Tribunal’s leave
to pursue ancillary claims. The Shareholder Claimants sought a clarification from
the Tribunal on this matter and the Tribunal did not provide it, simply taking note
of their letter. In the Shareholder Claimants’ view, “the Tribunal’s pretextual
approach to the Ancillary Claim has been engineered to avoid the precise conflict
of interest that plainly already exists between the Insolvency Administrator’s and
the Bank’s interests in the ICSID proceedings.” This, in their view, serves to
compound the perception of lack of impartiality arising from due process

violations.*

e. The Tribunal issued PO8 without awaiting responses from the Administrator and
the Respondent to the Shareholder Claimants’ letter of January 28, 2020, requesting

certain documents and information in relation to their meeting.**

(iti) Prejudgment violation
101. | The Shareholder Claimants advance this ground against the background of the Claimants’

allegation that they have legitimate expectations under EU law to access the investor-state

dispute resolution mechanism in the BIT, “which ‘trumps’ any alleged incompatibility with

*! Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 57. Also, Shareholder Claimants”
letter of March 26, 2020, paras. 40-41.

® Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 58. Also, Shareholder Claimants”
letter of March 26, 2020, paras. 24-27 and 42-43.

83 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, paras. 59-65. Also, Shareholder
Claimants’ letter of March 26, 2020, paras. 44-45, rejecting the Tribunal’s explanation on this matter.

* Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, paras. 66-67. Also, Shareholder
Claimants’ letter of March 26, 2020, para. 46.

31

102.

103.

EU law per Achmea.” In their view, it is not possible to decide on the bifurcated issue

 

without deciding on the legitimate expectations i

The Shareholder Claimants’ argument is based, inter alia, on the Tribunal’s statement in
the Decision on Bifurcation that it is “unnecessary to deal with any substantive provisions

of EU law to decide the [Bifurcated Objection]”.*°

The Shareholder Claimants argue that PO8 “proceeds on the basis that the Tribunal can
conclusively resolve the Bifurcated Issue without deciding whether the Claimants have
legitimate expectations under EU law.”*’ In their March 26 submission, the Shareholder
Claimants clarified that “the prejudged issue is not the issue of legitimate expectations, nor
its relationship to the remainder of the sub-issues of the Bifurcated Issue [...] the prejudged
issue is whether the Bifurcated Issue will or will not be conclusively resolved at the
bifurcated phase of the proceedings”.** In their view, “[bly foreclosing the possibility of
deferring the Bifurcated Issue to the merits phase, the Tribunal prejudged the Claimants’
repeated submission that, if not rejected, the Bifurcated Issue has to be deferred to the
merits phase, and thus cannot be resolved against the Claimants in the bifurcated phase.”*?
In their view, the Tribunal has prejudged their submission in one of two respects: (i) it may
have resolved that the legitimate expectations issue does not need to be decided to decide
the bifurcated issue against the Claimants because it does not trump the EU law rule in
Achmea (which would constitute prejudgment given that the Tribunal prohibited the parties
from arguing the legitimate expectations issue); or (ii) it may have resolved that it did not
defer the legitimate expectations issue to the merits phase (which would constitute

prejudgment because it means the Tribunal must have rejected “the Claimants’ position in

85 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 85.

*© Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 85, citing Decision on Bifurcation,
para. 154,

®7 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 69.
88 Shareholder Claimants’ letter of March 26, 2020, paras. 51-52 (emphasis in the original).
* Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, paras. 69-70.

32

the ICSID Proceedings that the Legitimate Expectations Issue had been deferred to the
merits phase”).°°

(iv) Tribunal’s reaction to the disqualification proposals

104. |The Shareholder Claimants argue that the Tribunal Members, in their observations on the

disqualification proposals, “decided to quote selectively (and, indeed, misleadingly) from

Professor Born’s treatise.”*!

105. The Shareholder Claimants contend that this adds to their “misgivings about the propriety

and impartiality of this Tribunal.”°?

b. Mr. Behrends’ Further Proposal for Disqualification

106. The Shareholder Claimants adopt Mr. Behrends’ argument describing the circumstances in
his letter as “sufficient, without further elaboration, for the Chairman to disqualify the

entire Tribunal.”

(3) Respondent’s Arguments
a. Admissibility

107. The Respondent argues that both disqualification proposals are inadmissible because they
constitute an abuse of process. It contends that, in examining the rules applicable to ICSID
proceedings, international law must be taken into account. This includes the principles that

cases must be litigated in good faith and efficiently.°*

% Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 86. Indeed, the Shareholder
Claimants note that the Tribunal had: directed the parties not to argue the legitimate expectations issue in the context
of the bifurcated issue; then asked the Respondent to reply, in its post-hearing submissions, to the Claimants’ assertion
(in their Counter-Memorial on the Bifurcated Objection) that the issue of the application of EU law of legitimate
expectations has been “deferred to the merits” and to paragraph 13 of the Tribunal’s decision of July 2, 2019; and then
withdrew that question after receiving a letter from the Claimants stating that, if the Tribunal had decided not to defer
the EU law of legitimate expectations question to the merits phase, this would be a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure and the Claimants would wish to adduce expert evidence. Shareholder Claimants’
disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 85.

°! Shareholder Claimants’ letter dated March 26, 2020, para. 9.

®? Shareholder Claimants’ letter dated March 26, 2020, para. 17.

°3 Shareholder Claimants’ letter dated April 6, 2020.

°% Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 3-5 and 9.

 

33

108. |The Respondent advances the following reasons:

a. The disqualification proposals constitute the Claimants’ third attempt to delay post-
hearing submissions on the bifurcated issue. According to the Respondent, Mr.
Behrends made himself known to the Tribunal “strategically” on December 11,
2019, i.e. less than a week before the filing of the first round of post-hearing
submissions, about three months after Mr. Krastins’s appointment as Administrator
on September 12, almost four months after the issuance of the power of attorney
(which Mr. Behrends alleges would grant him the relevant mandate) of August 25,
and almost three months after the hearing on the bifurcated issue (which was held

on September 19-20).°5

b. They appear to be aimed at trying to “beat Brexit,” extending the arbitration until
after the transition period under which EU law continues to apply to the UK
(December 31, 2020). By doing this, the Claimants would be trying to establish
jurisdiction over a claim after the fact where a tribunal actually had no jurisdiction

at the time the dispute arose and was submitted to it.°°

c. The Tribunal suspended the proceeding on the merits while inviting the Shareholder
Claimants to make an application to update their Memorial on the Merits (submitted
in May 2019) taking into account the Shareholder Claimants’ sale of a significant
part of the interest in the Bank in June 2019. However, rather than making such an
application, the Shareholder Claimants appear to aim at delaying or derailing the

proceedings.”

d. The effect of the disqualification proposals is that the Chairman is being asked to

review the Tribunal’s determination that Mr. Behrends does not represent a party

°5 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 6.
° Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 7-8.
°” Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 8.

34

at this time, which is a pre-requisite for filing a disqualification proposal under

Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 9.°°

b. The Legal Standard

109. As to the standard applicable to disqualification proposals, the Respondent notes that: (i)
pursuant to Arbitration Rule 9 they must be submitted “promptly”; and (ii) the threshold to
challenge an arbitrator or Tribunal is manifest lack of independence or impartiality,
including an appearance of bias.°? The Respondent argues, however, that “in the context
of complaints about the result of a decision [...], there must be something more than the
considerations of the tribunal or the manner in which the Tribunal reached the decision.
There must be, for example, bad faith.”!°° It also says that when disqualification proposals
have been based on the content of a decision, as well as more generally, the legal standard
is very high and only six out of 76 decisions between 1982 and 2019 compiled on ICSID’s

website have upheld such a challenge. '°!

110. The Respondent notes that under Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, the challenging party
has the burden of establishing the existence of “a fact indicating a manifest lack of the
qualities required by the paragraph (1) of Article 14.” The Respondent also says that it

agrees with the Shareholder Claimants that:

= according to Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention, arbitrators must be “both

impartial and independent”;
= the lack of those qualities must be “evident” and “obvious”;

= actual dependence or bias is not required but the appearance of dependence or bias

is sufficient; and

°8 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 8.

% Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 9-11.
10 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 11.
‘0! Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 11.

35

= the standard to be applied is an objective one based on a reasonable evaluation of

the evidence by a third party.!

111. However, citing the Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal
rendered in ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V. and others v. Venezuela, the Respondent says
that the Claimants “must prove not only that the purported lack of independence and

impartiality is ‘evident’ or ‘obvious’ but also that it is ‘highly probable, not just possible’

as pointed out by the Shareholder Claimants themselves.”!

112. Relying on Abaclat and others v. Argentina, the Respondent also argues that the burden of
proof is on the Claimants to establish (i) the existence of the facts from which it is said that
a manifest lack of the relevant qualities can be inferred, and (ii) that such an inference can

reasonably be made in the circumstances. !+

113. Finally, the Respondent argues that “disagreements over the merits of the case are not
considered proper arguments to request the disqualification of an arbitrator (or of an entire

Tribunal) as it does not constitute in itself evidence of lack of independence or

impartiality.” !°

c. Shareholder Claimants’ Disqualification Proposal

114. The Respondent asserts that the “prejudgement violation” ground indirectly attacks the

July 2, 2019 decision and should thus be deemed waived for not having been made

102 | etter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 12.

103 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 12, citing ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V. & others v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (“ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V. and others v. Venezuela”), 1CSID Case No.
ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, May 5, 2014, para. 56.

104 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 12-13, citing Abaclat and others (formerly Giovanna a
Beccara and others) v. Argentine Republic (“Abaclat and others v. Argentina”), ICSID Case No. ARB/07/05,
Recommendation on Proposal for Disqualification of Prof. Pierre Tercier and Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg, December
19, 2011, para. 63.

15 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 13-15, referring to Abaclat and others v. Argentina, \CSID
Case No. ARB/07/05, Recommendation on Proposal for Disqualification of Prof. Pierre Tercier and Prof. Albert Jan
van den Berg, December 19, 2011; Urbaser S.A. and Consorcio de Aguas Bilbao Biskaia, Bilbao Biskaia Ur
Partzuergoa y. Argentine Republic, I\CSID Case No. ARB/07/26, Decision on Claimants’ Proposal to Disqualify
Professor Campbell McLachlan, August 12, 2010 (“Urbaser S.A. and others v. Argentina”), Suez, Sociedad General
de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A. and Vivendi Universal, S.A. v. Argentine Republic (“Suez and others v. Argentina”),
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19, Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal,
October 22, 2007.

 

36

115.

116.

promptly.!°° To the extent that the Shareholder Claimants’ complaint relates to the

Tribunal’s decision to withdraw its post-hearing question on November 19, 2019, the

Respondent notes that the ground for disqualification is equally waived. !°7

The Respondent argues that all of the allegations of due process, transparency and

prejudgment violations concern the merits of the Tribunal’s decision and are thus not

proper grounds for a disqualification proposal

1, 198

Regarding the alleged “due process violations”, the Respondent rejects each one of them

also individually, for the following reasons: '!?

a.

Regarding the issue of whether Mr. KrastinS should have applied to be recognized
as the Bank’s representative, there is no rule on who must apply to be considered a
party representative in ICSID proceedings where there are competing claims on
party representation. In any event, Quinn Emmanuel Urquhart and Sullivan UK
LLP represented the Bank until the first half of December 2019, after stating at the
hearing in September 2019 that they represented the Bank. The Respondent also
notes that Mr. Behrends invokes a mandate from August 25, 2019, and that he
would have had ample opportunity to contact the Tribunal earlier and avoid the

issues he complains about.

It is incorrect to say that the Tribunal did not consider the EU law arguments on
representation advanced by the Claimants. The Tribunal considered the CJEU’s
Trasta Komercbanka judgement and considered that the facts were not comparable

to those in the present case.

106 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 16-17, citing the following decision of the Tribunal from
July 2, 2019: “With regard to the Claimants’ contention that they have legitimate expectations under EU law and that
EU law will not prevent access to the dispute resolution provisions of the BIT, the Tribunal notes that whether it has
jurisdiction to determine the EU law of x) i at all is by the bift issue.”
(emphasis omitted).

107 | etter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 17.

108 | etter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 17.

109 | etter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 19-20.

 

37

c. Efficiency is indeed a principle that applies to ICSID proceedings, while “the so-
called due process ‘right’ of the Bank to be represented by former management is
based on non-existent principles that do not obviously apply to investment treaty

arbitration.”

d. To the extent that Mr. Krastin$ would have a conflict of interest in representing the
Bank (which the Respondent denies), the material effect of the alleged situation is
relevant (as it is, e.g., regarding grounds invoked for annulment of ICSID awards),

and therefore such a consideration is proper.

e. The criticism that it is an abdication of duty by the Tribunal to open the door to
reconsider the matter of Mr. Krastin8’s conflict of interest is unfounded. According
to the Respondent, PO8 adopts a careful approach considering the Respondent’s
intra-EU objection, which goes both to jurisdiction and admissibility, and the

Respondent’s position on the role of EU law in the present dispute. !!°

f. The alleged incurable conflict of Mr. Krastin’ to represent the Bank is unfounded.
The Shareholder Claimants fail to mention Mr. Krastin’’s legal obligation to act in
the best interest of the Bank, and the civil and criminal law consequences that he
would be subject to if he failed to do so. The allegation that Mr. KrastinS rejected
the ancillary claim filed on January 8, 2020 does not change the fact that the interest
of the Shareholder Claimants and/or Mr. Behrends remain significantly aligned

with Mr. Krastins’s at this stage of the arbitration.

g. It is incorrect to affirm that the question of residual interest of the Bank
mischaracterizes the representation issue. The new shareholders of the Bank never
showed any interest in continuing the ICSID claim, nor have they presented
themselves to the Tribunal. On this basis, the Respondent raises a number of
questions as to the relationship between the former management board, Mr.
Guselnikov and the shareholders that purchased Mr. Guselnikov family’s shares in

the Bank, including why only three out of four members of the management board

410 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 21.

38

have been signing Mr. Behrends’ alleged power of attorney, and why former
management believes it is appropriate to continue signing new powers of attorney

in spite of their not having power to do so since the appointment of Mr. Krastin§.
117. Regarding the “transparency violations”, the Respondent argues as follows:!!!

a. The criticism that the interests of the Bank and those of the Shareholder Claimants
may not fully converge has been addressed above. Moreover, the question of who
will present arguments against the intra-EU objection is inapposite, as these have

been extensively made by the Shareholder Claimants’ lawyers.

b. The allegedly inappropriate deferral by the Tribunal of its final consideration of the
alleged conflict of interest of Mr. KrastinS has also been addressed above. The

Tribunal’s approach was prudent.

c. The alleged failure by the Tribunal to address the Carnegie Minerals decision is
unfounded and cannot go to establish any bias in favour of either party, as the
Tribunal also does not address the Respondent’s arguments on that point.
Moreover, the Shareholder Claimants’ and Mr. Behrends’ primary argument is
based on the Trasta Komercbanka judgement and EU law, which the Tribunal

should be careful about interpreting or applying.

d. There is no prejudgment or any pre-textual position on the ancillary claim of
January 8, 2020: (i) it is absurd to refer to the September 12, 2019 Insolvency
Judgment as a sham proceeding “since it is based on a finding of ‘failing or likely
to fail’ of the European Central Bank itself’; (ii) in any event, the Tribunal
suspended the proceeding on the merits since September 10, 2019, which means
the ancillary claim has no other purpose that manufacturing a conflict and the
Tribunal needs not to react; (iii) the Tribunal’s order of September 10, 2019 opens

the door to an application by the Claimants to update their Memorial on the Merits,

\11 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 22-24.

39

which they have shown no interest to do; and (iv) no ancillary claim can be

“accepted” until the bifurcated issue has been decided.

e. There can be hardly anything unfair in the Tribunal’s not granting the production
of documents requested by the Shareholder Claimants on January 28, 2020, and the

Tribunal considered it and referred to it specifically in PO8.
118. Regarding the alleged “prejudgment violations”, the Respondent says that: !!?

a. This ground does not arise from PO8 but rather from the Tribunal’s decision on

July 2, 2019, where the Tribunal held as follows:

With regard to the Claimants’ contention that they have legitimate
expectations under EU law and that EU law will not prevent access to the
dispute resolution provisions of the BIT, the Tribunal notes that whether it
has jurisdiction to determine the EU law of legitimate expectations at all is
encompassed by the bifurcated issue. !'*
b. The allegation is premature. The Tribunal has not decided the bifurcated issue and
therefore there is nothing to infer from the status of the matter, either on the link of
the intra-EU objection and legitimate expectations or on whether it may be

appropriate to re-join the matter to the merits of the case.

c. It was the Shareholder Claimants who opposed the consideration of the question of
their legitimate expectations under EU law to use the Latvia-UK BIT. After
opposing its consideration, the Shareholder Claimants complain the issue is

intertwined with the bifurcated issue.

119. Regarding the argument as to the Tribunal’s reaction to the disqualification proposals, the
Respondent argues that this is “yet another instance of an abusive argument.” They note
that “[i]Jn no way did the Tribunal misrepresent any legal standard on the independence or

impartiality of tribunals.”!'* It notes that the quote cited by the Tribunal Members “simply

2 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 25.
43 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 25 (emphasis omitted).
4 Letter from the Respondent dated April 6, 2020, p. 3.

40

120.

121.

122.

states that complaints as to arbitrators’ conduct have been ‘generally’ rejected”!!> and that
“the exceptions mentioned in Mr. Born’s treatise are not even remotely relevant to the

present disqualification proposal.” !!°

d. Mr. Behrends’ Disqualification Proposal

The Respondent argues that Mr. Behrends’ disqualification proposal must be dismissed
first and foremost because it constitutes a complaint about PO8, which is not a ground for

disqualification of an ICSID tribunal.!!7

The Respondent says that Mr. Behrends does not understand the legal standard when he
states that “the underlying motivation of the Challenged Arbitrators” for issuing PO8 is
“irrelevant” and that “[i]t is sufficient to demonstrate an intention not to treat the Bank
equally.” The Respondent relies on Abaclat to the effect that “an arbitrator’s lack of
independence or impartiality requires evidence other than the making of a decision which
is considered to be adverse to one party”, and that a ruling could be such evidence only if
it reveals objective evidence of bad faith.'!* In the Respondent’s view, the Tribunal has not

shown any bad faith justifying the disqualification of its members.

The Respondent addresses, in particular, Mr. Behrends’ criticism of the Tribunal’s
disclosure of submissions to the Administrator and not to him. The Respondent says that
this “does not illustrate any lack of independence or impartiality”. In its view, “an
‘objective observer’ would only see that the Tribunal accepted the appointment of the legal
representative, i.e. the representative designated by the law, of the Bank.”!'? The
Respondent also notes that there were no ex parte communications, as all of the parties

were copied except for Mr. Behrends, who is not a party.

45 Letter from the Respondent dated April 6, 2020, p. 3.
446 Letter from the Respondent dated April 6, 2020, p. 3.

‘17 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 29-30, citing Suez and others

». Argentina, ICSID Case No.

  

ARB/03/19, Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal, October 22, 2007,

para. 35.

48 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 31, citing Abaclat and others v. Argentina, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/05, Recommendation on Proposal for Disqualification of Prof. Pierre Tercier and Prof. Albert Jan van den
Berg, December 19, 2011, paras. 60, 83.

419 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 31.

4l

123. The Respondent finally rejects Mr. Behrends’ allegation that the Tribunal has no power to
tule on whether he represented the Bank, also noting that this is the first time Mr. Behrends
advanced this argument, and that it contradicts the position of the Shareholder

Claimants. !”°

(4) Administrator’s Arguments

124. According to the Administrator, the words “manifest lack” in Art. 57 impose a heavy
burden of proof on the party making the proposal, the facts must be obvious and highly
probable rather than just possible, and a supposed or inferred lack of impartiality does not
suffice. He also states that Art. 57 sets an objective standard. iat Further, the Administrator

argues that “proposals for disqualifications may not be used as an instrument to remove

arbitrators who have rendered a decision that is dissatisfying to one party.” !??

125. The Administrator states that the Shareholder Claimants have failed to demonstrate that
the Tribunal lacked impartiality or independence, and that their application is an attempt
to re-litigate issues previously argued. '** He notes that the Trasta Komercbanka case relied
upon by Mr. Behrends is immaterial to this proceeding, and noted that the first power of
attorney filed by Mr. Behrends was limited in scope to “judicial institutions of the Republic
of Latvia and the European Union”, while the second one, dated December 17, 2019, was

issued after the Insolvency Declaration and therefore the former management was not in a

120 | etter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, p. 31.

"1 Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, paras. 6-16, citing Vattenfall AB and others v. Federal
Republic of Germany, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/12, Recommendation pursuant to the Request by ICSID dated 24
January 2019 of the Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify all Members of the Tribunal dated 12 November 2018,
March 4, 2019, para. 50; Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID
Case No. ARB/12/20, Decision on the Parties’ Proposals to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, November 12, 2013
(“Blue Bank v. Venezuela”), para. 60; Suez and others v. Argentina, ICSID Cases No. ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19,
Decision on a Second Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal, May 12, 2018, paras.
29, 39; Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/19/3, Decision on the challenge to the President of the Committee, October 3, 2001, para. 24; ConocoPhillips
Petrozuata B.V. and others v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify L. Yves
Fortier, Q.C., Arbitrator, March 15, 2016, para. 33; Abaclat and others v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/05,
Recommendation on Proposal for Disqualification of Prof. Pierre Tercier and Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg, December
19, 2011, para. 60; and Electrabel S.A. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/19, Decision on the Claimant’s
Proposal to Disqualify a Member of the Tribunal, February 25, 2008, para. 39.

' Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, para. 14, citing Abaclat and others v. Argentina, ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/05, Recommendation on Proposal for Disqualification of Prof. Pierre Tercier and Prof. Albert Jan van
den Berg, December 19, 2011.

123 1 etter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, para. 17.

42

position to act on behalf of the Bank.'*4 He also distinguishes the Carnegie Minerals
decision relied upon by the Shareholder Claimants on the facts and said that it is

inapplicable to this case. !2>

126. The Administrator further notes that the Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal
“is not targeted at any particular arbitrator, but against the Honorable Tribunal as a whole.”
He also notes that, as a matter of fact, “all that the Shareholder Claimants do is identify

what they perceive as mistakes of the Honorable Tribunal.”!?¢

127. The Administrator also rejects the grounds advanced by the Shareholder Claimants, for the

following reasons:

a. The Shareholder Claimants failed to identify any “due process violations” of their
own due process rights. This, in his view, would prove that the interest of the former

management Board coincides with that of the Shareholder Claimants. !?”

b. Neither the Shareholder Claimants’ nor the Bank’s right to be heard has been
breached. The Tribunal directed that Mr. Behrends be included in copy on any
communications regarding the representation of the Bank. Moreover, the Tribunal
accepted that both the Administrator, in the exercise of his statutory powers, and
the former Directors of the current shareholders, reflecting the separate legal
personality of the Bank, are entitled to be heard if the Tribunal rejects the

jurisdictional challenge on the bifurcated issue. !7°

c. The alleged transparency violations constitute a distortion of the facts. The Tribunal
decided not to follow the case law adduced by the Shareholder Claimants and Mr.

Behrends.'”°

'24 Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, paras. 20-21.

5 Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, para. 22.

'26 Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, paras. 24-25, See also paras. 37-40.
27 Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, paras. 26-27.

28 Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, para. 28.

9 Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, paras. 29-30.

43

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

d. There is no evidence of a conflict of interest. !°°

e. The Tribunal made it clear in PO8 that this decision “must not be seen as pre-
judging either any application to raise such issues by way of an ancillary claim or

the allegations on which the challenge to Mr. Krastins is based.”'?!

(5) Tribunal’s Observations

In their explanations of March 17, 2020, the Tribunal Members denied any bias or

partiality.

The Tribunal Members also stated that they think “it is unwise for us to engage in any
defense or explanation of our own conduct of this arbitration or the rulings we have made
[...] except to state that we have done our best to address and decide fairly the numerous

and often difficult issues that have been presented to us.”

Finally, the Tribunal Members explained that, at the time of the issuance of PO8, they

understood that the ancillary claims had not yet been made. !**

ANALYSIS

(dd) Former Managers’ Disqualification Proposal
a. The Requirements to Propose the Disqualification of Tribunal Members
Article 57 of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:
A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the disqualification of any of
its members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the qualities
required by paragraph (1) of Article 14. A party to arbitration proceedings may, in

addition, propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that he was
ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of Chapter IV.

Pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, only a party to the proceeding is entitled

to propose the disqualification of a Tribunal member. Thus, as a preliminary matter it is

'30 Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, paras. 32-34 and 46.
'5! Letter from the Administrator dated March 12, 2020, para. 36.
82 Letter from the Tribunal Members dated March 17, 2020.

44

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

necessary to determine whether Mr. Behrends, who filed a disqualification proposal “on
behalf of AS PNB Banka”, can be considered an authorized representative of the Bank.

Only if that were the case can the Chair consider his application as being made by “a party”.

b. The Power to Decide on the Representation of the Bank

The first question is thus whether (i) the Chair has the power to determine de novo who
represents the Bank for purposes of deciding the disqualification proposal filed by Mr.
Behrends, or (ii) the Chair should defer to the Tribunal on the issue of representation of the

Bank.

According to the Shareholder Claimants, the Chair “stands in the shoes of a tribunal,” and
“as part of its power to decide whether to uphold a proposal for disqualification of a tribunal
under Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 [...] has
competence to determine whether a putative representative is entitled to file a proposal for
disqualification on behalf of that party.” '?? The Respondent, on the other hand, says that
the Chair’s role must be interpreted strictly and that it cannot be assimilated to the role of

the Tribunal under the ICSID Convention.!*
Art. 44 of the ICSID Convention provides that:

Any arbitration proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of this Section and, except as the parties otherwise agree, in accordance with the
Arbitration Rules in effect on the date on which the parties consented to arbitration.
If any question of procedure arises which is not covered by this Section or the
Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by the parties, the Tribunal shall decide the
question.

ICSID Arbitration Rule 19 provides that “[t]he tribunal shall make the orders required for

the conduct of the proceeding.”

Who represents the parties is a fundamental decision regarding the conduct of the

proceeding, which, pursuant to Art. 44 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration

'53 Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 9.
34 Letter from the Respondent dated March 12, 2020, pp. 27-28.

45

Rule 19, is vested in the Tribunal. In this case, this means that the Chair shall defer to the

Tribunal’s decision on the representation of the Bank.

138. Art. 58 of the Convention provides that the Chair shall decide a disqualification proposal
if it concerns a majority of the arbitrators or in the event that the unchallenged arbitrators
are equally divided, but does not suggest that the Chair has the power to make decisions on
party representation, or that the Chair should ignore a decision made by the Tribunal on

that matter.

139. The Shareholder Claimants appear to suggest that the Chair’s power to decide on the
representation of a party is inherent in the Chair’s role in deciding the disqualification
proposal.'*> This is incorrect; adopting the approach suggested by the Shareholder
Claimants would amount to ignoring a decision made by the Tribunal in the conduct of the

arbitral proceeding.

140. None of the authorities cited by the Shareholder Claimants and Mr. Behrends support their
position. They invoke the decision rendered in Carnegie Minerals (Gambia) Limited v.
Gambia,'*© for the proposition that the Tribunal failed to consider the issue and that, in the
circumstances, “it is incumbent on the Chairman to consider and address the prevailing
ICSID practice as part of an independent and reasoned decision on the issue” of the
representation of the Bank.!*’ This decision, however, was made by an ad hoc annulment
committee and not by the Chair. Pursuant to Art. 52 of the ICSID Convention, Art. 44
applies mutatis mutandis to proceedings before annulment committees. Thus, an annulment
committee is in the same position as an arbitral tribunal regarding procedural issues. No

similar powers are granted to the Chair in the context of a disqualification proposal.

'35 Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 10.

'36 Carnegie Minerals v. Gambia, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/19, Decision on Representation (Annulment Proceeding),
October 8, 2016.

'37 Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 15.

46

141.

142.

143.

The passage from the Chair’s decision in Conoco Phillips Petrozuata B.V and others v.
Venezuela is also inapposite.'** As acknowledged by the Shareholder Claimants, that
passage concerned a decision as to whether to hold a hearing. The Chair can decide the
manner in which it will hear the parties’ submissions on a disqualification proposal.
However, that does not extend powers to the Chair that belong to the Tribunal (such as the
issue of party representation) or allow the Chair to ignore the Tribunal’s decision on party

representation.

c. The Scope of the Tribunal’s Decision on the Representation of the Bank

In this case, the Tribunal has made a decision on the representation of the Bank in PO8. In

the dispositive part the Tribunal stated the following:

a. The Tribunal recognises Mr. Krastin’ as the representative of the Bank for the
purposes of completing submissions on the Bifurcated Issue in answer to the
Tribunal questions.

b. Mr. Krastins will be given access to the submissions on the Bifurcated Issue.

c. Until further order, the Tribunal rejects Mr. Behrends’ application to be accepted
as the representative of the Bank. The parties are directed to continue to copy Mr.
Behrends on any communication relating to the representation of the Bank.

d. The Tribunal accepts that both Mr. Krastin§, in the exercise of his statutory
powers, and the former Directors or the current shareholders, reflecting the
separate legal personality of the Bank, are entitled to be heard if the Tribunal
rejects the Respondent’s jurisdictional challenge on the Bifurcated Issue.

e. If that occurs, further submissions will be sought at that time.
Mr. Behrends and the Shareholder Claimants advance a number of arguments regarding
the scope of this decision. Mr. Behrends argues that PO8 “does not decide who the proper
representative of the Bank is in the present proceedings.” !*° He also says that PO8 “does

not answer the question as to the proper representative of the bank with respect to proposals

'38 Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 9, citing ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V.
and others v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the
Tribunal, May 5, 2014, para. 43.

'59 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 14 (emphasis in the original).

47

144.

145.

for disqualification”,'*° and suggests that the Tribunal believes “there are specific

circumstances in the present case that allow [it] to postpone the determination of the proper
representative of the Bank.”!*! Similarly, the Shareholder Claimants state that “[tJhe
Tribunal did not hold that the Insolvency Administrator was the representative of PNB
Banka for all purposes in these ICSID proceedings, let alone for the specific purpose of
filing a proposal for disqualification under Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention
and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.”!#? Further, the Shareholder Claimants argue that “[t]he
Tribunal did not hold that the Former Board (including via its counsel, Mr Behrends) does

not represent PNB Banka ‘in this proceeding’ (c.f, the Bifurcated Issue).”!3

The reading of PO8 by Mr. Behrends’ and the Shareholder Claimants’ is also not correct.

The Tribunal recognized Mr. Krastins “as the representative of the Bank for the purposes
of completing submissions on the Bifurcated Issue in answer to the Tribunal’s questions,”
and expressly “reject[ed] Mr. Behrends’ application to be accepted as the representative of
the Bank.” This constitutes a decision as to who represents the Bank in this arbitration, and
who does not. The fact that the Tribunal said that its decision regarding the Administrator
is “for the purposes of completing submissions on the Bifurcated Issue” does not change
the fact that the Tribunal has made a decision on the representation of the Bank which

remains valid today.

Deference to the Tribunal’s decision on the Bank’s representation does not amount to a
“tacit expansion” of the Administrator’s admission as a representative of the Bank, as
suggested by Mr. Behrends. PO8 is clear as to who is recognized as the proper
representative of the Bank today. Moreover, a party cannot be deemed to have a
representative for the purposes of making submissions before the Tribunal and a different
representative in relation to applications before the Chair in the context of the same arbitral
proceeding. From the moment the Administrator is recognized as the Bank’s representative

by the Tribunal, he is the Bank’s representative in the arbitral proceeding until the Tribunal

40 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 47. See also Letter from the Former Managers
dated February 17, 2020, para. 9.

41 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 15.

142

Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 11(c) (emphasis in the original).

45 Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 11(d) (emphasis in the original).

48

146.

147.

148.

149.

decides otherwise. The Tribunal’s decision on party representation applies to applications
before the Chair. The disqualification proposal cannot be dissociated from the arbitral

proceeding in the manner proposed by the Shareholder Claimants and Mr. Behrends.

The Chair does not see how the alleged “provisional” nature of the Tribunal’s decision in
PO8 may be relevant to its decision as to whether Mr. Behrends’ disqualification proposal
was validly made on behalf of the Bank.'*# Even if that were the case, it does not change
the Tribunal’s determination that, at the time Mr. Behrends filed the disqualification
proposal, purportedly on behalf of AS PNB Banka, the only recognized representative of

the Bank in this arbitration was the Administrator.

The Chairman’s decision does not mean any recognition of some sort of decision-making
power to the challenged arbitrators with respect to the disqualification proposal.'*° Nor
does it mean that it would allow the Tribunal to “immunise itself against the PNB Banka
Proposal.”'#© The decision is consistent with the allocation of power under the ICSID

Convention.

The Chair notes the Shareholder Claimants’ and Mr. Behrends’ arguments that
Mr. Behrends’ disqualification proposal arises directly out of PO8, the criticism against
PO8, and the fact that Mr. Behrends represents the Bank before institutions of the European
Union. However, Art. 58 of the ICSID Convention is not the appropriate mechanism to
challenge a decision rendered by the Tribunal and, as noted above, does not allow the Chair

to ignore the Tribunal’s decision on party representation.

d. Conclusion

For the reasons stated above, Mr. Behrends’ proposal for disqualification of February 17,
2020 is rejected as he did not represent the Bank at the time of its submission. Mr.

Behrends’ further disqualification proposal of March 29, 2020 is also rejected.

44 See, ¢.g., Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 33.

45 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 28, 2020, para. 29.
446 Letter from the Shareholder Claimants dated February 27, 2020, para. 11(b).

49

150. The Chair takes note of the Administrator’s observations to the authenticity of the
signatures of the members of the Board in the power of attorney accompanied by

Mr. Behrends. Given the Chair’s decision above, it is unnecessary to address this issue.

(2) Former Managers’ Request to Access the File

151. Mr. Behrends’ request for access to the file must also be rejected as he is not a party and

does not represent the Bank in this proceeding.

(3) Shareholder Claimants’ Disqualification Proposal
a. The Applicable Legal Standard

152. Art. 57 of the ICSID Convention allows a party to propose the disqualification of any

member of a tribunal.

153. As acknowledged by the Shareholder Claimants, a number of decisions have concluded

vlaT

that the word “manifest” in this provision means “evident” or “obvious, and that it

relates to the ease with which the alleged lack of the required qualities can be perceived. '“*
154. The required qualities are stated in Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention as follows:

Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high moral character
and recognized competence in the fields of law, commerce, industry or finance,
who may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment. Competence in the
field of law shall be of particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of
Arbitrators.

155. In this case, the Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal alleges that “there are

reasonable doubts as to the ‘independent judgement’ of each of the members of the

Tribunal due to an appearance of lack of impartiality or bias.” '4?

'47 Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on the Proposal for
Disqualification of Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia, December 13, 2013 (“Burlington v, Ecuador”), para. 68 and
footnote 83; Abaclat and others v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a
Majority of the Tribunal, February 4, 2014, para, 71 and footnote 25; Blue Bank v. Venezuela, para. 61 and footnote
43; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., and others v. Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal
to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, May 5, 2014, para. 39.

48 C, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Second Edition (2009), p. 1202, paras. 134-154.

49 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, para. 11.

 

50

156. While the English version of Article 14 of the ICSID Convention refers to “independent
judgment,” and the French version to “toute garantie d’indépendance dans l’exercice de
leurs fonctions” (guaranteed independence in exercising their functions), the Spanish
version requires “imparcialidad de juicio” (impartiality of judgment). Given that all three
versions are equally authentic, it is understood that pursuant to Article 14(1) arbitrators

must be both impartial and independent.'*°

157. Impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a party. Independence
is characterized by the absence of external control. Independence and impartiality both

“protect parties against arbitrators being influenced by factors other than those related to

the merits of the case.” !5!

158. The parties agree that Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention do not require proof
of actual dependence or bias; rather, it is sufficient to establish the appearance of

dependence or bias. !°?

159. The parties also agree that the legal standard applied to a proposal to disqualify an arbitrator

is an “objective standard based on a reasonable evaluation of the evidence by a third

153

party. As a consequence, the subjective belief of the party requesting the

disqualification is not enough to satisfy the requirements of the Convention. !*4

150 Burlington v. Ecuador, para. 65; Abaclat and others v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on the
Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, February 4, 2014, para. 74; Blue Bank v. Venezuela, para. 58;
ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., and others v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to
Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, May 5, 2014, para. 50.

151 Blue Bank v. Venezuela, para. 59; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., and others v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, May 5, 2014, para. 51; Urbaser S.A.
v. Argentina, para. 43.

'S2 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 17; Letter from the Respondent
dated March 12, 2020, p. 12; Burlington v. Ecuador, para. 66; Abaclat and others v. Argentina, ICSID Case No.
ARB/O07/5, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, February 4, 2014, para. 76; Blue Bank
v. Venezuela, para. 59; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., and others v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30,
Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, May 5, 2014, para. 52.

153 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 17; Letter from the Respondent
dated March 12, 2020, p. 12; Blue Bank v. Venezuela, para. 60; Suez and others v. Argentina, ICSID Cases Nos.
ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19, Decision on the Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal,
October 22, 2007, para. 28.

154 Yq,

51

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

Therefore, for the Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal to be accepted, they
must show that there is an evident or obvious appearance of a lack of impartiality or

independence, based on a reasonable evaluation of the relevant facts.

With respect to the timeliness of disqualification proposals, ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1)

reads as follows:

A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article 57 of the
Convention shall promptly, and in any event before the proceeding is declared
closed, file its proposal with the Secretary-General, stating its reasons therefor.
The ICSID Convention and Rules do not specify a number of days within which a proposal
for disqualification must be filed. Accordingly, the timeliness of a proposal must be

determined on a case by case basis.!*°

b. The Disqualification Proposal

As noted above, the Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal is grounded on the
allegation that “there are reasonable doubts as to the ‘independent judgment’ of each of the
members of the Tribunal due to an appearance of lack of impartiality or bias.” These doubts
would arise from a series of alleged violations by the Members of the Tribunal, namely: (i)
the due process violations; (ii) the transparency violations; and (iii) the prejudgment

violation.

(i) Due process allegations

The purpose of Art. 57 of the ICSID Convention is to ensure that arbitrators possess the
qualities required by Art. 14(1) of the ICSID Convention. Other provisions of the ICSID
Convention offer remedies against due process violations but do not allocate that task to
the Chair. In assessing the arguments advanced by the Shareholder Claimants the Chair has
focused solely on whether the circumstances are indicative of a manifest lack of the

qualities required by Art. 14(1).

'SSBurlington v. Ecuador, para. 73; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V., and others v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, May 5, 2014, para. 39; Abaclat and
others v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal,
February 4, 2014, para. 68.

52

165.

166.

167.

156 Shareholder Claimants’

The Shareholder Claimants say the Tribunal “started with the adverse assumption that it
was Former Management who needed to apply to be ‘recognised’ as representatives of the
Bank by the Tribunal, despite the fact that Former Management were recognised in the
ICSID Proceedings from the outset.” !°° The Chair does not find anything in PO8 indicating

in “adverse assumption” with respect to the submissions made by the Administrator and
Mr. Behrends on the issue of representation. The chronology of events shows that the
Insolvency Declaration gave rise to a dispute between three members of the former Board
and the Administrator as to who represents the Bank in this arbitration. The Tribunal had
to resolve the controversy arising from the Insolvency Declaration and gave everyone

involved ample opportunity to make submissions on the matter before issuing its decision.

The Shareholder Claimants also criticize the Tribunal for failing to identify the law
applicable to the issue of representation and for failing to apply EU law. The Shareholder
Claimants do not explain how this alleged deficiency would establish an appearance of
lack of independence or bias on each one of the Members of the Tribunal. They simply
point out that “the faults in the Tribunal’s approach are so fundamental and basic” and the
Tribunal’s approach to applicable law “so obviously objectionable” that a reasonable
observer would have reasonable doubts as to the Tribunal’s impartiality.'°” Yet an alleged
failure by the Tribunal in the application of the law is not per se sufficient to disqualify its
Members on the basis of alleged lack of independence or bias. As indicated above, Art. 57
of the ICSID Convention is not the appropriate mechanism to address alleged failures in

the Tribunal’s reasoning.

The same conclusion applies to the Shareholder Claimants’ arguments that the Tribunal:
(i) prioritized expediency in deciding the bifurcated issue over the decision on the
representation of the Bank; (ii) deferred the issue of conflict of interest even though it
acknowledged that the Administrator was recognized as the Bank’s representative subject
to allegations of conflict of interest or other disentitling circumstances; or (iii) deferred the
“final” decision on the representation of the Bank, leaving the door open for a finding that

the former Board represents the Bank. All of these allegations challenge the Tribunal’s

 

squalification proposal dated February 18, 2020, paras. 22 and 41.

'57 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 44.

53

168.

169.

170.

158 Procedural Order No. 8,
159 Shareholder Claimants’

reasoning in PO8. Additionally, the Shareholder Claimants have not substantiated how
these circumstances show an appearance of a lack of independence or bias by the Tribunal

Members.

The Chair does not find that the Tribunal “ignored” the conflicts of interest alleged by the
Shareholder Claimants. The Tribunal considered them but found that the “alleged conflict
does not have any material effect for the resolution of the jurisdictional question presented
by the Bifurcated Issue.”!>* That decision falls within the scope of the Tribunal’s functions

under the ICSID Convention.

The Shareholder Claimants also argue that the Tribunal mischaracterized the issue of
representation by referring to the representation of the “residual interests of the holders of
equity in the Bank.” They say that the Tribunal: (i) minimized the former Board’s interest
in representing the Bank and presumed that the Bank is insolvent, whereas the Insolvency
Declaration is being challenged before the Tribunal; (ii) suggested that it will permit the
Bank to be represented simultaneously by the former management and by the
Administrator, or that it may decide on an ad hoc basis who represents the Bank for any
particular decision; and (iii) “indicated that it may decide that the Former Management are
[...] not the proper representative of the ‘residual interest of the holders of equity in the
Bank’ and that this rests with the ‘new shareholders’, who have at no time sought to be

represented in the ICSID Proceedings.”

The second and third arguments above are speculative and thus must be rejected. So far,
the Tribunal has determined that only the Administrator represents the Bank in this
arbitration. As to the alleged minimization of the former Board’s interest in representing
the Bank, the Tribunal “accept[ed] that both Mr. KrastinS, in the exercise of his statutory
powers, and the former Directors or the current shareholders, reflecting the separate legal
personality of the Bank, are entitled to be heard if the Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s

jurisdictional challenge on the Bifurcated Issue.” '® This does not suggest that the Tribunal

8.
squalification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 53.

 
 

60 Procedural Order No. 8, p. 9.

54

171.

172.

173.

161 Shareholder Claimants’

162

“minimized the extent of the Former Management’s interest in representing the Bank.”
Finally, the concern as to the alleged “presumption” that the Bank was insolvent does not
appear to be justified. The Tribunal actually acknowledged that “the Shareholder Claimants
and the Board Members challenge as alleged breaches of the BIT the declaration of
insolvency of the Bank and the insolvency procedure,” and said that “[t]his Procedural
Order must not be seen as pre-judging either any application to raise any such issues by
way of an ancillary claim or the allegations on which the challenge to Mr. Krastins is
based.” It also held that that “the submissions on the Bank Representation issue overlap
with merits issues, upon which the Tribunal should not adjudicate before it has determined

whether it has jurisdiction.”

Finally, the allegation that PO8 “deprived the Bank of its right to be represented by Former
Management without justification, and undermined its right to be heard by recognising the
Insolvency Administrator as the Bank’s representative despite the fact that he has incurable

conflicts of interest”!°!

is not persuasive. In the absence of specific circumstances
indicating an appearance of lack of independence or bias, the outcome of the representation

decision cannot justify the disqualification of the Tribunal Members.

(ii) Transparency allegations

The Shareholder Claimants’ also argue that PO8 “was based on adverse assumptions,
indicated prejudgment on whether the Insolvency Administrator has conflicts of interest,
and failed to address ICSID and other authority on the matter.”!©? These aspects of the
decision, in their view, “imply that it was pretextual and designed to achieve a pre-

determined purpose” and “amplify the appearance of bias.”

They complain, in particular, about the Tribunal’s statement that “[c]ounsel for the
Shareholder Claimants will answer the Tribunal’s questions, having previously made
submissions on behalf of all Claimants, including the Bank,” and the Tribunal’s statement
that “[nJothing in the submissions made by Mr. Behrends [...] suggests that the former

Directors have any interest which diverges from that of the Shareholder Claimants.” In the

 

squalification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 54.

Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 55.

55

174.

175.

163

Shareholder Claimants’ view, not only does this affect the Bank’s right to be heard but also
the Tribunal cannot assume that the former Board’s arguments will be identical to those of
the Shareholder Claimants. This, in their view, constitutes an assumption that is adverse to

the interests of the Bank.'%

These statements must be read in the broader context of PO8. The Tribunal noted that: (i)
it had “received full submissions on the Bifurcated Issue, including on behalf of the Bank”;
(ii) the answers to some questions on the bifurcated issue are the only matters pending
before the Tribunal; and (iii) “[i]n the interest of fairness and efficiency it is desirable that
the Tribunal determines as soon as practicable the issue raised by the Bifurcated Issue as
to whether it has jurisdiction.”'®+ These statements suggest that the Tribunal, confirming
that full submissions had been filed on behalf of the Bank on the bifurcated issue, was
concerned about efficiency in the conduct of the proceeding. Indeed, as noted by the
Respondent, Mr. Behrends’ presentation on behalf of the former Board was first made on
December 10, 2019 (that is, almost three months after the Insolvency Declaration and the
appointment of the Administrator), and after almost three months from the hearing on the
bifurcated issue. Also, the Bank was represented by the same counsel as the Shareholder
Claimants up to December 17, 2019. In the circumstances, the Tribunal’s decision is not

indicative of an appearance of lack of independence or bias.

The Tribunal Members also acknowledged that “the submissions on the Bank
Representation issue overlap with merits issues, upon which the Tribunal should not
adjudicate before determining whether it has jurisdiction.” The Shareholder Claimants
suggest that this was an attempt by the Tribunal “to justify its failure ‘finally’ to decide the
Representation Issue.”!® They also argue that this does not reflect ICSID practice. The
relevant standard, however, is whether the concern expressed by the Tribunal Members is
indicative of an appearance of lack of independence or bias. In the circumstances
mentioned above, the Chair’s conclusion is that it is not. First, it is speculative to suggest

at this stage that the Tribunal’s decision to recognise the Administrator as the representative

Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 56.

'64 Procedural Order No. 8, pp. 7-8.

165

Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 57.

56

176.

177.

178.

of the Bank is not final. Second, as explained above, the Tribunal appears to have weighed
a number of different factors in its decision. The circumstances do not indicate an

appearance of lack of independence or bias on the part of the Tribunal Members.

The Shareholder Claimants further argue that the Tribunal “provided no justification for
why it recognized the Insolvency Administrator,” and that it appears to have disregarded
the Carnegie Minerals decision and other arguments advanced by the Shareholder
Claimants.'© This objection goes to the reasoning of the Tribunal’s decision. Alleged
deficiencies in the reasoning of the Tribunal are not in and of themselves enough to

establish a lack of independence or bias.

Finally, the Shareholder Claimants argue that the Tribunal’s position regarding the
ancillary claim is “pretextual and designed to achieve a predetermined result.” They note
the Tribunal’s statement in PO8 that: “[t]his Procedural Order must not be seen as pre-
judging either any application to raise any such issues by way of an ancillary claim or the
allegations on which the challenge to Mr. Krastin’ is based.”!®’ In the Shareholder
Claimants’ view, “it seems that the Tribunal has treated the Ancillary Claims not as
admitted, but rather as subject to an application for leave of the Tribunal to admit the
Ancillary Claim, to support its position that no conflict of interest has arisen yet.” They

contend, however, that the Ancillary Claim is properly before the Tribunal.

In their observations on the disqualification proposals, the Tribunal Members clarified that
“the Tribunal did not understand, when it issued Procedural Order No. 8, that the Claimants
had yet made an ancillary claim.” The Tribunal Members explained that “[t]he Claimants
had stated that they would make such a claim, but they had not yet made it.”!® The Tribunal
Members referred to the relevant correspondence with the parties on the issue of the
ancillary claim. The relevant passages of the letters notifying the ancillary claims (as

highlighted in the Tribunal Member’s observations) are as follows:

'66 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 58.

'61 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, paras. 59 et seq.
'68 Letter from the Tribunal Members dated March 17, 2020.

s7

Letter from Mr. Guselnikov to the Tribunal of December 4, 2019:

We write on behalf of Mr Grigory Guselnikov, the second named Claimant (Mr
Guselnikov). The purpose of the present letter is to notify the Tribunal of
ancillary claims brought by Mr Guselnikov, pursuant to Article 46 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

[..-]

We hereby notify the Tribunal and the Respondent of Mr Guselnikov’s ancillary
claims arising out of the Respondent’s wrongful conduct described above (the
Ancillary Claims). For the avoidance of any doubt, the Ancillary Claims, which
will be further particularised in due course (either in the Claimants’ updated
Memorial or in subsequent submissions), concern, in addition to the Criminal
Proceeding, the other supposedly ongoing “criminal proceedings” that relate to the
harassment and attempted extortion of Mr Guselnikov by Mr RimSéviés and his
affiliates, insofar as Latvia has failed properly to investigate and pursue those
proceedings in accordance with its international obligations.

Separately, the Tribunal may note that the present letter does not reflect the full
scope of ancillary claims that the Claimants (together or individually) might
intend to bring (in accordance with Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Rule
40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules) arising out of the subject-matter of the dispute
(including, amongst other things, the decision of Latvian authorities to deem AS
PNB Banka insolvent). At this juncture, all rights are fully reserved.

eek

Letter from the Second to sixth Claimants to the Tribunal of January 8, 2020:

We write on behalf of the second to sixth named Claimants. We hereby notify the
Tribunal that the second to sixth named Claimants challenge the Decision of the
Riga City Vidzeme District Court dated 12 September 2019 (the Insolvency
Judgment) and the conduct of Latvia’s Financial and Capital Market Commission
(FCMC) triggering the adoption of the Insolvency Judgment, and respectfully
wish and intend to file ancillary claims in respect of such measures in the present
proceeding.

[..-]

Our clients reserve their rights to make further submissions on the matters
described in brief above. With the Tribunal’s leave, we shall file further
submissions on the above-notified ancillary claims, in the form of a brief
“Request for Arbitration”, or otherwise, and on a date that the Tribunal may
direct. Our clients respectfully would require at least three weeks in order to
prepare and file such submissions.

58

179.

180.

181.

182.

Before going any further in the assessment of the relevant correspondence on this matter,
the Chair notes that the formulations used by the Claimants in their December 4 and
January 8 letters are ambiguous. In the circumstances, the Chair has no reason to doubt the

Tribunal Members’ assertion that they believed the ancillary claim had not yet been made.

The Shareholder Claimants also complain that on February 17, 2020, they requested a
clarification from the Tribunal on their ancillary claim and the Tribunal failed to provide
it. Specifically, they requested the Tribunal “to clarify that its statement in the letter dated
30 January 2020 was not intended to mean that the Shareholder Claimants’ Insolvency
Ancillary Claim is not properly brought before the Tribunal and that any permission to
admit such a claim is required.”!° The Tribunal’s letter to the Parties of January 30, 2020,

read as follows:

The Tribunal takes note of the Shareholder Claimants’ request for leave to make
an ancillary claim, dated January 8, 2020. The Tribunal also notes the
Shareholder Claimants’ further elaboration on this claim in their letter dated
January 24, 2020.

The subject of the ancillary claim notified by the Claimants on January 8, 2020
appears to be closely related to the merits of the case. The Tribunal suspended
the proceeding on the merits on September 10, 2019.

The Tribunal will therefore hold the Shareholder Claimants’ application for
leave until it has made its decision on the Bifurcated Issue. If it is necessary to
consider the application at that point, it will set a timetable for submissions on that
application then.

In response to the Shareholder Claimants letter of February 17, 2020, the Tribunal stated

that “it takes note of the content of the Shareholder Claimants’ letter of today.”

The issue before the Chair is now whether the Tribunal’s alleged failure to provide the
requested clarification is indicative of an appearance of lack of independence or bias. The
Chair finds that it is not. Both the letter of February 17, and the Tribunal’s reaction to it,
occurred more than two weeks after the issuance of PO8. The Chair fails to see any
connection between the handling of the ancillary claim and the decision on the

representation of the Bank. It also fails to see how this reaction would be indicative of a

‘69 Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal dated February 18, 2020, para. 65, citing SCC-44, p. 3.

59

183.

184.

185.

186.

187.

lack of independence or bias independent of PO8, given that the proceeding on the merits

had been suspended.

Finally, the Shareholder Claimants complain that the Tribunal “issued [PO8] without even
waiting for the responses of the Insolvency Administrator and the Respondent to the
Shareholder Claimants’ letter dated 28 January 2020.” The Shareholder Claimants refer to
a letter addressed by them to the Administrator and the Respondent — not to the Tribunal —
requesting the disclosure of information about a meeting between the Administrator and
counsel for the Respondent. While the Tribunal was in copy of that letter, neither party
requested the Tribunal to wait until the Administrator and the Respondent have responded
to the Shareholder Claimants before issuing the decision on the Bank’s representation. In
the absence of a specific request to that effect, the Chair does not see why the Tribunal
would have had to wait for the Administrator and the Respondent to address the

Shareholder Claimants’ letter.

On the basis of the above, the Chair does not agree that the Tribunal’s handling of the

ancillary claim demonstrates an appearance of lack of independence or bias.

(iti) Prejudgment allegation
In the view of the Shareholder Claimants, PO8 “reveals that the bifurcated issue will be
conclusively decided, one way or another, in the bifurcated phase, without allowing for the

joinder of the Bifurcated Issue to the merits.”!””

The Respondent stated that “the Tribunal has not decided the Bifurcated Issue and as such
there is nothing to infer from the status of the matter, whether on the link between intra-
EU objection and legitimate expectations at EU law or on whether it may be appropriate to

rejoin the matter to the merits of the case.”!7!

The argument advanced by the Shareholder Claimants is speculative. The Tribunal has not

yet rendered its decision on the bifurcated issue. PO8 is only a decision on the

170 Shareholder Claimants’ letter of March 26, 2020, para. 63. See also Shareholder Claimants’ letter of March 26,
2020, paras. 63-65(emphasis in the original).

"7! Respondent's letter of March 12, 2020, p. 25 (emphasis in the original).

60

188.

189.

190.

191.

representation of the Bank. The Chair cannot regard PO8 as conclusive evidence on what
the Tribunal may decide in the future regarding the bifurcated issue and cannot infer an

appearance of lack of independence or bias on that basis.

Having found that the Shareholder Claimants’ argument fails on the merits, it is
unnecessary to address the issue of whether this ground was advanced promptly pursuant

to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.

(iv) Tribunal’s observations on the disqualification proposals

The Chair does not see the Tribunal’s observations on the disqualification proposals as
indicating an appearance of lack of independence or bias. As noted by the Respondent, the
Tribunal Members refer to a general statement. In quoting that passage, the Tribunal
Members expressly noted that footnotes had been omitted. Even if one were to assume that
the omissions noted by the Shareholder Claimants were relevant, it is difficult to infer that

the Tribunal had any intention to mislead.

The arguments advanced by Mr. Behrends (i) that it was inappropriate for the Tribunal to
provide a collective statement, and (ii) that it was inappropriate for a challenged arbitrator
to avoid any substantive comment but instead launch a formal counterattack against the

parties proposing the disqualification, '””

are also rejected. The Arbitration Rules do not
include any specific requirements for the submission of observations by the challenged
arbitrators. Besides, as noted above, nothing in the observations submitted by the

challenged arbitrators indicate an appearance of lack of independence or bias.

(v) Other arguments

In this section, the Chair will address the arguments advanced by Mr. Behrends, as they
have been adopted by reference by the Shareholder Claimants. Mr. Behrends’ arguments
have been summarized above and are not reproduced here. To the extent that these
arguments overlap with the Shareholder Claimants’ arguments, reference will be made to

the analysis regarding the Shareholder Claimants’ disqualification proposal.

'2 Letter from the Former Management dated March 26, 2020, paras. 5-12.

61

192.

193.

For the reasons explained below, the Chair does not find that any of the arguments

advanced by Mr. Behrends justifies the disqualification of the Tribunal Members.

A number of the arguments advanced by Mr. Behrends fail for the same reason as those
advanced by the Shareholder Claimants. This is the case, for example, of Mr. Behrends’
arguments that: (i) the Tribunal “purports to exclude all or virtually all procedural rights of
the Bank [...] by provisionally limiting the powers of representation of potential
representatives of the Bank”;!”* (ii) “tribunals do not have the power to admit or reject
representatives of the parties [...] provisionally or subject to restrictions or conditions or
by admitting them only for certain limited purposes” and the task of satisfying themselves
that each party is appropriately represented may never be postponed; !” (iii) the Tribunal
proposes to resolve the representation issue at a later stage without finding that it is
impossible to resolve the issue immediately;'” (iv) while PO8 recognizes that other
persons may be the appropriate representative of the Bank, the decision is not justified
because those people have not been contacted;'"° (v) an overlap of representation issues
and merits issues does not justify a limitation of the powers of representation of a party;!””
(vi) the Tribunal cannot compartmentalize different issues and thereby create sub-
proceedings that run consecutively or simultaneously with different representations by the
parties. '’8 (vii) the Tribunal cannot identify different representatives of a party for purposes
of representing different interests in connection with a party;!” (viii) the challenged
arbitrators “see it as their duty to identify interests in connection with the Bank which they
regard as legitimate and therefore deserving ‘representation’ in the present
proceedings”; !*° (ix) any speculation by the Tribunal that the appropriate representation of

a party is less relevant in certain parts of the proceeding is in itself an indication of

"3 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 4.

"74 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 6-8.

"5 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 14.

"6 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 15.

"77 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 25-26.

"8 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 28-29.

"9 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 30-32.

'80 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 34. See also paras. 35-36.

62

194.

195.

196.

impermissible bias; '*! and (x) a tribunal cannot speculate with the representation of a party
and dispense with its representation, or limit it, on the ground that they are unlikely to make

any contributions which the Tribunal regards as important. !8?

The first three arguments suggest that the Tribunal has “postponed” or not “finally” ruled
on the representation of the Bank. As stated above, it is speculative to suggest at this stage
of the proceeding that the Tribunal’s decision to recognise the Administrator as the
representative of the Bank is not final.'** In any event, all of these arguments concern the
reasoning of the Tribunal. The Chair can neither review the merits of the Tribunal’s
decision, nor decide the disqualification proposal on the basis of alleged errors in the
Tribunal’s reasoning. It can only decide to disqualify the challenged arbitrators if their
decisions or statements indicate an appearance of a lack of independence or bias. The Chair
has already explained it did not find such evidence in PO8. When read in the broader
context of PO8, the Tribunal Member’s statements on the overlap of representation and
merits issues and the identification of the different interests arising from the Insolvency
Declaration do not show an appearance of lack of independence or bias on the part of the

Tribunal Members. '**

Mr. Behrends also stated that “the Challenged Arbitrators explicitly state that they will not
treat the Bank equally”. !*° However, the text of PO8 contains no statement by the Tribunal

to that effect.

Mr. Behrends also says that the motivation behind PO8 may be that the Tribunal Members
“are compromised” by statements made by the Board to the effect that the proceeding may
have been fundamentally undermined. Nothing in PO8 appears to confirm Mr. Behrends’
views. This cannot not serve as the basis for a finding of an appearance of lack of

independence or bias.

'8! Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, paras. 17-18.

182

183

Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 18.
See para. 175 above.

'84 See paras. 167 and 174-175 above.

185

Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 12.

63

197.

198.

199.

200.

Mr. Behrends further argues that PO8 is not justified because he “‘acts on the basis of a
valid power of attorney predating the appointment of the Administrator which the
Administrator expressly has not attempted to revoke.” '8° The Chair has concluded that the

decision on the representation of the Bank belongs to the Tribunal.

Mr. Behrends states that the Tribunal failed to provide him with a submission filed by the
Administrator on December 17, 2019, in spite of his allegedly having been informed
otherwise. The Tribunal ordered that Mr. Behrends be included in copy of correspondence
on the issue of the representation of the Bank on December 20, 2019, for the purposes of
making submissions on the representation. Thus, from this date onwards, Mr. Behrends
should have received the correspondence on the representation issue. He was inadvertently
omitted from an email of the Secretary of the Tribunal of December 23, 2019,
acknowledging receipt of an email from the Administrator, and the email was forwarded
to him on December 24, 2019. The reassurance given to Mr. Behrends on December 24
was intended to confirm that he had received all the correspondence on the representation
issue since December 20, 2019. It could never refer to earlier correspondence because the
Tribunal had not yet granted him access to earlier correspondence. This misunderstanding
does not appear to indicate a lack of independence or bias on the part of the Tribunal

Members.

Mr. Behrends’ argument about the alleged procedural assumption that he had to apply for
admission while the Administrator was accepted as the de facto representative'*’ has been

addressed above and does not need to be addressed again here. !8*

As to Mr. Behrends’ comment about the time allocation during the hearing on jurisdiction,
the Chair finds that it is speculative and that the Tribunal’s decision does not indicate any
appearance of lack of independence or bias. Should that decision be in any way unfair to
the Bank, counsel for the Bank at the time of the hearing wold have no doubt complained

about it at that time. No evidence to that effect has been submitted by Mr. Behrends.

'86 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 27.

'87 Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 42.

'88 See para. 165 above.

64

201.

202.

203.

Regarding Mr. Behrends’ argument that the Administrator was initially allowed to have ex

'89 the Chair notes that

parte communications with the Tribunal on the representation issue,
Mr. Behrends’ argument refers to the Administrator’s submission of December 17, 2019.
This submission by the Administrator did not constitute an ex parte communication
because counsel for the Respondent and counsel for the Shareholder Claimants were in
copy. As to Mr. Behrends’ being denied access to the file, the Chair does not see this
decision of the Tribunal as indicative of an appearance of lack of independence or bias,
particularly in circumstances where: (i) Mr. Behrends first invoked a power of attorney
which appears to have been unsuitable for this arbitration, having had to file a new one on
December 17, 2019; and (ii) on October 22, 2019, the then representative of the Bank

requested that the Administrator be added to the distribution list.

Mr. Behrends also suggests that an objective third party would be concerned about the
Tribunal’s inability to deal with the representation issue and with the Tribunal’s view that
the jurisdictional phase does not require any resolution of the representation issue. The
Chair has already addressed the issue of whether the Tribunal’s decision is indicative of an

appearance of lack of independence or bias, finding that it is not.!°°

DECISION
For the reasons stated above, the Chair decides as follows:

a. Mr. Behrends has no standing to file a proposal for disqualification on behalf of the

Bank.

b. Accordingly, his proposals for disqualification and request for access to the file of

February 17 and March 29, 2020, are dismissed.

c. The Shareholder Claimants’ proposal for disqualification is rejected.

'8° Letter from the Former Managers dated February 17, 2020, para. 43.
9 See paras. 174-175 above.

65

[Signed]

Mr. David Malpass
Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council

66

