International Centre for
the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID)

June 27, 1990

In the Matter of Arbitration between

ASIAN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS LTD.
(AAPL)

v.
REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
CASE No. ARB/87/3

FINAL AWARD
ident : Dr. Ahmed Sadek EL-KOSHERI
Members of the Tribunal : Professor Berthold GOLDMAN, and
: Dr. Samuel K.B. ASANTE
Secretary of the Tribunal :Mr. Bertrand P. MARCHAIS
In Case No. ARB/87/3,
Between Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. (AAPL),
represented by:

Dr. Heribert Golsong, as Counsel
{of the law firm of Fulbright & Jaworski}

And

The Republic of Sri Lanka

represented by:

{Messrs. William Rand, Robert Homick, Paul Friedland and Evan
Gray of the law firm of Coudert Brothers, as Counsel; and Messrs.
MS Aziz and A. Rohan Perera, as Agents}

THE TRIBUNAL
Composed as above,
After deliberation,

Made the following Award:

CASES 327

1. On July 8, 1987, the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (hereinafter called “the Centre” of “ICSID") received a Request for Arbi-
tration from Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. (Hereinafter called “AAPL” or “the
claimant”), a Hong Kong corporation.

The Request stated that AAPL wished to institute arbitration proceedings against
the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter called “'Sri Lanka” or “the
Respondent") under the terms of the ICSID Convention to which Sri Lanka is a con
tracting Party, and in reliance upon Article 8.(1) of the Agreement between the Gov-
ernment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem-Ireland and the
Government of Sri Lanka for the Promotion and Protection of Investments of Febru
ary 13, 1980 (hereinafter called “the Bilateral Investment Treaty”) which entered into
force on December 18, and was extended to Hong Kong by virtue of an Exchange of
Notes with effect as of January 14, 1981.

2. Article 8.(1) of the Bilateral Investment Treaty, invoked as expressing Sri
Lanka's consent to ICSID Arbitration, reads as follows:

Each contracting Party hereby consents to submit to the International Centre for

the Settlement of Investment Disputes (...) for settlement by conciliation or ar~

bitration under the Convention on the settlement of Investment Dispute between

States and Nationals of the Other States opened for signature at Washington on

18 March, 1965 any legal disputes arising between that Contracting Party and

national or company of the other Contracting Party concerning an investment of

the latter in the territory of the former.

3. ‘The Claimant indicated in the Request for Arbitration that a dispute arose
directly out of an officially approved investment by AAPL in Sri Lanka that took place
in 1983 under the form of participating in the equity capital of SERENDIB SEA-
FOODS LTD. (hereinafter called “the Company” or “Serendib”) a Sri Lankan public
company established for the purpose of undertaking shrimp culture in Sri Lanka.

According to the Claimant, the Company's farm, which was its main producing
center, was destroyed on January 28, 1987, during a military operation conducted by
the security forces of Sri Lanka against installations reported to be used by local rebels.
Asa direct consequence of said action, AAPL alleged having suffered a total loss of its
investment, and claimed from the Government of Sri Lanka compensation for the
damages incurred as a result thereof. The claims submitted on March 9, 1987, re-
mained outstanding without reply for more than the three months period provided for
in Article 8.(3) of the Bilateral Investment Treaty to reach an amicable settlement, and
hence AAPL became entitled to institute the ICSID arbitration proceedings.

4. On July 9, 1987, the Secretary General of ICSID sent an acknowledgment
of the Request to AAPL and transmitted a copy of the Request to Sri Lanka. On July
20, 1987, the Secretary General registered the Request in the Arbitration Register and
notified the Parties accordingly.

5. On September 30, 1987, the Centre received a communication from
AAPL to the effect that Professor Berthold Goldman has been appointed as member

528 ICSID REVIEW--FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

of the Tribunal in conformity with Rule 5.(1) of the Arbitration Rulles. He accepted
his appointment as arbitrator on October 8, 1987.

‘The Republic of Sri Lanka appointed Dr. Samuel K. B. Asante by a letter dated
October 20, 1987. He accepted his appointment on October 28, 1987.

Dr. Ahmed S. EL-Kosheri was appointed as the third arbitrator and President of
the Tribunal on December 24, 1987, by the Chaitman of the Administrative Council
of ICSID in consultation with the Parties. He accepted his appointment on January 4,
1988.

Accordingly, the Tribunal became constituted as of January 5, 1988, and the dec-
laration provided for under Arbitration Rule 6 was signed by each arbitrator.

6. Atthe first session of the Tribunal, held on February 23, 1988 at the Offices
of the World Bank in Washington, D.C., the Parties declared that they were satisfied
that the Tribunal had been properly constituted in accordance with the provisions of
Section 2, Chapter IV of the Convention and of Chapter I of the Arbitration Rules
(Minutes of said Session, Item I,(¢)).

‘The Parties and the Tribunal established the framework within which the plead-
ings have to take place, comprising two consecutive rounds of written submissions fol-
lowed by oral hearings to be electronically recorded without requiring the production
of verbatim transcripts (Items 10-12 of the Minutes).

It was also agreed upon in that First Session that the Arbitration Rules in effect
after September 26, 1984, shall apply (Item 2); that the language of the proceeding
would be English (Item 8); and that the place of the proceedings will be Washington,
D.C. at the seat of the Centre (Item 9).

7. The Climant’s Memorial, submitted on April 13, 1988, focused mainly
‘on the “bascs for the claim”, consisting of

() ~ the unconditional obligation of “full protection and security” provided
for in Article 2 of the Bilateral Investment Treaty;
i) - the more specific and clearly defined obligation stated in Article 4(2) of
‘Treaty requiring adequate compensation of the destruction of the
Chimant’s property under circumstances not justified by combat action
or necessities of the situation; and
Gi) - fly, the Claimant indicated that the Government's liability extends to
"damage caused under customary rules of international law on State
responsibilty” (ines 9 and 10 on page 6 of the Claimant's Memorial).

The remedy required was expressed by the Claimant in terms of evaluating “the
market value of the undertaking on the basis of discounted cash flow (DCF) theory”,
in order to establish the “going concern value” of Serendib Seafoods Ltd on January
28, 1978, the date of the destruction of its property.

8 The Respondent's Counter-Memorial, submitted on June 18, 1988,
placed the emphasis on different aspects; mainly to illustrate that the Serendib venture
“was a failure from the outset”, and its “fitful efforts to restructure was overtaken in

 

CASES 529

January 1987, by the civil war between Tamil separatists and the Sri Lankan Govern
ment”. Thus, the large majority of AAPL’ s claimed damages should be denied since
they are based on “the illusion of expected profitability.”

Moreover, according to the Respondent's account of the facts, the destruction of
Serendib’s property was duc to intense combat action between the Tamil rebels
known as the “Tigers”, who were allegedly operating out of Serendib’s farm and re-
ported by Governmental sources as having violently resisted the counter-insurgency
operation conducted by the Special Task Force (STF), and which aimed to drive the
Tiger rebels out of the area,

Equally, with regard to the relevant dispositions of the Bilateral Investment
‘Treaty, the Respondent's Counter-Memorial gave the Treaty an interpretation differ-
ent from that advanced by the Claimant. Particularly, the expression “full protection
and security” used in Article 2 has to be construed as simply incorporating the standard
which requires “due diligence” on the part of the States, and does not impose strict
liability. As to Article 4.(2), the Government's liability thereunder would not arise
except in case the Claimant succeeds in providing the proof that the counter-insur-
gency actions were not reasonably necessary or that the govemmental security forces
caused excessive destruction during their combat against the Tamil rebels.

9. The Claimant’s Reply to the Respondent's Counter-Memorial was duly
submitted on August 18, 1988. The first part of the Reply contained an elaboration of
the facrual aspects of the case from the Claimant's point of view, especially those
related to the events of January 28, 1987. According to Claimant, there was no
“battle” at the farm site, but rather “a murderous over-reaction by the STF which led
to the destruction and civilian deaths”.

Furthermore, no access to the farm was permitted before February 10, 1987,
cither by the Batticaloa Citizens’s Committee for National Harmony or by Serendib’s
staff, in order that “all evidence of the brutal actions in area could be obliterated”.

In the second part of the Reply, the Claimant started by indicating that the Sri
Lanka/UK. Bilateral Investment Treaty “should be considered tantamount to” an
agreement between the two Parties as to the applicable rules of law, within the context
of Article 42 of the ICSID Convention, Nevertheless, it has to be understood that the
Treaty itself is not limited to the explicit statement of certain substantive rules, but
renders applicable additional rules incorporated therein, either by reference or by im-
plication. Moreover, the Claimant's Reply states that the “rules of customary interna~
tional law”, as well as the “Law of Sri Lanka as the host country”, may be regarded as
supplementary “alternative source of applicable law” (p. 29 of the Reply).

With regard to the specific issue of the Standard of Liability under the general
pattern followed by Bilateral Investment Treaties, the basic argument developed by the
Claimant amounts to an assertion that the traditional “due diligence” criterion appli-
cable under the minimum standard of customary international law had been replaced by
a new type of “strict or absolute liability not mitigated by concepts of due diligence”
(p. 54 of the Claimant's Reply).

530 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

In case the strict liability argument based on Article 2 and on the most-favoured
nation clause contained in the Bilateral Investment Treaty, would not be assested by
the Tribunal, the Claimant presented “as an altemative submission only” another argu-
ment based on Article 4.(2) (p. 56 of the Claimant's Reply), and ultimately on article
4.(1) “which remains the fall-back provision in cases of war destruction” (Ibid, p. 57).

Under this alternative argument, the applicability of Article 4.(2) cannot be
avoided except in case Sri Lanka would succeed in carrying out its onus probandi by
providing convincing proof that the destruction of January 28, 1987 was caused “in
‘combat action”, and was required by “the necessity of the situation”.

‘At the end of the Claimant's reply, AAPLs submissions were formulated as re-
questing the Tribunal to:

1. Determine the liability of the Government of Sri Lanka to compensate AAPL

for the unlawful requisition and destruction of its investments;

2. Award to AAPL restitution or adequate compensation in the amount of freely

transferable US. Dollars of not less than $ 8,067,368 (eight million sixty-seven

thousand three hundred sixty-eight) on account of the requisition and destruc~

tion of its investment, increased by the additional costs, including all direct and

indirect costs of the present proceedings, 25 well as interest at commercial rates;

3. Order the Respondent to assume the guarantee which AAPL had accepted for

the loan by EAB/Deutsche Bank to SSL, or to pay in escrow the additional

amount of USS. $ 888,000 (eight hundred-eighty thousand), representing the

principal of the outstanding loan amount to be paid by AAPL if and when

Deutsche Bank prevails in a call on the guarantor for che guarantee subscribed on

September 15, 1984;

4. Deny the Counter-claim by the Respondent for costs and attomeys-fees.

10. On October 20, 1988 the Government of Sri Lanka submitted its Rejoin-
der mainly devoted to emphasizing two issues: ()—on the one hand, the incorrectness
of AAPL’ construction of the interrelation between Article 2.(2) and Article 4,(2) of
the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bilateral Investment Treaty; and (ji)—on the other hand, the ref-
uutation of AAPL’ claimed damages.

According to the Respondent's Rejoinder, Article 4,(2) is not an exemption from
the rule contained in Article 2.(2), since both articles “share a common standard of li~
ability (that of governmental negligence)”, but “the two provisions concem damages
arising in distinct situations and caused by distinct parties” (p. 6 of the Rejoinder)
Moreover, Article 4.(2) could not be considered superseded by operation of Article 3
(the most-fivoured-nation clause) as a result of the subsequent conclusion of the Sri
Lanka/Switzerland Investment Treaty. In the Respondent's own words, such conven-
tion “meets the same problem as AAPL’ s absolute liability theory; because Article 4
of the Treaty creates potential liability, and does not limit liability, its exclusion from a
subsequent treaty could not increase ULK. investor's rights under the Treaty" (p. 10 of
the Rejoinder).

‘The Respondent's propositions concerning the claimed damages are composed
of three elements:

CASES 531

(a) ~ Serendib’s desperate financial situation as reflected in the Memorandum
of Understanding dated December 22, 1986 could hardly become re-
versed to evidence future expected profitability;

(b) - the inclusion of assets and other elements which were never touched by
the destruction, such as the hatchery on the west coast;

(c) - the speculative nature of the projections concerning any possible future
profitabilicy.

The Respondent's position on the various legal and factual issues led to the fol-
lowing conclusions:

(i) ~ that the STF operation on January 28, 1987, was a legitimate exercise of
sovereignty;

(ii) - chat any damage which occurred at the Serendib shrimp farm on that date
was either necessary under the circumstances or not caused by the Gov=

ernment;

(iii) ~ that AAPL financial loss due to destruction of assets remains unproven;
and

(iv) - that AAPL suffered no loss of any reasonably foreseeable future profits (p.
39 of the Rejoinder).

11. ‘The oral phase of the proceedings took place from April 17 to April 20,
1989 at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C.

As indicated in the Summary Minutes of the Hearing of the Arbitral Tribunal,
oral presentations were made by counsels to both Parties, and counsel to each party
was given the opportunity to respond to the presentation made by the other.

The Tribunal heard also an oral presentation from Mr. Deva Rodrigo, advisor to
the Claimant, and Mr. Victor Santiapillai, Managing Director of Serendib Seafoods
Led,, appeared before the Tribunal as witness called by AAPL. After giving his evi-
dence, he was examined, and cross-examined by Counsel to each Party, and re-
sponded to the questions put to him by the members of the Arbitral Tribunal.

Before declaring the hearing adjoumed on April 20, 1989, the Tribunal re
quested the Parties to submit certain additional documents and information, together
with their respective comments thereon.

12. In compliance with the Tribunal’s oral order fixing the dates for filing the
requested submissions, the first exchange took place on May 22, 1989, and the second
exchange on May 29, 1989.

13, The Arbicral Tribunal having met for deliberation in Patis on Monday 26
and Tuesday 27 June 1989, and having considered the various issues pending before
it, fele necessary to request further clarifications from both Parties about certain impor-
tant points deemed not sufficiently pleaded during the previous hearing. A procedural
(Order was issued consequently on June 27, 1989, inviting both Parties to provide the
Arbitral Tribunal with their considered points of view, together with all supporting
documents, on the following:

532 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(A) ~ Within the context of Article 4.1 of the Sri Lanka/United Kingdom Bilat-
eral Agreement of February 13th, 1980, for the Promotion and Protection of In-
vestments, is there any existing precedent or established practice concerning
restitution, indemnification, compensation or other settlement allocated to Sri
Lanka nationals and companies, or to nationals and companies of any Third State

in the circumstances specified in said Article 4.(1)? Ifso how was the quantum
calculated?

(B) - Even if there is no precedent or established practice what are the applicable

rules and standards under the Sri Lanka domestic legal system wich regard to in=

vvestment losses suffered by private persons owing to any of the circumstances

mentioned in the said Article 4.(1)?

(6) ~ What are the legal obligations of Sri Lanka under international law with re-

gard to investment losses suffered owing to any of the circumstances mentioned

in Article 4.(1) by nationals of companies of Third States, whether these States

have or have not concluded Bilateral Investment Agreements with Sri Lanka?

14. In compliance with the Tribunal’s Order of June 27, 1989, both Parties
submitted their answers to the above-stated questions by September 15, 1989, and
Claimant commented on the Memorandum of the Respondent on October 27, 1989.

15. Ata later stage, and as a result of consultations undertaken between the
members of the Tribunal, a new invitation was addressed on December 26, 1989, to
Counsel to both Parties in the following terms:

Taking into consideration that the members of the Tribunal deem appropriate re-

ceiving from Counsels of both Parties their reflections and comments about the

Decision rendered in July 1989 by the International Court of Justice in the case

between the US.A. and Italy related to the scope of protection extended to a for~

ign investor under bilateral creaty:

Therefore, both Counsels are kindly invited to submit within the coming four

‘weeks their comments about the legal reasoning stated in said Decision and the

what extent they deem said reasoning relevant in adjudicating the pending Arbi-

tration Case.

‘Counsel to the Respondent dispatched his comments in a letter dated January 26,
1990, and Counsel to the Claimant expressed his comments in a faxed letter dated
January 29, 1990.

16. Subsequent consultations undertaken between the members of the Tribu-
nal indicated that there was no need to convene a new oral hearing, and the Tribunal
held its final meeting on March 26-27, 1990.

ee
*

17. As a result of said deliberations, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the
pending arbitration has to be adjudicated taking into account the following:

CASES 533

1 - Concerning the Applicable Law

18. The present case is the first instance in which the Centre has been seized
by an arbitration request exclusively based on a treaty provision and not in implemen-
tation of a freely negotiated arbitration agreement directly concluded between the
Parties among whom the dispute has arisen.

19. Consequently, the Parties in dispute have had no opportunity co exercise
their right to choose in advance the applicable law determining the rules governing the
various aspects of their eventual disputes.

In more concrete terms, the prior choice-of-law referred to in the first part of
Article 42 of the ICSID Convention could hardly be envisaged in the context of an
arbitration case directly instituted in implementation of an international obligation un-
dertaken between two States in favour of their respective nationals investing within the
territory of the other Contracting State.

20. Under these special circumstances, the choice-of-law process would nor-
mally materialize after the emergence of the dispute, by observing and construing the
conduct of the Parties throughout the arbitration proceedings.

Effectively, in the present case, both Parties acted in a manner that demonstrates
their mutual agreement to consider the provisions of the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bilateral In-
vestment Treaty as being the primary source of the applicable legal rules.

This basic premise relied upon heavily by the Claimant acquired fall acceptance
from the Respondent, who, not only based his main arguments on the provisions of
the Treaty in question, but also invoked Article 157 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka
emphasizing that the Treaty became applicable as part of the Sri Lankan Law.

21, Furthermore, it should be noted that the Bilateral Investment Treaty is not
a self-contained closed legal system limited to provide for substantive material rules of
direct applicability, but it has to be envisaged within a wider juridical context in which
rules from other sources are integrated through implied incorporation methods, or by
direct reference to certain supplementary rules, whether of international law character
or of domestic law nature, Such extension of the applicable legal system resorts clearly
from Article 3,(1), Article 3.(2), and Article 4 of the Sri Lanka/UK. Bilateral Invest
ment Treaty.

22. In fact, the submissions of both Parties (supra, § 7, iii, § 10) clearly demon-
strate that they are in agreement about admitting the supplementary role of the re-
course—regarding certain issues—to general customary international law, other
specific international rules rendered applicable in implementation of the most-favored-
nation clause, as well as to Sri Lankan domestic legal rules.

23. In spite of the Claimant's hostility to the general applicability of customary
international law rules and his reluctance to admit Sri Lankan domestic law as the basic
governing law under the last part of Article 42 of the ICSID Convention covering the
absence of choice of law by the Parties, AAPL arrived from a practical point of view
to 2 position similar to that adopted by the Respondent throughout the arbitral pro-

334 ICSID REVIEW-—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ceedings. This is particularly seen from what has been quoted in § 7, iii and § 9 herein-
above.

24. Accordingly, the Tribunal is of the opinion that che “false problem’ related
to the preliminary determination in principle of the applicable law has no relevance
within the context of the present arbitration, since both Parties agreed during their re-
spective pleading to invoke primarily the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bilateral Investment Treaty
as lex specials, and to apply, within the limits required, the international or domestic
legal relevant rules referred to as a supplementary source by virtue of Articles 3 and 4
of the Treaty itself.

Il ~ The legal grounds on which the
Respondent's responsibility could be sustained

25. As indicated herein-above, both Parties invoked the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bilat-
eral Investment Treaty as the primary applicable law. However, each Party construed
the Treaty’s relevant provisions in a manner which led to basically different conclu-
sions.

(). The Claimant's Case

26. The main point of view relied upon by AAPL to substantiate its submis-
sions can be summarized as follows:

(A) ~ By providing that the investments of one contracting Party “shall enjoy
full protection and security in the territory of the other Contracting Party”, Article 2
of the Treaty went beyond the minimum standard of customary intemational law
through the creation of an unconditional obligation to be bome by the host country.
According to the Claimant, “the ordinary meaning of the words “fall protection and
security’ points to an acceptance by the host State of strict or absolute liability” (Reply
of Claimant to Respondent's counter-Memorial, op. cit., p. 46);

(B) - Within the “context” of the entire Treaty’s “object and purpose”, and
taking into account the “identical or very similar” language used in most of the Bilat-
eral Investment Treaties concluded between Sti Lanka, and Third States, the compar-
ative analysis with the different other patterns followed elsewhere indicates that the
term “full protection and security” has to be considered “autonomous in character and
independent of any link to customary international law” (Ibid., p. 49);

(©) - By abandoning the “diplomatic protection” theory largely based on the
United States’ “Friendship, Commerce and Navigation” (FCN) pattern of indirect
protection, the foreign investor “enjoys” under the “Bilateral Investment Treaties”
(BIT?) a different method of direct protection.

According to the Claimant, “the right to protection is vested in the holder of the
investment with immediate effect upon the simple coming into force of the treaty”

cases 535

(Ibid., p. 52). Thus, a deliberate choice is reflected to follow a new pattern in matters
of protection different from that which prevailed under traditional International Law.

(D) - In implementation of the most-favoured-nation clause contained in
Article 3 of the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bilateral Investment Treaty, and in the light of the fact
that the Treaty concluded between Sri Lanka and Switzerland does not provide for a
“war clause” or “civil disturbance” exemption from the protection and security stan-
dard, the Claimant asserts that: “the standard of treatment under the Swiss Treaty,
which is obviously more favourable than the provision of the SL/UK Treaty, applies
to British investments. This means that a standard of unmitigated strict liability has to
be assured by Sei Lanka in favour of British Investments” (Ibid., P. 56).

27. Asan “alternative submission only”, the Claimant envisaged a supplemen-
tary argument based on Article 4.(2) of the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bilateral Investment Treaty
which could be relied upon in case the Tribunal “unexpectedly” would deem that
Article applicable.

The Claimant's position in this respect was clearly stated at page 57 of his Reply
to the Respondent's Counter Memorial, which reads as follows:

As stated above, Article 4(2) of the SL/UK Treaty provides for an exemption

from the strict liability rule of Article 2(2). Article 4(2) provides for restitution

and freely transferable compensation if the destruction of property in situation of

war or civil disturbances was not required by the necessity of the situation. Ts

sandard of compenation goes beyond the duty of granting “resin”

demnificsion”, oF “compensation” or “other seulement” provided for by Art

4(3) of the Treaty, which remains the fall-back provision in cases of war destruc~

tion.

It is clear from the above quotation that the Claimant invokes Article 4 of the
‘Treaty in its entirety, but considers the present case falling within the scope of the spe-
cific rule contained in Article 4.(2), which evidently provides a better type of remedy
that due under Article 4.(1).

28. The reasons sustaining that alternative as to the applicability of Article 4.(2)
are explained as follows:

(A) ~The act complained of was “not caused in combat action”, but amounts
to what the Claimant describes as “the wanton destruction of AAPL’ s property and
the cold-blooded killing of the farm manager and the permanent staff members”
which was “clearly not planned pursuant to any combat action” (page 8 of the Claim-
ant’s Memorial;

(B)- The property was “requisitioned” by Sri Lankan forces and was “de-
stroyed by those same forces” under circumstances suggesting that the wanton use of
force was “not required by the exigencies of the situation” (Ibid., same page 8);

(C)_- Moreover, the Claimant ascertains that: “the complete destruction and
cold-blooded killings by the Government's security forces were completely out of pro-
portion to what was necessary to meet the specific exigencies of the situation which
actually existed at the SSL facility” (Ibid., p. 9); and

536 ICSID REVIEW--FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(D) = In reliance upon the language of Article 4.(2), the Claimant is of the
opinion that said language: “places the burden on the Respondent to demonstrate that
the destruction of Claimant's property was required by the necessity of the situation”
(ibid., p. 11).

Invoking what is considered “a general principle of international judicial and ar-
bitral practice” the Claimant submitted at a later stage that:

the burden of proof shifts from the claimant to the defendant if the former has

advanced same evidence which prima facie supports his allegation. This is partic~

ularly appropriate if the defendant wishes to derive a benefit from an interpreta~

tion or rule operating in his favor as does Sri Lanka in this case. It is submitted

that rules justifying conduct which would otherwise be unlawful (such as military

necessity) fall into the category of norms operating in favor of the defendant for

which the defendant carries the onus probandi (Reply to Respondent's Counter-claim,

at p. 58).

29. During the written phase of the procedures, the Claimant deemed suffi-
cient to formulate his claims for “adequate compensation” on the basis of said Article
4.(2) without suggesting what could be the ultimate remedy available if the Tribu-
nal—contrary to his submissions—would arrive to the conclusion that conditions re-
quired for the applicability of the paragraph in question are missing in the present case,
and accordingly the rules referred to in paragraph (1) of Article 4 constitute the proper
legal framework within which the pending issues have to be adjudicated,

The only indications provided for in the Claimant's written pleadings with regard
to such alternative are limited to what was previously mentioned in two reported pas~
sages:

{i) - the short reference on page 6 of the Claimant's Memorial to the Govern-
ment's liability “under customary rules of international law on State re~
sponsibility” (supra, § 7, (iii);

and

Gi) - the closing sentence on page 57 of the Reply to the Respondent's
‘Counter-Memorial containing a precise reference to the remedies “pro-
vided for by Article 4.(1) of the Treaty, which remains the fall-back pro-
vision in cases of war destruction” (supra, § 27 at the end of the
quotation).

30. In order to obtain certain necessary clarifications about the Claimant's po-
sition a question was put to the Claimant's Counsel by the President of the Tribunal
at the Oral Hearing held in Washington D.C. from April 17 to April 20, 1989. Ac-
cording to the transcript of the tape containing Dr. Golsong’s Closing Scatement on
April 20, 1989, the latter responded by saying:

‘we were told that we had not based our claim on 4(1) which therefore has to be

deleted from the discussions. We have in our Memorial and in our Reply gener-

ally based our contention on the Bilateral Investment Treaty of the United King-

dom extended to Hong Kong and improved ‘eventually by way of incorporation

by reference of most-favoured-nation provisions deriving from other Investment

‘Treaties. And we maintain this position. We have started by saying that 2. para-

graph 2 enshrines an absolute or strict standard of ibility and certainly more than

due diligence. And that there are some exceptions in the UK Treaty, namely the

specific war situation in Arucle 4 in general, without making 2 distinction be~
tween 4(1) and 4(2). And in any way, if I refer to 4(2), 1 have implicitly to bring

into discussion 4(1). (Text provided by ICSID‘s Secretariat, as enclosure to leter dated

April 10, 1990, in response to an eatlier request from the President of the Arbitral Ti

bunal to chek the electronically recorded tapes of the hearing)

31, Ata later stage of the proceedings, the Arbiteal Tribunal issued the above-
mentioned Order of June 27, 1989 (supra, § 130), which invited both Parties to
provide the Tribunal with their considered points of view about certain aspects related
to Article 4,(1) and the results that could be obtained through its implementation.

By his letter dated September 14, 1989, the Claimant's Counsel provided the Tri-
bunal with answers to the questions put to both Parties without raising any objection
to the eventual adjudication of the case under Article 4.(1). Moreover, the last sentence
of said letter explicitly emphasized that:

sathere can be no doubt chat in the present case the provisions of Article 4(1) of

the Sri Lanka/UK Agreement are applicable, and being lex specilis, supersede any

ener principle ofIeratonal Law which otherwise may gover the cs a

  

(U1). The Respondent's Case

32. In Sri Lanka's Counter-Memorial, the Respondent adopted arguments
aimed to contradict the Claimant's initial submissions. The Government's main argu-
ments at that phase of the proceedings can be summarized as follows:

(A) ~ “The language ‘full protection and security’ is common in bilateral in-
vestment treaties, and it incorporates, rather than overrides, the customary intemna-
tional legal standard of responsibility. This international legal standard requires due
diligence on the part of the States and reasonable justification for any destruction of
property, but does not impose strict liability” (Government's Counter Memorial, p. 27);

(B) ~ The “standards for liability under Articles 2.(2) and 4.(2) are essentially
identical. In both instances, a requirement of reasonableness is imposed on Govern
ment action. Under the international law standard embodied in Article 2.(2), the Gov-
ernment incurs liability if it fails to act with due diligence. Under Article 4.(2), the
Government incurs liability ifits actions are not reasonably necessary” (Ibid., p. 28);

(©) - “Article 4.(2) sets forth the standard for compensation in the event the
Government is found to have violated its obligations under Article 2.(2). That is, ifthe
Government could have prevented the destruction ofthe farm through due diligence”.
In case it has been proven that the Government's lack of due diligence caused “unnec-
essary destruction, then the Government would both have violated its obligation under
2.(2) and owe restitution or compensation under Article 4.(2)” (Ibid, p. 28-29);

) = The burden of proof has to be assumed by the Claimant, by proving
“that through due diligence, the Government could have prevented Batticaloa from

  

538 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

falling under terrorist control, thus obviating the need for counter-insurgency action.
IE AAPL fails to prove chat the security action itself was avoidable, then its burden is
to prove that the Government caused excessive destruction during the operation of
January 28, 1987” (Ibid., p. 29);

(E)  ~ “To the extent there was excessive destruction, the Government of Sri
Lanka is ready to compensate AAPL for its proportionate ownership”, But, it is ques~
tionable “whether the Tribunal may determine that there was excessive destruction,
without second-guessing tactical decisions made by commanders during the heat of
combat” (ibid, p. 41).

(P)_ ~ “By investing in an area which it knew contained a vehement, and po-
tentially violent, separatist presence, AAPL assumed the risk that its investment would
be caught up in the sri Lankan civil war" (Ibid., p. 41).

33. The Government 's Rejoinder focused essentially on the arguments devel
oped in the Claimant's Reply, by ascertaining that:

(A) ~ AAPL’ s alleged “absolute liability theory” based on Article 2.(2) con-
cerns damages arising in situations and caused by parties other than those concemed
by Article 4.(2). In essence, according to the Respondent, Article 2.(2) “establishes the
general standard of protection owed to foreign investors against damage caused by
third parties"; but Article 4.(2) “applies to damages caused by the Government itself”
(Respondent's Rejoinder, p. 6);

(B) - Contrary to the Claimant's assertion that Article 4.(2) establishes an “ex-
emption” to the strict liability standard of Article 2.(2), Article 4.(2) “creates rather
than limits liability” (Ibid., p. 8);

(©) - There are no “authorities” suggesting that “full protection and security”
clauses are “among the innovative provisions of modem BIT”, and there is “no his-
torical support for AAPL s absolute liability theory” (Ibid., p. 8-9); and

(D)  -“"The absence of libility-creating provisions analogous to Article 4 of the
‘Treaty in other Sci Lanka BITs, such as the treaty with Switzerland, means only that
under those treaties investment losses due to destruction caused by the Govenument in
response to civil strife, whether necessary or not, are covered by the general “fair and
equitable treatment” standard found in virtually every BIT, or that investors are left to
their traditional remedies under customary international law” (Ibid., p. 10-11).

34, Finally, it bas to be noted that throughout the arbitration proceedings, the
Government of Sri Lanka maintained that:

() ~ the destruction was not attributable to the governmental security forces
but caused by the rebels;
(ii) - there was effectively a “combat” between the Government's Special Task
Force (STF) and the Tigers insurgents; and
(ii) - there is no proof that the destruction of the property was “not required
by the necessity of the situation”.

 

CASES 539,

Therefore, from the Respondent's point of view the liability provided for in
Article 4.(2) can not be sustained due to the absence of all three of its sine qua non con=
ditions. Hence, the applicability of Article 4.(1) could have been logically envisaged.

Nevertheless, the Government of Sri Lanka reffained from dwelling upon its in~
terpretation of said Article 4.(1), its scope of application, as well as the extent of the
responsibility that may emerge thereunder.

‘The reasons for such silence became perfectly clear during the oral phase of the
arbitral proceedings, since Mr. Homick, Counsel of the Respondent, indicated during
his oral argument on April 19, 1989, that there was no need to elaborate upon Article
4.(1), since in his understanding “AAPL is not claiming” thereunder (Transcript of the
electronic taping provided on April 12, 1990 by ICSID Secretariat upon request from the Tii-
bunal’s President).

35, Only ata later stage, and in response to the Tribunal’s Order of June 27th,
1989, the Respondent expressed the Government of Sri Lanka’ views on the three
issues related to the remedies that could be available under Article 4.(1) of the Sri
Lanka/U.K. Bilateral Investment Treaty.

36. With regard to the “applicable rules and standards under the Sri Lankan
domestic legal system”, the letter dated Seprember 13, 1989, addressed by the Re-
spondent’s Counsel in response to the Tribunal’s Order stated the following:

1, Ifa Sri Lankan individual or company wished to make a claim against the Sri

Lankan Government for any losses suffered owing to the war, etc, it may file an

action in a district court in Sri Lanka for compensation. The action will have to

be based an a cause of ation arising indice oy), The law relating to deli

based on Roman Dutch Law which provides a remedy under lex aquilian prin-

ciples, namely, for intentional or negligent wrongdoing. There is no special leg-
islation or other basis whereby liability is incurred in the absence of fault. Any
person making a claim against the Government would have to file an action in

the district court. The prescription ordinance of Sti Lanka, which may be availed

of by the Government any other defendant, sates (Sections 9):

No action shall be maintainable for any losses, injury or damage, unless the
same shall be commenced within two years from the time when the cause
of action shall have arisen.

2. It may also be relevant to note that the State (Liability in Delict) Act of 1969

based on the English Crown Liability in Delict Act permits an individual to file

an action against the Goverment in respect of delicts committed by its officers

cor agents, Under this Act, vicarious liability attaches to the State for the wrongful

acts of its servants.

37. Regarding Sri Lanka's legal obligations under international law, the last part
of the Respondent's letter dated September 13, 1989 emphasized that:

with regard to investment losses suffered owing to any of the circumstances men-

tioned in said Article 4.1 by nationals or companies of third States, whether these

have or have not concluded bilateral investment agreements with Sr

Lanka, the government refers to Appendix A of its Counter-Memorial (at 7-8)

in which it is explained that Government's obligation in such circumstances un-

 

540 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

der customary international law is to exercise due diligence to protect alien indi~
viduals or companies from investment losses (references deleted).

Thus, the mere occurrence of investment losses by an alien, such as AAPL, does
not render the Government responsible to compensate the alien for the losses.
Rather, the Government is obliged to compensate the alien only in the event the
alien demonstrates that the Government failed to act reasonably under the cir~
cumstances.

ML The Tribunal’s Findings

38, From the above-stated summary of the arguments advanced by each of the
two Parties to sustain his position, it becomes clear that the only point on which they
agree is the applicability of the Sri Lanka/ULK. Bilateral Investment Treaty as the
primary source of law. Beyond that preliminary point, the two Parties are in disagree-
ment, since each Party construes the relevant provisions of the Treaty in a manner fun-
damentally in conflict with the interpretation given by the other Party to the same
provisions.

Therefore, the first task of the Tribunal is to rule on the controversies existing in
this respect by indicating what constitutes the true construction of the Treaty’s relevant
provisions in conformity with the sound universally accepted rules of treaty interpre
tation as established in practice, adequately formulated by Ulnstitut de Droit Intemational
in its General Session in 1956, and as codified in Article 31 of the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties.

39, The basic rule to be followed by the Tribunal in undertaking its task with

to the pending controversial interpretation issue has been formulated since 1888
in the Award rendered in the Van Bokkelen case (Haiti/USA), where it was stated that:
fc the aerpreaion of wey langage and intention, sine controversy a aris-

‘es, reference must be made to the law of nations and to

dence (Repertory of ‘ncmational Arbitral Jurisprudence, Volume b 1794-1918,

Edited by; Vincent COUSSIRAT-COUSTERE and Pierre Michel EISE-

MANN, Nijhoff, Dordrecht/Boston/London, 1989, § 1015, p. 13).

In essence, the requirement that treaty provisions “must be interpreted according
to the Law of Nations, and not according to any municipal code”, emerges from che
basic premise expressed by Mr. WEBSTER in the following terms:

‘When two nations speak to each other, they use the language of nations (Quoted

by the Germany/Venezuela Mixed Claims Commission in the Christem Case, as

reproduced in the Repertory referred to herein-above, § 1017, p. 27)

40. The other rules that should guide the Tribunal in adjudicating the inter
pretation issues raised in the present arbitration case may be formulated as follows:
Rule (A) - “The first general maxim of interpretation is that itis not allowed to inter-

pret what has no need of interpretation. When a deed is worded in a clear and

precise terms, when its meaning is evident and leads to no absurd conclusion,
there can be no reason for refusing to admit the meaning which such deed nat-

urally presents” (passage from VATTEU'S Chapter on Interpretation of Treaties—
Book 2, chapter 17, relied upon in 1890 as expressing “universally recognized
law” by the US.A./Venezuela Mixed Commission in the Howland case, Reper-
tory, op. ct., § 1016, p. 16), and the Mixed Commission did not hesitate in de-
claring: “to attempt interpretation of plain words.... would be violative of Vattel’s
first rule” (Ibid., p. 26). -o. A. Ch. KISS, Répertoire de la Pratique Frangaise en Mat-
ire de Droit Intemational Public, Tome 1, 1962, p. 399, on p. 402 § 810-Text of
Prof. GROS's Pleading in the IC} on July 15-16, 1952 in the Moroco case, and
§ 811-Text of Prof. BASDEVANT's Pleading in of the PIC} on July 5, 1923 in
the Wimbledon case; S:BASTID, Les Traités Dans la Vie Intemationale, 1985, p.
129, footnote no. I—reproducing the text of the Résolution adopted by {Institut
de Droit Intemational, Grenada Session, Annuaire de l'Institut, vol. 46, 1956, under-
lining that the rules adopted are only applicable “lorsquiil y a lieu d'interpréter
tun traité” ~; and ILM. SINCLAIR, “The Principles of Treaty Interpretation and
‘Their Application By the English Courts”, Intemational and Comparative Law
Quarterly, vol, 12, (1963), p. 536—referring to the decisions pronouncing that if
the meaning intended to be expressed is clear the Courts are “not at liberty 0 go
farther”).

 

Rule (B) - “In the interpretation of treaties... we ought not to deviate from the com-
mon use of the language unless we have very strong reasons for it (...) words are
only designed to express the thoughts; thus the tu signification of an expression
in common use is the idea which custom has affixed to that expression” (another
passage from VATTEL relied upon by the US.A./Venezuela Mixed Commis-
sion in the Howland case, op.ct., p. 16—d. Award of the Mexico/U.S.A. Mixed
Commission of 1871 in the William Barron case, Ibid., § 1023, p. 30, emphasizing
that: “interpretation means finding in good faith that meaning of certain words,
if they are doubtful, which those who used the words must have desired to con-
vey, according to the usage of speech (usus loquendi)"; ALEXANDER’: award of
1899 in the Treaty of Limits case between Costa Rica and Nicaragua Ibid., § 1025,
P. 31, declaring that: “words are to be taken as fir as possible in their first and
simplest meanings” ,"in their natural and obvious sense, according to the general
use of the same wrord, “in the usual sense, and not in any extraordinary or un=
used acceptation”; S. BASTID, op.cit., p. 129, reproducing the Resolution adopt~
ed in 1956 by Iinstitut de droit Intemational according to which: “Liaccord des
parties s’étant réalisé sur le texte, ily a lieu de prendre le sens naturel et ordinaire
de ce texte comme base d'interprétation”; and ILM. SINCLAIR, op. ct., p. 537,
reporting that: “the Court .... is bound to construe them (the words) according
to their natural and fair meaning”).

 

 

 

 

 

Rule (C) - In cases where the linguistic interpretation of a given text seems inadequate
or the wording thereof is ambiguous, there should be recourse to the integral
context of the ‘Treaty in order to provide an interpretation that takes into consid
eration what is normally called: “le sens général, l'esprit du Traité”, or “son écon-

 

542 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

omie générale” (Award rendered in 1914 by the Permanent Court of Arbitration
in the Timor Island case between the Netherlands and Portugal, Repertory, op. ct.
§ 1019, p. 28; decision of the Bulgarian/Greek Mixed Arbitration Tribunal ren-
dered in 1927 in the Sarrapoulos case, Repertory, vol. Il: 1919-1945, § 2020, p.
21-22; The 1926 Paula Mendel case where the Germany/U.S.A. Mixed Claims
‘Commission disregarded “a literal construction of the language” since it “finds
no support in the other provisions of the Treaty as a whole”. Hence, “it cannot
stand alone and must fall” Repertory vol. Il, § 2025, p. 25; and the Decision of the
Germany/Venczuela Mixed Claims Commission of 1903 in the Kiummerow case
which stated that: “it isa uniform rule of construction that effect should be given
to every clause and sentence of an agreement”, Repertory, op. at, vol. I, § 1031, p.
38).

Rule (D) - In addition to the “integral context”, “object and intent”, “spirit”, “objec
tives”, “comprehensive construction of the creaty as a whole”, recourse to the
rules and principles of international law has to be considered a necessary factor

providing guidance within the process of treaty interpretation. (Resolution of
stu de Drit Interatonl, op. dt., Article 1.(2) which stipulates: “es termes
des dispositions du traité doivent étre interprétés dans le contexte entier, selon la
bonne foi et & la lumiére des principes du droit international”; Paragraph 3.(c),
of Article 31 of Vienna convention on the Law of Treaties, containing reference
to: “all relevant rule of intemational law applicable in the relations between the
parties", and the Award rendered in 1928 by the France/Mexico Claims Com-
mission in the Georges Pinson case, which stated among “les principes généraux
d'interprétation”: “Toute convention intemationale doit étre répurée s'en réferer
tacitement au droit international commun, pour toutes les questions quelle ne
résout pas elle-méme en termes exprés et d'une fagon différente” Repertory, op.
«it., vol. Il, § 2023, p. 24).

 

 

  

Rule (E) - Nothing is better setded, as a canon of interpretation in all systems of law,
than that a clause must be so interpreted as to give it a meaning rather than so 2s
to deprive it of meaning (Award of the UK/USA Arbitral Tribunal of 1926 in
the Cayuga Indians case, Repertory, vol. II, § 2036, p. 35-36). This is simply an ap-
plication of the more wider legal principle of “effectiveness” which requires favour
ing the interpretation that gives to each treaty provision “effet utile”.

Rule (F) - When there is need of interpretation of a treaty it is proper to consider stip~
ulations of earlier or later treaties in relation to subjects similar to those treated in
the treaty under consideration” (Award of the Mexico/USA General Claims
Commission of 1929 rendered in the Elton case, Repertory, vol. I1, § 2033, p. 35).
Thus, establishing the practice followed through comparative law survey of all
relevant precedents becomes an extremely useful tool to provide an authoritative
interpretation.

CASES 543

41. In che light of the above mentioned canons of interpretation, the relevant
provisions of the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bilateral Investment Treaty have to be identified,
each provision construed separately, examined within the global context of the Treaty,
in order to determine the proper interpretation of each text, as well as its scope of ap-
plication in relation to the other treaty provisions and with regard to the various
general rules and principles of international law not specifically referred to in the
Treaty itself

In more precise terms, all appropriate measures should be undertaken in view of
establishing the legal regime created by the Treaty for the protection of those investors
covered by the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bilateral Investment Treaty in case their investments
suffer destruction owing to activities related to the Government's counter-insurgency
actions.

42. The construction of the Treaty’s comprehensive system governing all
aspects related to the extent of the special protection conferred upon the investors in
question would permit the evaluation of the ‘Treaty’s effective contribution in ¢his
respect; i.e. in view of determining with regard to each issue whether the Sri Lanka/
UK. Treaty intended, merely, to consolidate the pre-existing rules of international law,
or, on the contrary, it tended to innovate by imposing on the host state a higher stan-
dard of international responsibility.

Essentially, said evaluation is required, not as a conceptual doctrinal exercise, but
for a practical reason related to the adjudication of the case, since in accordance there-
with the following question could be adequately answered: what are the limits within
which the classical international law based on the judicial and arbitral precedents could
be of relevance in adjudicating the present case?

43, Taking the above-mentioned remarks into consideration, the Tribunal
agrees with the Partics in considering that there are four fundamental texts in the Sri
Lanka/UK. Bilateral Investment Treaty that should be carefully considered for the
purpose of determining the host State’s responsibility for investment losses suffered as.
a result of property destruction:

First: The general obligation imposed by virtue of Article 2.(2), by which the host
State undertook that foreign investments “shall enjoy full protection and security in
the territory”, since violation thereof entails a certain degree of international respon-
sibility;

Second: The most-fivoured-nation provision contained in Article 3, which may be
invoked to increase the host State’s liability in case a higher standard of international
protection becomes granted to investments pertaining to nationals of a Third State;
Third: The special provision of Article 4.(1) which envisages the legal consequences
of losses suffered by foreign investments “owing to war or other armed conflict, rev-
olution, a state of national emergency, revolt, insurrection or riot” in the territory of
the host State; and

Fourth: “without prejudice to” the rules applicable under the previous text (Article
4.(1), the Treaty introduced a more specific rule tailored particularly to cover two

 

sua ICSID REVLEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

types of “losses”, which are “suffered” in any of the situations enumerated in Article
4.(1). These two categories are:

(2) requisitioning of their property by its forces or authorities; or

(b) destruction of their property by its forces or authorities which was not

caused in combat action or was not required by the necessity of the situation,

Whenever either case is established, the Treaty provided in the concluding sen
tence of Article 4.(2) for a certain remedy: “restitution or adequate compensation”,
and that the “resulting payments shall be freely transferable”.

44. Accordingly, the treaty envisaged different situations under which protec-
tion could be invoked in case of destruction of investments, and different remedies are
provided for in order to meet the particularity of each situation.

‘The various categories of such situations that could be encountered may be clas-
sified as follows:

(i) ~ Situations in which the foreign investor claims that the destruction of
the property was unnecessarily caused by the governmental security
forces acting out of combat, and in such case the Treaty provides for a
special rule in Article 4.(2), which was tailored particularly to fit the re~
quirements of such serious wrongful action directly attributable to the
State organs;

(ii) - In case the foreign investor fails to establish that the destruction was at-
tributable to the governmental security forces, or in case there was effec
tively a “combat” during which the property was destroyed under
conditions that could hardly permit assessing the unnecessary character of
the destruction in a convincing manner, the type of remedy envisaged
under Article 4.(2) of the Sri Lanka /U.K. Bilateral Investment Treaty has
to be considered excluded. Consequently, the other provisions of the
treaty become relevant;

(ii) - In presence of such situation not possibly governed by Article 4.(2), the
search has to be first directed towards investigating the existence of
certain rules more fivourable to the foreign investor than those provided
for under Articles 2.(2) and 4.(1), since the better treatment accorded to
investors of the Third State could be extended to apply by virtue of the
most-favoured-nation clause stipulated in Article 3 of the Sri Lanka/U.K.
‘Treaty;

{iv) = In the absence of a more favourable system applicable by virtue of
Article 3, the applicable rules become necessarily those governing the li-
ability of the Host State under Article 4.(1) and Article 2.(2), whether
taken together or separately as the case may be.

45. The Claimant's primary submission—as previously explained (supra, § 26)
~is based on the assumption that the “full protection and security” provision of Article
2.(2) created a “strict liability” which renders the Sri Lankan Government liable for

CASES. 545

any destruction of the investment even if caused by persons whose acts are not attrib-
utable to the Government and under circumstances beyond the State’s control.

For sustaining said construction introducing a new type of objective absolute re~
sponsibility called “without fault”, the Claimant's main argument relies on the exist-
ence in the text of the Treaty of two terms: “enjoy” and “fall”, a combination which
sustains, according to the Claimant, that the Parties intended to provide the investor

a “guarantee” against all losses suffered due co the destruction of the investment
for whatever reason and without any need to establish who was the person that caused
said damage. In other words, the Parties substituted the “due diligence” standard of
general intemational law by 2 new obligation creating an obligation to achieve a result
(“obligation de résultat") providing the foreign investor with a sort of “insurance”
against the risk of having his investment destroyed under whatever circumstances.

46. The Tribunal is of the opinion that the Claimant's construction of Article
2.(2) as explained herein-above cannot be justified under any of the canons of inter~
pretation previously stated (supra, § 40).

47. Inconformity with Rule (B), the words “shall enjoy full protection and se-
curity” have to be construed according to the “common use which custom has
affixed” to them, their “usus loquendi", “natural and obvious sense”, and “fir
meaning.”

In fact, similar expressions, or even stronger wordings like the “most constant
protection”, were utilized since last century in a number of bilateral treaties concluded
to encourage the flow of international economic exchanges and to provide the citizens
and national companies established on the territory of the other Contracting Party
with adequate treatment for them as well as to their property (“"Traité d’Amitié, de
‘Commerce et Navigation”, concluded between France and Mexico on November 27,
1886—g. A Ch.KISS, Répertire de la Pratique Francaise ..., op. ct., Tome Il, 1965 §
1002, p. 637; The Treaty concluded in 1861 between Italy and Venezuela, the inter-
pretation of which became the central issue in the Sambiaggio case adjudicated in 1903
by the Italy/Venezuela Mixed Claims Commission—U.N. Reports of Intemational Ar-
bitral Awards, vol. X, p. 512 ss.).

48. The arbitral Tribunal is not aware of any case in which the obligation
assumed by the host State to provide the nationals of the other Contracting State with
“full protection and security” was construed as absolute obligation which guarantees
that no damages will be suffered, in the sense that any violation thereof creates auto-
matically a “strict liability” on behalf of the host State.

Sambiaggio case seems to be the only reported case in which such argument was
voiced, but without success. The Italian Commissioner AGNOLI, referred in his
Report to:

‘The protection and security...which the Venezuelan Government explicitly guar-

antees by Article 4 of the Treaty of 1861 to Italians residing in Venezuela (U.N.

Reports, op cit., p. 502—underlining added).

The Venezuelan Commissioner ZULOAGA responded by indicating that:

546 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Governments are constituted to afford protection, not to guarantee it (Ibid., p. 511).

The Umpire RALSTON put an end to the italian allegation by emphasizing
that:

If it had been the contract between Italy and Venezuela, understood and con-

sented by both, that the larter should be held liable for the acts of revolutionists—

something in derogation of the general principles of international lw—this
agreement would naturally have found direct expression in the protocol itself and

would not have been left to doubtful interpretation (Ibid., p. 521).

49. In the recent case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.P.A.(ELSI) between the
US.A. and Italy adjudicated by a Chamber of the Intemational Court of Justice, the
US.A. Government invoked Article V.(1) of the Bilateral Treaty which established an
obligation to provide “the most constant protection and security”, but without claim-
ing that this obligation constitutes a “guarantee” involving the emergence of a “strict
liability” (Section 2—Chapter V of the U.S.A. Memorial dated May 15, 1987, where
reference is made, on the contrary at page 135 to the : “One well-established aspect
of the international standard of treatment... that States must use “due dilige
prevent wrongful injuries to the person or property of aliens within their territory”).

In its Judgment of July 20, 1989, the IC} Chamber clearly stated that:

‘The reference in Article V to the provision of “constant protection and security”

cannot be construed as thé giving of a warranty that property shall never in any

circumstances be occupied or disturbed (C.I,J., Recueil, 1989, § 108, p. 65).

Consequently, both the oldest reported arbitral precedent and the latest ILC J.
ruling confirms that the language imposing on the host State an obligation to provide

“protection and security” or “full protection and security required by international
Jaw” (the other expression included in the same Article V) could not be construed ac~
cording to the natural and ordinary sense of the words as creating a “strict lability”.
The rule remains that:

The State into which an alien has entered ... is not an insurer or a guarantor of

his security... It does not, and could hardly be asked to, accepe an absolute re-

sponsibility for all injuries to foreigners (Alwyn V. FREEMAN, Responsibility of

States for Unlawful Acts of Their Armed Forces, Sijthoff, Leiden, 1957, p. 14).

This conclusion, arrived at more than three decades ago, still reflects—in the Tri-
bunal’s opinion—the present status of International Law Investment Standards as re~
fected in “the worldwide BIT network” (f. KS. GUDGEON, “Valuation of
Nationalized Property Under United States and other Bilateral Investment Treaties”.
Chapter Hl, in the Valuation of Nationalized Property in Intemational Law, Ed. by
Richard B. LILLICH, vol. IV , (1987), p. 120).

50. _ In the opinion of the present Arbitral Tribunal, the addition of words like
“constant” or “full” to strengthen the required standards of “protection and security”
could justifiably indicate the Parties’ intention to require within their treaty relation-
ship a standard of “due diligence” higher than the “minimum standard” of general in
ternational Jaw,. But, the nature of both the obligation and ensuing responsibility
remain unchanged, since the added words “constant” or “full” are by themselves not

 

 

CASES a7

sufficient co establish that the Parties intended to transform their mutual obligation into
a “strict liability”.

51. The Tribunal’ opinion arrived at in applying the established rule, accord-
ing to which the words contained in a treaty provision have to be given the natural
and fair meaning affixed to them by the common usage, is further supported by re-
course to the other canons of interpretation.

According to Rule (C) (supra, § 40), proper interpretation has to take into account
the realization of the Treaty’s general spirit and objectives, which is clearly in the
present case the encouragement of investments through securing an adequate environ-
ment of legal protection. But, in the absence of travaux préparatoires in the proper sense,
it would be almost impossible to ascertain whether Sri Lanka and the United Kingdom
had during their negotiations the necessity of di
habitual pattern adopted by the previous treaties, and to establish a “strict liability” in
favour of the foreign investor as one of the objectives of their treaty protection.
Equally, none among the authors referred to by the Parties claimed in his commentary
that the Sri Lanka/U.K. Treaty or similar Bilateral Investment Treaties had the effect
of increasing the customary intemational law standards of protection to the extent of
imposing “strict liability” on the host State in cases where the investment suffers losses
due to property destruction.

Accordingly, recourse to the spirit O€ the Treaty and its objectives would not alter
the conclusion arrived at by the Tribunal in refusing to consider that the Sri Lanka/
UK. Treaty imposed by Article 2.(2) a “strict liability” in the event of failure to
prvi ull protection and security”.

Moreover, both Rules (D) and (E) confirm the Tribunal’s opinion, as Article
2.2) sould not be taken separately out of the Treaty’s global context.

The Claimant's contention that Article 2.(2) adopted a standard of “strict labil-
ity” would lead logically to the inevitable conclusion that Article 4 in its entirety
becomes superfluous, in the sense that according to the Claimant's interpretation the
Parties were not serious in adding to their Treaty two provisions which are not suscep-
tible of getting any application in practice. Such an interpretation has to be rejected in
application of Rule (E) which requires that Article 2.(2) be interpreted in a manner that
does not deprive Article 4 from having any meaning or scope of applicability.

‘Such an unaccepted result could have been easily avoided if the Claimant had not
disregarded Rule (D) according to which the rules of general international law have to
be taken into consideration by necessary implication, and not to be deemed totally ex-
cluded as alleged by the Claimant.

In the Tribunal’s opinion the non-reference to international law in Article 2.(2)
of the Sri Lanka/U.K. Treaty should not be taken as implying the Parties’ intention to
avoid its application under any aspect, including its role as supplementary source pro-
viding guidance in the process of interpretation.

548. ICSID REVIEW-FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

‘The Tribunal’s conclusion in this respect, is not only based on Rule (D) as previ~
ously indicated, but it is supported furthermore by what was expressed by an informed
author who stated that:

the U.K. BIT’s normally make no international law reference... This drafting de-

vice could be argued to cloud reliance on external sources of law and precedent

during the life of the treaty, although this is odoubredly not the intent. (K. Scott

GUDGEON, "Valuation of Nationalized Property....”” op.ct., at p. 119-120).

53. Finally, it has to be recalled that in reliance upon Rule (F) the precedents
established by the Arbitral Tribunal in the Sambiqggio case (1903) and by the ICJ
Chamber in the Elettronica Sicula case (1989), both previously referred to (supra, § 48-
49), are categoric in supporting the Tribunal’ refusal to construe the words “fll pro~
tection and security” as imposing a “strict liability” on the host State for whatever
losses suffered due to the destruction of the investment protected under the treaty.

Therefore, and taking into consideration all the reasons stated in the previous
paragraphs (supra, § 45-52), the Tribunal declares unfounded the Claimant's main plea
aiming to consider the Government of Sri Lanka assuming strict liability under Ail
2.(2) of the Bilateral Investment Treaty, without any need to prove that the dama
suffered were attributable to the State or its agents, and to establish the State's rerpom.
sibility for not acting with “due diligence”.

54. For the same reasons, the Tribunal rejects the Claimant's argument based
on the most-favoured-nation clause contained in Article 3 of the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bi-
lateral Investment Treaty.

By invoking the absence in the Sri Lanka/Switzerland Treaty of a text similar to
Article 4 providing for a “war clause” or “civil disturbance” exemption form the full
protection and security standard, the Claimant based his argument on two implicit as-
sumptions:

(i) - that the Sri Lanka/Switzerland ‘Treaty provides equally for a “strict lia~
bility” standard of protection in case of losses suffered due to property de~
struction; and

(i) that the rules of general international law are totally excluded and re-
placed exclusively by the Treaty’s “strict liability” standard.

Both assumptions are unfounded, as the Tribunal has no reasons to believe that
the Sri Lanka/Switzerland Treaty adopted a “strict liability” standard, and the Tribunal
is convinced that, in the absence of a specific rule provided for in the ‘Treaty itself as
lex specalis, the general international law rules have to assume their role as lex generalis.

Accordingly, itis not proven that the Sri Lanka/Switzerland Treaty contains rules
more favourable than those provided for under the Sri Lanka/U.K. Treaty, and hence,
Article 3 of the latter Treaty cannot be justifiably invoked in the present case.

55. Faced with the task of adjudicating the Claimant's “alternative submis-
sion”, the Tribunal has to provide an answer to the various arguments raised by both
Parties with regard to the interpretation of Article 4, the inter-relation between 4.(1)
and 4.2), their respective scope of application, as well as the burden of proof assumed

by each Party in evidencing the existence or non-existence of the conditions required
for the applicability of the rules and standards referred to in both paragraphs of Article
4.

56, In determining the applicability of either paragraph of Article 4, the Tri-
bunal shall be guided by the same rules of interpretation previously prescribed from
(A) to (F) (supra, § 40).

Nevertheless, in order to handle the legal issues related to evidence, the above-
stated canons have to be complemented by taking into consideration the following es-
tablished intemational law rules:

Rule (G)- “There exists a general principle of law placing the burden of proof upon
the claimant” (Bin CHENG, General Principles of Law as Applied by Intemational
Counts and Tabunals, Grotius Publications, Cambridge, (1987), p. 327, and the
supporting authorities referred to therein).

Rule (H)-“"The term actor in the principle onus probandi actor’ incumbit is not to be taken
to mean the plaintiff from the procedural standpoint, but the real claimant in
view of the issues involved” (Ibid., p. 332). Hence, with regard to “proof of in=
dividual allegations advanced by the parties in the course of proceedings, the bur
den of proof rests upon the party alleging the fact” (Ibid., p. 334; and Duruard V.
SANDIFER, Evidence before Intemsational ‘Tribunals, University Press of Virginia,
Charlottesville, (1975), p. 127, footnote 101).

Rule (1)- “A Party having the burden of proof must not only bring evidence in support

his allegations, but must also convince the Tribunal of their truth, lest they be

disregarded for want, or insufficiency, of proof" (CHENG, op. p. 329-331,
with quotations from the supporting authorities).

Rule ()- “The international responsibility of the State is not to be presumed. The party
alleging a violation of international law giving rise to international responsibility
has the burden of proving the assertion” (The Tanger Horses case (1924); the Corfu
‘Channel case (1949), and the Belgium Claims case (1930) referred to by CHENG,
at p. 305-306).

Rule (K)- “International tribunals are “not bound to adhere to strict judicial rules of
evidence”. As a general principle “the probative force of the evidence presented
is for the Tribunal to determine” (SANDIFER, op. at. pp. 9 and 17; Award of
1896 rendered in the Fabiani case between France and Venezuela, Repertory, op.
at., Vol; I, p. 412-413; and the 1903 Award rendered in the Frangui case by the
Spain/Venezuela Mixed Claims Commission, which considered this rule as ex-
pressing “the unanimous conviction of the most conspicuous writers upon inter~
national aw” and relying inter alia on Article 15 of the Rules for Arbitration
between Nations adopted in 1875 by UInsttut de Droit Intemational, and what

$30) ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

MERIGNHAC wrote at p. 269 of his Traité de Arbitrage International—U.N. Re-
ports, op.cit, Vol. X, p. 751-753).

Rule (L} In exercizing the “ice evaluation of evidence” provided for under the pre-

ule, the international tribunals “decided the case on the strength of the

evidence produced by both parties”, and in case a party “adduces some evidence

which prima facie support his allegation, the burden of proof shifis to his oppo-

nent (SANDIFER, op. cit, pp. 125, 129, 130, 170-173, relying upon the Parker

case of 1962 adjudicated by the Mexico/US.A. General Claims Commission,
U.N. Reports, op.cit., Vol. IV, p. 36-41; the ICJ's Ambatielos and Asylum cases).

Rule (M)- Finally, “In cases where proof of a fact presents extreme difficulty, a tribunal
may thus be satisfied with less conclusive proof, i.e., prima facie evidence”
(CHENG, op.di.,p. 323-325, with quotations from the supporting authorities
and cited with approval by SANDIFER, at p. 173).

57. In the light ofall the legal Rules from (A) to (M) stated herein above (§ 40

and 56), it becomes clear that Article 4.(2) regulated a specific situation by adopting 2

standard of responsibility representing a certain degree of particularity, and which

becomes applicable only in cases characterized by the cumulative existence of three
factors:

(@) - that the destruction of property not only occurred during hostilities,
but more precisely such desteuction has been proven to be committed
by the governmental forces or authorities themselves;

(0) - that the destruction was not caused in combat action, since the higher
standard of liability (‘adequate compensation” payable in “freely trans-
ferable” currency) is linked with the assumption of unjustified destruc~
tion committed out of combat; and

(©) ~ that the destruction was not required by the necessity of the situation,
as the existence of a combat would not be sufficient per se to alleviate
the responsibility of the governmental forces and authorities, once it has
been proven that the security forces bypassed the reasonable limits by
undertaking unnecessary destruction.

58. Moreover, it has to be noted that the foreign investor who invokes the ap-
plicability of said Article 4.(2) assumes a heavy burden of proof, since he has, in con
formity with Rules (G) and ()), to establish:

(@) ~ thar the governmental forces and not the rebels caused the destruction;

(i) ~ that this destruction occurred out of “combat”;

(ii) - that there was no “necessity”, in the sense that the destruction could
have been reasonably avoided due to its unnecessary character under the
prevailing circumstances.

 

cases ssi

59. Exercizing its discretionary power in evaluating the evidence produced by
both Parties during the proceedings of the present case in conformity with the above-
stated Rules (K) and (I), the Arbitral Tribunal considers that:

(@) ~ There is no doubt chat the destruction of the premises which existed
in Serendib’s Farm took place during the hostilities of January 28, 1987,
and the loss of the shrimps harvest occurred during the period in which
the governmental security forces occupied the Farm's fields;

(b) - Nevertheless, there is no convincing evidence produced which suffi-
ciently sustains the Claimant's allegation that the firing which caused
the property destruction came from the governmental troops, and no
reliable evidence was adduced to prove that the shrimps were lost due
to acts committed by the security forces;

(©) ~ Equally, no convincing evidence was produced which sufficiently sus-
tains the Respondent’ s allegation that the firing which caused the de-
struction of the property came from the insurgents resisting the security
forces.

60. Therefore, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that the first condition required
under Article 4,(2) cannot be considered fulfilled in the present case, due to the lack
of convincing evidence proving that the losses were incurred due to acts committed
by the governmental forces.

‘At the same time, the Tribunal cannot proceed in this respect on the basis of
prima facie evidence adduced in function of Rules (H) or (M) since the existence of a
legal condition as important as the attributability of the damage should, in the Tribu-
nal’s opinion, be proven in a conclusive manner.

61. Regarding the second condition which excluded from the scope of Article
4.(2) the losses suffered "in combat action”, it requires first the determination of what
is meant by “combat action” and absequeely wheter the investment loses were ef
fectively caused in “combat action

In implementation of the above-suted Rule (B) (supra, § 40), the term “combat
action” has to be understood according to its natural and fair meaning as commonly
used under prevailing circumstances, i.e. within the context of guerrilla warfare which
characterizes the modem civil wars conducted by insurgents.

Rarely, in contemporary history actions undertaken during civil wars would take
the classical form of a regular military confrontation between two opposing armed
‘groups on a battle field where the adversaries engage simultaneously in fighting each
other on the spot. In most cases, the opponents in current civil war situations would
resort to sporadic surprise attacks as far as possible from their home bases, trying to
avoid direct military confrontation through retreat to places where pursuit could be
extremely difficult.

Hence, a “combat action” undertaken against insurgents could be envisaged
comprising vast areas extending over the several square miles covering all the localities

 

 

352 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

in which the hit and run operations as well as the governmental counter-insurgency
activities could take place.

62. In the light of the fore-mentioned remarks, and taking into consideration
the evidence submitted by both Parties throughout the arbitration proceedings, the
Tribunal is of the opinion that the operation “Day Break” undertaken on January 28,
1987, against the “Tiger” fighters belonging to the movement known as LLTE, in
order to regain control of the Manmunai area, qualifies as “combat action”.

Accordingly, the losses caused as a result of said “combat action” are not covered
by Article 4.(2) of the Sri Lanka/U.K. Bilateral Investment Treaty, since they fall
within the explicitly excluded category.

63. The third and final condition provided for in Article 4.(2) relates to the

“necessity of the situation”, in the sense that the State responsibilty under said dispo-
can only be engaged ift has been proven thatthe loses incurred were not due
to “the necessity of the situation”,

The term in question follows a pattern long established in practice, as a number
of arbitral precedents refused to allocate compensation for destructions that took place
during hostilities on the assumption that these destructions “were compelled by the
imperious necessity of war” (f. the 1903 Award rendered by the Netherlands/Vene-
zuela Mixed Claims Commission in the Dania Bembelish case, Repertory...op.cit., vol.
I, § 297-280; and the Special Ad Hoc Arbitral Tribunal adjudicating the Handman case
between the U.K. and the US.A.). The doctrinal authorities approved that reasoning
mainly justified by the extreme difficulty, described as “next to impossible”, of obtain-
ing the reconstruction in front of the arbitral tribunal ofall the conditions under which
the “combat action” took place with an adequate reporting of all the accompanying
circumstances (f. RALSTON, The Law and Procedure of Intemational Tribunals, (1926),
p. 391; and C. EAGLETON, The Responsibility of States in International Law, (1928), p.
155).

64. In the present case, neither Party was able to provide reliable evidence ex-
plaining with precision the conditions under which the destructions and other losses,
mainly of the shrimps crop, took place. Under these circumstances, it would be ex-
tremely difficult to determine whether the destruction and losses were caused as an in
evitable result of the “necessity of the situation”, or, on the contrary, were avoidable if
the governmental security forces would have been keen to act with due diligence.

Therefore, the Tribunal deems appropriate to rely on the above-stated Rule (J)
according to which “the intemational responsibility of the State is not to be presumed”
(supra, § 56).

Consequently, all three conditions necessary for the applicability of Article 4.(2)
are proven to be non-existent in the present case, and Article 4.(1) becomes the only
part of Article 4 providing remedy that could be_available for the Claimant to base his
claims thereunder.

65. For the applicability of Article 4.(1), the only condition required is the
presence of “losses suffered”.

   

CASES $53

These owo key words are so clear that they do not call for interpretation in con-
formity with VATTELS Rule (A) which renders any attempted departure from the
plain meaning of the words a violation of intemational law rules on treaty interpreta-
tion.

Undoubredly, the term “losses suffered” includes all property destruction which
materializes due to any type of hostilities enumerated in the text (“owing to war or
other armed conflict, revolution, a state of national emergency, revolt, insurrection or
riot in the territory”).

Equally, the mere fact that such “losses suffered” do exist is by itself sufficient to
render the provision of Article 4.(1) applicable, without any need to prove which side
was responsible for said destruction, or to question whether the destruction was nec-
essary or not.

In essence, the scope of applicability of Article 4.(1) is not subject to any legal re-
strictions. Hence, it extends as lex generalis to all situations not covered by the special
rule of Article 4.(2), including necessarily cases where no proof has been established
to determine whether the governmental forces or the insurgents caused the property
destruction.

66. The only difficulty encountered under Article 4.(1) does not relate to its
interpretation or conditions of applicability, but to the type of remedy provided for
thereunder.

Precisely, Article 4.(1) does not include any substantive rules establishing direct
solutions; i. material rules providing remedies expressed in fixed and definitive terms.
Like conflict-of-law rules, Article 4.(1) contains simply an indirect rule whose function.
is limited to effecting a reference (renvoi) towards other sources which indicate the so-
lution to be followed.

‘According to the undisputed plain language of Article 4.(1), the investor—
already enjoying the “full security” under Article 2.(2) of the Sri Lanka/U.K. Treaty—
has to be accorded treatment no less favourable than:

() that which the host State accords to its own nationals and companies; or
Gi) ~ that accorded to nationals and companies of any Third State.

‘Taking into account the absence of restrictions, whether explicit or implied, and
the generality of the text, the “no less favourable treatment” granted thereunder covers
all possible cases in which the investments suffer losses owing to events identified as
including “a state of national , revolt, insurrection, or riot”, with regard to
remedies enumerated in the text itself: “restitution, indemnification, compensation or
other settlement”.

67. Consequently, it could be safély ascertained that the Bilateral Investment
Treaty, through the above-stated renvoi technique, had not left the host State totally
immune from any responsibility in case the foreign investor suffers losses due to the
destruction of his investment which occurs during a counter-insurgency action under-
taken by the governmental security forces.

 

354 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

In implementation of Article 4.(1), the host State could find itself in such a situ-
ation bound to bear a certain degree of responsibility to be determined in implemen-
tation of the renvoi contained in that Article 4.(1).

‘Once failure to provide “fall protection and security” has been proven {under
Article 2.(2) of the Sri Lanka/U.K. Treaty or under a similar provision existing in other
bilateral Investment Treaties extending the same standard to nationals of a third State),
the host State’s responsibility is established, and compensation is due according to the
general intemnational law rules and standards previously developed with regard to the
State’s filure to comply with its “due diligence” obligation under the minurnum stan-
dard of customary international law.

68. It should be noted in this respect that in the Government of Sri Lanka's
‘own words, its international responsibility could be engaged “if't fails to act with due
diligence” (Respondent's Counter—Memorial, at p. 28, second paragraph).

In the sentence starting at the end of the same page and continued on the follow-
ing page, it was clearly stated that:

If the government's lack of due diligence caused otherwise unnecessary destruc~
tion, then the government would ... have violated its obligation under Article
2.2

 

The reference to the “lack of due diligence” emerges from the Government's
basic assumption, according to which:

  

the language “full protection and security” is common in bilateral investment

treaties, and it incorporates rather than overrides, the customary international le-

gal standard of responsibility. This international legal standard requires due dili-

‘gence on the part of the states, and reasonable justification for any destruction of

property (Respondent's Counter-Memorial, at p. 27).

69. Hence, any foreign investor, even if his national State has not concluded
with Sri Lanka 2 Bilateral Investment Treaty containing a provision similar to that of
Article 2.(2), would be entitled to a protection which requires “due diligence” from
the host State, i.e. Sri Lanka. Failure to comply with this obligation imposed by cus-
tomary international law entails the host State's responsibility.

The Letter of September 13, 1989, containing the Government of Sri Lanka's re-
sponse to the Tribunal’s Order dated June 27, 1989, confirmed that:

The Government's obligation in such circumstances under customary interna-

tional law is to exercise due diligence to protect alien individuals or companies

from investment losses (paragraph (c) of said letter, with reference to authorities
stating that: “A state on whose territory an insurrection occurs is not responsible

for loss or damage sustained by an alien to his person or property unless it can be

shown that the govemment of this state was negligent in the use of, ot in the fail-

ure to use, the forces at its disposal for the prevention or suppression of the insur-

rection”.

The Respondent's submission as expressed in the Letter’s final paragraph reads as
follows:

Thus, the mere occurrence of investment losses by an alien, such as AAPL, docs

not render the Government responsible to compensate the alien for the losses.

Rather, the Government is obliged to compensate the alien only in the event the

alien demonstrates that the Government failed to act reasonably under the cir-

cumstances.

70, Within the context of the latter alternative, the Tribunal has to envisage
whether effectively Sri Lanka's responsibility could be sustained under intemational
law which has to be considered applicable by virtue of the renvoi provided for in Acticle
4.(1), combined with the conventional standard of “full protection and security” stip-
ulated in Article 2.(2), as well as in other Bilateral Investment Treaties concluded by
Ssi Lanka.

71. But, before turning to undertake that task, the Tribunal has to emphasize
that the Respondent referred in the september 13, 1989 Letter to another legal ground
available by virtue of the renvoi contained in Article 4.(1), which is the State's respon-
sibility under the rules of the domestic legal system.

As indicated in paragraph (B) of said letter, previously quoted in its entirety (supra,
§ 36), the Sri Lankan Law provides, for the person who suffered losses owing to armed
hostilities, “a remedy under lex aquilian principles, namely, for intentional or negligent
wrongdoing”.

Nevertheless, the Tribunal deems appropriate, for procedural considerations, not
to delve into the domestic law responsibility, since the Sri Lankan Law’ was not fully
pleaded during the present arbitration proceedings.

Ill—The Legal and Factual Considerations
on which the Respondent's Responsibility is Established

72. Ivis a generally accepted rule of International Law, clearly stated in inter-
national arbitral awards and in the writings of the doctrinal authorities, that
() - A State on whose territory an insurrection occurs is not responsible for
Joss or damage sustained by foreign investors unless it can be shown that
the Government of that state failed to provide the standard of protection
required, either by treaty, or under general customary law, as the case may
be; and
(ji) - Failure to provide the standard of protection required entails the state’s
international responsibility for losses suffered, regardless of whether the
damages occurred during an insurgents’ offensive act or resulting from
governmental counter-insurgency activities.
73. The long established arbitral case-law was adequately expressed by Max
HUBER, the Repporteurin the Spanish Zone of Moroceo claims (1923), in the following
terms:

‘The principle of non-responsbility in no way excludes the duty to exercise a cer
tain degree of vigilance. If a state is not responsible for the revolutionary events

556 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

themselves, it may nevertheless be responsible, for what its authorities do or not

to do to ward the consequence, within the limits of possibility. (Translation from

the French original text reported by CHENG, in his general principles... op.cit.,

at p. 229).

Furthemore, the famous arbitrator indicated that the “degree of vigilance” re-
quired in proving the necessary protection and security would differ according to the
circumstances.

In the absence of any higher standard provided for by Treaty, the general inter-
national law standard was stated to reflect the “degree of security reasonably ex-
pected”, Max HUBER. indicated in this respect:

Du moment que la vigilance exercée tombe manifestement au-dessous de ce

niveau par rapport aux ressortissants d'un Etat étranger déterminé, ce dernier est

en droit de se considérer comme \és¢ dans des intéréts qui doivent jouir de la pro-

tection du droit international (Rapport, U.N. Recueil des Sentences Arbitrales, vol.

Il, p. 634; and in Repertory ..., op.cit., p. 426).

In implementation of said standard of vigilance “qu’au point de vue du droit in-
ternational I"Etat est tenu de garantir”, HUBER. arrived in his award rendered on May
1, 1925 (Britanic Property case between Spain and the U.K.) to hold Spain responsible
for: “manque de diligence dans la prévention des actes dommageables” (U.N. Recueil
des Sentences... op.cit., p. 645), and in the Melillea-Ziat, Ben Kiran case be went as far as
to declare the authorities responsible for: “négligence qui friserait la complicité” (Ibid.,
p. 731).

74. Another reputed arbitrator and author, RALSTON acting as Umpire in
the Sambiggo case between Italy and Venezuela, did not hesitate to declare:

The umpire .... accepts the rule that if in any case of reclamation submitted to

him it is alleged and proved that Venezuelan authorities failed to exercise due dil-

gence to prevent damages from being inflicted by revolutionists, that country

should be held responsible (U.N. Recueil des Sentences Arbitrales, Vol. X, p.534).

75. On various other occasions, the State Responsibility had been admitted for
failure to provide the required protection, as witnessed by the following examples:

~ In the 1903 Kummerow case, the Germany/Venezuela Mixed Claims Commis-
sion declared:

substantially all the authorities on international law agree that a nation is respon

sible for acts of revolutionists under certain concitions such as lack of diligence,

 

o« negligence in filing to prevent such 2c, when posible, os x pouble
to punish the wrongdoer and make reparation for the injuring (Repertory, ep. cit,
Vol I, p. 37);

- In Max HUBER’s Report of 1925 on “the Individual Claims” (Spanish Zone of
Morocco cases), he treated the failure to provide the necessary protection and security
as an omission or inaction, and considered that:

T’on est fondé & envisager cette inaction comme un manquement & une obligation

internationale (Repertory, vol. Il, p. 430);

CASES

= In the 1926 Home Insurance Company case, the Mexico/USA General Claim
Commission emphasized the importance of the “duty to protect”, which required un~
dertaking all “means reasonably necessary to accomplish that end” (Ibid., p. 433).

= In three successive years (1927, 1928, and 1929), the Mexico/USA General
Claims Commission declared chat the Mexican Government is to be responsible for
what could be characterized as “lack of protection” in case this has been proven (the
David Richards case (1927), the Oriental Navigation Co. case (1928), and the F.M. Smith
case (1929), Repertory, vol. Il, p. 435-437).

= In the Victor A. Ermerins case (1929), the Presiding Commissioner, Dr. SIND-
BALLE, in response to the claim tht the Mexican authorities failed “to afford protec-
tion to the interest of Ermerins”, arrived at the conclusion that in the circumstances of
that case:

2 crime of this nature could not have taken place, if the authorities of the town

had properly fulfilled their duty to afford protection to the property of Etmerins

(U.N. reports of Intemational Arbitral Awards, vol. {V, p. 476-477);

~ In both the Chapman case and the Mrs. Mead case, adjudicated in 1930 by
Mexico/USA General Claims Commission, in spite of the insufficiency of the records
submitted, the Commission, relied on sworn affidavits and non-official reports intro-
duced as evidence in order “to sustain the charge of lack of protection” (U.N. Reports,
op.cit., Vol. IV, p. 639 and p. 656-657);

In the Dexter Balwin case (1933), the Panama/USA General Claims commission,
condemned the local authorities’s failure “to afford protection” (Repertory, vol. Il, p.
442);

- In the 1937 two cases conceming Mr, Brawmann and Frances Healey against the
Republic of Turkey, the Goverment was declared responsible according to NIEL-
SON’s ruling on the basis that “reasonable care to prevent injuries” was not afforded
(ibid, p. 443-444),

76. In the light of all the above-mentioned arbitral precedents, it would be ap-
propriate to consider that adequate protection afforded by the host State authorities
constitutes a primary obligation, the failure to comply with which creates international
responsibility. Furthermore, “there is an extensive and consistent state practice sup-
porting the duty to exercise due diligence” (BROWNLIE, System of the Law of
Nations, State Responsibility—Part I, Oxford, 1986, p. 162).

‘As a doctsinal authority, relied upon by both Parties during the various stages of
their respective pleadings in the present case, Professor BROWNLIE stated categori-
cally that:

There is general agreement among writers that the rule of non-responsibility can-

not apply where the government concemed has failed to show due diligence

(Principles of Public Intemational Law, Third Edition, Oxford, 1979, P. 453).

After reviewing all categories of precedents, including more recent international
[judicial case-law, the leamed Oxford University Professor arrived, not only to confirm
that international responsibility arises from the mere “failure to exercise due diligence”

558 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

in providing the required protection, but also to note “a sliding scale of liability related
to the standard of due diligence” (State Responsibility, op. cit. p. 162 and p. 168).

In addition, special attention has to be given to the following passages of
BROWNLIE’s writings which seem to be of particular relevance to the present case:
= “Unreasonable acts of violence by police officers ... also give rise to responsi-

bility” (Principles, op. cit. p. 447);

= “Substantial negligence to take reasonable precautionary and preventive ac-

tion” is deemed sufficient ground to create “responsibility for damage to foreign

public and private property in the area” (Ibid., p. 452);

= In commenting the ICJ Judgment rendered in the Cosfu case (1949), the fact

that “nothing was attempted to prevent the disaster” was qualified as “grave

omission” which involved the international responsibility of Albania (State Re-

sponsibility, op. cit., p. 154);

~ With regard to the IC) Judgment rendered in the Hostages case (1980), Profes-

sor BROWNLIE emphasizes Iran's failure “to take appropriate steps to ensure

the protection” required under the “fall protection and security” provision of the

tran/U.S.A. Amity, Navigation and Commerce Treaty (ibid. p. 157).

77. Anumber of other contemporary international law authorities noticed the
“sliding scale”, from the old “subjective” criteria that takes into consideration the rel-
atively limited existing possibilities of local authorities in a given context, towards an
“objective” standard of vigilance in assessing the required degree of protection and se-
curity with regard to what should be legitimately expected to be secured for foreign
investors by a reasonably well organized modem State.

As expressed by Professor FREEMAN, in his 1957 Lectures at the Hague
Academy of International Law:

The “due diligence” is nothing more nor less than the reasonable measures of

prevention which a well-administered government could be expected to exercise

under similar circumstances (Responsibility of States..., op. ct. p. 15-16).

According to modem doctrine, the violation of international law entailing the
‘State's responsibility has to be considered constituted by “the mere lack or want of dil-
igence”, without any need to establish malice ox negligence (gf. C.R AMERAS-
INGHE, State Responsibility for Injuries to Aliens, Oxford, (1967), p. 281-282; FV.
GARCIA-AMADOR, The Changing Law of Intemational Claims, vol. 1, (1987), p.
115,118; M. BEDJAOUI, “Responsibility of States: Fault and Strict Liability”, Ency-
clopedia of Public Intemational Law, vol. 10, (1987), p. 359; and K. ZEMANEK, “Re-
sponsibility of States: General Principles”, Ibid., p. 365).

78. In the light of the above-stated intemational law precedents and authori-
ties, the arbitral Tribunal has to review the evidence submitted by both Parties in the
resent case in order to establish the proven facts, and to determine whether these facts
sustain the Claimant's allegation that the Respondent Government failed to comply
with its obligation under the Sri Lanka/ULK. Bilateral Investment Treaty (particularly
the standard provided for in Article 2.(2), as well as by virtue of the rules goveming

CASES 559,

Seate responsibility under general international law (which becomes necessarily appli-
cable by virtue of the renvoi contained in Article 4.(1) of the Treaty).

79. The Claimant's case on the facts surrounding the events of January 28,
1987, as initially submitted can be summarized as follows:

(a) - “During the later part of 1986 and into 1987, the Government of Sri
Lanka was faced with grave difficulties because of terrorist activities, in
cluding terrorist activities in chat part of the country which is near Ser-
endib Seafoods, Ltd. farm” (Claimant's Memorial, P. 7);

(b) - The management of Serendib company had been closely cooperating
“with the security authorities in the region”, and “ was ready and will
ing to cooperate with the Government” (Ibid., p. 8-9);

(©) - The destruction and killing which took place on January 28, 1987
“was caused by special security forces”, under circumstances which
“strongly suggest that this incident was a wanton usc of force not re-
quired by the exigencies of the situation and not planned pursuant to
any combat action” (ibid., p. 8);

(d) - The burning of Serendib’s “office structure, repair shed, store and
dormitory”, the opening of the sluice gates to the grow-out ponds, thus
destroying the shrimp crop, as well as the execution of “21 staff mem-
bers of Screndib Staff", was not needed since “less destructive action—
short of wholesale destruction and murder- could surely have been tak-
en by the Sri Lankan special security forces” (Ibid., p. 9 and 10).

In order to substantiate the Claimant's version of the January 28th, 1987 events,
a number of sworn affidavits were submitted with the Claimant's Memorial, all ema-
nating from the former Serendib employees or relatives of dead former employees, to-
gether with copies of two letters addressed by Serendib’s Managing Director to the
President of the Republic on February 2, and February 9, 1987 (Exhibits form (F) to
(P)).

80. _ In the Claimant's Reply to Respondent's Counter-Memorial, special addi-
tional emphasis was put on reiterating that “the destruction and the killings on January
28, 1987 were caused by the STF”, and the following supplemental points were par-
ticularly stressed:

~ “the Serendib farm was not a terrorist facility”;
~ “the STF did not meet with violent resistance from the farm on January 28,
1987";
~ “extensive combat action did not occur at the farm between terrorists and the
STF"; a

“that Respondent has admitted its liability by offering compensation payments

to families of the staff members killed by the STF” (Claimant’s Reply, p. 72).

the documents attached to Claimant's Reply to the Respondent's
‘Counter-Memorial, only one Exhibit related to the factual aspects of the events that
took place on January 28, 1987, and during the following days was submitted as

 

560. ICSID REVIEW--FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

“Exhibit 00”. The document in question contains a letter addressed to the Managing
Director of Serendib Company by the Batticaloa District Citizen's Committee about
the results of the visit of the farm that took place on February 10, 1987.

81. Furthermoce, the only person who gave testimony in front of the Tribunal
during the oral phase of the arbitration proceedings was the Managing Director of Ser-
endib Company, Mr. Victor Santiapillai, whose two letters to the President of the Re-
public were submitted as evidence by the Claimant according to what has been
previously indicated (Claimant's Exhibits (M) and (P))

Mr. Santiapillai was examined by the Claimant's Counsel and cross-examined by
the Respondent's Counsel.

82. The Respondent's case provided a different version of the facts, which can
be summarized as follows:

(a) - “The Government of Sri Lanka was seeking ways to prevent the
spread of terrorism and the erosion of Government control in the towns
surrounding the shrimp farm” (Govermment’s Counter-Memorial, p. 3);

(b) - “that the Serendib farm was, in the months preceding the operation
(of January 28, 1987), used by Tiger rebels as a base of operations and
support” (Ibid., p. 4);

(c) ~ “That the farm’s management cooperated with the Tigers (Ibid., p. 4)

(4) - “That operating out of the farm (and the surrounding area) the Tigers
violently resisted the Special Task Force raid”, and “‘intense combat ac-
tion occurred at the farm between the Tigers and the special Task Force
during the raid” (Ibid., p. 4);

(c) ~ “Any destruction of the farm which occurred was caused directly by
terrorist action (in particular, mortar fire), and not by the Special Task
force” (ibid., p. 41).

83. During the first exchange of the written pleadings, the Respondent's case
on the facts concerning the events of January 28, 1987 relied exclusively on three Ex-
hibits submitted with the Counter-Memorial, which contain:

(i) - Document containing the Report of Assistant Superintendent Nimal
Lewke, dated February 2, 1987, and addressed to his superior, Superin-
tendent Karunascna, Commander of the Special Task Force (Exhibit No.
34);

(ii) - Document dated February 1, 1987, by virtue of which the Operation’s
‘Commander Superintendent Karunasena addressed his Report to his su~
perior, Superintendent Sumith Silva, the Coordinating Officer of Batti~
caloa (Exhibit No. 35); and

ii) - Three intemal correspondence within the General Intelligence & Se-
curity Department of the Ministry of Defense, dated successively Febru-
ary 3, 1987, February 9, 1987, and March 18, 1987, all related to the fate
of Serendib’s prawns which were in the farm ponds and disappeared after
the farm's destruction on January 28, 1987 (Exhibit No. 36).

CASES 561

84. The text of the Respondent's Rejoinder contained no new elaboration on
the facts, but its enclosures comprised two additional Exhibits related to the events of
January 28, 1987, which are:

(i) ~ A swom affidavie dated October 17, 1988 (Exhibit No. 38) emanating
from the same Mr, Karunasena, the author of the report previously sub-
mitted as Exhibit No. 35; and

Gi) - A sworn affidavit dated also October 17, 1988 (Exhibit No. 39), ema-
nating from Mr. Sumith Silva, the area Coordinating Officer to whom
Mr. Karunasena’s Report has been previously submitted.

85. _ Exercising its recognized prerogatives with regard to the evaluation of the
entire evidence submitted by both Parties taken as a whole, and after carefull consid-
eration of all arguments raised during the proceedings related to the factual aspects of
the case, the Arbitral Tribunal came to the following conclusions:

(A) - Both Parties are in agreement about one fact; that the infiltration by the

rebels of the area in which Serendib’s farm was located took such magnitude that
the entire district had been for several months before January 1987 practically out
of the Government's control.
Though such admitted situation would have raised logically the question of
whether there was during that period failure from the Government's part to
provide “full protection and security” according to the objective standard sug-
gested to be applicable, said question remains theoretical since there were no
claimed “losses suffered” due ¢o the lack of governmental protection throughout
that period.

®) ~ The Respondent never contested the evidence given by Mr. Santiapillai,
neither during the written phase of the proceedings, nor when he gave his testi-
mony at the Oral Hearing, about what he expressed in his letter of February 2,
1987, addressed the Sri Lankan President of the Republic by stating:
we maintained very cordial relationship with the senior officers of the security
forces in Batticaloa, repeatedly told chem that, if they had the slightest reservation
about any of our Batticaloa staff they should let us know quietly and we would
take action directly to get such persons out of the company.

More importantly, Mr. Santiapillai, indicated that:

On last visit to Batticaloa, (he) met Sumith de Silva, Coordinating Officer for the

area, on January 17, 1987, (and) introduced (to him) the new Farm Manager (Mr.

Karunargy), who was appointed on 1 January 1987 Farm Manager, after having

worked for the Company since its inception.

He added, that during that visit to Mr. Sumith de Silva on January 17, 1987, the

lauter:

assured me ... that he had no such reservation.

In his Affidavit prepared and swom in October 1988; i.e. after Mr. Santiapilla’s

letter was produced as evidence by the Claimant in the present case, the same Mr.

Sumith de Silva did not contest that the meeting in question took place at the

 

562 ICStD REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

indicated date (just 10 days before the January 28, 1987 operation), he did not
contradict the substance of the reported discussion, and he did not deny the ex-
istence of “cordial relationship” as manifested by making “enquiries from gov-
emment officials” before recruiting staff and readiness to dismiss whoever the
authonties have “the slightest reservation” about him.

In the light of said uncontested evidence, the Tribunal is of the opinion that rea~
sonably the Government should have at least cried to use such peaceful available
high level channel of communication in order to get any suspect elements ex-
cluded from the farm's staf. This would have been essential to minimize the risks
of killings and destruction when planning to undertake a vast military counter-
insurgency operation in that area for regaining lost control.

The Tribunal notes in this respect that the failure to resort to such precautionary
measures acquires more significance when taking into consideration that such
measures fall within the normal exercise of governmental inherent powers—as 2
public authority -entitled to order undesirable persons out from security sensitive
areas. The failure became particularly serious when the highest executive officer
of the Company reconfirmed just cen days before his willingness to comply with
any governmental requests in this respect.

‘Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that the Respondent through said inaction
and omission violated its due diligence obligation which requires undertaking all
possible measures that could be reasonably expected to prevent the eventual oc-
currence of killings and property destructions.

(©) There are no reasons to doubt the Respondent's submission regarding the long

planned character of the January 28, 1987 operation given the code-name “Day
Break” which obtained prior high level clearance. But the Tribunal does not
consider the military ata later date conclusive evidence with re-
gard the alleged heavy firing coming “from the direction of the Prawn Farm”,
or that “the enemy hold up in the Farm" and resisted the security forces during
a period over two hours.
The reports of the two officers are contradicted on these specific points by the in-
formation contained in the affidavits sworn by Mr. Kirupakara, the casual worker
at Serendib farm (Exhibit F), and by Mr. Selbatnamby, the tractor driver at Ser-
endib farm. Both provide more detailed account as eye-witnesses about what ef-
fectively happened on the spot with extreme rapidity between 7.45 in the
morning, when gunfire came “in the direction of the office” causing the employ-
e¢s to “rush into the Farm office for shelter”, and 8.00, when “three officers at-
tached to the STF entered the office”. The taking-over of the Farm by the
security forces faced no resistance according to these two eye-witnesses, and there
were no destructions at that time, as witnessed by the fact that the tractor driver
returned later in the day to the Farm with four members of the security forces to
take certain equipments fiom the Farm Office, which implies that it remained
non-destroyed till then.

CASES 363,

Moreover, it has to be noted that of the officers’ reports raise certain issue of cred~
ibility with regard to their chronological order, since unexpectedly the com-
mander of the operation, Mr. Karunasena who was observing from a helicopter
reported to his superior the Arca Coordinating Officer Sumith de Silva on Feb-
ruaty 1, 1987, before receiving any report from his assistant Mr. Lewke who ef-
fectively conducted on the ground the operation of taking over the farm facilities
(che latter’s report is dated February 2, 1987).
Therefore, the Respondent's version of the events has to be considered lacking
convincing evidence with regard to the allegation that the farm became a “ter
rorist facility” which “violently resisted the Special Task Force” through an
“intense combat action” that “occurred at the Farm”.
Apparently, the officers’ version of the events, which are not substantiated with
any credible evidence, and which are contradicted by the Affidavits submitted by
cye-witnesses, were intended to cover up their inability to prevent the destruc-
tion of the farm.

~ Neither Party succeded in providing the Tribunal with convincing evi-
dence about: (i) —the circumstances under which the destruction of the premises
took place after they came under the control of the governmental forces; (ii)—
who are the persons responsible for the effective destruction of the farm premises;
Gii)—how was the destruction committed; and (iv)—how the subsequent acts
causing the loss of the prawns in ponds took place.
‘The Respondent could have at Jeast provided the results of investigations con-
ducted in this respect by the competent Sri Lankan authorities, particularly since
all the events in question took place during the two weeks period when the farm
was under the exclusive control of the security forces.
In final analysis, no conclusive evidence exists sustaining the Claimant's allegation
that the special security forces were themselves the actors of said destruction
causing the losses suffered.
Ar the same time no conclusive evidence sustains the Respondent’ allegation tha
the destruction were “caused directly by the terrorist action”.
Hence, the adjudication of the State's responsibility has to be underaken by de-
termining whether the governmental forces were capable, under the prevailing
circumstances, to provide adequate protection that could have prevented the de-
structions from taking place totally or partially.
In this respect, it has been already indicated that the govemmmental authorities
should have undertaken important precautionary measures to get peacefully all
suspected persons out of Serendib’s farm before launching the attack, either
through voluntary cooperation with the Management of the company or by or=
dering the Company to expel the suspected persons.
The reports of Messrs. Lewke, Karumasena, and Silva, as well as the sworn affi-
davits of the last two senior officers, provide cestain indications that the govern
mental authorities failed to undertake such measures because they were

564 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

considering as suspected guerrilla supporters the entire Management of Serendib
‘Company, starting from the newly appointed farm manager Mr. Karunargy, up
to the american Manager, Mr. Bruce Cys. Even Mr. Sanciapillai che Managing
Director was accused of “complicity with LLTE as far as the management of the
Prawn Farm is concemed” (Paragraph 8, of the Report of the Commandant/
STF dated March 18, 1987, Respondent's Exhibit No. 37, which referred to “ev-
idence” against the Managing Director to that effect).
If this had been effectively the case, in the opinion of the Tribunal, the legitimate
expected course of action against those suspected persons would have been cither
to institute judicial investigations against them to prove their culpability or inno-
cence, or to undertake the necessary measures in order to get them off the Com-
pany’s farm. But, as previously explained, nothing of the sort took place. On the
contrary, only ten days before the January 28, 1987, operation no complaints
were voiced against any of them, including the newly appointed farm manager
Mr. Karunargy, during the meeting of Mr. Santiapillai with the Area Coordinat-
ing Officer Mr. Sumith de Silva. The mere fact that Mr. Karunargy had been the
first person who lost his life during the first hours of the operation “Day Break”,
under the circumstances described by Mr. Kirupakara in his Affidavit (Claimant's
Exhibit FP) and Mr. Selbathnamny in his Affidavit (Claimant’s Exhibit G), casts se
rious doubts about the ability of the security forces which took control over Ser-
endib's farm to provide the required standard of protection in preventing human
losses, or a fortion of property destruction, which is by far a less imperative objec-
ive.
Therefore, and faced with the impossibility of obtaining conclusive evidence
about what effectively caused the destruction of the farm premises during the pe-
riod in which the entire area was out of bounds under the exclusive control of
the governmental security force, the Tribunal considers the State’s responsibility
established in conformity with the previously stated international law rules of ev-
idence (especially Rules (L) and (M), supra § 56).
86. For all the legal and factual considerations contained in the present section
of the award, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the Respondent's responsibil
is established under international law.

 

1V—The Legal Consequences of the Respondent's
International Responsibility

(A)—Quantum of the compensation

87. Both Parties are in agreement that whenever the State's responsibility is es-
tablished, due to failure ofits authorities to provide foreign investors with the fill pro-
tection and security required under the relevant international law rules and standards,
the interested party becomes entitled to claim the type of remedy deemed appropriate,

CASES 565

which takes in the present case the form of monetary compensation (Respondent's
‘Counter Memorial, p. 28-29, p. 39, p. 40, p. 42 ss; and Govemment's Rejoinder, p. 11 ss)

88. Both Parties are equally in agreement about the principle, according to
which, in case of property destruction, the amount of the compensation due has to be
calculated in a manner that adequately reflects the full value of the investment lost 35,
a result of said destruction and the damages incurred as a result thereof

The basic rule long established in this respect was clearly formulated by Max
Huber in the 1925 Melilla-Ziat, Ben Kirm case in the following

Le dommage éventuellement remboursable ne pourrait étre que le dommage di-

rect, & savoir la valeur de marchandises détruites ou disparues (U.N. Repons of In-

temational Arbitration Awards, vol. Ui, p. 732).

Thus, the task of the Tribunal in the present case has to focus on the determina-
tion of the “value” of the Claimant's right which suffered losses due to the destruction
that took place on January 28, 1987, and throughout the following days during which
Serendib’s farm remained under governmental temporary occupation (unjustifiably
characterized by the Claimant as de facto “requisition”, since it has not been proven
that the Government used the farm to promote its own military interests and to benefit
thereof).

89, Disagreement among the two Parties to the present arbitration emerges
only with regard to the following two major points:

() - Which elements have to be taken into consideration in calculating the
Claimant's property rights to be compensated; and

(i) - What quantum reflects the fall value of the elements constituting the
Claimant's property right to be compensated.

90. With regard to the first point, the elements enumerated in the Claimant's
Memorial included the following:

(A) - 30% of the physical direct losses sustained by Serendib Company on January 28,

1987, which comprise:

(1) ~ loss of revenue from stocks of shrimp existing by then in the ponds;

(2) value of farm structure and equipment destroyed, damaged or missing;

3) ~ loss of investment in technical staff training at the Gm;

(4) ~ compensation payable to dependents of dead staff members;

(5) - pond rehabilitation to resume operations.

(B) - The “going concern value” of the Claimant's 50% share-holding percentage in

Serendib Company on January 28, 1987.

(C) - 50% of the projected lost profits for a reasonable period of 18 months (Claimant's

Memorial, p. 14-16).

91. According to the final form submitted by the end of the oral hearing on
April 19, 1989, expressing the Claimant's conclusions, the Tribunal was requested to
award AAPL compensation that includes the following elements:

(A) ~ 48.2% of the value of assests destroyed, comprising

 

 

:

566 ICSID REVIEW FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(1) - physical assets;

Q)- financial assets;

(3) - intangible assets.

(B) - 48.2% of Serendib’s net projected future earnings.

92. ‘The Respondent's Counter-Memorial, emphasized the following impor-
tant aspects:

(i) - AAPL’ Claims is “largely based on the illusion of expected profitability”
(Government's Counter-Memorial, p. 42);

(i) - AAPL’ claim “is based on blatant double (or triple) counting. AAPL
claims entitlement not only to its share of “going concem value” of Ser-
endib, but also to indemnification for physical losses and lost prospective
profits. Yet AAPL cannot be entitled to both, because any measurement
of the “going concern value” of Serendib on January 28, 1987, includes
a valuation of the net book value of both Serendib’s assets and its future
profitability” (Ibid., p. 43);

(iii) - “In the event the Tribunal finds the Government liable to AAPL for
damage sustained by Serendib, the Tribunal must chose either to under-
take a going concem valuation or to determine damages for “physical
loss” and lost prospective profits, but cannot logically award both” ([bid.,
p. 43).

93. During the course of the proceedings, the Respondent added another basic
objection according to which the percentage of AAPL 's share-holding in Serendib is
neither 50% as initially claimed, nor 48.2% as subsequently admitted, but a far lesser
percentage, since the “preference shares” of the Export Development Board should be
taken into consideration as an integral part of Serendib’s equity capital.

94. The Parties were invited by the Tribunal to express their considered opin-
ions and conclusions on that issue, by virtue of the Order of April 20, 1989, rendered
at the end of the oral hearing, and lengthy exchanges took place in this respect on May
22, and May 29, 1989 as previously indicated (supra, § 12).

95. In deciding on the issues under consideration which are subject to dis-
agreement among the Parties, the Tribunal has primarily to indicate that AAPL is cn-
titled in the present arbitration case to claim compensation under the Sri Lanka/U.K.
Bilateral Investment Treaty, on the legal grounds previously described in Part Il of this
award due to the fact that the Claimant's “investments” in Sri Lanka “suffered losses”
owing to events falling under one or more of the circumstances enumerated by Article
4.(1) of the Treaty (“revolution, state of national emergence, revolt, insurrection”,
ete....).

The undisputed “investments” effected since 1985 by AAPL in Sri Lanka are in
the form of acquiring shares in Serendib Company, which has been incorporated in
Sri Lanka under the domestic Companies Law.

Accordingly, the Treaty protection provides no direct coverage with regard to

Serendib’s physical assets 2s such (“farm structures and equipment”, “shrimp stock in

CASES 567

ponds”, cost of “training the technical staff”, etc.), or to the intangible assets of Ser-
endib if any (“good will”, “future profitability”, etc...). The scope of the international
law protection granted to the foreign investor in the present case is limited to a single
item: the value of his share-holding in the joint-venture entity (Serendib Company).

96. In the absence of a stock market at which the price for Serendib’s shares
were quoted on January 27, 1987 (the day preceding the events which led co the de~
struction of the value of AAPL s investment in Serendib’s capital), the evaluation of
the shares owned by AAPL in Serendib has to be established by the alternative method
of determining what was the reasonable price a willing purchaser would have offered
to AAPL to acquire its share holding in Serendib.

97. Certainly, all the physical assets of Serendib, as well as its intangible assets,
have to be taken into consideration in establishing the reasonable value of what the po-
tential purchaser could have been willing to offer on January 27, 1987 for acquiring
AAPL s shares in Serendib. But the reasonable price should have reflected also Ser-
endib’s global liability at that date; ie. the aggregate amount of the current debts, loans,
incerests, etc... due to Serendib’s creditors.

98. Consequently, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the determination of the
percentage of AAPL’ share-holding in Serendib’s capital is a false problem, since the
relevant factor is to establish a comprehensive balance sheet which reflects the result
‘of assessing the global assets of Serendib in comparison with all the outstanding indeb-
edness thereof at the relevant time.

For the purpose of evaluating the market price of AAPL’ shares on January 27,
1987, the result would be ultimately the same whether or not the “preference
shares"of Sri Lanka's Export Development Board technically qualify under the domes~
tic companies law as part of Serendib’s capital. Assuming that the correct legal inter-
pretation of the Sei Lankan Law would lead to include among Serendib’s capital assets
the value of the “preference shares” issued in favour of the Export Development Board
asa security for the cash money funds already supplied to the Company, Serendib’s
capital assets would have on one hand, to be considered increased. But on the other
hand, the global amount of the Development Board’s disbursements together with the
accruing interests due on January 27, 1987, should be taken into consideration in re~
flecting Serendib’s global indebtedness.

In other words, in case the “preference shares” of Export Development Board
decrease AAPL's percentage of share-holding in Serendib’s equity capital, this would
not ultimately affect the value of AAPLs share-holding.

In the language of figures, a 48% ordinary share-holding is an equity capital
amounting to 21,464,241 Sri Lankan Rupees (S-L.Rs) equals 37% share~ holding, in.
an entity having a total capital of S-L.Rs 28,184,241 (i.e. by adding the value of the
preferences shares).

At the other side of the equation, assuming 48% of loan liabilities totalling S-L.Rs
70,024,000, is the same as acquiring 37% of the global indebtedness amounting to S-
L.Rs 76,744,000.

 

 

568 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

99. Taking into consideration the above stated preliminary remarks of generat
character, the Tribunal is faced with no legal objections in allocating to the Claimant
compensation for the damages which were effectively incurred due to the destruction
of a substantial part of Serendib’s physical assets, thus rendering the legal entity in
which AAPL invested out of business since January 28, 1987. In essence, Serendib
ceased as of that date to be a “going concem” capable of realizing profits, thus causing
AAPL’ investment therein to become a total loss.

100. In the light of all the elements of evidence provided by both Parties, in-
cluding the evaluation Report of Coopers & Lybrand, the additional explanation per-
taining thereto (filed by AAPL as Exhibit BB), the Respondent's objections raised in
the Govemment’s Rejoinder (p. 17ss), as well as those other issues raised during the Oral
Hearing, particularly in crossexamination of the Claimant's advisor Mr. Deva
Rodrigo which led to revised evaluation figures submitted by the Claimant before the
end of the Oral hearing, the Tribunal considers that the fair evaluation exclusively
based on Serendib’s tangible assets leads to value AAPL’ investment in that company
at a total amount of 460,000 US. Dollars.

101. Nevertheless, the major part of the Claimant's pleas were directed towards
obtaining 5,703,667 US. dollars as compensation for a variety of other claimed
damages, which include intangible assets, mainly “goodwill”, and loss of future profits.

The admissibility of such claims raised serious legal objections from the Respon-
dent, which are expressed in the following two quotations:

(2) ~ “International arbitral tribunals are bound to project future on the ba-
sis of the past, Screndib’s history offers no sound basis for projecting any
fature profitability” (Counter-Memorial of the Government, p. 49);

(b) - “The loss of crops to be harvested in the future has usually been con-
sidered to be too speculative and indefinite to be included as a proper
element of damage under international law” (Ibid., p. 50).

102. In the Tribunal’s view, it is clearly understood that the evaluation of the
“going concern” which is Serendib Company in the present case, has for unique ob-
jective the determination of what could be the reasonable market value of the Com-
pany’s shares under the circumstances prevailing on January 27, 1987. Hence, as a
general rule all elements related to subsequent developments should not be taken as
such into consideration, and lucrum cessans in the proper sense could not be allocated
in the present case for which the precedents concerning unlawful expropriation claims
or liability for unilateral termination of a State contract are of no relevance.

‘The only pertinent question in the present case would be to establish whether
Serendib have had by then developed a “good will” and a standard of “profitabili-
ty"that renders a prospective purchaser prepared to pay a certain premium over the
value of the tangible assets for the benefit of the Company's “intangible” assets.

Consequently, the projection of future profits in function of the “Discounted
Cash Flow Method” (DCF) has to be envisaged simply as a tool to assess the level of

CASES 369

Serendib’s furure profitability under all relevant circumstances prevailing at the begin-
ning of 1

103. In this respect, it would be appropriate to ascertain that “goodwill” re-
quires the prior presence on the market for at least ewo or three years, which is the
minimum period needed in order to establish continuing business connections, and
during that period substantial expenses are incurred in supporting the management
efforts devoted to create and develop the marketing network of the company’s prod-
ucts, particularly in cases like the present one where the Company relies exclusively
on one product (shrimps) exportable to a single market (Japan).

The possible existence of a valuable “goodwill” becomes even more difficult to
sustain with regard to a company, not only newly formed and with no records of
profits, but also incurring losses and under-capitalized.

A reasonable prospective purchaser would, under these circumstances, be at least
doubrfill about the ability of the Company's balance sheet to cease being in the red,
in the sense that the future camings become effectively sufficient to off-set the past
losses as well as to service the loans which exceed in their magnitude the Company's
capital assets.

104. Furthermore, according to a well established rule of international Jaw, the
assessment of prospective profits requires the proof that:

“they were reasonably anticipated; and that the profits anticipated were probable

and not merely possible” (Marjorie M. WHITEMAN, Damages in in

Law, vol. 11, (1937), p. 1837, with reference to extensive supporting fs

disallowing “uncertain” or “speculative” future profits, p. 1836-1849: The 1902

Award rendered in EL Triunfo case (EL Salvador/U.S.A.), Repertory, op.cit., vol.

1, § 1350, p. 324; The 1903 Award rendered by the Italy/Venezucla Mixed

Commission in the Poggidi case, Ibid. § 1358, p. 328-329; Ignaz SEIDEL-1 HO-

HENVELDOERN, “Evaluation des Dommages dans les Arbitrages Tra

tionaux”, Annuaire Francais de Droit Intemational, vol.XXXII1, (1987), p. 17 ss.

with ample reference to the numerous decisions rendered by the Trin/USA

Claims Tribunal to that effect, and interestingly the Author's reference to the

DCE calculations provided by the Expert Accountants of the Parties which con-

tain “élément de conjecture” looking: “guére moins spéculatifs et tout aussi ob-

scurs que les prophéties de Nostradamus” P. 24).

105. The Claimant itself, in the Reply to the Respondent's Counter Memorial (p.
64-68), reproduced a long quotation from the Award rendered on July 14, 1987, by
the Chamber presided by the late Michel VIRALLY, in the case AMOCO Intemational
Finance Corporation v. Iran, which after clearly distinguishing the /ucrum cessans from the
“future prospects” of profitability that constitutes an element to be taken into consid-
eration in evaluating the “going concem”, find necessary to emphasize the need to
prove that:

the undertaking was a “going concern” which had demonstrated a certain ability

to eam revenues and was, therefore to be considered as keeping such ability for

the future ( § 203 of the Award as quoted on p. 67 of the Claimant's Reply).

 

 

370 ICSID REVIEW--FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

The fact that Serendib exported for the first time two shipments to Japan during
the same month of January 1987 when its farm was destroyed, does not sufficiently
demonstrate in the Tribunal’s opinion “a certain ability to earn revenues” in a manner
that would justify considering Serendib—by exporting for the first time in its short
life—able to keep itself commercially viable as a source of reliable supply on the jap-
anese market.

106. In the light of the above-stated considerations, and taking into account all
the evidence introduced by both Parties with regard to the existence or non-existence
of “intangible assets” capable of being evaluated for the purpose of establishing the
total appropriate value of Serendib on January 27, 1987, the Tribunal comes to the
conclusion that neither the “goodwill” nor the “future profitability” of Serendib could
be reasonably established with a sufficient degree of certainty.

107. Without putting into doubt the binding force of the rules requiring that
the intangible assets including “goodwill” and “fature profitability” of an enterprise
have to be reflected in the evaluation of a “going concem”, the Tribunal’s opinion is
established on considering the zsumptions upon which the Claimant's projection were
based in the present case insufficient in evidencing that Serendib was effectively by
January 27, 1987, a “going concer” that acquired a valuable “goodwill” and enjoying
a proven “future profitability”, particularly in the light of the fact that Serendib had
no previous record in conducting business for even one year of production.

108. Therefore, all the amounts of claimed compensation for “intangible assets”,
as well as for “future earnings” are rej

 

 

(B)—The issue of AAPL’s Guarantee
to the European Asian Bank

109. Evidently, the present Arbitral Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to adju-
dicate any controversy or dispute related to the interpretation of AAPL’ s Guarantee
given for the benefit of Serendib in AAPL’ s capacity as share-holder in Serendib
Company, in order to determine whether said Guarantee came to an end or is still op-
erative and capable of creating potential liability on AAPL.

110. Nevertheless, the Tribunal takes into consideration that AAPL as Claimant
in the present Arbitration has considered its investment in Serendib a total loss, and
submitted in its final conclusions dated April 19, 1989, that:

... AAPL is willing to give up its shares of Serendib Seafoods Ltd, should the Re-

spondent pay adequate compensation.

The Tribunal equally notes that the Respondent Government did not raise any
objection, with regard to said offer.

111. Accordingly, the Tribunal deems appropriate to invite the two Parties to
envisage, upon reception of the amounts becoming due to the Chimant by virtue of
the present Award, to conclude an agreement according to which AAPL undertakes
all the necessay steps in order to transfer free of charge all its shares in Serendib

CASES sm

‘Company to the Government of Sri Lanka or to any other entity the Government may
nominate, with the understanding that said transfer of title on the shares entails in ex-
change the passing of any potential liability under the European Asian Bank Guarantee
from AAPL to the new owner of the shares.

(C)—The allocation Of Interest

112. The Claimant requested interest at the rate of 10% per annum as of the date
of the losses incurred (January 28, 1987), and the Respondent did not raise any objec~
tion with regard to, cither the principle of entitlement to interests in case the Govem-
ment’ responsibility is sustained by the Tribunal, or to the suggested rate of 10% per
annum.

113. In accordance with a long established rule of international law expressed
since 1872 by the Arbitral Tribunal which adjudicated the Alabama case between the
UX. and US.A., “it is just and reasonable to allow interest at a reasonable rate” (Rep-
erty, op ait., vol. 1, § 1382, p. 343).

In implementation of the above-stated rule, and in view of the Parties’ attitude
indicated herein-above, the present Tribunal deems appropriate to allocate interest on
the amount of US. $460,000 granted to the Claimant as previously stipulated ( § 100),
at the rate of 10% per annum.

114. The only pending issue in this respect relates to the date from which that
interest starts accruing.

‘The survey of the literature reveals that, in spite of the persisting controversies
with regard to cases involving moratory interests, the case-law elaborated by interna-
tional arbitral tribunals strongly suggests that in assessing the liability due for losses in-
curred the interest becomes an integral part of the compensation itself, and should run
consequently from the date when the State's international responsibility became
engaged (of. R. LILLICH, “Interest in the Law of International Claims”, Essays in
Honor of Vade Saario and Toivo Sainio, (1983), P. 55-56).

115. Therefore, and taking into account that Article 8.(3) of the Sri Lanka/U.K.
Bilateral Investment Treaty provides that the forcign investor becomes entitled to file
a recourse in front of the Centre only in case agreement with the Host State “cannot
be reached within three months”, and since the claimant in the present case effectively
submitted his Request of Arbitration on the 8th of July, 1987, the Tribunal rules that
the 10% per annum rate of interest adopted starts accruing 2s of July 9th, 1987, and
continues to run as a part of the compensation allocated to the Claimant up to the date
of the payment of the sum awarded.

 

372 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(D}—Costs

116. In implementation of Article 61.(2) of [CSID Convention, the Tribunal
exercises the discretionary power accorded thereto in the following manner:

() ~ in assessing the fees and expenses incurred by the Claimant in prepara-
tion and presentation of its case, all the amounts figuring in AAPL’ s final
Statement of May 7, 1990 under Items 1, 4, Sand 6 in the Section entitled
“Statement of expenditure incuered by AAPL and its officers” have to be
excluded, since they are not proven necessary “in connection with the
proceedings”, and the rest which is totalling U.S. $164,917.20 (One
Hundred, Sixty Four Thousands, Nine hundred Seventeen, and Twenty
Cents) has to be shared on the basis of two thirds by the Claimant and
one third by the Respondent;

Gi) - the Respondent has to bear all the fees and expenses incurred in prep-
aration and presentation of its case;

(iii) - the costs of the arbitration, including the arbitrators’ fees and the ad~
ministrative charges of the Centre, have to be shared on the basis of 40%
by the Claimant and 60% by the Respondent.

For the above-stated reasons:

THE TRIBUNAL DECIDES AS FOLLOWS:

1. ‘The Republic of Sri Lanka shall pay to Asian Agricultural Products Ltd.,
the sum of US. Dollars FOUR HUNDRED AND SIXTY THOUSAND (US. $
460,000) with interest on this amount at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from
July 9, 1987 to the date of effective payment.

2. The Two Parties are invited to envisage adopting a solution that would
permit, upon reception of the payment due under the preceding paragraph, to con-
clude an agreement according to which Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. undertakes
all the steps required in order to transfer free of charge all its shares in Serendib SEA-
FOODS LTD. to the Govemment of Sri Lanka or any other entity the Government
may nominate, provided that in exchange the new owner of the shares assumes any
potential liability under the European Asian Bank Guarantee previously granted by
‘AAPL as shareholder to the benefit of Serendib Company.

3. All other submissions of the Parties are rejected.

4. The Republic of Sri Lanka shall bear the amount of US. $54,972.40 (Fifty
Four Thousands Nine Hundred Seventy Two, and Forty Cents) which represents one
third of the relevant fees and expenses incurred by Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. for
the preparation and presentation of its case.

5. The Republic of Sri Lanka shall bear the fees and expenses it incurred for
the preparation and presentation of its case.

CASES 573

6. ‘The Republic of Sri Lanka shall bear sixty percent (60%) of the arbitrators’
fees and expenses and the charges of use of the facilities of the Centre, and the remain
ing forty percent (40%) shall be borne by Asian Agricultural Products Ltd.

Ahmed S. EL-KOSHERI Berthold GOLDMAN

Signed by both arbitrators forming the majority of the Arbitral Tribunal on 21
June 1990, after taking notice of Dz ASANTE’s Dissenting Opinion dated 15 June
1990.

