INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the proceedings between

ATA CONSTRUCTION, INDUSTRIAL AND TRADING COMPANY
(CLAIMANT)

- and -
THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/2)

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., President
Professor Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri, Arbitrator
Professor W. Michael Reisman, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Aissatou Diop

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Renée Thériault

Representing the Claimant
Mr. Robert G. Volterra
Mr. Stephen Fietta
Ms. Joanna R. Dingwall
Mr. Hussein Haeri

Latham & Watkins LLP

Professor Dr. Ziya Akinci
Akinci Law Office

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: May 18, 2010

Representing the Respondent

Mr. Allan B. Moore

Mr. Peter D. Trooboff

Mr. Donald J. Ridings

Mr. Adam M. Smith

Mr. James M. Smith
Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Rabie’ M. Hamzeh
Advocate

L

IL.

Il.

IV.

VI.

VII.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURE 1
A. Registration of the Request for Arbitration

B. Constitution of the Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding.............. 2
Cc. Written and Oral Phases of the Proceeding .........sssssssssssssessssessssesssssssssessssssssnees 5
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 8
A. Introducti 8
B. The Final Award 10
Cc. The Amman Court of Appeal ProceedingS..........ssssssssssscsssscsssssssssesssssssessesees 12
D. The Court of C: ion Pr ding: 14
RELEVANT LEGAL SOURCES 21
A. The Treaty 21
B. The Jordanian Civil Code 23
Cc. The Contract 24

 

D. The Jordanian Arbitration Law..

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE RESPONDENT’S JURSIDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS ........cssssssssssssssessssesssseees 25
A. The Respondent’s Position 25
B. The Claimant’s Position 30
THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS 32
A. The Claimant’s Position 32
B. The Respondent’s Position 44
THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS. 52
A. The Tribunal’s Findings on Jurisdiction. ...........cscsssssecsesseeessesseeseeseeneeneenneenes 52,
B. The Tribunal’s Findings on the MEerits.........cc.sscsssssssssessssessssessseessssessssesssesssseed 62

AWARD 67

THE TRIBUNAL

Composed as above,

After deliberation,

Makes the following Award:

L PROCEDURE
A. Registration of the Request for Arbitration

1. On 14 January 2008, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received a Request for Arbitration (the ““Request”)
from ATA Construction, Industrial and Trading Company (“ATA” or the “Claimant”)
against the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (“Jordan” or the “Respondent”). The same
day, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the Request and transmitted a copy to the

Respondent.

2. The Claimant is a construction company constituted on 21 October 1983, under
the laws of Turkey, with registration number 197818 dated 16 November 2007, issued by
the Istanbul Chamber of Commerce, Department of Commercial Registry and
Registration. ATA was founded by three other Turkish construction companies, Seri
insaat or Seri Construction Ltd., Palet insaat or Palet Construction Ltd., and Enerji-Su
insaat or Enerji-Su Construction Ltd., with experience as contractors in road, railroad,

tunnel, industrial building, irrigation and dam projects.

3. The Request was brought under the Agreement Between the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan and the Republic of Turkey Concerning the Reciprocal Promotion and

Protection of Investment (the “BIT” or “Treaty”) and under the Convention on the

Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the

“ICSID Convention”).

4. The Claimant is represented by Mr. Robert Volterra, Mr. Stephen Fietta, Ms.
Joanna R. Dingwall and Mr. Hussein Haeri of the law firm of Latham & Watkins LLP
and by Dr. Ziya Akinci and Ms. Yasmin Cetinel of the Akinci Law Office. The
Respondent is represented by Mr. Rabie’ Hamzeh of Amman, Jordan and by Messrs.
Allan B. Moore, David A. Shuford, and Adam Smith of the law firm of Covington &

Burling LLP.

5. On 28 February 2008, the Secretary-General registered the Request pursuant to
Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and Rules 6(1)(a) and 7 of the Rules of Procedure
for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the “Institution Rules”).
The same day, the Secretary-General dispatched the Notice of Registration to the parties,
inviting them to proceed as soon as possible with the constitution of the arbitral tribunal,

in accordance with Articles 37 to 40 of the ICSID Convention.

B. Constitution of the Tribunal and Commencement of the Proceeding
6. The Claimant noted in its Request that the parties had not agreed any provisions
regarding the number of arbitrators or method of their appointment. Thus, under Rule
2(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”),
the Claimant proposed that the arbitral tribunal consist of three arbitrators, one appointed
by each party and the third, i.e. the presiding arbitrator, appointed by agreement of the

parties. The Claimant invited the Respondent to proceed under Arbitration Rule 2(1)(b)

for purposes of responding to the Claimant’s proposal regarding the constitution of the

arbitral tribunal.

7. By letter dated 21 April 2008, the Respondent agreed to the Claimant’s proposal
regarding the number of arbitrators and the method of appointing the two party-appointed
arbitrators, but rejected the Claimant’s proposal on the method of appointing the
presiding arbitrator. Instead, the Respondent suggested that the presiding arbitrator be
appointed by the two party-appointed arbitrators in consultation with their respective
appointing party. The Respondent further proposed a modification of the timeline

regarding the constitution of the arbitral tribunal.

8. By letter dated 23 April 2008, the Claimant rejected the Respondent’s counter-
proposal regarding the method of appointing the presiding arbitrator and new time limits
for constituting the arbitral tribunal. The next day, the Respondent invited discussions

between the parties for the purpose of reaching an agreement.

9. By letter dated 30 April 2008, the Claimant informed the Centre that it was
invoking Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention because 60 days had elapsed since the
registration of the Request and the parties had not reached an agreement regarding the

constitution of the arbitral tribunal.

10. By joint letter dated 27 May 2008, the parties informed the Centre that following
communications in accordance with Arbitration Rule 3(1), the Claimant had elected to
appoint Professor Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri and the Respondent had elected to
appoint Professor W. Michael Reisman. The parties indicated, by the same letter, that

they had not agreed on a presiding arbitrator.

11. On 29 May 2008, the Claimant notified the Centre that it was invoking Article 38
of the ICSID Convention because 90 days had elapsed since the registration of the

Request and the parties had not agreed on a presiding arbitrator.

12. The same day, without objecting to the Claimant’s request that the Chairman of
the Administrative Council designate the presiding arbitrator, the Respondent
communicated its wish that (1) the parties endeavour to reach an agreement on a
presiding arbitrator, and (2) the Chairman of the Administrative Council allow a

reasonable opportunity for the parties to pursue discussions in this regard.

13. By way of reply, the Centre informed the parties on 30 May 2008 that if they did
not confirm that they were engaged in meaningful discussions regarding the appointment
of the presiding arbitrator by 6 June 2008, the Centre would proceed to make the
appointment in accordance with the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and

Rules, and pursuant to the normal procedures of the Centre.

14. On 4 June 2008, the parties jointly informed the Centre that they were appointing

Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., to serve as presiding arbitrator.

15. Professors Reisman and Dr. El-Kosheri accepted their appointments on | and 2

June 2008, respectively, and Mr. Fortier accepted his appointment on 11 June 2008.

16. On 12 June 2008, the Centre notified the parties that the arbitral tribunal was
deemed to be constituted (hereinafter the “Tribunal’”) and the proceeding to have begun
on that day. The Centre also informed the parties and the Tribunal that Mr. Ucheora

Onwuamaegbu, Senior Counsel, would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. Mr.

Onwuamaegbu was replaced as Secretary of the Tribunal by Ms. Aissatou Diop on 26

September 2008.

Cc. Written and Oral Phases of the Proceeding
17. The First Session of the Tribunal was held on 29 July 2008 in London, United

Kingdom.

18. In advance of the First Session, the Secretary of the Tribunal circulated a
provisional agenda, in response to which the parties submitted a joint statement on 25

July 2008, agreeing upon most items of the said agenda.

19. At the First Session, the parties confirmed their agreement that the Tribunal had
been properly constituted, and that Ms. Renée Thériault, an associate of the Presiding

arbitrator, would serve as its Assistant.

20. The Minutes of the First Session, as signed by the President and Secretary of the

Tribunal, are dated 11 August 2008.

21. In accordance with the Minutes of the First Session, the parties filed their written

pleadings following the schedule below:

- the Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits dated 24 October 2008;

- the Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits
dated 13 February 2009;

- the Claimant’s Reply on the Merits and Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated
10 April 2009;

- the Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction and Rejoinder on the Merits dated 5 June
2009; and

- the Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated 3 July 2009.

22. On 20 August 2009, the President of the Tribunal chaired, with the agreement of
the two other members of the Tribunal, a pre-hearing conference by telephone with the

parties. The teleconference was audio-recorded.

23. On 5-9 October 2009, the Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction and merits at the
World Bank headquarters in Washington, D.C. (the “Hearing”). The following persons

attended the Hearing:

On behalf of the Claimant:

- Mr. Nurhan Motugan of ATA Construction, Industrial and Trading Co.;

- Mr. Robert Volterra, Mr. Stephen Fietta, Ms. Joanna Dingwall, Mr. Hussein
Haeri, Ms. Angela Angelovska-Wilson and Mr. Oscar Price of Latham & Watkins
LLP; and

- Ms. Yasmin Cetinel of Akinci Law Office.

On behalf of the Respondent:

- His Excellency Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Mr. Mahmoud D. Hmoud,
and Mr. Samer Dabbas of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan;

- Dr. Mahmoud A. Tabbal of the Arab Potash Company;

- Mr. Rabie’ Hamzeh as counsel and witness; and

- Mr. Allan B. Moore, Mr. Peter D. Trooboff, Mr. James M. Smith, Mr. Adam M.
Smith, Mr. Donald Ridings, Ms. Maggie J. Poertner, and Ms. Erin Kelly of

Covington & Burling LLP.

24. The following witnesses were examined by the parties:

By the Claimant:
- Mr. Rabie’ Hamzeh, the Respondent’s fact witness; and Dr. Khaled El Shalakany,

the Respondent’s expert witness.

By the Respondent:
- Mr. Adib Habayeb, the Claimant’s fact witness; and Dr. Mosleh Al’tarawneh, the

Claimant’s expert witness.

25. The Hearing was audio recorded, and a full verbatim transcript prepared.

26. On 3 December 2009, the parties filed simultaneous post-hearing briefs. On 5
February 2010, the parties filed a first round of simultaneous submissions on costs, and

on 26 February 2010, they filed a second round of simultaneous submissions on costs.

27. On 3 May 2010, the Tribunal declared the proceedings closed in accordance with

Rule 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

28. The Tribunal wishes to acknowledge the dedication and professionalism of
counsel for both the Claimant and the Respondent who have assisted the Tribunal

throughout this arbitration.

IL. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
A. Introduction

29. In order to fully understand the Tribunal’s analysis and findings, it is necessary to
set out at some length the factual matrix of this case. The Tribunal will now proceed to

do so.

30. In brief, this arbitration concerns the validity of the annulment by the Jordanian
courts of an arbitral award rendered in favour of the Claimant — a Turkish company —
following a dispute arising from the collapse of a dike constructed by the Claimant for
the Arab Potash Company (“APC”), an entity based in Jordan and, at the time the arbitral

award was issued, controlled by the Respondent.

31. It is common ground between the parties that the Claimant was engaged by APC
to construct a dike at a site on the Dead Sea pursuant to a FIDIC form contract entered
into on 2 May 1998 (the “Contract”). The Contract, the Tribunal notes, is governed by

the laws of Jordan.

32. Upon completion of the construction by the Claimant, the dike was handed over
to APC, who proceeded to fill it with water. During the filling process, a section of the
dike collapsed. A dispute arose under the Contract between the Claimant and APC as to

which entity was responsible for the collapse.

33. APC commenced FIDIC arbitration proceedings against the Claimant in
accordance with the arbitration agreement under Clause 67 of the Contract (the
“Arbitration Agreement”), and the Claimant brought a counterclaim in respect of sums

owing under the Contract. As set forth in more detail below, the tribunal constituted in

accordance with the Contract (the “FIDIC Tribunal’) issued its Final Award on 30
September 2003 (the “Final Award”), exonerating the Claimant from any liability for the
collapse and dismissing all of APC’s claims. It upheld, in part, the Claimant’s
counterclaim and awarded compensation to the Claimant. The Tribunal notes that the
Final Award was a majority Award and that it was accompanied by a dissenting opinion,

also dated 30 September 2003.

34. At this juncture, the Tribunal notes that it is common ground between the parties
that when the Contract was concluded in 1998, the Government of Jordan held a majority
interest in APC. On 16 October 2003, Jordan sold nearly one-half of its 52.883% interest

in APC to a Canadian company.

35. On 29 October 2003, APC applied to the Jordanian Court of Appeal to have the
Final Award annulled under the Jordanian Arbitration Law. As described in more detail
below, the Jordanian Court of Appeal decided to annul the Final Award and to extinguish

the arbitration agreement between the Claimant and APC.

36. As also described in more detail later in this Award, the Claimant appealed to the
Jordanian Court of Cassation, which upheld the Court of Appeal’s judgment on 16

January 2007.

37. It is against this background that the Claimant instituted the present ICSID
proceeding alleging that the Respondent has acted in violation of the BIT which, although
entered into on 2 August 1993, only came into force in Jordan on 23 January 2006. The
alleged violations of the Treaty include the unlawful expropriation of the Claimant’s

claims to money and rights to legitimate performance under the Contract and the Final

Award, as well as the failure to accord fair and equitable treatment to its investment, inter

alia by way of serious and repeated denials of justice by the Jordanian courts.

B. The Final Award

38. In the Final Award, the FIDIC Tribunal summarised as follows the four core

issues that it had to determine:

e Issue No. 1 was described by the arbitrators as “The
Applicable Article(s) of the Jordanian Civil Code”. The
FIDIC Tribunal considered that this issue had to be resolved
first as “it identifies the appropriate legal parameters within the
Articles of the Jordanian Civil Code that were pleaded by the
Parties and applied to the facts of this case”.

e Issue No. 2 was the issue of supervision. The FIDIC Tribunal
characterised this as “Who was entrusted with supervising the
construction of Dike 19? Was it [APC’s] appointed ‘Engineer’
or was the supervision entrusted to Gibb, the Designers?”

e Issue No. 3 was the issue of liability, which the FIDIC Arbitral
Tribunal considered as follows: “Upon whom should the
responsibility and liability of the collapse of the Dike be
attached and is the collapse the result of an act or omission by
any of the Parties to the Contract?”.

e Issue No. 4 was the issue of quantum. The FIDIC Tribunal
summarized the issue as “To what extent are the Parties
responsible and liable to each other in respect of the sums that
have been claimed by them in this arbitration?”.

39. In respect of issue No. 1, APC argued that Article 788 of the Jordanian Civil Code
applied to the dispute, with the result that ATA would be strictly liable if APC
demonstrated simply that the parties had entered into a contract for the construction of
Dike No. 19 and that the dike had not been built in a manner that fit its purpose. ATA,
on the other hand, contended that joint liability under Article 788 of the Civil Code would

only arise if it had worked under the supervision of Gibb, the designer of the dike.

-10-

Rather, ATA submitted that it had worked under the supervision of the Engineer
appointed by APC. As a result, the applicable provision of the Civil Code was Article
789, which was designed to cater for the situation where the “supervisors” were not the
“designers”. Under Article 789, each of the contractor and the designer would be liable
towards APC “only for his share of the damage”. In other words, to use the terms of

Article 789, ATA would be liable only for “defects in execution”, if any.

40. On this issue, the FIDIC Tribunal concluded as follows:

Having carefully considered the text of Article 788 and the submissions made by
the Parties in this connection, the Arbitrators do not agree with [APC’s]
interpretation of Article 788 because the Article clearly and plainly states that it
applies to a fact situation where the supervision is conducted by the engineer who
had designed the structure.

Al. The FIDIC Tribunal then opined that Article 788 applied if the “designer” (i.e.
Gibb) was the “supervisor”, whereas Article 789 applied in cases where the “supervisor”
was an “engineer” other than the “designer”, or the “owner” (i.e. APC) itself. The FIDIC

Tribunal concluded as follows:

Having carefully considered the above arguments on the various applicable
Articles of the Code to this case, the Tribunal finds that the decision must hinge
on whether or not “Supervision” was part of the duties of the designer.

42. In respect of issue No. 2, the FIDIC Tribunal found that the supervision under the

Contract was the sole responsibility of the engineer appointed by APC.

43. In respect of issue No. 3, the FIDIC Tribunal found that “breach of contract could
not be attributed to [ATA] in this case as matters were not under their control”. As noted
earlier, APC’s claims accordingly failed, and ATA’s counterclaim was maintained in

part.

-ll-

44, In respect of issue No. 4, the FIDIC Tribunal awarded ATA USD 5,906,828.30 in

addition to interest, costs and advocates fees.

45. As previously noted, the Final Award was accompanied by a dissenting opinion
which focussed on the identity of the “supervisor” and Article 788 of the Civil Code.
The dissenting arbitrator would have accepted APC’s claim and dismissed ATA’s
counterclaim. He opined, in part, as follows:
Since the obligation of the Contractor [ATA] and the Engineer is to achieve an
end result — to ensure that the structure shall remain safe throughout the liability
period, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract and in full
compliance with the fundamentals of architectural art, hence, any occurrence to
the contrary as may result in partial or total collapse or defect affecting the
strength and safety of the structure, both by the Contractor [ATA] and the
Engineer shall be answerable pursuant to the bylaws under discussion here.
Therefore, it is enough for the Employer [APC] to prove the occurrence of
defects or any thereof without the need to prove any mistakes on the part of the
Engineer or the Contractor [ATA], since their liability is presumed.
L.]
Accordingly, [APC] were not originally required to submit any evidence on
[ATA’s] liability. All that was required of them was to prove that the collapse
had occurred, which was not a matter of contention. Refuting, denying and
negating such liability is [ATA’s] duty, although [APC] have supplied enough
compelling evidence and have established that.
Cc. The Amman Court of Appeal Proceedings
46. Following the Final Award APC filed on 29 October 2003 an application in the
Amman Court of Appeal to annul the Final Award under the Jordanian Arbitration Law.
On 24 January 2006, the Court of Appeal issued a judgment annulling the Final Award
principally on the basis that the FIDIC Tribunal had made an error in concluding that
Article 789 of the Civil Code, upon which the FIDIC Tribunal had based its Final Award,

was applicable in the circumstances. Instead, the Court of Appeal concluded that the

FIDIC Tribunal should have applied other provisions of the Civil Code (namely, Articles

-12-

786 and 788) that would have imposed strict liability on ATA. In the words of the Court

of Appeal:

Accordingly the liability of the Contractor [ATA] is there at all times including
the absence of trespass or negligence and the exception from this if the cause of
the accident could not be avoided (Article 786 mentioned above) i.e. The
contractor [ATA] guarantees what results from his work or manufacture whether
by his trespass or negligence or not which means he indemnifies the damage in
general from trespass or failure or otherwise as long as the damage is a result
from the execution of the work whatever was its source.

As for 788 Civil Code which clarified the liability of the Engineer (in the
construction contract) who makes the design of the construction as executed by
the Contractor under the supervision of the Engineer where the Legislator
considers them jointly to compensate the employer for whatever happens during
10 years for the total or partial collapse of what they constructed in addition to
any defect that threatens the strength and safety of the building.

Accordingly what was mentioned in this article does not eliminate the liability of
the contractor [ATA] in indemnifying what comes out from his execution but the
Legislator wanted to give additional security to the owner by joining the liability
of the engineer with the liability of the contractor [ATA].

Again our court finds and from its scrutiny of the court file and the evidence
submitted therein that GIBB Co. has the main supervisory role on the agreed
upon construction between both parties to the litigation. This is reflected in
suggesting modifications and revising the daily decisions and allowing the issue
of-these decisions and any other decisions which are not daily as there was no
possibility of taking any decision unless after it being revised and the
representatives of the contractor [ATA] were aware of these issues through their
meetings with the representative of GIBB. In addition to that it was GIBB who
allowed the appointed Engineer from APC to issue the orders to continue the
work or variations.

From all of this, we find that GIBB — and by agreement of both parties to the
action — was the actual consultant since its work was the actual supervision on
every piece of work in the project in addition to maintaining the design i.e. it was
carrying out the actual supervision with all what this word means.

As for the liability of the employer and as we find that the construction subject
matter of the contract which represent the construction of a usable Dike and that
the execution requires a technological, technical and scientific experience which
we find is not available in the employer who is considered a layman and has no
experience to construct the Dike which leads that he is not responsible for the
construction of the Dike.

From all this, we find that the majority arbitration award which is appealed based

its award on article 789 of the Civil Code which we find that it does not apply on
the present court action and that the majority of the arbitrators failed to put in

-13-

gear article 786 of this law which means that the award appealed shelved the
application of the agreed law on the subject matter which constitute that these
grounds for the appealed award are valid in accordance with article 49/a-4 of the
prevailing arbitration law and require setting it aside.

47. Based on the above, the Court of Appeal thus decided to
set aside the appealed award issued by the majority of the arbitration tribunal and
adjudge of its nullity and at the same time dismiss the arbitration agreement
concluded between the parties to the action.
D. The Court of Cassation Proceedings

48. After the Court of Appeal decision, both ATA and APC filed recourses for

annulment before the Court of Cassation. ATA submitted to the Court:

(i) that the Court of Appeal had substantially erred in annulling the
Final Award on the basis of Article 49(a)(4) of the Jordanian
Arbitration Law;

(ii) that the Court of Appeal had substantially erred in purporting to re-
examine facts and evidence and in placing so much reliance on the
dissenting award as a basis for its findings;

(iii) that the Court of Appeal had acted in a contradictory and unfair
manner by effectively barring the parties from addressing issues of
fact and evidence in their submissions, only subsequently to
reverse the FIDIC Tribunal’s findings of fact in its judgment;
(iv) that the Court of Appeal had arbitrarily misapplied and
misinterpreted the Jordanian Civil Code in a way that contravened
the legislature’s intention, legal logic and applicable Court of
Cassation precedents.
49, APC, on the other hand, requested that the Court of Cassation find that the Court
of Appeal had erred in upholding parts of the Final Award as final and not subject to

challenge before the Court of Cassation.

-14-

50. On 16 January 2007, the Court of Cassation delivered its decision. Firstly, the
Court of Cassation found that there was no “contradiction” in the decision of the Court of

Appeal:

[T]he Court [of Appeal] did not endorse / uphold any portion of the Arbitral
Award, but rather nullified it, and its pronouncement that its decision vis-a-vis
the aforementioned dismissed grounds is final has no basis in law and does not
affect the final Decision it has reached in quashing the Arbitral Award passed by
majority.

51. The Court of Cassation therefore dismissed ATA’s recourse (and, in doing so,
also dismissed APC’s recourse in this regard), by declaring that the Court of Appeal’s
findings as regards the finality of the Final Award were not, in any event, dispositive and

had no effect on its ultimate decision.

52. Secondly, in relation to the grounds of appeal advanced by ATA, the Court of

Cassation made the following findings:

With respect of the Second and Third reasons that the Court of Appeal has erred
when it exceeded its jurisdiction prescribed in Article 49(a)(4) of the Arbitration
Law, in that after finding that the arbitrators have applied provisions of Jordanian
Law, it nevertheless proceeded to examine issues that are essentially factual and
legal and relate to the case’s facts and evidence and others that are not included
in the Award but rather in the Dissenting Opinion.

In this regard, we find that pursuant to Article 67 of the Contract concluded
between the parties, both parties have agreed to refer any dispute arising between
them in connection with the Contract to a trilateral Arbitral Tribunal, whereby
each Party appoints an arbitrator while the third arbitrator is appointed by
agreement of both Parties. They have also agreed that the applicable law is
Jordanian law in addition to the Contract’s terms and conditions.

And whereas the Claimant “the Respondent” has submitted, in the course of
marshalling its grounds to nullify the Arbitral Award, amongst which the
arbitrators have excluded in their Award the application of the agreed upon
Jordanian Law, thus requiring the Court of Appeal to ascertain the extent of the
application of the provisions of the Jordanian Civil Code appertaining to
contracts for independent works. This could be achieved by examining the facts
and evidence and the deductions in order to determine the party with whom

-15-

liability for the defects rests pursuant to the provisions of Article 785, 786, 788
and 789 of the Jordanian Civil Code.

And since the Court of Appeal in its capacity as a court of fact has concluded that
the Arbitral Tribunal, while it has apparently applied provisions of the Jordanian
Civil Code appertaining to contracts for independent works, it has nevertheless,
(in practice) excluded those provisions in light of the facts it has deduced and
which are gleaned from the file, which point out the Appellant’s joint liability
with the designer and supervisor for the construction of Dike 19.

And whereas the Court of Appeal’s Decision has its justifications in the case’s
file, the conclusion arrived at does not constitute an overreaching of the provision
of Article 49(a)(4) of the Arbitration Law no. 31 of 2001, but rather an
application thereof, which warrants that these two grounds be dismissed.

53. In addition, the Court of Cassation concluded that ATA had been free to present
evidence to the Court of Appeal and must accept the consequences of having chosen not

to do so.

54. Finally, the Court of Cassation concluded as follows:

[W]e find that if the Arbitral Award was upheld by the Court of Appeal, it would
have been duty bound to order its enforcement, and said decision would have
been final pursuant to Article 51 of the Arbitration Law no. 31 of 2001.
However, if the Court’s decision was to nullify the Award, said decision is
subject to challenge within thirty days following the date of notification of the
Decision. The final decision nullifying the Award results in extinguishing the
arbitration agreement.

In the case before us, the Court of Appeal has determined that the Arbitral Award
was in contravention of the provisions of Article 49(1) (4) sic of the Arbitration
Law, and accordingly, quashed it and pronounced the extinguishment of the
arbitration agreement. This, in effect, amounts to accepting the challenge.
L.]
Accordingly, we decide to dismiss the Appeal submitted by ATA and endorse /
uphold the appealed Decision appertaining to nullifying the Arbitral Award and
extinguishing the arbitration agreement. [...]
55. Following the Court of Cassation’s decision, APC commenced an action against

ATA before the Jordanian Court of First Instance, re-asserting its original claims against

ATA in relation to the collapse of Dike No. 19. The Tribunal further notes that after the

-16-

evidentiary phase of this ICSID proceeding, the Respondent extended an offer to the
Claimant to submit the ongoing Dike No. 19 dispute to a new commercial arbitration in
lieu of proceeding in the Jordanian courts. The Tribunal considers that it is pertinent to
its decision to quote the following extracts from the Respondent’s offer as described in its

letter to the Claimant of 3 November 2009:

In some of its submissions in this matter, Claimant has taken issue with the fact
that the Court of Cassation of Jordan extinguished the arbitration agreement
between ATA Construction, Industrial & Trading Co. (“ATA”) and Arab Potash
Company (“APC”) in the course of nullifying the majority arbitral award issued
on 30 September 2003. By this letter, the Government of Jordan proposes to
remove this issue from these proceedings. The Government is confident that any
judicial or arbitral tribunal observes fair procedures and does not exclude
governing Jordanian law or violate Jordanian public order will issue a valid
award in the dispute over Dike No. 19.

 

The Issue. The contract between APC and ATA provides, in relevant part, that
any dispute not otherwise resolved thereunder “shall be finally settled by
arbitration conducted in accordance with Jordanian Arbitration Law by a Board
of Arbitrators composed of three Arbitrations.” Contract No. APC/37/97
(“Contract”), Appendix I, § 67.3 [Ex. R-13]. The Jordanian Arbitration Law
provides, in regard to all valid annulments and irrespective of the identity or
nationality of the prevailing party in an annulment challenge, that “[t]he final
decision nullifying the award results in extinguishing the arbitration agreement.”
Jordan Arbitration Law, art. 51 [Ex. C-10]. Accordingly, the extinguishment of
the APC-ATA arbitration agreement was a legally automatic consequence of the
annulment that represents the straightforward recognition of an explicit and
transparent statutory provision of general applicability, which involved no
exercise of judicial discretion and which (because such extinguishment can only
arise in the context of a valid annulment) complies with the terms of the New
York Convention. [Ex. C-29].

When parties to a contract select an arbitration law to govern any future dispute,
they select such law as it may exist at the time any such disputes arise, at least in
regard to the non-derogable provisions of such law. Further, Claimant did not
establish, in the course of presenting its case in the present proceedings, that it
relied on a “BIT-protected” absence of this “extinguishment” provision when
ATA and APC agreed to Jordanian Arbitration Law in their Contract. On the
contrary, Claimant expressly argued, during the course of the annulment
proceedings, that the current Jordanian Arbitration Law must control and be
applied here, including Article 51 explicitly. See ATA Pleading in Case No.
71/2003 (16 Dec. 2003) at 9, 12 [Ex. R-102]; ATA Pleading in Case No. 71/2003
(Sept. 2005) at 144-45, 173 [Ex. R-105].

-17-

Because the arbitration agreement between APC and ATA has been extinguished
by operation of law, APC has not re-commenced arbitration but has filed suit in
the Jordanian courts against ATA for the relief to which it claims it is entitled
with respect to Dike No. 19. ATA has appeared and answered that suit; has filed
a counterclaim within it; and has not objected (and has waived any objection) to
jurisdiction on account of any arbitration agreement. That suit remains pending
today.

The Proposal. Notwithstanding the foregoing, APC has communicated the
following proposal to the Government, in regard to this “extinguishment” issue
and the ongoing suit regarding Dike No. 19 between ATA and APC, and the
Government has authorized us to extend this proposal to Claimant:

1. APC is prepared to refer its pending court case against ATA in
regard to Dike No. 19, without prejudice and pursuant to Article 10(c) of the
Jordanian Arbitration Law, including its contractual claims and any
counterclaims that ATA already has asserted in that case, to a new three-member
arbitral tribunal, appointed and convened in accordance with an arbitration
agreement worded in exactly the same language as Article 67.3 of the Contract.
This proposal reflects the result that would obtain, if the final sentence of Article
51 of the Jordan Arbitration Law were not a part of the Jordanian law.

2. In connection with any such new arbitration, ATA and APC
would be free, in any commercial arbitration, to present their respective
evidentiary showings, to argue their respective views of the facts, and to advance
their respective interpretations of controlling Jordanian law, subject in all
respects to any apposite or controlling provisions of Jordanian law or decisions of
the Jordanian courts, including, without limitation, the judgments of the Court of
Appeal and Court of Cassation in APC’s annulment action (Case No. 71/2003
and Case No. 1352/2006, respectively). The entire record of the ATA-APC
proceedings to date would be submitted, jointly by the parties, to the new arbitral
tribunal for consideration.

3. As ATA and APC have agreed, Jordanian law, including the
Civil Code and Arbitration Law, would still apply and would govern the new
arbitration, just as they have governed the ATA-APC proceedings to date. See
Contract, §§ 5.1, 67.3 [Ex. R-13]. Thus, neither ATA nor APC would forego, as
part of this proposal, any of its respective rights under Jordanian law, including,
for example, the limited rights to redress provided by Article 49 of the
Arbitration Law.

We want to be clear about the purpose and effect of this proposal by
APC, insofar as the Government is concerned:

- This proposal is not a settlement proposal by the Government. Rather its
purpose is to address and eliminate as a ground of dispute the statutory mandated
extinguishment of the ATA-APC arbitration agreement so that the present ICSID
Tribunal may focus on the issues that, Respondent believes, properly lie at the
heart of the current dispute.

- 18 -

- This proposal is intended to (and would, if accepted) have no effect on any
other aspects of the present dispute between Claimant and Respondent that are at
issue in this ICSID proceeding.

- This proposal is intended to (and would, if accepted) have no effect on any
other matter or dispute involving ATA and APC including, for example, the
dispute pending between those two parties over Dike No. 18.

The Government asks that Claimant communicate its position in respect to this
proposal, in writing, by no later than November 10, 2009 (5:00 p.m. Washington
time). Thereafter, if this proposal has not been accepted, it shall be deemed to
have been withdrawn.

The Government conveys this proposal by APC without prejudice to the
Government’s position that Claimant’s challenges to the extinguishment are
invalid.

We appreciate your consideration and are hopeful that we may limit the scope of
the dispute currently pending for decision, as indicated herein, and thus, resolve
this “extinguishment” issue, which Respondent considers an unnecessary
distraction.

56. On 10 November 2009, the Claimant declined the Respondent’s above-quoted

offer as follows:

By way of your letter, the Respondent proposes to “remove” the issue of
extinguishment of the arbitration agreement between the Claimant and APC from
the present ICSID di Your letter indi that the R
considers the extinguishment of the Claimant’s arbitration agreement an
“unnecessary distraction” in this proceeding.

 

The extinguishment of the Claimant’s arbitration agreement with APC is
anything but an “unnecessary distraction”. Alongside the unlawful annulment of
the Claimant’s Final Award, the extinguishment of the Claimant’s arbitration
agreement sits at the very heart of the Respondent’s violations of the Turkey-
Jordan BIT. Each of these issues forms a fundamental part of the factual matrix
that has given rise to the Claimant’s treaty complaint. As the Claimant observed
at the very outset of its Reply on the Merits and Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction, “the Final Award was annulled, and the Claimant’s arbitration
agreement was terminated, in a way that was clearly improper and discreditable
by international standards”.

As a responsible litigant, the Claimant would welcome any genuine good faith
proposal by the Respondent to resolve the present dispute. However, the
proposal set out in your letter is plainly nothing of the kind. All of the
surrounding circumstances indicate that the proposal constitutes a cynical attempt
by the Respondent (and its alter ego in this proceeding, APC) to manipulate the
outcome of this proceeding so as to achieve what the Respondent and APC have
wanted to achieve all along: namely, the unlawful expropriation of the

-19-

Claimant’s Final Award and arbitration agreement and the substitution of the
Final Award with a new decision upholding APC’s substantial unfounded claims
against ATA in connection with the collapse of Dike 19.

L.]

Perhaps most revealing of all, your letter sets out a proposal that ATA could not
possibly accept without undermining the basic rationale of its treaty complaint.
To put such a proposal forward under the disguise of tidying up a minor
distraction for the present arbitration defies credibility. The issue and the
underlying facts are anything but a minor distraction and, if they were, the
Respondent would obviously not be seeking to remove them from the Tribunal’s
consideration.

ATA’s treaty complaint relates to, inter alia, the unlawful taking by the
Respondent of both an arbitral award and an arbitration agreement. The
Respondent’s proposal would not compensate the Claimant for either of these
harms. The Respondent’s proposal would not restore the Claimant’s Final
Award (which awarded it compensation and rejected APC’s claim for
compensation). Nor would it reinstate the Claimant’s fundamental right to have
its dispute with APC fully and finally determined by way of arbitration. Rather,
the Respondent’s proposal would leave the Claimant without its Final Award
and, in addition, facing a rigged arbitration proceeding by the terms of which it
could not possibly prevail. But, even if it could prevail, that would not
compensate the Claimant for damage that it has suffered.

L.]

The Claimant accordingly rejects the proposal set out in your letter.

57. It is against this background that, in the present proceeding, the Respondent

maintains that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims.

58. Before addressing the parties’ respective contentions regarding jurisdiction, the
Tribunal has decided to provide citations to certain articles of the Treaty, the Jordanian
Civil Code, the Contract and the Jordanian Arbitration Law which recur and are often
referred to in the present Award to facilitate the reading and the understanding of its

Award.

- 20 -

Ill. RELEVANT LEGAL SOURCES

A. The Treaty

59. The following provisions of the Treaty are noted:

Agreement Between
the Hasihemite Kingdom of Jordan
and the Republic of Turkey
Concerning
the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments

The Hasihemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Republic of Turkey, hereinafter
called the Parties.

Desiring to promote greater economic cooperation between them, particularly
with respect to investment by investors of one Party in the territory of the other
Party,

Recognizing that agreement upon the treatment to be accorded such investment
will stimulate the flow of capital and technology and the economic developments
of the Parties,

Agreeing that fair and equitable treatment of investment is desirable in order to
maintain a stable framework for investment and maximum effective utilization of

economic resources, and

Having resolved to conclude an agreement concerning the encouragement and
reciprocal protection of investments,

Hereby agree as follows:

ARTICLE I
Definitions

For the purpose of this Agreement;
[...]

2. (a) The term “investment”, in conformity with the hosting Party’s laws and
regulations, shall include every kind of asset in particular, but not exclusively:

(i) shares, stocks or any other form of participation in companies

(ii) returns reinvested, claims to money or any other rights to legitimate
performance having financial value related to an investment,

(iii) movable and immovable property, as well as any other rights in rem
such as mortgages, liens, pledges and any other similar rights,

-21-

 

 

 

(iv) copyrights, industrial and intellectual property rights such as patents,
licenses, industrial designs, technical processes as well as trademarks,
goodwill, know-how and other similar rights,

(v) business concessions conferred by law or by contract including
concessions to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources on
the territory of each Party as defined hereafter.

 

ARTICLE II
Promotion and Protection of Investments

Each Party shall permit in its territory investments, and activities
associated therewith, on a basis no less favourable than that accorded in
similar situations to investments of investors of any third country, within
the framework of its laws and regulations.

Each Party shall accord to these investments, once established, treatment
no less favourable than that accorded in similar situations to investments
of its investors or to investments of investors of any third country,
whichever is the most favourable.

ARTICLE III
Expropriation and Compensation

Investments shall not be expropriated, nationalized or subject, directly or
indirectly, to measures of similar effects except for a public purpose, in a
non-discriminatory manner, upon payment of prompt, adequate and
effective compensation, and in accordance with due process of law and
the general principles of treatment provided for in Article II of this
Agreement.

Compensation shall be equivalent to the real value of the expropriated
investment before the expropriatory action was taken or became known.
Compensation shall be paid without delay and be freely transferable as
described in paragraph 2 Article 4.

Investors of either Party, whose investments suffer losses in the territory
of the other Party owing to war, insurrection, civil disturbance or other
similar events shall be accorded by such other Party treatment no less
favourable than that accorded to its own investors or to investors of any
third country, whichever is the most favourable treatment, as regards any
measures it adopts in relation to such losses.

-22-

60.

B.

ARTICLE IX
Entering into Force

This Agreement shall enter into force on the date on which the exchange
of instruments of ratification has been completed. It shall remain in force
for a period of ten years and shall continue in force unless terminated in
accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article. It shall apply to investments
existing at the time of entry into force as well as to investments made or
acquired thereafter.

Either Party may, by giving one year’s written notice to the other Party,
terminate this Agreement at the end of the initial ten year period or at any
time thereafter.

This Agreement may be amended by written agreement between the
Parties. Any amendment shall enter into force when each Party has
notified the other that it has completed all internal requirements for entry
into force of such amendment.

With respect to investments made or acquired prior to the date of
termination of this Agreement and to which this Agreement otherwise
applies, the provisions of all of the other Articles of this Agreement shall
hereafter continue to be effective for a further period of ten years from
such date of termination.

The Jordanian Civil Code

The following provisions of the Jordanian Civil Code are noted:

L.

DIVISION THREE
CONTRACTS OF WORK
CHAPTER ONE
CONTRACT FOR INDEPENDENT WORK

1. Obligations Of The Contractor

Section (785): The contractor shall perform the work in accordance with the
conditions of the contract, and if it shall be discovered that he performs what he
undertook in a defective manner or contrary to the conditions the employer may
apply for the immediate rescission of the contract if the repair of the work is
impossible, but if the repair of the work is possible the employer may ask the
contractor to comply with the contract conditions and repair the work within a
reasonable time, and if the time expires without effecting the repair the employer
may apply to the Court for the rescission of the contract or permission for him to
request another contractor to complete the work at the expense of the first
contractor.

-23-

61.

Section (786): The contractor shall be liable for the damage or loss that results
from his work or manufacture whether by his trespass or negligence or otherwise
and liability shall not be due f the cause is an accident which could not be
avoided.

Section (787):

1. If the contractor’s work shall have some effect on the property he may detain
it until he receives the remuneration due, and if it shall be demolished while in his
possession before the payment of his remuneration he shall not be liable for
damages nor shall he be entitled to remuneration.

2. And if his work shall have no effect on the property he may not detain it until
the receipt of remuneration and if he shall do so and it is demolished he shall be
liable for extortion.

Section (788):

1. If the contract for independent work shall be for the construction of a building
the design of which is to be made by the engineer under whose supervision the
contractor is to build, both of them shall be liable to compensate the employer for
whatever happens during ten years from the total or partial demolition of the
buildings they have constructed or the constructions they have built and for every
defect which threatens the strength and safety of the building unless the contract
provides for a longer period.

2. Liability for the said compensation shall subsist even if the defect or
demolition results from a defect in the land itself or the employer’s consent to the
building of the defected constructions.

3. The term of ten years shall commence on the date of the taking over of the
work.

Section (789): If the engineer’s work shall be limited to the making of design
without supervision of execution he shall only be liable for the defects in design,
and if the contractor shall work under the supervision of an engineer or that of the

employer who substituted himself for the engineer he shall not be liable except
for the defects in execution and not for the defects in design.

Cc. The Contract

The following provisions of the Contract are noted:

67.2 Arbitration
Delete the existing Sub-Clause 67.3 and substitute as follows:
Any dispute in respect of which:

(a) the decision, if any, of the Engineer has not become final and
binding pursuant to Sub-Clause 67.1, and

(b) amicable settlement has not been reached within the period stated
in Sub-Clause 67.2

-24-

62.

IV.

63.

shall be finally settled by arbitration conducted in accordance with
Jordanian Arbitration Law by a Board of Arbitrators composed of three
Arbitrators, one to be appointed by each party and the third to be jointly
appointed by both parties by virtue of the provisions of the said Law.
The language of arbitration shall be English.

D. The Jordanian Arbitration Law

The following provisions of the Jordanian Arbitration Law are noted:

Article 49(a)(4):

An action for the nullity of the arbitral award shall not be admitted except in any
of the following cases: [... ] If the arbitral tribunal excluded the application of
the law agreed upon by the parties to govern the subject-matter of the dispute.

Article 49(b):

The competent court seized of the action for nullity shall, by its own initiative,
nullify the award in respect of what is in its content violating public order in the
[Hashemite] Kingdom [of Jordan], or if the subject-matter of the dispute is not
capable of being subject to arbitration.

Article 50:

An action for nullity of the arbitral award must be raised within thirty days
following the date on which the arbitral award was notified to the party against
whom it was rendered; and such action is admissible even if the party invoking
the nullity had waived his right to do so before the issuance of the arbitral award.

Article 51:

If the competent court approves the arbitral award, it must decide its execution
and such decision is final. If, otherwise, the court decides the nullity of the
award, its decision is subject to challenge before the Court of Cassation within

thirty days following the date of notifying that decision. The final decision
nullifying the award results in extinguishing the arbitration agreement.

THE RESPONDENT’S JURSIDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS
A. The Respondent’s Position

It is the Respondent’s position that the Centre lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis

over the Claimant’s claims, and that the Tribunal thus lacks competence to rule upon

these claims, for the following reasons:

-25-

First, it is well established that, unless a contrary intent appears on the face of the
treaty, a bilateral investment treaty (or “BIT”) will not apply to a dispute that has
arisen, fully developed, and been extensively pursued before the BIT’s entry into
force. Here, the dispute in question had not only had [sic] arisen, but had been
extensively litigated, in both arbitral and judicial proceedings, for a period of
nearly six years before the BIT’s entry into force.

As Claimant has acknowledged, “[t]he Turkey-Jordan BIT entered into force on
23 January 2006.” Cl. Mem., { 99; see also ICSID Database of Bilateral
Investment Treaties - Treaties of Jordan, available at icsid.worldbank.org
(Exhibit R-5). The record establishes, however, that in September 2000, ATA
and APC each gave notice of an intent to commence arbitration, and on 29
October 2003, APC filed its annulment action challenging the arbitral tribunal’s
Final Award of 30 September 2003. See Cl. Mem., {ff 33, 66; see also ATA
Notice Letter (6 Sept. 2000) (Exhibit R-6); APC Notice Letter (10 Sept. 2000)
(Exhibit R-7).

By 23 January 2006, all proceedings in both the arbitration and the annulment
action before the Court of Appeal had been concluded, with nothing remaining
but the issuance of that Court’s judgment of annulment (which occurred on 24
January 2006, the day following the BIT’s entry into force) and the subsequent
appellate proceedings in the Court of Cassation.

By any reasonable assessment, the pertinent dispute had arisen, and the parties in
interest (APC and ATA) had fully developed and articulated their respective
positions and arguments, long before the Turkey-Jordan BIT’s entry into force on
23 January 2006. All of the material facts and arguments that ATA now seeks to
present, except the court judgements themselves, were presented and addressed
before the Court of Appeal — albeit without being phrased in the terminology of
public international law. ATA’s complaint before this Tribunal is not that the
Jordanian courts committed substantively new violations of its (newly created)
rights after the BIT entered into force; rather, it is that the Final Award should
not have been annulled under the Jordanian Arbitration Law and that Respondent
owes ATA the damages that were awarded in the Final Award, plus related relief.
In substance, this is the same dispute that was presented to, and fully litigated
before, Jordan’s Court of Appeal.

By no reasonable reading of Claimant’s own submissions and description of this
dispute can it be said, as ATA now asserts, that “the Claimant’s dispute with the
Respondent arose on 16 January 2007 when the Jordanian Court of Cassation
delivered the final judgment in the domestic proceedings between the Claimant
and APC, thereby annulling the Final Award and extinguishing the arbitration
agreement contained in the Contract.” Cl. Mem., { 159. The proceedings in the
Court of Cassation represented a continuation of the case presented to the Court
of Appeal well before 2006, and in substance, a continuation of the original
dispute, which began in 2000. The Court of Cassation’s judgement affirmed the
judgment of the Court of Appeal, on the basis of the same record and in the face
of the same substantive arguments. No new or different dispute arose on 16
January 2007 — or at any time after 23 January 2006.

- 26 -

Second, this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because, by its terms, the Turkey-Jordan
BIT “shall apply to investments existing at the time of entry into force as well as
to investments made or acquired thereafter.” Jordan-Turkey BIT, art. IX(1)
(Exhibit C-1). ATA’s claims are not predicated on any alleged “investment”
existing at the time of the Turkey-Jordan BIT’s entry into force, or made or
acquired thereafter. On the contrary, ATA’s claims are predicated on its Contract
with APC of 2 May 1998, which was executed nearly eight years before the
BIT’s entry into force and in connection with which ATA had (a) fully
completed its performance and “handed over control” by 9 December 1999, and
(b) subsequently obtained a liquidated damages award (as later annulled by the
Jordanian courts) on 30 September 2003.

 

It stretches language and legal reasoning beyond the breaking point to state, on
these facts, that Claimant’s interest in the arbitral damages award, which was
subject to judicial review for annulment in the ordinary course, constituted an
“investment” that “existed” at the time of the Turkey-Jordan BIT’s entry into
force on 23 January 2006. On that date, nothing remained of the alleged,
underlying “investment;” all that remained was the continuation of ongoing
Jordanian court proceedings, which concerned not the underlying contract or
performance but the legality of the subsequent arbitral award.

If there is jurisdiction ratione temporis over ATA’s claims here, then it is
difficult to perceive when this jurisdictional limitation ever properly applies. A
legal claim presumably never would be barred for temporal reasons, so long as
the claimant continues to assert it and phase it in the language of a BIT, or can
relate it to an allegedly underlying “investment” even if that investment was
made and terminated many years before the applicable BIT’s entry into force.
[emphasis in original]

64. More particularly, regarding the Respondent’s first jurisdictional objection to the
effect that the BIT does not apply to disputes that predate its entry into force, the

Respondent argues as follows:

Many BITs contain clear language that prohibits their application to disputes that
predate their entry into force. The Turkey-Jordan BIT contains no express
language to this effect. However, ICSID tribunals have consistently held that, in
“the absence of specific provision for reciprocity,” it is proper to infer that
“disputes that may have arisen before the entry into force of the BIT are not
covered.” This approach gives effect to the strong and longstanding presumption
against retroactivity that is expressed in the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties and embedded in customary international law. Under this settled
principle, the Turkey-Jordan BIT does not apply to any dispute that arose before
it entered into force, on 23 January 2006.

L.]

-27-

Here, ATA does not claim to be seeking retroactive application of the Turkey-
Jordan BIT: that is, it does not expressly argue that the Turkey-Jordan BIT should
be applied to a “dispute” that predated the BIT’s entry into force. Rather, ATA
contends that “the Claimant’s dispute with the Respondent arose on 16 January
2007 when the Jordanian Court of Cassation delivered the final judgment in the
domestic proceedings between the Claimant and APC, thereby annulling the
Final Award and extinguishing the arbitration agreement contained in the
Contract.” Cl. Mem., {[ 159.

It is apparent, however, that a “dispute,” as that term is defined in the ICSID
jurisprudence, both existed and had been extensively pursued long before the
issuance of the Court of Cassation’s judgement on 16 January 2007. Claimant’s
own recital of the facts shows that in September 2000 (i.e., more than five years
before the BIT’s entry into force) ATA and APC each gave notice of an intent to
commence arbitration, and on 29 October 2003, APC filed its annulment action
challenging the arbitral tribunal’s Final Award of 30 September 2003. See Cl.
Mem., {ff 33, 66; see also ATA Notice Letter (6 Sept. 2000) (Exhibit R-6); APC
Notice Letter (10 Sept. 2000) (Exhibit R-7).

In these circumstances, it is an understatement to say that the dispute had
“crystallized.” It had been extensively litigated long before the BIT’s entry into
force on 23 January 2006. By that point, all proceedings in both the arbitration
and the annulment action before the Court of Appeal had been concluded, with
nothing remaining but the issuance of that Court’s judgment of annulment (which
occurred on 24 January 2006, the day following the BIT’s entry into force) and
the subsequent appellate proceedings in the Court of Cassation.

The question, then, is whether a new and subsequently different “dispute” arose
on 16 January 2007, or at any other time after 23 January 2006.

L.]

The same analysis and result apply here, but with greater force. No new or
different dispute arose in this case on 16 January 2007 — or at any time after 23
January 2006. The proceedings before the Court of Cassation represented the
continuation of an ongoing annulment action, which had been initiated more than
two years before the BIT’s entry into force in the Court of Appeal. The Court of
Cassation’s judgment affirmed the judgment of the Court of Appeal, on the basis
of the same record and in the face of the same, substantive arguments that the
parties had presented to the Court of Appeal, in submissions that were completed
before 23 January 2006.

Moreover, Claimant’s argument is not that the Jordanian courts committed
substantively new and distinct violations of (newly created) treaty rights after the
BIT entered into force. Rather, it is that the Final Award should not have been
annulled, under a proper interpretation and application of the Jordanian
Arbitration Law, and thus, Claimant is owed the money damages that were
granted in the Final Award and related relief. In substance, this is the same
dispute that was presented to and fully litigated before the Court of Appeal and
then continued, on appeal, before the Court of Cassation.

- 28 -

The Turkey-Jordan BIT was not in effect when ATA made its alleged
“investment” or when the dispute at issue in this case first arose and was
extensively argued. Like the claimants in Lucchetti, ATA had no expectation of
legal rights or protection under the BIT when it executed the Contract, when it
commenced the Jordanian arbitration, or even when the annulment action was
filed (or submitted for decision), and the BIT cannot be applied retroactively to
breathe new life into ATA’s claims at this stage. [emphasis in original]

65. On the issue of jurisdiction ratione materiae, the Respondent adds:

Plainly, the Jordanian courts are not APC, and the annulment judgments are not
the underlying, alleged breaches of contract that were at issue in the APC-ATA
arbitration. However, the premise of ATA’s case, as a matter of jurisdiction
ratione materiae, is that the Contract and ATA’s legal claims arising therefrom
(including its alleged rights in the Final Award) must be considered as a whole
and that, when viewed together, they qualify as an “investment” within the
meaning of the ICSID Convention and the Turkey-Jordan BIT. Further, ATA
contends that APC has been “at all material times, under the direction and control
of the Respondent” and thus, in effect, is an arm or agent of Respondent. Cl.
Mem., { 3; see id., {J 13-14.

These allegations are essential to ATA’s case, as a matter of jurisdiction ratione
materiae, because without them, its claims relating to the annulment of the Final
Award cannot be said to “arise directly” from an underlying, jurisdiction-
conferring “investment,” as the ICSID Convention requires. Accordingly, by
Claimant’s own characterization of its case (and necessarily so, for the purposes
of its jurisdictional assertions), when ATC and APC arbitrated the original
dispute, it was already, in substance, an “investment” dispute between ATA and
Respondent. The present dispute, and the underlying annulment action, are but a
continuation of that initial dispute, framed in terms of the BIT.

Under no reasonable reading of the Turkey-Jordan BIT can Turkey and Jordan be
understood to have consented to ICSID jurisdiction over this dispute, and under
no reasonable reading of the facts and its own characterization of its case can
ATA claim to have relied upon rights conferred by the BIT when it made its
alleged “investment,” arbitrated the dispute, and litigated the annulment action.

66. As for the Respondent’s second jurisdictional objection to the effect that there
was no “investment existing” at the time of the BIT’s entry into force or “made or
acquired thereafter”, the Respondent contends:

[W]hen Article IX(1) states that the BIT “shall apply to investments existing at

the time of entry into force as well as to investments made or acquired

thereafter,” and when a claimant seeks to invoke and rely upon the “bootstrap”

provision in Article I(2)(a)(ii) to assert jurisdiction over its claim, it is only
reasonable that both the derivative “claim to money” or “financial performance”

-29 -

and the underlying “investment” to which it relates must be “investments existing
at the time of entry into force” or “made or acquired thereafter.” Otherwise, the
temporal limitation of Article IX(1) has no meaning. A “claim to money” or
“financial performance” would always be actionable, provided that the claim
itself was asserted (or continued to be asserted) after the BIT’s entry into force —
and even if the predicate “investment” had long since ceased to exist, as is the
case here. Because a claim can always be asserted, continued, or reasserted after
a BIT’s entry into force, that reading would provide no temporal restriction at all.
[emphasis in original]

B. The Claimant’s Position
67. The Claimant challenges the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections, arguing that
they result from the “erroneous conflation of the underlying construction dispute between
APC and the Claimant with the investment treaty dispute between the Claimant and the
Respondent”. The Claimant contends that the Court of Cassation judgment “crystallised”
the present investment treaty dispute and gave rise to its “denial of justice” claim. It

submits:

A claim on the international plane based on denial of justice does not arise as a
substantive, rather than procedural, matter until the system of national appeals
within the State in question has been exhausted. In the present case, this
occurred when the Court of Cassation rendered its judgment on 16 January 2007.
At that point, a manifestly “new and substantively different dispute” arose
between the Claimant and the Respondent. This dispute is not based on liability
as a matter of Jordanian law for the collapse of Dike No. 19, as the Respondent
seems to believe. Rather, it is based on a violation of the Respondent’s public
international law obligations that was effected by the Jordanian courts. The
Claimant is entitled to have this dispute resolved by this Tribunal to enforce its
rights arising from the Turkey-Jordan BIT. [footnote omitted]

68. More particularly, the Claimant maintains that the Respondent’s jurisdictional

objections are “misguided” for the following reasons:

[...] First, as will be demonstrated below, it is clear that there is a juridical
distinction between the Claimant’s treaty dispute, which concerns the actions of
the Jordanian courts in annulling the Final Award and extinguishing the
arbitration agreement, and the underlying domestic dispute concerning attribution
of liability for the collapse of Dike No. 19. The Claimant’s treaty dispute with
the Respondent did not arise until the Court of Appeal Judgment on 24 January
2006 and did not crystallise until the Court of Cassation delivered its final

-30-

judgment on 16 January 2007. Both of these dates were after the entry into force
of the Turkey-Jordan BIT.

Secondly, in any event, the application of the Turkey-Jordan BIT is not in fact
restricted to disputes that arose after its entry into force, provided that the dispute
relates to “investments existing at the time of entry into force.” As established in
section IV(B)(ii) below, the Claimant’s dispute with the Respondent relates to an
investment existing at the time of entry into force of the Turkey-Jordan BIT.

69. On the specific issue of the definition of “investment” under the BIT, the

Claimant maintains that:

The Claimant commenced its investment in relation to Dike No. 19 on 2 May
1998, when it entered into the Contract. The Claimant continued to have an
investment in Jordan after the entry into force of the Turkey-Jordan BIT on 23
January 2006. The fact that the Claimant made its initial investment before the
BIT entered into force is irrelevant.

The Respondent mischaracterises the Claimant’s investment. At the time the
Turkey-Jordan BIT entered into force on 23 January 2006, the Claimant
continued to possess legal and contractual rights, whose enforcement had been
improperly denied by the Jordanian courts. These rights derived from the
Claimant’s investment in Dike No. 19.

The plain meaning of Article I(2)(a) of the Turkey-Jordan BIT covers a broad
scope of investments. The definition of the term “investment” therein includes
“every kind of asset”, and provides a non-exhaustive list of examples of
investment. The object and purpose of the Turkey-Jordan BIT is also furthered
by a broad definition and not by a restrictive one.

The broad definition of “investment” contained in Article I(2)(a) of the Turkey-
Jordan BIT includes, at I(2)(a)(ii); “returns reinvested, claims to money or any
other rights to legitimate performance having financial value related to an
investment.”

As demonstrated by the Claimant in its Memorial, the Claimant’s rights arising
out of the Contract and the arbitration agreement there set out fall within this
wide definition of “investment”. First, it is beyond doubt that the Claimant’s
underlying investment in Dike No. 19, which formed the basis of its subsequent
legal and contractual claims, qualifies as an “investment” under the Turkey-
Jordan BIT. Pursuant to the Dike No. 19 Contract, over the duration of the
performance of the contract and beyond, the Claimant made contributions and
participated in the risks of the transaction.

Moreover, the Claimant’s investment includes the Final Award itself, which
constitutes a claim to money and a right to legitimate performance having
financial value related to an investment, for the purposes of Article I(2)(a)(ii).
This is consistent with the principle that investments must be examined
holistically and not separated into artificial components. Viewing the investment

-31-

as a whole, the Claimant’s legal and contractual rights under the Contract, as
enforced in the underlying arbitration and upheld in the Final Award, cannot be
separated from the rest of the Claimant’s investment in Jordan. The investment
undertaken pursuant to the Dike No. 19 Contract must be taken to include the
legal and contractual claims emanating from that contract that are the subject of
the Jordanian court cases.

70. Having set forth the parties’ respective positions on jurisdiction and subject to its
decision on the Respondent’s challenge for reasons which will appear later in the present
Award, the Tribunal deems it appropriate to turn now to the parties’ respective arguments

and submissions on the merits of the Claimant’s substantive claims in this arbitration.

Vv. THE CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS
A. The Claimant’s Position

1. The Claim that the Respondent Expropriated the Claimant’s Investment
Contrary to Article III of the BIT

71. The Claimant refers to Article III of the BIT and makes the following

submissions:

Article III contains a prohibition against expropriation of investments save, inter
alia, upon payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation and in
accordance with due process of law. It provides, in pertinent part:

“1, Investments shall not be expropriated, nationalized or
subject, directly or indirectly, to measures of similar
effects [sic.] except for a public purpose, in a non-
discriminatory manner, upon payment of prompt,
adequate and effective compensation, and in accordance
with due process of law and the general principles of
treatment provided for in Article II of this Agreement.

2. Compensation shall be equivalent to the real value of the
expropriated investment before the expropriatory action
was taken or became known. Compensation shall be
paid without delay and be freely transferable as
described in paragraph 2, Article IV [...]”.

Indeed, as the Tribunal will be well aware, the prohibition against expropriation
of the property of foreign nationals save in the public interest, on non-arbitrary

-32-

72.

and non-discriminatory basis and on payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation forms a principle of customary international law.

L..]

 

The Respondent’s annulment of the Claimant’s Final Award and the extinction of
its arbitration agreement with APC constitutes an expropriation of ATA’s
investment in Jordan. This expropriation does not satisfy the conditions for
lawful expropriation contained in Article III of Turkey-Jordan BIT. Therefore, it
constitutes a violation of the Turkey-Jordan BIT for which the Respondent is
liable to compensate the Claimant.

In support of its claim for expropriation, the Claimant argues as follows:

The Respondent failed to satisfy any of the conditions for lawful expropriation
under Article III of the Turkey-Jordan BIT.

The Respondent’s expropriation of the Claimant’s investment did not serve any
public purpose. In particular, it did not fulfil any of the public policy
objectives that are safeguarded by Article 49 of the Jordanian Arbitration Law.
On the contrary, the Court of Appeal noted that all of the arbitration procedures
had been correct and in accordance with the law and expressly dismissed any
notion that the Arbitral Tribunal had acted improperly or incorrectly. The
judgments of the Court of Appeal and Court of Cassation resulted in the
arbitrary reversal of a final arbitral award that was completely irreconcilable
with the narrow mandate for annulment provided by the Jordanian Arbitration
Law.

The Respondent’s expropriation of the Claimant’s investment was
discriminatory. The judgments of the Court of Appeal and Court of Cassation
contradicted the consistent practice of the Jordanian courts in refusing annulment
proceedings brought in similar circumstances against Jordanian parties on the
basis that the Jordanian Arbitration Law does not permit any re-examination of
the underlying merits of a dispute. This clear and established principle is
confirmed authoritatively in the Court of Cassation’s Case No. 201/2006:

“There is a unanimous agreement among jurists and judges
that annulment action of an arbitral award is not a
contestation by way of an appeal. It does not accommodate
the re-examination of the substance of the dispute or the
substantive incorrectness of the arbitral award. Further, the
Judge hearing the annulment suit has no right to review the
merits of the arbitral award to evaluate the accuracy or
exactness of the arbitrators’ judgment or their rightness or
wrongness of the facts or interpretation or application of the
law. The application of that is that the judicial review
provided for in Article 49 of the Jordanian Arbitration Law
has a formal nature as it does not extend to the substance of
the dispute and it does not empower the court to supervise
the arbitral tribunal’s mechanism of interpreting and

- 33 -

applying the law provided that the rules of public policy are
not breached.”

The principle that appellate review of arbitral awards is prohibited by the
Jordanian Arbitration Law is therefore a settled and uncontroversial issue under
Jordanian law. An annulment action is not an appeal:

“Judicial review of awards under [the Jordanian Arbitration
Law] is confined to annulment actions on issues of
arbitration agreement, procedural fairness, jurisdiction, and
public policy. Therefore, any judicial scrutiny of the
arbitrators’ substantive decisions on fact or law is not
allowed.”

Indeed, the Court of Appeal and Court of Cassation judgments against the
Claimant are unique and unprecedented in Jordan: “no other cases in the
Jordanian courts have annulled an award under Article 49(a)(4) due to
misapplication of the Jordanian law by an arbitral Tribunal.”

The glaring failure of the Court of Appeal to apply Article 49(a)(4) of the
Jordanian Arbitration Law seriously violated Jordanian law. The seriousness of
the violation is highlighted by the Court of Cassation judgment in Case No.
201/2006 that confirms the proper scope of Article 49(a)(4). The
unprecedented nature of the Jordanian Courts’ departure from the settled scope
of annulment demonstrates that the Courts’ actions were discriminatory
towards the Claimant.

Most importantly and evidently in this case, the Respondent has provided no
compensation to the Claimant (let alone prompt, adequate and effective
compensation) in respect of the expropriation of the Claimant’s investment. On
the contrary, the inevitable consequence of the taking of the Claimant’s
investment has been the denial of substantial compensation due under the Final
Award.

The Respondent’s expropriation of the Claimant’s investment was inconsistent
with due process of law. As detailed more fully in Section IV.C below, the
Claimant was denied basic rights before the Court of Appeal and Court of
Cassation, including the right to transparent, predictable and consistent court
procedures, the right to present evidence and to have evidence duly scrutinized
and the right to a decision that upholds the rule of law.

Further, as described in Section IV.C below, the Respondent’s expropriation of
the Claimant’s investment was inconsistent with the general principles of
treatment provided for in Article II of the Turkey-Jordan BIT, most particularly
the MEN standard under Article II(2).

For these reasons, the Respondent’s annulment of the Claimant’s Final Award
and the extinction of its arbitration agreement constitute an expropriation of
ATA’s investment in Jordan, contrary to Article III of the Turkey-Jordan BIT,
for which the Respondent must pay compensation.

-34-

2. The Claim that the Respondent Failed to Accord the Claimant’s Investment
Most Favoured Nation (“MFN”) Treatment Contrary to Article II(2) of the BIT

73. The Claimant refers to Article II(2) of the BIT! and makes the following

submissions:

Article II(2) of the Turkey-Jordan BIT provides as follows:

“Each Party shall accord to these investments, once established,
treatment no less favourable than that accorded in similar
situations to investments of its investors or to investments of
investors of any third country, whichever is the most
favourable.”

It is well established - and has been repeatedly affirmed in international
jurisprudence, including investment treaty claims — that a most favoured nation
(“MEN”) provision, such as the one contained in Article 11(2) of the Turkey-
Jordan BIT, entitles a claimant’s investment to benefit from substantive
guarantees contained in other BITs concluded by the host State (in this case,
Jordan).

[

In particular, as detailed further below, the MFN provision in the Turkey-Jordan
BIT entitles the Claimant to rely upon the following substantive protections
accorded to the investments of third State nationals under other Jordanian BITs
currently in force:

 

(a) the duty to accord fair and equitable treatment (e.g., pursuant to
the United Kingdom-Jordan BIT);

(b) the duty to accord treatment is no less favourable than that
required by international law (e.g., pursuant to the Spain-Jordan
BIT);

(c) the duty not to impair by unreasonable or discriminatory

measures the management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal of investments (e.g., pursuant to the United Kingdom-
Jordan BIT);

(d) the duty not to hamper, by arbitrary or discriminatory measures,
the development, management, maintenance, use, or enjoyment
of investments (e.g., pursuant to the Croatia-Jordan BIT); and

' The Tribunal notes that although the Preamble to the Treaty expressly refers to the “fair and equitable treatment of

investment”, there is no stand-alone “Fair and Equitable Treatment” provision in the body of the Treaty.

-35-

74.

(e) the duty to provide effective means of asserting claims and
enforcing rights with respect to investments (e.g., pursuant to the
United States-Jordan BIT).
L.]

The Doctrine of denial of justice is of central importance in the present case
because: (i) the Respondent is responsible for the conduct of its domestic courts
as a matter of international law; (ii) the Respondent is obliged, by virtue of
Article II(2) of the Turkey-Jordan BIT, to provide the Claimant’s investment
with treatment no less favourable than that accorded in similar situations to
investments of investors of any third country; (iii) such treatment includes fair
and equitable treatment and treatment required by customary international law,
by virtue of others of Jordan’s BITs; (iv) denial of justice constitutes a violation
of both fair and equitable treatment standard and customary international law;
and (v) consequently, the denials of justice committed by the Jordanian domestic
courts against the Claimant’s investment constitute a violation of the
Respondent’s obligations under Article II(2) of the Turkey-Jordan BIT, in respect
of which the Claimant is entitled to relief.

In connection with its claim of procedural denial of justice, the Claimant submits:

In the present case, it is clear that the Respondent has violated the Claimant’s
procedural rights and has not satisfied internationally recognised standards of
due process. It has therefore committed a denial of justice. The Court of
Appeal arbitrarily re-opened consideration of the underlying facts and merits of
the dispute between the Claimant and APC and subsequently proceeded to
reverse the Arbitral Tribunal’s Final Award. It did so notwithstanding the clear
prohibitions against such conduct under the Jordanian Arbitration Law.
Further, it did so notwithstanding its preliminary decision of 16 January 2005,
which had confirmed, with reference to the narrow mandate conferred by the
Jordanian Arbitration Law, that the underlying dispute had been finally
determined by the Arbitral Tribunal and could not be reconsidered. The
pertinent part of the preliminary decision confirmed that:

“[T]he subject of dispute has been decided upon by the
arbitration panel and that it is not permissible to reconsider.”

  

The Court of Appeal’s preliminary decision effectively confirmed the prohibition
against APC (and, by extension, the Claimant) re-submitting evidence relating to
the issues of fact and law that had been so meticulously analysed in the
underlying arbitration proceedings. It was patently arbitrary and inherently
contradictory for the Court of Appeal subsequently to reverse its approach and
annul the Final Award on the basis of a substitution of its own appraisal of the
facts and law.

The Court of Appeal and Court of Cassation denied the Claimant an adequate
opportunity to present its case on an equal footing with APC. The Court of
Appeal’s preliminary decision of 16 January 2005 confirmed that ATA should
refrain from translating and re-submitting the voluminous factual evidence and

- 36 -

75.

expert opinion that had underpinned the Arbitral Tribunal’s findings on the
merits. Notwithstanding its preliminary decision, the Court of Appeal
nevertheless proceeded, in its final judgment, to reverse the critical findings of
fact that had been reached in the Final Award. It did so in the absence of any
detailed review of the primary evidence. Rather, without giving the Claimant
any opportunity to comment, it based its crucial findings of fact upon those that
had been reached in the dissenting award of APC’s nominated arbitrator.

In summary, it is clear that not only was the Court of Appeal’s reversal of the
Arbitral Tribunal’s findings of fact way beyond the scope of its mandate under
Jordanian law; it was also conducted in a highly superficial and inadequate
manner that denied ATA any opportunity effectively to present its case.

The Court of Appeal denied the Claimant’s due process rights by accepting
APC’s allegations of fact after only a perfunctory analysis and without allowing
the Claimant to produce its own evidence or to examine and answer the evidence
ultimately cited against it. The Court of Cassation compounded this violation by
summarily denying the Claimant’s repeated requests to make oral submissions
and by endorsing the approach of the Court of Appeal.

As to its claim of substantive denial of justice, the Claimant contends:

In exceptional circumstances such as the present, the manifest misapplication of
national law gives rise to a denial of justice entailing the international
responsibility of the State. Thus, Jan Paulsson (whose approach to denial of
justice has been observed as being “narrower and more focused than that posited
by many past commentators and arbitral awards”) recognises that “in extreme
cases the substantive quality of a judgment may lead to a finding of denial of
justice”.

The Court of Appeal judgment annulling the Final Award and arbitrarily
reversing the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision on the facts and the law was “clearly
improper and discreditable,” leading to “justified concerns as to the judicial
propriety of the outcome”. Put differently, justice was administered by the
Jordanian courts “in a seriously inadequate way”. These flaws were exacerbated
by the judgment of the Court of Cassation.

The Respondent ignored the constraints imposed by Article 49(a)(4) of the
Jordanian Arbitration Law by (i) unlawfully using the annulment proceeding as
an opportunity to review the Arbitral Tribunal’s findings of law fact; (ii)
bizarrely interpreting the reference to “exclusion” of law in Article 49(a)(4) to
allow annulment on the basis of a supposed misapplication of law; (iii) distorting
the reference in Article 49(a)(4) to “the law agreed upon by the parties” (namely,
Jordanian law), to instead refer to specific provisions of the Jordanian Civil Code
that had never, of course, been “agreed upon by the parties”; and (iv) allowing
the Court of Appeal to substitute its own judgment de novo on questions of fact
and law for that of the Arbitral Tribunal.

-37-

76. In its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, the Claimant also refers to a judgment of the
Amman Court of Appeal in support of its contention as to the “narrow scope of

annulment proceedings under the Jordanian Arbitration Law”:

In addition, the Claimant submits the judgment of the Amman Court of Appeal in
Case No. 264/2008 as an exhibit to this Rejoinder. This judgment was delivered
on 20 April 2009. It therefore post-dates both the Memorial (filed on 24 October
2008) and the Reply (filed on 10 April 2009). In its judgment, which is publicly
available, the Amman Court Appeal reaffirms the narrow scope of annulment
proceedings under the Jordanian Arbitration Law and thereby demonstrates the
correctness of the Claimant’s previous submissions on this point. In particular, it
affirms consistent jurisprudence of the Jordanian courts to the effect that they
have no competence to annul arbitration awards based on an error of law and no
right to review the subject of the dispute or facts arrived at by an arbitral tribunal.
In so doing in this case, in violation of the Claimant’s fundamental procedural
rights, the Courts of Appeal and Cassation have rendered manifestly unjust
decisions contrary to the Respondent’s international obligations under the
Turkey-Jordan BIT.

77. The Claimant also contends that the Respondent breached the Claimant’s

legitimate expectations in connection with its investment. It argues:

[...] The Respondent’s conduct, in the form of: (i) the arbitration clause provided
in the Contract with the State-owned and controlled APC; (ii) the Terms of
Reference related to the proceedings before the Arbitral Tribunal; (iii) the
commitment to the sanctity of the arbitral process enshrined in the Jordanian
Arbitration Law; and (iv) the narrow scope of judicial annulment of arbitral
awards provided under the Jordanian Arbitration Law, created a reasonable and
justifiable expectation in the Claimant. That expectation is held by many
international investors whenever they enter into investment projects that make
provision to refer disputes with State-owned or local entities to arbitration. It
was the expectation that the outcome of the arbitral process under the Contract
would be a final and binding award that would be free from illegitimate and
unforeseeable interference by the domestic courts.

All of these aspects of the Respondent’s conduct were reasonably relied upon by
the Claimant when it made its investment in Jordan. They demonstrated that the
Respondent had a “transparent and predicable framework” for the Claimant’s
business planning and investment. Without them, it is unlikely that the Claimant
would have invested in Jordan at all. The judgments of the Court of Appeal and
Court of Cassation represent a manifest failure to honour the Claimant’s
expectations in respect of the arbitral process in Jordan.

The Court of Appeal’s preliminary decision on 16 January 2005 (particularly
when considered alongside the Jordanian Arbitration Law) created a further

- 38 -

reasonable and justifiable expectation in the Claimant. That expectation was to
the effect that it would be inappropriate to submit pleadings and evidence on the
underlying issues of fact to the Court of Appeal in the context of annulment
proceedings under Article 49 of the Jordanian Arbitration Law. Again, the
judgments of the Court of Appeal and Court of Cassation represent a manifest
failure to honour the Claimant’s expectation.

78. In its Reply on the Merits and Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Claimant

reverts to its “denial of justice” claim in the following words:

(i) The Respondent understates the scope of the “denial of justice” standard
to the point of repudiating that substantive “denial of justice” exists as a
matter of international law;

(ii) The Respondent in unable to cite any jurisprudence that is analogous to
the present case;

(iii) There has been a substantive “denial of justice” [because:]

(a) The Respondent’s assertion that the Arbitral Tribunal “erred as a
matter of law” is irrelevant and incorrect;

(b) The Respondent is unable to refute the fact that the Court of
Appeal Judgment was far beyond the threshold of being “clearly
improper and discreditable”;

(c) The Respondent is unable to address the fact that the
fundamental flaws in the Court of Appeal Judgment were
compounded by the Court of Cassation Judgment;

(d) The Respondent’s repeated references to “public order” are
misplaced and a transparent attempt to divert attention from the
inherent weaknesses in this case;

(e) The Respondent fails to address the nexus between the New
York Convention, the UNCITRAL Model Law and _ the
Jordanian Arbitration Law in prohibiting courts from treating
annulment proceedings as an appeal;

(iv) There has been a procedural “denial of justice” [because:]

(a) Contrary to the Respondent’s submissions, the record confirms
that the Court of Appeal improperly re-examined the issues of
law and fact that had been finally resolved in the Final Award;

(b) Contrary to the Respondent’s submissions, the record confirms
that, having re-opened the underlying dispute, the Court of
Appeal and Court of Cassation prevented the Claimant from
presenting its case on the issues of law and fact that had been

- 39 -

finally resolved in the Final Award and that ultimately formed
the basis of their judgments;

(c) The Respondent ignores the critical impact of the Court of
Appeal’s Preliminary Decision of 16 January 2005 in defining
the procedural framework for the annulment proceeding;

(d) The Respondent glosses over the fundamental flaws in the logic
and reasoning of the Court of Appeal and Court of Cassation
judgments;

(e) If the Respondent is correct that the Court of Appeal and Court of
Cassation judgments were dictated by Jordanian “public order”
imperatives (which it is not), then the courts’ failure to say so
demonstrates a failure to accord basic due process rights to the
Claimant.

3. The Claimant’s Assertion that the Respondent has Mischaracterized the
Present Dispute

79. In addition, the Claimant, in its written and oral contentions, objects to the
Respondent’s attempt to re-open the underlying dispute having led to the Final Award.
This, according to the Claimant, belies a fundamental mischaracterization of the present

investment treaty dispute. In the words of the Claimant:

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial is replete with references to the underlying
contractual dispute between APC and the Claimant, together with the provisions
of the Contract between APC and the Claimant and the Jordanian Civil Code that
governed the underlying dispute. The Counter-Memorial is, in large part, based
on the flawed premise that APC should have prevailed in the commercial
arbitration of the underlying construction dispute between APC and the
Claimant, and that this should somehow dictate the outcome of the present ICSID
proceedings. Accordingly, the Respondent has devoted a considerable portion of
the Counter-Memorial and supporting evidence to addressing the underlying
construction dispute between APC and the Claimant, presenting its preferred
interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Jordanian Civil Code and
explaining why, in its view, the Arbitral Tribunal erred as a matter of Jordanian
law. Indeed, the Respondent’s Egyptian law expert, Dr. El Shalakany, expresses
surprise that the Claimant’s expert, Dr. Al’tarawneh, “has not offered any
analysis of the [Jordanian] Civil Code or the judgments of the Court of Appeal
and Court of Cassation on these questions”.

In focusing so heavily on the underlying construction dispute between APC and
the Claimant, the Respondent is essentially attempting to re-open that dispute

- 40 -

before the present Tribunal as a means of vindicating the violations of
international law that arise out of the Court of Appeal and Court of Cassation
judgments. Such an approach is misconceived. It is based on a fundamental
mischaracterisation of the present dispute as being an extension of the
construction dispute between APC and the Claimant. However, that underlying
construction dispute was finally resolved by way of a consensual arbitration
process pursuant to the Contract. The Arbitral Tribunal that heard that
construction dispute issued its Final Award on 30 September 2003 following a
detailed review of the exhaustive submissions and evidence that had been
presented to both sides. The Final Award dismissed APC’s unfounded claims in
their entirety and allowed part of the Claimant’s counterclaim.

 

More than two years after the Final Award, in manifest disregard of the
applicable provisions of the Jordanian Arbitration Law, the Final Award (and the
underlying agreement to arbitrate between the Claimant and APC) was annulled
by the Jordanian courts. It is a settled principle of public international law (and is
undisputed by the Respondent) that “the judiciary is an organ of the State and
that judicial action which violates a rule of international law is attributable to the
State.” The present proceedings have been brought by the Claimant against the
Respondent exclusively for the violation of the Respondent’s international law
obligations under the Turkey-Jordanian courts. Therefore, the proper starting
point for these proceedings is the Final Award itself, which was rendered
pursuant to the Contract and the applicable provisions of the Jordanian Civil
Code. The Tribunal must resist the Respondent’s transparent attempts to divert
the Tribunal’s attention away from the core issues of international law that lie at
the heart of this case.

Given the clear conceptual distinction between a private commercial arbitration
and an investment treaty arbitration, it is entirely appropriate that the Claimant
has focused its submissions in this proceeding on the Respondent’s failure to
comply with its international law obligations. Thus, for example, Dr.
Al’tarawneh’s focus on the Respondent’s serious violations of Jordanian
arbitration law, as opposed to the issues of Jordanian construction law that
determined the underlying dispute, it is entirely apposite. Indeed, the issues of
Jordanian arbitration law that are relevant to this treaty dispute are ones in
relation to which Dr. Al’tarawneh is uniquely qualified to opine.

80. The Claimant also takes issue with the Respondent’s reliance on “public order” as

a ground for annulment of the Final Award:

Faced with the shocking way in which the Court of Appeal “strayed far beyond
its mandate” in examining the substance of the dispute, the Respondent has
brazenly tried to turn a decision that was clearly based on Article 49(a)(4) of the
Jordanian Arbitration Law into one based on a violation of the “public order” of
Jordan under Article 49(b) of that law.

This post-facto attempt to re-classify the Court of Appeal’s decision as being

based on public policy under Article 49(b) is a transparent effort to divert this
Tribunal’s attention from the court’s serious violation of Article 49(a)(4) of the

-41-

Jordanian Arbitration Law, on which the court exclusively based its annulment
decision. It is a telling insight into the insecurity surrounding the Respondent’s
case. As noted by an English judge almost two hundred years ago, public policy
“is never argued at all, but when other points fail.”

Article 49(b) of the Jordanian Arbitration Law was not once mentioned in the
Court of Appeal Judgment. Further, the operative part of the Court of Appeal
Judgment, at pages 10-12, is notable for lack of any reference to public order. In
its conclusion, the Court of Appeal held:

“From all this, we find that the majority arbitration award
which is appealed based its award on article 789 of the Civil
Code which we find that it does not apply to the present
court action and that the majority of the arbitrators failed to
put in gear article 786 of this law which means that the
award appealed shelved the application of the agreed law on
the subject matter which constitute that these grounds for the
appealed award are valid in accordance with article 49/a-4 of
the prevailing Arbitration Law and require setting it aside.”

As the Court of Appeal did not itself even cite public order, let alone the
possibility of annulment on public order grounds under Article 49(b) of the

Jordanian Arbitration Law, it cannot possibly be considered to have based its
decision on public order grounds.

4. The Claimant’s Position regarding the Extinguishment of the Arbitration
Agreement

81. In connection with the last sentence of Article 51 of the 2001 Jordanian Law,
which mandates extinguishment of the arbitration agreement in the event of a final
decision on the part of the Jordanian courts nullifying an arbitral award, the Claimant
argues that this provision has resulted in a violation of both the MFN (Article II(2)) and
expropriation (Article III) provisions of the Turkey-Jordan BIT, in addition to being
unfair and inequitable contrary to the Treaty. In its Memorial on the Merits, the Claimant

argues:

[A]s an inevitable consequence of the annulment of the Final Award, the Court of
Appeal and the Court of Cassation extinguished ATA’s agreement to arbitrate
contained in its Contract with APC (under Article 51 of the Jordanian Arbitration
Law). ATA has thus been permanently denied recourse to the dispute resolution
mechanism agreed between the parties.

-42-

82. More particularly, the Claimant submits that:

The Respondent violated the Turkey-Jordan BIT when its courts annulled the
Final Award and extinguished ATA’s arbitration agreement. The fact that the
Respondent’s courts’ arbitrary extinguishment of the Claimant’s arbitration
agreement was mandated by the clear terms of Article 51 does not, of course,
preclude the wrongfulness of that extinguishment as a matter of international law.
On the contrary, the mandatory terms of Article 51 and its automatic application
to the Claimant’s arbitration agreement following annulment of the Final Award
highlight the manifest nature of the Respondent’s violation of its international
obligations.

The mere existence of legislation does not constitute a violation of a State’s
international obligations owed to a foreign investor. If a State passes legislation
entitling its judiciary or executive to expropriate property, the State does not
violate its international obligation not to expropriate an individual investor’s
property until the judiciary or executive actually effects an unlawful taking of
that investor’s property.

It was the application of Article 51 by the Jordanian courts, rather than its simple
enactment, that violated the Claimant’s rights under the Turkey-Jordan BIT and
gave rise to the claims that lie at the heart of the present dispute. Otherwise, the
mere enactment of Article 51 could ipso facto (and without, for example, any
taking) have violated all of Jordan’s bilateral investment treaties.

5. The Relief Sought by the Claimant
83. The Claimant’s statement of the relief it seeks in the present proceeding is
expressed as follows:
Accordingly, the Claimant requests that the Tribunal provide adequate and
effective relief, including:
(i) an award of compensation in the amount of the Final Award;

(ii) an award of compound interest on the unpaid amount of the
Final Award in accordance with the Final Award;

(iii) an award of compensation for all costs, expenses and other
losses incurred to date in connection with the Court of Appeal,
Court of Cassation and ongoing Jordanian court proceedings in
relation to Dike No. 19;

(iv) an order terminating the ongoing Jordanian court proceedings in
relation to Dike No. 19;

-43-

(v) an order that any Jordanian court judgment against ATA in
relation to Dike No. 19 shall have no international effect;

(vi) an order requiring Jordan to compensate ATA for any additional
future costs, expenses and other losses caused by the ongoing
Jordanian court proceedings in relation to Dike No. 19, including
indemnifying ATA in the full amount of any judgment rendered
against ATA;

(vii) an award of compound interest on (iii) and (vi); and

(viii) an order that the Respondent pay the costs of the present
proceedings, together with the Claimant’s legal costs and
expenses.

B. The Respondent’s Position
84. The Respondent, under reserve of its challenge to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction,

contests the merits of the Claimant’s claims. In brief, it argues:

[...] First, ATA’s Memorial fails to show, or even to address, why the Jordanian
courts’ controlling application of the governing Jordan Civil Code provisions is
erroneous, let alone rises to the standard of a violation of international law.
Nowhere in its submissions does ATA confront the plain language of the Civil
Code (in particular, Article 786), on which two Jordanian courts expressly relied,
which unmistakably renders ATA strictly liable for the collapse of Dike No. 19,
on the facts as found by the Jordanian arbitral tribunal. An examination of the
Jordan Civil Code and the broadly accepted principles of contractor strict liability
and “decennial liability,” as understood in the Arab Middle East and parts of
Europe, confirms that the courts’ judgments were correct. At the very least, these
judgments, which were issued pursuant to the Jordanian legal process to which
the parties had agreed, were not manifestly unfair or inequitable, much less an
unlawful “expropriation” under the Turkey-Jordan BIT.

 

Second, ATA likewise failed to demonstrate how the Jordanian courts have
misapplied the governing standards of the Jordan Arbitration Law, let alone done
so in a manner that rises to a violation of the Turkey-Jordan BIT. ATA has
presented no showing of inconsistent or discriminatory treatment of the
governing substantive standards by Jordanian courts. Further, the record
demonstrates that the Court of Appeal rested its annulment decision on a facially
sound applicable judgment by Jordan’s highest court that dates from 1985 — i.e,
13 years before ATA and APC signed the contract at issue and 21 years before
the Court of Appeal’s judgment in this case. On these facts, there has been no
rebuke of bly settled exp i ding what Jordanian law provides.

 

Third, the Court of Appeal’s judgment that the arbitral tribunal “excluded the
application” of the Jordan Civil Code “by ignoring the provisions therein
including those relating to public order” is manifestly defensible under the terms
of Jordan’s Arbitration Law and Civil Code. It is also consistent with prevailing

-44-

international norms in the Arab Middle East and with the 1994 Egyptian
Arbitration Law and 1985 UNCITRAL Model Law, on which the Jordanian law
is based. In this connection, Claimant’s Memorial notably ignores the “public
order” aspect of the Court of Appeal’s judgment and the express and legitimate
mandate of Jordan’s Arbitration Law that, irrespective of any other ground for
annulment, a competent court “shall, by its own initiative, nullify the award” if
the award, “in its content,” violates the “public order” of Jordan. Jordan
Arbitration Law, art. 49(b) (Exhibit C-10).

Fourth, ATA has not only failed to prove a substantive denial of justice; it has
also failed to prove a procedural denial of justice. The Jordanian Court of
Appeal did not, as Claimant contends, selectively consider evidence, allow the
submission of new evidence, or render inconsistent or contradictory procedural
rulings in the course of the annulment proceeding, and it did not rest its decision
to annul the arbitral award on new findings of fact or on internally inconsistent
reasoning. In contending otherwise, and in other notable respects, ATA has
taken liberties with the record.

 

Lastly, ATA has shown no lawful expropriation. Because the Jordanian courts
committed no denial of justice in annulling the arbitral award, ATA has not been
unlawfully deprived of any interest in the award, and ATA’s claim of
expropriation fails under the standards of Article III(1) of the Turkey-Jordan BIT.
[emphasis in original]

85. The Tribunal observes that the Respondent’s defense on the merits is largely
devoted to rebutting the Claimant’s allegation that it has suffered a denial of justice in the
circumstances, be it of a substantive or procedural nature. In this regard, the Respondent

submits:

[...][T]he governing standards for proving a “denial of justice,” while capable of
expression in many formulations, are universally recognized as exacting — and
more demanding than those applicable to FET claims generally. In the words of
various cases and commentators:

. the “modern consensus is clear to the effect that the factual
circumstances must be egregious if state responsibility is to arise
on the grounds of denial of “justice;”

. a challenged judgment must be “manifestly unjust and one-
sided;” it must be “arbitrary or discriminatory;”

. even if a judicial conclusion “appears to be demonstrably wrong
in substance,” that alone is not a denial of justice; “it must impel
the adjudicator to conclude that it could not have been reached
by an impartial judicial body worthy of that name;”

-45-

. there must be “palpable deviations” from the accepted standards
of judicial practice; “a wilful disregard of due process of law, an
act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of judicial
propriety;”

. justice must be administered “in a seriously inadequate way,” or
with “the clear and malicious misapplication of the law;” and

. a challenged judicial act must be “clearly improper and
discreditable.”

L.]

Accordingly, even if the judgments of the Jordanian courts were substantively
erroneous (and they were not), unless Claimant has established egregious acts or
omissions that violate the minimum standard of due process, so that the final
outcome of the Jordanian legal process in this case cannot be understood or
explained as the actions or product of an impartial judicial system, it cannot
prevail on its present claims. As we demonstrate below, Claimant has fallen
short of this mark, and its assault upon the integrity of the Jordanian legal system
is a groundless affront.

86. Regarding the allegation of a substantive denial of justice in particular, the

Respondent rejects the Claimant’s allegations as follows:

Claimant rests its argument entirely upon:

1 the legal opinion of a Jordanian lawyer and associate law professor, who
has considered the judgments of the Court of Appeal and Court of
Cassation in this case and opines that they seriously erred in their
analysis and application of the governing Jordanian Arbitration Law (see
AI tarawneh Opinion (Exhibit C-51)), and

2 the witness statement of Claimant’s own lawyer in the Jordanian
proceedings, who also expresses his astonishment and dismay at these
adverse Judgments (see Habeyeb Statement (Exhibit C-7)).

This is not evidence of a denial of justice, substantive or otherwise. It is
evidence, if at all, of strong (and, in the case of Mr. Habayeb, emotional)
disagreement and disappointment. Claimant and its counsel had a full and fair
opportunity to make all of their arguments about the proper scope and application
of Article 49 of the Jordan Arbitration Law before the Jordanian courts, and they
did so. After extensive proceedings, each of those courts disagreed with
Claimant’s position, in a unanimous and reasoned, written judgment. Claimant
and its counsel plainly disagree with those judgments, but to challenge them here
on grounds that the Jordanian courts misapplied Jordanian law is to treat this
Tribunal as precisely the sort of “appellate body” that Mondev, Azninian, ADF,
and Waste Management rightly found to be improper.

- 46 -

87. The Respondent alleges that, from a substantive point of view, the Jordanian
courts applied correctly long-standing law and principles of contractor “strict liability’.

In the words of the Respondent:

Both Judgments are substantively reasonable and amply supported by the Jordan
Civil Code, which Claimant expressly accepted as the substantive law of the
Contract. Claimant, its expert witness, and its underlying counsel may disagree
with these Judgments, but they cannot reasonably claim, and plainly have not
shown, a “clear and malicious misapplication of the law” (Azinian, {[ 103 (Exhibit
C-37)) or court judgments that shock the conscience and are “clearly improper
and discreditable” (Mondev, { 127 (Exhibit C-41)).

88. Moreover, the Respondent avers that the Claimant ignores Jordanian law and
misunderstands the scope of Article 49(a)(4) of the Jordanian Arbitration Law. The

Respondent submits:

At bottom, Claimant’s complaint is not that the Jordanian courts treated the
annulment action as a plenary appeal or de novo proceedings. Rather, Claimant
disagrees with the courts’ substantive determination of what qualifies as
“exclusion” of “the application of the law agreed upon by the parties to govern
the subject-matter of the dispute,” for purposes of Article 49(a)(4) of the Jordan
Arbitration Law. That question, however, is one of Jordanian law for the
Jordanian courts to decide. Claimant and its underlying counsel, Mr. Habayeb,
had a full and fair opportunity to make their submissions on this point to the
Jordanian courts. They did so, and both courts (eight judges) unanimously
rejected their position. There is no substantive legal question for this Tribunal
properly to decide in regard to this issue. By Claimant’s own admission, this
Tribunal is not a further court of appeal with supervisory authority over Jordan’s
highest court on issues of Jordanian law.

Insofar as Claimant’s expert, Dr. Al’tarawneh, has advanced a different
interpretation and application of Article 49(a)(4) than the Jordanian courts have
expressed, he is necessarily wrong as a matter of Jordanian law. The Court of
Cassation has addressed the matter and ruled otherwise. Its Judgment affirming
the Court of Appeal is definitive proof of the correct, substantive interpretation of
Article 49(a)(4) as a matter of Jordanian law. Expert opinion testimony to the
effect that the Jordanian courts have misunderstood Jordanian law is not relevant
or even properly admissible. See, e.g., Al’tarawneh Opinion, { 54 (“Both the
Courts of Appeal and Cassation have violated the text and spirit of Articles 48
and 49 of the Arbitration Law .... “) (Exhibit C-51).

The pertinent question is whether the Jordanian courts’ annulment of the Final

Award under Article 49(a)(4) violates minimum, international standards and
represents an actionable “denial of justice” under the MEN provision of Article

-47-

II(2) of the Turkey-Jordan BIT. Viewing Claimant’s arguments through this
lens, Claimant has established no such violation.

Claimant has identified two alleged substantive defects in the courts’ annulment
rulings that it contends should entitle it to relief.

First, Claimant contends that “in order for an arbitral award to be annullable
under Article 49(a)(4), it must be demonstrated that the arbitral tribunal applied a
different system of law to that agreed by the parties in their arbitration
agreement.” Cl. Mem., {[ 211 (emphasis added). In the opinion of Claimant’s
expert, “[t]his means that if the parties have chosen the Jordanian law to govern
their contract and the arbitral tribunal have disregarded this choice and applied
English law, then the court may annul the award.” AlI’tarawneh Opinion, {[ 59
(Exhibit C-51); see also id., { 39. As there is no question in this case that the
arbitral tribunal applied “anything other than Jordanian law in its Final Award,”
there is no basis, according to Claimant’s submission, for annulment under this
provision (and by implication, no internationally creditable annulment). Cl.
Mem., { 211.

 

Second, Claimant contends that, having found the arbitral proceedings to have
been “procedurally proper,” the Court of Appeal was legally obligated to look no
further and to reject the annulment challenge. Jd. {| 217. As stated by
Claimant’s expert, “[a]n annulment action is different from an appeal in the sense
that the Court should look only at the procedural legality of the arbitral award
and not at its substance (the route through which the arbitral award was issued
including the arbitration agreement). ... Re-examining the substance simply
undermines the whole raison d’etre of arbitration in Jordan” Al’tarawneh
Opinion, {[ 61 (emphasis added) (Exhibit C-51).

 

Neither proposition withstands scrutiny or represents an established, international
norm. [emphasis in original]

89. It is the Respondent’s contention that, in the present circumstances, the scope of
judicial review in an annulment action against an arbitral award is not limited to issues of
“procedural legality” because Jordan takes a “broader view of the permissible grounds for

annulment”. The Respondent explains:

As other legal scholars have noted, the Egyptian arbitration tradition that Jordan
has espoused takes a somewhat broader view of the permissible grounds for an
annulment than some other legal traditions. Hence, at some level, “exclusion”
can be said to include “‘error in application and interpretation of the law, ... as
such errors would be a form of exclusion of the applicable law,’” and embraces
“the erroneous implementation [of law] to the extent of distortion.” Id., {| 94-95
(quoting El Sawy and Al-Dsougqi).

- 48 -

Claimant’s position that “exclusion” may only be invoked as a basis for
annulment where an award purported to apply a national body of law other than
that agreed by the parties is “extreme and untenable,” from an Egyptian or
Jordanian perspective:

On this approach, a tribunal may declare that it will apply
Jordanian law, and then proceed to decide a dispute without any
reference to Jordanian law. Or it may apply provisions that do
not form part of Jordanian law; or grossly misread provisions of
Jordanian law by omitting text or failing to notice a word or
phrase or a complete chapter. ... The line is, by definition, a
matter of judgment; but it is precisely the mandate of the
reviewing courts to decide where they will draw the line. [/d., |
103.]

 

In performing this “line-drawing” exercise, it is entirely appropriate, from an
international perspective, for the Jordanian courts to have concluded that an
arbitral award that ignored the plain language of a mandatory provision (Article
786 of the Civil Code) and that contravened 50 years of fundamental and
established doctrine (decennial strict liability) - effectively “excluded” the
applicable law and could not stand.

By contrast, Claimant’s view of where the line should be drawn has no
demonstrable stature as a minimum or exclusive international standard, let alone
as an accurate pronouncement of Jordanian law.

90. The Respondent also refers to Article 49(b) of the Jordanian Arbitration Law and
argues that annulment was warranted in the circumstances on the basis of “public policy”

concerns:

As detailed above, the doctrine of contractor “strict liability” codified in Articles
786 and 788 of the Jordan Civil Code is a mandatory, non-waivable principle of
Jordanian law that represents an overriding public policy and that “falls well
within the scope of Jordanian ordre public.” El Shalakany Report, {| 28; see id.,
at { 111. The arbitral tribunal was obligated to recognize and give effect to this
important public policy, and its failure to do so warranted, and was an express
basis for, the courts’ annulment rulings.

While the Court of Appeal did not expressly cite Article 49(b) in its Judgment,
APC cited and relied upon this provision in its submissions to the Court, and the
Court expressly credited and accepted this aspect of APC’s challenge. As the
Court’s Judgment explains, APC argued that the majority award, “in spite of
touching on the Jordan Civil Code has excluded the application of this law by
ignoring the provisions therein including those relating to public order by
misapplying, ignoring and grossly misrepresenting these provisions which led to
its distortion.” Court of Appeal Judgment, at 10 (emphasis added) (Exhibit R-2).
The Court agreed with APC. It “decide[d] ... to accept” APC’s second, third and

-49-

eighth grounds for annulment. /d., at 12. As summarized by the Court, APC’s
second and third grounds for annulment were as follows:

2. The Contract and the Arbitration Agreement have
stipulated that Jordanian Law is the applicable law in
relation to the Contract, the Arbitration proceedings and
the Award. However, the Majority Award, reciting
articles of the Jordanian Civil Code, nevertheless failed
to apply the provisions of said law by ignoring its
provisions, including those relating to Public Order.

3. Article 786-790 of the Jordanian Civil Code are
mandatory provisions, and accordingly, they are to be
regarded as tantamount to rules of Public Order. The
Majority Award has; [sic] clearly violated these Articles,
distorted them and ruled them out, which means that the
said Award is in breach of Public Order. [Id., at 1
(emphasis added).]

By the plain terms of Article 49(b), the Court of Appeal was thus duty-bound,
“by its own initiative, [to] nullify the award” because the Final Award “‘in its
content violat[ed] public order in the Kingdom.” Jordan Arbitration Law, art.
49(b) (Exhibit C-10). The Court of Cassation was duty-bound to affirm the
annulment on the same ground. [emphasis in original]

91. As for the Claimant’s allegation of procedural denial of justice, the Respondent

refutes it in the following words:

Claimant also contends that it has suffered a procedural “denial of justice”
because “[t]he Court of Appeal arbitrarily re-opened consideration of the
underlying facts and merits of the dispute between the Claimant and APC and
subsequently proceeded to reverse the Arbitral Tribunal’s Final Award.” Cl.
Mem., {| 196. Even worse, Claimant argues, the Court acted in an arbitrary and
inconsistent manner, by first (correctly) barring the submission of evidence but
then selectively and improperly considering evidence. Jd., {{[ 196-200. In a
further effort to bolster this argument, Claimant’s Memorial briefly cast
aspersions upon APC’s former chairman and also purports to find evidence of a
relevant and material irregularity in APC’s Annual Reports. See id., {{{[ 65, 68.

These contentions are uniformly without basis, and in advancing them, Claimant
has taken some liberties with the record. As detailed below:

1 the Court of Appeal did not base its Judgments on new findings
of fact;

2 the Court of Appeal committed no gross, procedural irregularity;

3 the Court of Appeal engaged in no arbitrary, inconsistent
reasoning;

4 Mr. Habayeb’s hearsay has no proper place in this proceeding;
and

-50-

5 Claimant has simply misread APC’s Annual Reports.
92. In connection with the Claimant’s expropriation claim, the Respondent dismisses

it as follows:

Claimant has based its expropriation claim on the same facts and circumstances
that underlie its FET and “denial of justice” arguments. If, as shown above, the
conduct of the Jordanian courts has effected no substantive or procedural denial
of justice, then that same conduct cannot have effected an unlawful
expropriation. That is, if it was lawful under minimum standards of international
law for the Jordanian courts to have annulled the Final Award as they did, then
the Claimant cannot have been unlawfully deprived of the property interest in the
award. [emphasis in original]

93. Finally, regarding the last sentence of Article 51 of the 2001 Jordanian Law,
which as noted earlier mandates extinguishment of the arbitration agreement in the event
of a final decision on the part of the Jordanian courts nullifying an arbitral award, the

Respondent adopts the following position:

Claimant has not properly presented or pleaded an argument that Article 51 of
the Jordanian Arbitration Law, standing alone, violates the Jordan-Turkey BIT.
Claimant likewise has not properly presented or pleaded an argument that the
ATA-APC arbitration agreement, standing alone, constitutes an “investment” in
Jordan, such that its extinguishment, without more, is a violation of the BIT.
Arguments to this effect now are both waived and untimely. Further, Claimant
expressly disavowed these arguments, and when it raised the former for the first
time in its closing submissions, it neither articulated a consistent position on the
question nor presented a clear or coherent statement of the legal standards upon
which this argument might be based. Even now, Respondent is not clear
precisely what legal theory or body of investment-treaty law Claimant may seek
to rely upon for this argument. See Response to Questions Nos. 2(A)-(G), infra.

Claimant has also waived, and is estopped from asserting, that the
extinguishment provision in Article 51 has effected a violation of the Turkey-
Jordan BIT. During the annulment proceedings, Claimant itself expressly relied
upon the 2001 Jordanian Arbitration Law and argued, over APC’s objection, that
this law — and Article 51 in particular —- should be applied in this dispute.
Claimant cannot both rely upon the current law, when it considers the statute
helpful to its position, and then renounce its applicability as an alleged violation
of international law, when that course seems more helpful. See Response to
Questions Nos. 2(E)-(G), infra.

Further, Claimant has affirmatively declined an offer from APC to submit the
ongoing Dike No. 19 dispute to a second commercial arbitration, in lieu of

-51-

proceeding in the Jordanian courts. Having been given, and refused, an
opportunity to proceed with a second arbitration, Claimant cannot reasonably be
heard to object to the statutory extinguishment of the ATA-APC arbitration
agreement, either on its face or as applied. Claimant can claim no injury from
the extinguishment: it was given the option of a new arbitration, under the same
terms as those set forth in the Contract, and it opted to leave the dispute in the
Jordanian courts.

Claimant’s refusal of APC’s offer of a second commercial arbitration reinforces
that the gravamen of Claimant’s case is not the extinguishment but Claimant’s
contention that the annulment itself is invalid. If Claimant does not succeed on
that core merits issue, then the Jordanian courts annulment judgments will
effectively be preclusive of Claimant’s liability to APC, whether the matter
proceeds before a new arbitral tribunal or before the Jordanian courts. See
Response to Questions Nos. 4-5, infra.

In all events, Claimant has failed to prove that the final sentence of Article 51 of
the Jordanian Arbitration Law violates the Turkey-Jordan BIT, either on its face
or as applied in this case, and the provision does not run afoul of applicable
international norms. For example, the provision and its operation in this case are
consistent with Article II(3) of the New York Convention, and Claimant has not
shown otherwise. See Response to Questions Nos. 2(B)-(D) & 3, infra.

VI. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

A. The Tribunal’s Findings on Jurisdiction
94. As noted earlier in the present Award, the Jordanian Court of Cassation rendered
a decision on 16 January 2007 confirming the annulment of the Final Award and

extinguishing the Arbitration Agreement in the Contract between the Claimant and APC.

95. The Tribunal, for the reasons set forth below, has found that the dispute giving
rise to the Claimant’s claims in this proceeding which crystallized when the Jordanian
Court of Cassation rendered its decision on 16 January 2007, confirming the annulment
of the Final Award, is legally equivalent to the contractual dispute which was initiated on
6 September 2000 when the arbitration was commenced. Since the Turkey-Jordan BIT

entered into application on 23 January 2006, the Tribunal, as will be seen, has concluded

-52-

that all claims of the Claimant in connection with the annulment of the Final Award per
se as well as its claims of denial of justice are inadmissible for lack of jurisdiction
rationae temporis. However, the Tribunal has concluded that it does have jurisdiction
rationae temporis over the Claimant’s claim resulting from the decision of the Jordanian
Court of Cassation declaring extinguished the Arbitration Agreement in the Contract

between the Claimant and APC.

96. Before turning to the analysis having led to this conclusion, the Tribunal wishes to
emphasize that an investment is not a single right but is, like property, correctly
conceived of as a bundle of rights, some of which are inseparable from others and some
of which are comparatively free-standing. This is why it is not unusual for “measures”
with respect to the same investment to give rise to claims of different violations of a BIT
and different defenses on the part of the respondent State, and likewise for tribunals to

find that there were violations on some measures and not on others.

97. For example, a claimant may be barred from bringing one alleged violation
because of estoppel or from bringing another because of waiver; yet, the same claimant
may still bring other claims. By the same token, claims of different violations of an
investment may be subject to different jurisdictional objections. For that reason, in the
instant case, the Tribunal is of the view that different types of claims require different
jurisdictional analyses ratione temporis: conventional BIT claims, denial of justice claims

and extinguishment of arbitral clause claims.

98. As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that a general principle of legality

instructs interpreters to apply innovative legislation prospectively, unless the legislation

-53-

clearly indicates that its creators intended to apply it retroactively and, even then, only if
such application would not offend some fundamental and peremptory principle of justice.
In the present circumstances, Article IX(1) of the BIT expressly makes the BIT
retroactive with respect to “investments existing at the time of entry into force [...]”. The
provision does not make the BIT retroactive with respect to disputes existing prior to the
entry into force of the BIT. Under the plain meaning of Article IX(1), the Tribunal may
only exercise jurisdiction ratione temporis over the Claimant’s claims if it finds that the

dispute arose after the entry into force of the Treaty on 23 January 2006.

99. Turning to the definition of the term “dispute” in international law, the Tribunal

recalls that it is concisely expressed in Lucchetti’ as follows:

[A]s a legal concept, the term dispute has an accepted meaning. It has been
authoritatively defined as a “a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict
of legal views or of interests between two persons,” or as a “situation in which
two sides hold clearly opposite views concerning the question of the performance
or non-performance” of a legal obligation. In short, a dispute can be held to exist
when the parties assert clearly conflicting legal or factual claims bearing on their
respective rights or obligations or that “the claim of one party is positively
opposed by the other.”*
100. There is no disagreement between the parties in the present case that each gave
notice of an intent to commence arbitration on 6 September 2000. In terms of the
Lucchetti standard, a dispute was initiated on that date and, at least in the submission of

the Claimant, it was a dispute between itself and Jordan.

101. The parties disagree, however, as to whether the dispute which gave rise to the

FIDIC arbitration proceedings was the same dispute which concluded in an annulment of

? Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. et al. v. Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Award (7 February 2005).

5 [bid. at paragraph 48.

-54-

the Final Award and, as a corollary, the extinguishment of the Arbitration Agreement
under the Contract by the Jordanian Court of Cassation. The Claimant argues that the
decision of the Court of Cassation “crystallized” the contractual dispute into a new claim.
For its part, Jordan maintains that the earlier dispute manifests the same subject-matter as

the dispute commenced in front of the Jordanian courts.

102. As Zeno demonstrated in his famous paradox, the ability of logicians to analyze
and break things into smaller components is infinite. But juridical analysis must be
conducted in ways consistent with the purposes of the rules in question, with the aim of
elucidating their animating policy and, of course, with respect for the manifest meaning
of the rule being analyzed. Lucchetti is, again, instructive here. Where an analysis
purports to identify two distinct disputes and the “second” dispute is comprised of the
same subject-matter and has the same origin or source (in this case the collapse of Dike
No. 19) as the first dispute, Lucchertti concluded that the disputes are legally equivalent.*

This Tribunal finds the Lucchetti holding persuasive.

103. In consequence, it seems to the Tribunal that the dispute over the annulment of
the Final Award per se (as opposed to the extinguishment of the Arbitration Agreement)
is really indistinguishable from the original dispute and, hence, like its progenitor, arose
prior to the entry into force of the Turkey-Jordan BIT; as a consequence, all claims in
connection with the annulment of the Final Award per se are inadmissible because of a

lack of jurisdiction ratione temporis.

4 Ibid. at paragraph 53.

-55-

104. The dispute over the Final Award first commenced in October 2003 when APC
filed an action in the Jordanian courts for annulment under Article 49 of the Jordanian
Civil Code. It was at this point that the parties first expressed disagreement over the
validity of the Final Award. Unless it falls prey to Zeno’s paradox, the Tribunal must
view the proceedings that followed as a continuation over this initial difference of legal

opinion regarding the issue of annulment.

105. But the Claimant also makes a distinct denial of justice claim which, it contends,
is subject to a different clock for purposes of jurisdiction ratione temporis. It argues that
there can be no denial of justice claim before the exhaustion of local remedies. Reference

is made in this regard to Loewen’:

The purpose of the requirement that a decision of a lower court be challenged
through the judicial process before the State is responsible for a breach of
international law constituted by judicial decision is to afford the State the
opportunity of redressing through its legal system the inchoate breach of
international law occasioned by the lower court decision.®

106. Hence, the Claimant submits that there is no lack of jurisdiction ratione temporis

with respect to its claim of denial of justice.

107. This contention, in the Tribunal’s view, raises two separate questions, each of
which relates to a different issue: the first question is when does a denial of justice occur
and the second question is with respect to what does it occur? As to the first question, a
denial of justice occasioned by judicial action occurs when the final judicial instance,

which is plausibly available, has rendered its decision. The determination of this moment

5 Loewen Group, Inc. et al. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3 (NAFTA), Award dated 26
June 2003.

© Ibid. at paragraph 156. See also generally Jan Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law (Cambridge
University Press, 2005).

- 56-

in time is important for determining whether the putative claimant has exhausted
domestic remedies, which is a precondition in general international law for bringing a
claim at the international level; despite the fact that exhaustion is not required by BITs,
the principle seems now to have been carried over specifically for denial of justice
claims. But in BIT claims in which an objection to jurisdiction ratione temporis is
lodged, the determination of this particular moment in time is irrelevant to the second
question, for the second question in this aspect of a BIT litigation is not when have
domestic remedies been exhausted, but with respect to which dispute has the denial of

justice taken place.

108. In this case, the Claimant attempts to present a denial of justice as an independent
violation of the BIT and to invite the Tribunal to treat it as if it were unconnected to the
dispute in order to shift the moment of its occurrence forward and to locate it in time
after the entry into force of a BIT. But the attempt must fail if, as in this case, the
occurrence is part of a dispute which originated before the entry into force of the BIT.
For this reason, the Tribunal has concluded that the claim of denial of justice is also

inadmissible for lack of jurisdiction ratione temporis.

109. The Mondev’ tribunal refused to find jurisdiction ratione temporis where the
entirety of the events in dispute occurred prior to the entry into force of the treaty at issue
in that case and all that was left was the final decision of the Massachusetts Courts. In

that case, the claimant had argued that a claim for denial of justice could not be

7 Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2 (NAFTA), Award dated 11
October 2002.

-57-

“perfected” until the exhaustion of local remedies and that local remedies were not

exhausted until after the entry into force of NAFTA. The Mondey tribunal responded:

Thus events or conduct prior to the entry into force of an obligation for the
respondent State may be relevant in determining whether the State has
subsequently committed a breach of the obligation. But it must still be possible
to point to conduct of the State after that date which is itself a breach. In the
present case the only conduct which could possibly constitute a breach of any
provision of Chapter 11 is that comprised by the decisions of the SJC and the
Supreme Court of the United States, which between them put an end to LPA’s
claims under Massachusetts law. Unless those decisions were themselves
inconsistent with applicable provisions of Chapter 11, the fact that they related to
pre-1994 conduct which might arguably have violated obligations under NAFTA
(had NAFTA been in force at the time) cannot assist Mondev. The mere fact that
earlier conduct has gone unremedied or unredressed when a treaty enters into
force does not justify a tribunal applying the treaty retrospectively to that
conduct. Any other approach would subvert both the intertemporal principle in
the law of treaties and the basic distinction between breach and reparation which
underlies the law of State responsibility.*

 

110. Even if the Tribunal were to assume, arguendo, that the alleged denial of justice
represented a discrete claim, unconnected to the dispute which is the gravamen of the
Claimant’s case on this point, and thus may be conceived as occurring after the entry into
force of the BIT, does an international commercial arbitral award constitute an
investment that could be, as it were, expropriated by an otherwise lawful annulment by a

national court?

111. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention does not provide a definition of investment
and, instead, simply states that “[t]he jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal
dispute arising directly out of an investment”. The ICSID Convention leaves the
definition of the term investment open to the parties, allowing them to determine its

scope and application pursuant to mutual agreement in the relevant BIT.

8 Tbid. at paragraph 70.

- 58 -

112. Article 1(2)(a) of the Turkey-Jordan BIT provides that a “claim to money” or a
“right to financial performance” is a discrete “investment,” separate from the investment
in the dispute which gave rise to it. The parties disagree, however, as to whether an
arbitral award in itself qualifies as a claim to money falling within the definition of
“investment” or if the underlying investment must still exist in order for the claim to be

asserted.

113. The Claimant cites Saipem v. Bangladesh’ for support of its position that an
arbitral award in itself falls within the definition of “investment” under the BIT. In fact,
the Saipem tribunal explicitly refrained from deciding whether an award comprised an

investment:

[T]he rights embodied in the ICC Award were not created by the Award, but
arise out of the Contract. The ICC Award crystallized the parties’ rights and
obligations under the original contract. It can thus be left open whether the
Award itself qualifies as an investment, since the contract rights which are
crystallized by the Award constitute an investment within Article 1(1)(c) of the
BIT.

114. While resisting making a decision as to whether the arbitral award itself was an
investment, the Saipem tribunal considered that the “entire operation” including the

underlying “Contract, the construction itself, the Retention Money, the warranty and the

related ICC Arbitration” was an investment under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention."'

° Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/O05/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and
Recommendation on Provisional Measures dated 21 March 2007.

!° Thid. at paragraph 127.
"! Thid. at paragraph 110.

- 59 -

115. Now, measured by the standards in Saipem, the Final Award at issue in the
present arbitration would be part of an “entire operation” that qualifies as an investment.
Since the first legal confrontation between the parties over the Final Award occurred
prior to the entry into force of the Turkey-Jordan BIT, as previously concluded, the
Tribunal cannot claim jurisdiction ratione temporis over any issue concerning the

annulment of the Final Award.

116. There remains, however, a third claim lodged by the Claimant. It relates to the
effects of the statutory extinguishment of the Claimant’s right to arbitration. The
Arbitration Agreement under the Contract served as the basis for the Final Award in the
dispute between the Claimant and APC. Upon the annulment of the Final Award by the
Jordanian Court of Cassation, the Claimant was entitled to initiate another arbitration
under the Jordanian Law which existed at the time of the conclusion of the Contract in
1998 and under international law, i.e. the then Jordanian law and the New York
Convention to which both Jordan and Turkey were party at all relevant times. But in
2001, the Jordanian Arbitration Law (Law No. 31 of 2001) came into effect, including
Article 51, last sentence, which provides for the extinguishment of the right to arbitration
if an arbitral award is annulled. That sentence unequivocally provides as follows: “The

final decision nullifying the award results in extinguishing the arbitration agreement.”

117. At this juncture, the Tribunal observes that the right to arbitration is a distinct
“investment” within the meaning of the BIT because Article I(2)(a)(ii) defines an
investment inter alia as “claims to [...] any other rights to legitimate performance having
financial value related to an investment”. The right to arbitration could hardly be

considered as something other than a “right [...] to legitimate performance having

- 60 -

financial value related to an investment”. This particular right was not annulled with the
enactment of the new Jordanian Arbitration Law (which took place before the entry into

force of the BIT) but upon the decision of the Jordanian Court of Cassation.

118. The Court of Cassation could have exempted the Claimant from the operation of
this new law. As a result, this part of the decision of the Court of Cassation, occurring, as
it does, after the entry into force of the BIT and distinct from the underlying investment,
is not barred ratione temporis and falls within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction because the
right to arbitrate was never in contention until the annulment whereupon the Court of
Cassation extinguished that right. Prior to the annulment, the Arbitration Agreement was
honored, and the arbitration between APC and the Claimant proceeded according to
contract. It was only with the extinguishment of the Arbitration Agreement through
Article 51 of the Jordanian Arbitration Law that the parties realized a legal dispute over

the continuing right to arbitrate in connection with the underlying investment.

119. In contemplating the autonomy of the arbitration clause, and its status as an

investment, Judge Schwebel observed:

[If one party could deny arbitration to the other party by the allegation that the
agreement lacked initial or continuing validity, if by such an allegation it could
deprive an arbitral tribunal of the competence to rule upon that allegation, upon
its constitution and jurisdiction and upon the merits of the dispute, then it would
always be open to a party to an agreement containing an arbitration clause to
vitiate its arbitral obligation by the simple expedient of declaring the agreement
void.”

" Stephen Schwebel, International Arbitration: Three Salient Problems (Cambridge Grotius Publications Limited,
1987) at page 4.

-61-

120. But this is exactly what happened here by operation of the new Jordanian
Arbitration Law and the decision of the Court of Cassation. Given that the right to
arbitration is considered a distinct investment, it follows that the decision of the Jordanian
Court of Cassation extinguishing the Arbitration Agreement between the Claimant and
APC, occurring as it did after the entry into force of the BIT, is not barred from the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis and the Tribunal so finds. The Respondent’s
jurisdictional objection is thus dismissed insofar as this specific claim of the Claimant is

concerned.

B. The Tribunal’s Findings on the Merits
121. For the reasons set forth below, the Tribunal finds that the extinguishment of the
Claimant’s right to arbitration by application of the last sentence of the 2001 Jordanian
Arbitration Law was contrary to the Turkey-Jordan BIT. The Tribunal’s notes that the
very first BIT adjudicated under the auspices of ICSID, in AAPLSSri-Lanka"’, the arbitral

tribunal stated:

[...] [T]he Bilateral Investment Treaty is not a self-contained closed legal system
limited to provide for substantive material rules of direct applicability, but it has
to be envisaged within a wider juridical context in which rules from other sources
are integrated through implied incorporation methods or by direct reference to
certain supplementary rules, whether of international law character or of
domestic law nature.”'

122. In this regard, the Tribunal recalls the general rule according to which a State
cannot invoke its internal laws to evade obligations imposed by a given treaty or

generally by public international law. As emphasized in the unanimous award rendered

'S Asian Agricultural Products Ltd.. (AAPL) v. Sri Lanka, 1CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award and Dissenting Opinion
dated 21 June 1990 and 15 June 1990, respectively.

4 Ibid. at paragraph 21.

-62-

in the Desert Line Co. v. Yemen® case, State authorities are estopped from undertaking
any act that contradicts what they previously accepted as obligations incumbent upon

them in a given context.

123. From the outset, the parties focussed on the conduct of the Jordanian courts in
adjudicating the grounds for annulment of the Final Award. Their actions could hardly
be said to have constituted abusive misconduct, bad faith or a denial of justice.
Notwithstanding its finding of a lack of temporal jurisdiction, the Tribunal would note
that it was unconvinced that, even if there had been jurisdiction, a claim of denial of

justice, whether substantive or procedural, could have been sustained.

124. But that is not the only issue at bar. After the annulment by the Jordanian courts,
ATA should have been able to invoke the Arbitration Agreement in the Contract;
Jordanian courts, in accordance with Article II of the New York Convention, should then
have respected ATA’s right and refrained from exercising their own jurisdiction on the
substance of the dispute. In the Tribunal’s view, the relevant issue on which to focus
relates to the extinguishment by operation of Jordanian law of the Arbitration Agreement
upon the annulment of the Final Award. This legal consequence was dictated by the
second sentence of Article 51 of the 2001 Jordanian Arbitration Law. This operation of
Jordanian law opened the door to the adjudication of the parties’ dispute before the
Jordanian State courts, depriving the Claimant of its legitimate reliance on the Arbitration

Agreement in the Contract of 2 May 1998.

'S Desert Line Projects LLC v. The Republic of Yemen, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award dated 6 February 2008.

- 63 -

125. The right to arbitration was an integral part of the Contract and, as noted earlier in
this Award, constituted an “asset” under the Treaty. In the words of the Preamble to the
Treaty, Jordan and Turkey agreed “that fair and equitable treatment of investment is
desirable in order to maintain a stable framework for investment and maximum effective
utilization of economic resources.” The extinguishment of the Claimant’s right to
arbitration by the Jordanian courts thus violated both the letter and the spirit of the

Turkey-Jordan BIT."

126. The retroactive effect of the Jordanian Arbitration Law, which extinguished a
valid right to arbitration deprived an investor such as the Claimant of a valuable asset in
violation of the Treaty’s investment protections. The parties are in agreement that when
the Contract at issue was concluded in 1998, APC was under Jordanian governmental
control and remained so throughout the period leading to the Final Award. It follows that
in concluding the Arbitration Agreement, the parties agreed and expected to preclude the
submission of potential disputes under the Contract to the Jordanian State courts, where
Jordan would have been both litigant and judge. Thus, it was vital to provide for

arbitration as the neutral mechanism for the settlement of disputes.

127. After October 2003, Jordan no longer held a majority interest in APC. Yet, even
after having sold half of its shareholding in APC, the Government of Jordan continued to
exercise a preponderant role in the conduct of APC’s activities. Nothing is more telling

in this regard than the offer extended by Jordan to (but refused by) the Claimant after the

'© The Tribunal notes also that, by virtue of Article II(2) of the Treaty (the “MFN” clause), the Respondent has assumed
the obligation to accord to the Claimant’s investment fair and equitable treatment (see the UK-Jordan BIT) and
treatment no less favourable than that required by international law (see the Spain-Jordan BIT).

-64-

evidentiary phase of this proceeding to submit the ongoing Dike No. 19 dispute to a new
commercial arbitration in liew of proceeding in the Jordanian courts.'’ In so doing,
Jordan effectively demonstrated that it could decide on behalf of APC to bring an end to
the judicial proceedings currently pending before the Jordanian State courts, which APC
initiated following the extinguishment ipso jure of the Arbitration Agreement. The
extinguishment rule prescribed in the last sentence of Article 51 of the Jordanian
Arbitration Law of 2001 operates in all cases of annulment of an arbitral award by a

Jordanian court.

128. By virtue of Article II of the New York Convention, Jordan’s State courts are
required to “recognize an agreement in writing under which the parties undertake to
submit to arbitration”, and in such circumstances to “refer the parties to arbitration,
unless it finds that the said agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being
performed”. There has never been any allegation in this case by either party that the
Arbitration Agreement at issue was per se “null and void, inoperative or incapable of
being performed”. It is arguable (but the Tribunal takes no position on the point) that the
extinguishment rule might be deemed to be prospectively compatible with Article II
insofar as parties electing Jordan as the venue for an arbitration or electing Jordanian law
as the law of the arbitration had notice of the rule and accepted it. But this argument
cannot work retroactively. Retroactivity is the problem here. The new rule should cover
only those arbitration agreements concluded after the coming into force of the Jordanian
Arbitration Law in 2001 and not arbitration agreements existing before the 2001 Law

came into force, such as the Arbitration Agreement at issue in this proceeding. In the
"7 See supra at paragraphs 55 and 56.

- 65 -

Tribunal’s view, the Jordanian Court of Appeal and Court of Cassation could have
complied with their duty in this case by refusing to apply retroactively the new rule

introduced in the last sentence of Article 51 of the Jordanian Arbitration Law.

129. Having found that the extinguishment of the Claimant’s right to arbitration was
unlawful, the Tribunal now turns to the question of adequate and effective relief in
reparation of the unlawful act committed by Jordan in the circumstances. The Tribunal
recalls that under Chorzow, a remedy should repair all the consequences of the unlawful

act:

[A] principle which seems to be established by international practice and in
particular by the decisions of arbitral tribunals — is that reparation must, as far
as possible, wipe-out all the consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the
situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that acted had not been
committed. Restitution in kind, or, if this is not possible, payment of a sum
corresponding to the value which a restitution in kind would bear; the award, if
need be, of damages for loss sustained which would not be covered by
restitution in kind or payment in place of it - such are the principles which
should serve to determine the amount of compensation due for an act contrary
to international law.'*

130. The Tribunal finds particularly apposite the statement of Christoph Schreuer

which it adopts that:

There is no doubt that an obligation imposed by an award that is expressed not

in monetary terms but in terms of an obligation to perform a particular act or to

refrain from a certain course of action is equally binding and gives rise to the

effect of res judicata.”
131. In the instant case, in the view of the Tribunal, the single remedy which can
implement the Chorzow standard is a restoration of the Claimant’s right to arbitration. In
this regard, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent has already indicated its willingness to

'S The Factory at Chorzow Case, 1928 P.C.L.J. No. 13.
° Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge University Press, 2009) at pages 1136-1138.

- 66 -

accept such an order by offering, as noted earlier, to submit the ongoing Dike No. 19
dispute to a new commercial arbitration in lieu of proceeding in the Jordanian courts.

That offer is tantamount to offering the restoration of the Claimant’s right to arbitration.

132. Therefore, based on its finding that the extinguishment of the Arbitration
Agreement in application of the last sentence of Article 51 of the 2001 Jordanian
Arbitration Law constitutes a breach of Jordan’s international obligations under the
Turkey-Jordan BIT, the Tribunal orders that (i) the ongoing Jordanian court proceedings
in relation to the Dike No. 19 dispute be immediately and unconditionally terminated,
with no possibility to conduct further judicial proceedings in Jordan or elsewhere on the
substance of the dispute, and (ii) the Claimant is entitled to proceed to arbitration in
relation to the Dike No. 19 dispute in accordance with the terms of the Arbitration

Agreement set forth in the Contract of 2 May 1998.

VII. AWARD

133. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal decides:

1. To declare the Claimant’s claims regarding the annulment of the Final

Award inadmissible for lack of jurisdiction ratione temporis.

2. To declare the Claimant’s claim regarding the extinguishment of the

Arbitration Agreement admissible ratione temporis.

3. To declare that the extinguishment of the Arbitration Agreement in the

Contract of 2 May 1998 between the Claimant and APC by the Jordanian

-67-

Court of Cassation of 16 January 2007 constitutes a breach of the

Respondent’s obligations under the Turkey-Jordan BIT.

To order that the ongoing Jordanian court proceedings in relation to the
Dike No. 19 dispute be immediately and unconditionally terminated, with
no possibility to engage further judicial proceedings in Jordan or

elsewhere on the substance of the dispute.

To order that the Claimant is entitled to proceed to arbitration in relation
to the Dike No. 19 dispute in accordance with the terms of the Arbitration

Agreement set forth in the Contract of 2 May 1998.

To order that the payment of the fees and expenses of the members of the
Tribunal and of the administrative fees for the use of the Centre shall be
paid in equal share by the Claimant and the Respondent who shall each

bear their own legal costs.

- 68 -

[signed] [signed]

Professor Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri Professor W. Michael Reisman

Date: [May 9, 2010] Date: [May 5, 2010]

[signed]

Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.

President

Date: [May 12, 2010]

- 69 -

