 

UNCITRAL Ad Hoc Arbitration

between

Claimant

The Slovak Republic

Respondent

 

FINAL AWARD

 

3 October 2009

Place of arbitration: Paris

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

UL

RELEVANT FACTS REGARDING JURISDICTION

Parties

a. Claimant

b. Respondent

c. Arbitral Tribunal

d. Secretary to the Tribunal

Background facts

a. Treaty

b. Origin of the present dispute
c. Contract

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Initial phase

Written phase on jurisdiction
Hearing on jurisdiction

Post-hearing submissions

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
Respondent's objections to jurisdiction

Claimant's responses

ANALYSIS

Preliminary issues

a. Applicable laws

b. Uncontroversial matters

c. Relevance of previous awards and decisions of other tribunals

Objections to jurisdiction
a. Scope of Article 8 of the Treaty: Expropriation or only Compensation?
i Respondent's position
ji. | Claimant's position
iti, Analysis
b. Scope of Article 3 of the Treaty: MFN clause
i. Respondent's position

Q

aor~NN NA

 

V.

ii. Claimant's position
iii. Analysis

Cc. Costs

DECISION

29
30

38

40

Answer

Arbitration Rules

Austria

Counter-Memorial
EU
Exh. C
Exh. CL
CWS-1
CWS-2
Exh. R
Exh. RL
icc

ICy
ICSID

Memorial

MFN
Notice
Parties
PClU
PO1

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Respondent's Answer of 8 August 2008 to the Claimant's Notice of
Arbitration of 8 April 2008

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law of 1976 (the UNCITRAL Rules)

The Republic of Austria

Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (13 March 2009)
European Union

Claimant's Exhibit

Claimant’s Legal Authorities
Claimant's witness statement of Dr. F
Claimant's witness statement of C
Respondent's Exhibit

Respondent's Legal Authorities
International Chamber of Commerce
International Court of Justice

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

1

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction by Respondent The Slovak
Republic (3 February 2009)

Most Favoured Nation

Claimant's Notice of Arbitration (8 April 2008)
Claimant and Respondent

Permanent Court of International Justice
Procedural Order No. 1 (14 October 2008)

 

Request for
Discovery

Respondent
RWS-1
soc

Scc

ToA
Treaty

Tribunal

TrJ
VCLT

Request for Production of Documents of Respondent The Slovak
Republic (13 February 2009)

The Slovak Republic
Respondent's witness statement of £

Statement of Claim (19 December 2008)

Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
Terms of Appointment (14 October 2008)

Bilateral investment treaty; specifically “Agreement between the
Republic of Austria and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic
Concerning the Promotion and Protection of investments” of 15
October 1990 (entered into force on 1 October 1991)

The Arbitral Tribunal

Tribunal's Hearing on Jurisdiction (8 April 2009)

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969 (entered
into force on 27 January 1980).

RELEVANT FACTS REGARDING JURISDICTION

This chapter summarises the factual background of this arbitration in so far as it is

necessary to rule on the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction. The Tribunal will

refer to other facts, as appropriate, in the discussion of the arguments of the Parties.

PARTIES

Claimant

Respondent

The Respondent is The Slovak Republic, represented in this arbitration by

Mr. A . 4Ms& , Ministry of Finance of The Slovak
Republic, Department of the Management and Accounting the Specific
Operations of the State, Stefanovigova 5, 81782 Bratislava 15, The Slovak
Republic; and

Mr. David Pawlak, David A. Pawlak LL.C., c/o Soltysinski Kawecki & Szlezak, ul.
Wawelska 15B, 02-034 Warsaw, Poland; and

Dr. Rudolf Ostrihansky, Soltysinski Kawecki & Sziezak, ul. Wawelska 15B, 02-
034 Warsaw, Poland; and

Daniel Weinhoid and Robert Kovacik, Weinhold Legal, branch office Bratisiava,
Hodzovo nam. 1A, 811 06 Bratislava, The Siovak Republic.

Arbitral Tribunal

The Arbitral Tribuna! is composed of

e Presiding Arbitrator: Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Lévy Kaufmann-
Kohler, rue du Conseil-Général 3-5, P.O. Bex 552, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland:
and

° Arbitrator appointed by the Claimant: The Honorable Charles N. Brower, 20
Essex Street Chambers, 20 Essex Street, London WC2R 3AL, United Kingdom;
and

* Arbitrator appointed by the Respondent: Dr. Veitéch Trapl, Dr. Trapl a partner
advokati s.r.o, Dvorecka 1182/2a, 147 00 Praha 4, Czech Republic

Secretary to the Tribunal

A Secretary to the Tribunal has been appointed by the Tribunal! with the consent of

the Parties. The Secretary is

2 Or. Jorge €. Vinuales, Lévy Kaufmann-Kohler, rue du Conseil-Général 3-5, P.O.
Box 552, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND FACTS
Treaty

On 18 October 1990. a treaty concerning the promotion and protection of
investments was concluded between the Republic of Austria and the Czech and
Slovak Federal Republic (the “Treaty”) (Exh. C-2). The Treaty entered into force on
1 October 1991.

At the time of the conclusion of the Treaty, the Respondent did not exist as a
sovereign State. li emerged as a sovereign State on 1 January 1993 out of the
dissoiution of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, which was officially enacted
and the

 

on 31 December 1992. The applicability of the Treaty between Aus!
Respondent by way of State succession was confirmed by an exchange of

diplomatic notes cn 4 August and 25 November 1994 {and eniered into force on i

January 1995) (Exh. C-3).

Origin of the present dispuie

 

 

fA:

12,

413.

c Contract

14. On 17 September 2004, the Claimant, the Ministry ~ antered into
a trilateral agreement for the purpose of developing, assisting and privatising
(the “Contract”) (Exh. C-4).

15.

16.

u Article 1{2), (4) and 1(10) of the Contract, Exh. C-4.

e Article (6) of the Contract, Exh, C-4.

 

20.

Article 1{7) and 1(8) of the Contract, Exh. C-4.
Article 1(12) of the Contract, Exh_C-4.
Asticle 1(11) of the Contract, Exh. C-4,
Aiticle 1(13) of the Contract, Exh. C-4.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
INITIAL PHASE

On 8 April 2008, the Claimant filed a Notice of Arbitration (the "Notice"), under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law of
1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules"), accompanied by eight exhibits (Exh. C-1 to C-8). In
its Notice the Claimant invoked provisions of the Treaty and sought the following
relief (noting that such relief would be further specified in due course):

(i) adeclaration that Slovakia has breached the Treaty, in pasticular
Articles 2, 3 and 4 thereof;

(ii) an order that Slovakia immediately pay full compensation to

3 in an amount to be determined but no less than

€ , plus pre- and post-award interest at appropriate
rates; and

(ii) an order that Slovakia is to bear in full and exclusively all costs

of these arbitration proceedings, including but not limited to the
Tribunal's fees and expenses and all costs and expenses

2h,

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

incurred by .~ in bringing and prosecuting these
proceedings ;..u2 wnerest.(Notice. 165)

 

On 14 July 2008, the Parties were advised of the constitution of the Tribunal. The
Tribunai invited the Respondent to submit an Answer to the Claimant's Notice by 21
July 2008 (the "Answer") and to state its position with regard to the seat and
language of the arbitration. The Tribunal proposed that an initial procedurai hearing
be held by telephone conference on 18 August 2008 and invited the Parties to
confirm their availability on the proposed date by no later than 18 July 2008.

On 17 July 2008, the Respondent requested an extension of three months to submit
its Answer. On 18 July 2008, the Tribunal invited the Claimant to submit a reply to
the Respondent's request for extension by no later than 22 July 2008. Upon request
from the Claimant, the Tribunal extended this deadline by one day. On 23 July 2008,
the Claimant filed its reply objecting to the Respondent's request for an extension.
On 28 July 2008, the Tribunal granted the Respondent an extension of time to
submit its Answer until 13 August 2008.

On 8 August 2008, the Respondent submitted its Answer.

On 14 August 2008, the Tribunal invited the Parties to confirm by no later than 15
August 2008 their availability to hold an initial procedural hearing by conference call
on 18 August 2008. The Parties confirmed their availability for the proposed hearing
and the Tribunal circulated a tentative agenda, draft Terms of Appointment, draft
Procedural Rules, and Dr. Jorge E. Vinuales's CV, in view of his potential

appointment as Secretary to the Tribunal.

On 18 August 2008, an initial procedural hearing was held by telephone conference,
during which the Tribunal and the Parties discussed the issues contemplated in the
agenda circulated by the Tribunal as well as other issues that arose on this

occasion.

On 20 August 2008, the Tribunal, inter alia, invited the Respondent to advise
whether it intended to raise jurisdictional objections. In this letter, the Presiding
Arbitrator also confirmed her independence from the Parties, referring to an earlier
communication pursuant to which (i) she was an independent non-executive
member of the Board of UBS, (ii) UBS had relationships with many companies and

governments, (iii) in her capacity she had no direct invoivement in client matters.

11

33.

36

36.

37.

38.

The Presiding Arbitrator also invited the Parties to revert to the Tribunal by no later
than 27 August 2008 on the matters addressed in this letter.

On 25 August 2008, Arbitrator Charles N. Brower confirmed the disdosue made
during the telephone conference of 18 August 2008 pursuant to which from 1997 to
2004 he represented Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka in an arbitration against the
Slovak Republic

On 27 August 2008, both Parties reverted to the Tribunal expressing ther
agreement, inter alia, on the choice of Paris as the seat of the arbitration and the
appointment of Dr. Vinuales as the Secretary to the Tribunal. Neither Party raised
any objections regarding the disclosures made by the Presiding Arbitrator and
Arbitrator Brower. Disagreements remained however on the timetable in view of
possible future objections to jurisdiction by the Respondent.

On 19 September 2008, the Tribunal circulated revised draft Terms of Appointment,
revised draft Rules of Procedure and a draft Procedural Order No. 1 with a proposed
procedural calendar ("PO 1"). The Tribunal invited the Parties to revert with any
comments on the draft PO 1 by no later than 26 September 2008.

On 24 September 2008, the Respondent requested an extension of the deadline
until 29 September 2008 in order to submit its comments to the draft PO 1. On 25
September 2008, the Tribunal extended the initial deadline of 26 September 2008,
set for both Parties regarding their comments on draft PO 1, until 29 September
2008.

On 29 September 2008, both Parties sent their comments on the draft PO 1. The
Claimant requested inter alia that the Tribunal order the bifurcation of liability and
quantum.

Qn 14 October 2008, the Tribunal circulated the final version of the Terms of
Appointment ("ToA") for signature and notified PO 1 to the Parties. The Trbunal
also took note of the Claimant's request for bifurcation of the merits and quantum
phases of the proceedings and invited the Respondent to submit its views. By letter
of the same date, the Presiding Arbitrator informed the Parties that she had been
asked to provide an expert opinion on issues of international arbitration law and
practice in certain arbitration proceedings pending before the Stockhoim Chamber of

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

Commerce ("SCC") in which acted as co-counsel

for the claimants in said proceedings.

On 20 October 2008, the Respondent sought further information about the Presiding
Arbitrator's disclosure of 14 October 2008, which the Presiding Arbitrator provided
by letter of 24 October 2004.

On 22 October 2008, the Respondent submitted its views and did not oppose the
Claimant's request for bifurcation of the merits and quantum phases of the
proceedings.

By letter of 28 October 2008, the Tribunal circulated the executed ToA and
confirmed that the timetable contemplated in PO 1 would apply to issues of liability
and, as the case may be, of jurisdiction, issues of quantum being left for a potential
subsequent phase.

On 3 November 2008, the Tribunal advised the Permanent Court of Arbitration at
The Hague ("PCA") that the Parties wished to retain its administrative services. On
the same day, the PCA confirmed that a specific account had been designated and
sought authorisation to post on its website information regarding the dispute. Upon
refusal by the Claimant, such authorisation was denied.

On 19 December 2008, in accordance with paragraph 1 of PO 1, the Claimant
submitted its Statement of Claim (SOC), accompanied by two witness statements
(CWS-1 and CWS-2) and five binders of supporting documentary exhibits and legal
authorities (Exh. C-1 to C-76 and Exh. CL-1 to CL-38).

WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION

On 3 February 2009, the Respondent submitted its Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction (the “Memorial'), accompanied by one witness statement (RWS) and
three binders of supporting documentary exhibits and legal authorities (Exh. R-1 to
R-80 and Exh. and RL~1 to RL-106).

By letter of 9 February 2009, the Tribunal notified that the calendar was to follow the
timetable set out in paragraphs 3 to 5 of PO 1

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

53.

By letter of 12 February 2009, the Claimant expressed its concem with respect to
the scope of the Respondent’s Memorial alleging that the Memorial addressed
issues relating to the merits and quantum phases. By email of the same date, the
Respondent confirmed its objections and advised that it would respond more fully in
short.

By letter of 13 February 2009, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to appoint an
expert to address the issues of State aid raised in the Memorial and submitted a
document production request seeking a number of documents from the Claimant
The Claimant responded on 16 February 2009.

On 17 February 2009, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to submit a response to
the issues of scope raised by the Claimant in its letters of 12 and 16 February 2009,
which the Respondent did on 18 February 2009.

On 24 February 2009, the Tribunal ruled that the Claimant's request in connection
with the scope of the Memorial was premature. It also denied the Respondent's
tequests for a Tribunal-appointed expert as well as for document production.

By letter of 3 March 2009, the Tribunal advised the Parties that, in light of their
disagreement as to the venue of the hearing on jurisdiction, the hearing would be
held in Paris, Paris being the seat of the arbitration. It aiso invited the Parties to
confirm their availability for the pre-hearing telephone conference to be held on 24
March 2009 at 6:00 p.m. By letters of 4 and 10 March 2009, the Parties confirmed
their availability for such conference.

On 13 March 2009, the Claimant filed its CounterMemoral on Jurisdiction
("Counter-Memoriai") accompanied by two annexes (A and B) and one volume of
supporting evidence (Exh. C-77 to C-81 and CL-39 to CL-131).

On 16 March 2009, the Tribunal invited the Parties inter alia to identify any issues
that they wished to discuss at the pre-hearing telephone conference, in addition to
those proposed by the Tribunal, which the Parties did on 19 and 20 March 2009.

On 24 March 2009, at 6 p.m., the Tribunal held a pre-hearing telephone conference
with the Parties for the organisation of the hearing on jurisdiction. The results of this

54.

55.

56.

57.

conference are recorded in the summary minutes circulated by the Tribunal on 30
March 2009.

HEARING ON JURISDICTION

The Tribunal held the hearing on jurisdiction on 8 April 2009, starting at 9:30a.m.
and ending at 4:55 p.m., at the ICC Hearing Centre, 112, avenue Kléber, 75016
Paris, France. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal, and the Secretary of the
Tribunal, the following persons attended the hearing on jurisdiction:

(i) Representing the Claimant

(ii) Representing the Respondent:
»« Mr. David Pawak, David A. Pawlak LLC
* Ms. Ms Agata Szeliga, Soltysinski Kawecki & Sziezak
e Mr. Eric Rheims, Soltysinski Kawecki & Sdezak
e Mr. Daniel Weinhold, Weinhold Legal
e Mr. PeterKazimir, State Secretary of the Slovak Ministry of Finance

During the hearing on jurisdiction, Messrs. Kazmir and Pawak addressed the
Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent and Mr. Turner addressed the Tribunal on
behalf of the Claimant.

The jurisdictional hearing was tape-recorded; a verbatim transcript was produced
and later distributed to the Parties.

At the end of the hearing, the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit, if possible
jointly, a list of investment treaties contemporaneous to the Austria-Slovakia BIT.
This was later confirmed in witing by the Tribunal, which set a deadline jor the
submission of such additional information on 22 April 2009.

58.

59.

60.

6t.

62.

63.

64.

POST-HEARING SUBMISSIONS

On 20 April 2009, the Tribunal circulated the draft transcript of the hearing and
invited the Parties to submit proposed corrections to the draft transcript by 1 May
2009, together with any comments on the decision rendered in Renta 4 S.V.S.A. et
al v. Russian Federation” ("Renta 4"), which the Tribunal deemed potentially

relevant to the present case.

On 22 April 2009, the Claimant advised the Tribunal that it was conferring with the
Respondent in order to submit the list of investment treaties requested by the
Tribunal and asked for an extension of time to submit such list together with its
Proposed corrections to the draft transcript and comments on the Renta 4 decision
by 1 May 2009.

On the same day, the Respondent submitted additional information regarding the
contemporaneous practice of the Slovak Republic and Austria regarding investment
treaties, and asked for an extension of the time to submit proposed corrections to
the draft transcript as well as comments on the Renta 4 decision.

On 24 April 2009, the Tribunal granted an extension until 12 May 2009 to both
Parties.

On that same date, the Claimant submitted its comments on the information filed by
the Respondent on 22 April 2009.

On 12 May 2009, each Party submitted its proposed corrections to the draft

transcript as well as comments on the decision in Renta 4.

The Tribunal has deliberated and considered the Parties’ written submissions, their
oral arguments and post-hearing submissions on its jurisdiction. Before reaching a
conclusion on the question of jurisdiction (V), the Tribunal will summarise the
positions of the Parties (Ill) and analyse the issues raised by the jurisdictional

objections (IV).

Renta 4 SV.SA. ef af v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No. 024/2007, Award on
Preliminary Objections, 20 March 2009.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
RESPONDENT'S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

In its Memorial, the Respondent puts forward seven objections to the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal. First, it argues that the Claimant has not shown that it has made an
investment ‘in the territory" of Slovakia and that, therefore, the investment is outside
the scope of the Treaty defined in Article 10. Moreover, the Respondent argues that
indirectly held investments of the type alleged by the Claimant are not covered by
the Treaty.

Third, the Respondent asserts that the clams are not covered by the Treaty's
dispute resolution provision contained in Article 8 which is limited to disputes
fegarding the amount or the conditions of payment of compensation for

expropriation.

Fourth, the Respondent also argues that the MFN clause contained in Article 3 of
the Treaty cannot serve as a basis to import the dispute resolution clauses of other
BITs concluded by the Slovak Republic because such an interpretation woud run
afoul of the intention of the State parties to the Treaty as it arises from the record of
the negotiation of the Treaty. Moreover, such an interpretation would not be

supported by arbitral jurisprudence.

Fifth, the Respondent contends that even assuming that the Trbunal has jurisdiction
over the Claimant's invocation of the MFN clause contained in Article 3 and of the
special agreements provision contained in Article 7(2) of the Treaty, quod non, the
Claimant cannot rely on the MFN clause to obtain benefits of a type not
contemplated by the State parties to the Treaty, such as the umbrella clauses
referred to by the Claimant in its SOC.

70.

A,

es

73.

74.

75.

Sixth, the Respondent argues that there is no basis in the Treaty for a claim for
breach of the full protection and security standard. In particular, the Claimant cannot
rely in this regard on Article 2.2 or Article 3 of the Treaty.

Seventh, the Respondent is of the view that even if it were admitted that the Tribunal
has jurisdiction under the Treaty to decide whether an expropriation has occurred,

the Claimant has failed to make even a prima facie showing of expropriation.

On the basis of these arguments, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to render

an award

{i) in favor of Slovakia and against .. dismissing , claims
for lack of jurisdiction in their entirety and with prejudice; and (ii) pursuant to parayraphs 1
and 2 of Aiticle 40 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, ordering tha. bear

all the costs of this arbitration, including the Slovak Republic's costs for legal representation

and assistance (Memorial, 261).

CLAIMANT'S RESPONSES

In its Counter-Memorial, the Claimant responds that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to
adjudicate the claims, as both the requirements ratione personae and ratione
materiae set out in the Treaty are met. It addresses certain of the objections of the
Respondent only briefly, because it considers that they relate to the merits and

quantum.

The Claimant further argues that the Respondent's request for an early dismissal of
the Claimant's expropriation claim is unfounded because the UNCITRAL Rules do
not provide for the dismissal of claims at a preliminary phase and, in any case, in the
jurisdictional phase the Tribunal should merely determine whether, if established,
the facts alleged would be capable of constituting a breach of the Treaty.

18

76.

TT

78.

79.

The Claimant discusses the question whether it has made a qualifying investment in
detail. It asserts that it has made an investment in accordance with the Treaty by
acquiring shares through interposed companies. It also contends that its
investment was made in accordance with the laws of the Slovak Republic because it
acted in good faith and according to commercial practice, and because the
Respondent's breach of its own laws cannot be held against the Claimant.

The Claimant also addresses in detail the scope of the MFN clause contained in the
Treaty with respect to the possibility of importing dispute resolution clauses from
other BITs concluded by the Slovak Republic. Its position is that (i) the Tribunal is
entitled to determine the effects of the MFN clause by application of the principle of
competence-competence; (ii) the purpose of an MFN dause is to import more
favorable clauses from other treaties, which is precisely the intention of the States
introducing an MFN clause in their treaty; (iii) the scope of an unrestricted MFN
clause extends to dispute resolution clauses; (iv) the wording of Article 3 of the
Treaty is unrestricted and therefore extends to Article 8 of the Treaty, as shown by
both Slovak and Austrian treaty practice; (v) international arbitration is more
favorable for the investor than fitigation in the courts of the host State.

On the basis of these arguments, the Claimant requests the Tribunal to:

* Declare that the ei «, the “full protection
and security argianent’ and the "request for ‘early dismissal’ of
expropriation claim" advanced by the Respondent in ts Memorial do not constitute
proper jurisdictional objections and shall therefore not be dealt with at this stage of the
proceedings;

* Declare that the Arbitral Tribunal has jurBdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae
over the Claimant's claims as setoutin its Statement of Claim;

* Dismiss any and all of Slovakia's objections to the admissibility of the Claimant's claims
and to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal; and

* Order the Respondent to pay all of the costs and expenses incurred by the Claimant in
defending against the Respondent's objections, including, but not limited to, the Arbitrat
Tribunal's fees and expenses, the fees and expenses of the Claimant's counsel, and
interest, on a full indemnity basis. (Counter-Memorial, {| 254)

ANALYSIS

After addressing some preliminary issues (A), the Tribunal will discuss the
Respondent's objections to jurisdiction (B).

A. PRELIMINARY ISSUES

7

Applicable laws

80. Section 6 of the ToA states that "[t}he applicable substantive law shall be the Treaty

as well as any relevant rules of international law”.

81. With respect to procedure, these proceedings are governed by the arbitration law of
the seat. In addition, Section 7 of the ToA provides for the application of the
following rules:

"7.1. In order of priority, this arbitration shall be governed by the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, these Terms of Appointment and the Procedural Rules issued by the Arbitral Tribunal.
7.2. If the provisions therein do not address a specific procedura! issue, the Arbitral Tribunal
Shall, after consultation of the parties, determine the applicable procedure”.

oe

Uncontroversial matters

82. There is no dispute as to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal to decide the
jurisdictional challenges brought by the Respondent, other than those expressly
identified by the Tribunal in the analysis that follows.

2

Relevance of previous awards and decisions of other tribunals

83. In support of their positions, both Parties rely on previous decisions or awards,
either to conclude that the same solution should be adopted in the present case or
in an effort to explain why this Tribunal should depart from that solution.

84. The Tribunal considers that it is not bound by previous decisions. At the same time,
it is of the opinion that it must pay due consideration to earlier decisions of
international tribunals. It believes that, subject to compelling contrary grounds, it has
a duty to adopt solutions established in a series of consistent cases. It also believes
that, subject to the specifics of a given treaty and of the circumstances of the actual
case, it has a duty to seek to contribute to the harmonious development of
investment law and thereby to meet the legitimate expectations of the community of

States and investors towards certainty of the rule of law*.

a See e.g., Saipem SpA v The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, |CSID Case No. ARC/05/07,
30 June 2009, {f 90. On the precedential value of ICSID decisions, see Gabrielle Kaufmann-
Kohler, Arbitral Precedent: Dream, Necessity or Excuse?, Freshfields Lecture 2006,
Arbitration International 2007, pp. 368 et seq.

20

85.

a.

i,

86.

87.

88.

OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

The Tribunal will start its analysis with the scope of the dispute resolution clause
(Art. 8 Treaty) (a); it will then continue with the scope of the MFN clause (Art. 3
Treaty) (b). Provided it has not ruled out jurisdiction on such grounds, it will pursue
its analysis with the questions whether the Claimant has made an investment
protected by the Treaty; whether the Claimant's allegation of breach of the Treaty's
umbrella clause has sufficient basis; whether the Claimant's allegation of breach of
the Treaty’s full protection clause has sufficient basis; and whether the Claimant's
allegation of breach of the Treaty's expropriation clause has sufficient basis. This
said, it will only examine the foregoing objections to the extent necessary to reach a

conclusion on jurisdiction.

Scope of Article 8 of the Treaty: Expropriation or only Compensation?

Respondent's position

The Respondent argues that Article 8 of the Treaty provides no basis to entertain
the claims. According to the Respondent, the application of the rules of treaty
interpretation of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (VCLT)° leads to the
conclusion that the Slovak Republic did not consent to arbitrate the claims before

this Tribunal (Memorial.

 

More specifically, the Slovak Republic puts forward that the Claimant has conceded
in its Counter-Memorial that Article 8 of the Treaty does not provide for the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal over the expropriation claim (Ir. J., p. 23, 6-10), and that
the ordinary meaning and the negotiating history show that the wording of that
provision was purposefully amended to confine it to disputes regarding the amount
or the conditions of payment of compensation pursuant to Article 4 of the Treaty (Tr.

J. pp. 28:14 et seq. and 38-39).

In support of its arguments, the Respondent refers to the decisions in EMV v. Czech

Republic,"° Berschader v. Russia,’ Nagel v. Czech Republic."? Rosinvest v.

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, done at Vienna on 23 May 1969 and entered into
force on 27 January 1980; UN Treaty Series, vol. 1155, p.331.

European Media Ventures SA v. Czech Republic, (2007) EWHC 2851 (Comm), Judgment on
jurisdiction, 5 December 2007.

21

   

 

ii.

89.

90.

91

Russia,"* and Telenor v. Hungary “* (Memorial, paras 210 et seq.; Tr. J.. pp. 41-45).
The Respondent further refers to Renta 4, in which the word "due" contained in the
dispute settlement clause was decisive for the tribunal to hold that it had jurisdiction
over the principle of the expropriation claim. It notes that such word is not found in
the Treaty (Respondent's submission of 12 May 2009. p. 3). Moreover, unlike in the
Renta 4 case, the Treaty specifies in Articles 4(4) and (5) that the Slovak courts are
competent to review the principle of expropriation (Respondent's submission of 12
May 2009, pp.4-5).

Claimant's position

The Claimant argues that the Tribunal has jurisdiction on the basis of Article 8 of the
Treaty over its claim for unlawful expropriation (SOC. par. 173; Tr. p. 175:13 -
176:10).

At the hearing, when addressing the decision in EMV v. Czech Republic," ,

+; advanced that it would be difficult for an international tribunal to value an
expropriation claim “when those findings {on the principle of expropriation} have
been reached elsewhere", which would "render the system of investment protection
wholly ineffective" (Tr. J., p. 178:2-7). According to the Claimant, the decision in
EMV v. Czech Republic is therefore not inconsistent with its interpretation of Article
8.

The Claimant further refers to Renta 4 in support of its allegation that the wording of
Article 8 does not preclude the Tribunal from exercising jurisdiction over the principle
of the expropriation claim. According to , the tribunal in Renta 4 paid
limited attention to the original intentions of the State parties and to the doctrines
prevailing at the time of the conclusion of the treaty and focused instead on the
specific wording of the arbitration clause in the light of the object and purpose of the
BIT. According to the Claimant, "[...] if Article 10 of the Spanish BIT [the arbitration

provision in Renta 4] was read as giving limited jurisdiction to the arbitral tribunal,

 

Berschader v. Russia, SCC Case No. 080/2004, Award, 21 April 2006.

Nagel v. Czech Republic, SCC Case 49/2002, Award, 9 September 2003.

RosinvestCo UK Lid. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. Arb. V079/2005, Award on
Jurisdiction, 5 October 2007.

Telenor Mobile Communications A.S. v. The Republic of Hungery, \CSID Case No.
ARB/04/15, Award, 13 September 2006.

EMV v. Czech Republic, Award on Jurisdiction (Lord Mustill, Pres.; Dr J. Lew Q.C.; Prof C.
Greenwood Q.C.), 15 May 2007

22

iii.

92

93.

94

leaving the decision as to whether compensation was due at ali to Russian courts
{which, on the international level, would mean Russia itself), this would give Russia
the unilateral power to avoid arbitration altogether" (Claimant's submission of 12
May 2009, p. 6). The Claimant acknowledges that the jurisdiction over the principle
of expropriation and over the compensation could be split provided such a split
stemmed clearly from the applicable treaty. It argues that this is not the case here
because Article 4(4) of the Treaty cannot be construed as giving the Slovak courts
exclusive jurisdiction over the principle of an expropriation. Therefore, the Claimant
can choose to bring its expropriation claim either before the Slovak courts or before
an arbitral tribunal constituted under Article 8 of the Treaty (Claimant's submission
of 12 May 2009, p. 7)

Analysis

The provisions of the Treaty most directly relevant to the elucidation of the
Respondent's first objection are Articles 8 and 4. The first one reads in relevant part,

as follows:

“(1) Any disputes arising out of an investment, between a Contracting Party and an investor
of the other Contracting Party, concerning the amount or the conditions of payment of a
compensation pursuant to Article 4 of this Agreement, or the transfer obligations pursuant to
Article 5 of this Agreement, shall, as far as possible, be settled amicably between the parties
to the disputes.

(2) If a dispute pursuant to para. 1 above cannot be amicably settled within six months as
from the date of a written notice containing sufficiently specified claims, the dispute shall,
unless othe:wise agreed, be decided upon the request of the Contracting Party or the
Investor of the other Contracting Party by way of arbitral proceedings in accordance with the
UNCITRAL-Arbitration Rules, as effective at the date of the motion for the institution of the
arbitration proceeding” (Exh C-2).

Article 8 must be read in connection with the pertinent passages of Article 4:

"(4) The investor shail have the right to have the legitimacy of the expropriation reviewed by
the competent authorities of the Contracting Party which prompted the expropriation.

(5) The investor shail have the right to have the amount of the compensation and the
conditions of payment reviewed either by the competent authorities of the Contracting Party
which prompted the expropriation or by an arbitra! tribunal according to Article 8 of this
Agreement" (Exh C-2).

 

Regarding first the Respondent's allegation that the Claimant concedes in its
submissions, particularly at paragraph 202 of the Claimant's Counter-Memorial, that
Article 8 of the Treaty does not provide for the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over the
expropriation claim, the Tribunal is unpersuaded by the Respondent's arguments.
Paragraph 202, as well as paragraphs 102 and 152 of the Claimant's Counter-
Memorial, which the Respondent also singled out at the hearing on jurisdiction (Tr.
J.. pp. 25-26), cannot be read in isolation from the overall reasoning developed by

23

95

96.

97.

98.

the Claimant, which does not support the Respondent's argument. Moreover, even if
such paragraphs were read in isolation, they do not clearly state what the
Respondent seeks to assert, namely that the Claimant does not rely on Article 8 as

the jurisdictional basis for its expropriation claim.

The Tribunal must thus review the scope of Article 8. Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT
will guide its interpretation. More specifically, pursuant to Article 31(1) of the VCLT
“[a] treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning
to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and

purpose."

The ordinary meaning of Article 8(1) arises from the words used in that provision
which are clear by themselves. They mean that only disputes "concerning the
amount or the conditions of payment of a compensation” can be submitted to
arbitration. The scope of Article 8 is therefore limited to disputes about the amount
of the compensation and does not extend to the review of the principle of

expropriation

Such meaning is confirmed by the context of Article 8, which includes Articles 4(4)
and 4(5). Indeed, Article 4(4) provides that an investor may challenge the
"legitimacy" of the expropriation before the competent authorities of the host State.
Article 4(5) provides, in contrast, that an investor who challenges the "amount of the
compensation and the conditions of payment" may do so either before the local
authorities or before an arbitral tribunal. For this second possibility, Article 4(5)
tefers expressly to Article 8. The distinction made in Article 4(5), which is not
present in Article 4(4), shows that access to arbitration was intended to be limited to
the amount and conditions of the indemnity, as opposed to the "legitimacy", or
lawfulness, or principle of expropriation.

The Claimant seeks to defend another interpretation. It is of the opinion that Article
4(4) does not grant the host State's authorities exclusive jurisdiction over the
principle of expropriation and that the use of the term "right" shows that an investor
is entitled to choose to submit the principle of expropriation to the local authorities
but that this entitlement does not rule out recourse to an arbitral tribunal under
Article 8. The Tribunal cannot share this interpretation. It is at odds with the wording
of Article 4(4) read in the light of Article 4(5) for the reasons just set out. Claims
about the principle of expropriation are for the local authorities under Article 4(4) and

24

 

99.

100.

claims about the amount of compensation are for the local authorities or for an
arbitral tribunal under Articles 4(5) and 8. In the second case, the investor has a
choice of means. In the first one, he has no choice of means. His choice is limited to
whether to challenge the principle of expropriation or not. If he decides to challenge
it, he must do it before the local authorities. The ordinary meaning of Article 4(4) and
4(5) is plain. Being part of the context of Article 8, it confirms the ordinary meaning
of that latter provision. In sum, Article 8 provides for arbitration on the amount and
conditions of payment of the compensation for expropriation. The principie of the
expropriation is beyond the scope of Article 8 of the Treaty.

These considerations suffice to conclude that Article 8 provides no jurisdiction over
the principle of the Claimant's expropriation claim. Indeed, in the words of the
International Court of Justice, “if the relevant words [of a treaty] in their natural and
ordinary meaning make sense in their context, that is the end of the matter”.’® For
abundance of motives, the Tribunal will nevertheless review the further arguments of
the Parties in connection with the object and purpose of the Treaty and the intent of
the Contracting States reflected in the travaux préparatoires.

The Claimant argues by reference to EMV v. Czech Republic that it is difficult for an
international tribunal to value an expropriation claim "when those findings [on the
Principle of expropriation} have been reached elsewhere", which would “render the
system of investment protection wholly ineffective" (Ir. J.. p. 178:14-19). The
Claimant makes a similar argument in reliance of Renta 4 v. Russia, stating that "if
Article 10 of the Spanish BIT {the arbitration provision in Renta 4 v. Russia] was
read as giving limited jurisdiction to the arbitral tribunal, leaving the decision as to
whether compensation was due at all to Russian courts (which, on the international
level, would mean Russia itself), this would give Russia the unilateral power to avoid

arbitration altogether’ (Claimant's submission of 12 May 2009. p. 6).

Advisory Opinion on the Competence of the General Assembly for the Admission of a State
to the United Nations "Competence of Assembly regarding admission to the United Nations,
Advisory Opinion: 1.C.J. Reports 1950, p.4°): "The first duty of a tribunal which is called upon
to interpret and apply the provisions of a treaty, is to endeavour to give effect to them in their
natural and ordinary meaning in the context in which they occur. If the relevant words in their
natural and ordinary meaning make sense in their context, that is an end of the matter. if, on
the other hand, the words in their natura! and ordinary meaning are ambiguous or lead to an
unreasonable result, then, and then only, must the Couit, by resort to other methods of
interpretation, seek to ascertain what the pasties really did mean when they used these
words.” These canons of construction were later reasserted in the Case concerning the
Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 between Guinea-Bissau and Senegal (Arbitra! Award of 31
July 1989, Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1991, p.53).

25

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

 

The Tribunal understands the Claimant's arguments as suggesting that a clause
which provides for arbitration over the amount of compensation only is not in
conformity with the object and purpose of a BIT, which is /nter alia the protection of
foreign investors. While this may have been a valid argument under the treaties
applicable in EMV v. Czech Republic and Renta 4 v. Russia, it cannot succeed here
in the light of the unmistakable meaning of Articles 8 and 4.

Indeed, this Treaty is different from the ones governing in the two other cases. It
expressly states that an investor who intends to challenge the expropriation can do
so but only before the local authorities. This difference was recognised by the
Tribunal in EMV v. Czech Republic with specific reference to the Treaty under
consideration in the present arbitration: “One can presume that a foreign investor
will generally not seek redress for the actions of a government expropriating or
dispossessing it of its property in the local courts unless that is expressly provided
for in the BIT (as is the case in the BIT between Austria and the Czech and Slovak
Federal Republic)”."”

In assessing the scope of Article 8 of the Treaty in the light of the Treaty's object
and purpose, the Tribunal cannot ignore the investment protection regime set up by
the Contracting States. Here they have in particular agreed that an investor may
challenge the legality of an expropriation but only before the local authorities. The
observation that they did not provide for arbitration on every aspect of all treaty
breaches cannot be deemed to be contrary to the Treaty's object and purpose of
protecting investment. It all depends on the protection contracted for. Otherwise the
provisions of an investment protection treaty (without or) with limited access to
arbitration would necessarily have to be viewed as contrary to the object and

purpose of that treaty consisting inter alia in protecting investment.

Moreover, from a practical perspective, the Tribunal has no reason to believe that
the review of the tegality of the expropriation by the host State's authorities, be they
Slovak or Austrian, would be ineffective. In other words, there is no indication in the
record that such review would not support the Treaty's object and purpose of
protecting foreign investors.

The Tribuna}’s conclusions are further supported by the travaux préparatoires of the

Treaty. The negotiating history shows that the final wording of Article 8 is the result

EMV v. Czech Repubiic, J 61, supra footnote 16.

26

 

of a process by which the scope of the disputes subject to arbitration was
purposefully restricted (Tr. J., pp. 28-32), Indeed, a draft Article 8(1) of 14 April 1988
merely referred to disputes “regarding an investment".

“if differences of opinion arise between a Contract Party and an investor of the other
Contract Party regarding an investment, then these are to be resolved amicably between the
disagreeing parties to the extent possible" (Exh. R-5). (Emphasis added)

106. A later draft of Article 8(1) dating from 14 September 1989 added the restriction

about the amount of compensation:

“If differences of opinion arise between a Contract Party and an investor of the other
Contract Party regarding an investment conceming the amount or modality of compensation
per Article 4 or transfer obligations under Article 5 of this Agreement, then these are to be
resolved amicably between the disagreeing parties to the extent possible.” (Exh. R-6).
(Emphasis added)

107. The final wording of Article 8(1) kept this restr’ction and is practically identical to the
one just quoted as it refers to disputes "concerning the amount or conditions of
payment of a compensation pursuant to Article 4". One can only deduct from this
sequence of texts that the Contracting States deliberately narrowed down the

initially broad scope of arbitral disputes.

108. Based on the foregoing considerations, the Tribunal concludes that it has no
jurisdiction over the Claimant's expropriation claim under Article 8 of the Treaty.

b. Scope of Article 3 of the Treaty: MFN clause

i. Respondent's position

109. The Respondent argues that the Claimant cannot rely on the Treaty's MFN provision
to replace in toto the dispute resolution mechanism that formed the basis of the

bargain for the Contracting States.

110. First, according to the Respondent, the Tribunal has no power to rule on Article 3. Its
power is restricted to the matters specified in Article 8 (Tr. J.. p. 48, 6-16).

111. Second, the Respondent argues that, even i the Tribunal considers that it is
empowered to rule on the MFN clause, such clause cannot operate to replace the
dispute resolution mechanism of the Treaty in its entirety. In this regard, the
Respondent advances in essence the following arguments: there is nothing in Article
3 that shows that it extends to dispute settlement; such an extension is not

27

   

112.

113.

compatible with the interpretation of Article 3 in the light inter alia of its wording,
context (particularly Articles 4(4), 4(5) and 8), and of the negotiating history of the
Treaty (Tr. J. p58, 9-19: pp. 77 et sea); the extension of the MFN clause to
dispute settlement is contrary to the ejusdem generis principle, because the
Contracting States would not have narrowed the scope of Article 8 during their
negotiations if they had at the same time intended that dispute settlement be
covered by the MFN clause (Tr. J.. p. 60. 3-16); interpretation on the basis of the
object and purpose of the Treaty should not be used to reach exaggerated results
(Tr. J. p. 61, 2-22); the practice of the Slovak Republic regarding dispute settlement
clauses in other contemporaneous or later treaties does not support the assertion
that the Stovak Republic subsequently consented to broadening the available

dispute resolution mechanisms (Tr. J., p. 62 et seq.).

tn support of tts arguments, the Respondent refers to a number of decisions,
including Tecmed v. Mexico,"* Salini v. Jordan,"* Impregilo v. Pakistan,” Plama v.
Bulgaria,"" Telenor v. Hungary,” Berschader v. Russia,” and Wintesshall v.
Argentina, which, according to the Respondent, have barred investors’ attempts to
apply MFN treatment to dispute resolution (Memorial, para. 227 n. 408; Tr. J., p.58-
59). The Respondent also cites EMV v. Czech Republic, which held that "one can
presume that a foreign investor will generally not seek redress for the actions of a
government in the local courts unless that is expressly provided for in the BIT (as in
the case between Austria and the Czech and Slovak Republic)" (Tr. J., pp. 77-78).

The Respondent further points to Renta 4 arguing that, even if the Tribunal follows
Renta 4's "BIT by BIT approach" with respect to the determination of the breadth of
the MFN clause, it must conclude that the MFN clause did not cover dispute
settlement in the present case. It refers in this regard to the wording of the Treaty,
arguing that the Treaty uses the words "right" or "rights" in relation with the

Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v. The United Mexican States, \CSID Case No.
ARB/AF 00/2, Award, 29 May 2003.

Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and ftalstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, |CSID
Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, 9 November 2004.

impregilo S.p.A v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005.

Plama Consortium Limited v. Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction,
8 February 2005.

Telenor Mobile Communications A.S. v. The Republic of Hungary, supra fooinote 15.
Berschader v. Russia, supra footnoie 12.

Wintershal! Aktiengeselischaft v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/04/14,
Award, 8 December 2008.

28

 

ii.

114,

115.

adjudicatory system and “treatment” in relation to substantive matters
(Respondent's submission of 12 May 2009. p. 8). According to the Respondent, this
interpretation is confirmed by the fact that the Contracting States did not have the
extension of the MFN clause to dispute settlement in mind when they concluded the
Treaty, contrary to the ejusdem generis rule articulated in Wintershall v. Argentina
and the 1979 ILC Commentaries on Draft Articles on the topic of MFN clauses”?
(Respondent's submission of 12 May 2009, p. 9). Furthermore, the Respondent
asserts that the Renta 4 tribunal acknowledged the dangers of exaggerating investor
protections (Respondent's submission of 12 May 2009, p. 9). It contends further that
the only decision where a dispute settlement clause was imported in foto, i.e.
Rosinvest v. Russia, was based on specific wording that does not appear in the
Treaty (Respondent's submission of 12 May 2009. p. 8 and Memorial, paras. 230-
232). In any event, in the Respondent's view it is not established that arbitration is a
more favourable forum than the Slovak courts. The Respondent refers in this
connection to the majority in Renta 4 stating that "it would be invidious for
international tribunals to be finding (in the absence of specific evidence) that host
State adjudication of treaty rights was necessarily inferior to international arbitration”

(Respondent's submission of 12 May 2009. p. 9)
Claimant's position

The Claimant essentially puts forward the following arguments: the Tribunal is
empowered to determine the effects of the MFN clause by application of the
principle of competence competence; the purpose of an MFN clause is to import
more favourable clauses from other treaties, which is in fact the intention of the
State parties when agreeing on such clauses; the scope of an unrestricted MFN
clause extends to dispute resolution; the wording of Article 3 of the Treaty is
unrestricted and therefore covers Article 8, as shown by both Slovak and Austrian
treaty practice; access to international arbitration is more favourable than litigation in

the courts of the host State (Counter-Memorial, para. 149: Tr. J.. pp. 182 et sea.).

More specifically, the Claimant contends that the debate about the intent of the
State parties to the Treaty is misleading, because the MFN clause precisely reflects
those intentions. It also notes that there should be no difference between
substantive and procedural rights in the application of an unrestricted MFN clause
such as Article 3 of the Treaty (Ir. J., p. 184:12-19). Moreover, the fact that

Yearbook of the Internatfonal Law Commission, 1978, Vol. Il, Part Two.

29

116.

iii.

117,

Paragraph (2) of Article 3 does not exclude the dispute resolution provisions from
the scope of Article 3(1) demonstrates that MFN applies to dispute settlement.

The Claimant further refers to Renta 4 arguing that this decision sets out a number
of principles that are consistent with the Claimant's position. First, the Claimant
emphasizes that Renta 4 supports the idea that the very purpose of an MFN clause
“is precisely to avoid the need (i) to check continually what the other contracting
party may be concurrently negotiating with third parties and (ii) to renegotiate the
basic treaty to take account of more favourable clauses in third-party treaties"
(Claimant's submission of 12 May 2009, p. 8). Second, the Claimant asserts that
Renta 4 "emphasised that the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal cannot be limited, in
the presence of an MFN clause, to the bare wording of the dispute resolution
provision in the basic treaty" (Claimant's submission of 12 May 2009, p._8). Third,
the Claimant notes that Renta 4 confirms that the wording of the applicable MFN
clause determines whether the clause extends jurisdiction. There is no consistent
line of precedents that excludes such extension. Fourth, according to the Claimant,
Renta 4 denies any distinction between substantive and procedural rights. Fifth, the
Claimant observes that the only reason why the majority in Renta 4 found that the
MFN clause in the Spanish BIT could not be used to import a dispute resolution
clause from another treaty was the specific wording of the particular MFN clause,
which referred to fair and equitable treatment only, whereas the MFN clause in the
Treaty does not contain any such restriction (Claimant's submission of 12 May 2009,
p.8-10).

Analysis

At the outset, the Tribunal notes that it has jurisdiction to review the application of
the MFN clause in Article 3(1) of the Treaty by virtue of the principle of compétence-
compétence. Pursuant to Article 21(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, which
govern this arbitration, “[t]he arbitral tribunal shall have the power to rule on
objections that it has no jurisdiction, including any objections with respect to the
existence or validity of the arbitration clause or of the separate arbitration
agreement." This provision is an expression of the principle of compétence-
compétence:

"The power of tribunals to determine their own jurisdiction is widely accepted. When such

power is not expressly provided for, as in the UNCITRAL Rules, it is generally thought to
exist aS an inherent power of the tribunal. The power is thus so generally accepted that

30

118.

419.

tribunals in proceedings governed by the UNCITRAL Rules have very farely found it
necessary to expressly address their ability to determine their own existence.”

This principle is solidly established in international law. As stated by the ICJ in the
Nottebohm case "{sJince the Alabama case, it has been generally recognized,
following the earlier precedents, that, in the absence of any agreement to the
contrary, an international tribunal has the right to decide as to its own jurisdiction
and has the power to interpret for this purpose the instruments which govern that
jurisdiction."*” In the present case, the Tribunal has the power to interpret Article
3(1) of the Treaty, which in the Claimant's submission grants it jurisdiction over the

claims.

Having determined that it has jurisdiction to do so, the Tribunal must now tum to the
interpretation of Article 3(1) and to the other arguments within the Respondent's
second objection to jurisdiction. In this regard, the Tribunal does not consider that
provisions that embody a State’s consent to arbitration must be strictly interpreted.
This view, which was adopted by the tribunals in Plama v. Bulgaria,* Telenor v.
Hungary,”* Berschader v. Russia® and Wintershall v. Argentina,*" is not an accurate
reflection of international law on this matter. As noted by another strand of decisions
and awards, including Amco v. indonesia,** Mondev v. United States,* Suez and
Interaguas v. Argentina, and Suez and Vivendi v. Argentina,’ there is no principle
of either restrictive or extensive interpretation of an agreement to arbitrate in
international law (it being specified that this may indeed be different under certain

national arbitration |aws).

CARON, D., CAPLAN, L.M., PELLONPAA, M., The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. A
Commentary, p. 445.

Nottebohm case (Preliminary Objections), Judgment of 18 November 1953, 1.C.J. Reports
1953, p. 111, at 119.

Plama v. Bulgaria, supra footnote 22, {{] 198, 199, 200, 204, 212, 218, 223.

Telenor v. Hungary, supra footnote 15, 4] 90.

Berschaderv. Russia, supra footnote 12, {] 181.

Wintershall v. Argentina, supra footnote 25, ¥ 167.

Amco Asia Corporation v. Republic of Indonesia, Decision on Jurisdiction, 25 September
1983, 1 ICS!D Reports 389 at p. 394 (1993).

Mondev v. United States, \CSID Case No, ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, 11 October 2002, 143.
Suez and /nteraguas v. Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, 15
May 2006, 1/64.

Suez and Vivendi v. Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/19, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3
August 2006, 4] 66.

31

120.

121.

122.

This point has also been stressed by the PClJ in the case concerning the Rights of
Minorities in Upper Silesia,*° as well as more recently by the ICJ in the Fisheries
Jurisdiction case.*” Judge Rosalyn Higgins has summarized the position of both the
PCIJ and the ICJ as follows:

“It is clear from the jurisprudence of the Permanent Court and of the International Court that
there is no rule that requires a restrictive interpretation of compromissory clauses. But
equatly, there is no evidence that the various exercises of jurisdiction by the two Courts
really indicate a jurisdictional presumption in favour of the plaintiff. [ ... ] The Court has no
judicial policy of being either liberal or strict in deciding the scope of compromissory clauses:
they are judicial decisions like any other.” CL

Therefore, the Tribunal considers that it must interpret Article 3 of the Treaty "neither
restrictively nor expansively but rather objectively and in good faith”.*® It must do so
in accordance with the usual rules of treaty interpretation set forth in Articles 31 and
32 of the VCLT, taking into account inter alia the wording of Article 3 of the Treaty,
its context, the object and purpose of the Treaty, as well as the relevant

supplementary means of interpretation.

Article 3 of the Treaty reads as follows:

"(1) Each Contracting Party shall accord to investors of the other Contracting Party and to
their investments treatment thatis no tess favorable than that which it accords to its own
investors or to investors of any third states and their investments;

(2) The provisions of para. 1 above, however, shall not apply to present or future benefits
and privileges granted by one Contracting Party to investors of a third state or their
investments in connection with

(a) any membership in an economic or customs union, a common market, a free trade zone
ofan economic community;

(b) an international agreement or a bilateral arrangement or national laws and regulations
conceming matters of taxation;

(c) a regulation to facilitate border traffic."
Exh C-2).

Rights of Minorities in Upper Silesia (Minority Schools), Judgment No. 12 of 26 April 1928,
1928 P.C.l.J. Series A, No. 15, p. 25.

Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada), Judgment of 4 December 1998, |.C.J. Reports
1998, pp. 450-451, ]] 38.

Oil Platforms (islamic Republic of tran v. United States of America), Preliminary Objections,
Judgment of 12 December 1996, Separate Opinion by Judge Higgins, |.C.J. Reports 1996,
p. 857, 7.35.

Southem Pacific Properties (Middle East) and Southern Pacific Properties Ltd v. the Arab
Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/3, Decision of Jurisdiction, 14 April 1988, 3
ICSID Reports 142/4; see also Duke Energy Electroquil Partners v. Republic of Ecuawor,
ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19, Award, 12 August 2008, {jf} 130-131; see further
Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, AS. (CSOB) v. The Slovak Republic, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999, {[ 35.

32

123.

124.

125.

a

The Parties disagree on the significance of the word "treatment" used in Article 3(1).
The Respondent has argued that extending the scope of the MFN clause to dispute
settlement provisions is contrary to the ejusdem generis principle in the light of the
negotiation history of the Treaty. More specifically, the Respondent stresses that the
Treaty uses the words “right” or "rights" in relation with the adjudicatory system and

"treatment" in relation to substantive matters (Respondent's submission of 12 May
2009. p. 8). The Claimant objects that an unrestricted MFN clause such as the
present one does extend to dispute resolution.

AS a general matter, the Tribunal observes that it sees no conceptual reason why an
MFN clause should be limited to substantive guarantees and rule out procedural
protections, the latter being a means to enforce the former.*° The Tribunal notes, in
this connection, that the potential application of an MFN clause to procedural
protections is widely accepted by investment tribunals. This view has been held
mostly with respect to the avoidance of procedural requirements prior to commence
arbitration,*’ but also, more fecently, with respect to the import of a dispute

settlement clause."

This said, a specific treaty can of course spell out a different approach. As noted by
the tribunal's majority in Renta 4 v. Russia.

See Ambatielos Claim (Greece v. United Kingdom), U.N.R.1.A.A., vol. XII, 1963, p. 101, at p.
107, noting that: “It is true that ‘the administration of just’ce’, when viewed in isolation, is a
subject-matter other than ‘commerce and navigation’, but this is not necessarily so when it is
viewed in connection with the protection of the rights of traders. Protection of the rights of
traders naturally finds a place among the matters dealt with by treaties of commerce and
navigation." The situation is no different in an investment context.

See Maffezini v. Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 25
Jan. 2000, {If 54-56; Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, ;CSID Case No. ARB/02/8,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 Aug. 2004, 4] 32 et seq. (concerning an MFN clause referring to
“treatment” of investors and their investments); Gas Natural SOG, S.A. v. The Argentine
Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision on Jurisdiction, 17 July 2005, 9¥ 24-30
(concerning an MFN clause referring to “treatment” accorded to investments, qualified by
“{iJn all matters governed by the present Agreement’); National Grid PLC v. The Argentine
Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 20 June 2006, {§ 53 et seg. (concerning an
MEN clause referring to “treatment” of investors and their investments); Suez and Interaguas
v. Argentina, supra footnote 35, {752-66 (concerning an MFN clause referring to “treatment”
accorded to investments, qualified by “[iJn all matters governed by the present Agreement”);
Suez and Vivendi v. Argentina, supra footnote 36, #§ 52-68 (concerning an MFN clause
referring to “treatment” accorded to investments, qualified by “fiJ]n alt matters governed by the
present Agreement”).

See Rosinvest v. Russia, supra footnote 14, {i] 124-139; Renta 4 v. Russia, supra footnote
7, §] 119 (the tribunal in Renia 4 v. Russia, despite agreeing with the possibility that MFN
may cover accessibility to international fora, found that the circumstances of that case did
not warrant such an extension)

33

 

126.

127.

128.

129.

“One might therefore wonder if the drafters of the Spanish BIT truly applied their minds to the
issue of arbitration when drafting Article 5 {the MFN clause]. The doubt may be justified. Yet
it hardly advantages the Claimants, The Treaty must be taken as it is written [ .. ] The
conclusion must be that the specific MFN promise contained in Article 5(2) of the Spanish
BIT cannot be read to enlarge the competence of the present Tribunal. This conclusion { ... ]
is that of a majon'ty of the Tribunal. The separate opinion appended hereto is viewed with full
sespect by the majority. They agree that ‘more favourable’ may in principle include
accessibility to international fora. Ultimately however their view is that the terms of the
Spanish BIT restrict MFN treatment to the realm of FET as understood in international law.

In the present case, Article 3(1) of the Treaty does not specify whether it applies to
dispute settlement. Such a possibility is neither affirmed nor ruled out by the
language of Article 3(1), which uses the term "treatment" without distinguishing
between substantive and procedural matters. The distinction made by the
Respondent between the words “treatment” and "right", may provide an indication
that the MFN clause was not meant for procedural “rights”, but only for substantive
“treatment”. Yet this distinction is not in and of itself sufficient to clear the ambiguity.

The Tribunal must therefore look to the context of Article 3(1) as well as to the other
elements relevant for its interpretation. Starting with the context, Article 3(1) must be
viewed for present purposes in combination with Article 3(2) as weil as with the
treaty provisions that deal with dispute settlement, ie. Articles 8 and 4(4) and 4(5).

Article 3(2) introduces three exceptions to the applicability of the MFN clause set
forth in Article 3(1). The Claimant argues that the exceptions identified in Article 3(2)
must be read to imply that all other matters not specifically excluded fall under the
scope of the MFN clause under the principle expressio unius est exclusio alterius.
Although this principle is not explicitly mentioned in Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT,
the Tribunal agrees with the Claimant that it may be relevant in the framework of the
contextual interpretation of the scope of Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

At first sight at least, the Tribunal sees the force of the argument drawn from the
expressio unius principle, of which Lord McNair meant that it “would find a place in
the logic of the nursery”*® If the Contracting States have excluded certain matters

See Renta 4 v. Russia, supra footnote 7, J 119.

The expressio unius principle is generally considered as a supplementary means of
ink iterpretation under Article 32 of the VCLT (see AUST, A., Modem Treaty Law and Practice,
2™ edn, pp. 248-249; GARDINER, R., Treaty interpretation, p. 312). The Tribunal refers to
oe principle as an aid to contextual interpretation under Article 31 VCLT (see GARDINER,

.. ibid.)

Lord McNair, The Law of Treaties, pp. 399-400: "That there is substantial element of truth in
this maxim is obvious. It would find a place in the logic of the nursery. if | agree that my
brother may play with my railway engine and my motor car, it is obvious that | have not given

34

130.

131.

132.

from the scope of the MFN clause, it could indeed be argued that they have not
excluded others, such as procedural treatment. It could also be argued, however, as
was noted at the hearing (Ir. J., p. 208, 3-10), that the exceptions in Article 3(2)
pertain to Substance, and therefore Article 3(1) should be read as applying only to
substantive matters. Yet, matters are not necessarily as simple

The substantive and/or procedural nature of the exceptions contemplated in Article
3(2) cannot be ascertained jn abstracto, as the type of instruments or arrangements
envisaged in this provision may include both substantive and procedural clauses.
Thus, Article 3(2) is not sufficient to exclude procedural matters from the scope of
Article 3(1), as procedural matters could implicitly be comprised in the exceptions
set forth in Article 3(2). Nor can Article 3(2) in and of itself be considered sufficient to
circumscribe the scope of the MFN clause in Article 3(1), independently of the other
provisions of the Treaty.

This is particularly so taking into account that the expressio unius principle is only a
supplementary means of interpretation that cannot alone determine the outcome of
the interpretation when a treaty contains other relevant elements. As noted by one
authority in the law of treaties with reference to the expressio unius principle and to
other supplementary means, “[ajll these supplementary means of interpretation
need to be used with special care. They are no more than aids to interpretation, and
might well produce wrong results if followed slavishly".“ What the Tribunal must
examine is whether the Treaty provides for exceptions to the application of the MFN
clause and, more specifically, whether the provisions governing access to arbitration
under the Treaty are to be regarded as a limitation to the scope of the MFN clause.

In its analysis of jurisdiction over expropriation claims, the Tribunal has held that
Article 8 does not grant jurisdiction over the principle of expropriation. It did so on
the basis of the objective meaning of Article 8 and of the interaction between that
provision and Article 4(4) and 4(5). In particular, it held that Article 4(4) must be read
as precluding foreign investors from submitting the "legitimacy" or legality of an
expropriation to arbitration. This conclusion was also buttressed by the negotiating
history, which shows that the Contracting States intended to limit arbitral jurisdiction

to the amount and payment of compensation for expropriation.

 

him permission to play with my model aeroplane." The PCIJ used a similar “a contrario”
reasoning to interpret certain provisions of the Treaty of Versailles in the Case of the S.S.
“Wimbledon”, Judgment of 17 August 1923, PClJ Series ANo. 1 (1923), at 24.

AUST, A, Modern Treaty Law and Practice, supra footnote 44, p. 249.

133.

134.

135.

136.

One may object that the introduction in Article 4(4) of the possibility of challenging
the legality of the expropriation represented a liberalization of the more restrictive
approach followed by socialist countries at the time. Be this as it may, it does not
change the Tribunal's conclusion. What matters is that, in the context of the Treaty,
the Contracting States agreed to regulate the access to dispute settlement and to
allocate disputes by categories to either the national courts or to international
arbitration. It matters further that with respect to this very Treaty, after having initially
contemplated broad access to arbitration, the Contracting States restr’cted such

access.

In this regard, the Tribunal further notes that the evidence presented in connection
with the treaty practice of the Slovak Republic at the relevant times appears to
confirm this conclusion. Indeed, certain BITs involving Czechoslovakia in effect at
the time of entry into force of the Treaty did contain broader dispute settlement
provisions as acknowledged by the Claimant (Respondent's submission of 22 April
2009, table of Slovak BITs; Claimant's submission of 24 April 2009, p. 2).

Faced with a manifest, specific intent to restrict arbitration to disputes over the
amount of compensation for expropriation to the exclusion of disputes over the
principle of expropriation, it would be paradoxical to invalidate that specific intent by
virtue of the general, unspecific intent expressed in the MFN clause. As a result of
these contextual considerations, the specific intent expressed in Articles 8, 4(4) and
4(5) informs the scope of the general intent expressed in Article 3(1), with the result
that the former prevails over the latter. In other words, the restrictive dispute
settlement mechanism for expropriation claims set out in Articles 8, 4(4) and 4(5)
constitutes an exception to the scope of Article 3(1). Hence, the MFN clause does
not apply to the settlement of disputes over the legality of expropriations.

There remains the question whether the MFN clause may bring claims for other
breaches within the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. In this respect, the Tribunal notes
that Article 8 does not limit arbitration to the amount and conditions of payment of
compensation for expropriation. It also makes arbitration available for disputes on
transfer obligations pursuant to Article 5 of the Treaty. The Tribunal sees in this
element an indication that the limits imposed by the Treaty on the access to
arbitration were not exclusively concemed with expropriation but had a more general
scope. The fact that Article 5 does not contain specifications such as those found in
Articles 4(4) and 4(5) does not change this observation. In other words, the Treaty's

36

137.

138.

dispute settlement mechanism is not confined to expropriation but also takes into
account other potential disputes. For some types of disputes specified in Article 8(1)
arbitration is available; for others, such as those specified in Article 4(4), arbitration
is not available. The analysis of Articles 4(4), 4(5), 5 and 8(1) further suggests that
the Contracting States have expressly so stated when they intended to make

arbitration available

The general scope of the limitations imposed on the MFN clause by the dispute
settlement provisions is unequivocally confirmed by the fravaux préparatoires of the
Treaty. As already discussed, the initial formulation of draft Article 8(1) of 14 April
1988 contemplated the availability of arbitration for differences between a
Contracting State and an investor from the other Contracting State “regarding an
investment" without any limitation (Exh. R-5). This general clause was subsequently
limited in the draft of 14 September 1989 to differences “regarding an investment
concerning the amount or modality of compensation per Article 4 or transfer
obligations under Article 5 of this Agreement" (Exh. R-6). The formulation of Article
8(1) finally adopted is almost identical to the draft of 14 September 1989 referring to
“disputes arising out of an investment, between a Contracting Party and an investor
of the other Contracting Party, concerning the amount or the conditions of payment
of a compensation pursuant to Article 4 of this Agreement, or the transfer obligations
pursuant to Article 5 of this Agreement”. This is a clear confirmation that the scope
of arbitration under the Treaty was intended to be restricted to two specific
hypotheses, i.e., compensation for expropriation and transfer obligations.

Considered in this light, the Claimant's argument that Article 3(1) expresses an
intent to import a more favourable arbitration clause from another treaty is
unpersuasive. Indeed, such argument could only succeed if Article 3(1) were to be
read as a neutral MFN clause taken in isolation. This would be contrary to the rules
of treaty interpretation that require that the context be considered. Taken in context,
Article 3(1) is not a neutral MFN clause. The Contracting States have confined
recourse to arbitration to clearly defined categories of disputes. This is particularly
evident for expropriation claims. It is also clear for disputes over transfer obligations.
Seen in interaction with the express limitations which the Treaty imposes on
arbitration, the general intent manifested in the MFN clause is insufficient to displace
such limitations. Moreover, if it were to follow the Claimant, the Tribunal would adopt
an extensive interpretation of the dispute resolution clause in contradiction to the

37

 

 

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

relevant interpretative approach, which rules out restrictive as well as extensive
interpretations.

As a result, neither the claim for expropriation nor the other claims brought by the
Claimant are covered by the arbitration provisions appearing in the Treaty. For
purposes of access to arbitration, there is no reason to treat these other claims
differently depending on whether the relevant substantive protection standards are
contained in the Treaty or not. For instance, even if the Treaty contained no
umbrella clause, which is a disputed issue, and such a clause could be imported
from another treaty together with the procedural protections attached to it in that
other treaty - a point that has not been argued before the Tribunal and upon which it
expresses no view - that would not change the Tribunal's conclusion as to the limited
availability of arbitration under the specific wording of the Treaty.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribuna} concludes that access to arbitration does not
fall within the scope of the MFN clause in Article 3(1). Accordingly, it lacks
jurisdiction over the Claimant's claims by application of Article 3 of the Treaty. As a
result, it would serve no purpose to review the Respondent's other objections to
jurisdiction.

Judge Brower wrote a separate opinion, which is appended to this Award.

Costs

Each Party has advanced costs in the amount of EUR which gives a total
advance of EUR

The expenses of the Tribunal amount to EUR Such amount also includes
hearing costs. The PCA's fees amount to EUR

The members of the Tribunal have spent a total of ~ hours on this matter,
which they decided to reduce to ) hours spread as follows: The Honorable
Charles Brower hours; Dr. Vojtéch Trap! hours; and Prof. Gabrielle
Kaufmann-Kohler ~ 1 hours. The Secretary of the Tribunal has sper’

hours. In the ToA, it was agreed that the Tribunal's time would be compensated at

38

145.

146.

an hourly rate of EUR and the Secretary's time at an hourly rate of EUR
Accordingly, the total arbitrator fees incumed amount to EUR

Vojtéch Trapl fees are subject to 19% VAT. Thus, EUR ) should be added
to such amount, which yields EUR 5

On the basis of the amounts set out above, the total costs of the arbitratij—) amount
to EUR

Ajthough the Respondent has prevailed in the present proceedings, the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal raised genuine and complex issues and, as a claimant, one could
legitimately initiate an arbitration in such a fashion that it was not unjustified for the
Claimant to have started this arbitration. Hence, in the exercise of its discretion
under Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules in matters of allocation of costs
and in accordance with a practice often followed in investor-state arbitrations, the
Tribunal finds it fair that the Parties bear the costs of the arbitration in equal shares
and that each Party bear its own legal and other costs expended in connection with

this arbitration.

| V. DECISION
|

147. Forthe reasons set forth above, the Tribunal makes the following decision:

(i) | The Tribunal lacks jur'sdiction over the present dispute;

(ii) | The arbitration costs are fixed at EUR

(iii) The Parties shall bear the costs of the arbitration in equal shares;
(iv) Each Party shall bear its own legal and other costs;

(v) All other claims are dismissed.

i. Bea Sens

The Honorable Charles Brower Dr. Vojtéch Trapl -
Separate Opinion Date: 7 October 2009
Date:

 

~~ Vala Wed

40

