ICSID CASE NO. ARB/00/5

AUTOPISTA CONCESIONADA DE VENEZUELA, C.A.

Claimant

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
Respondent

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Ill.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

TABLE OF CONTENTS

The Parties

A. The Claimant
B. The Respondent

The Relevant Facts Regarding the Issue of Jurisdiction

A. The Caracas—La Guaira Highway System
B. The Formation of Aucoven
C. The Highway Concession

D. The United States Corporation Icatech
E. The Transfer of Aucoven’s Shares to Icatech
E The Outset of the Dispute

G. Mexico’s Diplomatic Interventions

The Chronology of the Proceedings

The Parties’ Positions on Jurisdiction

A. Venezuela's Position

1.

Aucoven’s Operations in Venezuela are

Controlled by ICA Holding

ICA Holding’s Control over Aucoven was a
Condition of the Approval of the Share Transfer
The United States has no Significant Interest

in this Matter

Diplomatic Interventions by the Mexican
Government

Venezuela has not Consented to ICSID
Jurisdiction in the Circumstances of this Case, i.e.
on the Basis of a Fictional Control Relationship
The “Foreign Control” Provision of Article 25(2)(b)
does not Permit the Exercise of ICSID Jurisdiction
in the Circumstances of this Case

Page

Aucoven Cannot Benefit from Both Mexico's
Diplomatic Efforts and ICSID Arbitration

Aucoven’s Position

The Parties Executed an ICSID Arbitration Clause
that is Effective by its Terms

The Definition of Foreign Control Adopted by the
Parties in Clause 64 is Reasonable and Must be
Enforced

Venezuela has not Identified any Circumstances
that Warrant Setting Aside the Parties’ Agreement
The Efforts of Mexican Officials Towards an
Amicable Resolution Cannot Affect Jurisdiction
Venezuela's Arguments Based on Convenience are
Legally Irrelevant

V. The Jurisdiction of This Tribunal

A. The Relevant Texts

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
Clause 63 of the Agreement
Clause 64 of the Agreement

Discussion

Introduction

Article 64 of the Agreement: The Parties’ Agreement

to ICSID Arbitration

Clause 64: A Conditional Agreement to ICSID

Arbitration

The Effectiveness of the Parties’ Agreement to

ICSID Arbitration

The Requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID

Convention

5.1 The Parties’ Consent: The Cornerstone of
the Jurisdiction of the Centre

5.2 The Objective Requirements Provided by
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention

20

21

21

21

21

22

22

23

25

25

25

27

27

28

28

30

8 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

5.3 The Parties’ Agreement Expressed in
Clause 64 Remains Within the Limits of
the ICSID Convention

6. The Parties’ Agreement to ICSID Arbitration
is Valid and in Full Effect

7. The Significance of the Intervention by
Mexican Officials

VI. Conclusion

VIL. Award on Jurisdiction

34

38

38

40

4l

CASES 9

I. THE PARTIES
A. The Claimant

1. The Claimant, Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A.
(“Aucoven”) is a company incorporated under the laws of Venezuela,
which has its registered office at La Florida Avenida Las Acacias No. 39
Sector Av. Libertador y Andrés Bello, Caracas, Venezuela.

2. The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by David W.
Rivkin, Donald Francis Donovan, and Alexander A. Yanos, of Debevoise
& Plimpton, New York.

B. The Respondent

3. The Respondent is the Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela
(“Venezuela”). It is represented by the Government of Venezuela,
Ministry of Infrastructure (as successor to the Ministry of Transportation
and Communication), Avenida Lecuna, Parque Central Torre Oeste, Piso
51, Caracas, Venezuela and the Attorney General of Venezuela, Avenida
Lazo Marti, Edificio Procuraduria General de la Republica, Piso 8, Santa
Monica, Caracas, Venezuela.

4. The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by Alexander
E. Bennett, Susan G. Lee and Angie Armer-Rios, of Arnold & Porter,
Washington, D.C.

II. THE RELEVANT FACTS REGARDING
THE ISSUE OF JURISDICTION

A. The Caracas—La Guaira Highway System
5. On April 20, 1994, the President of Venezuela issued Decree
no. 138 regarding Concessions for National Public Works and Services

(Cl. Ex.1).

6. The design, construction, operation, preservation, and mainte-
nance of the Caracas—La Guaira Highway System (the “Project”) was put

10 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

to bid under this decree (Ven. Ex. 2). The project also included the
construction of an alternative viaduct over the Tacagua Gorge.

7. The Ministry of Transportation and Communication, which
subsequently became the Ministry of Infrastructure (“the Ministry”), was
to be responsible for the “process and supervision of the concession”
(Ven. Ex. 2, art. 12).

8. On December 28, 1995, the Ministry awarded the bid to a
consortium consisting of ICA, a Mexican engineering and construction
firm, and Baninsa, a Venezuelan investment bank.

B. The Formation of Aucoven

9. Aucoven was incorporated on January 24, 1996 to serve as the
concessionaire for the project. Aucoven is domiciled and registered in
Caracas, Venezuela. Upon Aucoven’s incorporation, ICA held 99% of
Aucoven’s shares and Baninsa 1%.

10. ICA is a subsidiary of Empresas ICA Sociedad Controladora,
S.A. de C.V. (“ICA Holding” or “EMICA”), the parent company of a
Mexican conglomerate of over 140 corporations, which provides a wide
range of engineering, construction and construction-related services

(CL. Ex. 7).

11. The majority of ICA Holding’s shares are traded on the Bolsa
Mexicana de Valores and on the New York Stock Exchange (Cl. Ex. 8).

C. The Highway Concession

12. Shortly after its incorporation, Aucoven began to negotiate
with the Ministry a contract providing for the terms and conditions of
the highway concession. On December 23, 1996 (Cl. Ex. A), Aucoven
and the Ministry entered into the Concession Agreement (the “Agree-
ment”), under which Aucoven has initiated these proceedings. Pursuant
to the Agreement, Aucoven was granted the exclusive right to design,
construct, operate, exploit, conserve, and maintain the Caracas—La
Guaira Highway and the Caracas—La Guaira old road (this included the
construction of the alternative viaduct, substantial improvements to the

CASES, 11

Caracas—La Guaira Highway, as well as improvements to the Caracas—La
Guaira old road) (Clause 2, Ven. Ex. 1).

13. Under the Agreement, Aucoven was permitted to collect tolls
generated by the Highway over a 30-year period (Clause 31, Ven. Ex. 1).
In addition, the Ministry guaranteed Aucoven the “Economic—Financial
Equilibrium of the Concession”, according to the “Economic—Financial
Plan”, the updates thereof, and the terms and conditions for the financing
negotiated with financial institutions. The “Economic—Financial Equilib-
rium” (i.e. the ability for Aucoven to cover its costs and obtain a fair and
equitable remuneration) was to be maintained at all times, to ensure the
continuity of the service to be rendered by Aucoven and the performance
of the corresponding services and work (Clause 44, Cl. Ex. 3).

14. The Ministry was also to compensate Aucoven through direct
payments and/or rate increases for any event not attributable to Aucoven
that would affect the Economic—Financial Equilibrium (Clause 45,

Cl. Ex. 3).
D. The United States Corporation Icatech

15. Icatech was incorporated on November 2, 1989, in the State of
Florida, United States of America. The first corporate name of the
company was ICA Investment Corporation. It was changed to Icatech
Corporation on June 15, 1990 (Cl. Ex. 6). Icatech has its principal place
of business in Miami, Dade County (CI. Ex. 5).

16. As a company organised under the laws of Florida, Icatech is
subject to Florida and United States laws and regulations. Particularly, it
was required to file its Articles of Incorporation with the Florida Secre-
tary of State and to designate and continuously maintain a registered
office in Florida with a registered agent. It was also required to pay
mandated fees and must submit its annual report to the Secretary of the
State.

17. Like ICA, Icatech is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Mexican
company ICA Holding. Shortly after its incorporation, Icatech acquired
different companies active in the construction industry. As a consequence
of the peso crisis in 1995-1996, during which Mexico’s currency was
repeatedly devalued, ICA Holding undertook to internationalise its oper-

12 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ations. It was, however, difficult for a Mexican company to finance
projects under the then prevailing economic conditions and a connection
to the United States enhanced the ability to obtain financing, a fact
which Aucoven asserted at the Hearing of June 28, 2001, without being
contradicted and which the Tribunal finds plausible. As a result, ICA
Holding decided that its U.S. subsidiary Icatech would establish or
acquire several international project companies including Aucoven
(namely Empresas y Guatemala, Empresas y Chile, Empresas y Peru,
IcaDom in the Dominican Republic, subsidiaries in Malaysia and Puerto
Rico, IcaPanama, Cl. Ex. 10; Ven. Ex. 4, p. 6-7. Ven. Ex. 14, 6 (see next
paragraph)).

E. The Transfer of Aucoven’s Shares to Icatech

18. The Agreement between Aucoven and Venezuela became effec-
tive on April 1, 1997. On April 7, 1997, at the start of Aucoven’s opera-
tion of the Highway system, Aucoven requested, in accordance with
Clause 7 of the Agreement (see par 92 below), the authorisation from the
Ministry to transfer 75% of Aucoven’s shares to Icatech (Cl. Ex. 11):

“[...] so that (i) Ingenieros Civiles Asociados, Sociedad Ano-
nima de Capital Variable, a commercial company duly orga-
nized and existing under the laws of the United Mexican States,
may transfer to ICATECH CORPORATION (formerly known
as ICA INVESTMENT CORPORATION), a commercial
company duly organized and existing under the laws of the state
of Florida, United States of America, domiciled at 2655 Lejeu-
ne Road, Suite 1000, Coral Gables, Florida 33134 and regis-
tered with the Department of State of Dade County on October
30, 1989, under NO 127636, two million, four hundred
eighty-four thousand, seven hundred twenty (2,484,720) Class
‘A” Shares with a par value of one thousand bolivars
(Bs.1.000.00) each, and four hundred thirty-three thousand,
eight hundred forty (433,840) Class “B” Shares with a par
value of one thousand bolivars (Bs. 1,000.00) each, which
make up the capital stock of Autopista Concesionada de Venezu-
ela, Acoven [sic], C.A.; and so that (ii) Baninsa Finanzas y
Valores, V.A. a commercial company duly organized and exist-
ing under the laws of Venezuela, may transfer to ICATECH
CORPORATION, identified above, thirty-nine thousand, four

CASES, 13

hundred forty (39,440) Class “D” Shares, with a par value of
one thousand bolivars (Bs. 1,000.00) each, which make up the
capital stock of Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela, Acoven
[sic], C.A. [...]”(Cl. Ex. 11)

19. Its request remaining unanswered, Aucoven renewed it on July
11, 1997 (Ven. Ex. 25). In response, the Ministry asked for additional
financial information regarding Icatech, which was provided on July 18
and August 13, 1997 (Cl. Ex. 12, 13).

20. On August 7, 1997, the Special Commission of the Minister for
Concessions submitted the request filed by Aucoven to Dr Carmen
Carrillo, of the Legal Department of the Ministry:

“‘T would like to submit for your study and consideration, the
requests d by the con ire A Concesionad

de Venezuela, C.A., submitted to this Office by means of Remit-
tal Sheet NO, 02350, received on July 14, 1997, whereby the
aforementioned concessionaire company requests authorization
to transfer shares representing its equity capital, in accordance
with the conditions specified in the same request.

 

In this regard, I would like to inform you that in the
opinion of this Office, the aforementioned share transfers are
appropriate in accordance with that stipulated in Article 33 of
Decree Law No. 138 regarding Concessions of Public Works and
National Public Services.[...]” (Ven. Ex. 26)

21. On April 6, 1998, after further requests by Aucoven, the
Ministry asked Aucoven to provide a guarantee from Icatech’s parent
company:

“[...] In response and after having reviewed and studied the
documents submitted with your request, this office has made the
following observations:

1, ICATECH CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARIES:

From the evaluation conducted for this company, we have noted
from the negative financial results of its operations that there are

14 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ongoing financial problems, which are covered by the parent
company; accordingly, it is necessary to request a guarantee from
its sole shareholder to financially guarantee the fulfillment of the

contract to be executed.
[...]” (Ven. Ex. 27)

22. ICA Holding submitted the requested guarantee on April 22,
1998. It accepted to be jointly responsible for share contributions that
Icatech was to make to Aucoven and to assume each and every obligations
of Icatech, in its capacity as shareholder of Aucoven. Attached to the same
letter, ICA Holding also submitted its financial statements, in order to
facilitate a better understanding and evaluation of its technical and finan-
cial capacity (Ven. Ex. 29).

23. On May 7, 1998, Aucoven renewed its request for the transfer
of the shares.

24. On June 6, 1998, the Ministry asked the Attorney General
whether the transfer of shares requested by Aucoven required the
approval of the President in Cabinet. The Attorney General answered on
June 29, 1998 that the transfer of shares did not require the Cabinet's
approval and was within the powers of the Ministry. The Attorney
General also stated:

“(...] Finally it would be important to point out that the offi-
cial letter in question clearly shows that the Minister of Trans-
portation and Communication is aware, that he is responsible
for authorizing or not authorizing the Concessionaire Com-
pany’s transfer of shares, and that he is in favor thereof, having
given much consideration to the request from the economic-
financial and legal point of view. Therefore, he does not require
the opinion of the Federal Attorney General as to the substance
of the matter. [...]” (Cl. Ex. 16)

25. On June 30, 1998, 15 months after Aucoven’s first request, the
Ministry authorized the transfer of 75% of Aucoven’s shares to Icatech
(Ven. Ex. 30).

CASES, 15

26. On August 28, 1998 Icatech acquired from ICA all of the regis-
tered class A shares in Aucoven and a majority of the registered class B
shares (Ven. Ex. 24). At the same time, it purchased Aucoven’s registered
class D shares from Santiago de Leén Valores, C.A. (Ven. Ex. 42). As a
result of these transactions, Icatech became Aucoven’s majority share-

holder with 75% of its shares.

27. On August 31, 1998, Aucoven provided the Ministry with a
copy of these share purchase agreements (CI.Ex.17). The remaining 25%
of Aucoven’s shares stayed in ICA’s hands. On July 14, 1999, Aucoven
requested that the Ministry authorise the transfer of these remaining
shares to Icatech as well. Such authorisation was never granted.

28. On August 31, 1998, Aucoven’s shareholders adopted a resolu-
tion stating that Aucoven was subject to foreign control by Icatech, for
all purposes of the Washington Convention and that Aucoven was subject
to the arbitration provisions of Clause 64 of the Agreement (see chapter
B.1, below). This resolution was forwarded to the Ministry on September

1, 1998 (Ven. Ex. 43).

29. In an administrative decision dated September 15, 1998, the
Ministry stated inter alia the following:

“[...] It should nevertheless be pointed out that this Ministry
entered into the Concession Contract with a Venezuelan com-
pany domiciled in Venezuela pursuant to the Decree with rank
and force of Organic Law No. 138, contractually electing spe-
cial domicile in the city of Caracas. Accordingly, any act claim-
ing to change the domicile or nationality thereof cannot be
approved by this Office unless previously approved by the Con-
gress of the Republic; in like manner, we wish to remind you
that the Concession Contract is an administrative contract and
as such, is of public interest pursuant to Article 127 of the Con-
stitution and the clause shall be incorporated according to which
“doubts and disputes which may arise regarding such contracts
and which are not amicably settled by the contracting parties
will be decided by the competent courts of the Republic, in
accordance with its laws, and they may not for any reason or
cause give rise to foreign claims.” (Ven. Ex. 44)

16 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

30. The reasons that motivated this decision remain unclear.
However, when Aucoven filed an Appeal for Review from the above
administrative decision, the Ministry confirmed on January 13, 1999
that Clauses 63 and 64 of the Agreement were legal and valid and in full
effect between the parties:

“[...] That clauses 63 and 64 of the Concession Contract No,
MTC-COP-001-95, referring to arbitration, will be in full
effect between the contracting parties, and are considered legal

and valid. |...” (Ven. Ex. 45)

31. During October and November 1998, the parties discussed
amendments to several provisions of the Agreement. As a result, eleven
clauses of the latter and of its Annex A were clarified or modified (Cl. Ex.
20). Clauses 63 and 64 remained untouched.

E The Outset of the Dispute

32. The performance of the Agreement gave rise to disagreements
between the parties, particularly regarding the implementation of the toll
increases as provided by Clauses 31 to 34 of the Agreement.

33. On March 8, 2000 Aucoven sent a letter to the Ministry to
initiate conciliation proceedings pursuant to Clause 62 of the Concession
Agreement (Cl. Ex. 22, 23, 24). The conciliation proceedings having
failed (Cl. Ex. 23, 24), on June 1, 2000, Aucoven filed a Request for Arbi-
tration pursuant to Clause 64 of the Agreement.

34, On June 13, 2000, Aucoven gave Venezuela notice of the termi-
nation of the Agreement:

“1. We inform the Ministry of Aucoven’s decision to terminate
the Concession Agreement, under the rights granted to the par-
ties in Clause 60 of the aforementioned Agreement. Notwith-
standing the foregoing and expressly subject to all the rights of
the company I represent arising from the Concession Agreement,
we would like to inform you that Aucoven is willing to continue
performing in good faith the routine maintenance and toll col-
lection activities described in the Concession Agreement, with

CASES, 17

the understanding that the execution of such activities in good
faith must not in any way affect the termination of the afore-
mentioned Concession Agreement.

2. We respectfully ask that this Ministry proceed to terminate
the administrative proceeding instituted by means of Resolution
No. 068 of October 25, 1999, thereby resolving that the matter
involved in this proceeding is reserved for the competent Arbi-
tration Panel, since clearly, pursuant to Clause 64 of the Con-
cession Agreement, Aucoven and the Ministry agreed to submit
to the Center for arbitration any dispute or difference related to
the Concession Agreement, and hence the aforementioned
administrative proceeding cannot have any effect on Aucoven's
rights under the Concession Agreement.” (Cl. Ex. 25)

G. Mexico’s Diplomatic Interventions

35. On several occasions, before and after the transfer of 75% of
Aucoven’s shares to Icatech, Mexican officials attempted to facilitate
meetings with the Venezuelan Government, in order to find an amicable
solution to the parties’ disagreements. The letter sent by the Ambassador
of Mexico to the Venezuelan Ministry of Foreign Affairs on November
25, 1999 is an example of such attempts:

“[...] Under such circumstances, I respectfully request the inter-
vention and valuable actions of Your Excellency before His
Excellency the President of the Republic, Hugo Chavez Frias for
the search for a solution—both viable and mutually accept-
able—to the outstanding matters discussed in relation to the
Concession Contract, in order that the important project of the
Caracas-La Guaira Highway make progress and be completed
in the full environment of traditional understanding and the
ever more important relations between Mexico and Venezuela.”
(Ven. Ex. 36; see also Ven. Ex. 37, 38).

36. The Mexican Government continued to try to facilitate settle-
ment discussions (Ven. Ex. 39) after the filing of Aucoven’s Request for
Arbitration. These interventions proved unsuccessful.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

III. THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE PROCEEDINGS

37. This paragraph sets forth the sequence of these arbitration

proceedings leading to this decision on jurisdiction:

On June 1, 2000, Aucoven filed its Request for arbitration.

On June 23, 2000, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the
request for arbitration and notified the parties of the registration.
By clause 64 of the Agreement, the parties had agreed that the
Tribunal was to be composed of three members from the Panel of
Arbitrators of the Centre, one appointed by each party and the
third, presiding, arbitrator appointed by the two party-appointed
arbitrators.

On August 1, 2000, Aucoven appointed Professor Karl—Heinz
Bockstiegel as arbitrator.

On September 14, 2000, Venezuela sent a letter to the Secretary
General of ICSID informing the latter that the parties had agreed
to a 90 day extension for Venezuela to name an arbitrator.

On November 17, 2000, counsel for Aucoven informed the Sec-
retary General of ICSID that Aucoven had terminated the exten-
sion for Venezuela to appoint an arbitrator.

On December 6, 2000, Venezuela appointed Professor Bernardo
Cremades as arbitrator.

On January 8, 2001, Professor Béckstiegel and Professor Cre-
mades designated Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann—Kohler as Presi-
dent of the Tribunal.

On January 16, 2001, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID
notified the parties that all the arbitrators had accepted their
appointment and therefore the Tribunal was deemed to be consti-
tuted on that date.

By letter dated February 14, 2001, Venezuela objected to the Tri-
bunal’s jurisdiction.

On February 15, Aucoven submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal Pre-
liminary Observations further to Venezuela’s letter dated Febru-
ary 14, 2001.

The Arbitral Tribunal held its first session in Paris on February
19, 2001. On this occasion, the Tribunal and the parties adopted
procedural rules and agreed on a timetable for the arbitration
proceedings. The Tribunal noted the Respondent’s objections to
the Tribunal jurisdiction in the following terms:

CASES, 19

“Having considered the views of the parties and the relevant rules,
the Tribunal decided to suspend the proceeding on the merits pursu-
ant to Rule 41(3) of the Arbitration Rules. It was agreed that each
party shall submit its observations on objections to jurisdiction (see
below para.17) and that the Tribunal will then decide by June 13,
2001 whether it will deal with these objections as a preliminary
question or join them to the merits of the dispute. If these objections
are joined to the merits, a telephone conference will be arranged to
discuss the following steps in the proceeding.” (Minutes of the
First Session of the Tribunal)

* On April 5, 2001, Venezuela submitted its Observations on juris-
diction.

* On May 7, 2001, Aucoven submitted its Counter-Memorial in
support of jurisdiction.

* On May 22, 2001, Venezuela submitted Further Observations on
jurisdiction.

* On June 6, 2001, Aucoven submitted its Rejoinder in support of
jurisdiction.

* On June 13, 2001, the President of the Arbitral Tribunal and the
counsel for Aucoven and Venezuela held a pre-hearing telephone
conference for the purpose of organising the hearing on jurisdic-
tion to be held on June 28, 2001.

* On June 14, 2001, the Tribunal rendered its Procedural Order no
1 regarding the organisation of the hearing on jurisdiction.

* On June 28, 2001, the Tribunal held a hearing in Washington, D.C.
on the objection to jurisdiction. During such hearing each party
presented oral arguments and the Arbitral Tribunal asked questions
from counsel. An immediate, verbatim transcript was made.

¢ Thereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal proceeded to deliberate and
issue this decision.

IV. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS ON JURISDICTION
A. Venezuela’s Position

38. Venezuela argues that Aucoven’s claim should be dismissed on
the ground that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks jurisdiction. Aucoven is a

20 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

company locally incorporated and Venezuela never agreed to treat it as a
national of another Contracting State because of foreign control
pursuant to Art. 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. In fact, Aucoven’s
argument regarding ICSID jurisdiction rests on two fictions: Aucoven is
under the foreign control of a US national and Venezuela agreed to
ICSID jurisdiction based on such fictional foreign control.

1, Aucoven’s Operations in Venezuela are Controlled by ICA Holding

39. From the date of its incorporation until today, Aucoven has
been a wholly or majority owned subsidiary of ICA Holding, through
one or more ICA Holding subsidiaries. The transfer of the shares to
Icatech did not change ICA Holding’s direct control over, and involve-
ment in, Aucoven’s operations and decision-making. ICA Holding is
not only the sole shareholder of ICA, Icatech and numerous other
subsidiaries, it also exerts direct control over these subsidiaries.
Notably, several officers and directors of ICA Holding hold the same
positions with many of the subsidiaries, including ICA and Icatech (Ven.
Ex. 15, 16). Significantly, the presence of Dr José Luis Guerrero, Exec-
utive Vice President of the ICA Group, was required at almost all
important meetings with officials of Venezuela regarding Aucoven’s
operations (Ven. Ex. 14, 16, 17).

40. The transfer of shares to Icatech did not diminish ICA
Holding’s control over Aucoven’s operations in Venezuela. For example,
Aucoven’s President went on requesting meetings with the Minister of
Infrastructure for himself and Dr Guerrero, the Mexican Vice President
of Aucoven (Ven. Ex. 20, 21). Mexican nationals with ties to the ICA
Group continued to exercise control over decisions related to Aucoven’s
future in Venezuela (Ven. Ex. 33, 34, 35). At all times relevant to this
case, Aucoven’s board of directors remained under the majority control of
Mexican nationals (Ven. Ex. 37, 38).

41. These elements show that the true control over Aucoven has
always been exerted by ICA Holding, notwithstanding the transfer of
75% of Aucoven’s shares to Icatech.

CASES, 21

2. ICA Holding’s Control over Aucoven was a Condition of the Approval
of the Share Transfer

42. ICA Holding’s continued control over Aucoven’s operations was
a condition of the Venezuelan Ministry’s approval of the transfer of
shares. Venezuela was advised that because of ICA’s ownership of ICA and
Icatech, the share transfer would not affect any material aspect of the
concession.

43. Given Icatech’s perilous financial condition and its dependence
on its parent company, the Ministry advised Aucoven that it would not
approve the transfer of shares, without a guarantee of Icatech’s obliga-
tions given by ICA Holding (Ven. Ex. 29). When it finally agreed to the
share transfer, the Ministry clearly indicated that its decision was moti-
vated by the fact that Aucoven had complied with the requirements
contained in its demand dated April 6, 1998, i.e. that it had provided the
required guarantee (Ven. Ex. 30).

3.The United States has no Significant Interest in this Matter

44, The United States has no significant national interest in this
matter which involves a Venezuelan corporation controlled by Mexican
interests, on the one hand, and the Republic of Venezuela, on the other.
When the present case was filed and until August 2000, no United States
citizen served as an officer or director of Aucoven.

4. Diplomatic Interventions by the Mexican Government

45. The control by Mexican nationals is further confirmed by the
diplomatic interventions undertaken by the Mexican Government both
before and after the transfer of the shares. Mexican actions have included
contacts between officials of the Mexican and Venezuelan Governments

(Ven. Ex. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37).

46. Mexican diplomatic efforts continued during 1999 and 2000. On
August 4, 2000, the Ambassador of Mexico and the Venezuelan Minister of
Infrastructure held a meeting, during which the Ambassador pressed for a
resolution of the disagreement between Aucoven and Venezuela. The

22 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Minister agreed to open settlement discussions, which resulted in a tempo-
rary suspension of the arbitration proceedings in September, 2000.

5. Venezuela has not Consented to ICSID Jurisdiction in the Circum-
stances of this Case, i.e. on the Basis of a Fictional Control Relationship

47. Venezuela never agreed that, by reason of the transfer of shares,
Aucoven would be treated as a United States national for purposes of
ICSID jurisdiction. Upon receipt of Aucoven’s resolution of August 31,
1998, Venezuela promptly rejected Aucoven’s position that it was under
the control of a United States corporation and that any disputes would
be resolved by ICSID arbitration (Ven. Ex. 44).

48. Consent of the parties is the cornerstone of ICSID jurisdiction.
Article 25(2)(b) requires a clear expression in writing of the parties’
consent to ICSID jurisdiction and of their agreement that a national of
the host state may be treated as a national of another contracting state
(Holiday Inns v. Morocco (Case No. ARB/72/1), in P. Lalive, The First
World Bank Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco)—Some Legal Problems, 1
ICSID Reports 645 (1993), Ven Auth. 4); Cable Television of Nevis, Ltd
and Cable Television of Nevis Holdings, Ltd, v. Federation of St. Christopher
(St Kitts) and Nevis (Case No. ARB/95/2), Award of December 16, 1996,
13 ICSID Review—FILJ 328 (1998), Ven. Auth.3; Klockner Industrie-
Anlagen GmbH and others v. Republic of Cameroon (Case No. ARB/81/2),
Award of October 21, 1983, 2 ICSID Reports 4 (1994), Ven. Auth. 5;
Amco Asia Corporation and Others v. The Republic of Indonesia (Case No.
ARB/81/1), Decision on Jurisdiction of September 25, 1983, I ICSID
Reports 377 (1993), Ven. Auth. 1; Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation
(LETCO) v. Goverment of the Republic of Liberia (Case No. ARB/83/2),
Award of March 31, 1986 and Rectification of May 14, 1986, 2 ICSID
Reports 343 (1994), Ven. Auth. 6); Société Ouest Africaine des Bétons
Industriels (SOABI) v. State of Senegal, Decision on Jurisdiction of August
1, 1984, 2 ICSID Reports 165(1994), Ven. Auth. 8).

49. In the present case, when the Agreement was executed, the
parties agreed that there would be no ICSID jurisdiction based on the
foreign control of Aucoven that then existed, namely control by the ICA
Group in Mexico. Hence, there can be no reasonable inference that the

CASES, 23

Republic agreed to ICSID jurisdiction, or agreed that Aucoven should be
treated as a national of the United States, as long as it would continue to
be under the control of the ICA Group. Thus, Venezuela’s consent to
arbitration in the present circumstances was limited to an arbitration by
independent arbitrators in Caracas under Venezuelan law, pursuant to
Clause 63 of the Agreement.

50. According to Venezuela, a full reading of Clauses 63 and 64
shows that the parties’ consent to ICSID jurisdiction is subject to a
transfer of actual control to a national of another Contracting State, as
Article 25(2)(b) requires. The transfer of Aucoven’s shares among subsid-
iaries of ICA Holding does not establish consent by Venezuela to ICSID
jurisdiction. As a consequence, Clause 64 of the Agreement did not
become effective.

6. The “Foreign Control” Provision of Article 25(2)(b) does not Permit
the Exercise of ICSID Jurisdiction in the Circumstances of this
Case

51. The cases decided under Article 25(2)(b) establish that the
“foreign control” referred to in the second clause of Article 25(2)(b)
means foreign control by nationals of a Contracting State party to the
Convention. Moreover, such “foreign control” must meet an objective
standard (Vacuum Salt Products Ltd. v. Government of the Republic of Ghana
(Case No. ARB/92/1) Award of February 16, 1994, 4 ICSID Reports
165(1994), Ven. Auth. 9). As a result, an arbitral tribunal must take into
account the true control relationship (Banro American Resources, Inc. and
Société Aurifere du Kivu et du Maniema, S.A.R.L. v. the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (Case No. ARB/98/7), Award Declining Jurisdiction of
September 1, 2000, Ven. Auth. 2; LETCO, Ven. Auth.6; SOABI, Ven.
Auth. 8; Christoph Schreuer, Commentary on the ICSID Convention, 12
ICSID Review—FILJ 59 (1997) (Second Installment of Commentaries
Discussing Article 25), 560, 562-563, Ven. Auth. 11).

52. Therefore, even if the parties had agreed to treat Aucoven as a
United States national for jurisdictional purposes, the pervasive control
by Mexican nationals over, and involvement in the affairs of, Aucoven
should lead the Tribunal to decline jurisdiction.

24 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

7. Aucoven Cannot Benefit from Both Mexico’s Diplomatic Efforts and
ICSID Arbitration

53. Nationals of non-contracting States have no access to ICSID.
Indeed, the treaty obligations of a Contracting State were an important
part of the balance that the drafters of the Washington Convention
sought to achieve. Significantly, when a national of a Contracting State
consents to an ICSID proceeding, a suspension of diplomatic protection
takes place in accordance with Article 27 of the Convention (Christoph
Schreuer, Commentary on the ICSID Convention, 11 ICSID Review—FILJ
§ 175 (1997), Ven. Auth. 11; Aron Broches, The Convention on the Settle-
ment of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States,
136 Recueil des Cours 331, 356 (1972-II), Ven. Auth. 12; Banro, Ven.
Auth. 2).

54. In this case, Mexico has made diplomatic representations to the
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Claimant, even after the share
transfer. In fact, it has espoused and endorsed Aucoven’s claim (see Ven.
Ex. 36, 37, 38). Mexico is free of any treaty commitments that would
prevent it from providing diplomatic protection to Aucoven, even while
the latter pursues the present arbitration proceedings.

55. Under these circumstances, to allow Aucoven access to ICSID
arbitration in spite of the overwhelming control and domination of it by
its Mexican parent company, would be contrary to the text and purpose
of the Convention. To do so would be incompatible with ICSID’s overall
scheme, which seeks to prevent a situation in which an investor benefits
from both diplomatic protection and ICSID arbitration at the same time.
Neither the ICSID Convention, nor any consent or agreement the
Republic has given, allows Aucoven to have it both ways.

56. In conclusion, the parties agreed when entering into the Agree-
ment that the dispute resolution mechanism would be a Venezuelan arbi-
tration. Such arbitration is an appropriate forum to resolve the present
dispute. This is fully supported by considerations of expense, burden,
convenience of parties and witnesses, and respect for the parties’ delib-
erate choices.

CASES, 25

B. Aucoven’s Position

57. Aucoven considers that the conditions of Article 25(2)(b) are
fulfilled, the parties having agreed to treat Aucoven as a national of
another Contracting State because of foreign control. It argues that, as a
consequence, Venezuela's objection to jurisdiction must be dismissed.

1. The Parties Executed an ICSID Arbitration Clause that is Effective by
its Terms

58. By Clause 64 of the Agreement, Venezuela consented to ICSID
arbitration, if Aucoven’s majority shareholder came to be a national of a
Contracting State.

59. The ICSID Convention allows the parties to subordinate the
entry into force of an arbitration clause to the subsequent fulfillment of
certain conditions, such as the adhesion of the States concerned to the
Convention, or the incorporation of the entity contemplated by the
agreement. On this assumption, a party’s consent is deemed given on the
date on which the conditions are definitely met (Holiday Inns S.A. v.
Morocco, Ven. Auth. 4).

60. On August 28, 1998, with Venezuela's express authorisation,
75% of Aucoven’s shares were sold to Icatech, a corporation organised
under the laws of the State of Florida, with its principal place of business
in Miami (Cl Ex. 5, 6; Ven. Ex. 24, 42). As a consequence, Venezuela's
consent to ICSID jurisdiction became effective on that day and may not
be revoked.

2. The Definition of Foreign Control Adopted by The Parties in Clause 64
is Reasonable and Must be Enforced

61. The drafters of Article 25(2)(b) ICSID Convention deliberately
left the term “foreign control” undefined in order to afford the parties
wide discretion to provide a definition (A. Broches, The Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other
States, 136, Recueil des Cours 331, 360 (1972-II), Ven. Auth. 12). In
other words, they solved the definitional difficulties by recognising the

26 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

autonomy of the parties to agree upon the criteria which would deter-
mine foreign control.

62. The parties’ freedom to define “foreign control” within the
framework of Article 25(2)(b) is confirmed by Vacuum Salt Ltd v. Ghana
(Ven. Auth. 9) and authoritative commentaries (C.F. Amerasinghe, Juris-
diction Rationae Personae under the Convention on the Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, 47 B.Y.I.L. 227,
262 (1974/75), Cl. Auth. 9; C.E Amerasinghe, Interpretation of Article
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, at 232, Cl. Auth. 8; RC. Szasz, A
Practical Guide to the Convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes, 1
Cornell Int’ | L. J., 1 20 (1968), Cl. Auth. 14).

63. In the present case, Venezuela and Aucoven agreed that
Aucoven would be under “foreign control”, and Clause 64 would become
effective, if a majority of Aucoven’s shares were transferred to a national
of a Contracting State. The parties thus agreed that, once a majority of
Aucoven’s shares were owned by a national of a Contracting State, the
criterion of “foreign control” would be met. No other test was considered
by the parties.

64. The agreement contained in Clause 64 is reasonable: the parties
defined control to mean direct control and used the traditional test of
share ownership to determine control. Indeed, as the two major cases
dealing with layers of foreign control, i.e. Amco, (Ven. Auth 1), and
SOABI (Ven. Auth. 8), made it clear, while there is authority for the
proposition that direct control is not the exclusive means of determining
control under Article 25(2)(b), direct control is undoubtedly one reason-
able method of determining control available to the parties to an ICSID
arbitration clause.

65. In light of the parties’ agreement on that test of control, there
is no reason for the Tribunal to examine different criteria (nationality of
the board members, frequency of visits of board members of the direct
shareholder, frequency of “monitoring” of Aucoven’s activities, financial
support etc.), even if such criteria might be relevant in different circum-
stances.

66. Aucoven nonetheless points out that, since the time that
Icatech became Aucoven’s majority shareholder, all shareholder resolu-

CASES, 27

tions have been passed with the votes of Icatech alone. Similarly, Icatech
exercised control by passing the shareholder resolutions pursuant to
which Aucoven terminated the Agreement.

3. Venezuela has not Identified any Circumstances that Warrant Setting
Aside the Parties Agreement

67. Although Venezuela views Icatech’s corporate identity as a mere
formality, this formality is the fundamental building block of the global
economy. No state, court, or tribunal, has the right to set aside that
corporate identity, except where the parties consent to such action or the
corporation has engaged in abuse or fraud. No such circumstances are
present here.

68. The fact that members of the boards of Aucoven and Icatech are
Mexican nationals, as well as the fact that ICA Holding made efforts to
settle the present dispute and gave Icatech financial support do not
suffice to disregard Icatech’s independent corporate identity (Pierre
Lalive, The First World Bank Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco)—
Some Legal Problems, 1 ICSID Reports 645 (1993), Ven. Auth. 4;
Klockner, Cl. Auth. 19).

69. The thicket into which Venezuela would lead the Arbitral
Tribunal is precisely what the drafters of the ICSID Convention decided
to avoid. Finding the “ultimate”, or “effective”, or “true” controller
would often involve difficult and protracted factual investigations,
without any assurance as to the result.

70. In addition, Aucoven has engaged in no abuse. Since its incor-
poration, Icatech has been an active corporation. It holds directly or indi-
rectly about 20 subsidiaries (Cl. Ex. 10). Icatech acquired its majority
shares in Aucoven at a time when it reoriented its activities towards the
international market.

71. Aucoven did not defraud the Ministry. The Ministry could not
have failed to know that Icatech was a United States national and it had
every opportunity to assess the legal consequences of the share transfer.
Hence, Venezuela’s position according to which Aucoven had an affirma-
tive obligation to advise the Ministry of the legal consequences under
Clause 64 of the share transfer has no legal support.

28 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

4. The Efforts of Mexican Officials Towards an Amicable Resolution
Cannot Affect Jurisdiction

72. The bar on diplomatic protection under Article 27(1) is not
meant to discourage the amicable resolution of disputes.

73. At no point has Mexico filed a formal protest before the Vene-
zuelan Government. It has not in any other way espoused a claim, and no
international dispute has arisen between Mexico and Venezuela. Thus,
even if Mexico's activities could affect Aucoven’s rights, which they could
not, they would not do so in this case.

74, Even if Mexico's actions could be construed as some form of
prohibited diplomatic protection, Article 27(1) would not apply here.
Indeed, Article 27(1) does not apply to Mexico which is not a Contracting
Party. Article 27(1) limits the prohibition of diplomatic protection to
disputes in which a national of the State granting the protection is a claimant
(Christoph Schreuer, Commentary on Article 27 of the ICSID Convention, 12
ICSID Review—FILJ 205 (1997) at 206, § 1, Cl. Auth. 13).

75. While active solicitation of diplomatic protection by the
investor might be a violation of Article 26, there is no support, however,
for the proposition that an ICSID tribunal may deny jurisdiction on this
ground.

5. Venezuelas Arguments Based on Convenience are Legally Irrelevant

76. Finally, Venezuela argues that considerations of convenience

should influence the interpretation of the dispute settlement provisions
of the Agreement. Such arguments are legally irrelevant.

V. THE JURISDICTION OF THIS TRIBUNAL
A. The Relevant Texts

77. Before entering the discussion on jurisdiction, it may be useful
to set out the relevant treaty and contract provisions in full text. These

CASES,

29

provisions are Article 25 ICSID Convention and Clauses 63 and 64 of
the Agreement.

1, Article 25 of the ICSID Convention

“(L) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dis-

(2)

(3)

(4)

pute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contract-

ing State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a

Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a

national of another Contracting State, which the parties to

the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When
the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its
consent unilaterally.

“National of another Contracting State” means:

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting
State other than the State party to the dispute on the date on
which the parties consented to submit such dispute to concil-
iation or arbitration as well as on the date on which the
request was registered pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article
28 or paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does not include any
person who on either date also had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute; and

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Con-
tracting State other than the State party to the dispute on the
date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to
conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person which
had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the
dispute on that date and which, because of foreign con-
trol, the parties have agreed should be treated as a
national of another Contracting State for the purposes of
this Convention.

Consent by a constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting

State shall require the approval of that State unless that State

notifies the Centre that no such approval is required.

Any Contracting State may, at the time of ratification, acceptance

or approval of this Convention or at any time thereafier, notify

the Centre of the class or classes of disputes which it would or
would not consider submitting to the jurisdiction of the Centre.

The Secretary-General shall forthwith transmit such notification

30 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

to all Contracting States. Such notification shall not constitute the
consent required by paragraph (1).” (emphasis added)

2. Clause 63 of the Agreement

78. By Clause 63 of the Agreement, the parties agreed to submit
their disputes to ad hoc arbitration in Caracas pursuant to the Venezuelan
Code of Civil Procedure and the Model Law on International Commer-
cial Arbitration of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law:

“In accordance with that expressly provided in article 10 of the
Decree with rank and force of Organic Law No.138, which
allows the doubts and controversies that may arise regarding the
interpretation andlor execution of the Concession, and in view
of the necessary financing and foreign investments in order to
fulfill the Concession, the parties agree that: Any doubt or con-
troversy that may arise regarding the interpretation andlor exe-
cution of the Agreement that cannot be resolved amicably by
means of the conciliation procedure established in the previous
Clause within a total period of thirty (30) working days from
the time of the last notification mentioned in Clause 62 of this
document, must be resolved by means of arbitration by law, the
procedure of which shall be governed by the provisions of the
Civil Procedure Code of Venezuela, provided these provisions
are not modified by this document or by the Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration, approved by the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law of June 21,
1985 (UNCITRAL, 1985) (“Model Law”), whose provisions
are understood to be contained in this document.

The arbitration shall be carried out in Spanish in the city of
Caracas, by an Arbitration Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) composed
of three (3) independent arbitrators, with the understanding
that each of the parties shall name one (1) arbitrator and the
third arbitrator, who will be president of the Tribunal, shall be
designated by mutual agreement between the two (2) arbitrators
designated by the parties. If within twenty (20) working days
from the time of receiving a request from the other party, one of
the parties does not appoint the arbitrator to which it is enti-

CASES,

tled, or if within the same amount of time, counted from the
designation of the arbitrators by the parties, they are not able to
come to an agreement on the appointment of the third arbitra-
tor, the same shall be appointed in accordance with the Model
Law. The swearing in of the arbitrators, their recusal, the valid-
ity of the arbitration clause and the execution of the award or
arbitral decision in Venezuela shall be governed by the rules of
the Code of Civil Procedures of Venezuela. Each party shall
waive any right that either may have at the present time or in
the future to initiate or maintain any judgement or legal proce-
dure with regard to any dispute, claim, controversy, disagree-
ment andlor difference related to, derived from, or in
connection with this Contract or related in any way to the inter-
pretation, execution, non-fulfillment, termination and/or reso-
lution of the same by any mechanism that is different from that
provided in this Clause. The validity and legality of the Conces-
sion shall be discussed before the Supreme Court of Justice and
shall be excluded from this clause.”

3. Clause 64 of the Agreement

31

79. Venezuela being a party to the ICSID Convention, the parties
agreed in Clause 64 to ICSID Arbitration instead of ad hoc arbitration
under Clause 63 if the following requirement was met:

“Whereas, by virtue of the Act of Approval of the Convention on
the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States and its ratification, published in the
Official Gazette of The Republic of Venezuela No. 35685, of
April 3, 1995, which constitutes valid law in Venezuela, The
REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA has seen fit to submit disputes
that may arise relating to investors who are nationals of other
Contracting States to international settlement methods, the par-
ties agree that if the shareholder or majority shareholder(s) of
THE CONCESSIONAIRE come to be (a) national(s) of a
country in which the Convention on the Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes between States and Nationals of other states were
to be in force, Clause 63 of this document would immediately be
substituted by the following text:

32

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

‘Any dispute, claim, controversy, disagreement andlor difference
related to, derived from, or in connection with the Concession or
related in any way with the interpretation, performance, non-ful-
fillment, termination, resolution of the same, all of which are recog-
nized by both parties to pertain to investments, which cannot be
resolved amicably through the process of conciliation provided for by
the previous Clause within a time period of thirty (30) working
days from the time of the last notification provided in accordance
with the methods established in this Document, must be resolved by
the International Centre For Settlement of Investment Disputes (the
“Centre’), by means of arbitration, in accordance with the provi-
sions of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States (the “Convention”)
and, except as otherwise agreed by the parties, pursuant to the Rules
of Arbitration of the Centre that are valid for the date of entry into
force of this clause (the ‘Arbitration Rules”). The arbitration shall
be carried out at the Centre by an Arbitration Tribunal (the “Tri-
bunal”) consisting of three (3) arbitrators from the List of Arbitra-
tors of the Centre, with the understanding that each party shall
name one (1) arbitrator and the third arbitrator, who will be Pres-
ident of the Tribunal, shall be designated by mutual agreement by
the two arbitrators designated by the parties. If, within a period of
twenty (20) working days from the time of the designation of the
arbitrators by the parties, they have been unable to agree on the des-
ignation of the third arbitrator, the latter shall be designated in
accordance with the Rules of Arbitration. Each of the parties shall
waive any right either may have at the present time or in the future
to initiate or maintain any judgement or legal procedure with
regard to any dispute, until the same has been determined pursuant
to the aforementioned arbitration procedure, and later only to
enforce the award or decision rendered by means of said arbitration
procedure. Both The Republic of Venezuela, acting by means of THE
MINISTRY, and THE CONCESSIONAIRE, agree to attribute to
THE CONCESSIONAIRE, a legal person of Venezuela subject to
foreign control for the date when this clause enters into force, the
character of “National of another Contracting state” for the purpose
of applying this Clause and the provisions of the Convention.

Regardless that set forth in of Clause 64, if for any reason The
Republic of Venezuela andlor the country of citizenship of the

CASES 33

majority shareholder or shareholders of THE CONCESSION-
AIRE were to revoke the Convention or if in any other way the
Convention were to lose validity for these countries before initi-
ating arbitration pursuant to the provisions of Clause 64 or if
for any other reason the Convention ceases to have validity in
said countries or if it is impossible to carry out the arbitration
in accordance with the convention, the Clause 63 of this docu-

ment shall regain its full effect and validity”.
B. Discussion
1. Introduction

80. Given Venezuela’s objections to ICSID jurisdiction, the
Tribunal will first construe Clause 64 of the Agreement to determine
whether it is meant to apply in the event of a transfer of Aucoven’s shares
within the ICA group (headings 2 to 4 below).

81. It will then determine whether the conditions of Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention are fulfilled (heading 5 below). In particular, it
will examine whether the parties’ agreement to treat Aucoven as a
national of another Contracting State because of foreign control remains
within the scope of the ICSID Convention. In this context, the Tribunal
will address the objections raised by Venezuela regarding the alleged
abuse of the Convention’s purposes, specifically due to ICA Holding’s
continued control over Aucoven notwithstanding the share transfer to
Icatech, and Aucoven’s alleged misleading conduct when requesting Vene-
zuela’s approval of the share transfer.

82. Finally, the Tribunal will examine if Mexico’s diplomatic efforts
may have an impact on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

2. Article 64 of the Agreement: the Parties Agreement to ICSID Arbitration

83. Clause 64 of the Agreement provides that the parties agree to
submit to ICSID any dispute, claim, controversy, disagreement and/or
difference related to, derived from, or in connection with the Concession or
related in any way with the interpretation, performance, non-fulfillment,
termination, resolution of the same, if the shareholder or majority share-
holder(s) of the Concessionaire, i.e. Aucoven, come to be a national of a country

34 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

in which the ICSID Convention is in force. Restating the conditions of Article
25(2)(b), Clause 64 (penultimate paragraph) expressly specifies that, in this
event, Aucoven shall be deemed a company under foreign control:

“Both The Republic of Venezuela, acting by means of the
MINISTRY, and THE CONCESSIONAIRE, agree to
attribute to THE CONCESSIONAIRE, a legal person of
Venezuela subject to foreign control for the date when this
clause enters into force, the character of “National of another
Contracting state” for the purpose of applying this Clause
and the provisions of the Convention.” (Emphasis added)

84. Again referring to the criterion of majority shareholding,
Clause 64, last paragraph, states that, if, for any reason, Venezuela “and/
or the country of citizenship of the majority shareholder or shareholders of
THE CONCESSIONAIRE” (emphasis added) were to revoke the Conven-
tion, Clause 63 would regain its full effect and validity.

85. According to Venezuela, Clause 64 does not aim at a transfer of
shares within the ICA group. Clause 64 is not meant to apply as long as
ICA Holding retains the ultimate and actual control over Aucoven (Vene-
zuela’s Further Observations on jurisdiction dated May 22, 2001, p. 4,
transcript of the Hearing of June 28, 2001, p. 25). Hence, Venezuela did
not consent to ICSID jurisdiction under the present circumstances.

86. Venezuela's construction is not in conformity with the clear
wording of Clause 64. Furthermore, there is no indication on record
showing that, when they entered into the Agreement, the parties
intended to subject their consent to ICSID jurisdiction to a condition
different from the one they had clearly expressed. The Tribunal has found
no element allowing it to find that, by the words the “majority share-
holder(s) of THE CONCESSIONAIRE », the parties did not mean the
person holding the majority shares, but rather the person exercing effec-
tive control over Aucoven. In other words, there is no indication on
record that the parties intended to exclude share transfers among ICA
Holding’s subsidiaries and meant to condition their agreement upon a
change of effective or ultimate control over Aucoven.

CASES 35

87. As a result, in the absence of any contrary indication, the
Tribunal does not see any reason nor justification for departing from the
clear wording of Clause 64, according to which the parties consented to
ICSID jurisdiction in the event that Aucoven’s majority shareholder(s)
came to be a national of another Contracting State.

88. Having established the meaning of Clause 64, the Tribunal
must determine whether the parties’ consent to ICSID jurisdiction meets
the requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. However,
before discussing this matter, the Tribunal will briefly address the issue
of conditional consent and of the effectiveness of such consent in the
context of Clauses 7 and 64 of the Agreement.

3. Clause 64: a Conditional Agreement to ICSID Arbitration

89. The parties’ agreement to ICSID jurisdiction expressed in
Clause 64 is subject to the fulfilment of a condition, i.e. the transfer of
Aucoven’s majority shares to a national of another Contracting State.

90. It is common ground that such a conditional arbitration agree-
ment is valid. Indeed, the ICSID Convention does not forbid the parties
to subject the entry into force of their arbitration agreement to the subse-
quent fulfilment of conditions:

“The Tribunal is of the opinion that the Convention allows par-
ties to subordinate the entry into force of an arbitration clause
to the subsequent fulfilment of certain conditions, such as the
adherence of the States concerned to the Convention, or the
incorporation of the company envisaged by the agreement. On
this assumption, it is the date when the conditions are definitely
satisfied, as regards one of the Parties involved, which consti-
tutes in the sense of the Convention the date of consent by that
Party. As for the date of consent contemplated by Article
25(2)(b) of the Convention, it will automatically be the date on
which the two corresponding consents coincide...” (Pierre
Lalive, The First World Bank Arbitration (Holiday Inns v.
Morocco)—Some Legal Problems, 1 ICSID Reports 645
(1993) p. 668, Ven. Auth. 4).

36 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

91. In such a case, the parties’ consent to ICSID jurisdiction
becomes effective once the condition provided in the arbitration agree-
ment is met. Assuming that Clause 64 is a valid agreement to arbitrate,
the consent became effective on August 28, 1998, on the date of the share
transfer.

4. The Effectiveness of the Parties’ Agreement to ICSID Arbitration

92. Pursuant to Clause 7 of the Agreement, the transfer of
Aucoven’s shares was subject to Venezuela’s approval:

“THE CONCESSIONAIRE is obligated to maintain, within
the term of the Concession, its status as a corporation domiciled
in Venezuela and its Venezuelan nationality. It is expressly
understood that the shares of THE CONCESSIONAIRE shall
remain registered and not convertible to bearer shares and that
they may not be sold or encumbered, directly or indirectly, with-
out prior authorization from THE MINISTRY. [...]”.

93. Thus, the occurrence of the event defined by the parties as the
condition for ICSID jurisdiction requires Venezuela's approval. However,
once the approval has been given and the transfer of the shares has taken
place, Clause 64 becomes immediately effective. There is no need for an
additional consent by the parties. In other words, Clause 7 does not
constitute an opportunity to reassess the conditions under which the
parties consented to ICSID jurisdiction in Clause 64.

5. The Requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
5.1 The Parties Consent: the Cornerstone of the Jurisdiction of the Centre

94. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention requires the Parties’
consent to submit a dispute to ICSID Jurisdiction. No proceedings can
take place under the Centre’s auspices unless the parties to the dispute
have given their consent in writing. More specifically, the system of the
Convention is premised on two levels of consent. At the first level, one
finds the consent expressed by the Contracting States which agreed to be
bound by the Convention. At the second level, one finds the consent
given by the host State and the investor by means of an agreement to
ICSID arbitration (Bernardo M. Cremades, Arbitration between States and

CASES 37

investors: some jurisdiction issues, in Business Law International, May
2001, p.157 (160-162).

95. According to ICSID Tribunals and the commentaries on the
ICSID Convention, great weight must be placed on the fact that the
parties consented to ICSID’s jurisdiction, consent often being described
as the cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre:

“The third and in a sense the most important jurisdictional
requirement is that of consent, by both parties, to the submission
of the dispute to the Centre. In the report of the Executive
Directors this requirement is described as “the cornerstone of the
jurisdiction of the Centre.” Its paramount importance is under-
lined by the fact that at least to a certain extent the other two
jurisdictional requirements can be conditioned (though not
waived) by agreement of the parties that would normally be
expressed in the instrument expressing the consent: the character-
ization of a particular transaction as an “investment, “ and the
stipulation that a domestic corporation is to be considered as a
national of another State because of foreign control.” (P. Szasz, A
Practical Guide to the Convention on Settlement of Investment
Disputes, 1 Cornell Int'l Law Journal (1968), Cl. Auth. 14; see
also Aron Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States, 136
Recueil des Cours 331 (1972-II), Ven. Auth. 12).

96. However essential, consent in and of itself is not sufficient to
ensure access to the Centre. Indeed, Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
provides for additional objective requirements which must be met in
addition to consent. These objective requirements are the following:

* The dispute between the parties must be a “legal dispute”;

* The dispute must arise directly out of an “investment”; and,

* In the event that the investor is a corporation registered under the
laws of the host State, the parties must agree to treat the locally incor-
porated company, because of “foreign control”, as a “national” of
another Contracting State for the purposes of the Convention.

97. The Convention does not contain any definition of these objec-
tive requirements. The drafters of the Convention deliberately chose not

38 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

to define the terms “legal dispute” “investment”, “nationality” and
“foreign control”. In reliance on the consensual nature of the Conven-
tion, they preferred giving the parties the greatest latitude to define these
terms themselves, provided that the criteria agreed upon by the parties
are reasonable and not totally inconsistent with the purposes of the
Convention (Aron Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States, 136 Recueil des
Cours 331 (1972-II), Ven. Auth. 12; C.F Amerasinghe, Jurisdiction
Ratione Personae under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, 47 B.Y.1.L. 227
(1974/75), p. 231-232, Cl. Auth.9); Christoph Schreuer, Commentary
on the ICSID Convention (1997), p. 82), Ven. Auth. 11).

98. Or in the words of Dr Aron Broches, General Counsel of the
World Bank, who chaired the consultative meetings at which the prelim-
inary draft of the Convention of October 15, 1963 was discussed:

“The World Bank staff in preparing a new draft for the Legal
Committee which was to advise the Executive Directors on a
final text, drew the conclusion from the Consultative Meetings
that attempts at definitions should be abandoned and that instead
an attempt should be made, relying on the consensual character of
the Convention, to give the greatest possible latitude to the parties to
decide under what circumstances a company could be treated as a
‘national of another Contracting State.” (Aron Broches, The
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and Nationals of Other States, 136 Recueil des
Cours 331 (1972-II), p. 360, Ven. Auth. 12)

“In the end, the effort to devise a generally acceptable definition of
the term “investment” was given up “given the essential require-
ment of consent by the Parties”.

I believe that this was a wise decision, fully consonant with the con-
sensual nature of the Convention, which leaves a large measure of
discretion to the parties. It goes without saying, however—and I
have made this remark before in another connection—that this dis-
cretion is not unlimited and cannot be exercised to the point of
being clearly inconsistent with the purposes of the Convention.

Le]

CASES 39

It was impossible to reconcile the different points of view, quite apart
Jrom the fact that some of the proposals would have unduly limited
the Centre’ s jurisdiction. In the end, a large majority was in favour
of dropping the definition but to retain the term “legal dispute.”
(Aron Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States, 136 Recueil
des Cours 331 (1972-II), p. 362-363, Ven. Auth. 12);

99. As a result, to determine whether these objective requirements
are met in a given case, one needs to refer to the parties’ own under-
standing or definition. As long as the criteria chosen by the parties to
define these requirements are reasonable, i.e. as long as the requirements
are not deprived of their objective significance, there is no reason to
discard the parties’ choice.

5.2 The Objective Requirements Provided by Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention

a) Article 25(1): a Legal Dispute Arising Directly out of an Investment

100. The conditions of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,
which are not disputed by the parties, are clearly met. The dispute
between Aucoven and Venezuela is a legal dispute, since it relates to the
parties’ obligations agreed upon in the Agreement.

101. Moreover, according to the Agreement, Aucoven was to design,
construct, operate, exploit, conserve, and maintain the Caracas—La Guaira
Highway and the Caracas—La Guaira old road. Pursuant to Clause 64, the
parties expressly agreed to consider these works as an investment, which
seems reasonable. Indeed, the performance of the Agreement, which implies
substantial resources during significant periods of time, clearly qualifies as
an investment in the sense of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

b) Article 25(2)(b): any Locally Registered Corporation which,
Because of Foreign Control, the Parties have Agreed should be
Treated as a National of Another Contracting State

102. Article 25(2)(b) creates an exception to the rule that a national
cannot initiate ICSID proceedings against its own State. This exception
is justified by the fact that host states may require foreign investors to

40 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

operate by way of a locally incorporated company, without intending to
prevent such investor from acceding to ICSID arbitration.

103. Article 25(2)(b) (second prong) defines “national of another
Contracting State” as any juridical person which had the nationality of
the Contracting State party to the dispute, and which because of foreign
control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of another
Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.

104. Hence, locally incorporated companies may agree to ICSID
arbitration subject to two requirements:

* The parties have agreed to treat the said company as a national of
another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention; and
* The said company is subject to foreign control.

¢) The Agreement to Treat a Juridical Person as a National of
Another Contracting State

105. The Convention does not require any specific form for the
agreement to treat a juridical person incorporated in the host state as a
national of another Contracting State because of foreign control.

106. Further, Article 25(2)(b) does not define nationality. As
reflected in the Travaux préparatoires, the drafters intentionally gave up
inserting into the ICSID Convention a definition of nationality:

“The subsequent First Draft is silent on the possible criteria for cor-
porate nationality and merely refers to a possible agreement on
nationality between the parties (History, Vol. I, p. 124). Although
there was some reference to the fact that the criteria for the nation-
ality of a juridical person remained to be determined (History, Vol.
IL, pp. 669,671), no serious effort to do so was made. A United
States attempt to reintroduce the criterion of a ‘controlling interest”
in the definition of “national of another Contracting State” was
defeated by a large majority (at pp. 837, 871). The Revised Draft
and the Convention are silent on the method to be employed for the
determination of a juridical persons nationality.” (Christoph

CASES, Al

Schreuer, Commentary on the ICSID Convention, 12 ICSID
Review—FILJ 59 (1997) (Second Installment of Commentar-
ies Discussing Article 25), p. 81, Ven. Ex. 11)

107. According to international law and practice, there are different
possible criteria to determine a juridical person's nationality. The most
widely used is the place of incorporation or registered office. Alternatively,
the place of the central administration or effective seat may also be taken
into consideration (Christoph Schreuer, Commentary on ICSID Conven-
tion: Article 25, p. 81, Ven. Auth. 11; Aron Broches, The Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States,
136 Recueil des Cours 331 (1972-II), p. 360, Ven. Auth. 12).

108. The test of the place of incorporation or of the seat has been
largely adopted by ICSID Tribunals, for example in SOABI:

“The Tribunal has observed that the Convention does not define
the term “nationality”, thus leaving to each State the power to
determine whether or not a company is possessed of its national-
ity. As a general rule, States apply either the head office or the
place of incorporation criteria in order to determine nationality.
By contrast, neither the nationality of the company’s sharehold-
ers nor foreign control, other than over capital, normally govern
the nationality of a company, although a legislature may invoke
these criteria in exceptional circumstances. Thus ‘a juridical
person which had the nationality of the Contracting State, party
to the dispute”, the phrase used in Article 25(2)(b) of the Con-
vention, is a juridical person which, in accordance with the
laws of the State in question, has its head office or has been
incorporated in that State.“ (SOABI, p. 181, Ven. Auth.8)

“Such a reasoning is, in law, not in accord with the Convention.
Indeed, the concept of nationality is there a classical one, based
on the law under which the juridical person has been incorpo-
rated, the place of incorporation and the place of the social seat.
An exception is brought to this concept in respect of juridical
persons having the nationality, thus defined, of the Contracting
State Party to the dispute, where said juridical persons are under
foreign control. [...]” (Amco, p. 396, Ven. Auth. 1)

42 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

109. However, as stated by Aron Broches, the purpose of Article
25(2)(b) being to indicate “the outer limits within which disputes may be
submitted to conciliation or arbitration under the auspices of the
Centre”, the parties should be given “the widest possible latitude” to
agree on the meaning of nationality. Any definition of nationality based
on a “reasonable criterion” should be accepted (see Aron Broches, The
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and
Nationals of Other States, 136 Recueil des Cours 331 (1972-II), p. 361,
Ven. Auth. 12).

d) Foreign Control

110. Like the other objective requirements of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention, foreign control is not defined. Article 25(2)(b) does
not specify the nature, direct, indirect, ultimate or effective, of the
foreign control.

111. In different decisions on jurisdiction, arbitral tribunals have
discussed how far a tribunal should go in searching for foreign control.
In Amco the tribunal considered that it should go one step behind the
nationality of the host State; in SOABJ the tribunal searched for real
control and went one step further to second-tier control, i.e. to the
majority shareholders of the company holding the share of the locally
incorporated entity.

112. According to Venezuela, foreign control in the meaning of
Article 25(2)(b) means effective control. However, this interpretation
lacks convincing support. Indeed, the term “effective control” is not
found in the ICSID Convention. In addition, there is no indication in
the Travaux préparatoires and in the commentaries on Article 25(2)(b)
that “effective control” should be viewed as a threshold that has to be
reached before the parties may agree to treat a local corporation as a
foreign national in the meaning of Article 25(2)(b).

113. The review of the Travaux préparatoires shows that, given the
criticism drawn by attempts to define foreign control, the drafters
considered that the enterprise of defining foreign control (like nation-
ality, investment or legal dispute) was impracticable. Moreover, defini-
tions of these terms would be difficult to apply in practice and would
often lead to protracted investigation of the ownership of shares, nomi-

CASES, 43

nees, trusts, voting arrangements, etc. Hence, the drafters decided to give
the parties wide discretion to determine under what circumstances a
company could be treated as a national of another Contracting State
because of foreign control. The concept of foreign control being flexible
and broad, different criteria may be taken into consideration, such as
shareholding, voting rights, etc. (see Aron Broches, The Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other
States, 136 Recueil des Cours 331 (1972-II), p. 361, Ven. Auth. 12).

114. Given the autonomy granted to the parties by the ICSID
Convention, an Arbitral Tribunal may not adopt a more restrictive defi-
nition of foreign control, unless the parties have exercised their discretion
in a way inconsistent with the purposes of the Convention:

“The Convention does not specify what constitutes “control” for
this purpose (i.e. must there be a majority of foreign sharehold-
ers), and thus it would be difficult to challenge later such a stip-
ulation agreed to by the Contracting State concerned, regardless
of the objective situation.” (Paul C. Szasz, a Practical Guide
to the Convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes,
p- 20, Cl. Auth. 14)

115. Some commentators even consider that an Arbitral Tribunal
should be less stringent in assessing the level of control and the reason-
ableness of the criterion or criteria chosen by the parties when there is an
express agreement in this respect (Amerasinghe, Interpretation of Article
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, in R.B. Lillich, C.N. Brower (eds):
International Arbitration in the 21st Century: Towards “Judicialization” and
Uniformity?, 223 (1993), p. 242 Cl. Auth. 8).

116. On the basis of the foregoing developments, it is the task of the
Tribunal to determine whether the parties have exercised their autonomy
within the limits of the ICSID Convention, i.e. whether they have
defined foreign control on the basis of reasonable criteria. For this
purpose, the Tribunal has to review the concrete circumstances of the case
without being limited by formalities. However, as long as the definition
of foreign control chosen by the parties is reasonable and the purposes of
the Convention have not been abused (for example in cases of fraud or
misrepresentation), the Arbitral Tribunal must enforce the parties’
choice.

44 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

5.3 The Parties Agreement Expressed in Clause 64 Remains within the
Limits of the ICSID Convention

117. As stated above, the parties decided to subject their consent to
ICSID jurisdiction to the occurrence of a transfer of the majority of
Aucoven’s shares to a national of another Contracting State. Thus,
Aucoven and Venezuela chose to define the term “foreign control” only
by reference to Aucoven’s direct shareholding. They did not take into
account additional criteria, such as nationality of the directors, effective
or ultimate control over Aucoven.

118. According to Venezuela, this definition of foreign control,
which is merely based on a formal criterion, i.e. direct shareholding, does
not meet the requirements of Article 25(2)(b) ICSID. Indeed, notwith-
standing the share transfer, ICA Holding retained the ultimate control
over Aucoven: the Executive Vice President of the ICA group, Dr Guer-
rero, continued to attend meetings with officials of Venezuela, the
majority of Aucoven’s directors remained Mexican nationals and ICA
Holding continued to financially support Aucoven and Icatech.

119. As a general matter, the arbitral Tribunal accepts that economic
criteria often better reflect reality than legal ones. However, in the
present case, such arguments of an economic nature are irrelevant.
Indeed, exercising the discretion granted by the Convention, the parties
have specifically identified majority shareholding as the criterion to be
applied. They have not chosen to subordinate their consent to ICSID
arbitration to other criteria.

120. As a result, the Tribunal must respect the parties’ autonomy
and may not discard the criterion of direct shareholding, unless it proves
unreasonable.

121. Direct shareholding confers voting right, and, therefore, the
possibility to participate in the decision-making of the company. Hence,
even if it does not constitute the sole criterion to define “foreign
control”, direct shareholding is certainly a reasonable test for control.

122. The actual circumstances prevailing in this case confirm this
finding. Indeed, the Tribunal has found no indication supporting Vene-
zuela’s assertions that Icatech would be a corporation of convenience

CASES, 45

exerting a purely fictional control for jurisdiction purposes or that
Aucoven’s conduct in the context of the share transfer would have been
misleading.

4) Icatech is not a Corporation of Convenience Exerting Merely
Fictional Control over Aucoven

123. Icatech was incorporated in Florida on November 2, 1989, well
before the conclusion of the Agreement, the share transfer and the emer-
gence of the present dispute. Icatech, which has about 20 subsidiaries in
different countries, is subject to economic, tax and social regulations in
the United States, a country which is not considered a tax or regulatory
heaven.

124. As stated above (see para. 18), Aucoven requested Venezuela’s
approval of the share transfer at the very beginning of the project. As
Aucoven alleged without being contradicted, it was difficult at that time
for a Mexican company to finance projects because of the peso crisis.
Since a connection to the United States enhanced the ability to obtain
financing, again an assertion which remained unchallenged, ICA
Holding decided that Icatech would establish or acquire several interna-
tional project companies including Aucoven. Such explanation which is
being put forward by Aucoven in the context of the present proceedings
(Hearing of June 28, 2001, transcript, p.175) is consistent with the one
expressed in the request for approval of the share transfer:

“On the other hand, I must indicate, Honorable Minister, that
the purpose of the authorization requested herein is to create a
new capital participation structure of the concessionaire com-
pany in charge of the project, construction, developement, con-
servation and maintenance of the Caracas-La Guaira
Expressway and Old Caracas—Highway and Related Services”
(Letter from E. Perez Alfonso to Minister M. Orozco
Graterol dated July 11, 1997, Ven. Ex. 25)

125. Further, in connection with corporate decision-making, the
fact that Icatech exercises its voting rights (at least as far as major issues
are concerned) in a way consistent with ICA Holding’s strategy shows the
group’s coherence. It is certainly not sufficient to conclude that Icatech is
a corporation of convenience.

46 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

126. On the basis of these facts, the Tribunal finds that Icatech cannot
be regarded as a corporation of convenience. Hence, the assertion of ICSID
jurisdiction based on the fact that Icatech holds 75% of Aucoven’ shares
does not constitute an abuse of the Convention purposes.

b) Aucoven’s conduct was not misleading

127. According to Venezuela, when requesting approval for the share
transfer, Aucoven purposefully failed to mention the consequences of
such transfer. Following Venezuela's argumentation, Aucoven knew well
that Venezuela would not have given its approval pursuant to Clause 7 of
the Agreement, had it realized that such approval would entail consent to
ICSID jurisdiction. Far from being informed of the jurisdictional conse-
quences of its approval, Venezuela had merely been advised that the
transfer from one subsidiary to another would not affect any material
aspect of the Concession. ICA Holding accepted to guarantee Icatech’s
obligations as Aucoven’s shareholder, thus confirming its intention to
maintain its financial support to Aucoven.

128. On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal does not find Aucoven’s
conduct misleading. Aucoven unequivocally stated that the shares would be
transferred to a United States corporation. With its request, Aucoven
submitted Icatech’s Articles of Incorporation and other documents, such as a
good standing certificate and consolidated financial statements (Cl. Ex. 11,
15; Ven. Ex, 25). On this basis, Venezuela was in a position to assess the juris-
dictional consequences of the contemplated share transfer.

129. Venezuela approved the share transfer 15 months after
Aucoven’s first request. During this period of time, Venezuela apparently
studied the consequences of the transfer carefully. The record shows that
Venezuela's main concern—understandably so—was to ascertain that
ICA Holding would continue to grant Aucoven the necessary financial
support to perform its obligations and that the new majority shareholder
would have the technical expertise to run the project. The memorandum
from Mr. F. Salas and the letter from the Attorney General clearly
expressed these concerns:

“By virtue of the foregoing, we can conclude that both Ingeni-
eros Civiles Asociados, S.A. de C.V. and ICATECH Corpora-

CASES, 47

tion are owned by and indirectly controlled by the Mexican
company called ICA Holding by virtue of which the operation
whose authorization has been requested initially implies the
transfer of shares between associated and related companies that
preserve and maintain the construction experience, financial
situation, infrastructure and necessary equipment to fulfill the
scope of the concession of the Highway System, already accred-
ited.” (Memorandum from F. Salas to C. Carrillo dated
August 7, 1997 Ven. Ex. 26)

“(...] Finally it would be important to point out that the offi-
cial letter in question clearly shows that the Minister of Trans-
portation and Communication is aware, that he is responsible
for authorizing or not authorizing the Concessionaire Com-
pany’s transfer of shares, and that he is in favor thereof, having
given much consideration to the request from the economic-
financial and legal point of view. Therefore, he does not require
the opinion of the Federal Attorney General as to the substance
of the matter. |...]” (Letter from J. N. Garrido Mendoza,
Attorney General to Minister M. Orozco Graterol dated
June 29, 1998, Cl. Ex. 16)

130. The review of these documents does not lead to the conclusion
that Venezuela was misled as to the jurisdictional implications of the
share transfer. They merely demonstrate that Venezuela’s foremost preoc-
cupations regarded the continued viability of the project, more specifi-
cally Icatech’s expertise in the construction field and Icatech’s financial
situation. The consequences of the transfer on Clause 64 do not appear
to have been a concern. Significantly, once it obtained ICA Holding’s
guarantee of Icatech’s obligations, Venezuela promptly gave its approval
on June 30, 1998, without raising any further points.

131. This understanding of the facts is further confirmed by the
parties’ conduct during the following months. Indeed, in October and
November 1998, the parties discussed several provisions of the Agree-
ment. As a result, eleven clauses of the latter and its Annex A were clari-
fied or modified (Cl. Ex. 20). Clause 64 remained untouched. Its validity
was even specifically confirmed by the Ministry on January 13, 1999
(Minister of Infrastructure J. Marti, Resolution No. 003 dated January
13, 1999, Ven. Ex. 45).

48 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

132. On the basis of the above considerations, the Tribunal
considers that Aucoven did not mislead Venezuela by omitting to draw its
attention to the jurisdictional consequences of the share transfer.

6. The Parties Agreement to ICSID Arbitration is Valid and in Full Effect

133. Pursuant to the above considerations, Clause 64 which makes
the parties’ consent to ICSID jurisdiction conditional upon the transfer
of Aucoven’s majority shares to a national of another Contracting State
meets the requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

134. A majority of Aucoven’s shares, i.e. 75%, were transferred to
Icatech on August 28, 1998. Pursuant to the criterion of incorporation
which is commonly used to determine the nationality of a corporation,
Icatech is a national of another Contracting State (the United States)
according to Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. As a result,
Clause 64 became effective on the same day.

7. The Significance of the Intervention by Mexican Officials

135. Article 27 prohibits a Contracting State from espousing the
claim of one of its nationals in respect of a dispute that one of its
nationals and another Contracting State consented to submit to ICSID
arbitration.

136. Mexico is not a Contracting State. Therefore, it is not bound by
Article 27 of the ICSID Convention. Hence, Venezuela contends that,
should the Tribunal accept its jurisdiction, Venezuela would have to face
multiple claims. Indeed, no treaty provision would prevent Mexico from
interfering in the dispute between Venezuela and Aucoven. According to
Venezuela, Mexico has already espoused Aucoven’s claim with a view to
protecting the financial interests of ICA Holding, which is one of its
nationals.

137. The Tribunal Agrees with Venezuela that Mexico's interest in
the outcome of this dispute is somewhat disturbing when one considers
the purpose of the ICSID Convention. However, it cannot give such
interest the weight Venezuela seeks to give it for two reasons.

CASES, 49

138. First, Article 27 of the ICSID Convention makes a clear
distinction between diplomatic protection and efforts to settle a dispute.
The ICSID Convention provides a forum for resolving disputes.
However, its purpose is not to commit parties to arbitration, when there
is a possibility to reach an amicable solution. Hence, attempts to settle a
dispute do not constitute prohibited diplomatic protection in the sense
of Article 27.

139. The record shows that the purpose of Mexico's efforts has been
to facilitate the settlement of the dispute between Aucoven and Venezuela
(see Ven. Ex. 36, 37, 38, 39). There is no indication that Mexico has
espoused Aucoven’s claim.

140. Second, even if Mexico’s interventions were to constitute
prohibited diplomatic interventions in the meaning of Article 27 of the
ICSID Convention, this would have no bearing on the jurisdiction of
this Arbitral Tribunal which is properly created under Article 25(2)(b).
Indeed a denial of jurisdiction is not a remedy available in the context of
Article 27.

VI. CONCLUSION

141. The conditions of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and of
Clause 64 of the Agreement are clearly met in the present case. As a
result, Clause 63 providing for arbitration in Caracas was substituted by
Clause 64. Venezuela’s arguments as to the convenience of arbitration
proceedings in Caracas are thus inapposite.

142. As a result of the factual and legal considerations set out in this
decision, the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that it has jurisdiction
over the dispute submitted to it in these proceedings. This conclusion
should not be read as a general statement in favour of one definition of
foreign control in Article 25(2)(b) rather than another. It does not reflect
such a statement or opinion. It applies the provisions pertinent to this
dispute, i.e. Clause 64 of the Agreement and Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention. In doing so, it enforces the parties’ own test of foreign
control, which the Tribunal has found to be within the boundaries set by
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

50 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

143. Finally, the Tribunal is aware that the ICSID award in Banro
(Banro American Resources, Inc. and Société Aurifere du Kivu et du Maniema,
S.A.R.L. v. the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Case No. ARB/98/7))
reached a different conclusion. However, the circumstances in Banro were
different too. In Banro the transfer of shares was not subject to the
approval of the Government and, more importantly, the parties had not
contractually defined the test for foreign control. As a result of these
differences, the Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that an analogy
between Banro and the present case is inapposite.

144, The Tribunal reserves its decision on costs, legal fees and other
expenses for this stage of the arbitration to be dealt with in the final award.

VII. DECISION ON JURISDICTION

The Arbitral Tribunal hereby makes the following decision:

a) The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute submitted
to it in this arbitration.

b) The arbitration costs, legal fees and other expenses in connection
with the issue of jurisdiction shall be addressed in the Final
Award.

Done on September 27, 2001, the place of Arbitration being Wash-

ington, DC, USA.
THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

Prof. Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel Prof. Bernardo M. Cremades

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler

