Azurix Corp.
v.
The Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12)
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on the Application for Annulment
of the Argentine Republic

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., President
Judge Bola Ajibola
Mr. Michael Hwang S.C.
Secretary of the ad hoc Committee: Ms. Natali Sequeira

Assistant to the ad hoc Committee: Ms. Freya Baetens

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:
Mr. R. Doak Bishop Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino

Mr. Craig S. Miles Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Kerrie Nanni Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Amy Roebuck Frey Posadas 1641

King & Spalding CP 1112 Buenos Aires

1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000 Argentina

Houston, Texas 77002
United States of America

and

Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil
Mr. Francisco M. Gutiérrez
Mr. Federico Campolieti

M & M Bomchil Abogados
Suipacha 268, Piso 12
C1008AAF Buenos Aires
Argentina

Date of dispatch to the parties: September 1, 2009.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 
 
    
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table of Abbreviated References 4
A. Introduction 12
B. The dispute 17
Cc. The grounds for annulment
(a) Introduction
(b) Improper constitution of the Tribunal (Article 52(1)(a)).
(c) Manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b))..........
(d) | Serious departure from fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d).
(e) Failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e))
D. Derivative claim: 29
(a) Introduction 29
(b) | Arguments of the parties 30
(c) | The standard of review under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention............. 36
(d) — Azurix’s claims and the Tribunal’s findings .........0..0.0.0.ccesceeeeeeceeeeeeteeeeeeees 38
(e) The Committee’s views 40
E. Applicable law. 61
(a) Introduction 61
(b) | Arguments of the parties 62
(c) Failure to apply the correct law as a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles
(d) Failure to apply the correct law as a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views...
(e) Failure of the award to state the reasons on which it is based as a ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles
88
(f) Failure of the award to state the reasons on which it is based as a ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views
89
F. Denial of fundamental evidence and failure to consider key arguments................ 91
(a) Introduction 91
(b) | Background 92
(c) | Arguments of the parties 100
(d) | Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure as a ground of

annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles
106

 

Failure of the award to state reasons as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles..
The Committee’s views

 

 

 

 

 

 

(g) | Other ground of annulment advanced by Argentina..........0....0c:cee eee 120
(h) — Conclusion 121
G. Alleged conflict of interest and lack of independent judgment ..........0..0.0 ee 121
(a) Introduction 121
(b) | Background 122
(c) | Arguments of the parties 129
(d) Improper constitution of the tribunal as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles... 136

(e) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure as a ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles
140

 

(f) Improper constitution of the tribunal as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views .

(g) | Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure as a ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views

- 140

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

142
(h) — Conclusion 142
H. Damages
(a) Introduction
(b) | Arguments of the parties
(c) The Tribunal’s findings with respect to damages
(d) Failure to apply the correct law as a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b)

of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles
(e) Failure to apply the correct law as a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention: the Committee's views.
(f) Failure of the award to state reasons as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles..
(g) Failure of the award to state reasons as a ground of annulment under Article

 

 

 

 

52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s Views .............:c cee 162
I. Costs 173
Decision 179

 

TABLE OF ABBREVIATED REFERENCES

ABA

ADC Award

AES Jurisdiction Decision

AGOSBA

Amco Annulment Decision

AMT Award

Argentina

AAPL Award

Award

Azurix AGOSBA S.R.L.

Azurix Buenos Aires S.A. (also referred to as “the
Concessionaire”)

ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management
Limited v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/16, Award, October 2, 2006

AES Corporation v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, April 26, 2005

Administracién General de Obras Sanitarias de la
Provincia de Buenos Aires

Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of
Indonesia, |ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on
Annulment, December 17, 1992

American Manufacturing & Trading, Inc. v. Republic of
Zaire, \CSID Case No. ARB/93/1, Award, February 21,
1997

The Argentine Republic (the Respondent)

Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. (AAPL) v. Republic of Sri
Lanka, |CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award, June 27, 1990

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case No.
ARB/01/12, Award, July 14, 2006

Azurix

Barcelona Traction case

BIT

Camuzzi
Jurisdiction Decision

Canon

CDC Annulment Decision

Chorzow Factory

CME Partial Award

CMS Annulment Decision

Azurix Corp. (the Claimant)

Case concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power
Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain), Second Phase,
Judgment, |.C.J. Reports 1970, p. 3

Treaty between the United States of America and the
Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investment, signed
November 14, 1991; entered into force October 20, 1994

Camuzzi International S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/03/2, Decision on Jurisdiction, May 11,
2005

Canon payment of 438,555,554 Argentine pesos made by
ABA to the Province on June 30, 1999

CDC Group plc v. Republic of Seychelles, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/14, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005

The Factory At Chorzéw (Claim for Indemnity) (The
Merits), P.C.1.J., Ser. A., No. 17, 1928

CME Czech Republic B.V. (Netherlands) v. Czech
Republic, UNCITRAL Partial Award, September 13, 2001

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on Annulment,
September 25, 2007

CMS Jurisdiction Decision

Comfort letter

Committee

Concession Agreement

Continental-Casualty

Jurisdiction Decision

Decision on Jurisdiction

Diallo case

Disqualification Decision

Duke Award

ELSI case

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID
Case No ARB/01/8, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction,
July 17, 2003

See paragraph 9 of this Decision

See paragraph 5 of this Decision

See paragraph 27 of this Decision

Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Jurisdiction,
February 22, 2006

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case No.
ARB/01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction, December 8, 2003

Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic
Republic of the Congo), Preliminary Objections Judgment,
I.C.J., 24 May 2007

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case No.
ARB/01/12, Decision on the Challenge to the President of
the Tribunal, February 25, 2005

Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1 Ltd v.
Republic of Peru, |CSID Case No. ARB/03/28, August 18,
2008

Case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United
States America v. Italy), Judgment, |.C.J. Reports 1989, p.
15

ENRON

Enron Ancillary Claim
Jurisdiction Decision

Enron

Jurisdiction Decision

Envelopes Nos. 1 and 2

Feldman Award

Fulbright

GAMI Award

Gas Natural Jurisdiction
Decision

Genin Award

Goetz Award

Hytsa

ICSID

See paragraph 24 of this Decision

Enron v. Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/01/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim) August 2, 2004
Enron v. Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/01/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction January 14, 2004

See paragraph 220 of this Decision

Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. The United Mexican States,
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Award, December 16,
2002

See paragraph 251 of this Decision

GAMI Investments, Inc. v. Mexico, NAFTA UNCITRAL
Final Award, November 15, 2004

Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/03/10, Decision on Jurisdiction, June 17, 2005

Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v.
The Republic of Estonia, |CSID Case No. ARB/99/2,

Award, June 25, 2001

Antoine Goetz and others v. Republic of Burundi, |CSID
Case No. ARB/95/3, February 10, 1999

See paragraph 24 of this Decision

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Convention

Kléckner
Annulment Decision

Lanco
Jurisdiction Decision

Law, the

LG&E

Jurisdiction Decision

Lucchetti
Annulment Decision

Maffezini
Jurisdiction Decision

Malaysian-Historical
Salvors
Annulment Decision

Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and Nationals of Other States, March 18,
1965, 575 U.N.T.S. 159

Kléckner Industrie-Aniagen GmbH and others v. United
Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des
Engrais, |\CSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Decision on
Annulment, May 3, 1985

Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/97/6, Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction,
December 8, 1998

See paragraph 24 of this Decision

LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, April
30, 2004

Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert,
S.A. (formerly Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and Lucchetti
Pert, S.A.) v. Republic of Peru, |ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/4, Decision on Annulment, September 5, 2007

Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, \CSID
Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdiction, January 25, 2000

Malaysian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Decision on Annulment, April
16, 2009

MINE Annulment Decision

Mitchell
Annulment Decision

MTD Annulment Decision

Myers Award

NAFTA

OBA

ORAB

Pan American Jurisdiction

Decision

Repsol
Annulment Decision

Schroeders

Maritime International Nominees Establishment v.
Republic of Guinea, |CSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision

on Annulment, December 22, 1989

Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo,
ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on Annulment,
February 9, 2004

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of
Chile, |CSID Case No. ARB/01/7, Decision on Annulment,
March 21, 2007

S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Canada, NAFTA, Partial Award,
November 13, 2000

North American Free Trade Agreement, 32 I.L.M. 289
(1993) (table of contents, preamble, parts I-Ill) and 32
I.L.M. 605 (1993) (parts IV-VII, annexes)

See paragraph 26 of this Decision

See paragraph 24 of this Decision

Pan American Energy LLC v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/03/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, July 27,
2006

Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petrdleos
del Ecuador (Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10,

Decision on Annulment, January 08, 2007

See paragraph 24 of this Decision

Sempra
Jurisdiction Decision

Siemens

Jurisdiction Decision

Soufraki

Annulment Decision

Suez Jurisdiction Decision

Total Jurisdiction Decision

Tribunal

Vienna Convention

Vivendi
Annulment Decision

Vivendi II
Jurisdiction Decision

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on Jurisdiction, September
28, 2007

Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case No.
ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2004

Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, \CSID
Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and
Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. Argentine
Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on
Jurisdiction, May 16, 2006

Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case No.
ARB/04/01, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, August
25, 2006

See paragraph 31 of this Decision

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Vienna, May
23, 1969; 1155 U.N.T.S. 331

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, (first Annulment), Decision on Annulment, July
3, 2002

Companhia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi
Universal (formerly Générale des Eaux) v. Argentine
Republic (“Vivendi II’), ICSID Case No. 97/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction, November 14, 2005

Waste-Management Award Waste Management, Inc. v United Mexican States, |CSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, April 30, 2004

Wena Hotels Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID
Annulment Decision Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment, February 5,
2002

A. Introduction

1. On November 13, 2006, the Argentine Republic (“Argentina”) filed with the
Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID”) an application in writing requesting the annulment of the
Award, rendered by the Tribunal in the arbitration proceeding between Azurix
Corp. (“Azurix”) and Argentina on July 14, 2006.

2. The Application was made within the time period provided in Article 52(2) of
the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (‘the ICSID Convention”).' In its Application,
Argentina sought annulment of the Award on four of the five grounds set forth
in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, specifically claiming that:

(a) under Article 52(1)(a) the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) under Article 52(1)(b) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) under Article 52(1)(d) there had been a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure; and

(d) under Article 52(1)(e) the Award failed to state the reasons on which it

was based.

3. The Application also contained a request, under Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”), for a stay of enforcement of the

Award until the Application for Annulment was decided.

4. The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application on December 11,
2006 and on the same date, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, transmitted the Notice of Registration to the parties. The
parties were also notified that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2), the

enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

‘ Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other
States, March 18, 1965, 575 UNTS 159

By letter of June 14, 2007, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the parties were notified by the Centre that an ad hoc
Committee (“the Committee”) had been constituted, composed of Dr. Gavan
Griffith Q.C., a national of Australia, Judge Bola Ajibola, a national of Nigeria,
and Mr. Michael Hwang S.C., a national of Singapore. On the same date the
parties were informed that Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Counsel, ICSID,
would serve as Secretary of the Committee. On May 14, 2009, Ms Natali
Sequeira, Counsel, ICSID, was appointed as Secretary of the Committee.

On August 3, 2007, after hearing both parties’ views concerning the schedule
for the filing of written observations on the continuation of the stay of
enforcement of the Award as requested by Argentina, the Committee invited
the parties to simultaneously submit their written observations on September
12, 2007. By the same letter, the Committee confirmed that the oral
arguments on this matter would take place during the first session and
informed the parties that the Committee would make a decision on the
continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award in accordance with
ICSID Arbitration Rule 54.

In compliance with the Committee’s instructions, on September 12, 2007,
Argentina filed its Observations on the Continuation of the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, and Azurix filed its Opposition to Argentina’s

Request to Continue to Stay Enforcement of the Award.

The first session of the Committee was held, as scheduled with the
agreement of the parties, on September 20 and 21, 2007, at the premises of
the World Bank in Washington D.C. Prior to the start of the session, the
Secretariat distributed to the parties copies of the Declarations, signed by
each Member of the Committee, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 52(2).
During the session on September 20, 2007, several issues of procedure were
agreed and decided. On September 21, 2007, both parties addressed the

Committee with their respective arguments concerning the question of the

continuance of the stay of enforcement of the Award. During the session, the

Committee put questions to the parties.

After having heard the parties’ arguments, the Committee offered Argentina
an opportunity to file within seven days a statement in writing of its intention to
comply with the Award under the ICSID Convention in the event that the
Award was not annulled (“the Comfort letter”). The Committee further decided
that it would welcome Azurix to file any comments on Argentina’s written
statement within seven days after such statement. At the same time, it
decided to continue the stay of enforcement of the Award until it had taken a
decision.

On September 27, 2007, Argentina submitted a written statement signed by
Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino, Argentina’s Attorney-General (Procurador
General del Tesoro de la Naciédn Argentina), which stated ‘“/tJhe Republic of
Argentina hereby provides an undertaking to Azurix Corp. that, in accordance
with its obligations under the ICSID Convention, it will recognize the award
rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal in this proceeding as binding and will enforce
the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award within its territories, in the

event annulment is not granted.”

In a letter dated October 4, 2007, Azurix expressed its concern that
Dr. Guglielmino’s letter did not in fact provide additional comfort or security to
Azurix, given Argentina’s prior actions, and particularly in light of its recent
public announcements that Argentina would not acknowledge the final and
binding nature of the Decision on Annulment in CMS v. Argentina rendered by
the CMS ad hoc Committee on September 25, 2007.”

By letter of October 5, 2007, Dr. Guglielmino responded to Azurix’s letter of
October 4, 2007, requesting the Committee not to reach a decision regarding
the bank guarantee prior to giving Argentina an opportunity to present its case
concerning the statements alleged by Azurix.

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on
Annulment, September 25, 2007 (“CMS Annulment Decision”).

14

After considering the parties’ written and oral arguments on the matter and
due deliberation, the Committee issued on December 28, 2007 its Decision on
the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award.

In its Decision, the Committee unanimously ordered that the stay of execution
“should continue in force pending its decision on Argentina’s application for
annulment” and declined “to order the provision of any security during the

period of the stay.”

In accordance with the timetable set forth by the Committee during the
September 21-22, 2007 session, Argentina filed its Memorial on Annulment
on January 8, 2008. On May 7, 2008, Azurix filed its Counter-Memorial.

In reply to a letter from ICSID dated May 23, 2008, the parties signified their
agreement on June 2, 2008 to the proposal of the President of the Committee
to appoint a Legal Assistant, Ms. Freya Baetens, to assist the Committee in

the proceedings.

The Argentine Republic filed its Reply on Annulment on June 18, 2008, and
Azurix filed its Rejoinder on July 28, 2008.

After consultation with the parties, the President of the Committee held a
preliminary organizational telephone conference call with counsel for both
parties on September 3, 2008. The conference call was attended by Mr. Craig
Miles, Mr. Rodrigo Castillo, Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil and Mr. Francisco
Gutiérrez, on behalf of Azurix and by Dr. Gabriel Bottini, Professor Philippe
Sands, Ms. Gisela Makowski and Ms. Maria Alejandra Etchegorry, on behalf
of the Argentine Republic. During the conference call the parties agreed on
the manner in which the hearing on annulment would be conducted. These
agreements were reflected in the Committee’s Procedural Order No. 1 dated
September 10, 2008.

20.

21.

By letter dated September 16, 2008, Azurix submitted its additional
documents for the hearing. By email of September 17, 2008, Argentina
submitted its additional documents, including lists containing new Exhibits and
new Legal Authorities.

As agreed, a 2-day hearing was held at the World Bank offices in Paris on
September 29 and 30, 2008, at which counsel presented their arguments and
submissions, and responded to questions from the Members of the
Committee. Present at the hearing were:

—_ the members of the Committee: Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., President;
Judge Bola Ajibola and Mr. Michael Hwang S.C.;

_ the representatives of Azurix: Mr. R. Doak Bishop, Mr. Craig Miles and
Ms. Nanni Kerrie of King & Spalding; Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil, Mr.
Francisco Gutiérrez and Mr. Federico Campolieti of M. & M. Bomchil
and Mr. Rod Castillo of Azurix Corp.; and

_ the representatives of the Argentine Republic: Mr. Adolfo Gustavo

Scrinzi, Dr. Gabriel Bottini, Mr. Ignacio Pérez Cortés, Mr. Nicolas
Diana, Ms. Verénica Lavista and Ms. Maria Alejandra Etchegorry of the
Procuracioén del Tesoro de la Nacién; Ms. Guillermina Cinti of the
Provincia de Buenos Aires; Professor Philippe Sands of Matrix
Chambers and University College London; Mr. Zachary Douglas of
Matrix Chambers and Cambridge University; Ms. Penny Martin of
University College London; and Alejandro Daniel Korn and Jonathan
Etra of Ferrel Law: and

_ the legal assistant of the Committee: Ms. Freya Baetens;

Following the ruling of the Committee on September 29, 2008 as to the
inadmissibility of experts’ reports filed by the parties, on October 10, 2008, the

parties filed letters identifying particular paragraphs of their expert reports

22.

23.

24.

upon which they relied as part of their submissions, to which answering

objections were made by the parties by letters dated October 17, 2008.

On August 24, 2009, the Committee declared the closure of the proceeding
pursuant to Arbitration Rule 38.

During the course of the proceedings, the Members of the Committee
deliberated by various means of communication and have taken into account
all pleadings, documents and testimony before them, including documents
tendered at the hearing.

The dispute

In 1996 the Province of Buenos Aires (the “Province”) commenced
privatization of the services of Administracién General de Obras Sanitarias de
la Provincia de Buenos Aires (“AGOSBA’), the Province-owned and -operated
company which provided potable water and sewerage services in the
Province. The Province passed Law 11.820 (“the Law’) to create the
regulatory framework for privatization of AGOSBA’s services. Under the Law,
the future operator of the water services would be granted a concession which
would be overseen and regulated by a new regulatory authority established
for the purpose, Organismo Regulador de Aguas Bonaerense (“ORAB”). The
concessionaire was required to be a company incorporated in Argentina. The
Province engaged Schroeders Argentina S.A. (“Schroeders”) as adviser for
the privatization of AGOSBA and requested Schroeders to distribute an
information statement to potential investors. Schroeders sent the information
statement to ENRON Corporation (“ENRON”), a United States corporation,
inviting this company to participate in the bidding. ENRON requested from a
consulting company, Hytsa Estudios y Proyectos S.A. (“Hytsa”), a preliminary
report on the information furnished by the Province on AGOSBA and its
operations.

25.

26.

27.

28.

The privatization process was conducted by the Privatization Commission,
which tendered the concession on the international market on the basis of the
Law and of a set of contract documents prepared in accordance with the Law
by ORAB, including the Bidding Terms and Conditions and a draft Concession

Agreement.

A bid offer was made by two companies of the Azurix group established for
this specific purpose: Azurix AGOSBA S.R.L. (“AAS”) and Operadora de
Buenos Aires S.R.L. (“OBA”). AAS and OBA are indirect subsidiary
companies of Azurix. AAS was registered in Argentina and was 0.1% owned
by Azurix and 99.9% owned by Azurix Argentina Holdings Inc. (a company
incorporated in Delaware), which in turn was 100% owned by Azurix. OBA,
also registered in Argentina, was 100% owned by Azurix Agosba Holdings
Limited, a company registered in the Cayman Islands. Azurix owns 100% of
the shares in Azurix Agosba Holdings Limited.

Having successfully won their bid, AAS and OBA incorporated Azurix Buenos
Aires S.A. (“ABA”) in Argentina to act as concessionaire. On June 30, 1999,
ABA (also referred to as “the Concessionaire”) made a “canon payment” of
438,555,554 Argentine pesos (“the Canon”) to the Province.° On payment of
the canon, ABA, AGOSBA and the Province executed a concession
agreement (“the Concession Agreement”) which granted ABA a 30-year
concession for the distribution of potable water, and the treatment and
disposal of sewerage in the Province (“the Concession”). Handover of the
service took place on July 1, 1999.

Azurix declared that it knew and accepted the bidding conditions and
committed itself to undertake all measures necessary to ensure that OBA
would fulfill the obligations set forth in the bidding conditions and the
Concession Agreement as operator of the Concession during the first 12
At the time the Canon was paid the Argentine Peso was fixed in a one to one ratio with the
United States dollar. The Argentine Peso was pegged to the US dollar until December 31, 2001,
when “pesification” was implemented by Argentina in response to its economic crisis (Azurix

Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction, December 8,
2003 [“Decision on Jurisdiction”], footnote 1).

29.

30.

4

years of operation. Similarly, Azurix accepted that it would be jointly

responsible for the obligations of AAS and that during the first six years of the

Concession there would be no change in the control of AAS.

In the proceedings Azurix contended:

(a)

(b)

(f)

that its investment in Argentina was expropriated by measures of
Argentina tantamount to expropriation and that Argentina had, in
addition, violated its obligations, under the BIT, of fair and equitable
treatment, non-discrimination and full protection and security;

that such measures were actions or omissions of the Province or its
instrumentalities that resulted in the non-application of the tariff regime
of the Concession for political reasons;

that the Province did not complete certain works that were to remedy
historical problems and were to be transferred to the Concessionaire
upon completion;

that the lack of support for the concession regime prevented ABA from
obtaining financing for its Five Year Plan;

that in 2001, the Province denied that the canon was recoverable
through tariffs; and

that “political concerns were always privileged over the financial
integrity of the Concession”,* and “[w]ith no hope of recovering its
investments in the politicized regulatory scheme, ABA gave notice of

termination of the Concession and was forced to file for bankruptcy”.°

Argentina disputed the allegations of Azurix. According to Argentina, the

dispute was a contractual dispute and the difficulties encountered by the

Award { 43 referring to Azurix’s Memorial, p. 7.

Ibid.

31.

32.

Concessionaire in the Province were of its own making. In particular,

Argentina argued:

(a) that the case presented by Azurix was intimately linked to Enron’s
business practices and its bankruptcy;

(b) that the price paid for the Concession was excessive and opportunistic
and related to the forthcoming IPO of Azurix at the time Azurix bid for
the Concession through AAS and OBA; and

(c) that the Concessionaire did not comply with the Concession
Agreement, in particular its investment obligations, so that the actions
of the Province, including the termination of the Concession Agreement
by the Province, were justified.

On September 19, 2001, Azurix filed a request for arbitration with ICSID
against the Republic of Argentina, based upon the alleged violation of several
articles of the Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine
Republic Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of
Investment (the “BIT’).® Azurix alleged that Argentina’s treatment of Azurix’s
investment was tantamount to expropriation; that Argentina failed to provide
fair and equitable treatment, and full protection and security to Azurix’s
investment; that Argentina did not observe the obligations that it had entered
into with respect to Azurix's investment, had acted arbitrarily, and did not act
transparently. The arbitral tribunal (the “Tribunal”) was duly constituted on
April 8, 2002.

The Tribunal rendered a decision on its jurisdiction (the “Decision on
Jurisdiction”) on December 8, 2003, in which the Tribunal found that:

(a) Azurix has shown that, prima facie, it has a claim
against Argentina for breach of obligations owed by
Argentina to Azurix under the BIT;

(b) Azurix has ius standi to bring this claim, and

Signed November 14, 1991; entered into force October 20, 1994.

20

33.

34.

35.

36.

(c) the present dispute is within the jurisdiction of the
Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.’
The hearings on the merits took place from October 4 to 13, 2004 and on
November 30, 2004 post-hearing briefs were filed. On November 29, 2004,
Argentina submitted a proposal challenging the appointment of Dr. Rigo
Sureda as President of the Tribunal, pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6).

Dr. Rigo Sureda defended his position in a letter of December 10, 2004 on
which Argentina commented on December 30, 2004. Further correspondence
from Azurix’ counsel dated January 28, 2005 and February 1, 2005
elaborated on the disclosure of Fulbright & Jaworski’s representation of one
affiliate of Azurix Corp. and of one affiliate of Enron Corp. (see paragraphs
261 to 266 below).

On February 25, 2005, the two co-arbitrators of Dr. Rigo Sureda issued their
decision on the matter of the Disqualification Request of Dr. Rigo Sureda (the
“Disqualification Decision”),® finding that:

By any reasonable standard it cannot be said in the present
case that the party putting forward its Proposal has acted
promptly... The Tribunal therefore concludes that Argentina
is deemed to have waived its right to request the
disqualification of Dr. Rigo, on the ground that it has not
reacted with the promptness required by Rules 9 and 27 of
the Arbitration Rules ...°

The Tribunal further rejected the challenge to Dr. Rigo Sureda on the ground
that:

... [i]t is difficult to conclude that this situation would lead to
a judge party relationship’ as argued by Argentina. And to
pretend that because of his appointment, Dr. Tawil would
somehow “have authority” over Dr. Rigo, simply because he
is a member of the firm which appointed him in a totally
different case from the one in which Dr. Rigo acts as

Decision on Jurisdiction J 102.

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Decision on the Challenge to
the President of the Tribunal, February 25, 2005 (the “Disqualification Decision”).

Disqualification Decision {| 7-8.

21

arbitrator, would certainly be stretching any reasonable
concept of the powers of arbitrators.

37. In its Award of July 14, 2006, the Tribunal unanimously decided:

1. That the Respondent did not breach Article IV(1) of the
BIT [the expropriation clause].

2. That the Respondent breached Article II(2)(a) of the
BIT by failing to accord fair and equitable treatment to
Azurix’s investment.

3. That the Respondent failed to accord full protection and
security to Azurix’s investment under Article II(2)(a) of
the BIT.

4. That the Respondent breached Article II(2)(b) of the
BIT by taking arbitrary measures that impaired Azurix’s
use and enjoyment of its investment.

5. To award compensation to Azurix on account of the fair
market value of the Concession in the amount of
US$165,240,753 (one hundred sixty-five million two
hundred forty thousand seven hundred fifty-three US
dollars), including in part the additional investments
made by Azurix to finance ABA.

6. To award interest compounded semi-annually on the
amount referred to in paragraph 5 of this decision: (i) as
from March 12, 2002 to June 30, 2006 at the rate of
2.44%, which is the average rate applicable to US six-
month certificates of deposit during that period, and (ii)
as from 60 days after the dispatch of this award to the
parties until such amount has been fully paid at the
average rate applicable to US six-month certificates of
deposit.

7. That each party shall be responsible for their own costs
and counsel fees, and the Respondent shall bear the
fees and expenses of the arbitrators and the costs of
the ICSID Secretariat except for US$34,496 (thirty-four
thousand four hundred ninety six U.S. dollars) which
Shall be borne by Claimant.

8. That all other claims are dismissed."°

‘© Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Award, July 14, 2006 (the
“Award") J 442.

22

38.

(a)

39.

40.

41.

"
12

Argentina now asks the Committee to annul this Award.

The grounds for annulment

Introduction

Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an
application in writing addressed to the Secretary-
General on one or more of the following grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;
(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its
powers;
(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member
of the Tribunal;

that there has been a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on
which it is based.

(d)

<9

In the present case, Argentina identifies a number of matters which it claims
are grounds for annulment, relating to the Tribunal’s jurisdictional findings, to
its findings relating to the applicable law, to its consideration of evidence, to
the constitution of the Tribunal, as well as to the Tribunal’s calculation of the
damages. Argentina relies on four of the five grounds of annulment provided
for in the ICSID Convention, namely those under sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (d)
and (e) of Article 52(1).

An ICSID award is not subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except
those provided for in the ICSID Convention."’ In annulment proceedings
under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, an ad hoc committee is thus not a

court of appeal, and cannot consider the substance of the dispute, '2 but can

ICSID Convention, Article 53(1).

Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert, S.A. (formerly Empresas Lucchetti, S.A.
and Lucchetti Perti, S.A.) v. Republic of Peru, |CSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Decision on
Annulment, September 5, 2007 (“Lucchetti Annulment Decision”) | 101; MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd.
and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/7, Decision on Annulment,
March 21, 2007 (“MTD Annulment Decision”) {| 52-54; Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab
Emirates, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007 (“Soufraki
Annulment Decision”) {| 20; Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of
Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des Engrais, \CSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Decision on

23

42.

(b)

43.

only determine whether the award should be annulled on one of the grounds
in Article 52(1)."°

As was for instance stated in the MTD Annulment Decision, annulment has a
limited function since a committee:

. cannot substitute its determination on the merits for that
of the Tribunal. Nor can it direct a Tribunal on a
resubmission how it should resolve substantive issues in
dispute. All it can do is annul the decision of the tribunal: it
can extinguish a res judicata but on a question of merits it
cannot create a new one. A more interventionist approach
by committees on the merits of disputes would risk a
renewed cycle of tribunal and annulment proceedings of the
kind observed in Kléckner and AMCO. ‘*

Improper constitution of the Tribunal (Article 52(1)(a))

Article 57 allows for the disqualification of an arbitrator “on account of any fact
indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article
14.” Article 14(1) states that ‘persons designated to serve on the Panels shall
be persons... who may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment.”

 

Annulment, May 03, 1985 (“K/éckner Annulment Decision”) {| 61; Amco Asia Corporation and
others v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Annulment, December
17, 1992 (Amco Annulment Decision”) 39 (| 7.19), 51 ({] 8.08); Maritime International Nominees
Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment,
December 22, 1989 (“MINE Annulment Decision) 87 ({| .5.04), 88 (| 5.08); Wena Hotels Limited
v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002,
(‘Wena Hotels Annulment Decision”) 135 (] 18); CDC Group ple v. Republic of Seychelles
(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14) Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005,(‘CDC Annulment
Decision”) 248-250 (J 34-37); Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case
No. ARB/99/7, Decision on Annulment, February 9, 2004 (“Mitchell Annulment Decision”) {| 21;
CMS Annulment Decision, J 43.

Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/97/3, (first Annulment), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002,(“Vivendi Annulment
Decision”) 357-8 {| 62 (citing other authorities), 64; Klockner Annulment Decision J] 3, 83; MTD
Annulment Decision {| 90; Soufraki Annulment Decision {| 23.

MTD Annulment Decision { 54. Also M/NE Annulment Decision, | 4.02 (“even within the
framework of the Convention it [the award] is not subject to review on the merits”) and J 4.04
(‘Annulment is not a remedy against an incorrect decision. Accordingly, an ad hoc Committee
may not in fact reverse an award on the merits under the guise of applying Article 52’). Further
CMS Annulment Decision, {J 43-44: “[A Committee] cannot substitute its determination on the
merits for that of the Tribunal. Nor can it direct a Tribunal on a resubmission how it should
resolve substantive issues in dispute. All it can do is annul the decision of the tribunal: it can
extinguish a res judicata but on a question of merits it cannot create a new one.” Also Soufraki
Annulment Decision {| 24.

24

44,

(c)

45.

46.

47.

7
18

The scope of this ground of annulment is considered in paragraphs 274-284

(applicable principles) and 286-292 (Committee’s views) below.

Manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b))

This ground of annulment will exist where the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction, for
instance because the dispute is not covered by the arbitration agreement. As
was stated by the ad hoc committees in the K/léckner | Annulment Decision
and CMS Annulment Decision:

an arbitral tribunal’s lack of jurisdiction, whether said to be

partial or total, necessarily comes within the scope of an

“excess of powers” under Article 52 (1)(b).'®
However, the ground of manifest excess of powers is not limited to lack of
jurisdiction. This ground of annulment may also exist where the tribunal
disregards the applicable law or bases the award on a law other than the
applicable law under Article 42 of the ICSID Convention.'® As the ad hoc
committee in the CMS Annulment Decision stated:

A complete failure to apply the law to which a Tribunal is
directed by Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention can also
constitute a manifest excess of powers.'”

However, there is a distinction between non-application of the applicable law
(which is a ground for annulment), and an incorrect application of the
applicable law (which is not),"® although this is a distinction that may not
always be easy to draw. In the MINE Annulment Decision it was said that:

Disregard of the applicable rules of law must be
distinguished from erroneous application of those rules

Kléckner Annulment Decision {| 4.

Kléckner Annulment Decision {| 59; MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.03; CMS Annulment Decision
49; Lucchetti Annulment Decision | 98; MTD Annulment Decision {| 44; Soufraki Annulment
Decision { 45.

CMS Annulment Decision {| 49.

MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.04; CMS Annulment Decision {| 50-51; Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A.
v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), |CSID Case No. ARB/01/10, Decision
on Annulment, January 08, 2007 (“Repso/ Annulment Decision”) {| 38; Soufraki Annulment
Decision {| 85; Lucchetti Annulment Decision | 112; MTD Annulment Decision {| 45-49.

25

48.

(d)

49.

50.

which, even if manifestly unwarranted, furnishes no ground
for annulment.'®

To the same effect, in the CMS Annulment Decision, it was said that:

The Committee recalls, once more, that it has only a limited
jurisdiction under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. In the
circumstances, the Committee cannot simply substitute its
own view of the law and its own appreciation of the facts for
those of the Tribunal. Notwithstanding the identified errors
and lacunas in the Award, it is the case in the end that the
Tribunal applied Article XI of the Treaty. Although applying it
cryptically and defectively, it applied it. There is accordingly
no manifest excess of powers.”

Additionally, as was observed in the MTD Annulment Decision, it is an

express requirement of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention that:

the error must be “manifest”, not arguable, and a
misapprehension (still less mere disagreement) as to the
content of a particular rule is not enough.

Serious departure from fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d))
As was stated in the Vivendi Annulment Decision:

... [uJnder Article 52(1)(d), the emphasis is clearly on the
term “rule of procedure,” that is, on the manner in which the
Tribunal proceeded, not on the content of its decision.22

The terms of Article 52(1)(d) indicate that, for this ground of annulment to be

established, not only must the departure from the rule of procedure be

“serious”, but the rule of procedure in question must be “fundamental”.2>

In the Wena Hotels Annulment Decision it was further stated that:

In order to be a “serious” departure from a fundamental rule
of procedure, the violation of such a rule must have caused
the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from

MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.04.

CMS Annulment Decision {| 136.

MTD Annulment Decision {| 47.

Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 83.

MINE Annulment Decision J 5.05 and 5.06; MTD Annulment Decision {| 49.

26

52.

53.

24
25

what it would have awarded had such a rule been
observed.

This point was elaborated upon in the MINE Annulment Decision:

A first comment on this provision concerns the term
"serious". In order to constitute a ground for annulment the
departure from a "fundamental rule of procedure" must be
serious. The Committee considers that this establishes both
quantitative and qualitative criteria: the departure must be
substantial and be such as to deprive a party of the benefit
or protection which the rule was intended to provide.

A second comment concerns the term "fundamental": even
a serious departure from a rule of procedure will not give
rise to annulment, unless that rule is "fundamental". The
Committee considers that a clear example of such a
fundamental rule is to be found in Article 18 of the
UNCITRAL Model Law on_ International Commercial
Arbitration which provides: "The parties shall be treated with
equality and each party shall be given full opportunity of
presenting his case." The term "fundamental rule of
procedure" is not to be understood as necessarily including
all of the Arbitration Rules adopted by the Centre.*®

Failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e))

It is generally accepted that this ground of annulment only applies in a clear
case when there has been a failure by the tribunal to state any reasons, and
not in a case where there has merely been a failure by the tribunal to state
correct or convincing reasons. In the M/NE Annulment Decision it was said
that:

[T]he requirement that an award has to be motivated
implies that it must enable the reader to follow the
reasoning of the Tribunal on points of fact and law. It
implies that, and only that. The adequacy of the reasoning
is not an appropriate standard of review under paragraph

1(e)...

In the Committee's view, the requirement to state reasons is
Satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how

Wena Hotels Annulment Decision {| 48.
MINE Annulment Decision Jf] 5.05-5.06.

27

the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to point B. and
eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact
or of law. This minimum requirement is in particular not
Satisfied by either contradictory or frivolous reasons.”©

54. Similarly, in the Wena Hotels Annulment Decision the ad hoc committee
considered that:

Neither Article 48(3) nor Article 52(1)(e) specify the manner
in which the Tribunal’s reasons are to be stated. The object
of both provisions is to ensure that the Parties will be able
to understand the Tribunal’s reasoning. This goal does not
require that each reason be stated expressly. The tribunal’s
reasons may be implicit in the considerations and
conclusions contained in the award, provided they can be
reasonably inferred from the terms used in the decision.?”

It is in the nature of this ground of annulment that in case
the award suffers from a lack of reasons which can be
challenged within the meaning and scope of Article
52(1)(e), the remedy need not be the annulment of the
award. The purpose of this particular ground for annulment
is not to have the award reversed on its merits. It is to allow
the parties to understand the Tribunal’s decision. If the
award does not meet the minimal requirement as to the
reasons given by the Tribunal, it does not necessarily need
to be resubmitted to a new Tribunal. If the ad hoc
committee so concludes, on the basis of the knowledge it
has received upon the dispute, the reasons supporting the
Tribunal’s conclusions can be explained by the ad hoc
Committee itself.

55. The ad hoc committee in the Vivendi Annulment Decision added in this
respect:

[I]t is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that
Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with
respect to all or part of an award, not the failure to state
correct or convincing reasons. ... Provided that the reasons
given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues
that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the
point in terms of Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be
stated succinctly or at length, and different legal traditions
differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must

MINE Annulment Decision ff] 5.08-5.09.
Wena Hotels Annulment Decision {| 81.
Wena Hotels Annulment Decision {| 83.

28

56.

(a)

57.

be allowed a degree of discretion as to the way in which
they express their reasoning.

In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article (52)(1)(e)
should only occur in a clear case. This entails two
conditions: first, the failure to state reasons must leave the
decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any
expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be
necessary to the tribunal’s decision. It is frequently said that
contradictory reasons cancel each other out, and indeed, if
reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might.
However, tribunals must often struggle to balance
conflicting considerations, and an ad hoc committee should
be careful not to discern contradiction when what is actually
expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said
to be but a reflection of such conflicting considerations.”°

Thus, in the CMS Annulment Decision, the ad hoc committee found that this
ground of annulment had not been established because:

although the motivation of the Award could certainly have
been clearer, a careful reader can follow the implicit
reasoning of the Tribunal.°°

Derivative claims

Introduction

In the course of the proceedings before the Tribunal relating to Argentina’s
challenge to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, Argentina raised an objection that
Azurix had no standing to assert rights that arise from the Concession.
Argentina argued, that because the Concession was a contract entered into
between the Province and ABA, only ABA could assert rights under the
Concession against the Province. Argentina claimed that Azurix, being only a
shareholder of ABA, lacked ius standi to put forward “indirect claims” or

“derivative claims” relating to ABA’s contractual rights.

xt Vivendi Annulment Decision ff] 64-65.

CMS Annulment Decision {| 127.

29

58.

59.

60.

(b)

61.

Although the Tribunal considered that this objection to jurisdiction had been
filed out of time as it was only raised in Argentina’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction,
it decided that the issues it raised were such that they should be considered
at the Tribunal’s own initiative under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(2).°"

The Tribunal found that, given the wide meaning of “investment” in the
definition in Article I.1(a) of the BIT, the provisions of the BIT protect indirect
claims. The Tribunal further considered that this conclusion concurred with
decisions of tribunals that have interpreted the same provision in the same
BIT or similar provisions in other BITs to which Argentina is a party.°? The
Tribunal affirmed the ius standi of Azurix in this case, finding that Azurix was
the investor that made the investment through indirectly owned and controlled

subsidiaries.°° The Tribunal therefore rejected the objection to jurisdiction.

In its Application for Annulment, Argentina contends that the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers, within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b) of the
ICSID Convention, by exercising jurisdiction over Azurix’s claim for damages,
as all of Azurix’s claims alleged interference by the Province with rights arising
from or attaching to the Concession, to which ABA, and not Azurix, was the
party. Argentina further contends that Azurix incurred its alleged losses only
derivatively through its indirect participation in ABA, but the Tribunal allowed
Azurix to recover damages equivalent to the fair market value of the
Concession Agreement as if there were no corporate distinction between
Azurix and ABA.

Arguments of the parties

Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

Decision on Jurisdiction J 68.
Decision on Jurisdiction J 73.
Decision on Jurisdiction J 74.
Application for Annulment {| 19-22.

30

(a) The fact that the Tribunal had jurisdiction over Azurix does not mean
that it had jurisdiction over any type of claim asserted by Azurix as a
shareholder of ABA. While a shareholder with the requisite nationality
has the capacity or standing of an investor under the treaty, there is an
entirely different question concerning the scope of the claims that can
be advanced by a shareholder as a shareholder.

(b) | The substantive rights that attach to shares in a company is a question
that can only be resolved by the /ex societas, since neither investment
treaties nor international law in general say anything about the rights of
shareholders.*° A fundamental characteristic of a corporation, which
cannot be ignored in the investment treaty context, is that it is a legal
entity separate from its shareholders, with rights and liabilities entirely
distinct from theirs. A person does not have an individual cause of
action against third parties for wrongs or injuries to a corporation in
which he or she holds stock, even if the stockholders suffer harm from
the damage to the corporation, such as a reduction in the value of his

or her stock.

(c) The Tribunal failed to distinguish between the procedural right of a
shareholder to pursue an investment treaty claim and the substantive
rights that might form the object of that claim, and failed to state
reasons for its decision to extend the rights of Azurix as a shareholder

beyond those recognised in the municipal legal system.

(d) | The rights of ABA under the Concession could not be a form of “any
rights conferred by law or contract’ for the purposes of Article I(1)(a)(v)
of the BIT, as a right arising out of a relationship to which Azurix is not
privy, could not constitute an investment of Azurix.

8 Relying on Case concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited

(Belgium v. Spain), Second Phase, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1970, p. 3 (“Barcelona Traction
case”) JJ] 33-34.

31

(e) | Awards in other cases adopting the approach of allowing shareholders
to bring indirect claims in respect of the diminution of the value of their
shares, ignore the basic contours of the rights attaching to shares in all
municipal legal systems. There is no doctrine of precedent in
investment treaty arbitration and the Committee should decide this
case on the basis of the force of the legal arguments deployed by each
of the parties.

(f) At the time of drafting of the ICSID Convention, drafters considered and
rejected the possibility of granting a direct action to controlling
shareholders of local companies. Instead, they included the possibility
prescribed by Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, which ensures
that damages are paid to the company rather than to the shareholders
thereby protecting the rights of the company's creditors and other third
parties, while also eliminating the possibility of the local company and
its shareholders pursuing different claims in different fora in respect of
the same damage. By virtue of Article 25(2)(b), if Azurix exercised
control over ABA, it was obliged to bring claims under the BIT and the
ICSID Convention in the name of ABA and for the account of ABA.°°
The Tribunal's decision circumvents the requirements of Article 25(2)(b)
and makes that provision pointless.

(g) | Where investment treaties do allow claims to be brought on behalf of a
local company, they insist that the claim be brought in the local
company's name and that any damages awarded be paid to the
company and not to the controlling shareholder.°”

(h) If damages are payable to the shareholders directly, then (1) the rights
of the company's creditors may be prejudiced if the company cannot
pay its debts as they fall due, (2) the company is effectively absolved
from the tax regime of the host state in relation to the damages paid by

36

or Referring to Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 291 (CUP 2001).

Citing North American Free Trade Agreement, 32 I.L.M. 289 (1993) (table of contents, preamble,
parts I-II) and 32 I.L.M. 605 (1993) (parts IV-VII, annexes) (“NAFTA”) Articles 1117 and 1135.

32

62.

(k)

the state, (3) the shareholder can bypass the company’s own governing
bodies by pursuing a strategy that the company itself does not endorse
and there is a risk of double recovery, and (4) in the case of a
multinational company, a single measure of the host state causing
prejudice to that company could potentially generate an endless
number of claims from individual or corporate shareholders with
different levels of direct or indirect control over the same investment for

the same damage.

For the purposes of Article 1 of Protocol | to the European Convention
on Human Rights, the European Court of Human Rights®® has held
that, whenever a shareholder's interests are harmed by any measure

directed at the company, it is up to the latter to take appropriate action.

Azurix’s argument, that in pursuing its BIT claims it was in fact invoking
its own rights rather than the rights of ABA, is sophistry as it relied on

ABA's rights under the Concession.

This case is distinguishable from most other cases brought by
shareholders against Argentina because ABA was in a position to bring
a claim under Article 25(2)(b) in terms of the required foreign control,
and because the reasoning of the Tribunal in certain parts of the
Award—such as the rejection of Azurix’s claim under the umbrella
clause—is contradictory to the admission of Azurix’s derivative claim.

Azurix argues, inter alia, that:

(a)

Argentina's argument ignores the very nature of the dispute before
ICSID in which Azurix claimed that Argentina violated its obligations

under the BIT. As required by Argentine law, Azurix invested in

The first paragraph of Article 1 of Protocol | to the European Convention on Human Rights states
that: “Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No
one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the
conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of international law.”

33

Argentina through ABA, and that investment was entirely lost because

of the acts and omissions in Argentina in specific violation of the BIT.

(b) | The jurisdiction of ICSID is determined by Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention and is governed by the terms of the instrument expressing

the parties consent to arbitration, which in the present case is the BIT.

(c) Because Article 25 of the ICSID Convention did not define
“investment”, that task was left largely to the terms of bilateral
investment treaties or other instruments on which jurisdiction is based.
After considering the facts and weighing the evidence the Tribunal
found that Azurix’s investment satisfies the definition of “investment” in
the Treaty, and that Azurix’s claims arose “directly from” its investment

in Argentina.

(d) | The Tribunal’s decision is consistent with more than 14 other ICSID
cases that have discussed this same issue and have unanimously

found jurisdiction to exist in the same circumstances.*°

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/01/8, Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction, July 17, 2003 (“CMS Jurisdiction Decision”); AES Corporation v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, Apr. 26, 2005 (“AES
Jurisdiction Decision”); LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/1,
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, Apr. 30, 2004 (“LG&E Jurisdiction Decision”); Lanco
International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/6, Preliminary Decision on
Jurisdiction, Dec. 8, 1998 (“Lanco Jurisdiction Decision”); Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de
Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID
Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, May 16, 2006 (“Suez Jurisdiction Decision”);
Total SA v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/04/01, Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction, Aug. 25, 2006 (“Total Jurisdiction Decision”); Enron v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim) Aug. 2, 2004 (“Enron Ancillary
Claim Jurisdiction Decision”); Enron v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision
on Jurisdiction, Jan. 14, 2004 (“Enron Jurisdiction Decision”); Continental Casualty Company v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Jurisdiction, Feb. 22, 2006
(‘Continental Casualty Jurisdiction Decision”); Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision on Jurisdiction, June 17, 2005 (“Gas Natural Jurisdiction
Decision”); Camuzzi International S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/2,
Decision on Jurisdiction, May 11, 2005 (“Camuzzi Jurisdiction Decision”); Compafiia de Aguas
del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal (formerly Générale des Eaux) v. Argentine Republic
(‘Vivendi II’), ICSID Case No. 97/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, Nov. 14, 2005 (“Vivendi II
Jurisdiction Decision”); Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/16, Decision on Jurisdiction, Sept. 28, 2007 (“Sempra Jurisdiction Decision”); Siemens
A.G. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, Aug. 3, 2004
(“Siemens Jurisdiction Decision’).

34

(f)

The Tribunal did not override the principle of privity of contract by
exerting jurisdiction. Instead it distinguished between claims for breach
of contract and claims for violation of the BIT, and denied several of

Azurix’s claims because it considered them to be contractual claims.

The Barcelona Traction case has been distinguished by many previous
ICSID cases, and no one arbitration panel has interpreted that case as
holding that a foreign shareholder does not have the right to claim
damages when its investment includes a domestic subsidiary, as is the
case here.*? The Barcelona Traction case _ itself recognised the
developments occurring in international law on investment protection,
especially investment protection treaties, which may accord direct

protection to shareholders.**

Argentina’s acts and omissions may amount to both violations of the
BIT for which Azurix can seek redress before ICSID and breaches of
the Concession. Azurix is not barred from bringing its own claims
simply because Argentina's acts and omissions also breached the
Concession, and at least 10 other ICSID tribunals have rejected this
argument of Argentina.“ It is inaccurate to refer to Azurix’s claims as
“derivative claims’, as Azurix sought a remedy for the harm to its
investment, not for ABA’s breached contractual rights.

Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention is not applicable in the current
case because ABA was not a party to the arbitration. Whether ABA can
bring a claim under Article 25(2)(b) does not affect the right of action of
foreign shareholders under the BIT in order to protect their own

interests in the qualifying investment.

Referring to CMS Jurisdiction Decision {| 43.

Referring to Barcelona Traction case J 90.

Referring to CMS Jurisdiction Decision J] 65-68; LG&E Jurisdiction Decision {| 48-63; Lanco
Jurisdiction Decision {J 10-11; Total Jurisdiction Decision J] 68-69; Enron Jurisdiction Decision
149; Continental Casualty Jurisdiction Decision {| 85-86; Camuzzi Jurisdiction Decision 83;
Vivendi If Annulment Decision {| 112-113; Sempra Jurisdiction Decision {| 95; Siemens
Jurisdiction Decision {J 180-183; Total Jurisdiction Decision {| 80.

35

(c)

63.

64.

65.

The standard of review under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention

As noted above, a tribunal will have “exceeded its powers” for the purposes of
Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention if and to the extent that it has
exceeded its jurisdiction.**

However, Article 52(1)(b) expressly provides that, in order to justify annulment

of an award under this provision, the tribunal must not only have exceeded its

powers, but must have done so “manifestly”.“*

In the Lucchetti Annulment Decision, the ad hoc committee considered the
effect of the word “manifestly” in Article 52(1)(b) in cases where it is claimed
that the tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction. It stated:

However, the requirement in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention is not only that the Tribunal has exceeded its
powers but that it has done so “manifestly”. From the
writings of legal scholars it appears that there are
divergent views on the impact of this additional
requirement of “manifestness”. On the one hand, the view
has been expressed that where an ad hoc committee
finds that a tribunal has wrongly either exercised or failed
to exercise jurisdiction, the award should be annulled,
wholly or partly, without any further examination of
whether the excess was manifest. On the other hand, it
has been held by others that there should be no
annulment when the tribunal has wrongly assumed, or
failed to assume, jurisdiction, but its decision on this point
was tenable, since in such a case the tribunal would not
have manifestly acted contrary to the Bir.“

The ad hoc committee then went on to conclude as follows:

The Ad hoc Committee, for its part, attaches weight to the
fact that the wording of Article 52(1)(b) is general and
makes no exception for issues of jurisdiction. Moreover, a

See, inter alia, Klockner Annulment Decision {| 4; Vivendi Annulment Decision | 86; Soufraki
Annulment Decision {| 37.

Kléckner Annulment Decision {| 59; MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.03; CMS Annulment Decision
49; Lucchetti Annulment Decision | 98; MTD Annulment Decision {| 44; Soufraki Annulment
Decision { 45.

Lucchetti Annulment Decision {| 100.

36

66.

67.

68.

46
47

request for annulment is not an appeal, which means that
there should not be a full review of the tribunal’s award.
One general purpose of Article 52, including its sub-
paragraph (1)(b), must be that an annulment should not
occur easily. From this perspective, the Committee
considers that the word “manifest” should be given
considerable weight also when matters of jurisdiction are
concerned.

... Bearing in mind the requirement of “manifestness”, the

Ad hoc Committee will now examine whether the Tribunal

exceeded its powers and, in the affirmative, whether it did

so to such an extent as to justify annulment.*®
In the present case, the Committee agrees with the ad hoc committee in the
Lucchetti Annulment Decision that the wording of Article 52(1)(b) is general
and makes no exception for issues of jurisdiction. Thus, an award will only be
annulled under that provision on grounds that the tribunal lacked jurisdiction
or exceeded jurisdiction if the lack or excess of jurisdiction was manifest.

Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that “[t]he Tribunal shall be the
judge of its own competence”. As is clear from Article 41(2), issues of whether
the tribunal has “competence” include the question of whether the tribunal has
jurisdiction. Thus, by virtue of Article 41, in cases where there is any
uncertainty or doubt as to whether or not a tribunal has jurisdiction, that
question falls to be settled by the tribunal itself in exercise of its compétence-

compétence under that provision.

The Committee is of the view that Article 52(1)(b) does not provide a
mechanism for de novo consideration of, or an appeal against, a decision of a
tribunal under Article 41(1) after the tribunal has given its final award. The
Committee is rather of the view that it is only where the tribunal has manifestly
acted without jurisdiction that an ad hoc committee can intervene under Article
52(1)(b).*” The expression “manifestly” in Article 52(1)(b) means “obvious”

rather than “grave”, and the relevant test is thus whether the excess of power

Lucchetti Annulment Decision ] 101-102.
Kléckner Annulment Decision {| 4.

37

69.

70.

(d)

71.

“can be discerned with little effort and without deeper analysis”.*® Thus, if it is
obvious, without deeper analysis, that a tribunal lacked or exceeded
jurisdiction, an ad hoc committee may annul the tribunal's award under Article
52(1)(b) at least to the extent of the lack or excess of jurisdiction. If, on the
other hand, reasonable minds might differ as to whether or not the tribunal
has jurisdiction, that issue falls to be resolved definitively by the tribunal in
exercise of its power under Article 41 before the award is given, rather than by
an ad hoc committee under Article 52(1)(b) after the award has been given.

In these circumstances, even if it is subsequently seen to be arguable
whether or not the tribunal’s decision under Article 41 was correct, it cannot
be said that the tribunal manifestly lacked jurisdiction, and there is no basis for
an ad hoc committee in purported exercise of its power under Article 52(1)(b)
to substitute its own decision for that of the tribunal. As the tribunal's decision
under Article 41 must be treated as conclusive, in such a case there is also no
occasion for an ad hoc committee to express its own view on whether or not
the tribunal had jurisdiction.

The Committee now determines this ground of annulment in the light of these
principles by reference to the claims made by Azurix, and determined by the

Tribunal.

Azurix’s claims and the Tribunal’s findings

First, Azurix claimed that its investment had been expropriated as a result of
“measures tantamount to expropriation” taken by the Province, contrary to
Article IV(1) of the BIT. In respect of this claim, the Tribunal found that a
breach of contract by a State or one of its instrumentalities will not amount to
a breach of a treaty unless it be proved that the State or its emanation has

Repsol Annulment Decision {| 36 (citing other authorities): “/t is generally understood that
exceeding one’s powers is ‘manifest’ when it is ‘obvious by itself’ simply by reading the Award,
that is, even prior to a detailed examination of its contents". Compare Soufraki Annulment
Decision {[] 38-40 (stating that “the excess of power should at once be textually obvious and
substantively serious” (emphasis added)).

38

72.

73.

74.

gone beyond its role as a mere party to the contract, and has exercised the
specific functions of a sovereign.*° The Tribunal rejected the claim, and found
that in this case the impact on the investment attributable to the Province’s
actions did not amount to an expropriation because Azurix did not lose the
attributes of ownership. At all times it continued to control ABA and its
ownership of 90% of the shares was unaffected.©°

Secondly, Azurix claimed that Argentina was in breach of the obligation in
Article II(2)(a) of the BIT,®" which provides that an “fijnvestment shall at all
times be accorded fair and equitable treatment’. The Tribunal found that
impugned actions of the Province reflected “a pervasive conduct of the
Province in breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment’, hence

Argentina was found in breach of this obligation.®°

Thirdly, Azurix claimed that the Province and Argentina failed to observe their
obligations under Article II(2)(c) of the BIT (the “umbrella clause”),°* which
provides that “[eJach Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered
into with regard to investments”. In respect of this claim, the Tribunal found
that there was no relevant contract between Azurix and Argentina, and that
while Azurix may submit a claim under the BIT for breaches by Argentina,
there was no undertaking to be honoured by Argentina to Azurix other than
the obligations under the BIT,°° and that accordingly there was no breach of
the umbrella clause in the BIT.

Fourthly, Azurix claimed that the Province failed to observe its obligations
under Article II(2)(b) of the BIT,°” which provides that “[nJeither Party shall in
any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management,

Award J 315.
Award J 322.
Award | 330.
Award J 377.
Award J 442.
Award | 379.
Award J 384.
Implied in Award J] 384.
Award {| 386.

39

operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or disposal
of investments’. In respect of this claim, the Tribunal found that various
actions of the provincial authorities were arbitrary actions without basis under
the law or the Concession Agreement and impaired the operation of Azurix’s

investment;® and that Argentina was therefore in breach of this obligation.

75. — Fifthly, Azurix claimed that the Province and Argentina failed to observe their
obligations under Article II(2)(a) of the BIT,°? which provides that “[iJnvestment
Shall enjoy full protection and security’. In respect of this claim, the Tribunal
found that Argentina, having failed to provide fair and equitable treatment to
the investment, also breached the standard of full protection and security
under the BIT.©°

(e) |The Committee’s views

(i) Introduction

76. According to Argentina, it is a general principle that:

A person does not have an individual cause of action
against third parties for wrongs or injuries to a
corporation in which he or she holds stock, even if the
stockholders suffer harm from the damage to the
corporation, such as a reduction in the value of his or
her stock.

Argentina contends that, as all of Azurix’s claims alleged interference by the
Province with rights arising from or attaching to the Concession, to which ABA
and not Azurix was the party, Azurix lacked ius standi to bring these claims.

77. On this ground, the Committee regards it as necessary to distinguish between
two separate issues.

58
59
60

Award 393.
Award | 396.
Award J 408.

40

78.

79.

80.

The first issue concerns the extent of the substantive protections afforded by
the investment protection treaty. Even if a shareholder in a company is an
“investor” for the purposes of the investment protection treaty, and even if the
shareholder’s interest in the company amounts to an “investment” for the
purposes of the treaty, the substantive protections afforded by the treaty may
not extend to protecting that investment against conduct causing harm to the
company, as opposed to conduct causing harm to the shareholder directly.
Regardless of any question of ius standi, in that event any claim by the
shareholder alleging a breach of the treaty in respect of the shareholder’s
investment caused by a wrong or injury to the company would fail on its
merits. On the other hand, the claim might well succeed on the merits if the
treaty also conferred protections on the investment of the company itself (for
instance because the company, although locally incorporated, is deemed to
be a foreign investor because of its foreign control).

The second issue concerns the ius standi of a particular claimant to bring a
particular claim. In the example just given, questions of jus standi might
include whether the shareholder has jus standi to bring a claim alleging
violations of the treaty in respect of the shareholders own investment,
whether the shareholder has ius standi to bring a claim alleging violations of
the treaty in respect of the investment of the company as opposed to that of
the shareholder, and whether the company has ius standi to bring a claim

alleging violations of the treaty in respect of the company’s investment.

In the present case, Azurix did not seek to bring a claim on behalf of ABA or in
respect of alleged violations of rights of ABA. Rather, each of Azurix’s claims
alleged violations of the BIT in respect of what Azurix claimed was, for the
purposes of the BIT, Azurix’s own investment. The Committee therefore
considers that no issue arose in this case as to the ius standi of Azurix to
bring a claim on ABA’s behalf or in respect of ABA’s rights. Rather, the issue
was whether Azurix had ius standi to bring a claim alleging a violation of the

BIT in respect of Azurix’s own investment and, if so, whether, in the

4

81.

82.

(ii)

83.

circumstances of the case the provisions of the BIT had been violated in

respect of Azurix’s investment.

The resolution of these issues is a matter of interpretation and application of
the relevant provisions of the BIT and ICSID Convention. It is the BIT which
determines which particular kinds of interests are protected, and it is the BIT
and ICSID Convention which determine the persons who may bring
proceedings in respect of an alleged violation of the BIT in respect of a
particular protected investment. While certain provisions or formulations may
be commonly used in different investment protection treaties, each treaty
must be applied according to its own specific terms.

As indicated in paragraphs 41-42 above, it is not the Committee’s function to
reach its own conclusion on the correct interpretation of the BIT and ICSID
Convention in respect of these questions. That is the function of the Tribunal.
Here the task of the Committee is confined to determining whether the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in reaching the conclusion that it did.
In addressing this question, the Committee must itself consider the terms of
the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

The relevant BIT and the ICSID Convention fall to be interpreted in
accordance with the principles articulated in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “Vienna Convention”), which reflect
the customary international law rules of treaty interpretation as they already
existed at the time that the text of the ICSID Convention and the BIT were

adopted. Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention state:

Vienna, May 23, 1969; 1155 U.N.T.S. 331.
E.g., Sovereignty over Pulau Ligitan and Pulau Sipadan (Indonesia/Malaysia), Judgment, |.C.J.
Reports 2002, p. 625, at pp. 645-646, {] 37.

42

Article 31
General rule of interpretation

A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance
with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of
the treaty in their context and in the light of its object
and purpose.

The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a
treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including
its preamble and annexes:

(a) | any agreement relating to the treaty which was
made between all the parties in connection with
the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more
parties in connection with the conclusion of the
treaty and accepted by the other parties as an
instrument related to the treaty.

There shall be taken into account, together with the
context:

(a) | any subsequent agreement between the parties
regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the
application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the
treaty which establishes the agreement of the
parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable
in the relations between the parties.

A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is
established that the parties so intended.

Article 32
Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of
interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and
the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the
meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to
determine the meaning when the interpretation according to
article 31:

43

84.

(iii)

85.

86.

63

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or
unreasonable.

Article 32 of the Vienna Convention demands that the Committee determine
the interpretation resulting from the application of Article 31 before

considering the potential application of Article 32.

The principles in Article 31 of the Vienna Convention

The parties have not referred to any relevant agreement or instrument of the
kind referred to in Article 31(2) of the Vienna Convention, nor any
“subsequent practice” of the kind referred to in Article 31(3)(b) that would
establish an agreed interpretation of the BIT between Argentina and the
United States of America. Nor have the parties referred the Committee to any
agreement or rules of international law of the kind referred to in
Article 31(3)(a) and (c), other than the BIT and the ICSID Convention, and

general principles of customary international law.

Argentina argues that the relevant provisions of the BIT and ICSID
Convention must be read in the light of general principles of customary
international law under which the distinction in municipal law between the
tights of a company and those of its shareholders is transposed onto the
international plane. Argentina relies in support of this argument on the
Barcelona Traction case, in which the ICJ said that:

If the Court were to decide the case in disregard of the
relevant institutions of municipal law it would, without
justification, invite serious legal difficulties. It would lose
touch with reality, for there are no corresponding
institutions of international law to which the Court could
resort. Thus the Court has, as indicated, not only to

fake cognizance of municipal law but also to refer to
it.

Barcelona Traction case {| 50.

44

The ICJ thus observed that, because a corporation has a legal personality
separate from that of its shareholders:

.. whenever a shareholder's interests are harmed by

an act done to the company, it is to the latter that he

must look to institute appropriate action; for although

two separate entities may have suffered from the same

wrong, it is only one entity whose rights have been

infringed.
In the context of ICSID proceedings, Argentina takes the position that a
shareholder cannot bring a claim in respect of harm done to a company
merely because the shareholder has been prejudiced through a diminution in

the value of the shares.

In this regard the Committee notes that the Barcelona Traction case
concerned customary international law rules of diplomatic protection rather
than investment treaty arbitration. The ICJ held that in the field of diplomatic
protection the general rule is that, in cases of an unlawful act committed
against a company, only the national State of the company is authorised to
make a claim, and not the national State of the shareholders. However, the
ICJ recognised in that case, as well as in the subsequent Diallo case, © that
this general rule of international law may be subject to possible exceptions.”
Furthermore, the ICJ indicated in the Barcelona Traction case that this
general rule of international law was applicable “in the absence of any treaty
on the subject between the Parties’. It thereby acknowledged that the
general rule can be modified by treaty provisions. The ICJ stated that:

... Thus, in the present state of the law, the protection
of shareholders requires that recourse be had to treaty
Stipulations or special agreements directly concluded
between the private investor and the State in which the
investment is placed. States ever more frequently
provide for such protection, in both bilateral and
multilateral relations, either by means of special

Barcelona Traction case {| 44.

Barcelona Traction case {| 88.

Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of the Congo), Preliminary
Objections Judgment, I.C.J., 24 May 2007(the “Diallo case”).

Barcelona Traction case ff] 65-66, 92; Diallo case J] 91.

Barcelona Traction case {| 36.

45

88.

89.

69
70

instruments or within the framework of wider economic
arrangements. Indeed, whether in the form of unilateral
or bilateral treaties between States, or in that of
agreements between States and companies, there has
since the Second World War been considerable
development in the protection of foreign investments.
The instruments in question contain provisions as to
jurisdiction and procedure in case of disputes
concerning the treatment of investing companies by the
States in which they invest capital. Sometimes
companies are themselves vested with a direct right to
defend their interests against States through prescribed
procedures.

Similarly, in the Diallo case the ICJ said that:

... in contemporary international law, the protection of
the rights of companies and the rights of their
shareholders, and the settlement of the associated
disputes, are essentially governed by bilateral or
multilateral agreements for the protection of foreign
investments, such as the treaties for the promotion and
protection of foreign investments, and the Washington
Convention of 18 March 1965 on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States, which created an International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), and also by
contracts between States and foreign investors. In that
context, the role of diplomatic protection somewhat
faded, as in practice recourse is only made to it in rare
cases where treaty régimes do not exist or have proved
inoperative.”

As an example, a treaty could provide for the possibility of diplomatic
protection of shareholders by their national State in respect of an injury to a
company having the nationality of another State and thereby modify the
otherwise applicable rule of customary international law. Similarly, a treaty
might provide for a company to bring arbitration proceedings directly against
the host State in the event of an injury to the company by the host State. For
instance, in the event of an injury to the company, a treaty might enable

shareholders to bring arbitration proceedings directly against the host State.

Barcelona Traction case {| 89-90.
Diallo case { 88.

46

90.

91.

92.

The Committee accepts that a treaty may need to be interpreted against the
general fabric of customary international law. However, except where norms
of ius cogens are involved, a treaty is capable of modifying the rules of
customary international law that would otherwise be applicable as between
the States parties to the treaty. Indeed, often the very purpose of a treaty is to
effect such a modification. The purpose of investment protection treaties is
generally is to augment or modify the customary international law procedures
for protection of foreign investors. Hence the starting point in determining the
effect of the treaty is the terms of the treaty itself, rather than the principles of
customary international law that may or may not be displaced by the treaty
provisions.

Here the BIT confers specific protections on “investments”. Article 1(1)(a)
clarifies that the investments protected by the BIT are those in the territory of
one party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies
of the other party. It is not disputed that Azurix is a company of the United
States of America, and it follows that, according to its terms, the protections
accorded by the BIT apply to every investment in Argentina that is “owned or
controlled directly or indirectly’ by Azurix. The term “investment” is defined
very broadly in Article 1(1)(a) as “every kind of investment’. The words
“includes without limitation’ in the chapeau of that provision indicate that the
list in that provision of types of investment is non-exhaustive. Types of
investment in that list include not only “shares of stock ... in a company’, but
also “a company’ itself, as well as any “other interest in a company’, or even
any “interests in the assets thereof’. Other types of investment listed include
“tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as mortgages, liens
and pledges” (Article I(1)(a)(i)); “a claim to money or a claim to performance
having economic value and directly related to an_ investment’
(Article I(1)(a)(iii)); and “any right conferred by law or contract, and any
licenses and permits pursuant to law’ (Article I(1)(a)(v)).

Azurix claimed in its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction that its investment in Argentina
consisted of “Azurix’s payment of its US$438.6 million canon (which

47

93.

94.

nm
72
73

constitutes invested capital), its ownership interest and investment in ABA,
and the rights in the Concession Agreement’ .”'

The Tribunal found that:

Azurix made an investment by paying a “canon” to obtain
the concession to provide water and wastewater services to
the Province. To carry out the investment, Azurix organized
several subsidiaries, as required by the Bidding Terms, and
established a locally registered company in Argentina,
ABA.”

The Tribunal ultimately concluded that:

The Tribunal is satisfied that the investment described by

Claimant in its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction is an investment

protected under the terms of the BIT and the Convention:

(a) Azurix indirectly owns 90% of the shareholding in ABA,

(b) Azurix indirectly controls ABA, and (c) ABA is party to

the Concession Agreement and was established for the

specific purpose of signing the Concession Agreement as

required by the Bidding Terms. 3
In its ordinary meaning, the wording of Article I(1)(a) of the BIT embraces that
ABA itself would be an “investment” of Azurix for purposes of the BIT, since
ABA is a company (Article I(1)(a)(iii)) owned and controlled directly or
indirectly by Azurix (Article I(1)(a), chapeau). Although assets of ABA would
as a matter of law belong to ABA and not to Azurix, Azurix nonetheless had,
by virtue of its controlling shareholding in ABA, “interests in the assets” of
ABA (Article 1(1)(a)(ii)), and through that shareholding indirectly controlled
those assets (Article I(1)(a), chapeau). Assets of Azurix would also be an
“investment” of Azurix for the purposes of the BIT. Additionally, the legal and
contractual rights of ABA (Article I(1)(a)(v)), including the rights of ABA under
the Concession, being indirectly controlled by Azurix through its majority
shareholding in ABA (Article 1(1)(a), chapeau), would similarly be
“investments” of Azurix for the purposes of the BIT. Contrary to what
Argentina seeks to argue, the Committee considers that there is nothing in the

Decision on Jurisdiction {| 59, referring to Azurix’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction {| 6(ii).
Decision on Jurisdiction {| 64 (footnotes omitted).
Decision on Jurisdiction J] 65.

48

95.

96.

97.

98.

74

wording of Article I(1)(a) that would suggest that it is only Azurix’s legal rights

as a shareholder in ABA that are protected.

By reference to the wide terms of Article 1(1)(a) of the BIT the Committee
does not consider the Tribunal’s conclusion as to the definition of Azurix’s
investment to be manifestly inconsistent with an interpretation of the BIT
made in accordance with the principle in Article 31(1) of the Vienna

Convention.

As to the ius standi of Azurix to bring the proceedings in this case, the
Tribunal ultimately found as follows:

We conclude the discussion on ius standi by affirming the

ius standi of Azurix in these proceedings: Azurix is the

investor that made the investment through indirectly owned

and controlled subsidiaries."
The Committee notes that none of the critical documents governing the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal (the BIT, the ICSID Convention and the ICSID
Arbitration Rules) expressly addresses the issue of who has ius standi to
bring investor-host State arbitration proceedings pursuant to those treaties.
However, Article VII(1) of the BIT defines an “investment dispute” for the
purposes of that provision as including:

... a dispute between a Party and a national or company of

the other Party arising out of or relating to ... (c) an alleged

breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with

respect to an investment.
In this case there was clearly a dispute between Azurix and Argentina, and
that dispute concerned an alleged breach of rights conferred by the BIT with
respect to what the Tribunal found was, for the purposes of the BIT, an
investment of Azurix. In its ordinary meaning, here there was an investment
dispute between Azurix and Argentina.

Paragraphs (2) and (3) of Article VII then provide for the possibility of “the

national or company concerned” to choose to consent in writing to the

Decision on Jurisdiction J] 74.

49

99.

100.

101.

submission of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration to ICSID. The
reference to “the national or company concerned” logically means Azurix, as
the party to the “investment dispute” with Argentina. The Committee
concludes that the ordinary meaning of these words enable Azurix to bring
these proceedings. Indeed, it seems logical that Azurix would have jus standi
to bring a claim alleging violations of the BIT in respect of what is, for the
purposes of the BIT, Azurix’s own investment.

However, Argentina argues that paragraphs (1) to (3) of Article VII of the BIT
are to be read in the context of Article VII(8) of the BIT and Article 25(2)(b) of
the ICSID Convention. Article VII(8) of the BIT provides that:

For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this
Article [dealing with investor-host State arbitration], any
company legally constituted under the applicable laws and
regulations of a Party or a political subdivision thereof but
that, immediately before the occurrence of the event or
events giving rise to the dispute, was an investment of
nationals or companies of the other Party, shall be treated
as a national or company of such other Party in accordance
with Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention provides that in Article 25, the
expression “National of another Contracting State” includes:

. any juridical person which had the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute
on the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person
which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to
the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign
control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a
national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention.

Argentina argues that, by virtue of these provisions, Azurix is not entitled to
bring ICSID proceedings in respect of alleged violations of the Concession, to
which ABA and not Azurix is a party, and that only ABA could be entitled to
do so.

The Committee agrees that the effect of these provisions is to treat ABA as a
national of the United States of America for purposes of the investor-host

50

102.

103.

104.

75
76

State arbitration clause in Article VII the BIT and for the purposes of Article 25
of the ICSID Convention. Although the Committee notes that Argentina’s
position is that ABA could not have so invoked those provisions because of a
waiver provision in the Concession, these provisions appear to give ABA the
capacity to bring ICSID proceedings in respect of alleged violations of the BIT
with respect to the Concession.

Here the Committee finds that it is not called upon in this case to decide
whether or not ABA could in practice have brought ICSID arbitration
proceedings under Article VII(8) of the BIT and Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention. Although these provisions establish a possibility in certain
circumstances for a company incorporated in the host State to bring
proceedings against the host State for violations of the BIT, there is nothing in
the wording of these provisions that derogates from any right that the
shareholders in the company might otherwise have to bring proceedings
under Article VII of the BIT. Similarly there is nothing in the wording of any
other provision of the BIT or the ICSID Convention to suggest that any right
that a person might otherwise have to bring proceedings is in some way
limited by or subject to Article VII(8) of the BIT or Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention.

For these reasons the Committee does not consider the Tribunal’s conclusion
as to Azurix’s ius standi to be manifestly inconsistent with an interpretation of
the BIT and the ICSID Convention in accordance with the principle in Article
31(1) of the Vienna Convention.

As to the merits of the case, the Tribunal rejected the first and third of
Azurix’s claims on the basis that Azurix had established no relevant breach of
the BIT.” In particular, in respect of Azurix’s third claim, the Tribunal found
that there had been no breach of the “umbrella clause” of the BIT with respect
to Azurix’s investment, given that Azurix was not a party to the Concession.’®

See paragraphs 71 and 73 above.
See paragraphs 73 above.

51

105.

106.

107.

7
78

The Tribunal also found that certain matters did not constitute breaches of the
BIT as they were purely contractual matters.’’ However, the Tribunal upheld
Azurix’s other claims, having found that there had been breaches of the BIT
for which Argentina was responsible in respect of Azurix’s investment.’®

On this issue, the Committee considers that if ABA itself is an investment of
Azurix for the purposes of the BIT, it follows that conduct towards ABA also
will be characterised as conduct towards an investment of Azurix. Thus, for
instance, a failure to afford fair and equitable treatment to ABA would be a

failure to afford fair and equitable treatment to an investment of Azurix.

Argentina argues that this interpretation, which would enable Azurix to bring
ICSID proceedings alleging violations of the BIT in respect of assets
belonging to ABA and not to Azurix, and in respect of the Concession to
which ABA and not Azurix is a party, ignores the separate legal personalities
of Azurix and ABA and the fundamental distinction that exists in municipal law
between the rights of the company and those of its shareholders. Argentina
argues that no legal system can tolerate a situation whereby two entities have

precisely the same rights over the same thing.

The Committee does not accept that this is the result of the Tribunal’s
interpretation. In this respect, an analogy might be drawn with contracts of
insurance. Although only one person may be the legal owner of an item of
property, there may be others who would suffer financial loss if the property
were damaged or destroyed, and who are therefore entitled to insure that
property. In many cases, such others may be persons having some direct or
indirect legal interest in the property falling short of legal title, such as a
beneficial owner, a lessor or mortgagor. However, in some legal systems it
may also be possible for a person having no direct or indirect legal interest in
the property to insure it simply on the basis that that person would suffer a
financial loss if the property was damaged or destroyed. If all such persons

Award JJ] 150, 155, 160.
See paragraphs 72, 74-75 above.

52

108.

109.

separately insured the same property, this would not mean that all of them
thereby have become the legal owners of the property, or that all of them
have the same legal rights in the same thing. In the event that the property is
lost or destroyed, it may be possible for all such persons to make insurance
claims, although each may ultimately only be entitled to be compensated to
the extent of their own pecuniary loss rather than for the full value of the

property.

In the same way, the Committee considers that, even where a foreign
investor is not the actual legal owner of the assets constituting an investment,
or not an actual party to the contract giving rise to the contractual rights
constituting an investment, that foreign investor may nonetheless have a
financial or other commercial interest in that investment. This is so,
irrespective of whether the actual legal owner of the assets or contractual
rights constituting the investment is a wholly or partly owned subsidiary of the
investor, or whether the actual legal owner is an unrelated third party. The
Committee sees no reason in principle why an investment protection treaty
cannot protect such an interest of a foreign investor, and enable the foreign
investor to bring arbitration proceedings in respect of alleged violations of the
treaty with respect to that interest. An investment protection treaty having this
effect does not alter the legal nature of the investor's interest nor that of the
legal owner of the investment, nor does it ignore the separate legal
personalities and separate legal rights and obligations of the shareholder and
the company. Rather, it merely ensures that whatever interest, legal or
otherwise, that the investor does have will be accorded certain protections.

Where this occurs, conduct which violates the treaty in respect of the
investor's investment may also violate the rights of the legal owner under
municipal law and/or under the same or a different investment protection
treaty. This is so irrespective of whether the actual legal owner of the assets
or contractual rights constituting the investment is a wholly or partly owned
subsidiary of the investor, or an unrelated third party. In such circumstances
the Committee perceives that there is no reason why a treaty cannot permit

53

110.

111.

(iv)

112.

the investor to bring a claim under the treaty in respect of its own interest
directly protected by the treaty, whether or not the legal owner of the rights
constituting the investment may simultaneously be able to bring proceedings
in respect of its own rights before the domestic courts or a different arbitration
tribunal. Although more than one person may be able to claim in different fora
in respect of the same damage to the same assets, each may ultimately only

be entitled to be compensated to the extent of its own loss.

Here the BIT confers certain protections on certain investments of Azurix as
defined in the treaty and permits Azurix to bring ICSID proceedings in respect
of alleged violations of the BIT in respect of such investments. The
arguments of Argentina effectively seek to insert a proviso into the wording of
the BIT to the effect that an investor may bring proceedings for an alleged
violation of the BIT with respect to the investor’s investment “except where
the investment is a company and the alleged violation of the BIT consists of
an alleged injury to the company or to assets or rights which are legally
owned by the company rather than the investor’. No such wording is
apparent in the terms of the BIT, and the Committee would see such an
exception as inconsistent with the broad definition of “investment” in Article
1(1)(a) of the BIT.

For these reasons the Committee does not accept that the Tribunal’s
conclusions with respect to the ius standi issue are manifestly inconsistent
with an interpretation of the BIT and the ICSID Convention in accordance with
the principle in Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention.

Article 32 of the Vienna Convention

The Committee does not consider the provisions of Article VII(8) of the BIT
and Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention to be ambiguous or obscure.
However, Argentina in effect argues that the interpretation referred to above

leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

113.

114.

115.

First, Argentina claims that if damages in respect of an injury to a company
are payable to the shareholders directly, then the rights of the company’s
creditors may be prejudiced if the company cannot pay its debts as they fall
due. In addition, according to Argentina, if the State pays damages directly to
the shareholders, the company is effectively absolved from the tax regime of
the host State in relation to such damages. Argentina also argues that there
is a danger of double recovery if both the host State and a shareholder, and
possibly several different shareholders, are able to bring separate

proceedings in respect of the same injury to the company.

The Committee considers that while there may be unresolved problems in
relation to the possibility of multiple proceedings, double recovery and the
extent to which minority shareholders should be compensated if the local
company remains a going concern, this in itself does not make the
interpretation of the BIT referred to above “ambiguous or obscure” or
“manifestly absurd or unreasonable” within the meaning of Article 32 of the
Vienna Convention. In the present case, Azurix is in the not unusual position
of a foreign investor incorporating a subsidiary in the host State through
which the investment is made. That investment was found by the Tribunal to
have been rendered worthless by action for which the host State was found
to be responsible. The need to protect foreign investors in Azurix’s position
was one of the main reasons why investment protection treaties and ICSID
itself have been adopted. As the problems identified by Argentina appear to
be hypothetical in the present case, the Committee finds that it does not need
to address them.

A further issue raised by Argentina is that, if both the host State and a
shareholder are able to bring separate proceedings in respect of the same
injury to the company, this could lead to an endless number of claims
“creating general chaos in the form of multiple proceedings by shareholders
in the company with the inevitable risk of double recovery’, with “disastrous
consequences for the sustainability of the system of investment treaty
arbitration”. Argentina points out that Azurix owns ABA indirectly through

55

116.

117.

79

several other corporate layers and argues that other companies in this layer
might similarly have brought a claim in respect of the same subject-matter.
Argentina also argues that, where one or more shareholders bring
proceedings in respect of an injury to a company, and especially where the
company in addition also brings proceedings in its own name, the various
courts and tribunals may not take the same approach to the assessment of
damages, and that it would be difficult to ensure that each claimant in each
proceedings recovers only for that claimant's actual loss. Argentina contends
that Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention was included to avoid this
problem.

On the basis of the material before it the Committee is not satisfied that this is
the purpose and effect of Article 25(2)(b). There have been examples of such
multiple claims in practice,” and it has not been demonstrated by Argentina
that any real risk of “general chaos” or “disastrous consequences” has
emerged. Indeed to the contrary: tribunals have repeatedly pointed out that
mechanisms exist in international law for preventing double recovery.©°
Although Argentina criticises such statements, the Committee does not
consider that the hypothetical possibilities raised suffice to conclude that this
particular interpretation of a treaty leads to a result which is manifestly absurd
or unreasonable.

Argentina also suggests that a minority shareholder might bring ICSID
arbitration proceedings in respect of an injury to the company while the
company’s own governing body is seeking to settle the matter with the host

See in particular Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, Award of 3 September 2001, 14 WORLD.

TRADE AND ARBITRATION MATERIALS 35 (2002); CME Czech Republic BV v. Czech
Republic, Partial Award of September 13, 2001, 14 WORLD TRADE AND ARBITRATION
MATERIALS 109 (2002), Final Award of 14 March 2003, Court of Appeals of Stockholm decision
of May 15, 2003, 42 ILM 919 (2003) 15 WORLD TRADE AND ARBITRATION MATERIALS 83
(2003).

Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.

ARB/03/29) Decision on Jurisdiction (November 14, 2005) {[] 270-272; Camuzzi Jurisdiction
Decision J] 89. See also Lowe, Vaughan, Changing Dimensions of International Investment Law,
(2007) Oxford Legal Studies Research Paper No. 4/2007, 110 et seq.; Sacerdoti, Giorgio, The
Proliferation of Bits: Conflicts of Treaties, Proceedings and Awards, Bocconi Legal Studies
Research Paper No. 07-02, (2007).

56

118.

119.

120.

81

State. Whilst the Committee acknowleged such a possibility, in that event the
tribunal would only award the shareholder damages for the shareholder's
own loss and the amount of any settlement reached by the company would
be a matter to which the tribunal would have regard in assessing such
damages. Again, the Committee does not consider that Argentina has
demonstrated the existence of any real problem in practice in this respect.

A further matter raised by Argentina is that if a shareholder brings ICSID
proceedings and recovers damages, there is no way of ensuring that the
compensation received by the shareholder is applied for the benefit of the
company. Argentina suggests that any compensation received by a
shareholder should be applied for the benefit of the company, as is the case
under the NAFTA Treaty.®"

The Committee is not persuaded that as a matter of principle any
compensation received by the shareholder should be applied for the benefit
of the company. As the Committee has already observed, Azurix is a foreign
investor that has incorporated a subsidiary in the host State through which
the investment is made, and that investment of Azurix was found to have
been rendered worthless by action for which the host State was found to be
responsible. As a matter of principle, compensation for such loss should be
paid to Azurix.

Argentina then argues that to allow a shareholder to bring ICSID proceedings
in respect of an injury to a company would enable the shareholder to
circumvent an exclusive choice of forum clause in a contract between the
host State and the company. Here Argentina argues that, in a clause of the
Concession entered into between ABA and Argentina, ABA waived recourse
to international arbitration and provided for the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Argentine courts. However, successful recourse to the national courts by a
company would not necessarily prevent the shareholder from subsequently

bringing ICSID proceedings alleging that its loss as a result of the breach of

Relying on NAFTA Articles 1117 and 1135.

57

121.

122.

the treaty has not been fully compensated, notwithstanding the amounts
recovered by the company in proceedings before the national courts. Again,
the Committee does not consider that this possibility is to be regarded as a
result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

For these reasons the Committee is not satisfied that the interpretation of the
BIT and ICSID Convention that results from the application of the principle in
Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention is to be regarded as leading to a
result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable. Hence the Committee is
not required to have recourse to supplementary means of interpretation
under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention.

Nevertheless, having regard to the extensive arguments made by the parties,
the Committee does also consider whether recourse to such supplementary
means of interpretation would mandate any different conclusion to that
reached above. In this regard, the supplementary means of interpretation to
which the Committee has been referred include case law, writings of
publicists and preparatory work to the ICSID Convention.

123. As to other case-law, Azurix relies on some 14 arbitral decisions in which it

says that ICSID tribunals have allowed shareholders to claim under an
investment protection treaty in respect of an injury to a company in which
they were shareholders.°2

Azurix refers to CMS Annulment Decision {|] 68-76; Emilio Agustin Maffezini v The Kingdom of

Spain, |CSID Case No. ARB/997/7, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, Jan.
25, 2000 (“Maffezini Jurisdiction Decision”) {J 65-70; Vivendi Annulment Decision {J 46-50;
LG&E Jurisdiction Decision J] 50, 63; American Manufacturing & Trading, Inc. v. Republic of
Zaire, \CSID Case ARB/93/1, Award, Feb. 21, 1997 (“AMT Award”) {| 5.14-5.16; CME Czech
Republic B.V. (Netherlands) v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Partial Award, Sept. 13, 2001 (“CME
Partial Award”) {| 375 et seq.; Camuzzi Jurisdiction Decision J] 12, 78-82, 140-145; Antoine
Goetz and others v. Republic of Burundi, \CSID Case No. ARB/95/3, Feb. 10, 1999 (“Goetz
Award”); Gas Natural Jurisdiction Decision, {J 32-35, 50-52; AES Jurisdiction Decision J] 85-89;
Jurisdiction Decision {| 43-65; Vivendi II Jurisdiction Decision J] 88-94; Continental Casualty
Jurisdiction Decision {| 51-54, 76-89; Pan American Energy LLC v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, July 27, 2006 {J 209-22,(“Pan American
Jurisdiction Decision”); Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. (AAPL) v Republic of Sri Lanka, \CSID
Case no. ARB/87/3, Award of June 27, 1990, (“AAPL Award”); Lanco Jurisdiction Decision {| 9-
10; GAMI Investments, Inc. v. Mexico, NAFTA UNCITRAL Final Award I] 26-33, 43, Nov. 15,
2004 (“GAMI Award”); Sempra Jurisdiction Decision {| 90-102; Alex Genin, Eastern Credit

58

124. Argentina seeks to distinguish some of these cases, arguing that they
involved direct injuries to the legal rights of the shareholders, and argues that
some decisions either are wrong or unhelpfully follow earlier cases without
analysis of the relevant principles.

125. The Committee considers that even if this case-law was resorted to pursuant
to Article 32 of the Vienna Convention, it would not militate towards a
different interpretation of the BIT and the ICSID Convention compared to that
resulting from the application of Article 31.

126. As to writings of publicists, the Committee has been referred to some
references that support the conclusion reached by the Tribunal,®° but to none
that would lead to a different interpretation of the BIT and ICSID Convention

to that resulting from the application of Article 31.

127. As to the preparatory work to the ICSID Convention, Argentina argues that,
at the time of drafting of the ICSID Convention, drafters considered and
rejected the possibility of granting a direct action to controlling shareholders
of local companies and instead included the possibility prescribed by Article
25(2)(b). In this regard the Committee is not satisfied that it has been
established from the preparatory work that the inclusion of Article 25(2)(b) in
the ICSID Convention was intended to preclude the possibility of a
shareholder bringing proceedings in respect of a violation of an investment
protection treaty in respect of the shareholder's own investment, merely

because the investment consisted of the shareholder's participation in a

 

Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v The Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Award J
319-29 (June 25, 2001), (“Genin Award”); Siemens Jurisdiction Decision J 125, 135-44; Enron
Jurisdiction Decision J] 37-40; Waste Management, Inc. v United Mexican States, \CSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award [| 76-85 (Apr. 30, 2004) (“Waste Management Award”), (all referred
to herein as “the cases upholding shareholder claims”).

Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 290-291(CUP 2001) (see footnote
37); Rudolph Dolzer and Christoph Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law (OUP.
2008) 57; Engela C. Schlemmer, Investment, Investor, Nationality, and Shareholders, in Peter
Muchlinski, Federico Ortino and Christoph Schreuer [Eds.], The Oxford Handbook of
International Investment Law (OUP 2008), at 81-86; lan Laird, A Community of Destiny - The
Barcelona Traction case and the Development of Shareholder Rights to Bring Investment
Claims, in Todd Weiler [Ed.] International Investment Law and Arbitration, (Cameron May 2005)
at 77-96.

59

company which might potentially instead have brought proceedings in its

own name pursuant to Article 25(2)(b).

128. Argentina also has referred by analogy to the European Convention on

Human Rights and NAFTA. As the extent of the protections afforded by an
investment protection treaty depends in each case on the specific terms of
the treaty in question, the Committee regards comparisons with differently-
worded treaties as of limited utility, especially treaties outside the field of
investment protection. It is noted that the European Court of Human Rights
has held that (subject to possible exceptions) a shareholder in a company
does not have standing to bring a claim for a violation of the company’s
right’s under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 of the European Convention on
Human Rights, and that the mere fact that there has been a violation of the
company’s right’s under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, does not of itself mean
that there has been a violation of the shareholder's rights under that
provision.® However, such an approach does not inform the situation where
a law or treaty might confer certain rights directly on a shareholder which
would be violated by an injury to the company, or answer the question
whether the shareholder could have standing to bring a claim in that event.

129. The Committee concludes that even if resorted to the principles in Article 32

of the Vienna Convention would not require a different interpretation of the
BIT and ICSID Convention to that resulting from the application of Article 31.

On shareholder rights under ECHR law in general see: Agrotexim Hellas SA and Others v
Greece A 330 (1995); (1996) 21 EHRR 250; Association and H v Austria (1984) 36 DR 187 at
191-2; Matos e Silva Lda and Others v Portugual 1996-IV 1092; (1997) 24 EHRR 573; Société
Colas Est et autres v France 2002-IIl 421; Autronic AG v Switzerland A 178 (1990); (1990) 12
EHRR 485; Demuth v Switzerland 2002-IX 704; (2004) 38 EHRR 20; Comingersoll SA v Portugal
2000-IV 355; (2001) 31 EHRR 772. On shareholder rights under Protocol 1(1) in particular:
Olezak v Poland, Decision of November 7, 2002, EHRR 2002-X {| 61; Company S-S | AB and BT
v. Sweden, Application 11189/84 (1986) 50 DR 121, 138; Bramelid and Malmstrém v. Sweden,
Application 8588-89/79 (1982) 29 DR 64, 81; (1983) 5 EHRR 249. For an extensive analysis see
Marius Emberland, The human rights of companies: exploring the structure of ECHR protection
(OUP 2006) at 65 et seq.

60

(v) Conclusion

130.

(a)

131.

132.

133.

85

For the above reasons, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not
manifestly exceed its powers in determining that Azurix had ius standi to
bring its claim. The Committee rejects this ground of annulment.

Applicable law

Introduction
Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that:

The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such

rules of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the

absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the

law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including

its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of

international law as may be applicable.
Argentina claims that the Tribunal failed to apply the law of Argentina to
disputed issues arising out of the Concession Agreement, as expressly
required by Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention. Instead, Argentina says
that the Tribunal considered that its inquiry was governed “by the ICSID
Convention, by the BIT and by applicable international law’, and that the
Tribunal determined the disputed issues arising out of the Concession
Agreement on the basis that they were of a “factual nature”. Argentina seeks
annulment of the Award on the basis that, in failing to apply the law of
Argentina to disputed issues arising out of the Concession Agreement, the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers within the meaning of Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.®®

Argentina further claims that the Tribunal expressed contradictory reasons
with respect to the law applicable to disputed issues arising out of the
Concession Agreement, which were critical to its findings of liability against

Application for Annulment ff] 16-18.

61

(b)

134.

Argentina. Argentina maintains that on the one hand the Tribunal stated that
the law of Argentina was “helpful in the carrying out of the Tribunal’s enquiry”
but that the Tribunal also characterised the issues arising out of the
Concession Agreement as factual issues, and dealt with Argentine law in a
part of the Award headed “The Facts”. Argentina further seeks annulment of
the Award on the ground that by issuing such contradictory reasons with
respect to the applicable law the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which
the Award was based, within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID

Convention.

Arguments of the parties
Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention

(a) It is a settled principle that a tribunal’s application of the wrong law is an

excess of authority and a ground for annulment.”

(b) As the parties did not agree on the applicable law, the Tribunal was
obliged, in accordance with Article 42 of the ICSID Convention, to apply
Argentine law and international law “as may be applicable” .®® Despite
this obligation, the Tribunal concluded that “the Tribunal’s inquiry is
governed by the ICSID Convention, by the BIT and by applicable
international law’ .®°

(c) Although the Tribunal stated that it did not completely discard Argentine
law, insofar as “the law of Argentina should be helpful in the carrying

Application for Annulment {| 30.

Relying on Eric A. Schwartz, Finality at What Cost? The Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee in
Wena Hotels v. Egypt, in ANNULMENT OF ICSID Awarps 43, 55 (Emmanuel Gaillard and Yas
Banifatemi eds., 2004); CMS Annulment Decision {| 49; M/NE Annulment Decision {] 5.03.
Relying on Amco / Annulment Decision {J 20-22; Kiéckner Annulment Decision {[{] 68-69; CDC
Annulment Decision {| 45-46; Repsol Annulment Decision | 37; MTD Annulment Decision {| 44.
Referring to Award {| 67.

62

out of the Tribunal’s inquiry into the alleged breaches of the
Concession Agreement to which Argentina’s law applies” °° the
Tribunal stated that this inquiry should be limited because of “the treaty
nature of the claims under consideration”.°' The Tribunal thereby
disregarded Argentine law in deciding the controversy since although it
found that Argentine law may be used to inquire into the alleged
breaches of the Concession Agreement, it also found that such
breaches of the Concession Agreement were not part of the “claims
under consideration”. As such, Argentine law was not considered by
the Tribunal to be law applicable to the claims under consideration,
contrary to Article 42(1).

(d) The Tribunal noted that “the allegations of [Azurix] are based on
disputes related to the Concession Agreement’, and, by its express
terms, the law of Argentina governed the interpretation of the

Concession Agreement. °°

(e) | The Tribunal referred to what it considered to be Argentine law in a
section of the Award dealing with the “Facts” and proceeded to
determine the disputed issues arising out of the Concession Agreement
on the basis that they were of a “factual” nature.** The Tribunal could
not avoid the application of Argentine law as the governing law of the
contract by re-labelling issues of contractual interpretation as issues of
fact. Even if, in general international law, a national law “is generally
regarded as a fact with reference to which rules of international law
have to be applied’, under Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention,
national law has to be treated as part of the applicable law and not as a
fact.

Referring to Award {| 67.
Referring to Award {| 67.
Referring to Award {| 53.
Referring to Award {| 67.
Referring to Award {| 68.

63

(f)

The Tribunal found that in light of the principle of exceptio non adimpleti
contractus (the “exceptio principle”), the Province should have
accepted ABA’s unilateral termination of the Concession Agreement,
and that the Province’s failure to do so was ultimately a breach of the
“fair and equitable treatment” provision in Article II(2)(a) of the BIT.
However, the exceptio principle is not part of Argentine administrative
law, which follows French administrative law in creating a special
regime for public contracts, one of the essential features of which is
that the concessionaire does not have the right to suspend its
performance of the contract even if the state party is in breach. The
Tribunal in effect modified the applicable law by relying upon a legal
principle unknown in Argentine law, and by then testing the Province’s
conduct against the “fair and equitable treatment” provision by
reference to that principle. The Tribunal’s reference to the exceptio
principle was a fundamental part of its decision regarding Argentina’s
alleged breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard.

An expert opinion presented by Professor Tomas Ramon Fernandez in
the original proceedings held that the inapplicability of the exceptio
principle to public service concessions is subject to exceptions where
the concession agreement foresees otherwise, or when the
inapplicability of the principle may force “one person to go bankrupt for
the benefit of another, or for the benefit of society as a whole”. While
Argentina rejects Professor Fernandez’s analysis of the exceptions, in
any event, none of those exceptions—as the Tribunal itself
recognised—exist in the present controversy: the Concession
Agreement did not foresee the exceptio in this case, and ABA could
have requested judicial termination of the Concession if it could not
continue the Concession.

The Tribunal’s decision therefore abandons the applicable law and in
so doing destroys the legitimate expectations of the parties to the

64

Concession Agreement, who contracted on the basis of the applicable

Argentine administrative law on public contracts.

In purporting to provide “a balance to the relationship between the
government and the concessionaire”,°> and by resorting to the exceptio
principle, the Tribunal in effect impermissibly decided ex aequo et bono
instead of deciding in accordance with Argentine law as the law
governing the Concession Agreement. The Tribunal recognised the
applicable law, saw what it thought the result would have been and

decided that it would apply something different.

If the Tribunal’s decision is generalised, the absence of the exceptio
principle in the legal regime applicable to public contracts may
constitute a per se violation of the equitable treatment standard, and
either the compatibility of public contracts with investment protection
obligations is now in doubt in all continental legal systems, or the
Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers by rewriting the rules
applicable to the Concession between ABA and the Province.

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention

(k)

Since the law which the Tribunal allegedly applied was not applicable
law at all, such law cannot provide a ground for the Tribunal’s
conclusion.

Contradictory reasons in an award have been regularly recognized by
ICSID ad hoc committees as a failure to state reasons,°” and “two

genuinely contradictory reasons cancel each other out’.®

Referring to Award {[ 260.

Relying on Soufraki Annulment Decision {| 96.

Relying on Kléckner Annulment Decision {| 116; Amco / Annulment Decision {| 97-98; Amco I/
Annulment Decision {| 1.18; Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 63; CDC Annulment Decision {| 70;
Mitchell Annulment Decision {| 21; Repso/ Annulment Decision {| 37; MTD Annulment Decision {|
78; Lucchetti Annulment Decision ] 127; Soufraki Annulment Decision {| 122.

65

The Tribunal’s statement that that it would not apply Argentine law
except to the alleged breaches of the Concession Agreement, and its
statement that it would not analyse the alleged breaches of the
Concession Agreement as they are not “under consideration”, are two
contradictory statements that cancel each other out. Either the Tribunal
applies Argentine law or it does not apply Argentine law, but for the
Tribunal to apply Argentine law to issues which it will not decide on is a
contradiction in terms.

Another contradiction in the Award is that the Tribunal acknowledged
that in accordance with Argentine administrative law, the only party who
could terminate the agreement was the Provincial Executive Authority,
yet the Tribunal found that the refusal by the Province to accept
Azurix’s notice of termination of the Concession was a breach of the
fair and equitable treatment standard. Either these two conclusions are
contradictory, or the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
applying the exceptio principle.

The Tribunal also failed to state reasons as regards its conclusion on
the issue of the zoning coefficients, °° since Tribunal in its conclusion
failed to address Argentina’s position that the ORAB’s decision had
become administratively final. The failure to address arguments raised
by the parties, if the answer could have affected the Tribunal’s

conclusion, amounts to a failure to state reasons.‘

In dealing with the “full protection and security” provision in Article
Il(2)(a) of the BIT, the Tribunal did not refer to the standard necessary
to violate that standard but rather decided that “the Tribunal, having
failed to provide fair and equitable treatment to the investment, finds
that the Respondent also breached the standard of full protection and

 

98
99
100

Relying on Kiéckner Annulment Decision {| 116.
Award {If 78-92.
Relying on MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.13.

66

security under the BIT’.'°' If the standard of full protection and security
were the same as the standard of fair and equitable treatment under
the Treaty, there would be no effet utile for the second standard.‘
Therefore, the Tribunal has not provided reasons for its conclusion
regarding the standard of full protection and security. Furthermore, if
the standard of fair and equitable treatment is annulled, this must
necessarily imply (as a direct consequence) the annulment of the
Tribunal’s conclusion as regards the standard of full protection and

security.

135. Azurix argues, inter alia, that:

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention

(a) | With respect to the applicable law, the Tribunal’s methodology is clearly
set out in paragraphs 65 and 66 of the Award. The Tribunal notes that,
under Argentine law, international treaties have primacy over domestic
laws, and that the Tribunal would apply “both legal orders” since each
one had “a role to play” which “may vary depending on which element
of the dispute is considered’. The Tribunal applied the BIT, the
ICSID Convention, international law and Argentine law to consider
Azurix’s claims, applying each of them in its proper role.

(b) | The Tribunal, upon applying Argentine law to the claims related to the

4 construction variations,°° Valuations 2000, 1%

7

zoning coefficients, '©

and the Bahia Blanca crisis, arrived at the conclusion that the

Province’s conduct not only violated the Concession Agreement and

Award J 408.

The Tribunal understands the term “effet utile” to have the same meaning as the Latin maxim “ut
res magis valeat quam pereat’.

Award {| 65-66.

Referring to Award J] 90-92.

Referring to Award [J] 99-102.

Referring to Award {| 107.

Referring to Award JJ] 141-144.

67

(c)

(f)

the regulatory framework, but also evidenced the exercise of sovereign
power that violated BIT standards.'°® Conversely, in the case of the
Retail Price Index (RPI) and certain Circular 31(A) works, the Tribunal
dismissed Azurix’s claims by considering that the Province’s conduct
did not violate Argentine law (RPI)'°® or that they were simple
contractual matters (Circular 31 works) rather than evidencing the

exercise of sovereign power.'"°

The approach of the Tribunal is consistent with international practice.'"*

The BIT is lex specialis under Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, ''2
as well as from the standpoint of Argentine national law, since
international treaties are part of Argentine law and prevail over local

legislation according to Article 75(22) of the Argentine Constitution.

The Tribunal did not “re-label” issues of contractual interpretation as
issues of fact. From the standpoint of international law, a national law is
generally regarded as a fact with reference to which rules of
international law have to be applied, rather than as a rule to be applied

on the international plane as a rule of law.‘

The Tribunal interpreted Argentine law as a step in determining if any
breach of contract occurred. Having found certain breaches of contract,
the Tribunal examined Azurix’s claims to determine if the conduct of the
State violated the BIT. Not every breach of contract by a State
automatically amounts to a violation of international law, but the fact
that there is a breach of contract does not exclude the possibility that

Referring to Award J] 374-377, 393, 408.

Referring to Award J] 114-119.

Referring to Award {J 150, 155, 160.

Relying on Siemens Award {| 78.

Relying on M.C./. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine, Inc. v. Ecuador, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/6, Award, July 31, 2007 J 217-218.

Relying on OPPENHEIM’S INTERNATIONAL LAW 83 (Jennings & Watts ed. 1992).

68

114

(h)

there has been a breach of international law; the standards are simply
different.'"*

The Tribunal applied the BIT and international law to Azurix’s claims
under the BIT, and also considered Argentine law in reaching its
conclusions on both liability and damages. This approach is consistent
with Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, and cannot be considered

as a “manifest” excess of powers.

The Tribunal’s findings regarding the termination of the Concession
Agreement and the violation of the fair and treatment standard are not
based on the exceptio principle. The Tribunal’s discussion of that
principle was obiter dicta and not central to its decision concerning
failure to accord fair and equitable treatment. The Tribunal considered
that the Province’s previous improper conduct and its subsequent
decision to refuse ABA’s “reasonable request’ to terminate the
Concession in September 2001 for the fault of the Grantor and instead
to unilaterally terminate the Contract due to an erroneously claimed
abandonment of service in March 2002 was a clear breach of the fair
and equitable treatment standard. This conclusion is not grounded on
the exceptio principle, which deals with the right of one party to
withhold its own contractual performance while the other party is not
performing its obligations. The exceptio principle was not directly
involved because ABA continued rendering the service until the
Province’s take-over.

Argentina mischaracterizes the exceptio principle by mixing it with
ABA's right to unilaterally terminate the Contract and the Province’s
duty to accept termination due to its own breaches. These are different

legal categories that do not overlap.

Relying on Christopher Schreuer, Investment Treaty Arbitration and Jurisdiction over Contract
Claims—the Vivendi | Case Considered, in International Investment Law and Arbitration: Leading
Cases from the ICSID, NAFTA, Bilateral Treaties and Customary International Law, 281, 295-
296 (T. Weiler ed., 2005); MTD Annulment Decision {| 75.

69

(k)

Even the historical legal doctrine which denies the right to apply the
exceptio principle in government contracts admits that, upon the State’s
serious breaches, the private party always is entitled to request
termination. The Concession Agreement itself provides that the
concessionaire may claim termination based on the Grantor's fault in
specified circumstances.

The Tribunal did not conclude that ABA could terminate the contract
unilaterally; it merely asserted that ABA could request termination and
that the Province was compelled by the facts of its own breaches to
accept such a request given the circumstances of the case. Regardless
of who was entitled to issue the formal declaration of termination, what
the Tribunal considered of relevance is that, given the Province’s
previous behaviour and the significance of its own beaches, it should
not have refused a reasonable request for termination of the contract.

In addition, termination of the Contract was not the only basis for the
Tribunal’s finding that the fair and equitable treatment standard was
violated. The Award also found that the fair and equitable treatment
standard was violated by the politicization of the tariff regime and the

measures taken by the Province during the Bahia Blanca incident.

Argentina mischaracterises the scope of the exceptio principle under
Argentine law. Both Argentine legal doctrine and case law have
recognised that the exception principle can be invoked by a private
party if the State engages in an abuse of rights or in breaches that
materially jeopardize the ability of the contractor to comply with the

terms of the contract, which was the situation in this case.

Argentina’s disagreement with the Tribunal’s observations on this
matter of Argentine law is not enough to meet the standard of
annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, since to
constitute a manifest excess of power, there must be a wilful refusal to
apply the proper law and not just an error in its interpretation or

70

(c)

136.

115

application. There is no evidence that the Tribunal applied a different
legal system from that required by Article 42(1) of the ICSID

Convention."

(0) — Since the Tribunal did not rely on the exceptio principle to conclude that
the Province had violated the fair and equitable treatment standard,
Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal decided ex aequo et bono by

resorting to this doctrine is without merit.

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention

(p) | Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal failed to state its reasons in the
award must fail as it is also reduced to the erroneous premise that the
Tribunal misapplied the law and decided the case according to general
equitable principles (ex aequo et bono).

(q) | There was no failure by the Tribunal to state reasons for its finding that
there had been a breach of the “full protection and security” provision in
Article 1I(2)(a) of the BIT. The Tribunal thoroughly detailed its reasons
for finding that Argentina breached the fair and equitable treatment
standard, and then concluded that these same reasons supported its

finding that Argentina breached the full protection and security clause.

Failure to apply the correct law as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles

The few prior decisions of ICSID ad hoc committees confirm, and the
Committee accepts, that a tribunal may manifestly exceed its powers where
the tribunal disregards the applicable law, or bases the award on a law other

Relying on Amco // Annulment Decision {| 7.21; CMS Annulment Decision {| 50; M/NE Annulment

Decision {] 5.04.

71

137.

than the applicable law under Article 42 of the ICSID Convention.'® Grounds
for annulment under Article 52(1)(b) will exist where the tribunal fails to apply
any law at all in determining the dispute, for instance, where the tribunal
decides the dispute ex aequo et bono despite not being authorised to do so
under Article 42(3).''7 Such grounds for annulment will similarly exist where
the tribunal purports to apply a law other than the law applicable under Article
42, or where while purporting to apply the law applicable under Article 42, the
tribunal manifestly applies a different body of law.''®

Such earlier ICSID ad hoc committee decisions emphasise that while non-
application by the tribunal of the law applicable under Article 42 may be a
ground for annulment, the incorrect application by the tribunal of the
applicable law is not.'? In. this respect, the Committee agrees with the
observation made by the ad hoc committee in the Amco / Annulment
Decision (the first ICSID annulment decision) and subsequently quoted with

approval in the Soufraki Annulment Decision, that:

The law applied by the Tribunal will be examined by the ad
hoc Committee, not for the purpose of scrutinizing whether
the Tribunal committed errors in the interpretation of the
requirements of applicable law or in the ascertainment or
evaluation of the relevant facts to which such law has
been applied. Such scrutiny is properly the task of a court
of appeals, which the ad hoc Committee is not. The ad
hoc Committee will limit itself to determining whether the
Tribunal did in fact apply the law it was bound to apply to
the dispute. Failure to apply such law, as distinguished
from mere misconstruction of that law would constitute a

Kléckner Annulment Decision {| 59; MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.03; CMS Annulment Decision
49; Lucchetti Annulment Decision {| 98; MTD Annulment Decision {] 44; Soufraki Annulment

Decision | 45.
Kléckner Annulment Decision {| 79; Amco // Annulment Decision {| 7.28; MTD Annulment
Decision | 44.
MTD Annulment Decision {| 47, cited with approval in CMS Annulment Decision J] 51: “... the

notion of endeavouring to apply the law is not a merely subjective matter. An award will not
escape annulment if the tribunal while purporting to apply the relevant law actually applies
another, quite different law. But in such a case the error must be ‘manifest’, not arguable, and a
misapprehension (still less mere disagreement) as to the content of a particular rule is not
enough.”

MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.04; CMS Annulment Decision {| 50-51; Repso/ Annulment
Decision | 38; Soufraki Annulment Decision | 85; Lucchetti Annulment Decision {| 112; MTD
Annulment Decision ff] 45-49.

72

manifest excess of power on the part of the Tribunal and a
ground for nullity under Article 51(1)(b) of the Convention.
The ad hoc Committee approached this task with caution,
distinguishing failure to apply the applicable law as a
ground for annulment and misinterpretation of the
applicable law as a ground for appeal."

(d) Failure to apply the correct law as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views

138. The claims made by Azurix and contested by Argentina that were determined
by the Tribunal in this case are described in paragraphs 29-31 above. All
claims were for alleged violations of the BIT. The Tribunal upheld three of the
five claims.

139. The Tribunal’s findings in respect of the applicable law are contained in
paragraphs 65 to 68 of the Award, following a discussion of the arguments of
the parties on the issue at paragraphs 58 to 64.

140. At paragraph 65 of the Award, the Tribunal began by noting “the agreement
of the parties with the statement that the BIT is the point of reference for
judging the merits of Azurix’s claim’. At paragraph 66, the Tribunal noted that
“Article 42(1) has been the subject of controversy on the respective roles of
municipal law and international law’, and stated that “both legal orders have a
role to play, which role will depend on the nature of the dispute and may vary
depending on which element of the dispute is considered”.

141. At paragraph 67 of the Award, the Tribunal then stated that:

Azurix’s claim has been advanced under the BIT and, as
stated by the Annulment Committee in Vivendi Il, the
Tribunal’s inquiry is governed by the ICSID Convention, by

the BIT and by applicable_international law. [Emphasis
added.]

"20 Amco | Annulment Decision { 23, cited with approval in Soufraki Annulment Decision {| 85.

73

142.

143.

The Committee considers that the reference in this passage to Vivendi II
clearly relates to the paragraphs of the Vivendi Annulment Decision
mentioned in earlier paragraphs of the Award summarising the arguments of
the parties. In particular, in paragraph 60 of the Award, the Tribunal refers to

paragraph 102 of the Vivendi Annulment Decision, which states:

In the Committee’s view, it is not open to an ICSID tribunal
having jurisdiction under a BIT in respect of a claim based
upon a substantive provision of that BIT, to dismiss the
claim on the ground that it could or should have been dealt
with by a national court. In such a case, the inquiry which
the ICSID tribunal is required to undertake is one governed
by the ICSID Convention, by the BIT and by applicable
international law. Such an inquiry is neither in principle
determined, nor precluded, by any issue of municipal law,
including any municipal law agreement of the parties.
[Emphasis added.]

 

This statement in the Vivendi Annulment Decision is further explained by
earlier passages in that decision, in which the ad hoc committee said:

As to the relation between breach of contract and breach of
treaty in the present case, it must be stressed that Articles
3 and 5 of the BIT do not relate directly to breach of a
municipal contract. Rather they set an independent
Standard. A state may breach a treaty without breaching a
contract, and vice versa, and this is certainly true of these
provisions of the BIT. The point is made clear in Article 3 of
the ILC Articles, which is entitled “Characterization of an
act of a State as internationally wrongful”:

The characterization of an act of a State as
internationally wrongful is governed by
international law. Such characterization is not
affected by the characterization of the same act
as lawful by internal law.

In accordance with this general principle (which is
undoubtedly declaratory of general international law),
whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether
there has been a breach of contract are different questions.
Each of these claims will be determined by reference to its
own proper or applicable law—in the case of the BIT, by
international law; in the case of the Concession Contract,
by the proper law of the contract, in other words, the law of

74

Tucuman. For example, in the case of a claim based on a
treaty, international law rules of attribution apply, with the
result that the state of Argentina is internationally
responsible for the acts of its provincial authorities. By
contrast, the state of Argentina is not liable for the
performance of contracts entered into by Tucuman, which
possesses separate legal personality under its own law
and is responsible for the performance of its own
contracts. '2"

144. The ad hoc committee in the Vivendi Annulment Decision went on to quote
from the judgment in the ELS/ case, in which the ICJ said:

Compliance with municipal law and compliance with the
provisions of a treaty are different questions. What is a
breach of treaty may be lawful in the municipal law and
what is unlawful in the municipal law may be wholly
innocent of violation of a treaty provision.

... the fact that an act of a public authority may have been
unlawful in municipal law does not necessarily mean that
that act was unlawful in international law, as a breach of
treaty or otherwise. A finding of the local courts that an act
was unlawful may well be relevant to an argument that it
was also arbitrary; but by itself, and without more,
unlawfulness cannot be said to amount to arbitrariness...
Nor does it follow from a finding by a municipal court that
an act was unjustified, or unreasonable, or arbitrary, that
that act is necessarily to be classed as arbitrary in
international law, though the qualification given to the
impugned act by a municipal authority may be a valuable
indication.

145. The Committee agrees with these findings in the Vivendi Annulment Decision
and the ELS/ case.

146. Here the principles are straightforward. Each of Azurix’s claims in this case
was for an alleged breach of the BIT. The BIT is an international treaty

between Argentina and the United States. By definition, a treaty is governed

121

102 Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 95-96.

Case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States America v. Italy), Judgment,
I.C.J. Reports 1989, p. 15 (“ELSI” case) J] 73 and 124, quoted in ILC Articles on Responsibility
of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, annexed to GA Resolution 54/83, 12 December 2001,
commentary to Article 3, quoted in Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 97.

75

147.

148.

by international law, |”? and not by municipal law. It is a fundamental principle
that “fa] party may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justification
for its failure to perform a treaty’.'*“ In any claim for breach of an investment
treaty, the question whether or not there has been a breach of the treaty must
therefore be determined, not through the application of the municipal law of
any State, but through the application of the terms of the treaty to the facts of
the case, in accordance with general principles of international law, including
principles of the international law of treaties. Bearing in mind that an
investment treaty, whether bilateral or multilateral, is itself a source of
international law as between the States parties to that treaty, 175 the applicable
law in any claim for a breach of that treaty can thus be said to be the treaty

itself specifically, and international law generally.

Furthermore, in arbitration proceedings under the ICSID Convention, the
tribunal also must comply with the terms of the ICSID Convention, which is
also an international treaty to be interpreted and applied in accordance with
general principles of international law, including principles of the international
law of treaties. The Committee considers that, in a claim for breach of an
investment treaty, the application by the tribunal of the terms of the
investment treaty and of international law as the applicable law is foreseen by
the words “and such rules of international law as may be applicable” in Article
42(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Committee considers that the second
sentence of Article 42(1) cannot possibly be understood as having the effect
that, in the absence of an express choice of law clause, the municipal law of
the Contracting State will be the applicable law in claims for alleged breaches

of an investment treaty.

The Committee concludes that the Tribunal correctly identified the law

applicable under Article 42 of the ICSID Convention to Azurix’s claims of

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 2(1)(a).
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 27.
Compare Statute of the International Court of Justice, Article 38(1)(a).

76

149.

150.

126
127

breaches of the BIT to be “the ICS/ID Convention, ... the BIT and ...

applicable international law’.'7°

In some cases, it may be an express term of the investment treaty that the
host State is required to comply with specified provisions of its own municipal
law. In such cases, a breach by the host State of municipal law may thus
amount to a breach of the treaty. Although municipal law does not as such
form part of the law applicable to a claim for breach of a treaty, in such cases
it may be necessary to determine whether there has been a breach of
municipal law as a step in determining whether there has been a breach of
the treaty. As the International Law Commission has said:

The rule that the characterization of conduct as unlawful in
international law cannot be affected by the characterization
of the same act as lawful in internal law makes no
exception for cases where rules of international law require
a State to conform to the provisions of its internal law, for
instance by applying to aliens the same legal treatment as
to nationals. It is true that in such a case, compliance with
internal law is relevant to the question of international
responsibility. But this is because the rule of international
law makes it relevant, e.g. by incorporating the standard of
compliance with internal law as the applicable international
standard or as an aspect of it. Especially in the fields of
injury to aliens and their property and of human rights, the
content and application of internal law will often be relevant
to the question of international responsibility. In every case
it will be seen on analysis that either the provisions of
internal law are relevant as facts in applying the applicable
international standard, or else that they are actually
incorporated in some form, conditionally or unconditionally,
into that standard. '*”

As a potential example of this, the Committee recalls the arguments of the
parties concerning the effect of Article II(2)(c) of the BIT, which states that
‘[eJach Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with

regard to investments”. In the present case, Azurix argued that the reference

Award {| 67.
ELSI case §] 124, quoted in ILC Articles, commentary to Article 3, quoted in Vivendi Annulment
Decision {| 97.

77

151.

152.

128

to “obligations” in this provision included obligations both under municipal law
and international law. Argentina on the other hand contended that contractual
claims do not become automatically treaty claims by virtue of this provision.
The Tribunal ultimately did not decide between these two competing
arguments. The Tribunal rejected Azurix’s claim for breach of Article I1.2(c) of
the BIT on the basis that the parties to the Concession Agreement were not
the parties to the present case, Azurix and Argentina. The parties to the
Concession Agreement were ABA (a subsidiary of Azurix) and the Province
(a political subdivision of Argentina), and, in the Tribunal’s view, there was
“no undertaking to be honored by Argentina to Azurix other than the
obligations under the BIT’.'2°

If Azurix and Argentina had been the parties to the Concession Agreement,
and if the Tribunal had found that the word “obligations” in Article 11.2(c) of the
BIT included obligations under municipal law (a matter on which the
Committee is not called upon to express any view), it might have become
necessary for the Tribunal to determine whether Argentina was in breach of
obligations under municipal law in order to determine a claim under Article
I1.2(c) of the BIT. In that event, it would have been necessary for the Tribunal
to apply Argentine municipal law in determining whether there was a breach
of obligations under municipal law. However, even in this situation, municipal
law would not thereby become part of the applicable law under Article 42 of
the ICSID Convention for purposes of determining whether there was a
breach of Article II.2(c) of the BIT. Rather, any breach of municipal law that
might be established would be a fact or element to which the terms of the BIT
and international law would be applied in order to determine whether there
was a breach of Article II.2(c).

Having determined that its inquiry in this case was “governed by the ICSID
Convention, by the BIT and by applicable international law’, the Tribunal went

on to say that:

Award J 384.

78

While the Tribunal’s inquiry will be guided by this
statement, this does not mean that the law of Argentina
should be disregarded. On the contrary, the law of
Argentina should be helpful in the carrying out of the
Tribunal’s inquiry into the alleged breaches of the
Concession Agreement to which Argentina’s law applies,
but it is only an element of the inquiry because of the treaty
nature of the claims under consideration. '*°
153. In the Committee’s view, this statement is consistent with the principles set
out above. The Committee therefore finds no fault with the Tribunal’s

identification of the applicable law under Article 42.

154. The Committee turns then to the question whether the Tribunal did in fact, in
deciding each of the three claims of Azurix that it upheld, apply the law that it
had identified as the applicable law. These three claims of Azurix were for
breach, respectively, of the “fair and equitable treatment” standard under
Article 1I(2)(a) of the BIT, of the “arbitrary or discriminatory measures”
provision in Article 1I(2)(b) of the BIT, and breaches of the “full protection and
security” provision in Article II(2)(a) of the BIT.

155. As to the claim for breach of the “fair and equitable treatment” standard under
Article |I(2)(a) of the BIT, the Tribunal began by stating that:

the BIT is an international treaty that should be
interpreted in accordance with the norms of interpretation
established by the Vienna Convention. As already noted,
the Vienna Convention is binding on the parties to the BIT.
Article 31(1) of the Convention requires that a treaty be
“interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose”. '°°

156. The Tribunal then found, applying these principles, that:

... It follows from the ordinary meaning of the terms fair
and equitable and the purpose and object of the BIT that
fair and equitable should be understood to be treatment in

129 Award {| 67.
8° Award {| 359.

79

157.

158.

159.

160.

an even-handed and just manner, conducive to fostering

the promotion of foreign investment.
The Tribunal went on to consider the expression “fair and equitable
treatment” in the context of the wording of Article II.2(a) of the BIT as a
whole,’ and to consider how “fair and equitable treatment” standards, as
found in various different investment protection treaties, have been
interpreted by different arbitral tribunals.'°? Following this analysis, the
Tribunal concluded that “there is a common thread in the recent awards ...
which does not require bad faith or malicious intention of the recipient State
as a necessary element in the failure to treat investment fairly and
equitably’. 4

It is clear to the Committee that in determining the content of the “fair and
equitable treatment” standard, the Tribunal applied the terms of the BIT itself
and the applicable general principles of international law, including the
international law of treaties. There was no suggestion that the content of the
standard was defined by municipal law or that the question whether there had
been a breach of the standard depended on whether or not there had been a
breach of obligations under municipal law.

The Tribunal then concluded, at paragraphs 374 to 376 of the Award, that
three separate instances “reflect[ed] a pervasive conduct of the Province in
breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment’.'*° The Tribunal did
not expressly find that any of these instances in isolation would necessarily
amount to a breach of that standard, but indicated that a breach of the
standard was established when the three instances were “considered
together’.

As to the first of these instances, the Tribunal said, at paragraph 374:

Award | 360.
Award J 361.
Award 1] 365-372.
Award J 372.
Award J 377.

80

161.

162.

163.

The Tribunal is struck by the conduct of the Province after

the Claimant gave notice of termination of the Concession

Agreement. ABA had requested to terminate it in

agreement with the Province. The Province refused what

was a reasonable request in light of the previous behavior

of the Province and its agencies. The refusal by the

Province to accept that notice of termination and its

insistence on terminating it by itself on account of

abandonment of the Concession is a clear case of a

breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard. It is

evident from the facts before this Tribunal that the

Concession was not abandoned.
Contrary to what is argued by Argentina, the Committee also finds no
suggestion in this paragraph of the Award that the Tribunal considered Azurix
to have a unilateral right under Argentine municipal law to terminate the
Concession Agreement, either by virtue of a principle of exceptio non
adimpleti contractus or otherwise. The Tribunal does not refer in this
paragraph to the position under Argentine municipal law at all. The reference
to the Province having “refused” a “request’ by ABA to terminate the
Concession would appear to indicate an assumption on the part of the

Tribunal that ABA had no legal right to do so unilaterally.

A plain reading of the wording of this paragraph of the Award indicates to the
Committee that what the Tribunal took into account as one of the three
instances amounting to a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard
were (1) the conduct of the Province in insisting on itself terminating the
Concession Agreement on account of abandonment of the Concession by
ABA, when it was evident from the facts that the Concession was not
abandoned, and (2) the conduct of the Province in refusing to allow ABA to
terminate the Concession in agreement with the Province. Regardless of
whether or not such conduct was justified under municipal law, the Tribunal
found this conduct of the Province to be material to a breach of the treaty

standard of fair and equitable treatment.

Argentina suggests that this reading of paragraph 374 of the Award is
contradicted by paragraph 260 of the Award, in which the Tribunal says that

81

164.

“the application of the maxim exceptio non adimpleti contractus provides a
balance to the relationship between the government and the concessionaire”.
According to Argentina, the Tribunal erroneously found that the exceptio
principle was a part of the municipal law of Argentina, and the Tribunal’s

finding in paragraph 374 of the Award is based on this erroneous finding.

In this regard the Tribunal’s reference to the exceptio principle in paragraph
260 of the Award is in the context of its consideration of Article 14.1.4 of the
Concession Agreement dealing with “Termination due to Fault of the Granting
Authority”. At paragraphs 255 to 259, the Tribunal dealt with the difficulties in
interpreting this provision. Then, at the impugned paragraph 260 the Tribunal
stated:

The difficulty in interpreting the provisions of Article 14
harmoniously is compounded by Article 49-II of the Law
which, as already noted, prescribes that termination “must
be resolved by the Provincial Executive Authority with the
intervention of ORAB.” The Law does not distinguish
between termination by the Grantor or the Concessionaire.
It would seem appropriate that the Concession Agreement
be interpreted consistently with the provisions of the Law.
On the other hand, the Tribunal cannot ignore the practical
result of this interpretation: if taken to the extreme, a
concessionaire would be obliged to continue to provide the
service indefinitely at the discretion of the government and
its right to terminate the Concession Agreement would be
deprived of any content. For this reason, the application of
the maxim exceptio non adimpleti contractus provides a
balance to the relationship between the government and
the concessionaire. The Tribunal considers it immaterial
whether ABA raised this defense in its recourse to the
Argentine courts. The Tribunal is assessing the conduct of
the Respondent and its instrumentalities in the exercise of
its public authority against the standards of protection of
foreign investors agreed in the BIT, and the application of
the maxim exceptio non adimpleti contractus has been
raised by the Claimant in these proceedings. This
exception is not unknown to Argentine law and to legal
systems generally as it is a reflection of the principle of
good faith. The Tribunal will take it into account when
evaluating the actions of the Province under the standards
of protection.

82

165.

166.

167.

On the basis of this paragraph the Committee is not satisfied either (1) that
the Tribunal found there to be an exceptio principle in Argentine municipal
law on which Azurix was entitled to rely in the circumstances of this case; or
(2) that the Tribunal’s finding of a breach of the fair and equitable treatment
standard was premised on any finding by the Tribunal that the Province had
denied ABA its right under Argentine law to rely on the exceptio principle.

First, as has been noted above, the Tribunal expressly stated in paragraph 67
of the Award that in determining Azurix’s claims under the BIT, the Tribunal’s
inquiry is governed “by the ICSID Convention, by the BIT and by applicable
international law’. The Tribunal relied for this proposition on the Vivendi
Annulment Decision, which makes clear that treaty standards are
independent of municipal law standards, such that the question whether or
not there has been a breach of the former does not depend on whether or not
there has been a breach of the latter. The Committee finds that it therefore
cannot read into paragraphs 260 and 374 of the Award any implied finding by
the Tribunal that the breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard was
due to ABA having been denied any specific right under Argentine municipal
law.

Secondly, there is no clear finding made in paragraph 260 that the exceptio
principle does in fact exist in Argentine municipal law. Indeed, the first three
sentences of this paragraph appear to assume that it does not or, at the least,
may not. The fourth sentence of this paragraph then refers to the practical
consequences of this conclusion. The fifth sentence of the paragraph then
states “/flor this reason, the application of the maxim exceptio non adimpleti
contractus provides a balance to the relationship between the government
and the concessionaire”. \t is not clear from the wording of this particular
sentence whether the Tribunal is speaking of the position under Argentine
municipal law or of the position under the treaty standard. However, the
remaining sentences of that paragraph appear to confirm that it is speaking of
the position under the treaty standard. In the remaining sentences the

83

168.

169.

136

Tribunal says that it is immaterial whether the exceptio principle was raised
before the municipal courts because “/t/he Tribunal is assessing the conduct
of the Respondent and its instrumentalities ... against the standards of
protection ... in the BIT, and the [exceptio principle] ... has been raised by the
Claimant in these proceedings”. The Tribunal says that the exceptio principle
is not unknown “to legal systems generally as it is a reflection of the principle
of good faith” and that the Tribunal would therefore “take it into account when

evaluating the actions of the Province under the standards of protection”.

Although the Tribunal also says in this paragraph that the exceptio principle is
“not unknown to Argentine law’, the Committee cannot read into this a
specific finding by the Tribunal that ABA would have been entitled in the
circumstances of this case to invoke this principle as a matter of Argentine
municipal law. In its Memorial on Annulment, Argentina appears to accept
that in Argentine law “in some cases the exceptio is a defence that can be
invoked by a _ concessionaire, although not an_ essential utility
concessionaire”."*° The Tribunal’s statement that the principle is “not
unknown in Argentine law” is therefore not incorrect. On the most adverse
construction of what the Tribunal said, the Committee considers that the
Tribunal did not go beyond referring to such principle merely as an additional
justification when applying the treaty standard. In any event, even if the
Tribunal had been wholly wrong in considering that the exceptio principle was
“not unknown to Argentine law’, nonetheless it would not constitute an
annullable error for the Tribunal to have taken it into account when applying

the treaty standard.

Furthermore, even if it were the case, contrary to the Committee’s
conclusions above, that the Tribunal erroneously found that ABA had the right
under Argentine law to rely on the exceptio principle in this case, and then
found that the Province’s denial of this right amounted to a breach of the fair

and equitable treatment standard, that would not in the Committee’s view

Memorial on Annulment, footnote 116.

84

170.

171.

137

amount to an annullable error. The Tribunal correctly identified the applicable
law under Article 42 as the ICSID Convention, the BIT and applicable
international law. It would have been open to the Tribunal to find that the
treaty standard had been violated in circumstances where ABA had been
denied a right that it had under Argentine municipal law. Even if the Tribunal
had been wholly incorrect in finding that ABA had such a right under
Argentine law, the Committee considers that this would be a matter going to
the merits of the Tribunal’s findings. And, as noted above, it is not a ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention that there are “errors in
the interpretation of the requirements of applicable law or in the
ascertainment or evaluation of the relevant facts to which such law has been
applied” .'°"

Argentina argues that if the Tribunal’s decision is generalised, the result is
that, in every municipal legal system in which the exceptio principle is not
recognised in the legal regime applicable to public contracts, the absence of
this principle may constitute a per se violation of the fair and equitable
treatment standard, such that the compatibility of public contracts with
investment protection obligations is now in doubt in those legal systems. The
Committee does not accept this argument. The Tribunal’s decision was
based on the specific factual circumstances of this particular case, and is
merely an example of a case in which it was found that, in all the
circumstances, there was a breach of a treaty standard even if there may
have been no breach of any obligation under municipal law.

In paragraphs 375 and 376 of the Award, the Tribunal refers to the two other
instances which, in the Tribunal’s view, considered together with the instance
referred to in paragraph 374, amounted to a breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard. In neither paragraphs 375 and 376 did the Tribunal
suggest that the question whether there was a breach of this treaty treatment

standard depended on whether or not there had been a breach of Argentine

See paragraph 137 above.

85

172.

173.

law. The quotes from the ELS/ case above confirm that a breach of municipal
law is not a prerequisite to a finding of a breach of the treaty standard,
although it may be a relevant consideration. From the wording of paragraphs
92, 102 and 375 of the Award, it appears to the Committee that in the case of
the zoning coefficients and construction variations, the Tribunal’s conclusion
was based not on any finding that there had been specific breaches of
Argentine law by the Province or its authorities, but on a finding that the
conduct of the relevant authorities was based on political considerations
rather than on applying the terms of the Concession Agreement, as
evidenced for instance in the different treatment given to the new service

provider after the Concession Agreement with ABA had been terminated.

As to the breach of the “arbitrary or discriminatory measures” standard in
Article II(2)(b) of the BIT, the Tribunal found on the basis of the plain wording
of the text of that provision (which it said was not contested by Argentina) that
a measure needs only to be arbitrary to constitute a breach of this

provision. ‘°°
The Tribunal then stated that:

The Tribunal is required to consider the ordinary meaning
of the terms used in the BIT under Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention. The findings of other tribunals, and in
particular of the ICJ, should be helpful to the Tribunal in its
interpretative task.'°°

The Tribunal went on to consider the ordinary meaning of the word “arbitrary”,
and decisions of other international arbitration tribunals and the ELS/ case, ‘4°
and ultimately concluded that certain actions of the Province were “arbitrary
actions without base on the Law or the Concession Agreement’ which

“impaired the operation of Azurix’s investment’.'*' The Committee considers

Award J 391.
Award J 391.
Award J 392.
Award J 393.

86

174.

175.

176.

that the law that the Tribunal applied was the applicable law under Article 42
referred to above.

As to the breach of the “full protection and security” standard in Article II(2)(a)
of the BIT, the Tribunal referred to other relevant international arbitration case
law,” to differences in wording in analogous provisions in other bilateral
investment treaties, '° and to the ordinary meaning of the expression. ‘4 The
Tribunal stated that other cases showed, and the Tribunal apparently agreed,
that:

... full protection and security ... gofes] beyond protection
and security ensured by the police. It is not only a matter of
physical security; the stability afforded by a secure
investment environment is as important from an investor’s
point of view.‘

The Tribunal went on to conclude that:

... the Tribunal, having held that the Respondent failed to
provide fair and equitable treatment to the investment,
finds that the Respondent also breached the standard of
full protection and security under the BIT.‘
The Committee once more is satisfied that the law that the Tribunal applied

was the applicable law under Article 42 referred to above.

The Committee reiterates that it is not part of its function in annulment
proceedings to examine the merits of the Tribunal’s decision to uphold the
claims of Azurix that it upheld, or to reject the claims of Azurix that it rejected.
In particular, as noted above, in relation to the present ground of annulment,
the Committee’s function is confined to determining whether Tribunal applied
the correct applicable law, not whether the Tribunal applied the applicable law
correctly.

Award J 406.
Award 1] 407-408.
Award J 408.
Award J 408.
Award J 408.

87

177.

178.

147

For these reasons, the Committee rejects Argentina’s ground of annulment
under Article 52(1)(b) based on the alleged failure of the Tribunal to apply the
applicable law under Article 42 of the ICSID Convention.

Failure of the award to state the reasons on which it is based as a
ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention:
applicable principles

The scope of this ground of annulment has been considered in various
decisions of ad hoc committees in different cases. It has been said that:

[I]t is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that
Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with
respect to all or part of an award, not the failure to state
correct or convincing reasons ... Provided that the reasons
given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues
that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside
the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons
may be stated succinctly or at length, and different legal
traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons.
Tribunals must be allowed a degree of discretion as to the
way in which they express their reasoning. ... In the
Committee’s view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should
only occur in a clear case. This entails two conditions: first,
the failure to state reasons must leave the decision on a
particular point essentially lacking in any expressed
rationale; and second, that point must itself be necessary
to the tribunal’s decision. It is frequently said that
contradictory reasons cancel each other out, and indeed, if
reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might.
However, tribunals must often struggle to balance
conflicting considerations, and an ad hoc committee should
be careful not to discern contradiction when what is
actually expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly
be said to be but a reflection of such conflicting
considerations. '*”

In the Committee’s view, the requirement to state reasons
is satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how

the tribunal proceeded from Point A to Point B and
eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact

Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 64-65; quoted in MTD Annulment Decision {| 50.

88

179.

180.

or of law. This minimum requirement is in particular not
satisfied by either contradictory or frivolous reasons. '

In the end the question is whether an informed reader of
the Award would understand the reasons given by the
Tribunal and would discern no material contradiction in
them."°

... annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only occur in
clear cases and ... a failure to state reasons, in order to
lead to annulment, must not only lack in any expressed
rationale, but the relevant point must also be necessary to
the tribunal's decision. ©°

Failure of the award to state the reasons on which it is based as a
ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: the
Committee’s views

As the Committee has found above that the Tribunal applied the correct
applicable law, Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal applied the incorrect

law is rejected.

For the reasons given above, the Committee must also reject Argentina’s
argument that the Award contains two contradictory statements, namely (1)
that it would not apply Argentine law except to the alleged breaches of the
Concession Agreement, and (2) that it would not analyse the alleged
breaches of the Concession Agreement as they are not “under
consideration”. At paragraph 67 of the Award, the Tribunal found that as
Azurix’s claims were based on the BIT and not on any contract, the Tribunal’s
enquiry was governed by “the [CS/ID Convention, ... the BIT and ... applicable
international law’. However, the Tribunal found that alleged breaches of the
Concession Agreement could be an element in that enquiry. The extent to
which alleged breaches of contract were material to the determination of

claims of breaches of a treaty standard was a matter for the Tribunal to

MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.09.

MTD Annulment Decision {| 92.

Lucchetti Annulment Decision {| 128. See also, for instance, Wena Hotels Annulment Decision J]
81-83; Soufraki Annulment Decision I] 121-128; CMS Annulment Decision [J] 53-57.

89

181.

182.

determine when dealing with each of the individual claims. The Committee

finds nothing contradictory in the Award in this respect.

Argentina further argues that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its

151 since it failed to address

conclusion on the issue of the zoning coefficients,
in its conclusion Argentina’s position that the ORAB’s decision had become
administratively final. The Committee finds that the Tribunal’s conclusion was
that the action of ORAB referred to in paragraph 83 of the Award “reflect[ed]
a concern with the political consequences of the elimination of the coefficients
rather than with keeping to the terms of the Concession Agreement,‘ and
that there was a breach of the BIT due to the fact that “the tariff regime was
politicized because of concerns with forthcoming elections or because the
Concession was awarded by the previous government’ .‘°° The Committee is
not persuaded that it was material to this reasoning of the Tribunal whether or
not ORAB’s decision had become administratively final, and the Committee
therefore considers that the failure of the Tribunal to address this argument
expressly does not amount to a failure to state reasons upon which its

decision was based.

Argentina additionally claims that the Tribunal did not state the standard
necessary to violate the “full protection and security” standard in Article
Il(2)(a) of the BIT, but merely stated that “the Tribunal, having failed to
provide fair and equitable treatment to the investment, finds that the
Respondent also breached the standard of full protection and security under
the BIT’.‘%4 Argentina argues that the Tribunal thereby treats the standard of
full protection and security as if it were the same as the standard of fair and
equitable treatment, and that this denies any effet utile for the full protection
and security standard.

Award {If 78-92.
Award | 92.
Award J 375.
Award J 408.

90

183.

184.

(a)

155

The Tribunal’s findings with respect to the content of the fair and equitable
treatment standard are set out in paragraphs 359 to 372 of the Award, and its
findings in respect of the full protection and security standard are contained in
paragraphs 406 to 408. The Committee considers it apparent from these
paragraphs that the Tribunal did not necessarily consider the two standards
identical, but that it did consider the latter to be, in effect, a sub-category of
the former, in the sense that a breach of the latter standard would necessarily
entail a breach of the former standard. This is apparent not only from the
sentence in paragraph 408 of the Award relied upon by Argentina, but also
from the statement in paragraph 407 of the Award that:

The tribunal in Occidental based its decision on a clause

worded exactly like in the BIT, and nonetheless considered

that, after it had found that the fair and equitable standard

had been breached, “the question of whether in addition

there has been a breach of full protection and security

under this Article becomes moot as a treatment that is not

fair and equitable automatically entails an absence of full

protection and security. '°°
Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal’s findings in this respect leave no effet
utile for the full protection and security standard might, if accepted, support a
conclusion that the Tribunal was wrong in law. However, mere error of law,
even if this could be established, is not a ground for annulment. The
Committee considers that the Tribunal’s reasoning, right or wrong, is quite
clear. The Committee therefore considers that there is no basis for annulling

this finding under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

Denial of fundamental evidence and failure to consider key arguments

Introduction

Award {| 407, referring to Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Ecuador (LCIA

Administered Case No. UN 3467) Award, dated July 1, 2004, {| 187.

91

185. Argentina claims that it was denied evidence essential to its defence, by
virtue of the Tribunal’s Procedural Orders No. 2 to No. 6, and that the
Tribunal failed to consider key arguments of Argentina in relation to certain
matters or to give reasons for its decision on those matters.

(b) Background

186. In its Counter Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal, Argentina
requested the Tribunal, under the terms of ICSID Arbitration Rules 33 and 34,

to request Azurix to:

a) Produce, and notify the Argentine Republic of, all the
reports, analyses, and all other documentation relating
to its participation in the privatisation in Buenos Aires
Province. This documentation should include all the
documents, records, reports, minutes of directors’
meetings, letters, and e-mails in possession of AZURIX
relating to the Bidding Process. Specially, AZURIX is
asked to attach a copy of the documentation filed with
the Buenos Aires Province for participating in the
Bidding Process (Envelope No. 1 and Envelope No. 2).

b) Produce, and notify the Argentine Republic of, all the
documentation filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) and with any other (federal or
state) governmental entity of the United States of
America relating to Azurix’s initial public offering (IPO)
on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in 1999, as
well as all other subsequent documentation submitted
during the period AZURIX’s stock was listed on the
stock markets (e.g., balance sheets).

187. The Counter-Memorial stated that:

The purpose of the foregoing is to prove the unfairness of
AZURIX’s offer, its opportunistic behaviour, the direct
relation with the impending IPO of AZURIX, its relation with
ENRON, as well as to prove the circumstances associated
with Information Letters Nos. 51(B) and 52(A) and Section
12.1.1 of the Contract.

92

188.

189.

190.

191.

By letter of March 15, 2004, Azurix objected to Argentina’s request, stating
inter alia that the request was inconsistent with the ICSID Rules, the parties’
agreements at the First Session of the Tribunal, and the general principles on
evidence in the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Commercial Arbitration, that the requests were grossly overbroad, that
Argentina had not explained how or why these documents were relevant to
the issues in dispute or would materially affect the outcome of the case, and
that many of the requested documents were already in Argentina’s
possession. The letter stated that Argentina’s request appeared to be “little
more than an impermissible fishing expedition” designed to delay the
proceedings.

By letter of March 26, 2004, Argentina rejected Azurix’s objections and stated
that Argentina would have no problem in requesting the Province of Buenos
Aires to produce evidence that the Tribunal considered relevant under the
terms of ICSID Arbitration Rule 34.

On April 19, 2004, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, which noted
that the Reply of Azurix was due by May 7, 2004, and resolved:

1. To invite the Respondent to request the Province to
provide it with “the documentation filed with the Buenos
Aires Province for participating in the Bidding Process
(Envelope No. 1 and Envelope No. 2)”...

2. To postpone consideration of the production of the
remainder of the evidence requested until the Tribunal
has had the opportunity to review the Claimant's Reply.

By letter dated May 17, 2004, Argentina informed the Tribunal that the
documents requested in Procedural Order No. 2 would be shortly submitted,
but stated:

Given that there are irregularities in this documentation,
especially in connection with Circulars Nos. 51(B) and
52(A), and that there is no circular supporting the inclusion
of article 12.1.1 or other amendments in the Concession
Contract, the Argentine Republic requests the Tribunal not
to send a copy of the aforesaid documentation to Azurix

93

192.

193.

194.

By letter dated May 20, 2004, Argentina informed the Tribunal that it had sent
to the Tribunal the documentation received from the Province and repeated

Corp. until the latter has produced a copy of the Envelopes
Nos. 1 and 2 that it submitted in the bidding process.

the request it had made in its letter of May 17, 2004.

On May 24, 2004, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, which noted
that there was a dispute between the parties relating to the documentation

presented in the bidding process, and decided to:

By letter to the Tribunal dated May 31, 2004, Argentina stated inter alia as

follows:

1. Request the Claimant to furnish to the Tribunal the
said envelopes No. 1 and No. 2 not later than June
7, 2004 and, upon their receipt, to send to each party
the envelopes No. 1 and No. 2 received from the
other party.

2. Inform the parties that the Tribunal will take into
account the relevance of such information and the
cost of this procedural incident in its decision on the
costs of these proceedings.

The purpose of the request for the confidentiality of the
documentation until after Azurix had submitted Envelopes
Nos. 1 and 2 was for Claimant to produce copies of the
documents in its possession so as to allow the Tribunal to
compare them with those to be produced by Argentina.
Thus, the Tribunal would be able to know the actual facts.

On Friday, May 28, this Treasury Attorney General's Office
became aware of Azurix Corp.’s failure to comply with the
confidentiality established in Procedural Order No. 3.

Pursuant to item 1 of Procedural Order No. 3, Azurix was
only to have access to the Envelopes in possession of the
Province after it had sent its own copies of the Envelopes.
However, Azurix requested copies of Envelopes Nos. 1 and
2 from the Province.

94

The request for access to the administrative record does
not make any reference to this arbitration.

According to the fax attached to this letter, on 28 May,
Azurix’s representatives had access to the requested
administrative record, in particular to Envelopes Nos. 1 and
2 of Azurix’s offer, and asked for photocopies thereof.

Owing to Azurix’s behaviour, the Argentine Republic hereby
waives the confidentiality it had requested from the Tribunal
by letters dated 17 and 20 May because the confidentiality
ordered by the President is pointless at present.

For the same reason, the Argentine Republic hereby
withdraws its request for Azurix to produce copies of
Envelopes Nos. 1 and 2 of its offer in the bidding process.

Notwithstanding the waiver of the confidentiality and the
withdrawal of the request for evidence, the Argentine
Republic requests the President to bear in mind that by
breaching a procedural order Azurix has infringed this
party’s right of defence since it has deprived Argentina of
evidence deemed essential to the safeguarding of its rights.

... the Tribunal (and Claimant) are hereby informed about
the irregularities of Envelope No. 2 of Azurix’s offer, a copy
of which was sent by the Province (and forwarded to the
Tribunal).

In particular, the following should be observed with regard
to Envelope No. 2 submitted by Azurix to the Province:

(a) Volume 1 of Envelope No. 2 includes the circulars
signed and accepted by Azurix upon submitting the
economic offer. This volume ends with the last page
of the list of personnel included in Circular No. 50(B);
i.e. the volume with the circulars accepted by Azurix
ends with Circular No. 50(B).

95

(b) Circulars Nos. 51(B) and 52(A) were inserted into the
List of Personnel to be transferred, in a place where
two pages of such list of personnel are missing.

(c) There seems to be no circular supporting the
inclusion of articles 12.1.1 and 13.2.5.6 in the
Concession Contract.

195. By a letter dated June 7, 2004, the Secretary to the Tribunal informed the
parties as follows:

The Tribunal notes the waiver by the Argentine Republic of
the confidentiality of the documentation furnished to the
Secretary of the Tribunal under cover of a communication
dated May 20, 2004, and the withdrawal by the Argentine
Republic of its request to the Tribunal regarding the
documentation referred to in Procedural Order No. 3. The
Tribunal notes further that, according to the Claimant,
copies of envelopes 1 and 2 are not readily available in its
own records.

The Tribunal will consider the relevance of the matters
raised in said communications as part of its overall
examination of the submissions by the parties in this case.

196. By letter to the Tribunal dated July 22, 2004, Argentina stated as follows:

Considering item 2 of Procedural Order No. 2, and in light of
the fact that Azurix filed its Reply on 7 May 2004, without
enclosing any documentation or evidence related to the
request made by the Argentine Republic in its Counter-
Memorial, the Tribunal is requested to order the submission
of the evidence that was requested in due time by this
Office and was not covered by Procedural Order No. 3.

It should be noted that the remainder of the evidence
requested is essential for the Argentine Republic to be able
to exercise its right of defence in this arbitration.

By a letter dated July 28, 2004, Azurix opposed this request on the ground
that it was belated, overbroad and that Argentina had not explained how the

requested documents were relevant.

197. On July 29, 2004, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4, which noted
that the Tribunal had now had the opportunity to review Azurix’s reply, and
decided to reject Argentina’s July 22, 2004 request for production of evidence

96

198.

“pecause of its general nature and failure to justify it on the basis of the
reasons adduced”.

By letter to the Tribunal dated August 2, 2004, the stated purpose of which
was “to justify in more detail the request for evidence made by this Office and
make it more precise”, Argentina asked the Tribunal to order Azurix to submit
the following documents:

a) the report prepared by the consulting firm “HYTSA
Estudios y Proyectos S.A.” for Azurix Corp. within the
context of the bidding process in the Province of
Buenos Aires for the purpose of evaluating the
Concession;

b) the technical, economic or legal studies of Azurix
Corp., or those prepared at the request of Azurix
Corp., in order to submit the technical offer
(Envelope No. 1) and the economic offer (Envelope
No. 2) in the bidding of the Province of Buenos Aires;
and

c) the January to August 1999 Board of Directors
meeting minutes of Azurix Corp., Enron Corp.,
Operadora de Buenos Aires SRL, and Azurix
AGOSBA SRL, related to the bidding.

That letter went on to state that:

The evidence requested is aimed at confirming that the
offer submitted by Azurix Corp. in the bidding process was
aggressive and opportunistic and that it was related to the
imminent initial public offering (IPO) by Azurix Corp. on the
New York Stock Exchange.

This request for evidence is made in the knowledge that it is
a general principle of law that the party that is in a better
position to prove a fact bears the burden of proof, and that
the Argentine Republic has proved perfectly well that the
offer made by Azurix Corp. was aggressive and
opportunistic.

This request is not aimed at postponing the hearing on the
merits. Claimant should be in possession of the evidence
requested and should be able to produce it within one or
two weeks. In that case, the parties and their experts would

97

have enough time to examine it before the scheduled
hearing.

Azurix opposed this request.

199. On August 16, 2004, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, in which the
Tribunal decided:

To reject the Respondent's request for production of
evidence formulated in its communication of August 2, 2004
because, even if such request is more precise in terms of
the requested evidence than the request that was the
subject of Procedural Order No. 4, it fails to be adequately
justified since it continues to be based on the amount paid
by the concession and accepted by the Province of Buenos
Aires.

200. By letter to the Tribunal dated August 23, 2004, Argentina requested the
Tribunal “to reconsider Respondent’s request for evidence so as to preserve
the Argentine Republic’s right of defence in these arbitration proceedings’.
That letter stated, inter alia:

. in the exercise of its right of defence, Argentina has
sufficiently proven that:

a) Azurix Corp.’s offer in the Province of Buenos Aires
was aggressive (it was six to eighteen times higher
than the next best bid).

b) There was a close and direct relationship between
the offer in the Province of Buenos Aires and the
imminent IPO in New York, as well as between the
former and the permanent objective to renegotiate
the terms of the Concession Contract.

c) Azurix Corp. needed to be awarded the provincial
water and sewage Concession to gain experience in
the water sector.

d) In accordance with the legal system applicable to the
Concession Contract, the Concessionaire was not
entitled to transfer the canon to tariffs.

2.- In addition to producing its own evidence, the Argentine
Republic requested the Tribunal to order Azurix Corp. to
produce the documents in its possession, in order to
confirm what had already been proven by Respondent.

98

201.

Azurix Corp. objected to this request by letter of 15 March
2004.

3.- In such circumstances, by Procedural Order No. 2 the
Tribunal decided: “To postpone consideration of the
production of the remainder of the evidence requested until
the Tribunal has had the opportunity to review the
Claimant’s Reply.”

4.- In its Reply, Azurix Corp. attempted to deny Argentina’s
contentions. However, it did not produce the evidence
requested in the Counter-Memorial nor did it adequately
refute the statements included therein.

5.- This was noted by the Argentine Republic in its letters of
22 July and 2 August 2004 and in the Rejoinder.

6.- In the context described above and based on item 2 of
Procedural Order No. 2, Respondent asks the members of
the Tribunal to reconsider Argentina’s request for evidence.

The reason for this petition for reconsideration is that if
Argentina’s allegations were not taken into account or were
held not to have been proven, Respondent's right of
defence would be seriously and inexplicably impaired.

Respondent is feeling extremely discouraged by seeing
how the Tribunal is gradually depriving Argentina of some of
its most basic defensive elements ...

It is not possible to understand the reasoning that allows
reconciling the natural urge of every impartial arbitrator to
know the material truth with the rejection of evidence that
might easily lead the arbitrator to find such truth. [Footnotes
omitted.]

Azurix reiterated its objections to this request.
On September 9, 2004, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6, in which

it said that it had considered anew Argentina’s request and had now had the
opportunity to review the Rejoinder, and in which it decided:

To request the Claimant to submit, not later than September
17, 2004, the study prepared by HYTSA referred to in
paragraph 35 of the Rejoinder, and

99

To request the Respondent to submit, not later than
September 17, 2004, the bid evaluation reports related to
each stage of the bidding for the concession prepared
under the authority of the Province of Buenos Aires.

(c) Arguments of the parties

202. Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a)

It was part of Argentina’s case that, because Azurix needed to win the
bidding process in order for its upcoming IPO to be successful, Azurix
had made an unreasonable offer in the bidding process, expecting to
later renegotiate the terms of the Concession Agreement. With the
purpose of proving that, Argentina requested the Tribunal to order
Azurix to submit all the documents on which it had relied to make such

offer and all the documents connected with the IPO.

Despite the importance of this evidence to Argentina’s defence, at first
the Tribunal postponed consideration of Argentina’s request until after
the submission of the Reply, and then subsequently twice rejected the

request, and then only partially granted it.

The Tribunal’s decision to order Azurix to submit the HYTSA Report
was issued seven months after Argentina’s initial request and less than
a month before the hearing on the merits, and Argentina received the
HYTSA Report only one week before the hearing on the merits, which

was too late to use it.

By depriving Argentina of evidence that might have supported its
allegations, the Tribunal seriously affected Argentina’s right of defence
which constitutes “an essential part of the right to a fair trial’, a violation
of which constitutes a “serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure” within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention.

100

(b) |The minutes of the first session of the Tribunal were stated to be
“[w]ithout prejudice to the power of the Tribunal to request the parties to
produce any further evidence at any stage of the proceedings”. Under
the ICSID Arbitration Rules, a party is not required to make a request
for evidence at any particular time, and is not required to tailor its
requests for evidence to the points to which the evidence would be
directed or under an obligation to explain why the documents are
relevant and material to the outcome of the case. In other ICSID cases,
evidence has been requested by a respondent in its counter-memorial
or later.

(c) | One of the consequences of the principle of cooperation of the parties
with the tribunal in establishing the relevant facts is that “any party is
obliged to provide the [tribunal] with relevant documents, which only it

possesses.”'°

(d) Instead of submitting its own copies of Envelopes No. 1 and 2 as
ordered in Procedural Order No. 3, Azurix instead obtained copies from
the Province of Buenos Aires, this destroying the ability of the Tribunal
to compare the two sets of documents. Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration
Rule 34(3), in case of failure of a party to comply with its obligation to
cooperate with the Tribunal in the production of evidence, the Tribunal
must take formal note of it. However, in the Award the Tribunal did not
establish what the consequences of Azurix’s conduct were. It simply
held that there was no evidence to support Argentina's allegations of
irregularities in the bidding process, without considering Azurix’s failure
to submit evidence which might have confirmed the existence of such
irregularities. By disregarding Azurix’s breach of Procedural Order

No. 3, the Tribunal seriously affected Argentina’s right of defence,

‘8° Relying on Robert Kolb, General Principles of Procedural Law, in THE STATUTE OF THE

INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE: A COMMENTARY 793, 829 (Andreas Zimmermann,
Christian Tomuschat & Karin Oellers-Frahm eds., 2006).

101

)

(f)

which was a serious departure from a fundamental rules of procedure
within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.

The Tribunal did not afford equal treatment of the parties with regard to
evidentiary issues. By Procedural Order No. 2 the Tribunal immediately
granted Azurix’s request for evidence of March 15, 2004, while it
postponed consideration of Argentina’s request for evidence of
February 9, 2004. Furthermore, Azurix only had to make its request for
evidence once, whereas Argentina had to make its request five times,
which the Tribunal only partially granted seven months after the initial
request. In addition, the Tribunal did not order Azurix to submit the
studies on which it had relied to make its offer in the bidding process,
but ordered Argentina to submit the bid evaluation reports related to
each stage of the bidding process. The Tribunal’s unequal treatment of
the parties are constitutes a serious departure from a fundamental rule
of procedure within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention.

Fundamental to Argentina’s case was the relationship between Azurix
and Enron. In addition to the fact that the relationship between Azurix
and Enron was public knowledge, Argentina produced various pieces of
evidence with the purpose of proving the existence of that relationship.
The fact that the HYTSA Report was not addressed to Azurix but to
Enron further proved the existence of this relationship. However, the
Tribunal neither granted Argentina’s request for the Tribunal to order
Azurix to produce certain other evidence aimed at confirming the
existence of the relationship between Azurix and Enron, nor acted on
Argentina’s proposal that the Tribunal request the United States
Congress to submit its reports on the Enron scandal and its connection
with Azurix.

Despite the evidence and requests of Argentina, the Tribunal denied
any relevance to the relationship between Azurix and Enron. The

102

203.

157

Tribunal did not give any reasons for disregarding the evidence
produced by Argentina on the connection between Azurix and Enron.
The Tribunal simply held that “[bJased on the documentation submitted
by the parties, the Tribunal considers that nothing has been proven that
relates the case before this Tribunal to ENRON’s case’. '*” If the
Tribunal was dissatisfied with the evidence before it, it should have
granted Argentina’s request for evidence. It was contradictory for it not
to grant such a request and then hold that the evidence in the record
was insufficient. The Tribunal thereby failed to state reasons within the
meaning of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

(g) | The Tribunal also failed to state reasons, within the meaning of Article
52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, in disregarding the existence of
irregularities in the bidding process without explaining why, and in
particular, in failing to explain why it did not give heed to Azurix’s

breach of Procedural Order No. 3.

(h) Procedural Orders No. 2 to 6, signed by the President of the Tribunal,
took on a new meaning in the context of the proposal to disqualify Dr.
Rigo Sureda.

Azurix argues, inter alia, that:

(a) | Argentina has failed to identify any ICSID procedural rule that it says
was violated. No party has an unfettered right of access to any and all

of the opposing party’s documents.

(b) | Argentina’s requests for production of documents were made more
than two and a half years after the case was filed and one and a half
years after Azurix filed its Memorial; and Argentina did not “narrow’ its
request until more than two months after Azurix’s Reply was filed, and
only days before Argentina's Rejoinder was due and just two months
before the final hearing date.

Referring to Award {| 55.

103

(c)

)

(f)

(h)

Argentina’s requests were overbroad, untimely and irrelevant. These
defects are what caused the Tribunal to deny Argentina’s requests, not
bias against Argentina.

Even if Azurix’s bid was found to be too large, in no way would this
provide Argentina with any defense to its unfair and inequitable
treatment of Azurix’s investment. The Province accepted the bid and
took the entire $438.55 million offered, never suggesting at the time
that it was unreasonable.

Argentina’s reasoning would deny the Tribunal any discretion relating to
evidence requests.

Argentina has not established how proving Azurix’s connection to
Enron or that Azurix’s bid was unreasonable would have proven or
have been of relevance to the issues in this case.

Each party was given precisely the same opportunities with regard to
discovery issues. The Tribunal did not deny Argentina the ability to
make requests, but merely held that Argentina was obligated to comply
with the same rules that were applicable to Azurix. Argentina’s failure to
conform its requests to the rules does not mean the parties were

treated unequally.

The Tribunal decided this case in a way that made any allegations of

n “unreasonable offer” by Azurix moot, since the Tribunal did not base
damages on the amount of the offer tendered by Azurix, but decided
instead that the Concession was worth only a fraction (USD 60 million)
of the total amount received by Argentina. In effect, Argentina prevailed

on this point.

104

(i) Argentina’s disagreement with the conclusion reached by the Tribunal
does not demonstrate any serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. °°

(j) The Tribunal did evaluate Argentina’s argument concerning Azurix’s
relationship to Enron, and ultimately rejected it.©° Enron’s problems
had absolutely no bearing on the case filed by Azurix against Argentina
for the latter's violations of the BIT. The Tribunal did not state that there
was not enough evidence to support a connection between Azurix and
Enron; rather, it stated that nothing showed that Enron’s problems were
related to Azurix’s case against Argentina.

(k) |The Tribunal expressly addressed the issue of “irregularities” in
paragraph 56 of the Award, and rejected Argentina’s argument due to
lack of evidence. Argentina seeks to reopen the issue of alleged
“corruption” at this stage without giving a single reason why the

Tribunal’s finding might be deemed inaccurate.

(l) Azurix did not breach Procedural Order No. 3; on the contrary it sought
access to the official public file precisely in order to comply with the
Tribunal’s request, as it has not kept copies of every document filed.

(m) Even if the Tribunal had breached a fundamental rule, Argentina has
not demonstrated that the breach was “serious” by showing that the
result would have been different had the departure from the rule not

occurred.

Relying on Wena Hotels Annulment Decision {J 59-61.

Referring to Award {] 55, and relying on Soufraki Annulment Decision J 131: “It is of course not
necessary for a tribunal to give a reason for an assertion which is in itself a reason. That would
be to initiate an endless and regressive cycle of reasoning. Not every word has to be explained.”

105

(d)

204.

(e)

205.

()

206.

(ii)

207.

Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure as a ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention: applicable
principles

The principles applicable to a ground of annulment based on Article 52(1)(d)
of the ICSID Convention are considered by the Committee in paragraphs 49-
52 above.

Failure of the award to state reasons as a ground of annulment under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles

The principles applicable to a ground of annulment based on Article 52(1)(e)
of the ICSID Convention are considered by the Committee in paragraphs 53-
55 and 178 above.

The Committee’s views

Introduction

Argentina claims that grounds of annulment exist, first, by virtue of the
Tribunal’s “denial of fundamental evidence”, and secondly, by virtue of the
Tribunal’s “failure to consider key arguments”. The Committee will consider

each of these in turn.

Argentina’s claim of “denial of fundamental evidence”

Argentina’s claim of “denial of fundamental evidence” concerns the Tribunal’s
response to a number of requests, made by Argentina to the Tribunal during
the course of the proceedings, for the Tribunal to exercise its power under
Article 43(a) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(2)(a) to
call upon Azurix for the production of certain documents.

106

208.

209.

210.

211.

As is clear from their terms each provision states that the power is
discretionary as one that the tribunal “may” exercise, “at any stage of the
proceeding”. Neither provision makes the exercise of the power contingent
upon a request being made to the tribunal by one of the parties; hence the
power may be exercised by the tribunal of its own motion. There is nothing to
prevent the tribunal from exercising the power pursuant to a request by a
party, but conversely, there is nothing to require the tribunal to accede to any
such request. Nor does either of these provisions lay down the criteria to be
considered by the tribunal when deciding whether to exercise this power. The
discretion of the tribunal in the exercise of this power is unfettered.

Because the unfettered nature of the discretion, there is a potentially wide
range of considerations to which the tribunal might legitimately have regard in
deciding whether to exercise that power pursuant to a request of a party,
such as the timing of the request, the importance of the documents to an
identified issue, the relevance of the identified issue to the determination of
the dispute, the reasonableness of the scope of the request and, in particular,
whether the other party objects to the request, and if so, the nature and basis
for those objections.

Because the power is discretionary, a decision by a tribunal not to accede to
a party's request to exercise that power can never, in and of itself, be a
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. A decision by a tribunal
whether or not to exercise a discretionary power that it has under a rule of
procedure is an exercise of that rule of procedure, and not a departure from
that rule of procedure. It is only where the exercise of that discretion, in all of
the circumstances of the case, amounts to a serious departure from another
rule of procedure of a fundamental nature that there will be grounds for
annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the |CSID Convention.

Argentina invokes two fundamental rules of procedure which it claims have

been violated as a result of the Tribunal’s response to Argentina’s requests

107

for the production of documents. These are, first, Argentina’s “right of

defence”, and secondly, “the principle of equality of the parties”.

212. As to the “right of defence”, the Committee notes that in the Wena Hotels

Annulment Decision it was said that:

[Article 57(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention] refers to a set of
minimal standards of procedure to be respected as a
matter of international law. It is fundamental, as a matter of
procedure, that each party is given the right to be heard
before an independent and impartial tribunal. This includes
the right to stake its claim more its defence and to produce
all arguments and evidence in support of it. This
fundamental right has to be ensured on an equal level, in a
way that allows each party to respond adequately to the
arguments and evidence presented by the other. ©

Subsequent ICSID case law has affirmed these propositions. ‘**

213. As to the “principle of equality of the parties”, the Committee notes that in the
MINE Annulment decision, it was said that:

The Committee considers that a clear example of such a
fundamental rule is to be found in Article 18 of the
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration which provides:

The parties shall be treated with equality and
each party shall be given full opportunity of
presenting his case."

214. The Committee notes that, additionally, it was observed in the Kléckner
Annulment Decision that:

Impartiality of an arbitrator is a fundamental and essential
requirement. Any shortcoming in this regard, that is any
sign of partiality, must be considered to constitute, within
the meaning of Article 52(1)(d), a “serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure” in the broad sense of the
term “procedure,” i.e., a serious departure from a

Wena Hotels Annulment Decision {| 57.

MTD Annulment Decision | 49; CDC Annulment Decision {| 49.

MINE Annulment Decision {[ 5.06. See also, for instance, Metalpar S.A. and Buen Aire S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/5, Award, June 6, 2008, If] 153-155.

108

fundamental rule of arbitration in general, and of ICSID
arbitration in particular.

215. However, in the Committee’s view, in the ICSID system, none of these
fundamental rules of procedure imply a right of a party to obtain evidence in
the hands of the opposing party. In its letter dated August 2, 2004, Argentina
refers to what it claims is “a general principle of law that the party that is in a
better position to prove a fact bears the burden of proof’ (see paragraph 198
above). The Committee does not accept that such general principle exists in
ICSID proceedings: to the contrary, the Committee considers the general
principle in ICSID proceedings, and in international adjudication generally, to
be that “who asserts must prove”, and that in order to do so, the party which
asserts must itself obtain and present the necessary evidence in order to
prove what it asserts.

216. There are no provisions in the ICSID Convention or ICSID Arbitration Rules
providing for any particular regime of discovery or disclosure of documents by
one party to another. It is well known that different national legal systems take
different approaches to the question of discovery and disclosure of
documents, and these differences have also been reflected in diverging
attitudes in international commercial arbitrations. As was stated in the Noble
Ventures Award:

Article 43(a) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration
Rule 34(2)(a) ... do not provide a basis for the application
of national rules of discovery such as those of the United
States Federal Rules of Civil Procedure or those for the
District of Columbia ...

The Tribunal recognises that, on one hand, requests and
orders regarding the production of documents are today a
regular feature of international arbitration ... but, on the
other hand, the present arbitration is a case between a
Government of a Civil Law country where production of
documents is used far less than in Common Law countries
from where the investor comes. ...

‘83 Kiéckner Annulment Decision 195.

109

217.

218.

164

The Tribunal further recognises that, on one hand, ordering
the production of documents can be helpful in the
Tribunal’s task of establishing the facts of the case relevant
for the issues to be decided, but, on the other hand, (1) the
process of discovery and disclosure may be time-
consuming, excessively burdensome and even oppressive
and that unless carefully limited, the burden may be
disproportionate to the value of the result, and (2) Parties
may have a legitimate interest of confidentiality.

... Finally the Tribunal notes that, insofar as a Party has the

burden of proof, it is sufficient for the other Party to deny

what the respective Party has alleged and then, later in the

procedure, respond to and rebut the evidence provided by

that respective Party to comply with its burden of proof.‘
The Committee finds that the fundamental rules of procedure referred to
above do not require any particular regime of discovery or disclosure to be
applied by a tribunal, and do not confer any particular right on a party to
compel the production of evidence by the opposing party. The extent to which
the tribunal does call upon one party to produce documents at the request of
another party will always be a matter for the tribunal to determine in its
discretion.

Argentina is correct when it argues that under the ICSID Arbitration Rules, a
party is not required to make a request for evidence at any particular time,
and is not required to tailor its requests for evidence to the points to which the
evidence would be directed, and is not under an obligation to explain why the
documents are relevant and material to the outcome of the case. However,
matters such as the timing of the request for evidence, and whether the
request is sufficiently precise in identifying the requested evidence and the
reasons why it is needed, are matters that the tribunal is entitled to, and in
practice no doubt normally will, take into account in deciding how to exercise
its discretion. It is not the case that a party has the right to demand any
evidence at any time without justification. Even where a request is timely,
precise and justified, the tribunal may in its discretion reject the request.

Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/11, Award, October 12, 2005 {| 20.

110

219.

220.

Where the request is not timely, precise and justified, the tribunal is even

more likely to do so.

The Committee finds that a party cannot, simply by requesting the tribunal to
call upon the other party to produce documents which are said to be relevant
to a particular allegation, mandate the tribunal either to require the production
of those documents or to accept the truth of the allegation in default of
production. A tribunal might in its discretion refuse the request to require the
documents to be produced, and ultimately find the asserted fact not to be
proved. Regardless of whether or not the tribunal decides to call upon a party
to produce documents, it will decide all of the issues on the basis of the
evidence before it. That is not to deny that in some circumstances a tribunal’s
refusal to exercise its power under Article 43(a) of the ICSID Convention and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(2)(a) at the request of a party could amount to a
denial of a party’s right to be heard. However, the fact that the tribunal
decides to exercise its discretion one way rather than the other cannot in
itself be an annullable error. To establish an annullable error, it is not
sufficient to show that the tribunal rejected repeated requests for the
production of evidence that the requesting party considered crucial to its
case. Rather, it is necessary to establish that, in all of the circumstances
there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

In the present case, Argentina, in its Counter Memorial, requested the
Tribunal to call upon Azurix to produce certain documents, including a copy of
the documentation filed with the Province for participating in the Bidding
Process (“Envelopes Nos. 1 and 2”). Azurix objected on the grounds referred
to in paragraph 202 above. Argentina subsequently stated that Argentina
would have no problem in requesting the Province to produce evidence that
the Tribunal considered relevant (see paragraph 189 above). The Tribunal
then adopted Procedural Order No. 2, in which the Tribunal invited Argentina
to request the Province to provide it with Envelopes Nos. 1 and 2, and
decided to postpone consideration of the remainder of Argentina’s request

111

221.

222.

223.

224.

until after the filing of Azurix’s Reply, which was then due in little more than 2

weeks.

In circumstances where Argentina had stated that it would have no problem
in requesting the Province to produce the evidence that Argentina was
seeking to obtain, and where Azurix had objected to Argentina’s request, the
Committee does not see how it could be regarded as a departure from any

fundamental rule of procedure for the Tribunal to have proceeded as it did.

By letters dated May 17 and 20, 2004, Argentina subsequently informed the
Tribunal that it was sending the Tribunal copies of Envelopes Nos. 1 and 2
that it had obtained from the Province, but requested the Tribunal not to send
a copy of this documentation to Azurix until Azurix had produced its own copy
of Envelopes Nos. 1 and 2 (see paragraph 202 above). By Procedural Order
No. 3, the Tribunal acceded to this request of Argentina, and this action by
the Tribunal cannot be the subject of complaint by Argentina.

By letter to the Tribunal dated May 31, 2004, Argentina stated that it was
withdrawing its request for Azurix to provide its own copies of Envelopes
Nos. 1 and 2. Argentina claimed that this was because Azurix’s conduct had
made Argentina’s request futile, and Argentina requested the Tribunal to take
this into account. By a letter from the Secretary of the Tribunal dated June 7,
2004 (paragraph 202 above), the parties were informed that the Tribunal took
note of Argentina’s withdrawal of its request for Azurix to produce Envelopes
Nos. 1 and 2, and that the Tribunal “will consider the relevance of the matters
raised in said communications as part of its overall examination of the
submissions by the parties in this case”. The Tribunal thereby effectively
acceded to Argentina’s request, and this action by the Tribunal also cannot
be the subject of complaint by Argentina.

By letter to the Tribunal dated July 22, 2004, Argentina requested the
Tribunal to order the submission of the evidence requested by Argentina in its
Counter Memorial that was not covered by Procedural Order No. 3. Azurix
opposed this request. It its Procedural Order No. 4, the Tribunal, noting that it

112

225.

226.

had now had the opportunity to review Azurix’s reply, declined this request of
Argentina “because of its general nature and failure to justify it on the basis of

the reasons adducea”.

The original request for the production of evidence made in Argentina’s
Counter Memorial, and the relevant parts of Argentina’s letter of July 22,
2004 are set out in paragraphs 186-187 and 196 above. The Committee
considers that the Tribunal was acting within its discretion in declining
Argentina’s request on the ground that it did, and the Committee is therefore
not satisfied that it is established that in the circumstances there was a

breach of any fundamental rule of procedure.

By a letter dated August 2, 2004, the stated purpose of which was “to justify
in more detail the request for evidence made by this Office and make it more
precise”, Argentina requested that Azurix be called upon to produce one
specific document, the HYTSA Report, and two general categories of
documents (see paragraph 198 above). The justification for the request was
that the requested documents were aimed at confirming that the offer
submitted by Azurix in the bidding process was “aggressive and
opportunistic” and that it related to the imminent IPO by Azurix (see
paragraph 198 above). In its Procedural Order No. 5, the Tribunal rejected
this request, stating that “it fails to be adequately justified since it continues to
be based on the amount paid by the concession and accepted by the
Province”. Although the reasons given in this Procedural Order are not very
detailed, the Committee considers it sufficiently clear that because the
Province had accepted the amount offered by Azurix for the Concession, the
Tribunal could not see the relevance of the reasons that Azurix may have had
for offering the price that it did. Having regard to the justifications that had
been advanced by Argentina in all of its requests for the production of
documents, the Committee considers that it was within the discretion of the

Tribunal to reject Argentina’s request on the basis that it did.

113

227.

228.

229.

230.

By letter to the Tribunal dated August 23, 2004, Argentina requested the
Tribunal “to reconsider Respondent’s request for evidence so as to preserve
the Argentine Republic’s right of defence in these arbitration proceedings”
(see paragraph 200 above). That letter stated, inter alia, that “Argentina has
sufficiently proven” certain facts, and that “[ijn addition to producing its own
evidence, the Argentine Republic requested the Tribunal to order Azurix
Corp. to produce the documents in its possession, in order to confirm what

had already been proven by Respondent’.

On September 9, 2004, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6, in which
it said that it had considered anew Argentina’s request and had now had the
opportunity to review the Rejoinder, and in which it decided to request Azurix
to submit the HYTSA Report and to request Argentina to submit the bid
evaluation reports related to each stage of the bidding for the Concession.

The Committee sees no contradiction in the Tribunal’s decision (in Procedural
Order No. 6) to call upon Azurix to produce the HYTSA Report, having
previously declined to do so in Procedural Order No. 5. The text of
Procedural Order No. 6 indicates that, since the previous order, the Tribunal
had had the opportunity to review Argentina’s Rejoinder, and it is necessarily
implicit in the latter order that this influenced the Tribunal’s change in
position. In any event, the Tribunal, by calling upon Azurix to produce the
HYTSA Report, thereby acceded to a request by Argentina, and in the
Committee’s view this action by the Tribunal cannot be the subject of
complaint by Argentina.

Argentina claims that it received the HYTSA Report too late for it to be used
by Argentina in the oral arguments in the case. The Committee notes,
however, that the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 6 was the result of
Argentina’s request dated August 23, 2006. Procedural Order No. 6 was
issued just over 2 weeks after Argentina’s request, and that order required
production of the HYTSA Report within some 8 days of the date of the order.
The Committee therefore considers that the Tribunal responded promptly to

114

231.

232.

233.

Argentina’s request, and that the timing of Argentina’s receipt of the Report
was a function of the timing of Argentina’s request. In any event, if Argentina
considered itself to be materially prejudiced by the timing of its receipt of the
Report, it could have applied to the Tribunal for appropriate relief, including
(for instance) by applying for a postponement of the oral arguments if it
considered this to be necessary. In the material before the Committee, there
is no suggestion that Argentina ever sought any relief from the Tribunal in this
respect. The Committee considers that Argentina, having failed to do so,
cannot now claim that there has been a departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure that would justify annulment.

Procedural Order No. 6 also requested Argentina to produce the bid
evaluation reports related to each stage of the bidding. It is not clear from the
material before the Committee whether the Tribunal was requested by either
party to call for the production of this evidence. However, the Committee
considers this to be immaterial, since the power under Article 43(a) of the
ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(2)(a) may be exercised on
the Tribunal’s own motion. The Tribunal’s decision to call for the production of
certain evidence that the Tribunal deemed necessary clearly cannot amount

to a “fundamental denial of evidence”.

Procedural Order No. 6 rejected Argentina’s request for the production of the
documents referred to in paragraph 198(b) and (c) above. The Committee
finds that this was consistent with Procedural Order No. 5, and finds, for the
same reasons given in respect of Procedural Order No. 5 above, that this
decision did not depart from any fundamental rule of procedure.

As to Argentina’s claim that the Tribunal’s Procedural Orders No. 2 to No. 6
did not treat the parties equally, the Committee observes that the fact that a
request by one party is allowed while a request by another party is denied
does not mean that there has been an inequality in the treatment of the
parties. Each request by each party must be considered and determined by
the tribunal on its own individual merits. It is only where it can be shown that

115

234.

235.

165

a tribunal has applied inconsistent standards in the way that it has treated the
requests of the different parties that there can be said to be inequality of
treatment. On the basis of the material before it, the Committee considers
that there are no grounds for suggesting that the Tribunal did anything other
than consider each party's requests on their own merits, and that there are no
grounds for suggesting there was any inequality of treatment of the parties.

The Committee also notes that in order to be a “serious” departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure, the violation of such a rule must have caused
the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it would have
awarded had such a rule been observed.’ The only evidence which
Argentina ultimately sought to have produced that the Tribunal failed to call
upon Azurix to provide were the documents referred to in paragraph 198(b)
and (c) above. As to the relevance of these documents to the case, Argentina
stated in its Memorial on Annulment that:

.. one of Argentina’s key allegations was that there had
been irregularities in the bidding process. The importance
of this contention lied in preventing Azurix from invoking
illegitimate expectations.

and that:

Demonstrating the existence of those irregularities was
important for preventing Azurix from invoking expectations
based on the already mentioned circulars and articles,
especially Circular No. 52(A) and Article 12.1.1 of the
Concession Contract.
On the material before it, it is not apparent to the Committee that in its
defences to the claims Argentina invoked the principle that claims based on
contracts obtained by corruption cannot be upheld by an arbitral tribunal. Nor
is it apparent to the Committee that Argentina “specifically” or “in terms”
claimed that the documents it requested would establish that the contract had
been obtained by corruption. Rather, the position of Argentina appears to
have been that “irregularities” in the bidding process would prevent Azurix

See above paragraphs 49-52.

116

236.

237.

from relying on “expectations” based on particular provisions of the
Concession Agreement, in particular Circular No. 52(A) and Article 12.1.1 of
the Concession Agreement.

However, in any event, the Tribunal noted that:

.. the Procurador General present at the hearing confirmed

that the investigation was continuing but that no evidence

of improper conduct had surfaced. No further information

has been transmitted to the Tribunal.'®
On the basis of the material before it, the Committee is not satisfied that there
is any justification for concluding that it was reasonably likely that the
documents requested by Argentina, had they been available in the
proceedings, would have established that the Concession Agreement was

obtained by corruption.

As to irregularities falling short of corruption, the Committee finds that the
Tribunal expressly took Argentina’s arguments into account."®” It is true that
the Tribunal appears to have made no express findings as to whether or not
such irregularities had in fact been established. However, the Committee
regards it as implicit in the Award that the Tribunal considered that any such
irregularities would not have invalidated the Concession Agreement or have
affected Azurix’s right to invoke the protections of the BIT in respect of its
investment.'® The controversy over Circular No. 52(A) and Article 12.1.1 of
the Concession Agreement went to the issue of Canon recovery.‘ The
Tribunal ultimately resolved that issue in Argentina’s favour, '” and also found
that the value of the Concession was only a fraction of what Azurix had paid
for it. Thus, the Committee finds it to be implicit from the Award that, in the
Tribunal’s view, any such irregularities, even if they had been established,
would not have affected the Tribunal’s decision.

Award {| 56.

Award especially J] 23, 25, 201, 203, 209, 242.
See especially Award {] 242.

Award 911195-243.

See especially Award ff] 219-243.

117

238.

239.

(iii)

240.

241.

242.

243.

71

On the basis of the material before it, the Committee is therefore not satisfied
that there is any basis for concluding that it was reasonably likely that the
documents requested by Argentina, had they been available in the
proceedings, would have caused the Tribunal to reach a substantially
different result.

The Committee therefore rejects Argentina’s argument based on “denial of
fundamental evidence”.

Argentina’s claim of “failure to consider key arguments”

In addressing Argentina’s contention that the Tribunal failed to consider
certain of its key arguments, the Committee recalls the Vivendi Annulment
Decision where it was said that:

No doubt an ICSID tribunal is not required to address in its

award every argument made by the parties, provided of

course that the arguments which it actually does consider

are themselves capable of leading to the conclusion

reached by the tribunal and that all questions submitted to

a tribunal are expressly or implicitly dealt with.'7'
Argentina argues that the Tribunal failed to state reasons, within the meaning
of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, in disregarding the existence of
irregularities in the bidding process without explaining why, and in particular,
in failing to explain why it did not give heed to Azurix’s breach of Procedural

Order No. 3.

For the reasons given in paragraph 237 above, the Committee considers that
it is apparent that the Tribunal took Argentina’s arguments concerning alleged
irregularities in the bidding process into account.

Argentina argues that the Tribunal failed to take properly into account
Azurix’s alleged breach of Procedural Order No. 3. The Committee notes that

Vivendi Annulment Decision J] 87; MTD Annulment Decision {] 50; Lucchetti Annulment Decision

| 128; Wena Hotels Annulment Decision [| 81-83; Soufraki Annulment Decision {J 121-128;

CMS Annulment Decision {J 53-57; M/NE Annulment Decision {| 5.09.

118

244.

172

the parties were informed by the letter dated June 7, 2004 that the Tribunal
would consider the relevance of the matters raised by Argentina in its letter of
May 20, 2004 as part of its overall examination of the submissions by the
parties in the case. The Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal must have
done so, even if it did not make express or detailed findings on those matters
in the Award itself. The fact that the Tribunal ultimately ordered Azurix to pay
the Argentina’s costs related to the “procedural incident” of Azurix’s failure to
submit its copies of Envelopes No. 1 and No. 2 as required by Procedural
Order No. 3'” is further confirmation that the Tribunal did take Argentina’s
submissions in respect of this incident into account. Argentina's argument
was in essence that Azurix’s alleged breach of Procedural Order No. 3
deprived Argentina of the opportunity to obtain further evidence of
irregularities in the bidding process. For the reasons given in paragraph 237
above, the Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal did not consider it material
whether or not there had been irregularities in the bidding process.
Accordingly, it would not have been material whether or not Azurix had

breached Procedural Order No. 3.

Argentina argues that it was a part of its case that, because Azurix needed to
win the bidding process in order for its upcoming IPO to be successful, it
made an unreasonable offer in the bidding process, expecting later to
renegotiate the terms of the Concession Agreement. The Committee notes
that the Tribunal ultimately found that “no well-informed investor, in March
2002” would have paid what Azurix had paid for the Concession, and that for
the purposes of assessing damages the Tribunal therefore took into account
less than a sixth of what Azurix had actually paid. The Committee considers
that the Tribunal thereby agreed with Argentina’s claim that Azurix had paid
an unreasonably large amount for the Concession. The Committee further
finds it implicit from the Award as a whole that the Tribunal did not consider it
to be material to its decision exactly why Azurix had done so. The Committee

finds that it is not a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

Award If] 441, 442.7.

119

245.

246.

(g)

247.

for a tribunal to decline to consider an issue that it considers to be irrelevant,
merely because one of the parties considers it to be important. For the
reasons given in paragraph 237 above, the Committee is not persuaded that
the Tribunal failed to consider Argentina’s argument that, because of the
alleged irregularities in the bidding process, Azurix was not entitled to any
compensation at all.

Argentina also contends that the Tribunal failed to mention the evidence
submitted by Argentina in order to show the existence of the relationship
between Azurix and Enron. The Committee considers that it is implicit in the
Award, including for the reasons given in the previous paragraph, that the
Tribunal did not consider Azurix’s relationship to Enron to be material to its
decision in the case. At paragraph 55 of the Award, the Tribunal refers
expressly to Argentina’s arguments concerning the relationship between
Azurix and Enron. The Committee is not persuaded that the Tribunal failed to
consider these arguments. The Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal
considered and rejected them.

The Committee therefore rejects Argentina’s argument based on “failure to
consider key arguments”.

Other ground of annulment advanced by Argentina

Argentina has also argued that “Procedural Orders No. 2 to 6, signed by the
President of the Tribunal, took a new meaning in the context of the proposal
to disqualify Mr. Rigo Sureda”. This contention is considered by the
Committee in connection with its consideration of Argentina's subsequent

ground of annulment below.

120

(h)

248.

250.

251.

Conclusion

For the reasons given above, the Committee rejects Argentina’s grounds of
annulment based on the Tribunal’s alleged denial of fundamental evidence
and failure to consider key arguments.

Alleged conflict of interest and lack of independent judgment

Introduction

Argentina claims that the Tribunal was not properly constituted, within the
meaning of Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention, on account of the fact
that the President of the Tribunal, Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, was “immersed in
various conflicts of interest’ which “cast reasonable doubts on his
impartiality’, such that “it was not possible for an objective observer to be
confident that he could be ‘relied upon to exercise independent judgment”.

Such doubts are claimed by Argentina to be reinforced by certain procedural
orders adopted by the President of the Tribunal which, according to

Argentina, denied evidence essential to Argentina’s defence.

The conflicts of interest in which Dr. Rigo Sureda is said by Argentina to have
been immersed are claimed to arise by virtue of three circumstances, namely:

(a) the fact that Dr. Rigo Sureda was employed as a consultant to the
United States law firm, Fulbright & Jaworski LLP (“Fulbright”), which
was representing the claimant in the case of Duke Energy International
Peru Investments No. 1 Ltd v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/28) (“the Duke case”), in which Fulbright appointed as
arbitrator Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil, one of the counsel for Azurix in the
present case;

(b) the fact that Fulbright provided legal advice to Azurix on other matters,
including while the arbitration in the present case was in progress; and

121

252.

253.

(b)

(c)

the fact that Fulbright participated in matters related to Enron, which

was Azurix’s parent company.

In its Reply on Annulment, Argentina contended that there are seven main

reasons why Dr. Rigo Sureda could not be relied upon to exercise

independent judgment and did not inspire full confidence in his impartiality of

judgment, namely:

(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(9)

the crossed roles played by Dr. Rigo Sureda and Dr. Santiago Tawil;

Dr. Rigo Sureda’s failure to disclose that he had participated in the
Duke case until after Argentina had proposed his disqualification;

Dr. Rigo Sureda’s provision of misleading information with regard to his
knowledge about Dr. Santiago Tawil’s appointment in the Duke case;

the attorney-client relationships between Fulbright and Azurix and
Fulbright and Enron;

Dr. Rigo Sureda’s failure to investigate despite the fact that Argentina
enquired about the possible attorney-client relationship between
Fulbright and Enron as from Argentina’s proposal to disqualify Dr. Rigo

Sureda;
Dr. Rigo Sureda’s resignation from Fulbright; and

the denial of evidence requested by Argentina in the Tribunal’s
Procedural Orders Nos. 2 to 6.

Argentina also contends that, by virtue of these conflicts of interest there has

been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, within the
meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.

Background

122

254.

255.

256.

257.

By letter dated March 27, 2002 the ICSID Secretariat informed Argentina and
Azurix that Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda was being considered for appointment as
the presiding arbitrator in this case. That letter stated that Dr. Rigo Sureda
had informed the ICSID Secretariat that the law firm to which he was advisor,
Fulbright, was at the time representing several parties in matters against
Enron Corp, but that he had not and would not participate in any of these
matters and would take the necessary steps to ensure that he would be
isolated from them. The letter requested the parties to indicate whether they

had any objections to his appointment.

By letter dated April 8, 2002, the ICSID Secretariat informed Argentina and
Azurix that Dr. Rigo Sureda had accepted appointment as President of the
Tribunal in this case, and that in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1),
the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted and the proceedings to

have begun on that date.

By letter dated March 30, 2004 Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil of M & M Bomchil
Abogados, one of the counsel for Azurix, informed Argentina that he had
been appointed as arbitrator in the Duke case.'”> The letter stated that, prior
to accepting such nomination, he considered it relevant to inform Argentina
that Dr. Rigo Sureda had previously been part of the legal team that was
acting for the claimant in the Duke case, but that Dr. Rigo Sureda did not
participate in the selection procedure that led to Dr. Santiago Tawil’s
appointment as arbitrator in that case and that Dr. Rigo Sureda no longer
participated in the Duke case. The letter requested Argentina’s consent for
Dr. Santiago Tawil to accept his nomination as arbitrator in the Duke case.

In a letter to Dr. Santiago Tawil dated April 13, 2004 the Argentine Attorney-
General’s Office stated that:

Since the Republic of Argentina is absolutely unrelated to
the case and bearing in mind, also, that the intervention of
the head of this Office has been required on the grounds of

‘73 See above paragraph 251.

123

258.

259.

260.

professional ethics and politeness, due to the fact that you
are a member of the Law Firm M&M BOMCHIL abogados--
adversary to the Republic of Argentina in the cases
SIEMENS AG and AZURIX Corp. which acting Tribunals
are presided over by a member of the Law Firm who
nominated you as arbitrator in [the Duke case] ... it is
unnecessary for this Office to deliver a formal decision
regarding your presentation.

By letter dated April 13, 2004 Dr. Santiago Tawil informed the ICSID
Secretariat that he accepted his nomination as arbitrator in the Duke case,
advised the ICSID Secretariat of the above matters and stated that “[pJrior to
this letter | have disclosed these facts before the Argentine Republic, who
has made no objection in such respect’.

In a letter to the ICSID Secretariat dated May 17, 2004 Dr. Rigo Sureda
stated that he had learned of the appointment of Dr. Santiago Tawil as
arbitrator in the Duke case, and said that:

Since Mr Tawil is counsel to the claimants in the cases of
Siemens v. Argentina and Azurix v. Argentina, cases in
which | chair the arbitral tribunal, | wish to confirm to you
that I had no involvement in the selection of Mr Tawil as an
arbitrator [in the Duke case], nor will | have any
involvement with the representation of Duke Energy
International by Fulbright & Jaworski.

On November 29, 2004 Argentina filed a proposal to disqualify Dr. Rigo
Sureda pursuant to Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention (the
“Disqualification Proposal”). That proposal stated, inter alia, that:

Mr Rigo Sureda is the President of two ICSID arbitration
panels in cases against the Argentine Republic. In such
cases Mr Tawil is co-counsel for the claimants. In addition,
Mr Tawil was appointed arbitrator by Mr Rigo Sureda’s law
firm in a case where such law firm is counsel for claimant.
Mr Rigo Sureda and Mr Tawil are reciprocally arbitrators
and parties.

In addition, Mr Rigo Sureda did not comply with the duty to
inform the Tribunal and the parties of the clear supervening
Situation that might give rise to evident incompatibility.
Moreover, according to the letter from Mr Tawil to the

124

Argentine Republic, it would appear that Mr Rigo Sureda
participated in the case where Mr Tawil was appointed as
arbitrator.

Mr Rigo Sureda’s professional and financial interests in
Fulbright & Jaworsky have been subjected to Mr Tawil’s
authority in the arbitration proceedings where the latter
serves as arbitrator. In turn, Mr Guido Tawil is co-counsel
for claimant in the present case. Mr Rigo Sureda is the
President of the Tribunal in a case initiated by a company
represented by Mr Tawil.

The particular position in which Mr Rigo Sureda has been
placed in connection with these arbitration proceedings, his
law firm and Mr Tawil — not only objectively but also
considering the appearance of these relationships —
provides the Argentine Republic — and any reasonable
individual — with enough reasons to conclude that Mr Rigo
Sureda’s independence and impartiality have been
impaired.

So far, Mr Rigo Sureda has not informed what his
professional and business interests and relationships with
Duke were and are.

Mr Rigo Sureda did not inform the parties about the
supervening situation and limited himself to sending a letter
to the ICSID’s Deputy Secretary-General, Antonio Parra,
informing about Mr Tawil’s appointment as arbitrator in a
case where his law firm is actively involved. This letter was
forwarded to the Argentine Republic.

This information does not even meet the basic
transparency and information duty that a president of an
arbitral panel is required to comply with. In addition,
according to Mr Tawil’s letter, it would appear that Mr Rigo
Sureda participated in the Duke case in the past.

Mr Rigo Sureda had a full, comprehensive, and detailed
disclosure duty and he has breached such duty. It is not
the Argentine Republic that should request the information,
but the arbitrator himself who must have provided it in a
timely manner.

125

261.

262.

263.

264.

The persistent withholding of information on the part of Mr
Rigo Sureda increases the appearance and/or objective
perception of partiality or bias. This is in itself a valid
reason for a request for disqualification; even more so
under the ICSID Convention standard. The same
conclusion is reached by analysing other significant
arbitration ethics rules.

In a letter dated December 10, 2004 addressed to the other two members of
the Tribunal, Dr. Rigo Sureda furnished explanations to the Tribunal pursuant
to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.

In a communication dated December 17, 2004, Azurix responded to the

Disqualification Proposal.

In a communication dated December 30, 2004, Argentina responded to
Dr. Rigo Sureda’s letter.

By a letter dated January 28, 2005 Azurix informed the ICSID Secretariat as
follows:

After Mr Rigo was appointed President of the Tribunal in
this matter, the officers and internal counsel of Azurix
changed. In November 2002, the new offices and internal
counsel of as Azurix Corp. (who were unaware of Mr.
Rigo’s relationship with Fulbright) engaged a Houston
partner of Fulbright to provide advice on a limited
engagement for the few months on a matter completely
unrelated to this arbitration. That engagement did not
involve the Argentine Republic or any project in Argentina
and specifically had nothing to do with the Buenos Aries or
Mendoza Province water systems or concessions or
Azurix’s subsidiaries in Argentina ...

That engagement was concluded by April 2003. Mr Rigo
was not involved in that engagement since it included only
lawyers in Fulbright’s Houston office ...

This disclosure stems from the very recent realization of an
officer of Azurix ...

126

265.

266.

267.

In addition, although the Fulbright was adverse to Enron in
several matters in April 2002, it was also representing
through one of its Houston partners 16 pipeline companies
in litigation with the United States Army Core of Engineers
. including Florida Gas Transmission Company, which
was an affiliate of Enron until late 2004. It had no
relationship with Argentina, and Mr. Rigo was not involved
in any way.
By a communication dated February 1, 2005 Argentina responded to Azurix’s
communication of January 28, 2005 and stated that it was confirming and
presenting new elements with respect to the disqualification of Dr. Rigo
Sureda. That communication said inter alia that statements made in Azurix’s
communication of January 28, 2005 constituted a new fact to disqualify

Dr. Rigo Sureda and confirmed the validity of the merits.

By a letter dated February 1, 2005 Dr. Rigo Sureda stated inter alia that he
had no role in or knowledge of any of the matters disclosed in Azurix’s
communication of January 28, 2005, and that, on receipt of the letter, he had
decided to resign from Fulbright with immediate effect so that he would serve
as President of the Tribunal "in a capacity of unquestionable independence
unaffected by events of which | have no knowledge or information and over
which | have no control".

By a communication dated February 10, 2005, Argentina stated that it ratified
its request for disqualification, and that it was furnishing new evidence for
admissibility of that request. That communication stated inter alia that the
resignation of Dr. Rigo Sureda from Fulbright implied recognition of the fact
that he was not in a position to act with impartiality or undeniable
independence, that the information provided on March 27, 2002 was
irrelevant, that Dr. Rigo Sureda’s statement was obscure, untimely and non-
transparent, that Dr. Rigo Sureda had acknowledged that Fulbright was
currently linked to Enron, and that the resignation of Dr. Rigo Sureda from
Fulbright could neither restore the absolute confidence in his independence
and impartiality nor wipe out the violation to the duty of disclosure and
transparency. That communication also stated that in the procedural orders of

127

268.

269.

270.

the Tribunal (as to which, see paragraph 254 above), Dr. Rigo Sureda
“unfairly kept a tight hold on the evidence requested in this proceeding by the
Republic of Argentina”, and that the expressions of Dr. Rigo Sureda in the
procedural orders “acquire today a new meaning in the light of the facts and
circumstances that relate the law firm of Fulbright & Jaworski with Mr. Rigo
Sureda and Azurix Corp”.

On February 25, 2005, the other two members of the Tribunal, Mr. Lalonde
and Mr. Martins, issued their “Decision on the Challenge of the President of
the Tribunal” (the “Disqualification Decision”), in which they rejected
Argentina’s proposal to disqualify Dr. Rigo Sureda.

The Disqualification Decision found that the Disqualification Proposal had to
fail for procedural grounds, on the basis that Argentina had failed to “state
promptly its objections” as required by ICSID Arbitration Rule 27. This was
because it was found that Argentina was made aware of the facts on which
the Disqualification Proposal was based as early as March 30, 2004, but that
Argentina did not propose the disqualification of Dr. Rigo Sureda until
November 29, 2004, some eight months later. The Disqualification Decision
rejected an argument that the new Attorney-General of Argentina had only
been informed of the matter recently, on the basis that the right to object did
not belong to the Attorney General in persona but to the Argentine Republic.
The Disqualification Decision therefore concluded that Argentina was
deemed to have waived its right to request the disqualification of Dr. Rigo
Sureda.

The Disqualification Decision also found that the Disqualification Proposal
had to fail for substantive reasons. It was considered that the procedural
orders were at the time taken by the three members of the Tribunal and not
by the President alone and that these procedural orders had no bearing on
the issue of disqualification raised by Argentina. The Disqualification Decision
found that, based on the facts presented by Argentina in connection with the
Duke case, there was no “real risk of lack of impropriety’ that would “negate

128

271.

(c)

272.

or place in clear doubt the lack of impartiality’. In the Disqualification
Decision, the other two members of the Tribunal also found that they could
not conclude that Dr. Rigo Sureda was in any way delinquent in the
application of his information and transparency duty. The Disqualification
Decision additionally considered that the new facts presented in Argentina’s
letter of February 1, 2005 were not sufficient to lead to the conclusion that Dr.

Rigo Sureda should be disqualified as President of the Tribunal.

By a letter dated April 4, 2005 to the ICSID Secretariat, Argentina stated that
it “rais[ed] a formal objection to the rejection of Argentina’s proposal to
disqualify Mr Rigo Sureda”, which was said to “infringe [...] Argentina’s
essential rights and guarantees recognised in the ICSID Convention”.

Arguments of the parties
Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a) | The Disqualification Decision contains significant errors and defects,
which lead to the conclusion that the President’s disqualification was
incorrectly rejected.

(i) The Disqualification Decision concluded that the letter from the
ICSID Secretariat dated March 27, 2002, had provided Argentina
with enough information for it to raise an objection to Dr. Rigo
Sureda’s appointment. However, that letter only stated that Dr.
Rigo Sureda had disclosed that Fulbright was representing
several parties in matters against Enron, while the
Disqualification Proposal and comments of December 30, 2004
had requested information regarding a possible attorney-client
relationship between Fulbright and Enron. It was not until
January 28, 2005 that Mr. Bishop disclosed that Florida Gas
Transmission Company, which had been an affiliate of Enron
until late 2004, had been a client of Fulbright.

129

(ii) The Disqualification Decision stated that there was no allegation
or evidence that Dr. Rigo Sureda had neglected to inform himself
or had wilfully withheld information, when in fact Dr. Rigo Sureda
appears to have been negligent in his approach and should have
investigated the possible client-attorney relationship between
Fulbright and Enron, at least as from the moment Argentina

raised this issue in its Disqualification Proposal.

(iii) | While the Disqualification Decision appeared to adopt an
“apparent bias” test in determining whether Dr Rigo Sureda’s
disqualification was justified, the decision not to disqualify him
was inconsistent with the ostensible adoption of the “apparent
bias” test.

(iv) The Disqualification Decision disregarded the Pinochet case’
and the Commonwealth Coatings case,'”° which Argentina cited

in support of its claim.

(b) | Although annulment proceedings are not an appeal, the Committee
does have the power to decide itself whether the Tribunal was properly
constituted, independently of what was decided in that regard in the

Disqualification Decision.

(c) | The ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention,
“that the Tribunal was not properly constituted”, leads to Article 57 of
the ICSID Convention which provides that “[a] party may propose to a
Commission or Tribunal the disqualification of any of its members on
account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required
by paragraph (1) of Article 14”. Article 14(1) requires that an ICSID
arbitrator be a person who, amongst other things, “may be relied upon
to exercise independent judgment’.

4 Argentina Memorial on Annulment 167 referring to Disqualification Decision at 15 (Exhibit AR 35).
"5 Argentina Memorial on Annulment 9167 referring to Disqualification Decision at 18.

130

(f)

There is a difference of meaning between the English, French and
Spanish texts of Article 14 of the ICSID Convention. The meaning
which best reconciles the texts, for purposes of Article 33(4) of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which reflects customary
international law, is that those designated to serve as arbitrators must
be persons who both may be relied upon to exercise independent
judgment (or offer every guarantee of independence in exercise of their
functions) and inspire full confidence in their impartiality of judgment.

A violation of the right to a fair hearing before an independent, impartial
and unbiased tribunal amounts to a “serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure”, so that if the member of the tribunal
cannot be relied upon to exercise independent judgment and/or does
not inspire full confidence in his or her impartiality of judgment, the
validity of the award may be challenged under both Article 52(1)(a) and
Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. Although these are separate
grounds of annulment, the former must be considered as a specific

case of the latter.

As to the crossed roles played by Dr. Rigo Sureda and Dr. Santiago
Tawil:

(i) each was in a situation where they exercised authority over the

other, which lent itself to a quid pro quo;

(ii) it was not until after Argentina made a proposal to disqualify him
that Dr. Rigo Sureda revealed that he had assisted two partners
in Fulbright in the preparation of the arbitration request in the

Duke case;

(iii) it is at least doubtful that Dr. Rigo Sureda, as he claims, only
learned of Dr. Santiago Tawil’s appointment as arbitrator in the
Duke case from the ICSID Secretariat.

131

(k)

Argentina did not consent to Dr. Santiago Tawil accepting appointment
as arbitrator in the Duke case. By its letter of April 13, 2004 Argentina

states that it was not for it to give such permission.

Argentina has not waived its right to complain regarding Dr. Santiago
Tawil’s role as arbitrator in the Duke case through any failure to object
in a timely manner, given that ICSID Arbitration Rule 27 does not apply
to proposals for disqualification and given that there were new facts
between Dr. Rigo Sureda’s letter of May 17, 2004 and the

Disqualification Proposal.

Where an arbitrator is appointed from a large firm which also advises
the client, even though the arbitrator may not have been directly
involved with the client, other colleagues in the firm would be, and this
may raise concerns of conflicts of interest.

Bias can be either actual or apparent. Apparent bias relies on the
principle that justice must not only be done but be seen to be done and
relies on the concept of justifiable doubts. The existence of justifiable
doubts is determined by applying an objective test, which makes it
necessary to ask whether a reasonably well-informed person would

believe that the perceived apprehension of impartiality is justified.

The word “manifest” in Article 57 of the ICSID Convention means
“obvious” or “evident” or “easily understood or recognised by the mind”.
The apparent bias test and the test of “manifest” in Article 14 of the
ICSID Convention do not contradict each other. What must be manifest
is that the arbitrator cannot be relied upon to exercise independent
judgment or does not inspire full confidence in his or her impartiality of
judgment, not that he or she is actually partial or dependent.

132

176

7

(m)

(n)

The apparent bias test has been adopted in ICSID cases.’ Article
14(1) of the ICSID Convention incorporates the test of whether there

are reasonable doubts as to the impartiality of an arbitrator.'””

The relationships between Fulbright and Azurix, and Fulbright and
Enron, fit squarely within the category of cases where the apprehension
of bias results from some direct or indirect relationship, experience or
contact with a person interested or otherwise involved in the
proceedings. Dr. Rigo Sureda played two incompatible roles, namely
the role of President of the Tribunal in this case, and the role of senior
advisor with Fulbright, which appointed Dr. Santiago Tawil as arbitrator
in the Duke case and advised Azurix and an affiliate of Enron, Azurix’s

parent company.

It cannot be argued that, because Dr. Rigo Sureda was only one of
three members of the Tribunal, the ultimate result of the Award would
have been the same if he had not served, given that improper
constitution of the tribunal compromises the integrity of the entire
arbitral process and is a ground of annulment, and given that Dr. Rigo
Sureda’s privileged position as President may have allowed him to
sway his fellow arbitrators and his power to issue procedural orders
allowed him to shape the entire arbitral process.

The Award favoured Azurix. The fact that the Award rejected some of
Azurix’s claims and did not award compensation for the full amount
claimed by Azurix is no evidence that Dr. Rigo Sureda could be relied

Relying on Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on the Challenged to the President of the Committee, Oct.
3, 2001, ¥| 25; SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID
Case No. ARB/01/13, Decision on Claimant's Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator of December 19,
2002; Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision of Professor
Domingo Bello Janeiro on the Proposal of the Argentine Republic to Disqualify Dr Andrés Rigo
Sureda Pursuant to Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 9, 11
February 2005, at 26.

Argentina Memorial on Annulment 1193.

133

273.

(p)

upon to exercise independent judgment and inspired full confidence in
his impartiality of judgment.

All of Argentina’s challenges to arbitrators in other cases have been
based on justified reasons and have not been dilatory tactics.

Azurix argues, inter alia, that:

(a)

(c)

Argentina’s annulment request puts forth merely a disagreement with

the Disqualification Decision, which is not a ground for annulment.

Argentina’s numerous unsuccessful challenges to arbitrators in other
ICSID and UNCITRAL arbitrations reflects a general strategy to
challenge arbitrators whose decisions it does not like and to delay the
arbitral process.

Argentina is not entitled to receive a de novo review of its challenges to
Dr. Rigo Sureda as this would be tantamount to granting Argentina a de
facto appeal of this issue. Consistent with the ICSID Convention’s
approach to annulment on all other grounds, the Committee’s review
should be confined to reviewing the Disqualification Decision for
manifest error.

For an award to be annulled under Article 52(1), Argentina must prove
by objective evidence that Dr. Rigo Sureda had a “manifest” lack of the
qualities required by Article 14(1). The lack of independence must be

“manifest” or “highly probable” and not just “possible”.

Argentina does not analyse the facts according to the standard of an
independent observer, but merely makes the same assertions already
rejected in the Disqualification Decision without presenting new
arguments or new facts that would change the Disqualification
Decision.

134

(f)

(k)

Before accepting appointment as an arbitrator in the Duke case,
Dr. Santiago Tawil informed Argentina that he was considering
accepting the nomination, and Argentina did not object.

While the Disqualification Proposal was pending, Azurix disclosed
Fulbright’s limited representation of Azurix and another subsidiary of
Enron on unrelated matters as soon as Azurix’s current management
and counsel became aware of this. Fulbright had no ongoing
relationship with either company. Dr. Rigo Sureda was not involved
with or aware of either representation, and resigned from Fulbright to
avoid even the appearance of any impropriety which he was not

required to do.

The Disqualification Proposal correctly concluded that Argentina had
waived its argument based on the alleged relationship between
Dr. Rigo Sureda and Dr. Santiago Tawil.

Argentina’s complaint that Dr. Rigo Sureda did not disclose that he had
participated in the Duke case until after the proposal for disqualification

was made is wrong.

Argentina even agreed to have Dr. Rigo Sureda serve as President of

another tribunal after it received this disclosure letter.

The Disqualification Decision did not disregard the Pinochet and
Commonwealth Coating cases, but considered both cases inapplicable
because of their factual differences and because they were not decided
under the standard in the ICSID Convention.

Argentina asserts “a veiled and completely unsubstantiated allegation”
that Dr. Rigo Sureda actually knew of Fulbright’s limited connection
with Azurix and an Enron subsidiary and failed to disclose it, which is

untrue.

135

(d)

274.

275.

276.

178

Contrary to what Argentina claims, the “apparent bias” test is not the
correct standard that the ICSID Convention requires, which is whether
Dr. Rigo Sureda could be “relied upon to exercise independent
judgment’ and whether the facts indicated a “manifest lack of the
qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14”. This is the test that
the Disqualification Decision applied.

Although not legally binding on Argentina and Azurix, and although not
yet even adopted at the time of Dr. Rigo Sureda’s appointment as
President of the Tribunal in this case, the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of

Interest provide additional support for the Disqualification Decision.

Even a cursory review of the unanimous Award and its rejection of
many of Azurix’s claims and damages clearly demonstrate
independence and a lack of bias by the Tribunal.

As there was no ground to disqualify Dr. Rigo Sureda, there was no
“serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure” in this regard.
In any event, as Argentina’s request for annulment did not include this

claim, it was waived.

Improper constitution of the tribunal as a ground of annulment under
Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles

The ICSID Convention does not contain provisions specifying when a tribunal

will or will not be “properly constituted” for the purposes of Article 52(1)(a).

As a matter of principle, in its interpretation of Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID

Convention, the Committee is guided by Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna

Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “Vienna Convention”).

178

The Committee therefore gives the expression “properly constituted” its

ordinary meaning in the context of the ICSID Convention and in the light of its

See paragraphs 83-130 above.

136

277.

278.

279.

280.

object and purpose, as a reference to proper compliance with the provisions
of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rules dealing with the
constitution of the tribunal. Such provisions appear to include Section 2 of
Chapter IV (Articles 37-40) of the ICSID Convention (entitled “Constitution of
the Tribunal”) as well as Chapter V (Articles 56-58) of the ICSID Convention
(entitled “Replacement and Disqualification of Conciliators and Arbitrators”).

Argentina contends that there has been non-compliance with only one of the
provisions relating to the constitution of the Tribunal, namely the first

sentence of Article 57.

The first sentence of Article 57 states that “fa] party may propose to a ...
Tribunal the disqualification of any of its members on account of any fact
indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article
14”. Article 58 then sets out the procedure for a decision on such a proposal
for disqualification.

Article 52 does not state that “any fact indicating a manifest lack of the
qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14” will constitute a ground of
annulment. Rather, the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(a) is that the
tribunal was “not properly constituted”. The procedure for constituting the
tribunal, including the procedure for challenging arbitrators on grounds of a
manifest lack of the qualities required Article 14(1), is established by other
provisions of the ICSID Convention. If the procedures established by those
other provisions of the ICSID Convention have been properly complied with,
the Committee considers that the tribunal will be properly constituted for the
purposes of Article 52(1)(a).

It must follow from this that if a party proposes the disqualification of an
arbitrator under the first sentence of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, and if
that proposal is rejected in accordance with the procedure established in
Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 for deciding
such proposals, then it cannot be said that the tribunal was “not properly
constituted” by reason of non-compliance with the first sentence of Article 57.

137

281.

282.

The Committee considers that Article 52(1)(a) cannot be interpreted as
providing the parties with a de novo opportunity to challenge members of the
tribunal after the tribunal has already given its award. A Committee would
only be able to annul an award under Article 52(1)(a) if there had been a
failure to comply properly with the procedure for challenging members of the
tribunal set out in other provisions of the ICSID Convention.

This means that if a party never proposed the disqualification of a member of
a tribunal under Article 57 of the ICSID Convention (with the consequence
that there was never any decision under Article 58), there would be no basis
for seeking annulment on the ground that the provisions of Article 57 and 58
were not properly complied with. In the event that the party only became
aware of the grounds for disqualification of the arbitrator after the award was
rendered, this newly discovered fact may provide a basis for revision of the
award under Article 51 of the ICSID Convention but, in the Committee’s view,
such a newly discovered fact would not provide a ground of annulment under
Article 52(1)(a). If no proposal for disqualification is made by a party under
Article 57, there will be no decision under Article 58, and in such a case there
can (in the Committee’s view) be no basis for contending that the tribunal was
not properly constituted by reason of any failure to comply with Article 57 or
Article 58.

The Committee further is of the view that an ad hoc committee cannot decide
for itself whether or not a decision under Article 58 was correct, as this would
be tantamount to an appeal against such a decision. All that an ad hoc
committee can consider is whether the provisions and procedures prescribed
under Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule
9 were complied with. Thus, for instance, a ground of annulment might exist
under Article 52(1)(a) if a proposal for disqualification was made under Article
57, but was never decided under Article 58 before the award was given, or if
a decision on a proposal for disqualification was purportedly taken by a
person or body other than the person or body prescribed by Article 58. In
either of these cases, because these provisions of the ICSID Convention

138

283.

284.

relating to the constitution of the Tribunal would not have been properly
complied with, the Tribunal would not have been “properly constituted” within
the meaning of Article 52(1)(a).

Azurix argued in its Counter Memorial on annulment that:

. consistent with the ICSID Convention’s approach to
annulment on all other grounds, the Committee’s review
should be confined to reviewing the unanimous decision
already made by the unchallenged arbitrators for manifest
error. Argentina has presented no reason why the
Committee’s task for deciding this issue should differ from
the type of analysis used for the other grounds for
annulment. Such narrow review of the arbitrators’ decision
is consistent with the way the ICSID Convention demands
that all annulment challenges be approached, which does
not authorize a de novo appeal of the arbitrators’ decision.

The Committee understands this argument to raise the possibility that a
decision under Article 58 on a proposal for disqualification might itself be
annulled on any of the grounds of annulment in Article 52(1). The Committee
notes that this possibility seems at odds with the literal wording of Article 52,
which provides only for annulment of the award. However, the Committee
does consider that it is self-evident that a decision under Article 58 must, for
instance, be taken by the correctly constituted body, and that such decision
must not manifestly exceed the powers of the body taking the decision. If
these requirements are not met, the proposal for disqualification will not have
been properly decided under Article 58. There will thus have been a material
non-compliance with a fundamental provision relating to the constitution of
the tribunal, with the consequence that the tribunal was not “properly

constituted” within the meaning of Article 52(1)(a).

139

(e)

285.

286.

287.

288.

Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure as a ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention: applicable
principles

The principles applicable to a ground of annulment based on Article 52(1)(d)
of the ICSID Convention are considered by the Committee in paragraphs 49-

52 above.

Improper constitution of the tribunal as a ground of annulment under
Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views

On November 29, 2004 Argentina filed a proposal under Article 57 of the
ICSID Convention for the disqualification of Dr. Rigo Sureda. Pursuant to
ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(2), the proposal was transmitted to members of the
Tribunal, and Azurix was notified of the proposal. Pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9(3), Dr. Rigo Sureda furnished explanations to the Tribunal.
Pursuant to Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule
9(4), the proposal was considered and voted on by the other two members of
the Tribunal in the absence of Dr. Rigo Sureda. The Committee finds that the
procedure prescribed by Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9 were complied with in relation to Argentina’s proposal to
disqualify Dr. Rigo Sureda.

There is no suggestion that the body which took the Disqualification Decision,
namely the other two members of the Tribunal, Mr. Lalonde and Mr. Martins,
was not the proper body prescribed by Article 58.

The Committee finds that there is no basis for concluding that Mr. Lalonde
and Mr. Martins, in making the Disqualification Decision, manifestly exceeded
their powers. In particular, the Committee finds that there is no basis for
concluding that they failed to apply the correct law in considering and
deciding upon the Disqualification Proposal. Mr. Lalonde and Mr. Martins
expressly applied Articles 14, 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention, and ICSID

140

289.

290.

291.

Arbitration Rule 9. Argentina argues that Mr. Lalonde and Mr. Martins failed
to apply the correct legal test and that they failed to consider certain
authorities. However, the Committee finds that Argentina thereby argues that
Mr. Lalonde and Mr. Martins failed to apply the law correctly, rather than that
they failed to apply the correct law. The Committee finds that it cannot annul
an award under Article 52 on the basis that the body which took a decision
under Article 58 of the ICSID Convention failed to apply the law correctly
(see, by way of analogy, paragraphs 46-48 and 136-137 above).

The Committee further finds that there is no basis for concluding that Mr.
Lalonde and Mr. Martins seriously departed from any fundamental rule of
procedure in dealing with the Disqualification Proposal. In particular, the
Committee finds that Argentina was given a full opportunity to present its
case in respect of the Disqualification Proposal.

The Committee notes that, unlike Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention
(which provides that an award must state the reasons upon which it is
based), Article 58 does not state that a decision on a proposal for
disqualification of a member of the Tribunal must give reasons. Nevertheless,
a duty to state reasons for a decision under Article 58 might be considered
implicit. The Committee finds that it need not determine in the present
proceedings the extent to which decisions under Rule 58 must be reasoned.
This is because the Committee finds that the Disqualification Decision in this
case, which consisted of some 18 pages of single spaced text, fully analysed
the arguments, documents and authorities of both parties and was a well-
reasoned decision.

Moreover, the Committee agrees that Argentina was alerted to the situation
by Dr. Santiago Tawil’s letter dated March 30, 2004, and again by Dr. Rigo
Sureda’s letter in May 2004, where it had the chance to make further
enquiries if it had so wished. However, did not challenge Dr. Rigo Sureda
until November 29, 2004. There was thus an eight-month period between Dr.
Santiago Tawil’s letter and the submission of Argentina’s Proposal for

141

292.

(g)

293.

(h)

294.

Disqualification. During that time, the hearing on the merits took place and
the parties submitted their post-hearing memorials. Accordingly, the
Committee agrees with the Disqualification Decision that Argentina had
waived its right to and/or was estopped from raising objections to the

President of the Tribunal.

For these reasons the Committee concludes that the Disqualification
Proposal was decided in accordance with the requirements of Articles 57 and
58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9, and that as a result
of the Disqualification Decision, Dr. Rigo Sureda properly remained a
member of the Tribunal. The Committee rejects Argentina’s claim that the

Tribunal was not properly constituted.

Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure as a ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention: the
Committee’s views

Argentina has argued that, by virtue of these conflicts of interest, there has
also been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.
However, Argentina states that, although the improper constitution of the
tribunal and the serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure are
listed as separate grounds for annulment under Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention, it must be considered that the former is a specific case of the
latter. The Committee finds that Argentina has advanced no argument in
respect of its ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(d) that has not already
been considered by the Committee above in relation to the ground of

annulment based on Article 52(1)(a).

Conclusion

For the reasons in this Section G, the Committee rejects Argentina’s grounds

of annulment based on the alleged improper constitution of the Tribunal.

142

(a)

295.

296.

1
1

79
80

Damages

Introduction

Argentina seeks annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention on
the basis that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it
determined the applicable standard of compensation. According to Argentina,
the Tribunal, having found that there had been no expropriation but that there
had been breaches of other obligations under the BIT, considered that it had
a full discretion to determine the appropriate standard of compensation in the
circumstances. Argentina maintains that the Tribunal had no such discretion,
that the applicable standard of compensation was a question of law, and that
by exercising a discretion that it did not have and in failing to decide the
standard of compensation in accordance with the applicable law, the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers. '”°

Argentina also seeks annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention on the basis that the Tribunal failed to state reasons and/or

issued contradictory reasons, in that:

(a) on the one hand, the Tribunal ruled that there had not been an
expropriation because the measures attributable to Argentina had not
completely destroyed the value of Azurix’s investment; on the other
hand, the Tribunal, by awarding damages for the full market value of
the investment in respect of breaches of other provisions of the BIT,
contradicted its previous finding that Argentina was not responsible for

the complete destruction of Azurix’s investment;'@°

(b) the Tribunal failed to provide any analysis whatsoever as to the causal
link between the findings of liability in Part VII of the Award, and, the

Application for Annulment {| 23-25, referring to Award {| 419-424.
Application for Annulment {| 36.

143

(b)

297.

(c)

assessment of damages in Part VIII of the Award, and in quantifying

the amount of compensation, the Tribunal simply assumed, without

stating any reasons, that the breaches of the BIT identified in Part VII of

the Award had caused the total destruction of Azurix’s investment;

the Tribunal failed to state reasons:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

in relation to the first head of damages, as to how it calculated or
otherwise obtained the figure of USD 60 million as “what an
independent well-informed third party would have been willing to
pay for the Concession in March 2002, in a context where the

Province would have honoured its obligations”; ®

in relation to the second head of damages, as to why it adopted
the figure of USD 105,240,753 as the “additional investments to
finance ABA”,"85

as to why it decided to award both USD 60 million for the “value
of the Canon” and USD 105,240,753 for the “additional
investments to finance ABA”;'**

as to why Azurix was entitled to 100% of what a third party would
pay for the Concession in circumstances where Azurix indirectly
owned 90% of ABA's shares. '°

Arguments of the parties

Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a)

The BIT does not expressly provide for the standard of compensation

for breaches of provisions of the BIT other than in the case of

Application for Annulment {| 37-39.

Application for Annulment {| 41, referring to Award J] 427, 429.
Application for Annulment {] 42, referring to Award {[ 430.
Application for Annulment {| 43, referring to Award I] 427-429.
Application for Annulment {| 44, referring to Award {| 322.

144

186

(b)

(c)

(d)

)

expropriation. The tribunal was obliged to refer to customary
international law to fill that Jacuna, and not to determine the standard of

damages as a matter of discretion.

The Tribunal's decision on the appropriate standard of compensation is
contained in five paragraphs of Award.'®” There is no attempt in this
section of the Award to divine principles of law and the standard of
compensation for a breach of the fair and equitable standard of
treatment or any other obligation in the BIT. The Tribunal's ultimate
decision on the appropriate standard of compensation is contained in
paragraph 424 of the Award in a single sentence, which is an assertion
of an unfettered discretion, and not an adequate statement of the

Tribunal's legal reasons for its decision.

The need for supporting reasons is particularly acute as the idea that
the same standard of compensation should be applied to a breach of
each and every investment protection obligation of the BIT makes
expropriation as a cause of action redundant.

The “fair market value” standard of compensation applies only to
situations of expropriation, and in cases of breaches of other treaty
provisions, the standard of compensation is “the amount of loss or
damage that is adequately connected to the breach” or the “amount of

the loss or damage actually incurred”.'®

The Tribunal did not have the discretion to apply the standard of
compensation for an expropriation (fair market value of the investment)
to breaches of other obligations in the BIT. By exercising a discretion

Relying on Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 31(3)(c); ICSID Convention, Article
42(1); Saluka Investments BV v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Arbitration, Partial Award of March
17, 2006 {| 254, referring to Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America),
Judgment, ICJ Reports 2003, p. 161, I] 23, 41 and Asian Agricultural Products Ltd v. Republic of
Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award of June 27, 1990 J] 41.

Referring to Award J] 419-424.

Relying on ILC Articles, Articles 31, 36 and 39; Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. The United
Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1), Award of December 16, 2002 (“Feldman
Award”) {| 194.

145

(f)

that it did not have and failing to decide the standard of compensation
in accordance with the applicable law, the Tribunal manifestly

exceeded its powers.

If the approach adopted by the Tribunal were to be generalised, there
would be no reason for a claimant to seek to establish the higher
threshold of a liability for expropriation because the claimant would
obtain the same amount of damages for a breach of any obligation of
the BIT.

On the one hand, the Tribunal ruled that there had not been an
expropriation because the measure attributable to Argentina had not
completely destroyed the value of Azurix’s investment. On the other
hand, in upholding Argentina’s liability under the other obligations and
awarding damages for the full market value of the investment, the
Tribunal contradicted its previous findings that Argentina was not

responsible for the complete destruction of as Azurix's investment. "°°

The Tribunal failed to state any reasons with respect to the question of
causation. Having found that Argentina had breached certain
obligations under the BIT, the Tribunal proceeded in Part VIII of the
Award to quantify damages on the basis of the full market value of the
Concession Agreement without providing any analysis whatsoever as
to the causal link between the findings of liability in Part VII of the
Award and the assessment of damages in Part VIII of the Award or the
standards of compensation related to the violations that it had
established. '°° Causation must be positively established by Azurix, and
the issue of causation is fundamental in the determination of damages

191

in international law as well as in municipal law. '~" While it must follow

that the Tribunal was persuaded that Argentina caused some damage

Referring to Award [J] 322, 424 and MINE Annulment Decision ff] 6.105 to 6.107.

Referring to Award J] 424, 428.

Referring to Award {| 322; ILC Draft Articles on State Responsibility, Article 31(2); John Y.
Gotanda, Recovering Lost Profits in International Disputes, 36 GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF
INTERNATIONAL LAW 61, 66 (2004).

146

193
194

(k)

to Azurix’s investment, the connection between Argentina’s specific

acts and the damage to the investment is never explained in the Award.

In its analysis of the calculation of damages in the Award, the Tribunal’s
reasoning is contradictory. Having defined the standard of “fair market
value”, 1? the Tribunal then awarded compensation to Azurix under two
separate heads of damages: USD 60 million for the “value of the
Canon” and USD 105,240,753 for the “additional investments to finance
ABA’.

As to the first of these heads of damages, the Tribunal stated that the
figure of USD 60 million was “what an independent and well-informed
third party would have been willing to pay for the Concession in March
2002, in a context where the Province would have honoured its
obligations",'°° but failed to provide any formulae or principles in the
Award as to how that figure was calculated or otherwise obtained. '*

As to the second of these heads of damages, the Tribunal failed to
state any reasons for adopting the figure of USD 105,240,753. The
Tribunal’s approach and decision contradicts and is inconsistent with its
findings with respect to the first head of damages in so far as the actual
amount invested by Azurix to finance ABA would not correspond to the
amount recoverable upon a sale to a hypothetical third party (that is,
the fair market value).

It was completely contradictory for the Tribunal to award compensation
based upon both the fair market value of the concession on March 12,
2002 and the additional investments to finance ABA.

The Tribunal further failed to state reasons when it decided to award
both heads of damages. If the first head of damages represents the

Referring to Award J] 424.

Referring to Award J] 418, 424-430.

Contrasting MTD Annulment Decision §] 103; and drawing an analogy with Kiéckner Annulment
Decision {| 176.

147

298.

amount that a third party might pay for the Concession in March 2002
based upon the profits that the Concession Agreement would generate
over time, then logically that amount must include the second head of
damages.

Azurix argues, inter alia, that:

(a)

(c)

Although the BIT is lex specialis, it contains no lex specialis standard of
compensation for violations of the BIT standards of fair and equitable
treatment, full protection and security, and arbitrary measures.
Customary international law may therefore fill the lacunae and provide

governing rules of compensation.

The accepted standard of compensation under customary international
law is found in the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, '®° and in the
Chorzéw Factory case.'®” This standard has been applied by many
tribunals in investment arbitrations.‘

The Tribunal applied this standard, but then adjusted the amount of the
compensation to take into account certain responsibilities that it

decided Azurix should bear. ‘°°

The international law standard of compensation is not expressed in
formulaic terms, and tribunals exercise a broad discretion in
determining how best to provide full compensation in a given case.
Past arbitral tribunals have taken various approaches to determine a

Referring to ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. Republic of
Hungary, |\CSID Case No. ARB/03/16, Award, Oct. 2, 2006 (“ADC Award”) {| 483.
Referring to ILC Articles on State Responsibility, Article 36.
Referring to Permanent Court of International Justice, Chorzow Factory case, Merits, 1928, Ser.
ANo. 17, p. 47.(“ Chorzéw Factory case”)
Referring to CMS Award {| 400; Siemens Award I] 352-353; ADC Award {| 497; MTD Award {|
238; Amoco Award If] 191-193; SD Meyers Award, Chapter XI; Metalclad Award {| 122.
Referring to Award {| 432.

148

(f)

measure of damages appropriate to the individual circumstances of

each case.?

Like the present Tribunal, several other investment arbitral tribunals
have used the fair market value standard for calculating damages for
violations of the fair and equitable treatment standard, even though no
expropriation was found in those cases.”°' This is an exercise by the
tribunal of assessing the best way to compensate given the full and
specific factual circumstances of the case. Expropriation requires
different elements from other BIT standards, but it is not a higher
standard, merely a different one. There is no law or rule or BIT
provision mandating that only acts of expropriation can give rise to an

award of full compensation or fair market value.

Other tribunals have exercised their judgement to apply different
methodologies to compensate for non-expropriatory violations for which
the BIT provided no explicit standard.”? These varying approaches
show that arbitral tribunals possess discretion in determining how
damages are best calculated in the full circumstances of the case in the

absence of a /ex specialis in the BIT.

It is essential that tribunals are granted the discretion to exercise their
own judgement to determine the best manner in which to compensate
for harm. In both common law countries and in civil law countries there
is a broad discretion in fixing the amount of damages awarded.
International treaties also provide tribunals discretion in calculating

damages.?°°

Referring to CMS Award {| 409; SD Meyers Award {| 309.
Referring to CMS Award {| 410; Enron Award {J 360-363; Sempra Award I] 403-404; SD
Meyers Award {J 311-315; Metalclad Award {| 122; BG Group Plc v. Argentine Republic,
UNCITRAL Rules, Award, December 24, 2007 {| 422.
Referring to PSEG Award {| 304; LG&E Award §] 36; ADC Award If] 496, 521.
Referring to United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods,
Secretariat Commentary {| 4, in Guide to GISG article 74; UNIDROIT Principles of International
Commercial Contracts, Article 7.4.3(3) (2004).

149

(h) It is not necessary to prove the exact damage suffered in order to
award damages; determining damages is not an exact science, and a

certain amount of independent judgement is required.2™

(i) There is nothing contradictory between the Tribunal’s finding that there
was no expropriation and the Tribunal’s decision to award the fair
market value of the Concession as damages. The Tribunal did not use
the fair market value of the Concession simply “because” it found the
Province had taken it over; the Tribunal found that fair market value
was “appropriate” because other tribunals had used that method in
non-expropriation cases, and “particularly since” the Province had
taken over the Concession.

(j) Not every reason needs to be stated and even reasoning that is implicit
or inferred can amount to a well reasoned award. The Tribunal
sufficiently explained the causal link between its findings of liability and

its determination of damages.

(k) In fact, the Award does expressly state its causation findings. The
Tribunal made several findings that in the aggregate amounted to
breaches of the BIT, and specifically when "considered together, ...

reflect a pervasive conduct of the Province in breach of the standard

t", 205

fair and equitable treatmeni in particular, the politicisation of the

tariff regime,?°° damage inflicted on Azurix’s relationships with its

7

customers,” and the Province's response to Azurix’s notice of

termination.2°° The Tribunal found that these cumulative actions with

respect to the Concession reduced the value of Azurix’s investment.2°

Referring to Sapphire International Petroleum Ltd v. National Iranian Oil Co, Arbitral Award,
March 15, 1963 {J 187-188; Delagoa Bay and East African Railway Co (United States and Great
Britain v. Portugal) (1900), quoted in Marjorie M. Whiteman, 3 Damages in International Law
1694, 1699 (1943).

Referring to Award {| 377.

Referring to Award JJ] 92, 102, 167, 375.

Referring to Award {JJ 320, 375-376.

Referring to Award {| 374.

Referring to Award {| 393.

150

(m)

In this case, the "causal link" that the Tribunal found was not something

complicated, in need of elaborate explanation.2"°

The Tribunal took great care to assess damages only for Argentina's
breaches that caused Azurix harm. The Tribunal rejected two of the
four heads of damages claimed by Azurix. Regarding the two heads of
damages the Tribunal accepted, the Tribunal expressly found that the

Province caused the loss."

As to the value of the Canon, the Tribunal based its Award on what it
believed an informed, independent party would have been willing to pay
in March 2002 and provided very specific reasons for this.2'? The
Tribunal accepted Argentina’s argument that the fair market value was
not equal to the price Azurix paid for the Concession.?"° The Tribunal
sufficiently detailed its reasoning.2"* The Tribunal was not required to
provide an exact formula for arriving at the amount of USD 60 million
because it had a considerable discretion and its explanation was more
than adequate.?'> The Award clearly states that the amount of USD 60
million is the Tribunal’s estimation of the fair market value of the Canon

payment as of March 2002, based on all the evidence in the case.?"6

As to the damages for Azurix’s additional investments, the Tribunal
made its own calculation of the amount of additional investments and
then decreased that amount to account for what it considered Azurix
should bear as part of its business risk. Argentina never disputed that
Azurix invested USD 102.4 million in additional capital contributions to

Referring to MTD Annulment Decision {| 97.

Referring to Award {| 428.

Referring to Award J] 427-429.

Referring to Award J] 413.

Referring to Award J] 426, 429.

Referring to Wena Hotels Annulment Decision {| 91; SD Meyers Second Partial Award {| 175.
Referring to Award {| 430.

151

(c)

299.

300.

218
219

ABA. The Tribunal explained precisely how it arrived at the amount of

additional investments made by Azurix.2"”

(0) The Tribunal did not contradict itself or fail to state reasons for
awarding both the “value of the Canon” and the “additional
investments”. The Tribunal found that, in addition to the Canon
payment, "Azurix should be compensated, as part of the fair market
value of the Concession, for the additional investments to finance
ABA"."® It is perfectly appropriate to include actual investments in
addition to the investor's initial acquisition cost when determining fair
market value.2"° The fair market value of the Concession and the
additional investments taken together, accurately represent the full
value of what Azurix invested in Argentina, and are also parts of the
Tribunal's opinion of the fair market value of the Concession as of the
Province’s takeover in March 2002.

The Tribunal’s findings with respect to damages

In Part VI of the Award, entitled “The Facts”, the Tribunal made relevant

findings of fact.

In Part VII of the Award, entitled “Breach of the BIT”, the Tribunal then
proceeded to consider and determine whether the facts as found in Part VI
established any breach of the BIT as alleged by Azurix. The Tribunal decided
that there had been no breach of the expropriation clause in Article IV of the
BIT, or of the obligation in Article 1I(2)(c) of the BIT that “fejach Party shall
observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to

investments”.?2°

Referring to Award {| 430.
Referring to Award {| 430.
Referring to Siemens Award.
See paragraphs 150-151 above.

152

301.

302.

303.

304.

However, the Tribunal found that there had been breaches for which
Argentina was responsible of the obligation in Article 1I(2)(a) of the BIT that
investments must be “at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment’,
of the obligation in Article 1I(2)(b) of the BIT not to impair the management,
operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or disposal
of investments “by arbitrary or discriminatory measures”, and of the obligation
in Article II(2)(a) of the BIT that investments “shall enjoy full protection and
security’.22' The Committee has already determined in paragraphs 45-48,
138-177 and 179-184 above, that in making these findings the Tribunal did
not manifestly exceed its powers within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b) of the
ICSID Convention and did not fail to state reasons for its decision, within the
meaning of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

The issue of damages was then dealt with by the Tribunal in Part VIII of the
Award, entitled “Compensation”. The Tribunal considered that there were

three issues to be determined in relation to the question of compensation.222

The first issue was the question of what compensation had been claimed by
Azurix. The Tribunal decided that it would not consider an additional head of
compensation that had been included only in the Post-Hearing Memorial,
namely an amount on account of discrete damages detailed in the NERA
report.° The decision of the Tribunal to exclude this additional head of
damage was in Argentina’s favour and has not been challenged by Azurix.

The second issue, described by the Tribunal as “the starting point for the
calculation of damages”, was the date on which the breach of the BIT had
occurred. The Tribunal referred to the difficulties in establishing the relevant
date where a breach of the BIT had been caused, as in this case, not by a
single act occurring on a particular day, but by a series of acts over time.225

The Tribunal referred to an award of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal, which

See paragraphs 174-177 above.

Award 7 415.
Award J 416.
Award J 415.
Award § 417.

153

305.

decided that “where the alleged expropriation is carried out by way of a series
of interferences in the enjoyment of property’, the date of the expropriation is
“the day when the interference has ripened into a more or less irreversible
deprivation of the property rather than on the beginning date of the events’ .226
The Tribunal went on to say that in this case there could be “legitimate
disagreement’ as to what date was, but that the Tribunal considered there to
be no doubt that by March 12, 2002 (the date on which the Province put an
end to the Concession alleging abandonment by ABA), the breaches of the

BIT had “reached a watershed”.”2”

The third issue was the question of the basis upon which damages should be
assessed. In relation to this issue, the Tribunal found:

(a) that the only BIT provision establishing the measure of compensation
was Article IV(1), which provides for “[clompensation ... equivalent to
the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before
the expropriatory action was taken or became known”, in cases of an
expropriation that meets the BIT’s requirements that it be done for a

public purpose and be non-discriminatory;?”

(b) that in the CMS Award, the tribunal, when faced with a similar situation,
applied “the standard of fair market value” to assess damages in a case
where there had been breaches of provisions other than the

expropriation provision of the same BIT;2”°

(c) that case law indicates that under NAFTA, which also provides for a
measure of compensation only in cases of expropriation, tribunals have
in cases of non-expropriatory breaches “exercised considerable

discretion in fashioning what they believed to be reasonable

Award {| 417, quoting Malek v. Iran, award 534-193-3, para. 114 (1992) (citing Int Technical
Prods. Corp. v. Iran, Award No. 190-302-3, at 49, 9 Iran-U.S. Cl. Trib. Rep. 206, 240-241
(1985)).

Award J 418.

Award J 419.

Award {| 420, referring to CMS Award {| 410.

154

306.

307.

(d)

)

(f)

approaches to damages consistent with the requirements of
NAFTA”,

that case law indicates that under NAFTA it is “open to the tribunals to
determine it [compensation] in light of the circumstances of the case
taking into account the principles of both international law and the

provisions of NAFTA”;73"'

that in the MTD case, where the tribunal found a breach of the fair and
equitable treatment obligation of the relevant BIT, the tribunal accepted
the claimants’ proposal to apply the standard of compensation

formulated in Chorzow Factory case;7°2

that in the present case, the Tribunal was “of the view that a

compensation based on the fair market value of the Concession would

be appropriate, particularly since the Province has taken it over’.?°°

Having thus decided that the standard of compensation was the “fair market

value”, the Tribunal proceeded to define that concept as:

... the price, expressed in terms of cash equivalents, at
which property would change hands between a hypothetical
willing and able buyer and a hypothetical and able seller,
acting at arm’s length in an open and unrestricted market,
when neither is under compulsion to buy or sell and when
both have reasonable knowledge of the relevant facts.74

The Tribunal then referred to the methodologies for measuring the fair market

value in the present case that had been submitted by Azurix, namely the

“actual investment” method and the “book value” method.?°° As to the former,

the Tribunal said:

Award {| 421, referring to Feldman Award, {| 197.
Award {| 422, referring to S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Canada, NAFTA, Partial Award, November 13, 2000
(“Myers Award”) {J 303-319.
Award {| 423, referring to MTD Award {| 238; Chorzow Factory case.
Award J 424.
Award {| 424, quoting International Glossary of Business Valuation Terms, American Society of
Appraisers, ASA website, June 6, 2001, p. 4.
Award J 425.

155

308.

309.

310.

Under the actual investment method, Azurix claims to have
invested $449 million when it acquired the Concession,
$102.4 million in additional capital contributions to ABA, and
$15 million on consequential costs including corporate
expenditures and legal costs related to negotiations with the
Province.

The Tribunal referred to Azurix’s submission that “using actual investment is
compelling as the investment is recent and highly ascertainable”, and

concluded that this method was “a valid one in this instance”.?°”

However, the Tribunal went on to say that “a significant adjustment is

238 on

required to arrive at the real value of the Canon paid by the Claimant’,
the ground that “in the Tribunal’s view, no well-informed investor, in March
2002, would have paid for the Concession the price (and more particularly,
the Canon) paid by Azurix in mid-1999”.?°°

The Tribunal gave its reasons for this finding in paragraphs 426 to 428 of the
Award.?4° Considering various factors, the Tribunal concluded that the value

of the Canon on March 12, 2002 was USD 60 million.

As to Azurix’s claim for its further investments, the Tribunal found that there
were investments additional to the Canon amounting to USD 112,844,446.
However, the Tribunal considered that this amount should be reduced by
USD 7,603,693 which represented those damages which the Tribunal found
to be related to contractual claims**' and that should be borne by Azurix as

part of its business risk.2“

Award 411.
Award J] 425.
Award J 425.
Award {| 426. At {| 430 it is indicated that Azurix claimed that the initial sum invested by Azurix

was USD 449 million of which USD 438,555,551 represented the payment for the Canon. At | 41

it is indicated that the “canon payment” was 438,555,554 Argentine pesos (the Argentine peso
being at the time at parity with the United States dollar): Decision on Jurisdiction, footnote 1.
Award J 429.

That is, losses arising from matters in which the Tribunal found that the Province did not exercise
its public authority but acted as any other contractual party: see Award ff] 150, 155, 160.

Award J 430.

156

311.

312.

313.

(d)

314.

As to Azurix’s claim for unpaid bills to ABA for services rendered prior to the
take over of the Concession by the Province and which the Province directed
customers not to pay to ABA, the Tribunal found that this amount was owed
by the Province to ABA and, therefore, should not be part of the
compensation awarded to Azurix.74°

As to Azurix’s claim for corporate expenditures for negotiations with the
Province, termination of the Concession and transfer of the service, the
Tribunal found that it had not received sufficient evidence in support of such
costs and that, in any case, these costs related to the business risk that
Azurix took when it decided to make the investment.” As to Azurix’s claim
for costs of the ICSID proceedings, the Tribunal decided to consider these as
part of the award of costs in the proceedings.”
Finally, the Tribunal rejected a proposal by Azurix that damages be
assessed, as an alternative to the fair market value of the investment, on the
theory of unjust enrichment.”
Failure to apply the correct law as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles
The principles applicable to a ground of annulment based on Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention are considered by the Committee in paragraphs
136-137 above.

Award {| 431.

Award {| 432.

Award {| 432.

Award If] 434-438.

157

(e)

315.

316.

317.

Failure to apply the correct law as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views

It is not in dispute between the parties, nor in the Committee’s view could it
seriously be disputed, that the Tribunal had the power in this case to award
damages for any loss that the Tribunal found to have been suffered by Azurix

as a result of breaches of the BIT for which Argentina was responsible.

In considering how to assess damages, the Tribunal began by noting that the
only BIT provision providing for the measure of compensation was the
expropriation clause in Article 1v(1).247 The Tribunal then proceeded to
consider how damages were assessed for non-expropriatory treaty breaches
in the CMS Award (which involved the same BIT as the present case), and in
certain arbitrations under NAFTA and a BIT between Malaysia and Chile
(both of which, analogously to the BIT in the present case, provide an
express standard of compensation only in cases of expropriation).”48 The
Tribunal noted that in the NAFTA cases, it was found that in cases of non-
expropriatory breaches of the treaty “the tribunals exercised considerable
discretion in fashioning what they believed to be reasonable approaches to
damages consistent with the requirements of NAFTA”,”“° and that

... the lack of a measure of compensation in NAFTA for
breaches other than a finding of expropriation reflected the
intention of the parties to leave it open to the tribunals to
determine it in light of the circumstances of the case taking
into account the principles of both international law and the
provisions of NAFTA.?°°
The Committee considers that it is implicit from this discussion that the
Tribunal considered that the law that it was to apply in determining the
quantum of damages was the BIT itself, and that failing any express provision
in the BIT, the matter was governed by general principles of international law.

The Committee finds no fault with the Tribunal’s identification of the

Award J 419.
Award {J 420-423, referring to Myers Award {| 197; Feldman Award {| 303-319; MTD Award |
238.

Award {| 421, quoting Feldman Award §] 127.

Award {| 422, quoting Myers Award Jf] 303-319.

158

318.

319.

320.

321.

322.

251
252

applicable law for purposes of determining the quantum of damages, which is

in fact consistent with Argentina’s position.

The Committee finds that it is also implicit from the Tribunal’s discussion of
these cases that the Tribunal considered that under such general principles
of international law, in the absence of any express provision in the BIT
dealing with assessment of damages for breach of a particular provision of
the BIT, the tribunal will have a discretion to determine what it considers to be

a reasonable approach to damages.

Even if the Tribunal were wrong in its conclusion that under general principles
of international law it has such a discretion, the Committee considers that this
would be a case of incorrect application of the applicable law (which is not a
ground of annulment), rather than a case of non-application of the applicable

law.25"

Whether the Tribunal applied the applicable law rightly or wrongly, the
Tribunal did in the Committee’s view apply the correct applicable law, namely

the BIT itself and general principles of international law.

The Committee therefore cannot accept Argentina’s argument that the
Tribunal determined the standard as a matter of discretion rather than
applying principles of customary international law. The Tribunal decided to
exercise a discretion pursuant to customary international law, and not to

exercise a discretion instead of customary international law.

The Tribunal proceeded to determine how it would exercise its discretion in
this particular case, and concluded that “[/Jn the present case, ... a
compensation based on the fair market value of the Concession would be
appropriate” particularly since the Province had taken the investment over.752

Argentina argues that the Tribunal did not have the discretion to apply the
“fair market value” standard of compensation because under the BIT, this is

the standard of compensation for expropriation, and the Tribunal expressly

See paragraphs 47-48 above.
Award J 424.

159

323.

324.

253

found in this case that there had been no expropriation. However, the
Committee finds nothing in the BIT that reserves this standard of
compensation solely to cases of expropriation. If the Tribunal had, as it found,
a discretion in the approach that it adopted to the assessment of damages,
there is no reason in logic why it might not, in the exercise of that discretion,
in any case where it considered it appropriate to do so, also apply the “fair

market value” standard to cases of non-expropriatory breaches of the treaty.

Argentina suggests that this conclusion would make “expropriation as a
cause of action redundant’ as there would be no reason for a claimant to
seek to establish the “higher” threshold of liability for expropriation. The
Committee is not persuaded by this argument. Indeed, the Committee does
not accept Argentina's premise that the BIT provides for the “fair market
value” standard in cases of breaches of the BIT amounting to expropriation.

Article IV(1) of the BIT provides that investments shall not be expropriated or
nationalised, except where certain conditions are satisfied, one of these being
the payment of compensation “equivalent to the fair market value of the
expropriated investment immediately before the expropriatory action was
taken”.?> Thus, where all requirements of Article IV(1) are met, including the
payment of the fair market value, there will be no breach of the BIT. On the
other hand, in cases where an expropriation does constitute a breach of the
BIT, either because the requisite compensation has not been paid, or
because one of the other requirements are not met, the BIT does not state
what the applicable standard for the assessment of damages will be.7 It
thus appears that the BIT does not provide the standard of compensation for

Article IV(1) of the BIT relevantly provides: “Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized

either directly or indi ly through unt to or
(‘expropriation’) except for a public purpose; in a non- discriminatory manner; upon payment of
prompt, adequate and effective compensation; and in accordance with due process of law and
the general principles of treatment provided for in Article II(2). Compensation shall be equivalent
to the fair market value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriatory
action was taken or became known, whichever is earlier ...”

Thus, in ADC, the tribunal found that in a case of an unlawful expropriation contrary to the BIT,
the level of compensation is not the level provided for in the expropriation clause of the BIT
(which applies to awful expropriations), but the standard under customary international law: ADC
Award {If 479-500, especially J] 485 and 495.

 

160

325.

326.

327.

255

any type of breach of the BIT, in which case, on the Tribunal’s reasoning the
determination of the standard of compensation will always be in the tribunal’s
discretion.

In any event, even if it were the case that the “fair market value” standard is
applicable to all breaches of the BIT involving expropriation, it would not
make the expropriation provision of the BIT redundant for that standard of
compensation also to be applied where the tribunal considers it appropriate to
cases involving breaches of other provisions of the BIT. Contrary to what
Argentina seems to suggest, the Tribunal did not find that the “fair market
value” standard was the applicable standard for all breaches of all provisions
of the BIT.

Argentina argues that, in cases of breaches of the BIT other than the
expropriation clause, the standard of compensation is “the amount of loss or
damage that is adequately connected to the breach” or the “amount of the
loss or damage actually incurred’, rather than the “fair market value”
standard. The Committee considers that, by this argument, Argentina
requests the Committee to find that the Tribunal incorrectly applied the
applicable law (by applying an incorrect standard) rather than find that the
Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law (the BIT and general principles of
international law). The Committee reiterates that incorrect application of the
applicable law is not a ground of annulment.

In any event, the Committee is not persuaded that the Tribunal failed to adopt
an approach of ascertaining the “amount of the loss or damage actually
incurred”. The Tribunal referred to the standard of compensation identified in
the Chorzéw Factory case, namely that which would “wipe-out all the
consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in
all probability, have existed if the act had not been committed.”?>
Furthermore, the Tribunal, in rejecting Azurix’s proposal that damages be

assessed on the theory of unjust enrichment, stated that:

Award J] 409 and 423 (referring to the submissions of Azurix and the MTD Award respectively).

161

... damages and unjust enrichment are conceptually distinct
in terms of the principles of liability and the measure of
restitution. In the case of damages, liability rests on an
unlawful act, which is not necessarily the case in unjust
enrichment. As to compensation on account of an unlawful
act, it is based on the loss suffered, while, in the case of
unjust enrichment, it is based on restitution ...?°°

 

328. It is apparent to the Committee that the Tribunal considered in the present
case that the “fair market value of the investment” would be appropriate in the
circumstances of this particular case to achieve the result of compensating

Azurix for the actual loss suffered by it.

329. For these reasons, whether or not the Tribunal was right or wrong in applying
the standard of compensation that it did, the Committee finds that the
Tribunal did not fail to apply the applicable law. The Committee therefore
finds no annullable error under Article 52(1)(b).

(f) Failure of the award to state reasons as a ground of annulment under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: applicable principles

330. The principles applicable to a ground of annulment based on Article 52(1)(e)
of the ICSID Convention are considered by the Committee in paragraph 178
above.

(g) Failure of the award to state reasons as a ground of annulment under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views

331. Argentina argues that the Tribunal’s decision on the appropriate standard of

t?5” which contain no

compensation is contained in five paragraphs of tex'
attempt to divine principles of law and the standard of compensation for a
breach of the fair and equitable standard of treatment or any other obligation

in the BIT. For the reasons given above, the Committee does not accept this

288 Award {| 436 (emphasis added).

287 Award Jf] 419-424.

162

332.

333.

334.

335.

258

argument. The five paragraphs of text referred to by Argentina contain a
discussion of other cases dealing with the same issue, and it is apparent that
the Tribunal concluded that it had a discretion under the applicable law to
determine the approach to damages.

The Committee does not consider that the Tribunal found the “fair market
value” standard to be the standard of compensation for all breaches of the
BIT. Rather, the Tribunal found that for breaches of BIT obligations other than
the expropriation clause, the Tribunal has a discretion in determining the
approach to damages, and that it may in its discretion, if it considers it
appropriate, apply the “fair market value” standard.

As to the reasons why the Tribunal, in the exercise of the discretion that it
found that it had, decided to adopt the “fair market value” standard, the
Committee notes the following.

The Tribunal gave the following history relating to the termination of the
Concession Agreement. On July 18, 2001, ABA requested the Province to
cure its breaches of the Concession Agreement. On August 29, 2001, the
Province replied denying any wrongdoing. On October 5, 2001, ABA
terminated the Concession Agreement. On November 1, 2001, the Province
issued an Executive Order rejecting the termination of the Concession
Agreement and ordering ABA to cease and desist from claiming that it had
terminated the Concession Agreement. On February 26, 2002, ABA filed for
bankruptcy reorganization proceedings. On March 7, 2002, the Province
deemed that ABA had abandoned the service. On March 12, 2002, the
Province terminated the Concession Agreement alleging ABA's fault. On
March 15, 2002, ABA delivered the service to the Province.?

The Tribunal found that ABA’s request to terminate the Concession in
agreement with the Province “was a reasonable request in light of the

previous behavior of the Province and its agencies”, and that the Province’s

Award If] 244-245.

163

336.

337.

338.

339.

refusal to accept ABA's notice of termination and insistence on terminating it
by itself on account of abandonment of the Concession was a clear case of a
breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard.7°°

The Tribunal found that certain conduct of the Province prior to ABA’s request
to terminate the Concession also amounted to breaches of BIT for which
Argentina was responsible.7°° The Committee considers it implicit that it was
because of this that the Tribunal considered ABA’s request to terminate the
concession to be “a reasonable request in light of the previous behavior of
the Province and its agencies’.

The Committee also considers it implicit from the above that the Tribunal
considered that the breaches of the BIT for which Argentina was responsible
had caused the termination of the Concession Agreement, and that the loss
caused to Azurix by these breaches was therefore the value of the
Concession on the date on which the Province terminated the Concession
Agreement. This is particularly implicit in the Tribunal’s comment that
“compensation based on the fair market value of the Concession would be

appropriate, particularly since the Province has taken it over’.?°'

Thus, contrary to what Argentina claims, the Committee finds that the
Tribunal did provide adequate reasons as to the causal link between the
Tribunal’s findings of liability in Part VII of the Award and its finding that the
amount of damages would be the fair market value of the Concession on
March 12, 2002.

Argentina claims that there is an inconsistency, on the one hand, between the
Tribunal’s finding that there had not been an expropriation, and, on the other
hand, the Tribunal’s finding that Azurix was entitled to the fair market value of
the Concession, which is the standard of compensation provided for in

Article IV(1) of the BIT in cases of expropriation.

Award ¥ 374.
Award i] 375-377, 393, 408.
Award J 424.

164

340.

341.

342.

343.

The Committee considers that these two findings cannot be considered to be
contradictory for the reasons given in paragraphs 322-323 above. It is clear
from the Tribunal’s reasons that the Tribunal considered that the “fair market
value” standard of compensation was not confined exclusively to cases of
expropriation, but that it could be applied also in cases of breaches of other
provisions of the BIT. The Tribunal’s decision to apply the “fair market value”
standard therefore does not contradict its finding that there was no
expropriation.

As to the reasons why the Tribunal found that USD 60 million was the “fair
market value” of the Concession on March 12, 2002, the Committee notes
the following.

At paragraph 425 of the Award, the Tribunal determined that the methodology
it would adopt for determining the “fair market value” of the Concession was
the “actual investment” method. The Tribunal indicated that this was one of
two methodologies put forward by Azurix,”6? and it appears from the Award
that Argentina did not propose any particular alternative methodology.2© The
Tribunal appeared to accept Azurix’s submission that the “actual investment”
method “is compelling as the investment is recent and_ highly

ascertainable”.?°4

The Tribunal said that “the actual investment method is a valid one in this
instance”. It is implicit from this that the Tribunal considered that the actual
investment method was not the only valid method that might have been used
to determine the fair market value, that the Tribunal had a discretion in
determining the methodology that it would adopt, and that the Tribunal
preferred the actual investment methodology for the reasons given. The
Committee does not find any insufficiency in the Tribunal’s reasons for

adopting this methodology.

Award J 425.
Award J 413.
Award J 425.
Award {425 (emphasis added).

165

344.

345.

346.

In then proceeding to determine Azurix’s “actual investment’, the only
amounts that the Tribunal took into consideration were the Canon payment,
and Azurix’s additional capital contributions. The Tribunal declined to take
into account certain other amounts that had been claimed by Azurix.7° The
Tribunal’s decision to exclude these additional amounts was one in
Argentina’s favour, and Argentina raises no objection in respect of this

decision.

Argentina has argued that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for deciding to
include both the Canon payment and Azurix’s additional capital contributions.
The Committee considers it clear that the damages awarded under the
“actual investment” method correspond to the amounts actually invested by
the claimant. As the additional contributions were amounts invested in
addition to the Canon payment, it is quite logical that both would be taken into
account under an “actual investment” methodology. The Committee does not
find any insufficiency in the Tribunal’s reasons for including both of these

amounts.

As to the Canon payment, the amount actually paid was in excess of
USD 438 million.2°” However, the Tribunal considered that “a significant
adjustment is required to arrive at the real value of the Canon paid by the
Claimant’.”©. The Tribunal considered that the relevant amount to be taken
into account was not what Azurix actually paid, but rather, “what an
independent and well-informed third party would have been willing to pay for
the Concession in March 2002, in a context where the Province would have
honored its obligations”.2© Ultimately, the Tribunal concluded that what an
independent and well-informed third party would have been willing to pay for
the Concession in March 2002 was USD 60 million.

Award 1] 416, 431-432.
Award 7 41, 414, 430.
Award J 425.

Award J 427.

166

347.

348.

349.

Argentina claims that the Tribunal gave no reasons as to how it arrived at this
figure of USD 60 million. However, the Committee considers it sufficiently
clear from a reading of paragraphs 426 to 429 of the Award that the Tribunal
considered that it had itself to “try and determine” the fair market value in

March 2002 on the basis of all of the material before it.

One factor that the Tribunal took into account was that “no well-informed
investor, in March 2002, would have paid for the Concession the price (and
more particularly, the Canon) paid by Azurix in mid-1999, irrespective of the
actions taken by the Province and of the economic situation of Argentina at
that time’,2”° and that “that no more than a fraction of the Canon could
realistically have been recuperated under the existing Concession
Agreement’.2” The Tribunal had previously noted in this respect that other
bidders for the Concession presented canons “with values at least ten times
lower than that submitted by the Claimant’.2” This suggests that the most
that any other bidder would have been prepared to pay for the Concession in
mid-1999 would have been in the order of USD 38.52 million.

However, against this, the Tribunal took into account that “[wjhen the
Province accepted Azurix’s bid, it considered it as the fair market value for
the Concession and the Province benefited from the alleged aggressive price
paid”.2” The Tribunal also took into account that the Province, “through its
actions and inaction, contributed to the loss in value of the Concession”?
The Tribunal also took into account the possibility of the hypothetical investor
expanding the system and improving efficiency between the periodic 5 year
tariff reviews and expected tariff increases from time to time due to increases
in the inflation rate. 27°

Award J 426.
Award J 429.
Award J 240.
Award 191 426.
Award 1] 428.
Award | 427.

167

350.

351.

352.

Having balanced these competing considerations, the Tribunal arrived at a
figure of USD 60 million, that is, a figure that was in the order of 56 percent
more than what other investors would have been prepared to pay for the
Concession in mid-1999, but that was less than one sixth of what Azurix had

actually paid.

It has been said that:

. it is well settled that the fact that damages cannot be

fixed with certainty is no reason not to award damages

when a loss has been incurred. In such cases,

approximations are inevitable; the settling of damages is not

an exact science.”
Although the Tribunal in this case may not have said so expressly, the
Committee considers it clear from the Award that the figure of USD 60 million
was an approximation that the Tribunal considered to be fair in all the
circumstances. The Committee does not find any insufficiency in the
Tribunal’s reasons in arriving at this figure.

Argentina then argues that the Tribunal failed to state reasons as to why
Azurix was entitled to 100% of what a third party would pay for the
Concession in circumstances where Azurix indirectly owned 90% of ABA’s
shares. The Committee notes in this respect that both the Decision on
Jurisdiction and the Award contain both statements that the Canon was paid
by Azurix,2”” and statements that the Canon was paid by ABA.2”° However, at
paragraph 64 of the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal said:

Azurix made an investment by paying a “canon” to obtain
the concession to provide water and wastewater services to
the Province. To carry out the investment, Azurix organized
several subsidiaries, as required by the Bidding Terms, and
established a locally registered company in Argentina, ABA.
The objective of the definition of investment in the BIT is
precisely to include this type of structure established for the
exclusive purpose of the investment in order to protect the
real party in interest.

Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID

Case No. ARB/97/3, Award, August 20, 2007 {| 8.3.16 (footnotes omitted).
For example, Decision on Jurisdiction J 64; Award {| 426.
For example, Decision on Jurisdiction 22; Award [ 41.

168

353.

354.

355.

356.

357.

The Tribunal also referred in paragraph 59 of the Decision on Jurisdiction to
Azurix’s claim that its “investment” consisted of “Azurix’s payment of its
US$438.6 million canon (which constitutes invested capital), its ownership
interest and investment in ABA, and the rights in the Concession Agreement”.

The Committee considers that it is sufficiently clear that the Tribunal
considered that the whole of the Canon payment was an investment of
Azurix, and that ABA was merely a vehicle for carrying out the investment.
The Committee does not find any insufficiency in the Tribunal’s reasons in

taking into account the full value of the Concession.

Argentina further claims that the Tribunal gave no reasons as to why it
adopted the figure of USD 105,240,753 as the “additional investments to
finance ABA”.

The Tribunal’s reasons in this respect are set out in paragraph 430 of the
Award, which must be read in conjunction with paragraph 411 of the Award,
setting out the damages claimed by Azurix under the “actual investment”
method.

The Tribunal noted that Azurix claimed to have invested USD 449 million
when it acquired the Concession, an amount that included the Canon
payment. This meant that, at the time that it acquired the Concession, in
addition to the Canon payment of USD 438,555,554, Azurix had also invested
an additional amount of USD 10,444,446 (the difference between the total

amount of USD 449 million originally invested and the Canon payment).

The Committee further noted that Azurix also claimed to have made
additional capital contributions to ABA of USD 102.4 million. This meant that
Azurix’s actual investment, in addition to the Canon payment, was
USD 112,844,446 (the sum of USD 10,444,446 and USD 102.4 million). From
paragraph 413 of the Award, it appears that Argentina did not dispute that
these figures accurately reflected the actual amounts invested by Azurix in

169

358.

359.

360.

279
280
281

addition to the Canon. In any event, it is clear from paragraph 430 of the

Award that the Tribunal accepted Azurix’s claim that they did.

The Tribunal then went on at paragraph 430 of the Award to find that the
amount of USD 112,844,446 should be reduced by USD 7,603,693, which
the Tribunal said represented:

the aggregate of the claims presented by Azurix on account

of damages which the Tribunal has found to be related to

contractual claims-those related to the works listed in

Circular 31(A) except for Bahia Blanca—and that should be

borne by Azurix as part of its business risk.2”
This is a reference back to the Tribunal’s findings in paragraphs 150, 155 and
160 of the Award. The footnote to paragraph 430 of the Award indicates that
this figure of USD 7,603,693 was taken from a report by NERA, an expert

consultancy company,”°°

that was annexed to Azurix’s memorial. Argentina
has not disputed this particular figure. If this sum of USD 7,603,693 is
deducted from USD 112,844,446, that leaves the amount of
USD 105,240,753 as the amount of Azurix’s additional investments beyond

the Canon payment.

However, Argentina argues that the Tribunal’s adoption of this figure of
USD 105,240,753:

. contradicts and is inconsistent with its findings with
respect to the first head of damages in so far as the actual
amount invested by Azurix to finance ABA would not
correspond to the amount recoverable upon a sale toa
hypothetical third party (i.e. the fair market value).
In this respect, the Committee notes that it has already found, at paragraph
305-306 above, that the Tribunal implicitly found that it had a discretion to
determine what it considers to be the appropriate approach to damages in the
circumstances of the particular case. The Tribunal decided to assess
damages on the basis of the “fair market value” standard, and it further
decided that it would determine the “fair market value” in accordance with the

Award J 430.
Award J 213.
Argentina Memorial on Annulment {| 227.

170

361.

362.

282

“actual investment” method. Although the Tribunal did not spell out in detail
what the “actual investment” method involved, the Committee considers it
plain from the reasoning in the Award that under this method, the amount of
damages would correspond to the amounts actually invested by Azurix prior
to March 2002.7? |t logically follows from this that the sum of
USD 105,240,753, being part of the amount actually invested by Azurix, was

to be taken fully into account in the assessment of damages.

It would in principle therefore also follow from the Tribunal’s adoption of the
“actual investment” method that the full amount of the Canon payment,
USD 438,555,554, should also have been included in the damages awarded.
While the Tribunal’s reasoning is not expressed in detail, the Committee finds
that it is implicit from the reasoning as a whole that the Tribunal in fact
decided to apply a modified form of the “actual investment” method. Under
the method that the Tribunal employed, in determining the fair market value,
the Tribunal took the actual amounts invested by Azurix as its starting point,
but then reduced the relevant amounts when it considered that there were
reasons justifying this. Thus, while the actual amount of the Canon payment
was USD 438,555,554, the Tribunal only took USD 60 million of this into
account in assessing damages, for the reasons given above. Similarly, while
the actual amount of the additional capital contributions was
USD 112,844,446, the Tribunal only took USD 105,240,753 of this into

account in assessing damages, for the reasons given above.

The Committee recalls that it is not a court of appeal, and that it is not the
function of the Committee to pass judgment upon the substance of the
Tribunal’s decision with respect to the quantum of damages. In this ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, the issue for the

Committee to determine is whether the award has failed to state the reasons

In this respect, it is also noted that in the Vivendi Award §] 8.3.12, the tribunal referred to
“generally accepted alternative means of calculating fair market value, such as ‘book value’— the
net value of an enterprise’s assets, ‘investment value’ — the amount actually invested prior to the
injurious acts, ‘replacement value’ — the amount necessary to replace the investment prior to the
injurious acts, or liquidation value’ — the amount a willing buyer would pay a willing seller for the
investment in a liquidation process’.

171

363.

283
284

on which its decision as to the quantum of damages was based. The
Committee is satisfied that the Award “enables one to follow how the tribunal
proceeded from Point A to Point B and eventually to its conclusion”,?=° and
that “an informed reader of the Award would understand the reasons given by

the Tribunal and would discern no material contradiction in them”.?®

The Committee considers it clear from the reasoning in the Award that the

assessment of damages proceeded by the following steps:

(1) Compensation was to be based on the fair market value of the

investment on March 12, 2009.

(2) | The fair market value on March 12, 2009 was to be assessed by the

actual investment method.

(3) | The actual investments made by Azurix to March 12, 2009 were:
(a) | the Canon payment was USD 438,555,554; and
(b) the additional capital contributions of USD 112,844,446.

(4) However, of these amounts actually invested by Azurix, the Tribunal
would only take into account in the assessment of damages:

(a) | USD 60 million of the Canon payment, this being the amount
that an independent and well-informed third party would have
been willing to pay for the Concession in March 2002, in a
context where the Province would have honored its obligations;

and

(b) USD 105,240,753 of the additional capital contributions, the
remainder being an amount that Azurix should bear as part of its

business risk.

MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.09.

MTD Annulment Decision {| 92.

172

364.

365.

366.

286

The Committee sees no inconsistency or contradiction in steps (1) to (3) in
this reasoning. The Committee accepts that step (4) at first blush may appear
difficult to reconcile with steps (2) and (3). However, the Committee finds that
steps (2) and (3) on the one hand, and step (4) on the other, are not
“genuinely contradictory’ reasons that “cancel each other out’, such that the
Award is “essentially lacking in any expressed rationale”.?® For the reasons
given above, the Committee considers that it is clear from the reasoning of
the Award as a whole that steps (1) to (4) together constitute a modified form

of the “actual investment” method that the Tribunal was applying.

Furthermore, even if step (4) was in genuine contradiction with the previous
steps, in the Committee’s view this contradiction would not justify annulment
of the entire portion of the Award dealing with quantum of damages. The
Committee considers it clear that steps (1) to (3) were the fundamental basis
of the Tribunal’s assessment of damages. If the last step in the Tribunal’s
reasoning contradicted this fundamental basis, it was a contradiction that was
very much in Argentina’s favour. The Committee has “a certain measure of
discretion as to whether to annul an award, even if an annullable error is
found”.”®° Even if step (4) was contradictory, and for the reasons given the
Committee does not think that it was, the Committee would in the
circumstances of this case not be minded to annul the decision on quantum
of damages on the basis of a contradiction that was to the advantage of the

party requesting annulment.

The Committee therefore rejects Argentina’s request for annulment under
Article 52(1)(e).

Costs

MTD Annulment Decision {| 50, quoting Vivendi Annulment Decision {|| 64-65.
Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 66; MINE Annulment Decision {J 4.09 and 4.10; Soufraki

Annulment Decision {fj 24-27.

173

367.

368.

369.

370.

For the reasons given above, the Committee has rejected Argentina’s
application for annulment in its entirety. It follows that the Tribunal’s ruling on

the costs of the proceedings before the Tribunal stands.

As to the costs of the present annulment proceedings, under Article 61(2) of
the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j), read in conjunction
with Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 53, the
Committee has a discretion to determine how and by whom shall be paid the
expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings, the fees
and expenses of the members of the Committee and the charges for the use

of the facilities of the Centre.

The Committee notes that in the MTD Annulment Decision, it was said that:

In all but one of the concluded annulment proceedings,
Committees have made no order for the parties’ own costs
and have held that ICSID’s costs should be borne equally
by the parties. They did so not only where the application
for annulment succeeded in whole or part but also where it
failed.”

In that case, the ad hoc committee went on to say that:

This result might be thought anomalous. However, in the
interest of consistency of ICSID jurisprudence and in the
circumstances of the present case, the Committee
proposes to follow the existing practice.

288

The ad hoc committee in the Soufraki Annulment Decision,** in adopting the

same approach to costs, also referred to a “developing practice” in this
respect, a practice which was followed in more recent cases such as the CMS
Annulment Decision”®* and the Lucchetti Annulment Decision.?”

However, in the MTD Annulment Decision, the ad hoc committee added that:

. this practice is not without flexibility and admits of
exception. In this regard, it observes that in CDC Group
PLC v Republic of the Seychelles, the committee ordered

MTD Annulment Decision {| 110.
Soufraki Annulment Decision {| 138.
CMS Annulment Decision {J 161-162.
Lucchetti Annulment Decision {| 131.

174

the unsuccessful respondent to pay both the claimant’s and
ICSID’s costs of the annulment proceedings. The
committee noted that the annulment application was
“fundamentally lacking in merit” and that the respondent's
case was ‘to any reasonable and impartial observer, most
unlikely to succeed.”**"

Particular circumstances were also considered to justify a different order as to
costs in the Repsol Annulment Decision*®? and the Malaysian Historical
Salvors Annulment Decision.

371. As regards the expenses incurred by the Centre in connection with this
proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the members of the
Committee, the Committee is of the view that what has been referred to as
“existing practice” fails to accord proper deference to Regulation 14(3)(e) of
the Administrative and Financial Regulations, which provides that in
annulment proceedings:

... the applicant shall be solely responsible for making the
advance payments requested by the Secretary-General to
cover expenses following the constitution of the Committee,
and without prejudice to the right of the Committee in
accordance with Article 52(4) of the Convention to decide
how and by whom expenses incurred in connection with the
annulment proceeding shall be paid.

372. In this regard, in respect of ICSID’s expenses there is a different regime as
to costs advances between annulment proceedings and the original
proceedings before the tribunal, where, pursuant to Regulation 14(3)(d) of the
Administrative and Financial Regulations:

... unless a different division is provided for in the Arbitration
Rules or is decided by the parties or the Tribunal, each
party shall pay one half of each advance or supplemental
charge, without prejudice to the final decision on the
payment of the cost of an arbitration proceeding to be made
by the Tribunal pursuant to Article 61(2) of the Convention.

373. As to this difference in approach the Committee takes the view that a default
position is thereby established that in the absence of other order, a party who
291

292
293

MTD Annulment Decision {] 111.
Repsol Annulment Decision {| 88.
Malaysian Historical Salvors Annulment Decision {| 82.

175

374.

375.

376.

294
295

has applied for annulment and has paid in advance all of the costs of the
Centre in relation to that application as is required by the Regulations should

bear those costs.

On this issue of ICSID’s costs, the Committee acknowledges that the
annulment procedure is a feature of the ICSID system that is important for
maintaining the confidence of parties in that system. Thus, the Committee
has observed that a requirement for an applicant for annulment to provide
security for a continuation of a stay of enforcement of the award pending
annulment proceedings, other than in an exceptional case, could compromise
this confidence-balancing function.” On the other hand, the Committee
considers that after an application for annulment by one party has proved to
be entirely unsuccessful, it would risk compromising confidence in the ICSID
system, and in the finality of ICSID awards, if the other party is required as of
course to reimburse the unsuccessful applicant a share of the ICSID costs

associated with the unsuccessful application.

Whilst the Committee is mindful of the high importance of maintaining
consistency in the ICSID jurisprudence, the Committee does not consider that
an approach that it sees as wrong in principle should continue to be followed,
merely for the sake of consistency with precedent. The Committee agrees
with the MTD Annulment Decision that the existing practice is “anomalous” to
the extent that it normally requires the ICSID costs to be borne equally by the
parties even in a case where the application for annulment was wholly
unsuccessful. In the Committee’s opinion, that anomalous position arises
from having insufficient regard to the provisions of Regulation 14(3)(e)
compared with Regulation 14(3)(d) that applies to proceedings before a

tribunal.

As regards the existing practice, the Committee notes that there have only

been six cases in which a final decision of the ad hoc committee rejected in

Azurix Stay of Proceedings Decision {| 30.
Azurix Stay of Proceedings Decision {J 31-32.

176

377.

378.

379.

380.

whole the application for annulment.” In two of these cases, the ad hoc
committee ordered the costs of the Centre and of the ad hoc committee to be
paid wholly by the unsuccessful applicant for annulment.” That leaves only
four cases in which a wholly unsuccessful applicant for annulment was held

to be entitled to recover part of the ICSID costs from the other party.

In all the circumstances, the Committee does not consider that it would
amount to too fundamental a departure from precedent for it for apparent and
good reasons of principle derived from the Regulations themselves for it to

decline to follow the approach adopted in those four cases.

The Committee considers that under the Regulations, and as a matter of
discretion, the normal course should be for a wholly unsuccessful applicant
for annulment carry the burden of the whole of the costs of the Centre
advanced by it associated with the proceedings, including the fees and
expenses of the members of the ad hoc committee. Of course, the
Committee does not exclude the possibility that circumstances might justify a
departure from this normal rule, but the Committee finds no such exceptional
circumstances in the present case. In particular, the fact that there are novel
and complex issues to be determined in the annulment proceedings, as here,
does not of itself amount to such exceptional circumstances. Also, as here, it
is of the essence of annulment matters that they are original and difficult.

The Committee determines that Azurix shall not be ordered to refund
Argentina a proportion of the expenses of the Centre in connection with this
proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the members of the
Committee.

As to each party’s own litigation costs, the Committee notes that in only two
previous cases was the wholly unsuccessful applicant for annulment ordered

Wena Hotels Annulment Decision; MTD Annulment Decision; Repso/ Annulment Decision;
Soufraki Annulment Decision; CDC Annulment; Decision Lucchetti Annulment Decision.
Repsol Annulment Decision {| 88; CDC Annulment Decision {| 90.

177

to pay all or half of the other party’s costs.” In the other four cases referred
to above, there was either no order for such costs, or each party was ordered
to bear its own costs. The Committee notes that each party to the present
proceedings has borne its own litigation costs throughout the course of the
proceedings. The Committee does not consider that there are circumstances
in the present case that would justify an order for Argentina to reimburse
Azurix for some or all of the latter's litigation costs.

298

Repsol Annulment Decision {| 88; CDC Annulment Decision {| 90.

178

Decision

For the reasons given above, the Committee decides:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The application for annulment of the Argentine Republic is

dismissed in its entirety.

Argentina shall bear all expenses incurred by the Centre in
connection with this proceeding, including the fees and expenses

of the members of the Committee.

Each party shall bear its own litigation costs and expenses
incurred with respect to this annulment proceeding, including its
costs of legal representation.

Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 54(3), the stay of enforcement of the Award
ordered by the Committee in its decision of December 28, 2007 is

terminated.

[Signed]

Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C.
President of the ad hoc Committee

 

[Signed] [Signed]
Judge Bola Ajibola Michael Hwang S.C.
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

179

