B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

Excerpts of Award dated April 5, 2019 made pursuant to Rule 48(4) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules of 2006
Claimant
B3 Croatian Courier Coéperatief U.A. (Dutch national)
Respondent
Republic of Croatia (“Croatia”)

Tribunal

 

Bernard Hanotiau (President; Belgian), appointed by the co-arbitrators in consultation with the Parties
under Article 37(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention

Stanimir Alexandrov (Bulgarian), appointed by the Claimant
Brigitte Stern (French), appointed by the Respondent

Award

Award of April 5, 2019 in English (unpublished)

Instrument relied on for consent to ICSID arbitration

 

A n E, and Reci 1 Protection of Ii between the Republic of Croatia
and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which entered into force on 1 June 1999 (the “BIT”)

Procedure

Applicable Arbitration Rules: \CSID Arbitration Rules in force as of April 2006

Place of Proceedings: Washington, D.C.
Procedural Language: English
Full procedural details: Available at

id.

 

B/1S/5

Factual Background

The Claimant operated a company in Croatia which provided postal services. The case concerned
allegations that the Croatian Government, through the actions of the Ministry of Transport, the Competition
Authority and the postal services regulator, violated the applicable regulatory framework and attempted to
re-monopolize the postal services market. According to the Claimant, by failing to properly apply the
regulatory framework and by discriminating against the Claimant, Croatia failed to accord the Claimant
fair and equitable treatment. Also, the Claimant complained that Croatia’s treatment led to the complete
destruction of the value of its investment, and therefore the measures amounted to an indirect expropriation.

EXCERPTS

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

B3 Croatian Courier Coéperatief U.A.
v.

Republic of Croatia

(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Bernard Hanotiau, President of the Tribunal
Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov, Arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Francisco Abriani

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Juliana Iancu

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 5 April 2019

EXCERPTS

B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

Parties’ representatives

Representing B3 Croatian Courier
Coéperatief U.A.

Ms. Monika Lukacs (party representative)
The Bancroft Group

Mr. John Willems
Ms. Noor Davies
Mr. Sven Volkmer
Mr. Bachir Sayegh
Ms. Tara Agoston

White & Case LLP
19, Place Vend6me
75001 Paris
France

Representing the Republic of Croatia

Ms. Zlata Hrvoj-Sipek
Ms. Zeljka Saskor
Ms. Melina Rali8

Ms. Kosjenka Krapac

State Attorney’s Office
Gajeva 30a,

10000 Zagreb
Republic of Croatia

and

Mr. Tim Portwood

Mr. Louis-Christophe Delanoy
Ms. Marina Weiss

Ms. Giulia Carbone

Mr. Shane Daly

Ms. Julia Benke

Bredin Prat

53 Quai d'Orsay
75007 Paris
France

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

TABLE OF CONTENTS*

I. THE PARTIES.
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
THI. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEP........ccccccsesssssssessssesscnssscnssscnssncnsscssencsseneees

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IV. THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE
A. The Croatian legal framework on postal services.......
B. Relevant entities 16
Cc. The acquisition of [...] 16
D. The classification of hybrid mail 16
E. The interpretation of value-added Services .........ssesessesesseseseseeseeecseeeeseeeeseeeeseeaeseeseeneees 16
F. The drafting of the 2012 PSA 16
G. [...]’s cost accounting separation 17
H. HAKOM’s regulatory supervision of [...]’S PriCes .......ceeeceseseeseeseseeseseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeenee 17
I. [...]’s complaints with the CCA 17
J. [...]’s attempted acquisition of [...]o...cececceseeseseeseseseeeseeeeseesseeeseeaeseeeseesnseseseesneeeeees 17
K. _[...]’s network access demands 17
L. [...]’s participation in public tenders under the 2012 PSA ......cceeeeeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeenee 17
M. The establishment of [...]’s compensation fUN 0.0.0.0... eeeeseeeeeeeeeeteeeeteseeneeteeeeeeneeeeee 17
N. The complaints before the European Commission .
O.  [...]’s financial performance and ultimate bankrupte;
V. THE APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK.
VI. WHETHER THE TRIBUNAL HAS JURISDICTION ..........cccsssssseseseseseesscneeesseseeeeseses 19
A. — Respondent’s position 19
1. Objection No. 1: The dispute resolution clause included in Article 9 of the Treaty is
inapplicable. 19
2. Objection No. 2: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione voluntatis ....c..1.cccseesseees 20
3. Objection No. 3: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione Materide ......ccceesseeeeeeees 20
4. Objection No. 4: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis over claims pre-
dating 1 April 2011 20
B. Claimant’s position 20
1. Objection No. 1: The dispute resolution clause included in Article 9 of the Treaty
remains applicable 20
2. Objection No. 2: The Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione VolUntatis .......cccseeeseeeeeees 21
3. Objection No. 3: The Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione MAtCride ....c..scecseeseseeteeees 21

3

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

 

 

 

4. Objection No. 4: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis over claims pre-
dating 1 April 2011 21
Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis 21
1. Objection No. 1: Whether the dispute resolution clause included in Article 9 of the
Treaty is inapplicable 21
i. The applicable law 22

 

ii. The first prong of Respondent’s objection: whether Article 9 of the Treaty is
inapplicable to the present dispute due to its incompatibility with EU law... 23
iii. | The second prong of Respondent’s objection: Whether Article 9 is inapplicable to
the present dispute by operation of Article 30 of the VCLT

 

iv. The third prong of Respondent’s objection: Whether Article 9 is inapplicable to the

 

 

 

 

present dispute by operation of Article 351 TFEU. 34

v. Potential issues with enfc 36

vi. Conclusion 36
2. Objection No. 2: Whether Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione voluntatis and/or ratione
personae 36
3. Objection No. 3: Whether the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae.............. 40
4. Objection No. 4: Whether the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis over

claims pre-dating 1 April 2011

VII. WHETHER CROATIA BREACHED ARTICLE 3(1) OF THE BIT..
A. — Claimant’s position

 

 

 

1. Legal standard.

 

 

 

2. Arbitrary measures
i. Extension of [...]’s statutory monopoly over hybrid mail services
ii. HAKOM’s decision concerning [...]’s value-added services

  

iii. Declarations in support of [...].

 

 

 

iv. Separate cost accounting 50
v. HAKOM’s failure to investigate [...] Prices .......ceceseeseseeecseseeeeseeeseeeeeeeneeteneeeae 50
vi. The CCA Decisions 50
vii. Access to [...] network 50
viii. Public procurement of postal Services.........c.cesseesseseeseseceesecesecseseseeeeeneeeseeneetenes 50

ix. The compensation fund

x. The failed acquisition of [..

 

3. Breach of legitimate expe

4. Impairment by unreasonable or discriminatory MCASUTES wesc te testeseeeeees 51

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. Respondent’s position 51
1. Legal standard. 51
2. Arbitrary measures 51
i. Extension of [...]’s statutory monopoly over hybrid mail services..........cceseeeee 51
ii. HAKOM’s decision concerning [...]’s value-added services .........ccceeeeeeeeeeees 51
iii. Declarations in support of [...] ...c.eeceeeceseeeceeseseeseeeeseeesseeeeseeneseeaeeneateeeaeseeaesneaneneass 51
iv. Separate cost accounting 51
v. HAKOM’s failure to investigate [...]’s prices.
vi. The CCA Decisions 52
vii. Access to [...] network 52
viii. Public procurement of postal Services.........c.cesseesseseeseseceesecesecseseseeeeeneeeseeneetenes 52
ix. The compensation fund 52
x. The failed acquisition of [...]
3. Breach of legitimate exp 52
4. Impairment by unreasonable or discriminatory MCASUTES wesc te testeseeeeees 52
Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis 52
1. Whether Respondent failed to ensure that [...] timely implemented separate cost
i 56
2. Respondent's treatment of value-added services 59
3. Whether HAKOM abdicated its regulatory mission to supervise [...]’s prices and
discounts 69
4. Whether the CCA repudiated the applicable Croatian competition law principles... 85
i, The 2012 CCA Decision 87
ii. | The 2015 CCA Decision 91
5. Whether Respondent denied [...] timely and non-discriminatory access to [...]'s
postal network 95
6. Whether Respondent wrongfully blished [...]’s comg ion fund 99
7. Whether Respondent unlawfully excluded [...] from public procurement procedures
8. The failed acquisition of [...] 107
VIII. =WHETHER CROATIA BREACHED ARTICLE 6 OF THE BIT...........cccccseseeee 109
A. — Claimant’s position 109
B. Respondent’s position 109
Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis 109
IX. DAMAGES 114

 

w

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

 

A. — Claimant’s position

B. Respondent’s position

 

Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis

 

X. COSTS

 

A. — Claimant’s position

B. Respondent’s position

 

Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis

 

XI. DECISION:

114
115
115

118
118

118
118
121

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

IL

1.

THE PARTIES

The present dispute has been submitted to arbitration under the auspices of the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) on the basis of
Article 9 of the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
between the Republic of Croatia and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which entered into
force on 1 June 1999 (the “BIT” or the “Treaty”).!

Claimant is B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. (“B3 Courier” or “Claimant”), a
cooperative incorporated under the laws of the Netherlands, with its registered address at

[.}

Claimant is represented in this arbitration by its duly authorized attorneys and counsel
mentioned at page 2 above.

Respondent is the Republic of Croatia (“Croatia” or “Respondent”).

Respondent is represented in this arbitration by its duly authorized attorneys and counsel
mentioned at page 2 above.

Claimant and Respondent are jointly referred to as the “Parties” and individually as a
“Party”.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 14 January 2015, the Centre received a Request for Arbitration (the “Request for
Arbitration”) from B3 Courier. On 21 January 2015, the Centre, in accordance with Rule
5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings (the “Institution Rules”), acknowledged receipt of the Request for Arbitration
and transmitted a copy to Croatia.

On 3 February 2015, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration
and notified the Parties, pursuant to Article 36 of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the “ICSID Convention”
or the “Convention”) and in accordance with Institution Rules 6 and 7. The case was
registered as ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5.

 

Agreement on E | Protection of s between the Republic of Croatia and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands Sioned on 28 April 1998 and entered into force on 1 June 1999 (Exhibit CL-97).

7

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

On 5 May 2015, Claimant appointed Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov, a national of Bulgaria, as
arbitrator in this case. Dr. Alexandrov accepted this appointment on 26 May 2015.

On 20 May 2015, the Parties agreed on the number of arbitrators and the method of their
appointment. The Parties agreed that the Tribunal would be made up of three arbitrators,
with one arbitrator appointed by Claimant, one arbitrator appointed by Respondent and the
President of the Tribunal to be appointed by the party-appointed arbitrators in consultation
with the Parties.

On 4 June 2015, Respondent appointed Prof. Brigitte Stern, a French national, as arbitrator.
Prof. Stern accepted her appointment on 9 June 2015.

On 28 July 2015, following appointment by the two co-arbitrators, Prof. Bernard Hanotiau,
a Belgian national, accepted his appointment as Presiding arbitrator.

On the same day, ICSID’s Secretary-General notified the Parties that the Tribunal was
deemed to be constituted in accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the Convention and Rule
6 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (the “Arbitration Rules”). The Centre also informed the
Parties and the Tribunal that Mr. Francisco Abriani, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of
the Tribunal.

On 22 September 2015, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held the first
session by video-conference.

On 5 October 2015, after consultation with the Parties, Procedural Order No. 1 was issued
by the Tribunal, recording the Parties’ agreement and the Tribunal’s decisions on a number
of procedural matters. Among other things, it was decided that the applicable Arbitration
Rules would be the Rules in force as of April 2006 and that the place of proceedings would
be Paris, France. The Tribunal confirmed the Parties’ agreement that Ms. Iuliana Iancu act
as Assistant to the Tribunal.

On 30 November 2015, pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, Claimant submitted its
Memorial (the “Memorial’”), accompanied by:

- the witness testimonies of [...];

- the expert testimonies of [...];

- factual exhibits C-1 through C-279; and

- legal authorities CL-1 through CL-109.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

17.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

On 9 March 2016, Respondent filed a Notification of Jurisdictional Objections and Request
for Bifurcation (the “Request for Bifurcation”), accompanied by legal authorities (RL-1
through RL-17) and a suggested procedural calendar, as well as a letter requesting that
Claimant inform the Tribunal and Respondent as to the current status of the funding of its
claims in these proceedings.

On 11 March 2016, the Tribunal invited Claimant to submit its comments on Respondent’s
request for disclosure of third-party funding by 18 March 2016. The Tribunal also invited
the Parties to confer and agree on a calendar for the filing of submissions concerning
Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation by the same deadline.

On 18 March 2016, Claimant informed Respondent and the Tribunal that it had not entered
into any form of third-party funding arrangements to finance its claims in these proceedings
and that it had not entered into any form of assignment or transfer arrangements in view of
assigning or transferring any of its claims to a third party.

On the same date, the Parties notified the Tribunal of the procedural calendar for the
purposes of Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation.

On 29 March 2016, Claimant filed its Response to Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation,
accompanied by factual exhibits (C-301, C-302, C-303, and C-304) and legal authorities
(CL-114 through CL-122).

On 6 April 2016, Respondent submitted Observations on Claimant’s Response to
Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation.

On 13 April 2016, Claimant filed its Response to Croatia’s Observations of 6 April 2016,
accompanied by factual exhibits (C-305 through C-316) and legal authorities (CL-125 to
CL-127).

On 22 April 2016, the Tribunal issued the Decision on Bifurcation. On the same day, the
Parties agreed to extend the deadline for the submission of Respondent’s Counter-
Memorial (the “Counter-Memorial’”) to 2 May 2016, which the Tribunal accepted.

On 29 April 2016, the Parties agreed to amend the procedural timetable, which the Tribunal
accepted on 4 May 2016.

On 2 May 2016, Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial, accompanied by:
- the witness testimonies of [...];
- the expert testimonies of [...];

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

- factual exhibits R-1 through R-150; and
- legal authorities RL-18 through RL-76.

On 17 May 2016, the Parties exchanged their respective document production requests.
The comments and objections to those requests were exchanged on 23 May 2016.

On 30 May 2016, following the receipt of a request from Claimant dated 29 May 2016 and
of a reply from Respondent dated 30 May 2016, the Tribunal accepted to extend the
deadline for its decision concerning the Parties’ document production requests until 17
June 2016.

On 2 June 2016, the Parties exchanged their further observations concerning the document
production requests and submitted them to the Tribunal. During the following two weeks,
the Parties also exchanged additional observations regarding confidentiality and the issue
of possession, custody or control of the requested documents.

On 17 June 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, dealing with the Parties’
document production requests and directing Respondent to submit comments with regard
to Claimant’s proposed confidentiality order within seven days of receipt of Procedural
Order No. 2.

On 25 June 2016, Respondent submitted its comments with regard to Claimant’s proposed
confidentiality order.

On 30 June 2016, Claimant represented that it had no objections to the amendments
proposed by Respondent with regard to the confidentiality order.

On the same day, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, establishing a confidentiality
regime applicable in this arbitration.

On 2 August 2016, Claimant requested that the Tribunal order Respondent to immediately
comply with its disclosure obligations with respect to Claimant’s Request No. 22 under
Procedural Order No. 2 or, failing immediate compliance, draw adverse inferences against
Respondent on account of non-disclosure in violation of Procedural Order No. 2.

On 3 August 2016, the Tribunal invited Respondent to submit its reply with regard to
Claimant’s application by 8 August 2016.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

36. On 4 August 2016, Claimant requested that the Tribunal grant it an extension for the
submission of the reply.

37. On 8 August 2016, upon leave from the Tribunal, Respondent represented that it did not
object to Claimant’s request for an extension. However, Respondent reserved the right to
request an extension for the preparation of its rejoinder equal to the same amount of time
given to Claimant.

38. On 9 August 2016, Respondent submitted its answer to Claimant’s application of 2 August
2016. Claimants replied to Respondent’s letter that same day.

39. On the same date, the Tribunal amended the procedural calendar.

40. On 11 August 2016, Respondent indicated its commitment to produce the documents
responsive to Claimants’ Request No. 22 under Procedural Order No. 2.

Al. On 12 August 2016, Claimant withdrew its application of 2 August 2016 following
Respondent’s representation above.

42. On 13 September 2016, Claimant requested an additional two-day extension for the filing
of its Reply, to which Respondent did not object with the proviso that it reserved the right
to request a similar extension for its Rejoinder.

43. On 14 September 2016, the Tribunal granted the extension.

44. On 16 September 2016, Claimant submitted its Reply (the “Reply”), accompanied by:
- the witness testimonies of [...];
- the expert testimonies of [...];
- factual exhibits C-317 through C-489; and
- legal authorities CL-128 through CL-186.

45. On 14 November 2016, the ICSID Secretariat circulated to the Parties a disclosure made
by Arbitrator Stern.

46. On 17 November 2016, Claimant took note of Arbitrator Stern’s disclosure.

47. On the same day, the ICSID Secretariat circulated to the Parties a disclosure made by
Arbitrator Alexandrov.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

On 23 November 2016, Respondent requested that Claimant produce either voluntarily or
following an order from the Tribunal documents showing. The application was
accompanied by factual exhibits R-151 through R-153 and legal authority RL-77.

On 2 December 2016, upon invitation from the Tribunal, Claimant filed its response.
Claimant argued that Respondent’s document production requests were belated and
addressed undisputed and irrelevant issues. Claimant however undertook to search for and
produce responsive documents.

On 16 December 2017, the ICSID Secretariat wrote to the Parties concerning the
organization of the hearing on jurisdiction and the merits.

On 26 January 2017, the ICSID Secretariat reverted to the Parties concerning the
organization of the hearing on the merits, noting that one of the arbitrators had a conflicting
commitment on Monday, 20 March 2017, and therefore the Tribunal would not be able to
sit on that date.

On the same day, Respondent requested an extension for the submission of its Rejoinder
to 30 January 2017, which Claimant had no objection to. The Tribunal granted the
extension on the same day.

On 30 January 2017, Respondent submitted its Rejoinder, accompanied by:
- the witness testimonies of [...];

- the expert testimonies of [...];

- the legal opinions of [...];

- factual exhibits R-154 through R-207; and

- legal authorities RL-78 through RL-124.

On 13 February 2017, the Parties notified each other and the Tribunal of the list of
witnesses and experts that they intended to cross-examine at the hearing.

On 16 February 2017, Claimant inquired whether the Tribunal would be available to sit on
Saturday, 18 March 2017, or, alternatively, on Saturday, 25 March 2017.

On 19 February 2017, the Tribunal suggested lengthening the hearing days on the first
week of the hearing (13-17 March) and on the following Tuesday (21 March) by an
additional hour, from 9 am to 6 pm.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

57. On 20 February 2017, the Parties communicated their positions with respect to the
organization of the hearing on jurisdiction and the merits.

58. On 22 February 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 concerning the
organization of the hearing jurisdiction and on the merits.

59. The hearing on jurisdiction and the merits took place during the period of 13-17, 21-24
March 2017, at the World Bank Paris Office, 66, avenue d’Iéna, 75116 Paris. In addition
to the Tribunal members, the Secretary of the Tribunal and the Assistant to the Tribunal,
the following persons participated at the hearing:

On behalf of Claimant:

Ms. Monika Lukacs, The Bancroft Group
Mr. John Willems, White & Case LLP
Ms. Noor Davies, White & Case LLP
Mr. Sven Volkmer, White & Case LLP
Mr. Bachir Sayegh, White & Case LLP
Ms. Hadia Hakim, White & Case LLP
Ms. Tara Agoston, White & Case LLP
Mr. Reese Ofiate, White & Case LLP

On behalf of Respondent:

Ms. Zeljka Sa’kor, Republic of Croatia, State Attorney’s Office
Ms. Melina Rali8, Republic of Croatia, State Attorney’s Office
Ms. Kosjenka Krapac, Republic of Croatia, State Attorney’s Office
Ms. Maja Kuhta, Republic of Croatia, State Attorney’s Office
Mr. Tim Portwood, Bredin Prat

Dr. Raéd Fathallah, Bredin Prat

Mr. Shane Daly, Bredin Prat

Ms. Giulia Carbone, Bredin Prat

Ms. Julia Benke, Bredin Prat

Mr. Alexandre Souleye, Bredin Prat

Mr. Olivier Billard, Bredin Prat

Mr. Toni Nogolica, Bredin Prat

Ms. Elisabeth Malafa, Bredin Prat

Witnesses:

[J

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

Experts:
[...]

Interpreters:

Ms. Eliza Burnham, French to English

Ms. Chantal Bret, French to English

Ms. Christina Victorin, French to English

Ms. Julijana Jularic-Beekman, Croatian to English
Mr. Toni Luburi¢, Croatian to English

Ms. Vlatka Mihelié-Landay, Croatian to English

Court reporters:
Ms. Georgina Ford, Briault Reporting Services
Ms. Ashleigh Roberts, Briault Reporting Services

60. On 15 March 2017, Claimant submitted its corrections to the expert reports of [...].

6l. On 20 March 2017, Claimant submitted an amended version of Exhibit C-490.

62. On 5 April 2017, the ICSID Secretariat circulated to the Parties a disclosure made by
President Hanotiau.

63. On 11 April 2017, the Tribunal circulated a list of questions for the Parties’ post-hearing
submissions.

64. On 19 May 2017, amended transcripts of the hearing were circulated by the court reporters.

65. On 30 June 2017, the Parties filed the first round of their respective post-hearing
submissions (“C-PHB1” and “R-PHB1”, respectively). Respondent’s submission was
accompanied by Exhibit R-207, a translation of part of [...]’s General conditions for the
provision of other postal services and additional services (an initial section thereof was on
the record as exhibit C-356).

66. On 28 July 2017, the Parties submitted their reply post-hearing submissions (“C-PHB2”
and “R-PHB2”, respectively).

67. On 28 August 2017, in answer to an inquiry from the Parties, the Tribunal directed the

Parties to file their cost submissions in the form of brief (no more than 10 pages) memorials
on the issues pertaining to the question of costs.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

On 15 September 2017, the Parties filed their submissions on costs (“C-CS” and “R-CS”,
respectively).

On 17 April 2018, Respondent filed a request for leave to submit a new jurisdictional
objection, based on the Judgment of the European Court of Justice (the “CJEU”) in Case
C-284/16 Slowakische Republik v. Achmea BV (“Achmea’). In its application (“R-Ach1”),
Respondent set out a number of arguments supporting its new jurisdictional objection.

On 18 April 2018, the Tribunal invited Claimant to comment on Respondent’s request for
leave by 24 April 2018. Claimant was instructed not to address, at that point, the merits of
Respondent’s jurisdictional arguments.

On 24 April 2018, the ICSID Secretariat circulated to the Parties a disclosure made by
Arbitrator Stern.

On the same day, Claimant submitted its comments on Respondent’s request for leave to
file a new jurisdictional objection. Claimant accompanied its submission by Exhibit C-
0490,” as well as Exhibits CL-187, CL-188 and CL-122 (amended).

On 25 April 2018, the Tribunal granted Respondent leave to answer Claimant’s submission
of the previous day, which Respondent did on 27 April 2018. Respondent attached Exhibits
RL-125 through RL-131.

On 2 May 2018, following leave from the Tribunal, Claimant submitted additional
comments regarding Respondent’s request for leave.

On 3 May 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, granting Respondent leave to
introduce an additional jurisdictional objection into the record and setting a calendar for
the pleadings.

On 14 May 2018, Respondent submitted its second memorial contesting jurisdiction on the
basis of the Achmea judgment (“R-Ach2”), accompanied by Exhibits R-208 and R-209,
and by legal authorities RL-125 through RL-149.

On 1 June 2018, Claimant submitted its memorial addressing Respondent’s jurisdictional
objection based on the Achmea judgment (“C-Ach”), accompanied by authorities CL-189
through CL-200.

? The Tribunal considers that this exhibit was incorrectly numbered.

15

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

78. On 2 August 2018, the ICSID Secretariat circulated to the Parties a disclosure made by
President Hanotiau and Arbitrator Stern.

79. On 6 March 2019, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 37(2), the European Commission filed an
application for leave to intervene as a non-disputing party.

80. On 15 March 2019, after consulting both Parties, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No.
6, dismissing the European Commission’s application.

81. On 19 March 2019, the Tribunal closed the proceedings.

Ill. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

82. [...]

IV. THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

87. [...]

A. The Croatian legal framework on postal services
88. [...]

B. Relevant entities

97. [...]

Cc. The acquisition of [...]

106. [...]

D. The classification of hybrid mail

119. [...]

E. The interpretation of value-added services
128. [...]

F. The drafting of the 2012 PSA

150. [J

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

G. [...]’s cost accounting separation

160. [...]

H. HAKOM’s regulatory supervision of [...]’s prices
194. [...]

I. [...]’s complaints with the CCA

281. [...]

J. [...]’s attempted acquisition of [...]

317. [...]
K. [...]’s network access demands
326. [...]

L. [...]’s participation in public tenders under the 2012 PSA

356. [...]

M. The establishment of [...]’s compensation fund

378. [...]

N. The complaints before the European Commission
391. [...]

oO. [...]’s financial performance and ultimate bankruptcy
409. [...]

Vv. THE APPLICABLE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
425. Article 1 paragraphs (a) and (b) of the BIT read:

“For the purposes of this Agreement:
(a) the term ‘investments’ means every kind of asset and more particularly, though not
exclusively:

EXCERPTS

B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

(i) movable and immovable property as well as other rights in rem in respect of every kind
of asset;

 

(ii) rights derived from shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in companies and joint
ventures;

(iii) claims to money, to other assets or to any performance having an economic value;

(iv) rights in the field of intellectual property, technical processes, goodwill and know-
how;

(v) rights granted under public law or under contract, including rights to prospect, explore,
extract and win natural resources.

(b) the term "nationals" shall comprise with regard to either Contracting Party:

(i) natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party;

(ii) legal persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party;

(iii) legal persons not constituted under the law of that Contracting Party but controlled,

directly or indirectly, by natural persons as defined in (i) or by legal persons as defined in

(ii).”

426. Article 3(1) of the BIT provides:

“Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment of the investments of
nationals of the other Contracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures, the operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal thereof by those nationals. Each Contracting Party shall accord to such
investments full physical security and protection.”

427. Article 6 of the BIT reads:

“Neither Contracting Party shall take any measures depriving, directly or indirectly,
nationals of the other Contracting Party of their investments unless the following
conditions are complied with:

a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of law;

b) the measures are not discriminatory or contrary to any undertaking which the
Contracting Party which takes such measures may have given;

c) the measures are taken against just compensation. Such compensation shall represent the
genuine value of the investments affected, shall include interest at a normal commercial
rate until the date of payment and shall, in order to be effective for the claimants, be paid
and made transferable, without delay, to the country designated by the claimants concerned

18

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

428.

429.

VI.

430.

and in the currency of the country of which the claimants are nationals or in any freely
convertible currency accepted by the claimants.”

Article 9 of the Treaty provides in relevant part:

“1, Disputes between one Contracting Party and a national of the other Contracting Party
concerning an obligation of the former under this agreement in relation to an investment of
the latter, shall at the request of the national concerned be submitted to the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, for settlement by arbitration or conciliation
under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States, opened for signature at Washington on 18 March 1965.

3. Each Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of
disputes as referred to in Paragraph 1 of this Article to international arbitration in
accordance with the provisions of this Article.”

Article 10 of the Treaty reads:

“The present Agreement shall apply to investments, made in the territory of one of the
Contracting Parties, in accordance with its legislation, by investors of the other Contracting
Party prior to as well as after the entry into force of the present Agreement. The present
Agreement shall however not be applicable to disputes concerning investments which are
subject of a dispute settlement procedure under the Agreement on the Protection of
Investments between the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands of 16 February 1976. In that case the latter Agreement shall continue to apply
to these investments, as far as it concerns the disputes referred to, until a final settlement
for these disputes has been reached.”

WHETHER THE TRIBUNAL HAS JURISDICTION
Respondent’s position

Objection No. 1: The dispute resolution clause included in Article 9 of the Treaty is
inapplicable

[J

Article 9 is inapplicable to the present dispute due to its incompatibility with EU law

432.

Article 9 is inapplicable to the present dispute by operation of Article 30 of the VCLT

439.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

Article 9 is inapplicable to the present dispute by operation of Article 351 TFEU
446. [...]

The effects of incompatibility

448. [...]

2. Objection No. 2: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione voluntatis

451. [...]

3. Objection No. 3: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae

461. [...]

4. Objection No. 4: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis over claims pre-dating
1 April 2011

468. [...]

B. Claimant’s position

470. [...]

1. Objection No. 1: The dispute resolution clause included in Article 9 of the Treaty remains
applicable

476. [...]

Article 30 of the VCLT has no bearing on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
480. [...]

Article 351 TFEU did not operate to displace Article 9 of the Treaty
488. [...]

The effects of incompatibility

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

490.

2.

491.

3.

496.

506.

507.

508.

509.

[J

Objection No. 2: The Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione voluntatis

[J

Objection No. 3: The Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione materiae

[J

Objection No. 4: The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis over claims pre-dating
1 April 2011

[...]
The Tribunal’s analysis

Objection No. 1: Whether the dispute resolution clause included in Article 9 of the Treaty
is inapplicable

The Tribunal notes that Respondent has put forward three alternative bases for its
jurisdictional objection:

i. The investor-State dispute settlement provision contained in the Treaty (Article
9) is incompatible with EU law;
ii. Article 30 of the VCLT confirms that in the intra-EU context Article 9 has been
superseded by the TFEU; and
iii. Pursuant to Article 351 of the TFEU, the TFEU prevails over Article 9 of the
BIT.

The Tribunal notes that the alleged incompatibility between Article 9 of the Treaty and EU
law is set out both as a distinct and sufficient basis for Respondent’s jurisdictional
objection, and as one of the (several) conditions that justifies the application of Article 30
of the VCLT and/or Article 351 of the TFEU.

The Tribunal has carefully considered the Parties’ arguments put forward in favor of
upholding or denying jurisdiction on account of the alleged incompatibility between Article
9 of the Treaty and EU law, and the succession in time between the BIT and the EU treaties.
For the reasons that will be developed in more detail in the paragraphs below, the Tribunal
has reached the conclusion that Respondent’s jurisdictional objection must be dismissed.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

i.

510.

S11.

512.

513.

514.

The applicable law

Respondent argues that the Tribunal must apply EU law in deciding the question whether
it has jurisdiction. More precisely, Respondent argues that: (i) Article 42 of the ICSID
Convention requires that the Tribunal, in the absence of the Parties’ agreement to the
contrary, decide the dispute submitted to it in accordance with the national law of the State
and “such rules of international law as may be applicable”; (ii) EU law forms part of
international law, as well as part of the law of Croatia; and, therefore, (iii) EU law applies
to the assessment of this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

The Tribunal considers that Respondent’s arguments above fail to distinguish between the
law applicable to jurisdiction and the law applicable to the merits. The Tribunal is of the
view that Article 42 of the ICSID Convention, relied upon by Respondent, refers to the
choice of law for the merits of the dispute, and not for jurisdiction. This conclusion has
been repeatedly confirmed by other investment arbitration tribunals constituted on the basis
of the ICSID Convention. This Tribunal considers that the reference in Article 42(1) of the
ICSID Convention to “dispute” (“The tribunal shall decide a dispute”) should be
interpreted on the basis of Article 31 of the VCLT so as to refer to the substantive dispute
between the parties. In contrast, it will be Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and the
relevant provisions of the consent instrument — in this case, Article 9 of the Treaty — that
will be pertinent for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The Tribunal notes in this respect that
Article 25’s placement within the body of the ICSID Convention (i.e., in Chapter II,
Jurisdiction of the Centre) further underscores the fact that it is Article 25, as opposed to
Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, that should be the starting point of the Tribunal’s
assessment of its own jurisdiction.

Consequently, the Tribunal’s jurisdictional analysis must focus on the text of the Treaty
(in particular, Article 9) and on Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

The analysis above should not be understood a contrario as a statement that EU law is
applicable to the merits of the dispute. The Tribunal agrees with Claimant that its mandate
in these proceedings is to apply the provisions of the Treaty and customary international
law to determine whether Respondent has breached its international obligations. The
Tribunal’s reasoning and ultimate decision as reflected in this Award are based on the
provisions of the Treaty and applicable principles of customary international law. They are
not based on EU law. EU law forms part of the factual matrix of this case, but is not a basis
for determining liability (or lack thereof).

The observation above applies d plus forte raison in the case of the events which pre-date
Croatia’s accession to the European Union. Croatia was under an obligation to incorporate

22

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

S15.

516.

517.

518.

the acquis communautaire as of the date of its accession to the bloc, but EU law did not
form part of Croatian law until its accession, on 1 July 2013. In other words, prior to 1 July
2013, there could have been no question of the Tribunal being “called on to interpret or
indeed apply EU law” as there was no EU law that applied in Croatia. Consequently, the
reasoning of the Achmea judgment that forms the basis for the CJEU’s finding of
incompatibility between intra-EU arbitration clauses and the TFEU is by definition not
applicable to the events which pre-dated Croatia’s accession to the EU.

At the outset, the Tribunal underscores that it is not persuaded by Respondent’s argument
that the Achmea judgment is binding upon it. As an international arbitral tribunal
constituted on the basis the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal is not bound by the rulings of
the CJEU. Nevertheless, in the paragraphs below, the Tribunal will demonstrate that, even
if it were to consider the Achmea judgment to be binding (quod non), this would not deprive
the Tribunal of jurisdiction under the Treaty or the ICSID Convention.

The first prong of Respondent’s objection: whether Article 9 of the Treaty is
inapplicable to the present dispute due to its incompatibility with EU law

The crux of Respondent’s argument seems to be that, due to the incompatibility between
Article 9 of the Treaty and the TFEU, Croatia could not have expressed, and therefore did
not express, a valid consent to arbitrate disputes with Dutch investors. Respondent argues
that Croatia’s consent to be bound by the Treaty and thus the validity of its consent under
the ICSID Convention must be assessed by reference to the TFEU. Moreover, Respondent
argues that such assessment must be both prospective and retroactive.

The Tribunal recalls that, pursuant to Article 42 of the VCLT to which both Croatia and
the Netherlands are parties, the validity of Croatia’s consent to be bound by the Treaty can
be challenged solely on the basis of the grounds set out in the VCLT. Article 42 states as
follows:

 

“1. The validity of a treaty or of the consent of a State to be bound by a treaty may be
i hed only through the application of the present Convention.

2. The termination of a treaty, its denunciation or the withdrawal of a party, may take place
only as a result of the application of the provisions of the treaty or of the present
Convention. The same rule applies to suspension of the operation of a treaty.” [emphasis
added]

The Tribunal finds that the Treaty’s alleged incompatibility with EU law, as declared by
the CJEU, does not fall within the sphere of application of any one of the grounds for

> Achmea judgment, at 42.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

519.

520.

521.

522.

invalidating a treaty, which are set out in Articles 46 through 53 of the VCLT: provisions
of internal law regarding competence to conclude treaties (Article 46); specific restrictions
on authority to express consent of the State (Article 47); error (Article 48); fraud (Article
49); corruption of a representative of a State (Article 50); coercion of a representative of a
State (Article 51); coercion of a State by the threat or use of force (Article 52); and conflict
with a peremptory norm of general international law (Article 53).

Respondent has not invoked any of the grounds set out in Articles 46 through 53 of the
VCLT to argue that the Treaty, or any part thereof, is invalid. Respondent’s argument
focuses exclusively on the Treaty’s (and its Article 9) incompatibility with EU law.

The Tribunal considers it to be uncontroversial that EU law does not qualify as a
peremptory norm of general international law (or jus cogens) such that a conflict with its
norms and principles would invalidate Croatia’s consent to be bound by the Treaty (Article
53 of the VCLT).

Presumably, Respondent’s argument might fall within the scope of Article 46 of the VCLT,
i.e., the consent to be bound by the Treaty was given in violation of provisions of internal
law (based on the reasoning that EU law, as interpreted by the CJEU in the Achmea
judgment, is part of the internal law of all EU Member States, including Respondent). The
Tribunal does not see even a remote link between Respondent’s argument and any one of
the other grounds for invalidating consent to be bound by a Treaty listed in the VCLT.

However, even if one were to approach EU law from this (limited) perspective, the VCLT
is not of great assistance to Respondent’s case. Article 46 of the VCLT specifies that the
provisions of a State’s internal law may not be invoked in order to invalidate its consent to
be bound by a treaty, unless the violation of internal law was manifest and concerned a rule
of fundamental importance. Further, Article 46 of the VCLT defines “manifest” as
“objectively evident to any State conducting itself in the matter in accordance with normal
practice and in good faith”:

“1. A State may not invoke the fact that its consent to be bound by a treaty has been
expressed in violation of a provision of its internal law regarding competence to conclude
treaties as invalidating its consent unless that violation was manifest and concerned a rule
of its internal law of fundamental importance.

2. A violation is manifest if it would be objectively evident to any State conducting itself
in the matter in accordance with normal practice and in good faith.” [emphasis added]

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

523.

524.

525.

526.

The Tribunal is of the view that any incompatibility between Article 9 of the Treaty and
Articles 267 and 344 of the TFEU cannot be considered as “manifest” as this term is
defined in Article 46(2) of the VCLT.

First, the Tribunal recalls that, in the Achmea judgment, the CJEU framed the
incompatibility between intra-EU investment arbitration clauses and the TFEU in terms of
the mere potential to threaten the full effectiveness of EU law, not in terms of a blatant
violation of EU law:

“56. Consequently, having regard to all the characteristics of the arbitral tribunal mentioned
in Article 8 of the BIT and set out in paragraphs 39 to 55 above, it must be considered that,
by concluding the BIT, the Member States parties to it established a mechanism for settling
disputes between an investor and a Member State which could prevent those disputes from
being resolved in a manner that ensures the full effectiveness of EU law, even though they

might concern the interpretation or application of that law.” [emphasis added]

 

Second, the Tribunal recalls that the question of the compatibility of intra-EU bilateral
investment treaties with EU law has been the subject of considerable debate. The position
of the European Commission itself has evolved. At the initial stages of the European
Union’s enlargement in Central and Eastern Europe, the purported incompatibility between
intra-EU arbitration clauses and EU law was not raised as an issue. Subsequently, the
European Commission took the view that Member States should begin proceedings to
terminate intra-EU BITs according to their own terms. At that time, the European
Commission was careful to note that these agreements did not terminate or cease to apply
automatically. Subsequently, the European Commission began arguing that intra-EU BITs
had already ceased to apply on account of being incompatible with EU law. Before the
CJEU rendered its judgment, the Advocate General Wathelet expressed the opinion that no
incompatibility existed between intra-EU BITs and EU law.

The Tribunal considers that the evolution in the European Commission’s position and the
contrary opinion of Advocate General Wathelet are a perfect illustration that, up until the
Achmea judgment was issued, the arbitration clauses’ compatibility with EU law was very
much an open, complex and disputed question on the plane of EU law, and that it could not
have been “objectively evident to any State conducting itself in the matter in accordance
with normal practice and good faith” that the CJEU would eventually find an
incompatibility to exist.

4 Achmea judgment, at 56, 59.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

527.

528.

529.

530.

531.

Therefore, even if Respondent had invoked Article 46 of the VCLT, which it has not, that
provision would not provide sufficient grounds for the Tribunal to conclude that the Treaty,
or its arbitration clause, was invalidated.

Consequently, the validity of Croatia’s consent to be bound by the Treaty cannot be
impeached by Respondent on the basis of any one of the grounds listed in Articles 46
through 53 of the VCLT.

This conclusion is not affected by the fact that Respondent does not purport to contest
Croatia’s consent to be bound by the entire Treaty, but only by its Article 9. Article 44 of
the VCLT, on the separability of treaty provisions, provides in relevant part:

“2. A ground for invalidating, terminating, withdrawing from or suspending the operation
of a treaty recognized in the present Convention may be invoked only with respect to the
whole treaty except as provided in the following paragraphs or in article 60.

3. If the ground relates solely to particular clauses, it may be invoked only with respect to
those clauses where:

(a) the said clauses are separable from the remainder of the treaty with regard to their
application;

(b) it appears from the treaty or is otherwise established that acceptance of those clauses
was not an essential basis of the consent of the other party or parties to be bound by the
treaty as a whole; and

(c) continued performance of the remainder of the treaty would not be unjust.” [emphasis
added]

In other words, the VCLT establishes that the parties to a treaty cannot, as a rule, invalidate
or suspend individual provisions in a treaty, but only the entire document. If contracting
parties wish to invalidate or suspend individual provisions, they must demonstrate: (i) that
there is “[a] ground for invalidating ... or suspending the operation of a treaty recognized
in the present Convention” that affects such individual provisions; (ii) that the challenged
clause is separable from the remainder of the treaty; (iii) that the challenged clause “was
not an essential basis of the consent of the other party ... to be bound by the treaty as a
whole”; and (iv) that “continued performance of the remainder of the treaty would not be
unjust”.

Respondent has not made any such demonstration. Instead, Respondent has confined its
pleadings to arguing — without providing any justifying rationale — that Croatia’s consent
to arbitrate this dispute is invalid on account of its incompatibility with EU law. Assuming,
as stated by the CJEU, that Croatia’s consent to arbitrate disputes with Dutch investors
under Article 9 of the Treaty is incompatible with the TFEU, it would mean that Croatia is
in breach of its obligations under EU law. This, however, is not a ground for invalidating

26

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

Respondent’s consent to be bound by the Treaty (or by its arbitration clause) pursuant to
the VCLT. Respondent’s potential breach of its obligations under EU law does not affect
Croatia’s consent to be bound by Article 9 of the Treaty and/or the ICSID Convention,

which is assessed by reference to these legal instruments and the VCLT.

532. In conclusion, Respondent has not demonstrated that any grounds for invalidating its
consent to be bound by the Treaty or its arbitration clause, as limitatively set out in the
VCLT, exist in the present case. This is sufficient to conclude that Croatia’s consent to be

bound by the Treaty and its Article 9 was validly expressed.

533. However, out of an abundance of caution, the Tribunal shall also show that, even if
Respondent had successfully invoked a ground for challenging the validity of its consent
to be bound by the Treaty or its Article 9 (quod non), this would not be sufficient to deprive
the Tribunal of jurisdiction for the following two reasons. The first is that the invalidation
of the Treaty would not have operated automatically, but only at the conclusion of a
procedure clearly set out in Articles 65-67 of the VCLT. The second is that, even if such a
procedure had been followed (quod non), it would not have affected arbitration agreements
concluded in good faith, such as the one which is the basis for this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

The Tribunal shall explain these findings in more detail in the paragraphs below.

534. The Tribunal recalls that, pursuant to Articles 65-67 of the VCLT, the invalidation,
termination, withdrawal from or suspension of the operation of a treaty do not operate

automatically, but must follow a specific procedure*:

“Article 65

Procedure to be followed with respect to invalidity, termination, withdrawal from or

suspension of the operation of a treaty

 

 

1. A party which, under the provisions of the present C ion, invokes either a defect
in its consent to be bound by a treaty or a ground for impeaching the validity of a treaty,
terminating it, withdrawing from it or suspending its operation, must notify the other parties
of its claim. The notification shall indicate the measure proposed to be taken with respect

to the treaty and the reasons therefor.

2. If, after the expiry of a period which, except in cases of special urgency, shall not be less
than three months after the receipt of the notification, no party has raised any objection, the

5 The only instance in which the invalidation and termination of a treaty operate automatically is if the treaty is contrary
to a norm of jus cogens, pursuant to Article 64 of the VCLT: “Ifa new peremptory norm of general international law
emerges, any existing treaty which is in conflict with that norm becomes void and terminates.” The Tribunal has
already established that EU law does not qualifiy as a peremptory norm of general international law, such that a
conflict with its norms and principles would invalidate Croatia’s consent to be bound by the Treaty. Article 64 of the

VCLT is therefore inapplicable.

27

EXCERPTS

B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

party making the notification may carry out in the manner provided in article 67 the

measure which it has proposed.

3. If, however, objection has been raised by any other party, the parties shall seek a solution
through the means indicated in Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations.

4. Nothing in the foregoing paragraphs shall affect the rights or obligations of the parties
under any provisions in force binding the parties with regard to the settlement of disputes.

5. Without prejudice to article 45, the fact that a State has not previously made the
notification prescribed in paragraph | shall not prevent it from making such notification in
answer to another party claiming performance of the treaty or alleging its violation.

Article 66
Procedures for judicial settlement, arbitration and conciliation

If, under paragraph 3 of article 65, no solution has been reached within a period of 12
months following the date on which the objection was raised, the following procedures
shall be followed:

(a) any one of the parties to a dispute concerning the application or the interpretation of
article 53 or 64 may, by a written application, submit it to the International Court of Justice
for a decision unless the parties by common consent agree to submit the dispute to
arbitration;

(5) any one of the parties to a dispute concerning the application or the interpretation of
any of the other articles in part V of the present Convention may set in motion the procedure
specified in the Annex to the Convention by submitting a request to that effect to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Article 67
Instruments for declaring invalid, terminating, withdrawing from or suspending the
operation of a treaty

1. The notification provided for under article 65, paragraph 1, must be made in writing.

2. Any act of declaring invalid, terminating, withdrawing from or suspending the operation
of a treaty pursuant to the provisions of the treaty or of paragraphs 2 or 3 of article 65 shall
be carried out through an instrument communicated to the other parties. If the instrument
is not signed by the Head of State, Head of Government or Minister for Foreign Affairs,
the representative of the State communicating it may be called upon to produce full
powers.” [emphasis added]

535. The Tribunal is aware that some EU Member States have embarked on the process of
modifying and/or terminating their intra-EU BITs, while others have not. For their part,
Croatia and the Netherlands have signed a political declaration (together with other EU

28

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

Member States) regarding the consequences of the Achmea judgment, but have not yet
terminated the Treaty. Instead, they have committed to do so by the end of this year.
Consequently, the procedure set out in Articles 65-67 of the VCLT has not yet been
followed and the Treaty has not been invalidated and/or terminated pursuant to the VCLT.

536. The Tribunal adds, for completeness, that, even if Croatia and the Netherlands had
completed the procedure set out in Articles 65-67 of the VCLT (quod non), this would not
have affected in any way the arbitration agreement which is the foundational basis of this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

537. First, the Tribunal recalls that, pursuant to Article 70 of the VCLT, the termination of a
treaty as a rule only produces effects for the future. Consequently, it would not affect the
validity of arbitration agreements that were concluded prior to the termination of the
Treaty, including the one concluded between Claimant and Respondent.

538. Second, even if Article 9 of the Treaty had been invalidated on account of its
incompatibility with EU law, this would not have affected arbitration agreements that were
concluded in good faith. Pursuant to Article 69 of the VCLT:

“Article 69
Consequences of the invalidity of a treaty

1. A treaty the invalidity of which is established under the present Convention is void. The
provisions of a void treaty have no legal force.

2. If acts have nevertheless been performed in reliance on such a treaty:
(a) each party may require any other party to establish as far as possible in their mutual
relations the position that would have existed if the acts had not been performed;

(b) acts performed in good faith before the invalidity was invoked are not rendered unlawful
by reason only of the invalidity of the treaty.

3. In cases falling under article 49, 50, 51 or 52, paragraph 2 does not apply with respect to
the party to which the fraud, the act of corruption or the coercion is imputable.

4. In the case of the invalidity of a particular State’s consent to be bound by a multilateral
treaty, the foregoing rules apply in the relations between that State and the parties to the
treaty.” [emphasis added]

539. Inother words, pursuant to Article 69(2)(b) of the VCLT, even if the invalidation of a treaty
operates retroactively and the parties to a treaty may be required to reestablish the position
that would have existed if the treaty had not been performed, this does not, in and of itself,
invalidate “acts performed in good faith before the invalidity was invoked” if such acts
were performed “in reliance on such a treaty”.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

540.

S41.

542.

543.

The Tribunal considers that the arbitration agreement concluded between Claimant and
Respondent represents one such act. In this respect, the Tribunal recalls that, in the case of
standing offers to arbitrate included in bilateral investment treaties, the arbitration
agreement is concluded upon the acceptance of such offer by the investor, through the
initiation of arbitration proceedings. In the case sub judice, the arbitration agreement
between Claimant and Respondent was perfected on 14 January 2015 by the filing of the
Request for Arbitration. At that time, the Achmea judgment had not yet been rendered and
tribunals constituted under intra-EU BITs were unanimous that there was no incomptability
between such BITs and EU law. Fully cognizant of this jurisprudence, Respondent did not
challenge this Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the basis of Article 9’s incompatibility with EU
law in the initial stages of this arbitration. It was only after the Achmea judgment was
rendered (i.e., in April 2018, four years after the conclusion of the arbitration agreement)
that Respondent objected to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction by invoking Article 9’s
incompatibility with EU law. The Tribunal thus finds that both Respondent’s offer to
arbitrate included in the Treaty and Claimant’s acceptance of that offer were made in good
faith, and in reliance upon the compatibility with EU law of arbitration agreements based
on intra-EU BITs.

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal considers that the arbitration agreement concluded
between Claimant and Respondent represents an “act performed in good faith before
invalidity was invoked” and “in reliance on” the Treaty.

Consequently, even if the Tribunal were to assume: (i) that the Achmea judgment is binding
upon it (quod non); (ii) that Respondent successfully invoked a ground for challenging the
validity of the Treaty and/or Article 9 thereof which is recognized under the VCLT (quod
non); and (iii) that the procedure for the termination and/or invalidation of a Treaty in
Articles 65-67 VCLT had been followed by Respondent (quod non), this would not affect
this Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the present arbitration for two reasons: (i) the termination
of the Treaty would produce effects for the future only and would not affect the arbitration
agreement already concluded between Claimant and Respondent; and (ii) the invalidation
of the Treaty and/or Article 9 thereof, even if retroactive, would not affect the arbitration
agreement concluded in good faith between Claimant and Respondent upon the initiation
of these arbitral proceedings.

The Tribunal considers that the above conclusion is further confirmed by Article 25(1) of
the ICSID Convention, pursuant to which once “the parties have given their consent [to
arbitration under the ICSID Convention], no party may withdraw that consent unilaterally”.
Pursuant to the unambiguous terms of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, once consent
to arbitration has been given and has been accepted by an investor through the initiation of

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

544.

545.

iii.

546.

547.

arbitral proceedings, this consent may not be withdrawn unilaterally by the respondent
State.

The principle of legal certainty, which is embodied in both Article 69(2)(b) of the VCLT
and in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, entitles investors to legitimately rely upon
a State’s written consent to arbitrate disputes as long as that consent has not been
withdrawn prior to its acceptance by the investor through the proper procedures in the
underlying treaty or in the VCLT. This conclusion is doubly apposite in the case sub judice,
where, by the express terms of Article 9(3) of the Treaty, Croatia “[gave] its unconditional
consent to the submission of disputes as referred to in Paragraph 1 of this Article to
international arbitration” [emphasis added]. Respondent must have been aware that this
wording in Article 9 of the Treaty would induce reliance on the part of investors.

For all the reasons set out in the paragraphs above, the Tribunal concludes that, even if the
Achmea judgment were binding upon it (quod non), it would not deprive it of jurisdiction
under the Treaty and the ICSID Convention on account of a purported invalidity of its
consent to be bound by the Treaty and/or its Article 9.

The second prong of Respondent’s objection: Whether Article 9 is inapplicable to the
present dispute by operation of Article 30 of the VCLT

Respondent argues that the dispute settlement provision contained in Article 9 of the Treaty
is inapplicable because it has been superseded by the TFEU pursuant to Article 30(3) of
the VCLT. According to Respondent, Article 30 of the VCLT, which deals with the
“Application of Successive Treaties relating to the Same Subject-Matter”, “
posterior principle as the rule to be used for resolution of conflict of treaties and provides
that where parties to an earlier treaty are also parties to a later treaty ... the earlier treaty
applies only to the extent that its provisions are compatible with those of the later treaty”.°
While the Treaty entered into force on 28 April 1998, Croatia became a Member State of
the EU only on 1 July 2013. Therefore, Respondent asserts, the Treaty of Accession of
Croatia, which makes Croatia a party to the TFEU, and entered into force on 1 July 2013,
is the later of the two treaties concluded by the Netherlands and Croatia and supersedes the

Treaty’s dispute settlement clause.

codifies the Jex

The Tribunal recalls that Article 30 of the VCLT provides as follows in relevant part:

“1. Subject to Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, the rights and obligations
of States Parties to successive treaties relating to the same subject-matter shall be
determined in accordance with the following paragraphs.

 

© R-Ach?, at 13.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

548.

549.

550.

551.

LJ

3. When all the parties to the earlier treaty are parties also to the later treaty but the earlier
treaty is not terminated or suspended in operation under article 59, the earlier treaty applies
only to the extent that its provisions are compatible with those of the later treaty.” [emphasis
added]

The Tribunal considers that, for Article 30 of the VCLT to apply, two conditions must be
met: (i) the two treaties must relate to the same subject-matter; and (ii) the treaties, or parts
thereof, must be incompatible. If one of those conditions is not fulfilled, i.e., if the treaties
do not relate to the same subject-matter or if they are compatible, Article 30 does not apply.
The first question before the Tribunal, therefore, is whether the Treaty and the TFEU relate
to the same subject-matter. If the Tribunal determines that they do not, such determination
will be sufficient to defeat this prong of Respondent’s objection.

The Tribunal notes that the Achmea judgment found that arbitration clauses, such as Article
9 of the Treaty, are incompatible with Articles 267 and 344 of the TFEU. The CJEU
however, did not discuss the application of Article 30 of the VCLT, which is not even
mentioned in the Achmea judgment. Therefore, in analyzing the question whether the
Treaty and the TFEU relate to the same subject-matter, the issue of the binding or non-
binding nature of the CJEU’s conclusions in Achmea does not arise.

The gist of Respondent’s position is that the application of Article 30 of the VCLT requires
only that the application of the rules of two different treaties lead to incompatible results,
rather than requiring an identity of subject-matter between the earlier and the later treaties.
The Tribunal disagrees. Respondent’s argument essentially collapses the two conditions
set forth in Article 30 of the VCLT into one. Unpacked, the logic of Respondent’s argument
is as follows: the two treaties are incompatible (because their application leads to
incompatible results); therefore, the two treaties relate to the same subject-matter;
therefore, Article 30 applies.

This is not, however, what Article 30 says. As discussed above, Article 30 sets forth two
independent conditions: (i) the two treaties must relate to the same subject-matter; and (ii)
they must be incompatible. Respondent’s argument removes the first condition and thus
makes it superfluous. The Tribunal does not believe that this is a proper interpretation of
Article 30 of the VCLT because it reads the first condition out of its text, which is contrary
to the principle of effet utile. Adopting Respondent’s interpretation of Article 30 of the
VCLT would essentially require that the Tribunal rewrite its text, which is not within the
Tribunal’s powers to do.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

552.

553.

554.

The Tribunal, therefore, will turn to the first condition: the question whether the two
successive treaties (in this case, the Treaty and the TFEU) relate to the same subject-matter.
First, the Tribunal does not believe that the relevant benchmark for determining “the same
subject-matter” is whether the two successive treaties apply to the same set of facts or
whether they have the same goal. The Tribunal agrees with the analysis of the EURAM v.
Slovakia tribunal, which stated:

“Even if two different rules deal with issues arising from the same facts, it does not
necessarily mean that they have the same subject matter. This can be seen from a simple
example: a treaty on environmental protection and a treaty on trade may both apply to the
same factual situation but the subject matter with which they deal is quite different.

Secondly, [...] it is [not] sufficient for two treaties to have the same goal for them to have
the same subject matter. For example, two treaties can each have the goal of enhancing the
well-being of children, one in providing for an international mechanism of monitoring of
child labor, another in deciding that children under fourteen may not be married against
their will. Yet no reasonable person would consider that those two treaties, although
pursuing the same goal, the same overall purpose, have the same subject matter.” 7

Respondent argues that the Treaty and the TFEU relate to the same subject-matter because
they deal with foreign investment activity and include rules for foreign investment
regulation. Respondent adds that the two successive treaties serve the same purposes, offer
the same standards of protection and provide equivalent remedies. Investment arbitration
tribunals have consistently rejected this argument. The Tribunal sees no basis to depart
from the consistent jurisprudence of investor-State tribunals that intra-EU BITs and the EU
treaties deal with different subject matters.*

The Tribunal agrees with the EURAM v. Slovakia tribunal that the subject-matter of a treaty
is determined by the issues with which its constituent provisions deal, i.e., its topic or
substance. Similarly to the Oostergetel v. Slovakia and EURAM v. Slovakia tribunals, the
Tribunal considers that the EU treaties’ objective is to promote economic integration,
including by creating a common market, among the Member States, whereas the objective
of BITs (including the Treaty) is to provide for specific guarantees in order to encourage
the international flows of investment into particular States. Further, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that the substantive protections afforded to a foreign investor under the Treaty
are comparable to, or of the same nature as, those offered under the EU treaties. For
example, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the Treaty’s FET standard is coextensive with
the fundamental EU freedoms or that EU law specifically forbids treatment that is not fair
and equitable. As the Eureko v. Slovakia tribunal concluded, the protections afforded by

7 EURAM v. Slovakia, at 169, 170.
* See, Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic, at 159-164; Oostergetel v. Slovakia, at 74-79; EURAM v. Slovakia, at 178-
184,

33

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

555.

556.

557.

558.

BITs under the FET standard are not exhausted by the existing EU law provisions
prohibiting discrimination.’ Respondent has not carried its burden to demonstrate
otherwise. Further, while EU law may condition expropriatory takings on public interest
and fair compensation requirements, Respondent has not established that it offers
comparable protections to those available under the Treaty in the case of indirect
expropriations, or that it applies to “every kind of asset”.

In sum, the Tribunal is not convinced that the relevant provisions of EU law guaranteeing
the fundamental freedoms or prohibiting discrimination have the same topic or substance
as the substantive protections offered under the Treaty. The potential simultaneous
application of EU law and the Treaty to the same set of facts is not sufficient to conclude
that the Treaty and EU law have the same subject matter.

The Tribunal therefore finds that Article 30 of the VCLT does not apply and, consequently,
does not render Article 9 of the Treaty inapplicable.

The third prong of Respondent’s objection: Whether Article 9 is inapplicable to the
present dispute by operation of Article 351 TFEU

Article 351 of the TFEU provides as follows in relevant part:

“(1) The rights and obligations arising from agreements concluded before 1 January 1958
or, for acceding States, before the date of their accession, between one or more Member
States on the one hand, and one or more third countries on the other, shall not be affected
by the provisions of the Treaties.

(2) To the extent that such agreements are not compatible with the Treaties, the Member
State or States concerned shall take all appropriate steps to eliminate the incompatibilities
established. Member States shall, where necessary, assist each other to this end and shall,
where appropriate, adopt a common attitude.”

Respondent accepts that Article 351(1) of the TFEU applies to agreements entered into by
an EU Member State with third countries before the accession of that Member State to the
EU and, thus, deals only with relations between EU Members and non-EU States without
addressing relations between EU Member States. Respondent argues that, according to the
Electrabel v. Hungary tribunal, a negative interpretation of Article 351 of the TFEU
demonstrates that inconsistent earlier treaties between Member States should not survive
entry into the European Union and, therefore, EU law prevails in case of inconsistency
with another earlier treaty.

° Eureko v. Slovakia, at 250.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

559.

560.

561.

562.

563.

Regardless of whether Article 351 of the TFEU can be subject to a “negative
interpretation”, on which issue this Tribunal expresses no views, the Tribunal cannot see
how, on the basis of the ordinary meaning of the text of Article 351 TFEU, it could be
concluded that the earlier treaties and agreements between Croatia and other States (be they
EU Member States or not) are automatically superseded by EU law. Article 351 of the
TFEU does not state that, in case of incompatibilities, EU law prevails or that the earlier
agreement is invalid. It simply requires the Member States concerned to take steps to
eliminate incompatibilities.

Moreover, the Tribunal agrees with Claimant that, even if one were to endorse the
interpretation of Article 351 of the TFEU adopted by the Electrabel v. Hungary tribunal,
Respondent’s jurisdictional objection would still fail. Indeed, as pointed out by Claimant,
the Electrabel v. Hungary tribunal conducted its analysis under Article 351 of the TFEU
on the assumption that the two successive treaties (in that case, the Energy Charter Treaty
and the EU treaties) had the same subject-matter:

“4.176. As regards the substantive protections in Part III of the ECT, the Tribunal does not
consider that the ECT and EU law share the same subject-matter; and, accordingly, it
considers that Article 16 ECT is inapplicable.

 

LJ

4.178. Article 307 EC (Article 351 TFEU): Assuming the same subject-matter, the Tribunal
decides that Article 16 ECT would still be inapplicable because the conflict rule of the later
treaty would apply, namely Article 307 EC.”"” [internal citations omitted] [emphasis added]

In other words, that tribunal’s observations with regard to Article 351 of the TFEU were
made obiter on the basis of an assumption of both identity of subject-matter and
incompatibility, which the tribunal had already decided did not exist in the case.

This Tribunal has already determined that the Treaty and the EU treaties do not have the
same subject-matter and thus do not fall within the ambit of Article 30(3) of the VCLT. In
line with the principle of judicial economy, the Tribunal does not consider it necessary to
repeat those considerations here, in the context of Article 351 of the TFEU. Suffice it to
say for the purposes of the present analysis that Article 351 of the TFEU does not apply in
this case for the same reasons as Article 30(3) of the VCLT does not apply.

For all the reasons identified above, the Tribunal finds that the arbitration clause included
in Article 9 of the Treaty continues to be applicable. Therefore, Respondent’s Objection
No. | is hereby dismissed.

'” Electrabel v. Hungary Decision on Jurisdiction, at 4.176, 4.178.

35

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

v.

564.

565.

566.

vi.

567.

Potential issues with enforcement

The Tribunal has taken note of the Parties’ arguments with respect to the problems that
may arise if the Tribunal upholds jurisdiction notwithstanding the Achmea judgment and
the Award is presented for enforcement either within or outside of the European Union.
The Tribunal is of course aware that it is preferable to render an award that is easily
enforceable. But the Tribunal does not agree with the proposition that the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction must be contingent on the absence of potential issues at the enforcement stage.
This Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not determined by national rules governing the enforcement
of arbitral awards, but by the Treaty, the ICSID Convention, and international law.

Two further considerations should be borne in mind. First, the ICSID Convention provides
for a self-contained dispute resolution mechanism that does not allow national courts to
play any role in reviewing an ICSID award. Pursuant to Article 54(1) of the ICSID
Convention, “[e]ach Contracting State shall recognize an award rendered pursuant to this
Convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award within
its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court in that State”. Thus, domestic courts
are not allowed to exercise judicial review of ICSID awards, during the enforcement
process or otherwise.

Second, the fact that execution of awards is subject to the laws governing the execution of
judgments in force in the respective State (pursuant to Article 54(2)) or that “[nJothing in
Article 54 [relating to enforcement of an ICSID award] shall be construed as derogating
from the law in force in any Contracting State relating to immunity of that State or of any
foreign State from execution” (pursuant to Article 55), has not deterred ICSID tribunals
from routinely rendering awards against States. It will be up to the courts at the enforcement
stage to assess the effects of the Achmea judgment, if any, on the enforceability of this
Award within their respective jurisdictions.

Conclusion

On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that the Achmea judgment does not
preclude it from exercising the jurisdiction granted to it pursuant to Article 9 of the Treaty
and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. Respondent’s Objection No. | is hereby
dismissed.

Objection No. 2: Whether Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione voluntatis and/or ratione
personae

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

568.

569.

570.

S71.

On a preliminary note, the Tribunal observes that Respondent’s main argument under both
the objection to jurisdiction ratione voluntatis and the objection to jurisdiction ratione
materiae is that Claimant is a “passive”, as opposed to an “active”, investor. The Tribunal
considers that Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction ratione voluntatis is, at its core, an
objection to jurisdiction ratione personae: by arguing that Croatia never agreed to arbitrate
disputes with entities that did not “make” an investment, Respondent is essentially
challenging Claimant’s status as an investor. Moreover, the objection to jurisdiction ratione
personae is inextricably connected with the objection to jurisdiction ratione materiae:
arguing that Claimant is not an investor because it did not “make” an “investment” is just
another way of saying that Claimant did not make the “investment”.

For the reasons set out in more detail in the paragraphs below, the Tribunal finds that it has
jurisdiction ratione personae and/or ratione voluntatis. Respondent’s objection to
jurisdiction ratione materiae will be addressed in Section VI.C.3 below.

The Tribunal observes that Claimant was incorporated on 31 March 2011 in Amsterdam. !!
Claimant thus meets the definition of the term “national” as per Article 1(b)(ii) of the
Treaty:

“(b) the term ‘nationals’ shall comprise with regard to either Contracting Party:

LJ
(ii) legal persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party”.

While Respondent does not dispute that the conditions in Article 1(b) of the BIT are met
in the present case, it argues that this is not sufficient for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction
over the present dispute. In its view, Article 10 of the Treaty imposes an additional
jurisdictional requirement: that the investor be actively involved in the making of the
investment. In this respect, Respondent argues that the term “made” in Article 10 of the
BIT (investments, made in the territory of one of the Contracting Parties, in accordance
with its legislation, by investors of the other Contracting Party prior to as well as after the
entry into force of the present Agreement”) demonstrates that the BIT requires that the
investor be actively involved in the making of its investment, as opposed to being a mere
passive owner of shares. Respondent adds that this interpretation is further supported by
the use of the terms “by” in the Preamble (“investments by the nationals of one Contracting
Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party”) and “of” in Article 9 (“an investment
of [a national of the other Contracting Party]’”).

\' Certification of Incorporation of B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A., 31 March 2011 (Exhibit C-406).

37

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

572.

573.

574.

575.

576.

The Tribunal recalls that the VCLT is applicable in the relationship between Croatia and
the Netherlands and both Parties refer to the VCLT as support for their arguments. Thus,
the Tribunal shall interpret the Treaty, including its Article 10, in the light of the provisions
of the VCLT.

The Tribunal is not persuaded that a “good faith” interpretation of the term “made” in
Article 10 of the BIT, which takes into account the “ordinary meaning” of the terms
employed seen “in their context” and in the light of the “object and purpose” of the Treaty,
as per Article 31(1) of the VCLT, supports the interpretation advocated by Respondent.

The Tribunal is of the view that the ordinary meaning of the verb “to make” includes the
act of acquiring an investment.'? The verb “to acquire” is defined as “to gain possession or
control of; to get or obtain”!? something. In other words, the emphasis is on the act of
obtaining title or possession over something, as opposed to the monetary value exchanged
for title or possession. Thus, “making” an investment includes instances in which title or
possession over an asset that qualifies as an investment is obtained. Respondent disputes
that Claimant acquired the investment at issue in the present case, countering that it merely
held it, which is not one of the accepted meanings of the term “to make”. The Tribunal
disagrees. Claimant acquired (i.e., gained control over) the investment on 1 April 2011,
[...]. Thus, Claimant’s indirect holding of 100% shares in [...] is in conformity with the
ordinary meaning of the term “made” in Article 10 of the Treaty.

Further, the Tribunal considers that the context of the verb “made”, as well as the object
and purpose of the Treaty, equally demonstrate that Respondent’s restrictive interpretation
of Article 10 is not supported by the BIT.

First, the Tribunal notes that Article 10 specifies that the BIT applies to “investments, made
in the territory of one of the Contracting Parties, in accordance with its legislation, by
investors of the other Contracting Party prior to as well as after the entry into force of the
present Agreement”. The Tribunal considers that this provision only sets forth a legal and
temporal limitation to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. There is no wording in this text that
differentiates between so-called “passive” investors (who merely hold an investment) and
“active” investors (who, according to Respondent, are actively involved in the act of the
making of an investment).

2 Black’s Law Dictionary (10" ed. 2014), p. 1099 (Exhibit CL-131): “make, vb. (bef. 12c) [...] 3. To acquire
(something)”.
3 See, Black’s Law Dictionary (8" ed. 2004), p. 25.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

577.

578.

579.

Second, the Tribunal also considers that the interpretation advocated by Respondent is at
odds with the object and purpose of the Treaty. For instance, the Treaty’s Preamble reads
in relevant part:

“Desiring to strengthen their traditional ties of friendship and to extend and intensify the
economic relations between them particularly with respect to investments by the nationals
of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party.”

The Tribunal is of the view that Respondent's narrow interpretation of the Treaty in general,
and Article 10 in particular, which seeks to limit the Treaty’s protections to just one class
of investors, i.e., the “active” investors, is in direct conflict with the Preamble’s stated
purpose of extending and intensifying the economic relations between the Netherlands and
Croatia. The Tribunal considers that investments from “passive” investors, for instance,
from portfolio investors, equally serve to intensify the flow of capital from one of the
Contracting Parties to the BIT to the other and thus meet the stated purpose of the Preamble.
The Tribunal finds that the use of the word “by” in the Preamble (“investments by the
nationals of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party”) does not
assist Respondent’s case. There is nothing in the meaning of the word “by” that supports
Respondent’s reading of the Preamble as requiring the active involvement of the investor.
The Tribunal considers that, instead, in the context of the Preamble, the word “by” simply
establishes a link, an affiliation between the investment and the investor. An investment
can be made either by an “active” or by a “passive” investor.

The Tribunal further notes that the Treaty’s definition of “national” as inter alia “legal
persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party” refers to the notion of
incorporation. The Tribunal considers that, if the Contracting Parties had wished to limit
the categories of investors protected by the BIT to those nationals actively involved in the
making of an investment, an easy way to achieve this objective would have been to limit
the categories of protected “nationals” to those legal entities with substantial business
activities in the State of nationality, or to entities that are managed and/or controlled from
within that State. Instead, no such limitation exists in Article 1(b). To the contrary, Article
1(b) seeks to extend the Treaty’s protections even further by assimilating to “nationals”
those “legal persons not constituted under the law of that Contracting Party but controlled,
directly or indirectly, by natural persons as defined in (i) or by legal persons as defined in
(ii)”. In the Tribunal’s view, this latter choice by the Contracting Parties further
underscores their desire to broaden the sphere of protected investors. Respondent’s
interpretation seeks to introduce a limitation to the sphere of protected “nationals” that
finds no support in the language of the definition of the term “national”.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

580.

581.

582.

583.

The Tribunal also considers that the use of the word “of” in Article 9 of the Treaty
(“Disputes between one Contracting Party and a national of the other Contracting Party
concerning an obligation of the former under this agreement in relation to an investment of
the latter”) likewise does not support Respondent’s case. Similarly to the CEMEX v.
Venezuela tribunal, this Tribunal considers that the word “of” simply connotes the fact that
the investments must belong to the investor in order to benefit from Treaty protection. '*
An investment can belong both to an “active” and to a “passive” investor.

The Tribunal further observes that the Treaty does not include any other provision clearly
limiting the categories of protected investors to “active” investors.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal finds that Article 10 of the BIT and the BIT more broadly
do not require investors to be actively involved in the making of the investment in order to
qualify for Treaty protection. Claimant is a protected investor and Respondent’s objection
to jurisdiction ratione personae is thus dismissed. For the same reasons, the Tribunal also
considers that the language of the Treaty and the evidentiary record do not support
Respondent’s contention that Croatia’s offer to arbitrate was only addressed to “‘active”, as
opposed to “passive”, investors. Thus, even if the Tribunal were to accept that
Respondent’s arguments can more adequately be characterized as an objection to
jurisdiction ratione voluntatis (quod non), that objection would still be dismissed.

Objection No. 3: Whether the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae
Article 1(a) of the BIT provides:

“For the purposes of this Agreement:
(a) the term ‘investments’ means every kind of asset and more particularly, though not
exclusively:

(i) movable and immovable property as well as other rights in rem in respect of every kind
of asset;

(ii) rights derived from shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in companies and joint
ventures;

(iii) claims to money, to other assets or to any performance having an economic value;

(iv) rights in the field of intellectual property, technical processes, goodwill and know-
how;

\§ CEMEX v. Venezuela, at 157.

40

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

584.

585.

586.

(v) rights granted under public law or under contract, including rights to prospect, explore,
extract and win natural resources.”

Respondent does not dispute that Claimant’s indirect shareholding in [...] meets the
definition of “investment” included in the BIT. Respondent however argues that this is not
sufficient to establish jurisdiction ratione materiae, as Claimant’s investment must also
meet the objective and inherent meaning of the term “investment” in Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention. Respondent posits that this meaning is that of “[a]n expenditure to
acquire property or assets to produce revenue; a capital outlay”! or “[t]he conversion of
money or circulating capital into some species of property from which an income or profit
is expected to be derived in the ordinary course of trade or business”.!° Respondent
considers that the Tribunal should look to certain benchmarks (contribution, duration and
risk) in order to determine whether a certain operation qualifies as an “investment” under
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. Claimant, on the other hand, argues that the
definition of the term “investment” in the BIT should inform the Tribunal’s understanding
of the term “investment” under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. In its view, holding
shares in a local Croatian company satisfies the requirements of Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention.

The Tribunal recalls that the meaning of the term “investment” under Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention has been, and remains, one of the most disputed issues in investment
arbitration to date. As shown below, when interpreting this term, the Tribunal finds very
little guidance in the text of the ICSID Convention itself or in its drafting history.

The Tribunal considers that the interpretation of the term “investment” in Article 25(1) of
the ICSID Convention must be accomplished by reference to the provisions of the VCLT,
beginning with Article 31(1)’s prescription that a treaty must be interpreted in good faith,
in accordance with the ordinary meaning of the terms employed, seen in their context and
in the light of the object and purpose of the treaty. The Tribunal aligns itself with the
Ambiente Ufficio v. Argentina" and Philip Morris v. Uruguay tribunals, which found that
the ordinary meaning of the term “investment” “covers a wide range of economic
operations” and has a “broad scope of ... application, subject to the possibility for States
to restrict jurisdiction ratione materiae by limiting their consent either in their investment

legislation or in the applicable treaty”.'*

'S B, Gamer, Black’s Law Dictionary, 9" ed. West Group, 2009 (Exhibit RL-62).

6 Oxford English Dictionary (online ed.), definition of “investment” (Exhibit RL-69).

"” Ambiente Ufficio S.p.A. and others (formerly Giordano Alpi and others) v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/9), Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 8 February 2013 (Exhibit CL-159) (“Ambiente Ufficio v.
Argentina”).

'8 Philip Morris v. Uruguay Decision on Jurisdiction, at 200; See also, Ambiente Ufficio v. Argentina, at 456.

4

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

587.

588.

589.

590.

The context in which the term “investment” is placed within the ICSID Convention, as well
as the object and purpose of this international agreement, do not provide particularly
helpful guidance in this analysis. The Preamble of the ICSID Convention refers to “the
need for international cooperation for economic development and the role of private
international investment therein”, and to the “important ... role of foreign investment in
the economic development process”, which could be construed both as supporting a broad
meaning for the term “investment”, and a narrower one.

As pointed out by the Ambiente Ufficio v. Argentina tribunal, little guidance can be derived
from subsequent State practice (Article 31(3)(b) of the VCLT) or from pertinent case law
(even assuming that other arbitral awards can be considered to be “judicial decisions”
within the meaning of Article 38(d) of the Statute of the International Court of Justice).
The definitions of “investment” in international investment treaties and domestic
investment legislation vary considerably, as does the jurisprudence on the matter.

What is nevertheless clear from both the ordinary meaning of the term “investment”, from
subsequent State practice and relevant arbitral jurisprudence is that the term has so-called
“outer limits”. These are usually understood to exclude ordinary commercial transactions,
such as one-off sale agreements, from the sphere of application of the ICSID Convention.
The Tribunal considers that, within the bounds of these limits, the States’ agreement on the
meaning of the term “investment”, to be found in international investment agreements or
domestic investment legislation, should be afforded due weight. In the words of the Alpha
v. Ukraine tribunal:

“[T]he Tribunal does not contend that any definition of ‘investment’ that might be agreed
by States in a BIT (or by a State and an investor in a contract) must constitute an
‘investment’ for purposes of Article 25(1). To cite the classic example, a simple contract
for the sale of goods, without more, would not constitute an investment within the meaning
of Article 25(1), even if a BIT or a contract defined it as one. However, when the State
party to a BIT agrees to protect certain kinds of economic activity, and when the BIT
provides that disputes between investors and States relating to such activity may be
resolved through ICSID arbitration, it is appropriate to interpret the BIT as reflecting the
State’s understanding that that activity constitutes an ‘investment’ within the meaning of
the ICSID Convention as well. That judgment, by States that are both parties to the BIT
and Contracting States to the ICSID Convention, is entitled to great deference.”'? [internal
citations omitted]

The Tribunal also recalls that the drafters of the ICSID Convention deliberately decided to
leave the term “investment” undefined, as shown in the 1965 Report of the Executive
Directors on the ICSID Convention:

Alpha v. Ukraine, at 313.

42

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

“No attempt was made to define the term ‘investment’ given the essential requirement of
consent by the parties, and the mechanism through which Contracting States can make
known in advance, if they so desire, the classes of disputes which they would or would not
consider submitting to the Centre (Article 25(4)).”??

591. The Ambiente Ufficio v. Argentina tribunal aptly summarized the background to the
adoption of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention:

“449. To begin with, the statement must be qualified inasmuch as several, though
unsuccessful, attempts at defining the term ‘investment’ had actually been made in the
negotiation process leading to the adoption of the ICSID Convention in 1965. In fact, the
question of whether and how to define the concept of ‘investment’ was one of the most
contentious issues in that process. While a first camp, mostly consisting of developed (viz.
capital-exporting) States, proposed to abstain from any definition of investment and to
leave that matter entirely to the consent of the States involved, another group of States,
dominated by developing (viz. capital-importing) States, was strongly in favour of a precise
and narrow definition that would limit the Convention’s scope of application ratione
materiae to a well-defined (and if possible even exhaustive) list of protected investments.
When the negotiations were on the brink of failure due to the stalemate between the two
camps, a compromise proposal introduced by the United Kingdom brought the
breakthrough, permitting that in the final vote the Convention was adopted by an
overwhelming majority.

450. This compromise proposal sought to take account of the concerns of both camps. To
this effect, it combined two aspects: On the one hand, it opted for the bare use of the term
‘investment’. This was a concession to the proponents of the non-definition approach,
implying that the Convention would impose no, or only very weak, limits as to the
jurisdiction ratione materiae of the Centre regarding the question whether a certain
economic operation would qualify as an investment under Art. 25 of the ICSID Convention.

451. On the other hand, this liberal approach was complemented, and contained, by the
establishment of a mechanism by which (namely the capital-importing) States could
withhold matters from the jurisdiction of the Centre which they considered inappropriate
to be dealt with by this institution. The immediate result of the move to accommodate these
States’ concerns was the introduction of Art. 25(4) of the ICSID Convention — a provision
which was not in the Convention’s draft before. It permits any Contracting State, before or
after ratification of the Convention, to ‘notify the Centre of the class or classes of disputes
which it would or would not consider submitting to the jurisdiction of the Centre [...] Such
notification shall not constitute the consent required by paragraph (1).’

452. States had therefore the possibility of restricting the Centre’s jurisdiction ratione
materiae to economic operations and assets which they considered to constitute
investments, by giving or not giving consent or by qualifying their consent with certain
restrictions — be it via their domestic investment legislation or via the applicable BIT. In
addition, notifications under Art. 25(4) of the ICSID Convention allowed States to make
announcements in general terms as to the types of disputes in respect of which they would

?° Report of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on the Convention,
nr. 27.

43

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

592.

593.

594.

595.

596.

consider giving consent. While such notifications do not amount to limiting as such the
jurisdiction ratione materiae of the Centre and while those notifications cannot replace the
specific consent to arbitration required under Art. 25 (see its afore-cited para. 4, final
sentence), they may have an indirect bearing on jurisdiction: a consent clause which is not
entirely clear may be interpreted by reference to a prior notification of classes of disputes
in respect of which the host State has expressed its intentions. Accordingly, the consent of
the parties as to the scope of the term ‘investment’ is to be deemed of great relevance when
establishing the meaning of Art. 25 of the ICSID Convention, without the concept thus
becoming subject to the parties’ unfettered discretion.”?! [internal citations omitted]
[emphasis in original]

In other words, for the drafters of the ICSID Convention, the issue of the Contracting
Parties’ consent was crucial. However, the Contracting Parties did not (and do not) have
unfettered discretion when establishing the meaning of the term “investment”.

The Tribunal notes that the Parties’ positions reflect the two schools of thought on the
meaning of the term “investment” under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. While
Claimant considers that the definition of the term “investment” in the BIT should be given
considerable weight when interpreting Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, Respondent
counters that, beyond any definition included in the Treaty, the term “investment” has an
inherent meaning, entailing contribution, duration and risk.

The Tribunal, after examining the evidence before it, concludes that, whether one adopts
the interpretation propounded by Claimant or the one put forth by Respondent, the answer
remains the same: Claimant made a qualifying “investment” and the objection to
jurisdiction ratione materiae is dismissed.

In particular, if the Tribunal were to adopt the interpretation put forward by Claimant,
Claimant’s indirect shareholding in [...] would qualify as an “investment” under Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

It has already been mentioned that Claimant’s indirect shareholding in [...] meets the
definition of the term “investment” in Article 1(a)(2) of the Treaty: “a) the term
‘investments’ means every kind of asset and more particularly, though not exclusively:
[...] Gi) rights derived from shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in companies and
joint ventures”.

2! Ambiente Ufficio v. Argentina, at 449-452.

44

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

597. Under this interpretation, considering that the jurisdictional requirements in the underlying
investment treaty are satisfied, it would take exceptional circumstances to refuse to exercise
jurisdiction on the basis of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention:

“Tn the Tribunal’s view, the four constitutive elements of the Sa/ini list do not constitute
jurisdictional requirements to the effect that the absence of one or the other of these
elements would imply a lack of jurisdiction. They are typical features of investments under
the ICSID Convention, not ‘a set of mandatory legal requirements’. As such, they may
assist in identifying or excluding in extreme cases the presence of an investment but they
cannot defeat the broad and flexible concept of investment under the ICSID Convention to
the extent it is not limited by the relevant treaty.””’ [internal citations omitted] [emphasis

 

 

added]

“The Tribunal izes that el di d in the Salini test might be of some use if
a_tribunal were concerned that_a BIT or contract definition of ‘investment’_was
ov hing and captured tr: ions that ifestly were not i under am

 

 

acceptable definition. Indeed, a number of tribunals and ad hoc committees have treated
the Salini elements as non-binding, non-exclusive means of identifying (rather than
defining) investments that are consistent with the ICSID Convention. However, in most
cases [...] it will be appropriate to defer to the States’ definition of investment in a BIT or
a contract.” [internal citations omitted] [emphasis added]

“[T]he criteria assembled in the Sa/ini test, while not constituting mandatory prerequisites
for the jurisdiction of the Centre in the meaning of Art. 25 of the ICSID Convention, may
still prove useful, provided that they are treated as guidelines and that they are applied in
conjunction and in a flexible manner. In particular, they may help to identify, and exclude.

extreme phenomena that _must_remain outside of even a broad reading of the term
‘i ” in Art. 25 of the ICSID Convention. N hel the basic character, and
rationale, of the ‘non-definition’ of investment allow Art. 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
to cover a wide range of economic operations and assets, susceptible to include non-
standard and atypical investments and capable of adapting to the evolving nature of

925

economic activity.”” [internal citations omitted] [emphasis added]

 

 

598. In the case sub judice, Croatia and the Netherlands have agreed to protect investments
consisting of “rights derived from shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in companies
and joint ventures”. The Tribunal considers that there are no exceptional circumstances
present in this case that could justify a decision to decline jurisdiction and thus effectively
override Croatia’s and the Netherlands’ agreement to arbitrate disputes pertaining to
Claimant’s shareholding.

~ The Tribunal notes that, in any event, even if the Tribunal were to follow the Salini criteria, Claimant's indirect
shareholding in [...] would still meet these criteria.

2 Philip Morris v. Uruguay Decision on Jurisdiction, at 206.

24 Alpha v. Ukraine, at 313.

5 Ambiente Ufficio v. Argentina, at 481.

45

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

599.

600.

601.

602.

First, the Tribunal finds that Claimant’s alleged lack of active involvement in the making
of the investment cannot be construed as one such exceptional circumstance. Indeed, as
concluded in Section VI.C.2 above, the Treaty does not include a requirement that the
investor be actively involved in the making of an investment. These observations, made in
the context of Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction ratione personae, are also pertinent
for an analysis of jurisdiction ratione materiae: there is nothing in the Treaty to support
Respondent’s interpretation that only “investments” made by “active”, as opposed to
“passive”, investors are protected. The Treaty’s protections extend to investments “made”,
i.e., “acquired”, by passive investors. The Treaty does not exclude from its protections the
investments owned by holding companies.

Second, the Tribunal does not consider the use of a private equity fund for the making of
the investment an exceptional circumstance that could justify a departure from the
Contracting Parties’ understanding that rights derived from shares should be entitled to
protection under the BIT and the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal notes that the Treaty
does not include any requirements as to the source of the funds used for making an
investment. Arbitral case law has been consistent in its conclusion that, absent specific
language in the underlying treaty, the origin of the funds employed by an investor for
making an investment (i.e., the investor’s own funds, funds from affiliates, funds from
financing entities) is irrelevant. Moreover, the investment structure that was employed in
this case is fairly typical and commonly encountered in the case of foreign investments. In
this respect, the Tribunal understands that, typically, for the purpose of individual
investment projects or for categories of investment projects, private equity funds set up
individual funds that act as capital-pooling entities. [...]

Third, the Tribunal also observes, for completeness, that indirectly holding shares in a
company cannot be deemed to go beyond the so-called “outer limits” of Article 25(1) of
the ICSID Convention, as it is not in any way equivalent to ordinary commercial
transactions, such as one-off sale agreements.

In other words, if the Tribunal were to endorse Claimant’s interpretation of the term
“investment” in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, there would be no compelling
rationale for the Tribunal to consider that the Netherlands’ and Croatia’s definition of
“investment” in Article 1 of the Treaty is excessively broad, an “extreme phenomen[on]
that must remain outside of even a broad reading of the term ‘investment’ in Art. 25 of the
ICSID Convention”,”® or that the “definition of ‘investment’ [in the BIT] [is] overreaching
and capture[s] transactions that manifestly [are] not investments under any acceptable

6 Ambiente Ufficio v. Argentina, at 481.

46

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

603.

604.

605.

606.

607.

608.

definition”.?’ The Tribunal would thus find that the definition of “investment” in Article
l(a) of the BIT falls squarely within the bounds of the term “investment” included in
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and must be respected by upholding jurisdiction
ratione materiae in this case.

If the Tribunal were to adopt the interpretation put forward by Respondent and find that
the term “investment” has an inherent meaning, encompassing contribution, duration and
risk, the conclusion would remain the same: Claimant has made an investment and the
objection to jurisdiction ratione materiae must be dismissed.

In particular, with respect to the issue of a contribution, the Tribunal finds that Claimant’s
contribution consisted of its indirect ownership of shares in [...], the follow-on investments
made in order to keep the company afloat and the management of [...]. Moreover, and in
any event, as part of its ongoing investment in [...], Claimant made a series of capital
expenditures [...] as follow-on investments and managed and controlled [...] through the
appointment of its Managing Directors [...]. These elements are sufficient, in the
Tribunal’s view, to qualify as a “contribution”.

With respect to the element of duration, the Tribunal observes that Claimant’s investment
entailed a certain duration: after acquiring shares in [...] in March 2011, Claimant
continued to hold these shares for a number of years, throughout the series of events
pertinent for this arbitration.

Claimant’s indirect ownership of shares in [...] also involved an element of risk, namely
the risk that [...] business might fail and the funds injected into the company would be lost.

For these reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal concludes that, even if it were to endorse
Respondent’s interpretation of the term “investment” in Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention, Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction ratione materiae would still be
dismissed.

In conclusion, regardless of whether the Arbitral Tribunal adopts the interpretation of the
term “investment” put forward by Claimant or the one put forward by Respondent, the
result remains the same: Claimant has made a qualifying “investment” under Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention and the objection to jurisdiction ratione materiae is dismissed.

27 Alpha v. Ukraine, at 313.

47

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

4.

609.

610.

6ll.

612.

613.

614.

615.

Objection No. 4: Whether the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis over claims pre-
dating 1 April 2011

Respondent argues that the Treaty does not apply to conduct that pre-dated Claimant’s
investment in [...] and relies upon Article 28 of the VCLT as support for its objection.
Claimant does not appear to dispute the merits of Respondent’s objection.

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent, albeit it cannot endorse the legal basis of its
jurisdictional objection.

Article 28 of the VCLT sets out the principle of non-retroactivity of treaties:

“Article 28: Non-retroactivity of treaties

Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is otherwise established, its
provisions do not bind a party in relation to any act or fact which took place or any situation
which ceased to exist before the date of the entry into force of the treaty with respect to that
party.” [emphasis in original]

It is not in dispute between the Parties that the Treaty entered into force on | June 1999.
The conduct with respect to which Respondent raises this jurisdictional objection dates
from 2003 until 2011. In other words, it is not a question of the Treaty being applied
retroactively to events which took place prior to its entry into force.

The Tribunal considers that Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction ratione temporis
pertains to the inapplicability of the Treaty’s substantive standards of protection prior to
the making of an investment, as well as to the inexistence of a dispute with respect to an
investment, as per Article 9(1) of the Treaty: “[d]isputes between one Contracting Party
and a national of the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the former under
this agreement in relation to an investment of the latter’. The Tribunal agrees with
Respondent that it has no jurisdiction over conduct occurring prior to Claimant making its
investment, but the legal basis of this finding is Article 9(1) of the Treaty.

More precisely, in the case sub judice, Claimant made its investment on | April 2011,
when, subsequent to its purchase of the totality of the shares in [...].

Consequently, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction ratione temporis over events which
took place prior to 1 April 2011, and in particular over claims that:
— The Ministry of Transport and HAKOM gave contradictory interpretations of
hybrid mail services with the intent to extend [...] monopoly over reserved services;
— [...] interfered in the drafting of the 2009 PSA; and

48

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

616.

617.

VIL.

— HAKOM failed to ensure that [...] implemented a separate cost accounting model
for its regulatory accounts under the 2003 PSA.

The Tribunal finds however that it does have jurisdiction over Claimant’s claims
concerning Respondent’s treatment of value-added services under the 2009 PSA and
Respondent’s failure to ensure that [...] implemented separate cost accounting under the
2009 PSA. While the conduct pertaining to these claims began before Claimant made its
investment (in March 2010, in the case of the value-added services claim; and in 2009,
upon the entry into force of the 2009 PSA, in the case of the separate cost accounting
claim), the conduct continued well after Claimant had made its investment. In the case of
Claimant’s claim pertaining to value-added services, HAKOM’s decision finding [...] in
breach of the 2009 PSA was issued on 18 May 2012, after Claimant had made its
investment. In the case of Claimant’s claim pertaining to separate cost accounting, [...]
only fulfilled this obligation in May 2014. The Tribunal concludes that it has jurisdiction
over these complex or continuous acts, which begun before Claimant made its investment
but continued well after that moment.

§

Having dismissed Respondent’s jurisdictional objections, the Tribunal therefore finds that
it has jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention and the Treaty.

WHETHER CROATIA BREACHED ARTICLE 3(1) OF THE BIT
Claimant’s position

Legal standard
[..]
Arbitrary measures

Extension of [...]’s statutory monopoly over hybrid mail services
[...]
HAKOM’s decision concerning [...]’s value-added services

[J

49

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

iii. Declarations in support of [...]

637. [...]
iv. Separate cost accounting
641. [...]

Vv. HAKOWM’s failure to investigate [...] prices

645. [...]

vi. The CCA Decisions

661. [...]
The 2012 CCA Decision
662. [...]
The 2015 CCA Decision
669. [...]

Whether [...]’s prices were predatory

vii. Access to [...] network

689. [...]

viii. | Public procurement of postal services

696. [...]
ix. The compensation fund
701. [...]

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

xX.

709.

3.

713.

4.

717.

723.

732.

733.

734.

iii.

744,

748.

758.

The failed acquisition of [...]

[ed

Breach of legitimate expectations

[ed

Impairment by unreasonable or discriminatory measures
[ed

Respondent’s position

Legal standard

[J

. Arbitrary measures

Extension of [...]’s statutory monopoly over hybrid mail services
[...]

HAKOM’s decision concerning [...]’s value-added services

[...]

Declarations in support of [...]

[...]

Separate cost accounting

[J

HAKOWM’s failure to investigate [...]’s prices

[J

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

vi. The CCA Decisions

774. [...]
The 2012 CCA Decision
7715. [...]
The 2015 CCA Decision
783. [...]

Whether [...] prices were predatory

vii. Access to [...] network

801. [...]

viii. | Public procurement of postal services

808. [...]

ix. The compensation fund

813. [...]

xX. The failed acquisition of [...]
820. [...]

3. Breach of legitimate expectations
824. [...]
4. Impairment by unreasonable or discriminatory measures

829. [...]

Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

835.

836.

837.

838.

Article 3(1) of the BIT provides:

“Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment of the investments of
nationals of the other Contracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures, the operation, management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal thereof by those nationals. Each Contracting Party shall accord to such
investments full physical security and protection.”

The Parties do not dispute that the Fair and Equitable Treatment (“FET”) standard is
breached by conduct that is arbitrary, in bad faith, that fails to afford due process or to
ensure appropriate levels of transparency. The Parties disagree however on whether
conduct by a State needs to be outrageous or shocking for the State to be in breach of
Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

The Tribunal aligns itself with a consistent line of jurisprudence finding that it is not
necessary to make a showing of bad faith in order to conclude that the FET standard has
been breached.* However, ultimately, any analysis under the FET standard will be heavily
dependent on the facts of each case. The Tribunal would be reluctant to attempt to
determine in the abstract whether a breach of the FET standard occurs when the conduct
of a respondent State is objectionable or whether something more is required before a
violation can be established. In any event, the Tribunal is not persuaded that it is
empowered to make such a general determination.

The Parties agree and the Tribunal concurs, that arbitrary conduct falls foul of the FET
standard. The Tribunal considers that the Lemire v. Ukraine Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability contains a useful overview of the notion of arbitrariness. Referring inter alia to
Lauder v. Czech Republic,?? Tecmed v. Mexico, Loewen v. United States,*° Saluka v. Czech
Republic, the Lemire v. Ukraine tribunal found that:

“262. Arbitrariness has been described as ‘founded on prejudice or preference rather than
on reason or fact’; ‘... contrary to the law because ... [it] shocks, or at least surprises, a
sense of juridical propriety’; or ‘wilful [sic] disregard of due process of law, an act which
shocks, or at least surprises a sense of judicial propriety’; or conduct which ‘manifestly
violate[s] the i of i ry, even-handed and_non-
discrimination’. Professor Schreuer has defined (and the Tribunal in EDF v. Romania has
accepted) as ‘arbitrary’:

?8 See, Mondev v. United States, at 116; Bayindir v. Pakistan, at 181; Crystallex v. Venezuela, at 543.

2° Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Final Award, 3 September 2001, at 221 (Exhibit RL-24)
(“Lauder v. Czech Republic”).

3° Loewen v. United States, at 131.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

839.

840.

841.

‘a. a measure that inflicts damage on the investor without serving any apparent
legitimate purpose;

b. a measure that is not based on legal standards but on discretion, prejudice or
personal preference;

c. a measure taken for reasons that are different from those put forward by the
decision maker;

d. a measure taken in wilful disregard of due process and proper procedure.’

263. ing up, the underlying notion of arbitrariness is that prejudice. or

bi substituted for the rule of law.” *! [internal citations omitted] [emphasis added]

  

The Tribunal subscribes to this view. A State’s conduct will be arbitrary when the State
acts capriciously, without a legitimate purpose, when it repudiates its own laws and
regulations or when it shows preference or bias, as opposed to even-handedness.

Further, the Tribunal agrees with Claimant that the FET standard is infringed not only when
a State engages in a positive act, but also when it fails to discharge its duties and to comply
with its statutory obligations, when it fails to “to take reasonable precautionary and
preventive actions”? to avoid damage to private property. Moreover, a breach can be
established not only by means of a single act, but also by a series of acts or omissions which
over time cumulatively result in a violation of the FET standard, even if each individual
measure would not constitute by itself a breach.**

In the case before the Tribunal, Claimant argues that Article 3(1) of the Treaty has been
breached by Respondent in multiple ways: (i) through arbitrary conduct; (ii) through the
breach of Claimant’s legitimate expectations; and (iii) through impairment by unreasonable
or discriminatory measures. For each type of alleged violation, Claimant substantiates its
claim by challenging conduct of Respondent’s pertaining to several sets of facts:
@ the alleged re-monopolization of hybrid mail services;
(ii) the treatment of value-added services;
(iii) the alleged preference accorded to [...] during the drafting process of the 2012
PSA;
(iv) _ the alleged failure to implement separate cost accounting;
(v) the alleged failure by HAKOM to supervise [...]’s prices and discounts;
(vi) the alleged failure by the CCA to sanction [...]’s abuse of its dominant position
on the postal services market;
(vii) _ the failed acquisition of [...];

3! Lemire v. Ukraine Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, at 262, 263.
»2 Toto Costruzioni v. Lebanon, at 150.
33 See, El Paso v. Argentina, at 518.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

842.

843.

844.

(viii) the alleged failure to ensure timely and non-discriminatory access to [...]’s
network;

(ix) _ the alleged exclusion from public tenders based on discriminatory grounds;

(x) HAKOM’s double standard in exercising its regulatory powers;

(xi) the CCA’s failure to take any measures in response to [...]’s second complaint
against [...] for abuse of a dominant position in 2019; and

(xii) _ the alleged wrongful establishment of a compensation fund.

The Tribunal notes that not all of these claims, which were set out in the Memorial, were
reiterated in the Reply, at the hearing or in Claimant’s post-hearing submissions. In
particular, Claimant’s claim that the CCA failed to take any measures in response to [...]’s
second complaint against [...] was not reiterated in the Reply or in subsequent argument
before the Tribunal, presumably because prior to the filing of the Reply, the CCA rendered
the 2015 CCA Decision. The Tribunal thus understands that this claim is now moot and
Claimant’s complaints with regard to the conduct of the CCA are subsumed in its claim
that the CCA failed to sanction [...]’s abuse of its dominant position. Further, Claimant did
not reiterate in its Reply or in subsequent argument before the Tribunal its claim that
HAKOM practiced a double standard in its regulatory supervision of [...] and [...]. The
Tribunal thus understands that Claimant is no longer pursuing this argument as a separate
claim for arbitrary conduct, but has instead integrated it in its general criticism of
HAKOM’s failure to supervise[...]’s prices and discounts. The argument appears to be
maintained, however, in connection with Claimant’s claim of impairment by arbitrary or
unreasonable measures.

The Tribunal has taken note of Claimant’s argument that Respondent showed a distinct
preference for the national postal operator during the drafting of the 2012 PSA, by
attempting to include a series of provisions meant to protect [...] from competition.
Claimant however acknowledges that these alleged attempts were ultimately unsuccessful.
On this basis, the Tribunal is of the view that Claimant is not putting forth these allegations
in order to attempt to substantiate a separate breach of the Treaty, but in order to
demonstrate that the intent to protect the national postal company permeated and can
ultimately help to explain Respondent’s conduct at issue in this arbitration. The Tribunal
will bear this in mind when addressing the substance of Claimant’s claims.

The Tribunal also reiterates here that it has established at Section VI.C.4 above that
Claimant’s claim pertaining to hybrid mail services falls outside of its jurisdiction ratione
temporis. Therefore, Claimant’s allegations in this regard will only serve as background to
the Tribunal’s analysis.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

845.

846.

847.

848.

849.

As will be demonstrated in greater detail below, after careful consideration of the evidence
before it and of the Parties’ submissions, the Tribunal has reached the conclusion that
Respondent has violated the FET standard through arbitrary conduct, which consisted of
its repudiation of the ex ante regulatory framework that governed the provision of postal
services and its attempt to re-monopolize a part of the postal services market in the first
half of 2013 with a view to protecting the national postal operator. These actions and
omissions reflect Respondent’s outright repudiation of the ex ante regulatory framework
governing the provision of postal services and constitute a breach of Article 3(1) of the
Treaty.

Having reached this conclusion, the Tribunal does not consider it necessary to seek to
establish further if this conduct also represented a violation of Claimant’s legitimate
expectations or resulted in an unreasonable or discriminatory impairment of Claimant’s
investment.** In the words of the TECO v. Guatemala tribunal:

“A willful disregard of the law or an arbitrary application of the same by the regulator
constitutes a breach of the minimum standard, with no need to resort to the doctrine of
legitimate expectations.”*°

In the paragraphs below, the Tribunal will explain in more detail its findings with respect
to each one of Claimant’s allegations.

Whether Respondent failed to ensure that [...] timely implemented separate cost
accounting

After having examined the Parties’ positions and the evidence in the record, the Tribunal
finds that Respondent did not breach Article 3(1) of the Treaty by failing to ensure that
[...] timely implemented separate cost accounting.

At the outset, the Tribunal notes that, when investing in [...], Claimant was aware that [...]
had not implemented separate cost accounting and that this was unlikely to be achieved in
the following years. [...] observed in his Report to [...]:

“Accounting separation
7.11 However, such compensation funding could only become possible if [...] had
separated its accounts between universal and non universal services, according to the

* The Tribunal will make, where appropriate, some observations with regard to Claimant's legitimate expectations or
impairment claims.
35 TECO v. Guatemala, at 621.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

850.

851.

852.

853.

requirements of Article 14 of the Postal Directive. My understanding is that this is unlikely
to be achieved over the next few years.”*°

It is not disputed by the Parties that the implementation of separate cost accounting is a
complex and time-consuming enterprise.[...], testified at the hearing that it took [...] five
years to implement separate cost accounting.*”[...], also acknowledged at the hearing that
the introduction of separate cost accounting was a process that could take a number of years
and was highly complex.°*

The Tribunal notes that, in 2010 and 2011, HAKOM and [...] had initiated a number of
projects aiming at developing and implementing separate cost accounting, and were
meeting regularly in order to coordinate their actions. At the hearing, [...], testified that
personnel from[...], HAKOM, [...] and [...] met every month or every two weeks in order
to discuss and work on the project for separate cost accounting.*® [...] also testified that, as
a result of these projects, by the end of the first quarter/beginning of the second quarter of
2012, [...] was able to run the first calculations based on the [...] model.*° The Tribunal
expresses no view on the reliability of these calculations, considering that they had not
been verified by any independent auditor or by HAKOM. Nevertheless, what is evident
from the record is that progress on the project for developing separate cost accounting was
being made.

However, by 2012, the project had not been completed, as acknowledged both by HAKOM
and[...]. For its part, HAKOM wrote in a letter to the Ministry of Transport dated 28 June
2012:

“However, regardless of all conducted measures and procedures in connection with the so-
called ‘accounting unbundling and cost allocation’, [...] has not fully complied with its
obligation. HAKOM believes that more significant improvements, i.e., compliance with
the obligation, can hardly be expected without the use of sophisticated computer program
solutions and the accompanying purchase of IT and other equipment, nor without the
implementation of modern accounting methods and models.””*!

In September 2012, [...] wrote to the CCA that:

“Tt is true that the cost accounting system in [...] has not yet been set up. However, its
implementation had to be preceded by the adoption of secondary legislation (the adoption
of which is not the responsibility of [...] but the state), which was initiated during 2012.

36 f...] (Exhibit C-31).

51 Tr., Day 3, 182: 5-25; 183: 1.

38 Tr., Day 4, 21: 16-25; 22: 1-16.
 Tr., Day 5, 103:9-104:4.

“0 Tr., Day 5, 110: 10-25; 111: 1-11.
41[...] (Exhibit C-69).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

854.

855.

856.

857.

During 2011 and 2012, [...] worked intensively on meeting this particular legal obligation.
The external adviser [...] was engaged for this purpose and a contract was signed on 15
June 2011 for the provision of advisory services for the development and the
implementation of the cost accounting model within a 20 month period. The realization of
the contract is progressing as planned, and it is expected that the system will be established
by 2013, while the full regulatory report is to be submitted to the relevant regulatory agency
for 2012.”

The Tribunal observes that the project continued in 2013 and 2014. On 27 March 2013,
HAKOM issued its Instructions on Accounting Separation.** This permitted [...] to submit
its first Regulatory Report to HAKOM on 29 August 2013. Following a series of meetings
between HAKOM and [...] to discuss the first draft of the 2012 Regulatory Report, [...]
amended and resubmitted it on 30 October 2013.47 HAKOM then engaged the services of
[...] in order to audit[...]’s amended Regulatory Report. In April 2014, [...] found this
report to be compliant with HAKOM’s Instructions on Accounting Separation.*° In August
2014, the UPU also informed [...] that it approved the final report of the project for the
development of its cost accounting model.*”

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal finds that, while the implementation of separate
cost accounting began considerably later than the deadline set by the 2009 PSA (or, for that
matter, the 2003 PSA), nevertheless, by the time of Claimant’s investment, both HAKOM
and [...] had set in motion the projects that were necessary for its completion. Because the
development and implementation of separate cost accounting is highly complex, the
finalization of the project took a number of years. However, the Tribunal has found nothing
in the record to demonstrate that Respondent was not committed to the completion of the
project.

For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent did not breach Article 3(1) of
the Treaty on account of failing to ensure that [...] timely implemented separate cost
accounting.

While no breach of the Treaty has been established, the fact remains that the separate cost
accounting project was only completed in May 2014. The Tribunal, where appropriate, will
take this fact into account when deciding other claims.

..-] (Exhibit C-454).
..-] (Exhibit R-87); [...] (Exhibit R-88).
.--] (Exhibit R-95).

..-] (Exhibit C-346); [...] (Exhibit C-347).
..-] (Exhibit C-223); [...] (Exhibit C-348).
..-] (Exhibit R-114).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

2.

858.

859.

860.

861.

Respondent's treatment of value-added services

After having considered the positions of both Parties and the evidence in the record, the
Tribunal concludes that Respondent’s treatment of value-added services was not arbitrary,
but was reasoned, was applied consistently and uniformly on the market during the years
when the 2009 PSA was in force. Respondent’s conduct thus did not fall foul of the
Treaty’s Article 3(1). However, the Tribunal considers that Croatia’s conduct was
characterized by a lack of transparency and predictability, which resulted in a significant
degree of confusion on the Croatian postal services market.

The Tribunal will explain its findings in more detail in the paragraphs below.

The Tribunal recalls that Article 10 of the 2009 PSA (“Other postal services and additional
services”) reads as follows:

“(1) Other postal services shall be considered to be value added postal services and other
postal services that are not universal postal services.

(2) Value added postal services are the services which, along with the clearance, sorting,
transport and delivery of items, comprise certain added value.

(3) The added value referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall in particular comprise
the following:

1. collection of the item at the request of the service user,

2. possibility to monitor the transport and delivery of a postal items over
the Internet or in another appropriate way,

3. possibility of direct communication with the employee of the postal
service provider for the purpose of giving additional instructions
concerning the delivery of an item,

4. agreed time of delivery of an item,

5. the delivery of an item to the addressee after he signs for it.

(4) Additional services are the services comprising a special manner of treatment during
the clearance, sorting, transport and delivery of items in the provision of universal postal
services, value added postal services and other postal services that are not universal postal
services.”

First, the Tribunal observes that Croatia’s interpretation of Article 10(3) of the 2009 PSA
on value-added services could well have been inconsistent with the acquis communautaire
in the matter of postal services. This view has been expressed in no uncertain terms by the
European Commission on a number of occasions in correspondence and during meetings

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

862.

863.

with representatives of Croatia.** In addition, it is apparent from the record that the
Commission only understood the Ministry of Transport’s interpretation of value-added
services after HAKOM’s decision of 18 May 2012 had already been rendered.*”

In particular, [...], a member of the working group tasked with the drafting of the 2009
PSA, testified as follows during the hearing with respect value-added services:

“MS DAVIES: Do you remember who proposed the wording of that provision?

[...]: We had many discussions about it. We had, as a working group, many different views
on that matter, and at the end of the story, when we were at the end of our time to finish
that text, [...] from Ministry [of Transport] made a final version of this Article and he
explained how it should be treated”.*°

“DR ALEXANDROV: What was, at that time, the position of [...]?

[...] was head of the postal and telecommunication part of the Ministry. [...]

DR ALEXANDROV: He presented the draft of Article 10 to the working group? Did I
understand you correctly?

[...]: He presented that Article to the working group, yes.

DR ALEXANDROV: He explained, you said, how it worked.

[...]: Yes, he explained what that words [sic] should mean.

DR ALEXANDROV: What was his explanation is my question.

[...]: His explanation was that all five of those value added services were obligatory to
consider some service as a value added service, and that will be his or the Ministry’s
standing point if in some point in future will be dispute about that.

We had many different opinions about it. We had so many discussions about that issue,
and he said that he will handle this issue with HAKOM and with operators, and at the other
hand, he will handle that with European Commission, which we were very concerned that
European C ission will not accept that kind of restriction.”*! [emphasis added]

The Tribunal considers that [...]’s testimony is corroborated by the rest of the evidence in
the record and is credible. It is evident from the European Commission’s correspondence
with the Ministry of Transport in 2012 that the Ministry of Transport had not informed the
European Commission of its intention to interpret value-added services cumulatively,
despite its awareness that a restrictive interpretation ran the risk of not being accepted. In
the 2 October 2012 meeting in Brussels between representatives of Croatia and of the
European Commission, the latter made the following representation:

“The European Commission emphasizes that it understands those are the provisions of the
valid Act (even though such interpretation by the Croatian side was not earlier understood

+8 See, [...] (Exhibit C-84); [...] (Exhibit C-93); [...] (Exhibit C-330); [...] (Exhibit C-104).
*°£...] (Exhibit C-330).

Tr, Day 3, 231: 11-19.

5 Tr, Day 4, 88: 21-24; 89: 8-25; 90: 1-6.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

864.

865.

866.

867.

868.

by the European Commission, so the EC did not react sooner), but it states that such
interpretation of the provision is not in accordance with the acquis.”>

Second, even though Croatia’s interpretation of value-added services contravened the
postal acquis, the Tribunal considers that this is only one of the factors in determining
whether Respondent’s conduct was arbitrary.

It is true that, at the time of the issuance of its interpretation of Article 10(3) of the 2009
PSA, Croatia was bound by an obligation to employ its best efforts in order to implement
the acquis communautaire with respect to postal services. However, Croatia was not yet a
member of the European Union and European Union law was not part of Croatian law.
Therefore, Croatia remained at liberty to interpret national legislation in the manner it
deemed fit, with the possible attendant consequence that an interpretation contrary to
European Union law could affect its eventual accession to the European Union. This was
explicitly acknowledged by the European Commission.*?

While Respondent’s interpretation of value-added services may not have been in line with
the postal acquis, the Tribunal finds that it was consistent and applied equally to all
operators on the market since the drafting of the 2009 PSA and until the entry into force of
the 2012 PSA. This is sufficient to establish that Croatia’s conduct was not arbitrary and
was not in breach of Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

As shown above, [...] clarified that the Ministry of Transport’s interpretation of value-
added services was, from the very beginning, cumulative. After the entry into force of the
2009 PSA, HAKOM and the Ministry of Transport issued several interpretive notes to a
number of postal operators, clarifying that Article 10(3) of the 2009 PSA should be read
as requiring the provision of all five services listed therein. This is how, on 10 March 2010,
HAKOM responded to a request for interpretation from the postal operator[...].°* On 1
March 2011, the Ministry of Transport clarified to HAKOM that Article 10(3) of the 2009
PSA required the effective provision of all five listed services, not simply the availability
of all the services.*> On 9 May 2011, the Ministry of Transport responded to an inquiry
from [...] in this matter, again providing the same interpretation.*°

Third, the Tribunal finds that Croatia’s interpretation of Article 10(3) of the 2009 PSA —
while consistent — was not completely clear to the operators on the market. To the contrary,

%2[,..] (Exhibit C-330).

58 Id.; [...] (Exhibit C-28).

541... (Exhibit R-176).

55 [,..] (Exhibit C-331); [...] (Exhibit R-37).
56... (Exhibit C-332); [...] (Exhibit R-38).

  

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

prior to Claimant’s investment in[...], there was considerable regulatory uncertainty with

respect to the correct interpretation of value-added services.

869. In this respect, the Tribunal finds that the record does not support a conclusion that the
interpretations issued by HAKOM or the Ministry of Transport had been made public in
any way. To the contrary, [...]’s inquiry with the Ministry of Transport in May 2011, more
than a year after HAKOM’s first interpretive letter, demonstrates that the postal services

providers had not been offered any official guidance on this matter.

870. __[...] was one of the operators that were uncertain as to the correct interpretation of value-

added services under Croatian law. During the hearing, [...], declared:

“MR PORTWOOD: You had a concern at the time that Article 10 might be interpreted as

requiring all five value added services to be provided cumulatively.
[...]: That is correct.”5”

871. The Tribunal observes that, due to its concerns with respect to the interpretation of the 2009
PSA, an instrument of Croatian law, [...] elected to seek the opinion of the European

Commission on the meaning of value-added services. The Tribunal does not find anything

inherently wrong with[...]’s choice to obtain the views of the European Commission on

this matter. In light of Croatia’s impending accession to the European Union, it was prudent

of [...] to obtain an interpretation of the acquis communautaire from the Commission.

However, [...] did not endeavor to also obtain the opinion of any Croatian public authority.

When questioned about this choice during the hearing, [...] testified:

“MR PORTWOOD: If you did not have a problem over the definition of the value added
services in Article 10 of the Postal Services Act of 2009, why were you writing to the

European Commission for their view?

[...]: Our enquiry for the other interpretation, or our enquiry towards the European
Commission came about through my colleague[...], he had joined our company, and he
actually proposed that the letter would have a certain weight since Croatia is nearing entry
into the European Union and, on the other hand, such an opinion would provide a certain,
let us say, certainty for us who are here in the market. We did not know which way the

answer would go but our decision was made due to the reasons I just stated.”**

“MR PORTWOOD: Having got this letter, you decided to do nothing with respect to the

Croatian authorities, did you?

[...]: Yes.

MR PORTWOOD: You did not show them this letter?

[...]: No, we did not.

MR PORTWOOD: You did not ask them for their interpretation of Article 10?

  

51 Tr., Day 2, 28:
88 Tr., Day 2, 273:

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

872.

873.

874.

° Tr, Day 2, 28
.] (Exhibit R-35).

or,

 

[...]: No, we never asked HAKOM to interpret Article 10.
MR PORTWOOD: Neither the Ministry of Transport?
[...]: No, neither the Ministry of Transport.”*?

Respondent contends that [...]’s inquiry with the European Commission, instead of the
Ministry of Transport, was prompted by its awareness that the Ministry would interpret
value-added services to its detriment. Respondent notes that the inquiry with the European
Commission had been made pursuant to advice from [...], who had joined [...] in
September 2010.°°

The Tribunal finds that, even if Respondent’s contention that [...] had knowledge of the
Ministry of Transport’s cumulative interpretation of Article 10(3) of the 2009 PSA were
true, [...] would not have been wrong to assume that, in light of Croatia’s impending
accession to the European Union, the Ministry of Transport may change its stance when
confronted with the express disapproval from the European Commission. Or, in other
words, as [...] testified during the hearing, to assume that the letter from the European
Commission would act as “kind of an insurance for [...]”.°!

The uncertainty on the Croatian postal services market with respect to the correct
interpretation of value-added services was also expressly recorded in the [...], which was
provided to [...] before the acquisition of [...]:

“6.2 The current situation is that (universal service) letters weighing below 50g are
reserved to[...]. However, value added items are not reserved.

6.3 [...] has claimed that its letter services are value added and as such are legal under
current arrangements.

6.4 However, there remains some legal ambiguity about what constitutes value added
services and it could be argued that this has deterred some possible clients from
switching to [...].

6.5 Further, this legal ambiguity has placed the company at some disadvantage in its
relationship with the regulatory authorities and with [...]. It can be argued that the
company has tended to ‘keep a low profile’ in order to avoid legal or regulatory
difficulties.

6.6 This may have prevented it from pursuing both a more aggressive sales strategy
and from seeking some form of legal solution to other issues such as obtaining
access to[...]’s facilities.”

 

-15.

&! Ty,, Day 2, 273: 15, 16.

er.

.] (Exhibit C-31).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

875.

876.

877.

Bancroft’s Investment Memo also noted that [...]’s services were value-added but that
there was a risk that they could be classified by the regulator as universal services.
However, [...]’s Investment Memo explicitly mentioned that, based on the letter from the
European Commission, it considered[...]’s services to be value-added:

“[...] requested interpretation from the EU authorities of what is universal postal
services. Based on the criteria provided by the European Commission the company
provides only value added services, which are permitted under the regulation.”*

Respondent argues that, based on the conclusions of the [...] and of the Investment Memo,
Claimant should have been aware of the risk that [...]’s operations could be found non-
compliant with the 2009 PSA. The Tribunal does not share Respondent’s view. At the time
of Claimant’s investment, neither HAKOM, nor the Ministry of Transport had issued any
public official interpretation of Article 10(3) of the 2009 PSA. In addition, the European
Commission had expressly stated that, for purposes of European Union law, it was
sufficient if a value-added postal service included only one additional added value.
Importantly, at the time of Claimant’s investment, Croatia was under an obligation to
incorporate the acquis communautaire into its internal law.

[...], confirmed that, before investing in [...], [...] had relied upon the express views of the
European Commission, on HAKOM’s lack of interference with [...]’s operations and on
the legal due diligence provided by [...]. On these bases, [...] concluded that [...] was
providing its services in compliance with the law:

“The postal market expert that [...] retained for the commercial due diligence on [...]
pointed out that there was a ‘lack of detailed regulatory supervision of the [Croatian postal]
sector’ and that [...] had ‘been able to build its network during a time of considerable
regulatory uncertainty’. At the time, we did not think that the ‘lack of detailed regulatory
supervision’ would unfairly affect [...]. The expert also pointed out that there was ‘legal
ambiguity about what constitutes value added services’ in Croatia and that ‘[i]t can be
argued that the company has tended to ‘keep a low profile’ in order to avoid legal or

 

 

 

 

regulatory difficulties.’ Bancroft di d this with [...]’s who assured us
that [...] had at all times complied with the Croatian postal r M also
showed [...] a letter in which the European C ission confirmed [...]’s und di
of the relevant provisions of the Croatian postal legislation.” [internal citations omitted]
[emphasis added]

“MR PORTWOOD: How do you know what [...] was doing with the full knowledge of
HAKOM?

© [...] (Exhibit C-33).
41] Witness Statement, at 19.

EXCERPTS

B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

[...]: Well, [...] had registered, I think it was in the spring of 2010, to provide other postal
services and every year [...] paid a fee to HAKOM with respect to the provision of those
services but it was certainly within the knowledge of HAKOM what [...] was doing.

 

LJ

MR PORTWOOD: Do you know whether HAKOM every time a company registered did
a review of what this company was actually doing?

[...]: Well, no, but take a reasonable approach to this. [...] had 20 per cent of the market
share. [...] was the only principal competitor to [...].[...] was delivering 60 million letters
a year, 5 million plus per month. HAKOM knew what [...] was doing and —

MR PORTWOOD: How do you know that HAKOM knew?

[...]: Well, as I said, it stands to reason that HAKOM would know what the number 2
competitor in the market is doing.”*

 

“MR PORTWOOD: But you did not do any investigation yourself of what actually was
happening in Croatia by[...], did you?

[...]: Well, that is a bit exaggerated. We did hire a law firm, [...], to conduct due diligence
before we did the transaction. [...] did an extensive chapter on the regulatory environment
in Croatia and on[...]’s position in that environment and Wolf Theiss found that there was
no issue, no problem, with[...]’s provision of postal services.

LJ

MR PORTWOOD: Did they do that? Did they actually say, ‘Yes, we have investigated
what [...] is doing and it is legal’?

[...]: Yes. That is, it was not in the form of an opinion, it was, as I said, a due diligence
memo which is typical in our industry that you request from a law firm to identify any legal
issues or problems that the investor should be aware of. They found that there was no
regulatory issue with regard to [...] in the provision of postal services.”

 

878. [...] also testified at the hearing that, in particular, the European Commission’s
interpretation of value-added services carried significant weight with [...]:

“MR PORTWOOD: When you read this, this did not concern you, that you were, in fact,
asking someone had [sic] no authority to interpret Croatian law to do so?

[...]: No, it rather gave us comfort, and the reason it gave us comfort is because we had
invested over the years as [...] in a variety of regulated sectors in Hungary and in Romania
and in Estonia, and we were aware from those experiences that when the country in
question was in the queue to become part of the EU, as part of the acquis, the country in
question would commit to do its best to align its regulations with those of the EU, and that
is acommitment that Croatia made.

We had made, as I said, two or three similar investments in previous years and we expected
and relied upon Croatia to do this prior to accession to the EU.

So the fact that there was an EU/an EC statement about added value services that coincided
with the [...] position, we thought that was important because we expected Croatia to
honour that commitment.”°”

© Tr,, Day 2, 42: 12-19, 24, 25; 43: 1-12.

Tr, Day 2, 44: 6-

 

© Tr., Day 2, 56: 10-25; 57: 1-8.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

879.

880.

881.

882.

883.

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal cannot accept Respondent’s contention that [...]
and/or Claimant had assumed the risk that [...]’s operations were illegal under Croatian
law. The record supports the conclusion that Claimant invested in [...] at a time of
regulatory uncertainty but in the genuine belief that its operations complied with both
Croatian and European Union law.

Fourth, the Tribunal cannot agree with Respondent’s contention that [...]’s operations were
illegal or that [...] did not provide any one of the five listed services in Article 10(3) of the
2009 PSA.

As mentioned earlier, before HAKOM’s decision of 18 May 2012, neither HAKOM nor
the Ministry of Transport had issued any public official interpretation of Article 10(3) of
the 2009 PSA. While [...] did not request an official interpretation from these two
authorities, it did obtain an official answer from the European Commission clarifying the
meaning of value-added postal services under European Union law. As reflected in the
correspondence from the European Commission to the Ministry of Transport and HAKOM
in the second half of 2012, Croatia’s interpretation of value-added services appeared to
contravene the postal acquis at a time when its incorporation into national law was
incumbent upon it. Moreover, even though [...] registered with HAKOM for the provision
of value-added services in April 2010, it was only in July 2011 that HAKOM initiated an
expert supervision of [...] seeking to verify the regularity of its operations.

The Tribunal finds that [...]’s inaccurate understanding of the meaning of value-added
postal services under Croatian law is not the result of any fraudulent intent to abscond from
the postal regulator, as implied by Respondent, but of a genuine belief that Croatian law
and European Union law on this issue were aligned. It is also, in part, the necessary
consequence of Croatia’s own failure to publicly clarify the meaning of value-added
services and of its refusal to incorporate the postal acquis into national law. In other words,
while Respondent’s treatment of value-added services was consistent and applied equally
on the market, and while Croatia could refuse to incorporate the entirety of the postal acquis
before its accession to the European Union,®* Respondent’s failure to ensure full
transparency and clarity on the market necessarily invalidates the conclusion that [...]’s
operations could be deemed illegal under the Treaty.

Further, the Tribunal finds that the record does not support Respondent’s argument that
[...] did not in fact provide any one of the five services listed in Article 10(3) of the 2009
PSA. The minutes of HAKOM’s inspection of [...] in November 2011 clearly show that

8 As mentioned earlier, the Tribunal draws this conclusion from the perspective of the Treaty, not from the perspective
of European Union law.

66

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

884.

HAKOM reviewed [...]’s contracts and made inquiries with respect to the manner in which
[...] provided services to its customers.° HAKOM’s inspection of [...] was intended to
verify precisely if [...] was providing value-added postal services in compliance with the
2009 PSA. However, HAKOM’s 18 May 2012 decision, issued at the conclusion of this
inspection, only found that [...] was not collecting signature upon delivery. [...], the
supervisor from HAKOM in charge of the inspection, confirmed at the hearing that [...]
was providing the remaining four services listed in Article 10(3) of the 2009 PSA:

“MS DAVIES: So you found that [...] was not providing signature on delivery for every
letter that it was delivering, correct?

[...]: Yes.

MS DAVIES: That was the fifth added value under Article 10(3).

[...]: That is correct, yes.

MS DAVIES: In that decision, [...], did you find that [...] was not collecting postal items
at the request of the sender?

[...]: No, I only found that the fifth one is missing from the paragraph — from the item 3 of
Article 10.

MS DAVIES: Right, so having done your supervision, questioned management, reviewed
documents, asked for additional information, you found that the only missing service was
the signature on delivery, did you not?

[...]: That is correct.””°

Fifth, the Tribunal finds that the HAKOM Council’s refusal to address the European
Commission’s letter in its decision dismissing [...]’s appeal or to otherwise refer to EU
law was not arbitrary. The Tribunal reiterates that, not being a member of the European
Union in 2012, it was Croatia’s prerogative to decide how to interpret national legislation.
The HAKOM Council explained that its refusal was based on the European Commission’s
acknowledgement that its letter did not represent an authentic interpretation of European
Union law and that Croatia could freely interpret its own laws:

“[...] HAKOM points out that the letter submitted by the European Commission to the
Appellant clearly states that it does not represent ‘the opinion of the College of
Commissioners nor the interpretative evaluation of the provisions of said Postal Directive,
nor the authentic and final interpretation of the Union law, which is a prerogative of the
European Court of Justice (the EU court)’. In light of all the above mentioned, it is evident
that the made in the letter cannot be idered in this procedure in order to
assess the admissibility of the interpretation of the provision of Article 10, paragraph 3 of
the PSA in light of the EU acquis. This has been confirmed by the European Commission
in its explanation provided in the stated letter of the “interpretation of the national postal
service legislation as an exclusive responsibility of national authorities” of EU country
members.””! [emphasis added]

© [...] (Exhibit C-43),
Tr, Day 6, 54: 4-22.
7 [...] (Exhibit C-78).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

885.

886.

887.

888.

It is true that HAKOM did not refer to other sources of European Union law, such as
judgments of the CJEU, in order to assess whether the Ministry of Transport’s
interpretation complied with the postal acquis. However, that is not dispositive of the
Tribunal’s analysis, which is made on the basis of the Treaty and international law, not
European Union law. What matters, for purposes of international law, is that the
HAKOM’s Council decision, including its refusal to follow the European Commission’s
views, was reasoned.

The Tribunal notes that, when the European Commission requested both HAKOM and the
Ministry of Transport to reconsider their interpretation of value-added services, arguing
that it was contrary to the Postal Directives and unjustifiably restrictive,’ Respondent
refused to do so. However, again, its refusal was reasoned. In the Ministry of Transport’s
letter to the European Commission dated 14 September 2012, Respondent explained that
its interpretation of value-added services was intended to “preven[t] the illegal provision
of services, which [were] the subject of the exclusive rights of the public operator (reserved
universal postal services), by other postal services providers, i.e. for the purpose of
retaining the universal postal services by the only legally determined mandatory universal
postal services provider in the Republic of Croatia under the Act” and to ensure “a higher

level of service quality”.”?

Further, Croatia did not select this interpretation irrationally. In its letter to the European
Commission, the Ministry of Transport explained that it intended to protect the provision
of the universal service and to ensure higher levels of quality in postal services. While
Claimant may disagree with the justification of these concerns, the Tribunal finds that they
were legitimate. The universal postal service was a service of public interest. In addition,
considering that the postal services market was not fully liberalized in 2012, Respondent
could decide to what degree it opened the market to private operators. Consequently, the
Tribunal does not find that Croatia’s insistence on a cumulative interpretation of Article
10(3), as it had done on a number of previous occasions, was arbitrary.

In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that Respondent’s treatment of value-added services
under the 2009 PSA was reasoned, was applied consistently and uniformly on the market,
albeit with some deficiencies with regard to transparency. On this basis, the Tribunal
concludes that, while Croatia could have definitely handled the matter in a more
satisfactory way, Respondent’s conduct was not arbitrary. Further, because Croatia could
interpret its national legislation as it deemed fit and was only held to fully implement the

7 [...] (Exhibit C-84),
™[...] (Exhibit C-98).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

889.

890.

891.

892.

acquis communautaire as of the date of accession to the European Union — facts
acknowledged by the European Commission on several occasions — Croatia’s conduct
could not have been in breach of any legitimate expectations held by Claimant, even if the
Tribunal were to endorse its understanding of this concept. Finally, and for the same
reasons, Croatia’s conduct with respect to value-added services cannot be deemed to have
impaired Claimant’s investment by unreasonable or discriminatory measures.

Whether HAKOM abdicated its regulatory mission to supervise [...]’s prices and discounts

At the outset, the Tribunal recalls that its task under the Treaty is not to sit in appeal against
decisions taken by regulatory agencies at the State level. Equally, the Tribunal is not
empowered to sanction purported non-compliance with national law:

“The international tribunal’s sole duty is to consider whether there has been a treaty
violation. A claim that a regulatory decision is materially wrong will not suffice. It must
be proven that the State organ acted in an arbitrary or capricious way.””*

The Tribunal also bears in mind that, due to the fact that a national postal regulator is made
up of experts with intimate knowledge of underlying data, it is best placed to assess whether
the prescriptions of the postal legislation and attendant regulations have been complied
with. It is not the task of this Tribunal to substitute its judgment for that of a national
regulatory authority.

The Tribunal, after having examined the facts of this case, concludes nevertheless that this
is not a case where the regulator attempted in good faith but ultimately failed, to discharge
its duties. This is a case where the regulator completely abdicated its duties: HAKOM
utterly failed to regulate [...]’s prices and discounts and ignored repeated complaints from
[...] alleging serious violations of the postal law. The Tribunal considers that HAKOM’s
conduct can only be explained by a desire to protect [...] from competition either before,
or after the liberalization of the postal services market. No deference is due when a national
regulatory authority manifestly refuses to fulfill its obligations. For these reasons, which
will be developed in greater detail in the paragraphs below, the Tribunal finds HAKOM’s
conduct was arbitrary and in violation of Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

There is considerable debate between the Parties with regard to the precise contours of
HAKOM’s powers as regulator of the postal services market. The Tribunal considers that
a comprehensive analysis of HAKOM’s role is not necessary as this case does not turn on

Lemire v. Ukraine Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, at 283.

69

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

the minutiae of HAKOM’s regulatory powers. This is a case where the regulator of the
postal services market utterly failed to fulfill its statutory duties.

893. Nevertheless, for more clarity, the Tribunal will address below the question of HAKOM’s
regulatory powers under both the 2009 and the 2012 PSAs with respect to the prices of
postal services.

894. The Tribunal recalls that Article 32 of the 2009 PSA (“General Principles”) provides:

“(1) Prices of postal services shall be charged pursuant to the price list of postal services.

(2) The postal service provider shall submit the price list of postal services to the Agency
at least 15 days before its application.

(3) The postal service provider shall make publicly available a clearly understandable price
list of postal services, and shall put an excerpt from the price list on a visible place in the
premises intended for the users of postal services, and shall make the price list available at
the request of the user.

(4) Prices of postal services:

1. shall not comprise additional amounts that the postal service provider would determine
solely on the basis of this significant market power on the postal services market,

2. shall not be determined below the unit cost with the intention of taking or maintaining
the significant market power on the postal services market,

3. shall not be discriminatory.

(5) More specific stipulations on the manner and terms of payment shall be set out in the
general conditions of the postal service provider.” [emphasis added]

895. Article 33 of the 2009 PSA (“Prices of universal postal services”) provides:

“(1) The prices of universal postal services shall be:

1. equal for equivalent services for items of correspondence for all users in the entire area
where the postal service provider provides universal postal services,

2. affordable, cost-oriented and stimulating for the efficient provision of universal postal
services,

3. determined so as not to give preference to some users over other users of equivalent
services who deposit items under similar conditions.

 

(2) The provision of paragraph | of this Article shall not exclude the right of the universal
postal service provider to grant discounts to users who send a larger number of items.
provided that such discount is envisaged in the price list of postal services and applies in

the equal manner to all users sending items under similar conditions.

EXCERPTS

B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

(3) The Agency may pass a decision entirely or in part amending or revoking the prices of
universal postal services, prior to or after their publication, if it iblishes that they are

contrary to the provisions of this Act.

(4) The Agency shall approve the prices of reserved services referred to in Article 9.
paragraph 1 of this Act at the proposal of the public operator, which must contain the
calculation formula for the cost of each service respectively.

(5) The Agency shall decide on the proposal of prices referred to in paragraph 4 of this
Article within 30 days of having received the proposal concerned.” [emphasis added]

896. Article 45 of the 2012 PSA (“General Principles”) reads:

“(1) Prices of postal services shall be charged pursuant to the tariffs of postal services.

(2) The postal service provider shall submit the tariffs for postal services to the Agency at
least 15 days before its application.

(3) The postal service provider shall be obliged to publish clear and valid postal services
tariffs, and shall put an excerpt from the tariffs in a visible place at the premises intended
for the users of postal services, and shall make the tariffs available at the user’s request.

(4) Prices of postal services may not:

1. comprise additional amounts that the postal service provider would determine solely on
the basis of his significant market power on the postal services market,

2. be determined below the unit cost with the intention of taking or maintaining significant
market power on the postal services market.

(5) The manner and terms of payment shall be set out in the general terms and conditions
of the postal service provider.” [emphasis added]

897. Article 46 of the 2012 PSA (“Prices of universal services”) provides:

“(1) The prices of the universal postal service shall be:

1. identical for identical services for items of correspondence for all users in the entire
territory of the Republic of Croatia,

2. affordable, cost-oriented and stimulating for the efficient provision of universal postal
services,

3. non-discriminatory and transparent.

(2) The provision of paragraph | of this Article shall not exclude the right of the universal
postal service provider to grant discounts to users who send a larger number of items,
provided that such discount is envisaged in the tariffs for universal services and applied in
the equal manner to all users sending postal items under similar ci:

(3) The discounts referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall not influence the increase
of net costs referred to in Article 50 of this Act.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

898.

899.

(4) When the universal service provider, pursuant to Agreement in Article 16 Paragraph 2
of this Act, applies special prices, it must respect the rules of transparency and_non-
discrimination regarding prices and related terms and conditions.

(5) The Agency may pass a decision entirely or in part amending or revoking the prices of
universal service, before or after their publication, if it establishes that they are contrary to
the provisions of this Act.” [emphasis added]

With a few exceptions, the principles established by the 2009 and 2012 PSAs with respect
to the prices of postal services are the same. For purposes of the Tribunal’s analysis, the
relevant principles are:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

iv)

(v)

(i)

(vii)

(viii)

Prices of postal services are charged pursuant to the price list of the postal
service provider (Article 32(1) of the 2009 PSA and Article 45(1) of the 2012
PSA);

Postal service providers must submit their price lists to HAKOM at least 15
days before their application (Article 32(2) of the 2009 PSA and Article 45(2)
of the 2012 PSA);

Prices of postal services may not be determined below unit cost with the
intention of taking or maintaining significant market power on the postal
services market (Article 32(4).2 of the 2009 PSA and Article 45(4).2 of the
2012 PSA);

Prices of universal postal services must be identical for identical services
(Article 33(1).1 of the 2009 PSA and Article 46(1).1 of the 2012 PSA);

Prices of universal postal services must be cost-oriented (Article 33(1).2 of the
2009 PSA and Article 46(1).2 of the 2012 PSA);

Prices of universal postal services must be non-discriminatory (Article 33(1).3
of the 2009 PSA and Article 46(1).3 of the 2012 PSA);

The principles set out at points (iv) through (vi) do not prevent the universal
postal service provider from offering discounts to large volume users, provided
that the discounts are envisaged in the price list and are non-discriminatory
(Article 33(2) of the 2009 PSA and Article 46(2) of the 2012 PSA);

HAKOM is empowered to pass a decision amending (entirely or in part) or
revoking the prices of universal services, before or after their publication, if it
establishes that they are contrary to the applicable PSA (Article 33(3) of the
2009 PSA and Article 46(5) of the 2012 PSA).

Under the 2009 PSA, which predated the liberalization of the postal services market,
HAKOM had the following additional powers with respect to the prices of reserved

services:

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

@ HAKOM approved the prices of reserved services at the proposal of the public
operator, which proposal was required to contain the calculation formula for the

cost of each service (Article 33(4) of the 2009 PSA);

(ii) HAKOM decided on the public operators’ proposal for the prices of reserved
services within 30 days from the day of receipt of the proposal (Article 33(5) of

the 2009 PSA).

900. The Parties dispute whether HAKOM was empowered under both the 2009 and the 2012
PSAs to approve the discounts offered by the universal postal service provider. The
Tribunal does not consider that the question of HAKOM’s possible authority to approve
discounts before their application is dispositive. What is dispositive is whether HAKOM
had the authority to regulate the universal service provider’s discounts and, to this question,
both Parties’ answers are in the affirmative. Both Parties accept that HAKOM could amend
(entirely or in part) or revoke the prices of universal postal services, including the

discounts, if it determined that they were contrary to the provisions of the postal law.

901. The Tribunal considers that this necessarily includes the situation in which [...]’s
discounted prices were found to be in breach of the PSAs’ prohibition against below-cost

pricing.

902. The Tribunal observes that Respondent seeks to limit the scope of HAKOM’s power to
amend or revoke [...]’s prices or discounts to a verification pertaining to the universal
service provider’s net cost. The Tribunal considers that this interpretation is not supported
by the express provisions of the 2009 and 2012 PSAs, both of which refer to the “provisions
of this Act” [emphasis added] and not just to the provision regarding the net cost

calculation.

903. In addition, the Tribunal finds that the evidence in the record similarly supports the
conclusion that HAKOM could amend or revoke, and thus regulate, [...]’s discounts, if it

found that they were contrary to the postal law. [...], admitted as much at the hearing:

“MS DAVIES: In the 15-day period between when the provider submits the price list and

when the price list applies, what does the Postal Services Department do, [...]?

[...]: They confirmed that the price is in accordance with the law, with the provisions of

the law.”

“MS DAVIES: So you are telling us, [...], that [...]’s discounts were not at all, regulated

by HAKOM?
LJ
[...]: Yes. As I said, HAKOM regulated prices, not discounts.

8 Tr., Day 6, 58: 9-15.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

904.

905.

THE PRESIDENT: Discounts is part of prices.

[...]: I said a moment ago that we considered discounts only in the context of whether or
not the provider of universal services is going below the unit cost so that they would not
then apply to the State for an unwarranted net cost, which they had the right to do from the
law in 2009.

We only looked for prices — and the discounts — that they cost-oriented [sic], meaning that
the discounts do not go below the unit cost price only economists in HAKOM did this [sic].
MS DAVIES: So, [...], you would have to check whether the discounted prices, the prices
with the discounts, were below the unit cost, would you not?

[...]: Yes, that is what I said.

MS DAVIES: If the discounted prices were below the unit cost then HAKOM, as the
regulator, would have the authority to amend or revoke those discounted prices. Is that not
right?

[...]: Yes, that is correct but the price was not confirmed. None of the economists alerted
me that the price was below the cost, unit cost.””° [emphasis added]

   

 

The Tribunal considers that HAKOM’s authority to amend or revoke [...]’s discounts is
also evident from the documentary evidence in the record. When, on 21 June 2012, [...]
informed HAKOM that its price list of 18 May 2012 contained an “unintentional” error
and that discounts of 7% should be read as discounts of “at least 7%”,”7 HAKOM met with
[...] in order to discuss its discounts. Following this meeting, HAKOM requested from
[...] “an explanation and more detailed elaboration of the questionable rebate class in order
to establish the amount of rebate in a transparent way and in relation to the quantity of
mails (letters) over 10,000,001 per annum or legality of the submitted Pricelist”.”* In other
words, according to HAKOM’s own words, the elaboration of [...]’s discounts was
necessary not only in order to ensure transparency, but also the “legality of the submitted
Pricelist”. The Tribunal finds that HAKOM’s choice of words demonstrates that the
regulator understood perfectly well that it was under a legal duty to verify if [...]’s
discounts brought its prices below unit cost. This was undoubtedly understood by [...] too,
considering that, in its 6 September 2012 letter to HAKOM, [...] purported to demonstrate
that its discounts did not bring its prices below the unit cost.”

[...] also testified at the hearing that HAKOM needed to know the extent of [...]’s
discounts, and not just to ensure that the discounts were transparent and non-
discriminatory:

“MS DAVIES: HAKOM reacted to this letter by calling for a meeting with [...]’s
representatives; is that not right?
[...]: Yes, that is correct. The HAKOM Council and the Management Board of [...] met.

% Tr., Day 6, 63: 1-3, 9-25; 64: 1-12.
7 [...] (Exhibit R-54),
78 [...] (Exhibit R-58).
7 [...] (Exhibit R-65).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

906.

907.

908.

MS DAVIES: That was because HAKOM knew that [...] was not describing its prices and
discounts in a transparent manner, is it not?

[...]: Not in that manner but the discount needed to be determinable, so to say. We need to
know exactly how much it is. We need to know how far the discounts can go. This means
only starting at 7 per cent.

LJ

MS DAVIES: But you also needed that information in order to assess whether [...]’s
discounts were cost-oriented or below the unit cost, did you not?

[...]: The discounts could not go — could not be less than the cost.

MS DAVIES: In order to determine whether the discounted prices were below the cost you
needed first to determine the maximum discounts?

[...]: suppose so, yes.”*° [emphasis added]

“MS DAVIES: If [...]’s management takes a decision to grant discounts, those discounts

are subject to review by HAKOM: yes or no?
[...]: Yes.”*! [emphasis added]

The Tribunal therefore finds that both the 2009 PSA and the 2012 PSA required HAKOM
to amend or revoke [...]’s prices and discounts if they were found to be contrary to the
provisions of the law, including as a result of the fact that [...]’s discounts brought its prices
below unit cost.

The Parties disagree on the type of analysis that HAKOM was required to undertake in
order to make such a determination. Claimant argues that HAKOM would have needed
[...]’s detailed cost information and that this only became available once [...] implemented
separate cost accounting, on 9 May 2014. Claimant adds that, on the basis of [...]’s cost
data, HAKOM would have been required to perform a bottom-up cost analysis. Respondent
disputes that HAKOM was obligated to perform a bottom-up cost analysis and adds that
HAKOM was sufficiently acquainted with [...]’s ABC model in 2012 in order to be
confident that [...]’s prices were not inferior to its costs.

It is not the task of this Tribunal to identify the calculations that HAKOM would have
needed to run in order to verify if [...]’s discounts brought its prices below unit cost. What
is important is that both the 2009 and the 2012 PSAs obligated HAKOM to make such
verifications. It was therefore incumbent upon HAKOM to develop the necessary
regulatory tools that would have allowed it to comply with its statutory obligations. In
addition, the Tribunal notes that, while the 2009 and 2012 PSAs did not specify how
HAKOM could verify if [...]’s prices were below unit cost, they did impose other
obligations that, if complied with, would have assisted HAKOM in the performance of its
tasks. Under Article 33(4) of the 2009 PSA, [...] was required to substantiate its proposal

* Tr., Day 6, 83: 15-25; 84: 1, 2, 23-25; 85: 1-8.
8! Tr., Day 6, 117: 15-18.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

909.

910.

911.

for the price of reserved services with “the calculation formula for the cost of each service
respectively”. Presumably, on the basis of this formula, HAKOM could have at least
ascertained whether [...]’s discounts on the price of its reserved services brought its prices
below unit cost. However, as will be further elaborated upon below, in 2012, [...] did not
provide such calculation formula. In addition, under both the 2009 and the 2012 PSAs, [...]
was obligated to apply the principles of cost accounting separation. Again, as demonstrated
at Section VII.C.1 above, [...]’s cost accounting separation project had not been completed
in 2012. While [...] could generate some data on the basis of the system that it had
implemented by 2012, the evidence in the record demonstrates that the system was not yet
fully functional and had not been verified. In other words, at that point in time, [...]’s
calculations based on the incipient stage of its ABC model could not be verified.

More importantly, the Tribunal considers that this debate is more academic than practical.
As will be developed in more detail below, the Tribunal has found that HAKOM did not
perform any verification with respect to [...]’s discounts in 2012 or 2013. In addition, in
2012, HAKOM failed almost catastrophically to comply with any one of its regulatory
duties concerning the prices of postal services.

First, the Tribunal finds that HAKOM failed to exert any control in both 2012 and 2013
over the amendment and publication of [...]’s price lists. The lack of any regulatory
oversight on this matter permitted [...] to modify or backdate its price lists to suit its needs
without fear of any legal repercussion.

As noted above, both the 2009 and the 2012 PSAs mandated that postal services providers
submit their price lists to HAKOM at least 15 days prior to their entry into force. [...]
complied with this obligation on 18 May 2012, when it notified to HAKOM the price list
that would be published on 5 June of that year. However, when [...] purported to amend
that price list so as to include discounts of “at least 7%”, [...] no longer waited the required
fifteen days and published the amended price list on the very same day, on 21 June 2012.
In spite of its voiced reticence as to the legality of the discount category of “at least 7%”,
HAKOM did not object to the unauthorized publication and amendment of [...]’s price list.
When [...] complained about HAKOM’s inaction faced with [...]’s attempt to thus legalize
its predatory discounts,*? HAKOM failed to react. On 4 September 2012, before notifying
HAKOM or providing the requested explanation of its discount category that included
rebates of “at least 7%”, [...] published a new price list, backdated to 5 June 2012 and
which introduced discounts of 40%-55%.® [...] changed the date of the price list on 10

%2[...] (Exhibit C-90).
%...] (Exhibit C-96).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

912.

913.

Ty,
2 Ty,
8 Ty,

September 2012.** When, on 17 September 2012, [...] again complained to HAKOM about
these unauthorized changes to [...]’s price lists,** HAKOM failed to react. In December
2012, [...] published another price list, valid from 1 January 2013.8° However, [...] only
notified it to HAKOM on 18 January 2013.87 When [...] complained about the
“falsification” of [...]’s price list,8* HAKOM again left this grievance go unanswered.*?

Second, the Tribunal finds that HAKOM failed to ensure that [...]’s 2012 price lists were
accompanied by “the calculation formula for the cost of each service”, as mandated under
Article 33(4) of the 2009 PSA. [...]’s price list of 18 May 2012 did not include any
attachment setting out the calculations that substantiated the proposed discounts. [...]’s
letter to HAKOM dated 6 September 2012, offering explanations with respect to [...]’s
discount category of “at least 7%”, only purported to explain the cost of one activity out of
a total of 433 and to calculate the real cost of delivering a small letter in Zagreb.°” However,
[...]’s 10 September 2012 price list included discounts not only for the town of Zagreb
(Zone I), but also for all other towns in Croatia (Zone II).

At the hearing, [...] testified that [...] had sent HAKOM a more in-depth explanation of
the calculations submitted on 6 September 2012,°! which is exhibit C-455 in the record.
However, the Tribunal observes that exhibit C-455 is a document that does not bear a date
or a signature and from which it does not transpire whether it was transmitted to any public
authority (HAKOM or the CCA). Moreover, [...] admitted that the calculation was “very
high level””? or, in other words, not of the level of granularity required by Article 33(4) of
the 2009 PSA. The Tribunal also notes that [...] testified that HAKOM did not receive an
additional substantiation of [...]’s calculations dated 6 September 2012:

“MS DAVIES: Is there any attachment to this letter, [...]?

[...]: No, it would be listed here. It would be customary to list any attachments.

MS DAVIES: When [...] sent you this letter of 6 September 2012, did it also provide you
with data that would allow you to verify whether the real cost, in fact, kuna 1.30? [sic]
[...]: Documentation already existed because my colleagues who worked on cost
accounting, they had all the cost information in great detail at that time.””?

 

..-] (Exhibit C-359).
.--] (Exhibit C-99).

..-] (Exhibit C-115).

..-] (Exhibit C-363).

..-] (Exhibit C-120).

..-] (Exhibit C-128).

[...] (Exhibit R-65).

, Day 5, 147:25 — 148: 1-14,
, Day 5, 192: 12.

, Day 6, 109: 7-18.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

914.

915.

916.

917.

918.

Third, the Tribunal finds that, in 2012 and 2013, HAKOM abdicated from its duties to
regulate [...]’s discounts and to ascertain whether these discounts brought [...]’s prices
below the unit cost.

The Tribunal notes that, in mid-July 2012, HAKOM requested from [...] an elaboration of
the discount category of “at least 7%” included in [...]’s price list of 21 June 2012.4

However, this request did not come until weeks after [...] purported to amend its price list.
By this time, HAKOM had already received two complaints from [...], in which the latter
alerted the regulator that [...] was poaching its clients with discounts of between 35% and
50% that had not been included in the official price list.°°

HAKOM clearly considered that [...]’s price list did not comply with the 2009 PSA’s
requirements of transparency and non-discrimination. In a letter to [...], HAKOM stated:

“Article 33 Paragraph 2 of the Postal Services Act (Public Gazette no. 88/09 and 61/11;
hereinafter referred as PSA) prescribes that the provider of universal postal services may
give rebates to users that are sending a larger number of mails under the condition of such
rebate being covered by the Postal Services Pricelist as well as applied equally to all users
that are sending their mails under similar conditions. From the submitted scale of rebates
thereof, and first of all for the rebate stated in the line 4 (over 10,000,001 mails per annum
— rebate of at least 7 %), the biggest possible amount of that rebate has not been stated as
well as the way of its application has not been transparently established, reading ‘equally
for all users that are sending their mails under similar conditions’, pursuant provisions of
PSA.

In addition, HAKOM needs to get an explanation and more detailed elaboration of the
questionable rebate class in order to establish the amount of rebate in a transparent way
and in relation to the quantity of mails (letters) over 10,000,001 per annum or legality of

the submitted Pricelist accordingly.” ° [emphasis added]

 

Despite having reservations as to the legality of the price list, HAKOM imposed no
measure in this regard, and the price list continued to apply and to produce effects on the
market. Moreover, despite being fully aware of the seriousness of the allegations levied by
[...] against [...] and of the blatant breach of the 2009 PSA’s provisions on transparency
and non-discrimination, HAKOM did not direct the universal service provider to provide
the requested clarifications by any specific deadline. In effect, [...]’s answer to HAKOM
only came on 6 September 2012, almost three months after [...] had amended its price list.

°4 £..] (Exhibit R-54).
°5 FJ (Exhibit C-60); [...] (Exhibit C-68).
%6 [...] (Exhibit R-58).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

919.

920.

921.

In the interim, [...] was permitted to make use of its illegal price list. [...] did precisely this
by signing, on 9 July 2012, an agreement with ZABA which included discounts of up to
55%.°" The record does not establish that, upon offering these terms to ZABA, [...] offered
them to all similarly situated clients and potential clients. On the most generous of
interpretations, [...] only extended these discounts to other clients and potential clients
once it amended its price list again, on 4 September 2012. Once again, the resulting lack
of transparency and discrimination did not seem to preoccupy HAKOM excessively.

When, on 6 September 2012, [...] did submit an explanation to HAKOM with respect to
its discounts and clarified that reductions of “at least 7%” in actuality meant reductions of
up to 55%,°* HAKOM did not react in any way. Despite the fact that, on the face of it, [...]
was only purporting to calculate the cost of one out of 433 activities (“registered mails in
domestic traffic received individually”) and to only establish that “the real cost of a mail
sent in the area of the Town of Zagreb” was HRK 1.30, HAKOM made no further inquiries
with [...] regarding the costs of all remaining 432 activities or the cost of delivering mail
to other towns in Croatia, where discounts of up to 46% were applicable. HAKOM did not
question the cost justification of the discount scale proposed by [...], which provided that
users sending between 5,000,001 and 10,000,000 mail items were offered a 5% discount,
whereas users sending over 10,000,001 mail items were offered discounts of 40%-48%,
depending on the delivery zone.

The Tribunal notes that [...] testified at the hearing that HAKOM had in fact performed an
analysis of [...]’s discounts based on the cost information available to it as part of
HAKOM’s ongoing cooperation with [...] for the implementation of separate cost
accounting:

“MS DAVIES: [...], did the economists prepare a note setting out the conclusions of their
analysis about [...]’s prices and discounts? Did they send you an email?

[...]: No, they did not send to me, they told me that. Well, lawyers write and economists
calculate. They did not write to me, they just informed me. [...] who was head of the cost
accounting project relayed that to me orally that information, which my colleagues were
working on the cost accounting model.

THE PRESIDENT: Sir, you find sufficient to hear that on the telephone, you do not want
to check whether the economists did their work properly or to see the result on paper?
[...]: You see, [...], he was next door to me. He did not phone me. He told me face-to-face.
I believe that he was a greater authority in that area. I had respect for him given his long
years of experience. I think that his master’s degree and his PhD were in economics.”””

°7 [...] (Exhibit C-378).
°8 [...] (Exhibit R-65).
® Tr., Day 6, 111: 11-25; 112: 1-6.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

922.

923.

924.

The Tribunal finds that this testimony is simply not credible. The record does not support
the conclusion that HAKOM performed any analysis with respect to [...]’s discounts in
September 2012 or thereafter. Had Respondent had in its possession such evidence,
undoubtedly it would have placed it onto the record. Further, the Tribunal has already
concluded that, in September 2012, [...]’s cost accounting system had not been fully
completed and, more importantly, it had not been verified. Even if HAKOM had relied on
information provided by [...] from other channels, which has not been demonstrated, [...]’s
calculations may not have been accurate.

The Tribunal also notes that [...] , testified at the hearing that no proposals were put to
HAKOM’s Council with respect to [..]’s discount calculations and that those calculations
were not reliable:

“MR PORTWOOD: So do you recall receiving a copy of the letter in September — well,
around 6 September 2012?

[...]: Yes, I went through my files and we had a meeting on September 13 to deal with this
topic.

MR PORTWOOD: What we see in this letter [...] is that [...] responds to HAKOM’s
request that there be more detail on the rebate above 10,000,001 items of mail and provides
that detail, correct?

[...]: Yes, they do provide it but I have to answer that this is absolutely an insufficient
document for the reason that it was made according to the development model of the
accounting practices that wasn’t functional and had not been authorised.

There is the additional question of why the HAKOM Council, in its sessions, did not

receive this, or accept this or reject this? So this is the key question, why this was not
di d_at the Council when this is an issue within the zone of ibility of

HAKOM’s Council.
MR PORTWOOD: You said that there was a meeting on 13 September following this.
That was a meeting of whom?

That was a meeting that was led by [...]. He only presented the content of this letter

without any proposals how to proceed further and without forwarding this letter to the
Council for decision-making.”'’[emphasis added]

When [...] amended its price list in December 2012 and January 2013 and started offering
a more gradual discount scale based on the same calculations as those included in its 6
September 2012 letter,!°' HAKOM again completely failed to react. HAKOM likewise
failed to ask any questions or to make any inquiries when, on 21 October 2013, [...]
submitted a revised explanation of its discount policy dated 6 September 2012.!°

100 Tr, Day 3, 211: 25; 212: 1-25; 213: 1-6.
101 [| (Exhibit C-363).
102 [,..] (Exhibit C-370).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

925. The Tribunal observes that, according to [...]’s submission to the CCA on 3 August 2015,
HAKOM had not responded to any one of [...]’s letters regarding discounts to large volume
users:

“After 6 September 2012, [...] sent the following three letters to HAKOM:

- letter no. DP2-025033/12 of 18 January 2013 relating to the delivery of the Decision on
discounts for the universal services of reception, sorting, transport and delivery of letters
weighing up to 2000 grams of 16 January 2013 (which is attached to the letter)

- letter no. DP2/025033/12 of 4 February 2013, with additional clarification of the meaning
of ‘*” indication in the table from Article 1 of the Decision on discounts for the universal
services of reception, sorting, transport and delivery of letters weighing up to 2000 grams,
which was submitted in the previous letter, and

- letter no. DP2-8545/12 of 21 October 2013, which contains a supplement of the
clarification of discount policy submitted to HAKOM in 2012 (clarification referred to in
this letter was also submitted to the Agency on 18 October 2013), which was submitted by
[...] to HAKOM during its analysis of [...]’s regulatory reports for 2012.

LJ

[...] does not have HAKOM’s official responses to the submitted letters, given that
pursuant to the Postal Services Act HAKOM can, at any time by means of a decision, in
whole or in part, amend or abolish the prices for universal services, before or after their
publication, if it determines that they are contrary to the provisions of the Postal Services
Act (Article 46(5) of the Postal Services Act). In other words, given that HAKOM did not
respond to [...], and hence did not question any part of the price list, and therefore it did
not question the discount scale for [...]’s universal service, of which [...] regularly and in
accordance with law informed HAKOM, HAKOM confirmed the legality of the pricing
policy.”

926. In other words, during three years and seven months of regulatory supervision of [...]’s
prices and discounts, HAKOM did not once verify [...]’s representations as to the cost
justification of its discounts. HAKOM performed its purported regulatory supervision by
relying unquestioningly on the information provided by the entity it was its mission to
regulate.

927. Moreover, during this time, HAKOM did not adopt any decision with respect to [...]’s
prices and discounts. This is confirmed by [...], who testified as follows with respect to
HAKOM’s regulatory supervision during 2012:

“MS DAVIES: In response to a question from counsel for Croatia, you said that the letter
from HAKOM to the Ministry of Transport dated 28 June 2012 [...] the letter concerning
[...]’s prices and discounts, you said:

“Was an exercise in evading taking a decision’.

Can you please explain what you meant?

103 [| (Exhibit C-358).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

928.

929.

930.

[...]: [wanted to say that the Council was comprised of seven members, a collegial body.
The legislator gave, according to the law, the way to adopt decisions. [...] There were not
seven members in the Council so that optional meetings would be held through some
workshops or some courses which have no authority and decisions are not made. [...] This
is a typical example of how they avoided putting key topics to the Council for decision-
making.

MS DAVIES: When you say they needed to take a decision, which decision are you
referring to?

[...]: If it is about the price for universal services with regards to the reserved area, this
decision is made — the law prescribes this precisely — can be made only by the Council and
no one else, it is not made by the separate individual members but the Council is supposed
to make this decision.

LJ
MS DAVIES: To your knowledge, in 2012 while you were still a member of the Council,
did the Council ever approve the prices of [...]’s reserved services?

[...]: No, they never approved it. They could not have done so because they were not at the

sessions.”!

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal finds that HAKOM abandoned its statutory duty to
regulate [...]’s discounts and to verify if [...]’s prices were below unit cost.

Fourth, the Tribunal finds that HAKOM failed to respond and to seriously consider [...]’s
numerous complaints against [...] and thus to ensure a level-playing field on the market
for postal services.

The Tribunal observes that, on 5 March and 6 May 2012, [...] requested that HAKOM
initiate an expert supervision of [...], alleging that [...] had failed to implement separate
cost accounting and was subsidizing its business centered on other postal services based
on income from reserved postal services.'°> Despite the seriousness of [...]’s allegations,
HAKOM only reverted to [...] four and a half months later, on 19 July 2012, requesting
further information.'°° After [...] provided this information on 7 August 2012 and
complained about HAKOM’s inactivity,!°7 HAKOM did not revert to [...] until 11
February 2013, when it dismissed the request for an expert supervision of [...]’s prices
under the 2009 PSA on the grounds of the entry into force of the 2012 PSA.'8 In other
words, HAKOM strategically delayed answering [...]’s complaint until it was too late to
intervene. In the Tribunal’s view, HAKOM’s conduct amounts to a refusal to consider
[...]’s complaint.

104 Tr, Day 3, 215: 4-15, 20-25; 216: 1-12; 217: 10-15.
10S [...] (Exhibit C-47); [...] (Exhibit C-54).

106 [...] (Exhibit C-85).

07 [...] (Exhibit C-90).

108 [| (Exhibit C-128).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

931. The Tribunal also finds that [...]’s complaint against [...] for breach of the 2009 PSA on
account of predatory discounts was treated in a similar manner.

932. The Tribunal notes that, on 31 May 2012, [...] filed a complaint against [...] with a number
of Croatian public authorities alleging that [...] was breaching both the 2009 PSA and the
Croatian Competition Act by offering massive, selective discounts not envisaged in its
official price list.!°? This complaint was forwarded to HAKOM by the Ministry of
Transport on 8 June 2012!'° and was refiled by [...] with HAKOM on 27 June 2012.!!!

933. On 28 June 2012, less than three weeks after [...] submitted its initial complaint and
without having conducted any investigation into the substance of the allegations, HAKOM
had already made up its mind to dismiss it.'!? The Tribunal considers that it is useful to
render below HAKOM’s reasoning:

“HAKOM did not find anything contrary to the provisions of the PSA in the submitted
decision on approved dicounts [sic]. Such volume discounts, if they are transparent,
nondiscriminatory and allowed, are as a rule compliant with market competition rules in
view of their justification in cost reduction, and arise as a result of savings due to ordering
a larger service volume.

Following from all the above, HAKOM believes that [...], as the universal postal service

provider, is entitled to grant discounts to users who send a larger number of mail items
provided that such a discount has been foreseen under the postal service price list. In light
of the incomplete and unclear statement made by [...] as to the distortion of market
competition by [...] through setting and applying the price list and volume discounts,
HAKOM cannot respond to the above without additional explanation and information,
which will be requested from [...] in the course of further procedure.” 8 [emphasis added]

934. The Tribunal considers that the wording chosen by HAKOM shows that, despite purporting
to require additional information from [...] in order to substantiate its allegations, HAKOM
was already inclined to dismiss the complaint. Moreover, HAKOM’s wording also shows
that the postal regulator had not in fact examined [...]’s discounts. This conclusion is
supported by the record, which shows that it was only on 17 July 2012 that HAKOM made
some inquiries with [...] with respect to its discounts.

935. The Tribunal notes that [...], the head of HAKOM’s Postal Services Department, testified
at the hearing that HAKOM saw [...]’s allegations of massive discounts not envisaged by
[...]’s price list as mere “gossip”:

109 [...] (Exhibit C-60).

110 See, [...] (Exhibit R-55).
111 [...] (Exhibit C-68).

12[. ..] (Exhibit C-69).

1B Id,

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

936.

937.

4 Tr, Day 6, 92: 21-2

“MS DAVIES: [...], they had told you, had they not, that [...] was granting discounts that
were not envisaged in the price list and that would have been a violation of the Postal
Services Act, would it not?

[

 

 

[...]: It is not specific. Along with that letter, they do not submit the offers of [...].

MS DAVIES: [...], how would [...] have — how would [...] have access to offers made by
[...] to its customers? [...] had presumably heard about those offers from its clients but
how would it have the evidence? Would you not as the regulator be able to get that
evidence?

[...]: The regulator does not operate on the basis of rumours.

 

LJ

MS DAVIES: You are the regulator, [...] is the State-owned public operator. It is the
dominant provider of postal services on the market. You are faced with allegations that
[...] is offering discounts that are not envisaged in the price list, that those discounts are
very large, that they probably bring the discounted prices below the unit cost and you were
satisfied with a phone call where you were told that none of those allegations were true.
That was enough for you as regulator?

[...]: It was enough. On the other hand, as I said, all we had were allegations and gossip.
There was no evidence. I mean [...] by the other side.”!"*

At the hearing, [...] attempted to explain that HAKOM did perform some investigations
into [...]’s allegations by calling a representative of [...] and questioning them about the
discounts [...] was allegedly offering.'!> Regardless of the fact that [...]’s shifting
testimony was not credible as he appeared not to remember if he spoke on the phone to
[...] or to [...] or whether he had taken part in a conference call with several people from
[...], what [...] attempted to describe could not, even under the most generous of
interpretations, be qualified as an investigation into [...]’s discounts. It would simply
amount to a regulator taking the regulated entity at its word without any verification of its
own.

The Tribunal notes that, after its 28 June 2012 answer to [...]’s complaint, HAKOM
reverted to [...], requesting additional evidence and clarifications that would substantiate
its complaint against [...]. Nevertheless, the Tribunal considers that this request for
information was a mere pretense of form, as HAKOM failed to investigate [...]’s
allegations or to take any further action.!!°

 

3: 8-19; 102: 22-25; 103: 1-11.

4S See, Tr., Day 6, 98-103.

116

The Tribunal finds that the expert supervision of [...] conducted by HAKOM between 3 and 18 December 2012

concerned the provision of postal services and was completely unrelated to [...]’s discount policy (See, [...], Exhibit

R-78).

84

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

938.

939.

940.

941.

942.

Indeed, after [...] provided HAKOM the requested information and clarifications in August
2012, '|'7 HAKOM did not respond. HAKOM did not inform [...] of the explanations
provided by [...] in September 2012. Moreover, as the Tribunal has already determined
above, HAKOM did not independently check [...]’s calculations in 2012 in order to
determine if its discounted prices were inferior to its unit cost.

When [...] reminded HAKOM of its unanswered complaint, on 11 February 2013,
HAKOM informed it that there were “no conditions for subsequent establishment of
infringements” of the 2009 PSA by [...] since the 2012 PSA had just entered into force.!!®
In other words, similarly to [...]’s request that HAKOM initiate an expert supervision of
[...], HAKOM delayed answering [...]’s complaint that [...] was breaching the 2009 PSA
through its discount policy until the 2012 PSA had entered into force and then used this to
argue that it was too late to intervene.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that HAKOM abdicated its role as regulator of the postal
services market by utterly failing to regulate [...]’s prices and discounts and ignoring
repeated complaints from [...] alleging serious violations of the postal law. The Tribunal
considers that the substantial difference in treatment between the two postal operators —
with [...] being permitted to offer massive and, at points, non-transparent discounts on the
market without any supervision, and with [...]’s repeated complaints being completely
ignored or dismissed without any investigation — demonstrates that HAKOM’s dereliction
of duties was motivated by a desire to protect the national postal operator.

For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that Respondent’s conduct was arbitrary and breached
Article 3(1) of the Treaty. Having already found a breach of the Treaty on account of
arbitrariness, the Tribunal considers it unnecessary to investigate whether this same
conduct breached Claimant’s legitimate expectations or amounted to an impairment of
Claimant’s investment by unreasonable or discriminatory measures.

Whether the CCA repudiated the applicable Croatian competition law principles

The Tribunal recalls its finding at Section VII.C.3 above that it is not empowered to sit in
appeal against decisions taken by regulatory agencies at the State level.''? The FET
standard cannot be equated with the misapplication of national law and something more is
required than mere error in order to demonstrate a breach of the Treaty:

117 [..] (Exhibit C-85); [...] (Exhibit C-90).
48 [...] (Exhibit C-128).
419 Lemire v. Ukraine Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, at 283.

85

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

“The Tribunal has approached this question on the basis that it is not every process failing
or imperfection that will amount to a failure to provide fair and itabl The
standard is not one of perfection. It is only when a state’s acts or procedural omissions are,
on the facts and in the context before the adjudicator, manifestly unfair or unreasonable
(such as would shock, or at least surprise a sense of juridical propriety) — to use the words
of the Tecmed Tribunal — that the standard can be said to have been infringed.” '?° [emphasis
added]

 

943. In the words of the Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic tribunal:

“A violation of a BIT does not only occur through blatant and outrageous interference.
However, a BIT may also not be invoked each time the law is flawed or not fully and
properly implemented by a state. Some attempt to balance the interests of the various
constituents within a country, some measure of inefficiency, a degree of trial and error, a
modicum of human imperfection must be overstepped before a party may complain of a
violation of a BIT. Otherwise, every aspect of any legislation of a host state or its
implementation could be brought before an international arbitral tribunal under the guise
of a violation of the BIT. This is obviously not what BITs are for.”'?! [emphasis added]

944. The Tribunal considers that a certain level of deference is due to national agencies, tasked
to regulate highly technical and specialized fields of economic activity (such as the CCA),
with regard to their assessment of whether particular forms of conduct ran counter to the
prescriptions of national law. The Tribunal thus aligns itself with the finding of the Saluka
v. Czech Republic tribunal that a regulator’s decision taken in the application of its
competence pursuant to national law is entitled to some deference.'?? However, this
deference will not impede the Tribunal’s task to verify if international law was complied
with:

“[A]lthough the role of an international tribunal is not to second guess or to review
decisions that have been made genuinely and in good faith by a sovereign in the normal
exercise of its powers, it is up to an international arbitral tribunal to sanction decisions that
amount to_an_ abuse of power, are arbitrary, or are taken in manifest disregard of the
applicable legal rules and in breach of due process in regulatory matters.”!?> [emphasis
added]

945. For the reasons set out in the paragraphs below, the Tribunal has concluded that the 2012
and 2015 CCA Decisions, despite containing a number of errors in the application of the
relevant principles of competition law, nevertheless do not evidence a repudiation of these
principles, a lack of due process or a failure by the CCA to discharge its duties under
Croatian law. They do not therefore amount to violations of Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

20 AES v. Hungary, at 9.3.40.

21 Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic, at 272.
122 Saluka v. Czech Republic, at 272, 273.
!23 TECO v. Guatemala, at 493.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

i.

946.

947.

948.

 

The 2012 CCA Decision

The Tribunal notes that the CCA rendered its 2012 Decision after a procedure that
complied with the requirements of due process. [...] was allowed to supplement its
complaint against [...] twice.!* Before deciding, the CCA requested information from
[...],!?5 from [...]!?° and from HAKOM.!?’ Further, the 2012 CCA Decision was reasoned
and could be appealed before the Croatian courts.

The CCA first attempted to identify the relevant product market and whether it allowed
competition. The CCA concluded that the delimitations included in the 2009 PSA between
the universal postal service and other postal services corresponded to two different product
markets:

“The primary task of the Agency is to confirm whether it is the case of the market which
allows competition. In other words, the Agency’s first task is to confirm if on the said
market competition is allowed or there is legal monopoly and is therefore closed for the
competition because it is regulated by special, legal, sub-legal acts and precisely defined
rules and conditions.

So, the Agency must confirm if rules on the protection of competition can be applied to
certain markets or is it the case of markets or activities on which, due to certain public
interest, there is no freedom of competition, but all important conditions according to which
the competition is carried out on such markets, such as prices, discounts etc. are defined by
special laws and therefore are not subject to the control of this Agency, but the control of
those markets is carried out by a certain regulator or other authorized government body.

In this case it is the market which is precisely defined by the Postal Services Act, which
differentiates the universal postal services market and other postal services market. In that,
universal postal services and pertaining specifically reserved universal postal services
belong to the sphere of public interest protected by Postal Services Act, while other postal
services, among them the services with the added values, are situated on a completely open
and entirely liberalized market.”'?* [emphasis added]

The CCA then established the positions of [...] and [...] on these markets. The CCA
concluded that [...] could not compete with [...] on the market for universal postal services
because [...] did not have a license to provide this type of service and [...] held a legal
monopoly on reserved services:

“The Agency confirmed that [...] is in dominant position on the market of universal postal
service, more exactly reserved letters, based on the legal monopoly defined by the Postal

[...] (Exhibit C-88); [...] (Exhibit C-103).
[...] (Exhibit C-91).
.-.] (Exhibit C-475).

] (Exhibit C-482).
] (Exhibit C-112).

EXCERPTS

B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

Competition Act as a special regulation.

LJ

Considering that the said discounts of [...] refer to the universal postal services market,
and taking into consideration that in accordance with the decision of HAKOM, class: [...]
in the procedure of profession audit, it has been confirmed that [...] provides postal service
with added value, the Council estimated that, at the time when [...] sent the quotations with
the discounts to the universal postal services users, [...] was not a competitor of [...] on
the universal postal services market, considering that at the time it did not have legally
defined licence to provide those services, while at the same time according to Article 9
Paragraph 3 of the Postal Services Act, the right and the obligation of providing reserved
universal postal services is the exclusive prerogative of [...].” '° [emphasis added]

 

 

949. In reaching its conclusion that [...] could not legally compete with [...], the CCA also
relied upon HAKOM’s representation that it had verified [...]’s prices:

“At the same time, the Postal Services Act gives direct authorities [sic] to HAKOM as a
sector regulator, to approve the prices of those services as stated in Point II of the
explanation of this conclusion.

Related to all the above stated, HAKOM, as stated in point IV of this conclusion, in its
response of 12 November 2012 pointed out that in its analysis of said discounts, it did not
consider them discriminatory, considering that they are equally applied to all users of
services provided by [...].

Also, in this particular case, the discounts that [...] offers to its users who send a larger
number of letters refer to the universal postal services, are predicted in the postal services
Price List, and are not entirely or partly amended or annulled by HAKOM, before or after
their publication, in application of Article 33 Paragraph 3 of the Postal Services Act.” '*°
[emphasis added]

950. On the basis of the above, the Tribunal concludes that the CCA complied with due process,
correctly identified the relevant facts and the applicable law, and made an earnest, good
faith effort to apply that law to the facts. The Tribunal agrees with Claimant that the 2012
CCA Decision contains a number of errors, as developed below. However, in the
Tribunal’s view, the errors in the 2012 CCA Decision do not demonstrate an outright
repudiation of the applicable rules of competition law or a manifest failure by the CCA to
discharge its mandate. The Tribunal finds that the mistakes in the 2012 CCA Decision are
nothing more than the incorrect application of national law and are not enough to represent
a breach of Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

129 Fg.
130 fq.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

951.

952.

1B yg.

Claimant complains that the CCA failed to carry out an economic analysis of demand
substitutability before reaching the conclusion that [...]’s reserved postal services were not
on the same relevant market as [...]’s value-added postal services. Claimant takes issue
with the CCA’s exclusive reliance on the 2009 PSA for purposes of a relevant product
market analysis. In other words, Claimant complains that the CCA confused the
classification of postal services for purposes of ex ante regulation, as per the 2009 PSA,
with the definition of different product markets, for purposes of an ex post competition law
analysis. The Tribunal observes that the CCA correctly identified the legal question to be
answered — whether the services offered by [...] and [...] were on the same product market
— and referred to one of the relevant factors that could provide an answer to that legal
question. Indeed, Claimant does not dispute that the applicable regulatory framework is an
important consideration when undertaking an analysis of the relevant product market. The
Tribunal does not agree with Claimant that the error of judgment made by the CCA is
anything more than a mistake in the application of the law.

The Tribunal also agrees with Claimant that the CCA afforded considerable weight to
HAKOWM’s ex ante regulation of the postal services market, whereas, in actuality, HAKOM
had failed in its mandate to regulate [...]’s prices and discounts. However, again, the
Tribunal observes that it is not in dispute that the ex ante regulation of a dominant
enterprise’s prices is a relevant factor to take into account in an ex post competition law
analysis. In other words, the CCA correctly identified one of the legal principles applicable
to its analysis. Moreover, the Tribunal observes that the CCA’s findings with respect to
HAKOM’s supervision of the postal services market were based on the false
representations made by HAKOM in its submission to the CCA dated 12 November 2012.
More precisely, the CCA found that the 2009 PSA gave HAKOM “direct authorit[y] ... to
approve the prices of [reserved postal services]” and that HAKOM had explicitly
represented that “in its analysis of said discounts, it did not consider them discriminatory,
considering that they [were] equally applied to all users of services provided by [...]”.'*!
Indeed, in its submission to the CCA, HAKOM had represented that [...]’s discounts were
justified by savings in costs and that it had analyzed these discounts and found them to be
non-discriminatory:

“Tn accordance with Article 33, paragraph 2 of the PSA, [...] made a business decision to
grant a discount to users who send significant amounts of postal items from the universal
scope, that is, for receiving, directing, transferring and delivering postal items of up to 2
kilograms, from Article 8 of the PSA. These are only quantity-based discounts with an
economic justification in the sense that they decrease costs and result from the savings due
to orders of larger quantities of services. In its analysis, HAKOM did not consider these
discounts to be discriminatory, since these apply in the same manner to all the users of the

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

953.

954.

955.

956.

services offered by [...]. [...] notified HAKOM of this decision in a memo dated 18 Ma’
2012, and the discounts, as an integral part of [...]’s price list, were published on [...]’s
web site on 5 June 2012. On [21] June 2012, [...] delivered to HAKOM a correction of the
above decision. On 19 July 2012, HAKOM requested an elaboration of the above decision.
On6 ber 2012, HAKOM received the d elaboration based on an i
justification, all according to the conclusions of a meeting with the public operator held on
19 July 2012. In its memo, [...] stated that the quantity-based discounts are based on the
calculation by virtue of the model of separate cost accounting and that this accounting
model, although in a development stage, provides enough parameters which makes it
possible to determine the actual cost of a particular service or group of services.”'*?
[emphasis added]

 

     

The Tribunal considers that it was not unreasonable for the CCA to place trust in the postal
regulator’s statement that it had made a determination that [...]’s discounts complied with
the applicable postal legislation. While it would have been preferable for the CCA to have
investigated the matter further, the Tribunal does not share Claimant’s view that its
decision to take the postal regulator at its word was a grave error of judgment.

The Tribunal also agrees with Claimant that the CCA failed to consider the possible effects
in a neighboring market of an abuse of a dominant position on the relevant product market,
as well as the continuing effects of [...]’s discounts on a liberalized postal services market,
post 1 January 2013. However, it appears to the Tribunal that these were not central points
in [...]’s complaints. The Tribunal is also not persuaded that the CCA should have
ascertained if [...] had abused its dominant position by granting discounts on its
transactional letter service, considering that [...] had not submitted this complaint at all.

While the CCA should have been more diligent and carried out the analyses referred to
above, the Tribunal does not consider that failures of this nature, without more, can be
sanctioned under an investment treaty. If the CCA in good faith erred in its application of
competition law but did not act arbitrarily, it is not the Tribunal’s task to correct these
errors of law.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal cannot agree with Claimant’s position that the CCA’s
Decision was manifestly unfair or unreasonable or that it represents something more than
an incorrect application of Croatian competition law so as to constitute an effective
“repudiation of [competition] rules altogether”.'*? The Tribunal therefore finds that
Respondent did not breach Article 3(1) of the Treaty through arbitrary conduct, as a result
of the 2012 CCA Decision. In light of its findings that the 2012 CCA Decision was
reasoned, was issued following due process and contained the CCA’s good faith attempt

32 [,..] (Exhibit C-468).
33 Reply, at 458.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

957.

958.

959.

960.

961.

to apply the correct law to the correct set of facts, the Tribunal also finds that Claimant’s
claim for breach of legitimate expectations is without merit.

The 2015 CCA Decision

After careful consideration, the Tribunal finds that, by issuing the 2015 CCA Decision,
Respondent did not fall foul of the requirements of Article 3(1) of the BIT.

The Tribunal observes that the 2015 CCA Decision was issued following a procedure
which observed due process. Indeed, the CCA requested information and comments from
[...], L...] and HAKOM on several occasions, met with representatives of HAKOM and
[...] for further clarifications, and sought and obtained [...]’s Regulatory Reports.

Further, the 2015 CCA Decision is reasoned. It contains an in-depth analysis of the legal
questions before the CCA. The CCA examined the legislation on the postal services
market, focusing in particular on the ex ante regulation of prices and discounts. The CCA
then proceeded to identify the relevant product and geographic markets, noting in this
regard:

“Tn establishing the relevant market, pursuant to Article 8, paragraph | of the Regulation
on Definition of the Relevant Market, the most immediate criterion is the demand
substitutability of the particular product, then also the supply substitutability of the
particular product, and when necessary, the criterion of the existence of potential
competitors or barriers to entry. Pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 2 of the same
Article, applying the criteria previously mentioned, the relevant market is defined with a
view to defining and differentiating the market segments of particular products in which
undertakings compete with one another.”**

The CCA found that the relevant product and geographic markets were the provision of
letter post services in the entire territory of Croatia. Thereafter, the 2015 CCA Decision
analyzed the Croatian postal market and found that [...]’s market share was 78.6% in 2013
and 78.4% in 2014, whereas [...] held 17.4% of the market in 2013 and 17.7% in 2014.
Referring to the CJEU jurisprudence, the CCA concluded that, based on its market share
and due to its quality as the historical national operator, [...] was in a dominant position on
the relevant market.

The CCA then examined [...]’s price lists in 2013 and 2014, as well as the contracts it had
concluded with high volume customers. The CCA found that these contracts had been
concluded on the basis of the prices and discounts contained in [...]’s official price lists.

134 f,_] (Exhibit R-137).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

962.

963.

25 7,
86 1d,

The CCA subsequently verified if [...]’s discounts had been granted by foregoing profits.
The CCA relied upon the Akzo and Tetra Pak II cases, as well as on the Guidance on the
Commission’s Enforcement Priorities. The CCA used the cost information included in
[...]’s 2013 Regulatory Report and BDO Croatia’s audit, but maintained that, in addition
to this information, “specific data were also obtained on costs, which in essence stem[med]
from and [were] complementary to the information from the Regulatory Report for [...]
for 2013”.!°5 The CCA then ran the price-cost test both at the market level and at the level
of the individual user. For this analysis, the CCA decided to treat the majority of [...]’s
staffing costs as fixed costs in light of [...]’s universal service obligation. The CCA found
that, at the market level, [...]’s average total revenue covered its average total cost, while
at the individual user level (determined for the high-volume users [...] and [...]), [...]’s
prices were lower than average total costs but higher than average variable costs.

Having found that, at the individual user level, [...]’s prices were below average total costs,
the CCA went on to assess whether [...]’s conduct betrayed the intent to limit competition
on the market. The CCA referred to the regulatory environment relevant to assessing [...]’s
conduct and in particular to HAKOM’s power to regulate [...]’s prices and discounts. After
examining the correspondence between HAKOM and [...], the CCA concluded:

“Taking into account these provisions of the legislation on postal services and the active
supervision of discounts on the prices of the universal service of [...], within the framework
of the ex ante regulations, the Agency deems that the provision of services by [...
according to the price list of services, which was the subject of ex ante regulation in the
appropriate manner, essentially excludes any certain lusion_that_there_was_am
unilateral exclusionary conduct by [...], within the meaning of the regulations on protection

of market competition.

Here the Agency additionally emphasizes that, pursuant to the provision of Article 46,
paragraph [sic] of the PSA, HAKOM may, by a decision, completely or partially amend or
revoke the prices of the universal service before or after their publication, as well as the
special prices referred to in paragraph 4 of the same Article, if it establishes that they are
in contravention of the provisions of the PSA.

From the examination of the observations by [...] of 19 July 2013, in essence it stems that
ri 's

HAKOM, as the s I ly monitors [..
prices were never the subject of amendments by HAKOM.

 

From [...]'s additional observations of 3 August 2015, the same conclusion may be drawn
in essence, in the sense that HAKOM did not react towards [...], that is it did not question
any part of the price list, including the scale of discounts for the universal service of [...].

thereby presents the logical point of view that HAKOM thereby confirmed the

lawfulness of [...]'s pricing policies.” '*° [emphasis added]

 

    

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

964.

965.

966.

967.

137 fq.

The CCA continued its analysis with an examination of the possible selectivity of [...]’s
discounts, noting that this was closely linked to its previous analysis of intent. The CCA
observed that [...]’s discounts were included in a price list that was public and that [...]
had been providing postal services to high volume users such as [...], [...], [...] and [...]
simultaneously with [...] since before the liberalization of the postal services market. The
CCA considered that [...]’s prices were not selective in 2013 due to the fact that [...]’s
volumes for major users were superior to [...]’s and that [...] was attempting to retain the
services of these users on a more competitive liberalized market. Referring to CJEU
jurisprudence, the CCA found that “the dominant undertaking [could] not be denied the
right to protect its own commercial i or economic i if they [were] ‘ked”
and that a dominant undertaking “must be conceded the right to take such reasonable steps
to protect its own commercial or economic interests”!*” so long as these measures are
proportionate.

 

For these reasons, the CCA declined to find a breach of the Croatian Competition Act by

[..]}

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal finds that, in the 2015 CCA Decision, the CCA
abided by the requirements of due process, correctly identified the relevant facts and
applicable law, and applied the law so identified to those facts. Claimant argues that the
2015 CCA Decision contains a number of errors in the application of competition law
principles. That may well be the case. However, as is detailed below, the Tribunal considers
that it is not its role to correct simple errors of judgment made by the CCA. In any event,
the Tribunal does not share Claimant’s view that those errors are significant enough to
warrant a conclusion that the CCA repudiated the applicable rules of competition law or
manifestly failed to discharge its mandate. The 2015 CCA Decision does not therefore
constitute a breach of Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

In this respect, the Tribunal observes that Claimant’s most important criticism of the 2015
CCA Decision is that the CCA misapplied the price-cost test at the individual user level.
In Claimant’s submission, instead of referring to [...]’s average costs that would have been
avoided if [...] stopped delivering small letters, the CCA incorrectly used [...]’s average
costs that would have been avoided if [...] no longer provided the universal service of letter
post to an individual user. Claimant argues that this misapplication of competition law
principles was not merely technical, but glaring and in direct contradiction to the CIEU
judgment in Post Danmark I:

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

968.

969.

970.

971.

“a pricing policy such as that in issue in the main proceedings cannot be considered to

amount to an exclusionary abuse simply because the price charged to a single customer by
a dominant undertaking is lower than the average total costs attributed to the activity
concerned, but higher than the average incremental costs pertaining to the latter”. 38
[emphasis added]

The Tribunal considers that a finding that the CCA made an error of law is not sufficient
to demonstrate a breach of the Treaty. A violation of the FET standard requires the
submission of evidence that a national regulatory authority acted in an arbitrary or
capricious way. The Tribunal considers that the evidence put forward by Claimant with
respect to the CCA’s price-cost test does not meet this threshold and that Claimant’s
criticism goes only to the substantive correctness, as opposed to the possible arbitrariness,
of the CCA’s holding.

This conclusion is even more appropriate with respect to Claimant’s contention that the
CCA, on the basis of its incorrect application of the price-cost test, incorrectly determined
what Claimant deems to be the largest component of [...]’s avoidable costs: labor costs. It
is certainly not the role of this Tribunal to ascertain which proportion of [...]’s labor costs
was avoidable and which proportion was unavoidable. Such task is for a national regulatory
authority and national courts and will not be reviewed by an international investment
tribunal for correctness. Again, Claimant has failed to meet its burden and demonstrate the
arbitrariness of the CCA’s holding.

Claimant also takes issue with the CCA’s analysis of the element of intent, arguing that the
CCA’s reliance on HAKOM’s regulatory supervision cannot sustain the conclusion that
the element of intent was missing. In Claimant’s submission, the CCA’s failure to request
[...]’s internal correspondence or to conduct a surprise inspection of [...]’s premises
amounts to a failure by the CCA to independently perform the activities within its powers.
The Tribunal cannot agree. As was noted earlier, the 2015 CCA Decision contains an
analysis of the element of intent. Claimant’s criticism again purports to show that the CCA
ran this analysis incorrectly, by relying on one relevant consideration over another. While
the Tribunal may disagree with the CCA’s finding with respect to HAKOM’s regulatory
supervision of [...]’s prices and discounts, it cannot reverse the CCA’s analysis on this
point, as it is not manifestly arbitrary.

The Tribunal further finds that the same conclusions are applicable to Claimant’s
contention that the CCA should not have relied on [...]’s 2013 Regulatory Report.
Claimant contends that the CCA’s analysis should not have used the costs in the [...]’s
2013 Regulatory Report in light of the criticisms contained in the auditor’s letter of

138 Post Danmark I, at 37.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

972.

973.

974.

975.

recommendation. The Tribunal repeats that its task under the Treaty is not to determine
what documents a national regulatory authority may rely upon in order to discharge its
duties. The Tribunal finds nothing unreasonable or arbitrary in the CCA’s use of [...]’s
audited Regulatory Report. In any event, the Tribunal notes that [...] ultimately concluded
that [...]’s 2013 Regulatory Report had been completed in accordance with the Instructions
on cost accounting separation.

The Tribunal observes that, as argued by Claimant, the CCA did not examine both the
potential retroactivity of [...]’s discounts, an issue raised by [...] in its complaint before
the European Commission and submitted to the CCA, and the question of [...]’s alleged
unfair terms for access to its postal network. The Tribunal agrees with Claimant that the
CCA’s infra petita ruling is a significant failing on its part. However, the Tribunal also
notes that, in its appeal against the 2015 CCA Decision before the High Administrative
Court of Zagreb, [...] explicitly challenged the CCA’s failure to rule on these
complaints.!*° The Tribunal is of the view that, while the CCA’s failure to rule on these
issues is significant, it is not at all uncommon for procedural errors to be committed before
local regulatory authorities. As long as these errors do not show bad faith, abuse of process
or arbitrariness, and there is a reasonable opportunity to remedy the procedural failing, a
breach of the FET standard would be difficult to establish. In the case before the Tribunal,
Claimant has not produced convincing evidence that the CCA intentionally or abusively
omitted to rule on these claims. Moreover, there was a reasonable opportunity for [...] to
correct the CCA’s errors before the national courts.

For all the reasons identified above, the Tribunal finds that the 2015 CCA Decision does
not fall foul of Article 3(1) of the Treaty on account of arbitrariness. For these very same
reasons, the Tribunal also finds that Claimant’s claim for breach of legitimate expectations
is without merit.

Whether Respondent denied [...] timely and non-discriminatory access to [...]’s postal
network

After having examined the evidence in the record and the Parties’ submissions, the
Tribunal finds that Respondent did not breach Article 3(1) of the Treaty by denying [...]
fair and non-discriminatory access terms to [...]’s network.

At the outset, the Tribunal notes that Claimant’s claim that HAKOM assisted [...] in
denying [...] timely and fair access to the public postal network, included in the Memorial,

89 f._] (Exhibit R-142).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

976.

977.

978.

979.

was not reiterated in the Reply, at the hearing or in Claimant’s post-hearing briefs.
However, Claimant has not expressly represented that it is withdrawing the claim.
Therefore, out of an abundance of caution, the Tribunal has decided to address it.

The Tribunal observes that [...] filed with HAKOM three complaints against [...] for denial
of network access. [...]’s first complaint was dismissed by HAKOM on account of [...]’s
failure to specify the beginning and the duration of the network access contract, a
mandatory requirement under the Ordinance on the Provision of the Universal Service. '°
[...]’s second complaint was dismissed by HAKOM on account of the fact that [...] had
filed a third request for access with [...], for the same quantities of mail and in relation to
the same sorting stations, before HAKOM had had the chance to review [...]’s second
complaint on the merits.'“! The Tribunal notes that [...]’s first complaint was resolved in a
period of three months, whereas the second complaint in a little over a month. [...]’s third
complaint before HAKOM was submitted on 3 October 2013 and HAKOM rendered its
decision on 15 January 2014,'
HAKOM requested observations from, and heard, both parties.

three and a half months later. In all three instances,

The Tribunal therefore finds no support in the record for Claimant’s contention that
HAKOM denied [...] timely access to [...]’s postal network. To the contrary, the record
supports the conclusion that any delay in obtaining access was also due to [...]’s conduct,
i.e., the submission of an incomplete request for access and of a third request for access
while the dispute pertaining to its second request was still ongoing.

The core of Claimant’s complaint with regard to Respondent’s treatment of [...]’s requests
for network access concerns an alleged failure to be heard and to provide reasons.
According to Claimant, despite [...]’s repeated complaints about the exclusionary nature
of [...]’s access prices, HAKOM never addressed this question and the High
Administrative Court in Zagreb simply accepted, without any analysis, HAKOM’s
reasoning. The Tribunal disagrees.

[...] argued before HAKOM that the Ordinance on the Provision of the Universal Service
established cost avoidance as a guiding principle for determining network access prices. In
[...]’s submission, this principle had not been implemented in [...]’s price list. [...] pointed
out that access users, on account of performing part of the service normally in the charge
of [...], were granted discounts of maximum 21% regardless of volume, whereas universal
postal service users were granted a discount of up to 55% on volume, despite not

40 [| (Exhibit C-150).

 

(Exhibit C-170).

18 [J (Exhibit C-210).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

980.

981.

M3 [
Maa

performing any service.'*? In other words, [...]’s complaint pertained to the lack of
correlation between the (non-)performance of part of [...]’s service, volume and the
discounts granted. [...] did not argue that the absence of volume discounts for network
access users created an exclusionary effect that resulted in a margin squeeze.

In its decision, HAKOM concluded that users of postal services and network access users
were not in like circumstances and that the 2012 PSA and the Ordinance on the Provision
of the Universal Service did not contain any obligation to treat these categories in the same
manner. HAKOM then explained that discounts granted to network access users and
discounts granted to universal postal services users were established on two different bases:

“Furthermore, Article 53 Paragraph 6 of the Act stipulates that when defining the prices
for the access to the network for the access users, it is important to consider the costs of
actions carried out before accessing the network and acknowledge them as avoided costs.
Also, Article 25 Paragraph | of the Regulation on the universal service, states that the
prices of access are defined according to the percentages of the price for the appropriate
service in the Price List of the universal service provider, where the price is decreased for
the costs of the parts of the jobs carried out by the access user. So, the decision on prices
by [...], which has been delivered to the Agency, defines that the prices for the access to
the network are based on appropriate prices for the letters from the area of the universal
service (to which a value added tax is added) and on the prices obtained in that way,
appropriate discounts are applied, depending on the access points and the level of letter
elaboration. On the other hand, Article 46 Paragraph 2 of the Act does not exclude the right
of the universal service provider to approve discounts to the service users who send a larger
number of letters, under condition that such an amount is defined as taking into
consideration the costs, then that it is foreseen in the universal service Price List and that
it is applied in the same way for all users who send letter under similar conditions. Unlike
network access, where only the costs of carried out/avoided steps are acknowledged, in this
case only the amounts are taken into consideration, that is, the number of letters, so in

 

er that
the ones in the network access, which depends on the amounts of letters. which make the
basic difference. Furthermore, discounts on the amount in the case of the universal service,
if they are transparent and non-discriminatory, are in accordance with the regulations on
market competition, because they have justification in the decrease of costs and occur only
as a result of cost cutting due to the order of a larger number of services.”'“* [emphasis
added]

Regardless of the correctness of HAKOM’s finding, the Tribunal observes that HAKOM
addressed [...]’s complaint in full and explained at length why it considered that [...]’s
network access prices complied with the 2012 PSA and the Ordinance on the Provision of
the Universal Service. Because [...] never argued that the absence of volume discounts for
network access users resulted in a margin squeeze, HAKOM did not address this question.

.--] (Exhibit C-185).
..J (Exhibit C-210).

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

982.

983.

984.

985.

While HAKOM could have addressed this issue of its own motion, the Tribunal considers
that HAKOM did not act in an arbitrary manner by not doing so.

[...] likewise did not argue that [...]’s refusal to grant it volume discounts created a margin
squeeze before the High Administrative Court in Zagreb.'*° The Tribunal therefore
considers that Respondent did not run foul of Article 3(1) of the Treaty by not adjudicating
it.

The Tribunal also observes that, in any event, Claimant’s legal argument, pursuant to which
network access users should be granted volume discounts (on a per sender basis, as opposed
to discounts in the aggregate), in addition to operational discounts, appears to be novel and
is currently not supported by cogent authority. This was acknowledged at the hearing by
Claimant’s competition law expert, [...]:

“MR PORTWOOD: Looking at the [Bpost] ECJ case, decision, it is not an authority to say
that universal service providers should always provide a volume discount to network access
users, is it?

[...]: That is a question and a case that has never, to my knowledge, never been tested
because no-one has taken this approach.”'“°

Consequently, neither HAKOM nor the High Administrative Court in Zagreb can be
faulted for failing to address the argument raised by Claimant in these proceedings, which
was both novel for competition law authorities and had not been raised during the local
proceedings by [...].

Further, the Tribunal cannot agree with Claimant’s contention that the High Administrative
Court in Zagreb did not independently assess the merits of [...]’s claim. The fact that the
court relied upon the same legal texts and arrived at the same conclusion as HAKOM does
not, in and of itself, demonstrate that the court performed no independent analysis.
Moreover, the Tribunal considers that the court’s reasoning shows that it gave independent
consideration to [...]’s claim:

“Pursuant to the provisions of Article 53, paragraph 6 of the Postal Services Act (Official
Gazette 144/12 and 153/13) when establishing the price of access to the postal network, it
is necessary to recognize to users of access the costs of activities undertaken before
accessing the network, as costs avoided by the universal service provider.

Article 25, paragraph 1 of the Rules on Provision of the Universal Service (Official
Gazette, 41/13) prescribes that the prices (rates) for the postal network access service are
determined as a percentage of the public operator’s standard rates for a respective service,

M8 See, [...] (Exhibit R-124).
M6 Tr,, Day 7, 192: 12-18.

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

986.

987.

988.

whereby standard rates are reduced by the cost of work performed by the user of the access
service.

From the information in the case file it stems that in the decision by the first plaintiff on
prices, which it sent to the respondent, it is defined that the prices of access to the network
are based on the appropriate prices for postal items in the realm of the universal service,
on which VAT is calculated, and for the prices obtained in that way, the appropriate
discounts are applied, depending on the access point and the degree of categorization of
postal items. In this specific case, the second plaintiff did not provide evidence from which
it could be concluded that the first plaintiff's prices for the service of access to the network
were not aligned with the Postal Services Act and the Rules on Provision of the Universal
Service, so in the part relating to the prices of access to the postal network, the claim by
the second plaintiff was correctly assessed to be not well-founded.” !47

For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent did not breach Article 3(1) of
the Treaty by arbitrarily denying [...] fair and non-discriminatory access terms to [...]’s
network. For the same reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Claimant’s claim for breach of
its legitimate expectations fails.

Whether Respondent wrongfilly established [...]’s compensation fund

 

The Tribunal finds that Respondent did not breach Article 3(1) of the Treaty by establishing
a compensation fund for [...]. Equally, Respondent’s refusal to attempt to accommodate
[...]’s requests for a reasonable extension of the payment deadline or for permission to pay
in instalments do not amount to breaches of Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

Claimant argues that HAKOM’s errors in the establishment of the compensation fund were
of such a serious nature as to undermine the very necessity of establishing a compensation
fund in the first place. Claimant argues that HAKOM: (i) uncritically accepted [...]’s
calculation of [...]’s net cost; (ii) incorrectly considered that the requirement of having 700
post offices in Croatia was restrictive; (iii) overestimated [...]’s reasonable return on assets;
and (iv) included a significant amount of inefficient delivery costs in its calculation. The
Tribunal recalls that the FET standard is not one of perfection and allows for a certain
degree of error. It is only when a State acts capriciously, without a legitimate purpose,
when it repudiates the applicable law or shows preference or bias, that its conduct can be
deemed arbitrary. The Tribunal is not persuaded that HAKOM’s alleged errors in this
regard rise to the level of arbitrariness. '#* In particular, the Tribunal finds nothing arbitrary
in HAKOM’s reliance on [...]’s calculation of [...]’s net cost and cannot accept Claimant’s

147] (Exhibit R-124).
'48 The Tribunal notes that, in the Reply, at paragraph 350, Claimant acknowledged that HAKOM did not incorrectly
establish [...]’s contribution to the compensation fund.

99

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

989.

990.

991.

992.

contention that such reliance was uncritical. In this respect, the Tribunal recalls that
HAKOM was actively engaged in the process of reviewing [...]’s net cost calculation and
that [...]’s report was issued following a series of meetings between that company, [...]
and representatives of HAKOM. As regards the remaining substantive errors allegedly
made by HAKOM, the Tribunal considers that they are not manifest and that Claimant has
failed to discharge its burden to show that they were capricious, showed bias or a
repudiation of the applicable law. Moreover, HAKOM rendered its decision at the close of
a procedure that entailed the participation of all interchangeable postal services providers
and that complied with due process.

In its Memorial, Claimant alleged that HAKOM established the compensation fund in the
absence of any transparency about the net cost of the universal service, in light of the fact
that HAKOM only shared an excerpt of [...]’s net cost calculation with interchangeable
postal service providers. This claim was not reiterated in the Reply, at the hearing or in the
post-hearing briefs. Nevertheless, out of an abundance of caution, the Tribunal has decided
to address it.

After reviewing the evidence before it, the Tribunal agrees with Respondent that
HAKOM’s decision establishing a compensation fund was issued following a procedure
that ensured due process and appropriate levels of transparency.

The Tribunal notes that HAKOM’s decision was issued one year after HAKOM notified
[...] that the establishment of a compensation fund was likely and that provisions needed
to be made for this eventuality in the business plan.'*? When HAKOM received [...]’s
request for compensation, which was accompanied by its audited financial statements,
HAKOM retained the services of an independent auditor, [...], in order to verify [...]’s
methodology and calculation. This resulted in a downward correction of [...]’s net cost
calculation.!°° Thereafter, HAKOM sought the views of all interchangeable postal service
providers, including [...], on the calculation put forward by [...].!°!

[...] refused to provide those comments, citing the insufficiency of the information offered
by HAKOM.!* Claimant contends that [...] could not have provided substantive
comments on [...]’s net cost calculation without having the opportunity to review it in its
entirety, as opposed to having access to the excerpts provided by HAKOM. The Tribunal
does not find anything objectionable in HAKOM’s decision not to transmit the full net cost
calculation to [...]’s competitors. The Tribunal considers that HAKOM had an obligation

49 [J (Exhibit C-188).
150 See, [...] (Exhibit R-118).
‘51 [...] (Exhibit C-240).
52 [,..] (Exhibit C-241).

100

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

993.

994.

995.

996.

to balance the competing interests of, on the one hand, [...], who understandably did not
desire that its extremely sensitive cost and pricing information be disclosed to its
competitors, and, on the other hand, the interchangeable postal providers’ interest to have
sufficient information that would allow them to offer substantive comments on the net cost
calculation. The Tribunal also observes that, while [...] initially refused to provide
comments on [...]’s net cost calculations citing the insufficiency of the information
provided, on 28 November 2014, after the expiry of the deadline for comments and after
HAKOM had already rendered its decision,'® [...] was able to put forward a number of
substantive criticisms pertaining to [...]’s net cost calculation.'** The Tribunal therefore
concludes that Respondent cannot be sanctioned for [...]’s strategic decision not to submit
comments on [...]’s net cost calculation when invited to do so by HAKOM.

A further criticism put forward by Claimant is that HAKOM summarily refused to
accommodate [...]’s request for a deferment in payment or for permission to pay the
contribution in instalments, which led to the freezing of [...]’s accounts and the
commencement of pre-bankruptcy proceedings.

The Tribunal finds that Claimant’s contention is not supported by the record. HAKOM’s
decision rejecting Claimant’s request was reasoned. HAKOM noted that the establishment
of a compensation fund was provided for in the 2012 PSA and had been notified to [...] at
least a year in advance. HAKOM took the position that [...] should have better planned its
finances to account for this and should have filed observations on the calculation, when
prompted to do so. Finally, HAKOM concluded that [...] had not demonstrated that the
payment of its contribution would cause it to suffer irreparable damage, and that a stay in
enforcement would endanger the universal postal service, which was in the public
interest.'*> The Tribunal notes that these reasons were upheld by the High Administrative
Court in Zagreb.'*°

Further, the Tribunal notes that, while [...]’s bank accounts were frozen in order to permit
the execution of HAKOM’s decision, the effect of the freezing order was limited to fifteen
days. On 20 March 2015, FINA’s Settlement Council lifted the freezing order and allowed
[...] to dispose of the funds.!°7

On these bases, the Tribunal finds that HAKOM’s refusal to accede to [...]’s request for a
deferral in payment or for permission to pay in instalments was reasoned and did not cause

53 [...] (Exhibit C-242).
54 [._.] (Exhibit C-246).

 

(Exhibit C-247).

156 f.] (Exhibit R-139).
157 [|] (Exhibit R-199),

101

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

[...] to incur lasting damage. Moreover, throughout these proceedings, [...]’s due process
rights were complied with.

997. For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent’s conduct with respect to the
establishment of [...]’s compensation fund was not arbitrary or discriminatory and did not
contravene any expectations held by Claimant — regardless of whether those expectations
would have been protectable under the Treaty. No breach of Article 3(1) of the Treaty on
this account is therefore established.

7. Whether Respondent unlawfully excluded [...] from public procurement procedures

998. After a careful analysis of the Parties’ submissions and the evidence in the record, the
Tribunal has concluded that Respondent breached Article 3(1) of the Treaty through its bad
faith attempt to re-monopolize a part of the postal services market in the first half of 2013,
after the entry into force of the 2012 PSA and the liberalization of the Croatian postal
market. However, the Tribunal holds that Respondent’s treatment of Claimant’s investment
in connection with actual public procurement procedures opened after | January 2013 does
not amount to a violation of the FET standard.

999. The Tribunal recalls that, on 23 January 2013, following an inquiry from [...], the
Directorate for the Public Procurement System confirmed that the Public Procurement Act
and the 2012 PSA had completely liberalized the public procurement of postal services. !**
The Directorate concluded that contracting authorities were no longer permitted to invite
tenders for “universal postal services” or to require that tenderers have licenses for the
provision of the universal postal service.!*°

1000. The Tribunal however observes that, when [...] wrote to the Ministry of Transport in order
to request clarifications as to the correct interpretation of the 2012 PSA and argued that the
2012 PSA “defin[ed] the universal postal service as an exclusive right of public interest,
and exclud[ed] it from competition pursuant to its basic characteristics”,'°’ HAKOM and
the Ministry of Transport adopted [...]’s opinion almost word for word. HAKOM, which
had previously been involved in the discussions with the European Commission
concerning the drafting of the 2012 PSA and was therefore fully aware of its purpose to
open the postal services market to competition, opined that the 2012 PSA “defin[ed] the
universal service as an exclusive right of public interest” that “in some way, [had] been

158 [...] (Exhibit C-123).
99 Id.
160 [. ..] (Exhibit C-399).

102

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

exempt from competition due to its basic features”.'°' HAKOM not only purported to
establish that contracting authorities were at liberty to contract for universal postal services,
something which in its opinion of 5 February 2013 to [...] it had acknowledged was no
longer possible, but even went one step further when it opined that “the universal service,
as an exclusive right, should be procured pursuant to a negotiated public procurement
procedure without prior notification”.'** This opinion was adopted almost word for word
by the Ministry of Transport, the principal drafter of the 2012 PSA, on 6 March 2013.!°

1001. Respondent argues that HAKOM’s and the Ministry of Transport’s interpretations were

not made in bad faith, but were the result of a genuine misunderstanding of the new law.
The Tribunal considers that this is not supported by the record. Both institutions, in light
of their involvement in the drafting of the 2012 PSA and of their extensive discussions with
the European Commission, were completely cognizant of the fact that the 2012 PSA was
intended to open the postal services market to competition. Both HAKOM and the Ministry
of Transport, in their interpretations, opined however that the universal postal service was
“exempt from competition due to its basic features” under the 2012 PSA (in the case of
HAKOM) or that the 2012 PSA “defin[ed] the universal service as the public interest and
in a certain manner, according to its basic features, eliminat[ed] it from the market
competition” (in the case of the Ministry of Transport).'™ The Tribunal considers that such
a blatant disregard for the 2012 PSA cannot be explained in the manner suggested by
Respondent.

1002. The Tribunal also observes that, when [...] requested that the Ministry of Transport revoke

its interpretation of the 2012 PSA on account of its effect of reintroducing a monopoly on
the postal services market, the Ministry of Transport refused to substantively address [...]’s
arguments. It was only after the European Commission intervened, forcefully challenging
Respondent’s interpretation as being “contrary to both the letter and spirit of the postal
acquis” and as a “re-monopolization both in law and in practice of a specific area of
universal postal services”,'® that the Ministry of Transport rescinded its restrictive
interpretation of the 2012 PSA.'°

1003. The Tribunal considers that Respondent’s conduct in the first half of 2013 was arbitrary.

There is no rational explanation for the Ministry of Transport’s and HAKOM’s attempts to
re-monopolize a part of the postal services market. On account of the intended effects of

161 [...] (Exhibit C-136).
162 7g.

163 [| (Exhibit C-138).
164 Ty,
165 [| (Exhibit C-147).
166 [| (Exhibit C-157).

 

103

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1004.

1005.

1006.

1007.

their interpretation and of their uncritical adoption of [...]’s arguments, the Tribunal
considers that Respondent’s conduct can only be understood as a bad faith attempt to
protect the interests of the national postal operator at the expense of its competitors.

The Tribunal is satisfied that this bad faith and arbitrary conduct of Respondent’s is
sufficient to establish a breach of Article 3(1) of the Treaty, independently of whether
Respondent was ultimately successful in its endeavors to re-monopolize a part of the postal
services market or whether [...] was in effect excluded from public tenders.

In contrast, no finding of breach of Article 3(1) of the Treaty can be made with respect to
Claimant’s argument that Respondent upheld discriminatory or arbitrary tender
requirements.

Claimant complains that DKOM arbitrarily annulled the results of a public tender
organized by the City of Koprivnica, which had awarded the contract to [...], on account
of [...]’s professional misconduct in the provision of value-added services. '©’ The Tribunal
however is not persuaded that DKOM’s reliance upon HAKOM’s 18 May 2012 decision,
a valid act pursuant to Croatian law at the time of its issuance, was arbitrary. The Tribunal
has already concluded at Section VII.C.2 above that Respondent was at liberty to interpret
value-added postal services cumulatively prior to its accession to the European Union.
While the European Commission criticized Respondent’s reliance upon this restrictive
interpretation after Croatia’s accession to the European Union, and pointed out that it was
incompatible with the postal acquis,'®* the Tribunal does not consider that the European
Commission’s position is determinative for Claimant’s claim under the Treaty. The
Tribunal applies the provisions of the Treaty and international law in order to determine
whether Respondent breached Article 3(1) of the Treaty.

Claimant also criticizes as discriminatory DKOM’s decision, dated 3 July 2013, which
dismissed [...]’s appeal against the results of the tender organized by [...]. In that
procurement procedure, [...]’s bid had been disqualified on account of failing to submit a
certificate from HAKOM appointing it as the universal service provider.' The Tribunal
observes however that [...]’s appeal in this case was dismissed on procedural grounds, not
on the merits. DKOM concluded that [...] had requested the wrong remedy and should
have challenged the validity of the request for bid collection. In other words, DKOM did
not review or uphold the legality of the tender requirements due to [...]’s own choice of
remedy.

167 [...] (Exhibit C-163).
468 [...] (Exhibit R-116).
169 [| (Exhibit C-164).

104

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1008. Claimant further takes exception to DKOM’s decision of 5 July 2013, upholding [...]’s
appeal against the decision of the City of Karlovac awarding a contract to [...].!7 In that
procedure, DKOM invalidated the results of the tender on account of the expiration of
[...]’s license to provide universal postal services, a requirement that Claimant deems
discriminatory. However, the Tribunal observes that the tender at issue in that case dated
from October 2012 and the procurement procedure was conducted pursuant to the
provisions of the 2009 PSA, not the 2012 PSA. The Tribunal notes that this transitory
situation had been envisaged in Article 71 of the 2012 PSA, pursuant to which
“[p]roceedings initiated pursuant to the provisions of the Postal Act ... up to the date of
entry into force of this Act shall be completed in compliance with the provisions of that
Act and regulations adopted on the basis of that Act’. Moreover, [...] invoked this legal
text in the procedure before DKOM. As a result, Claimant cannot now complain of the
consequences stemming from the application of the 2009 PSA.

1009. In a fourth public procurement procedure deemed discriminatory by Claimant, DKOM
dismissed the appeal filed by [...] against the tender documents, finding that they did not
favor the universal postal service provider.!7! In that proceeding, [...] complained that the
tender requirement to submit proof of continuous quality measurement for 2012 according
to standard HRN EN 14508 was discriminatory. The Tribunal however observes that
DKOM noted that the contracting authority was required under the Public Procurement
Act to accept equivalent measurements of quality. In other words, [...] was not held by the
impossible obligation to provide the certificate of quality measurement that is specifically
tailored to the provision of universal services.!7”

1010. Claimant devotes a substantial portion of its pleadings to challenge the tender requirements
included in two high-value public tenders, organized by the State Office for Central Public
Procurement and [...] in September 2012.'” The Tribunal notes that both public tenders
contained a requirement of continuous quality measurement pursuant to the HRN EN
14508 standard. In addition, the procedure organized by the State Office for Central Public
Procurement contained a requirement that tenderers have a distribution of territorial offices

170 [._.] (Exhibit C-166).

171 [._.] (Exhibit C-174).

'? The Tribunal observes that [...] clarified in his second witness statement that the HRN EN 14508 standard was
specifically tailored to the provision of the universal service: “The HRN EN 14508 standard is specifically tailored to
the provision of universal services. In fact, the designated universal service provider (i.e., [...]) was required under
Article 30 of the 2010 Ordinance on the Provision of the Universal Service to publish a tender for the selection of an
independent body to measure the quality of its universal services in accordance with certain defined standards,
including the HRN EN 14508 standard, with respect to non-priority mail items. The very same requirement was carried
through in Article 31 of the 2013 Ordinance. By contrast, private postal companies were not required to measure the
quality of their services; nor were they required to comply with the HRN EN 14508 standard.” ([...] Second Witness
Statement, at 62; internal citations omitted).

173] (Exhibit C-182); [...] (Exhibit C-402).

105

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1011.

1012.

1013.

1014.

  

4
175

176

identical to the requirements of the universal postal service obligation. However, the
Tribunal observes that, in both cases, [...] did not submit the required bank guarantees.
According to the testimony of [...]:

“As the Minutes of Public Opening of Tenders reflect, [...]’s tender price inclusive of VAT
was lower than [...]’s by approximately HRK 30,000,000 (which is equivalent to
approximately EUR 4,000,000). However, we were well aware that without the required
quality certificate, [...] stood no chance to prevail over [...]. As I recall, we nonetheless

participated in this tender to show the Central Procurement Office that we would typically
charge them a lower price than [...] for the provision of the same services. However, in

order to avoid incurring unnecessary costs, we did not submit the bank guarantee required
by the tender documentation. Had it not been for the discriminatory requirements that I

discuss above, [...] was well-placed to win this tender.”'™ [internal citations omitted]
[emphasis added]

In other words, according to the testimony of Claimant’s own witness, [...]’s participation
in these two tenders was not serious. If [...] had submitted the bank guarantees and had
been excluded from the tenders on the grounds mentioned above, Claimant could have
challenged these discriminatory tender conditions in this arbitration. Having chosen not to
do so, Claimant cannot now complain of being denied access to these lucrative public
contracts.

That leaves only two tenders where [...] was excluded on the basis of discriminatory
requirements: the tender organized by [...].'7> In these tenders, [...]’s bid was excluded for
failure to provide evidence of continuous quality measurement as per standard HRN EN
14508 and for failure to demonstrate that its network met the density conditions for network
access points provided in Article 15 of the Ordinance on the Provision of the Universal
Service.

The Tribunal considers that, in light of the other evidence in the record, these were isolated
instances in which a breach of national law occurred. However, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that [...]’s exclusion from two public tenders is sufficient to establish that, after
June 2013, Respondent attempted to re-monopolize a part of the postal services market in
breach of the Treaty. To establish a Treaty breach, the Tribunal would have required

evidence going beyond the mere showing of a breach of national law.'”°

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal finds that Respondent did not seek to re-
monopolize a part of the postal services market, post-June 2013, by upholding
discriminatory tender requirements. Thus, this conduct does not represent a breach of

..] Second Witness Testimony, at 70.
} (Exhibit C-184).
See, Eastern Sugar v. Czech Republic, at 272.

106

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

Article 3(1) of the Treaty, be it on the grounds of arbitrariness, of a breach of legitimate
expectations or of the non-impairment obligation. However, the Tribunal maintains its
conclusion that Respondent engaged in arbitrary and bad faith conduct in the first half of
2013, when HAKOM and the Ministry of Transport (unsuccessfully) attempted to restrict
competition on the postal services market in order to protect the national postal company,

[J

The failed acquisition of [...]

1015. The Tribunal finds that Claimant’s claim is without merit.

1016. The Tribunal agrees with Claimant that direct evidence in the record supports the

conclusion that the [...] transaction fell through as a result of [...]’s competitive challenge
to [...] and [...]’s subsequent refusal to approve the necessary financing. As [...] reported
to [...] on its discussion with the [...], the reasoning behind [...]’s decision was “[the]
worsening outlook for [...] because of hostile actions of the [Croatian] Post, new law in
current format, hence weak figures”.!7’ [...] added that [...] “would have approved the deal
had such worsening in outlook not occurred”.!”8 Contrary to Respondent’s contention, [...]
did not mention [...]’s inability to meet the covenants under the Facilities Agreement.
However, the bank did mention [...]’s “weak figures”. Significantly, this reference was
made in connection with the effects of [...]’s competitive challenge (“hostile actions [...]
hence weak figures”!”’), The Tribunal understands this to include not only the direct effect
of this competitive challenge (the loss of [...]), but also the indirect effect of [...]’s
necessary decision to reduce its prices in order to keep its clients. In its letter of 24 July
2012 to [...], [...] had relayed:

“(a) on April 5" 2012, [...], the second largest customer of the Company terminated the
agreement for providing postal services with the Company. Termination was a result of a
significantly lower pricing offered by [[...]], relying on the current provisions of the Postal
Services Act authorizing universal postal services provider to offer discounts to large
customers on contractual basis and avoid charging VAT on such services.

The same offer was made by [...] to the following other customers of the Company: [...],
[...]. In order to avoid losing these customers, the Company lowered the prices charged to
these customers and succeeded in keeping them.

Enclosed to this letter please find the revised Budget for 2012.”'*° [emphasis added]

..] (Exhibit C-397).
d.

1 Ig.
'80 [...] (Exhibit C-396).

107

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1017. Respondent argues that other reasons also played a role in the failure of the transaction,
such as business decisions taken by [...] (the expansion of its network) or improper
financial planning by the company. The Tribunal disagrees. No such reasons are mentioned
in the email from [...] or in the preceding letter from [...] to [...]. Had these reasons been
of such capital importance as Respondent makes them out to be, undoubtedly [...] would

have referred to them.

1018. The Tribunal therefore finds that there is a direct causal link between [...]’s competitive
challenge to [...] and the failure of the [...] transaction. However, this is not sufficient in
order to establish a breach of the Treaty. Croatian competition law, like any other
competition law system, encourages price-based competition (including under certain
conditions by enterprises with significant market power) as a means to achieve consumer
welfare. In a similar vein, the applicable postal legislation — the 2009 PSA — likewise
recognized [...]’s legal right to compete with other postal services providers on the basis
of price, including by offering discounts. Consequently, for Claimant’s claim to succeed,
it is not sufficient to establish that [...] offered discounts and [...] lost clients due to those
discounts. It is necessary to establish that [...]’s discounts were illegal, that they were
contrary to the applicable Croatian Competition Act. For instance, assuming that [...] had
conducted itself in the same manner described at Section VII.C.3 above with respect to the
disclosure of its discounts to HAKOM, but that in that scenario HAKOM had actually
verified the discounts and determined that they did not bring prices below unit cost, in this
situation, [...] would have suffered from the normal effects of competition on the merits
and the failure of the [...] transaction would have been the result of normal market forces

at play.

1019. In the case sub judice, as established at Section VII.C.3 above, HAKOM did not perform
any verification of [...]’s prices and discounts. However, in its 2012 Decision, the CCA
looked into this matter. The CCA concluded that [...] and [...] were not competing on the
same product market and that [...]’s discounts could not have been predatory. Claimant
challenges that decision as being riddled with errors. That may be true. But, as the Tribunal
has already concluded at Section VIL.C.4 above, the 2012 CCA Decision does not fall foul
of Article 3(1) of the Treaty. The CCA complied with due process, correctly identified the
relevant facts and the applicable law, and made an earnest, good faith effort to apply that
law to the facts. More importantly, while the CCA made some mistakes, some of which
may have been serious, those mistakes do not rise to the level of arbitrariness.
Consequently, for purposes of these proceedings, the 2012 CCA Decision remains
determinative and final with regard to the question of whether [...] violated the Croatian

Competition Act through the discounts offered in 2012.

108

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1020. Since [...]’s discounts were found by the CCA as being compliant with the Croatian
Competition Act, this means that [...]’s attendant loss of revenues and customers, including
as a result of the failure of the [...] transaction to close, was simply the normal, to be
expected result of market forces at play.

1021. For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that Respondent did not breach Article 3(1) of the
Treaty through unfair and arbitrary conduct that led to the failure of the [...] transaction.

§
1022. For all the reasons set out above in Section VILC, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent
breached Article 3(1) of the Treaty through arbitrary conduct, which consisted of its
repudiation of the ex ante regulatory framework that governed the provision of postal

services and its attempt to re-monopolize a part of the postal services market in the first
half of 2013 with a view to protecting the national postal operator.

VIII. WHETHER CROATIA BREACHED ARTICLE 6 OF THE BIT

A. Claimant’s position
1023. [...]

B. Respondent’s position
1033. [...]

Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis
1047. Article 6 of the BIT reads:

“Neither Contracting Party shall take any measures depriving, directly or indirectly,
nationals of the other Contracting Party of their investments unless the following
conditions are complied with:

a) The measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of law;

b) The measures are not discriminatory or contrary to any undertaking which the
Contracting Party which takes such measures may have given;

c) The measures are taken against just compensation.”

109

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1048. The Parties agree that Article 6 of the Treaty applies to both direct and indirect
expropriations and that an expropriation claim requires evidence of a substantial
deprivation of an investor’s investment or, in other words, that the challenged measures
must lead to an interference with property rights that is sufficiently restrictive so as to
support a finding that the investment was taken from the owner.

1049. Further, the Parties are in agreement that “States are not liable to pay compensation to a
foreign investor when, in the normal exercise of their regulatory powers, they adopt in a
non-discriminatory manner bona fide regulations that are aimed at the general welfare”.'*!
The Tribunal likewise considers that the economic harm consequent to the non-
discriminatory application of generally applicable regulations adopted in order to protect
the public welfare do not constitute a compensable taking, provided that the measures were
taken in good faith, complied with due process and were proportionate to the aim sought
to be achieved. The Tribunal also recalls its finding at paragraph 944 above, made in the
context of its analysis under the FET standard, but which is equally applicable and pertinent
to the expropriation claim, that a certain level of deference is due to national agencies,
tasked to regulate highly technical and specialized fields of economic activity, with regard
to their assessment of whether particular forms of conduct run counter to the prescriptions

of national law.!*

1050. The Parties dispute however: (i) whether a claim for expropriation may be based upon
omissions as well as actions; and (ii) whether establishing a State’s intent to expropriate is
a necessary pre-condition for indirect expropriation. The Tribunal agrees with Claimant,
and considers it to be uncontroversial, that an expropriation claim may be based not only
on positive acts of the State, but also on omissions.'*? The Tribunal does not consider it
necessary to determine in the abstract whether a claim for indirect expropriation must be
based on a State’s intent to expropriate. For present purposes, the Tribunal considers it
sufficient to note that the element of the State’s intent already factors into its analysis as to
whether the State legitimately and in good faith employed its police powers.

1051. After having carefully examined the facts of this case, the Tribunal has reached the
conclusion that the measures challenged by Claimant, either individually or cumulatively,
do not constitute a compensable taking.

'8! Saluka v. Czech Republic, at 255.
"82 fd, at 272, 273.
83 See, ILC Articles on State Responsibility, p. 32, Article 1, comment 1 (Exhibit CL-103).

110

EXCERPTS

B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1052. In this respect, the Tribunal notes that Claimant raises in the context of its expropriation
claim the same arguments as those made in the context of its FET claim. The Tribunal has
already determined in Section VILC above that:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

HAKOM undertook a series of measures and implemented a number of
projects in order to ensure that [...] timely implemented separate cost
accounting. In view of the complexity of the entire operation, its completion
took several years. Claimant’s contentions to the contrary are therefore
factually inaccurate and cannot support its expropriation claim.

Respondent’s treatment of value-added services was not arbitrary, but
reasoned, applied uniformly and consistently on the market. Respondent
was not under an obligation to follow the European Commission’s views
with respect to the interpretation of value-added services, as the obligation
to incorporate the acquis communautaire became due only upon
Respondent’s accession to the European Union, on | July 2013. While
Croatia could have been more transparent regarding its understanding of the
meaning of value-added services, this does not change the conclusion that
its approach was consistent and reasoned. In other words, Respondent
applied Article 10(3) of the 2009 PSA, a regulation aimed at the general
welfare, in good faith, in a non-discriminatory manner and in compliance
with due process. For these same reasons, the Tribunal finds that
Respondent’s treatment of value-added services is not expropriatory.

The CCA’s 2012 and 2015 Decisions, while imperfect, were issued at the
close of proceedings that complied with due process, and evidenced the
agency’s good faith efforts to apply the correct body of law to the correct
set of facts. The alleged errors included therein were within the range of
errors to be expected in a regulatory and administrative context and did not
show an intent to repudiate the applicable principles of competition law or
a manifest failure by the CCA to discharge its mandate. The CCA’s
Decisions were thus issued on the basis of a regulation aimed at the general
welfare (the Croatian Competition Act), in good faith, in a non-
discriminatory manner and in compliance with due process. For these
reasons, the Tribunal finds that the CCA’s conduct was not expropriatory.

HAKOM did not deny [...] timely and non-discriminatory access to [...]’s
postal network. Claimant’s contentions to the contrary are factually
inaccurate and cannot support its expropriation claim. Moreover, HAKOM
and the Zagreb High Administrative Court rendered their decisions on

1

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1053.

1054.

1055.

1056.

access on the basis of a regulation aimed at the general welfare (the 2012
PSA), in good faith, in a non-discriminatory manner and following
procedures that guaranteed[...]’s due process rights. For these reasons, the
Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s conduct with respect to the
compensation fund was not expropriatory.

(v) Respondent did not wrongfully establish a compensation fund for [...], but
did so on the basis of specific provisions in the 2012 PSA. Moreover, the
process followed by Respondent for this purpose protected [...]’s due
process rights. Any errors in calculation made by HAKOM are not
reviewable by this Tribunal as they were within the range of normal errors
to be expected in a regulatory and administrative context. Respondent
therefore applied the 2012 PSA in good faith, in a non-discriminatory
manner and guaranteed due process. Respondent’s conduct concerning
[...]’s compensation fund cannot be considered expropriatory.

(vi) Respondent did not unlawfully exclude [...] from public procurement
procedures through discriminatory tender requirements. Claimant’s
contentions to the contrary are factually inaccurate and cannot support its
expropriation claim.

The Tribunal has also concluded in Section VII.C.7 above that, in the first half of 2013,
HAKOM and the Ministry of Transport attempted to re-monopolize a part of the postal
services market through a restrictive interpretation of public procurement procedures. This
conduct, while constitutive of a breach of the FET standard on account of Respondent’s
bad faith, did not produce any effects on the market. For this reason, the Tribunal finds that
it cannot be considered to be expropriatory.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the challenged conduct above, taken individually, is
not expropriatory.

The Tribunal will now address the question of whether HAKOM’s manifest failure to
regulate [...]’s prices and discounts in 2012 and 2013, in and of itself, can substantiate
Claimant’s expropriation claim. The Tribunal finds that it cannot.

In this respect, the Tribunal recalls its observations, made in Section VILC.8 above,
pursuant to which Croatian competition law and the 2009 (and 2012) PSA encourage price-
based competition as a means to achieve and enhance consumer welfare. It is only if [...]’s
discounts had been contrary to the Croatian Competition Act (in this instance, on the
grounds of predation) that they would have been illegal and Respondent’s failure to control

112

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1057.

1058.

1059.

1060.

such discounts would have been expropriatory. In any other circumstances, even steep
discounts would be a normal competitive strategy and competition on the merits, and any
business losses incurred as a result could not amount to an expropriation, but only to the
normal effects of market forces at play.

The Tribunal has already determined that the CCA, in both its 2012 and 2015 Decisions,
analyzed whether [...]’s conduct in granting discounts on the postal services market was
contrary to the Croatian Competition Act. In both instances, the CCA concluded, after
procedures that complied with due process and following the application of the correct
body of law to the correct set of facts, that it was not. While both decisions may have
contained some errors in the application of the law, they do not fall foul of Article 3(1) of
the Treaty and they represent a good faith exercise of Croatia’s police powers. For these
reasons, the Tribunal will not intervene and review the substantive correctness of the 2012
and 2015 CCA Decisions on the merits. It is only if the Tribunal had concluded that the
CCA had acted capriciously, without a legitimate purpose, that it had repudiated the
applicable law or had shown preference or bias, that it would have corrected the CCA’s
findings. Consequently, for purposes of these proceedings, the 2012 and 2015 CCA
Decisions remain determinative and final with regard to the question of whether [...]
violated the Croatian Competition Act through the discounts offered in 2012 and 2013.
Since[...]’s discounts were found by the CCA to be in line with the Croatian Competition
Act,[...]’s loss of revenues and customers was simply the normal, to be expected result of
competition on the merits, of market forces at play.

Having concluded that the conduct challenged by Claimant, when approached from the
perspective of each individual measure, is not expropriatory, the Tribunal will now
determine whether, when seen cumulatively, Respondent’s actions and inactions formed a
composite act that was expropriatory. The Tribunal finds that they did not.

The Tribunal is not satisfied, and Claimant has not convincingly established, that the series
of actions and omissions above, which have been found to not be expropriatory when
analyzed individually, can be considered, when examined cumulatively, to be unlawful and
expropriatory.

Indeed, the Tribunal finds that such a finding cannot be made in the present case. In this
respect, the Tribunal notes that the crux of Claimant’s expropriation claim is its submission
that[...]’s predatory and unchecked discounts led to the loss of a number of clients and of
significant revenue for[...], and was the key determining factor behind the failure off...]’s
business. In Claimant’s submission, the other measures challenged in this arbitration
aggravated these losses so that, ultimately, Claimant’s entire investment was expropriated.

113

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

The Tribunal thus considers that Claimant’s expropriation claim is fundamentally linked

to its submission that [...]’s discounts were illegal under the Croatian Competition Act.

1061. The Tribunal has concluded above that the legality of [...]’s discounts was conclusively
established by the CCA in its 2012 and 2015 Decisions, both of which do not run foul of
Article 3(1) of the Treaty. When the Tribunal approaches Claimant’s expropriation claim
from the perspective of the cumulative effect of the challenged measures, it must also
depart from the premise of the legality of [...]’s discounts. Therefore, the most important
element of Claimant’s expropriation claim — [...]’s illegal and unchecked discounts — must
necessarily fail. The Tribunal also bears in mind its other findings above, such as the
legality of HAKOM’s decision establishing [...]’s compensation fund and of its decision
concerning [...]’s value-added services. Consequently, any financial impact on [...]’s
business of the actions and omissions concerning [...]’s discounts,[...]’s compensation
fund and[...]’s value-added services cannot be sanctioned through the application of
Article 6 of the Treaty. Bearing in mind the legality of [...]’s discounts, the Tribunal finds
that Claimant did not conclusively establish that HAKOM’s abdication of its regulatory

obligations, in and of itself, substantially deprived it of its investment.

1062. For all these reasons, the Tribunal finds that Respondent did not breach Article 6 of the

BIT as a result of the actions and omissions challenged by Claimant in this arbitration.

IX. DAMAGES

A. Claimant’s position

1063. [...]

Causal link

1066. [...]

Pre-expropriation period damages
1079. [...]

[...] fair market value

1083. [...]

114

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

Lost incremental cash flows

1089. [...]

Interest

1092. [...]

B. Respondent’s position
1095. [...]

Causal link

1096. [...]

Pre-expropriation period damages
1105. [...]

Post-expropriation period damages
1112. [...]

Loss of opportunity damages

1115. [...]

Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis

1117. For the reasons that will be explained in more detail in the paragraphs below, the Tribunal

concludes that Claimant’s damages claim must be dismissed.

1118. The Tribunal has concluded at Sections VILC.3 and VII.C.7 above that Respondent
breached Article 3(1) of the Treaty through HAKOM’s manifest failure to regulate [...]’s
prices and discounts and through HAKOM’s and the Ministry of Transport’s attempt, in
the first half of 2013, to re-monopolize a part of the postal services market. The Tribunal
has found that the remainder of Claimant’s claims under Article 3(1) of the Treaty, as well
as its expropriation claim, have no merit. The Tribunal’s determination with respect to

Claimant’s claim for damages must reflect, and be informed by, these findings.

1119. The Tribunal notes that Claimant’s calculation of damages is based on a finding of a Treaty
breach consisting of a complex act that encompasses Respondent’s treatment of value-

115

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

added services, HAKOM’s and the CCA’s conduct with respect to [...]’s prices and
discounts, HAKOM’s decision regarding [...]’s compensation fund and the failure of the
[...] transaction. Claimant did not isolate the losses allegedly stemming from these
individual claims'** but only calculated their aggregate effect. Claimant maintains
that[...]’s losses were mainly due to[...]’s alleged anticompetitive discounts, but they do
not distinguish, on the one hand, between the damages caused by HAKOM’s conduct, and,
on the other hand, the damages caused by the conduct of the CCA. As [...], Claimant’s
damages expert, admitted at the hearing, Claimant’s calculation of damages involved a
cumulative assessment of the losses caused by both HAKOM’s and the CCA’s conduct
under the rubric “anti-competitive conduct off...]”, which was the primary driver of the
final calculation of damages:

“DR ALEXANDROV: Good morning. One question. You have identified on slide 4 of
your presentation the different alleged breaches. There was a discussion of your figure 17
generally starting at paragraph 97 of your first report to talk about loss of revenue due to
loss of customers, then you talk about increased costs due to certain measures.

My question is where do we — assuming and we have not decided anything, obviously,
but when we do you will not be here -- if we, and I emphasise "if", we come to the
conclusion that some but not all of those measures are breaches, where do we look? Do we
look at the lost revenue and the increased cost by measure to isolate the effect of one
measure versus another?

[...]: I will answer that. That is a fantastic question.

Slide 4, obviously the size of the circles is meant to be relative so, obviously, losing
the revenues due to the anti-competitive, alleged anti-competitive measures of [...] is the
primary issue in this case.

Claimants do complain about, for example, in the upper left corner the denied access
to public tenders. We do not actually calculate anything for that. It is a loss of chance, if
you will. What chance they would have had is very subjective to assess but we decided to
leave that out. You could consider overall damages to be quite conservative in that respect
because we have not come up with that.

The compensation fund payment I think you know. That is a factual matter; so not
a problem.

Upper right corner, acquisition off...], we have a very specific --

DR ALEXANDROV: That you have isolated, right.
[...]: The other two, access to the postal network and enforcement of value added postal
services, extremely difficult to calculate individually.

Just to give you an example, the postal services, you know, having to do the signature,
to calculate that individually we would need to know and have data on how long it took a
postal operator to deliver a letter, how many times he had to go to the door versus what
they had to do before when they just had to drop it off without a signature and come up
with a calculation.

I think the effort to do that calculation probably outweighs the value of it. What we
tried to do is come up with what we thought was a normalised non-type of cost structure

  

'84 With the exception of the Al Direkt transaction.

116

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

that included having to get signatures for bills but we do not have a specific calculation for
those two factors.”'*> [emphasis added]

1120. Claimant’s calculation of damages is therefore of no use to the Tribunal in light of its
finding that, with the exception of HAKOM’s failure to supervise[...]’s prices and
discounts, the remainder of the challenged acts and omissions mentioned herein did not
breach the Treaty.

1121. The Tribunal also considers that Claimant has not succeeded in its attempt to establish a
causal link between, on the one hand, HAKOM’s conduct and, on the other hand, the losses
allegedly incurred by[...]. As pointed out by Respondent, “Claimant [was] [...] required
to prove with reasonable certainty, on the basis of sufficient and cogent evidence, that
Respondent actually caused[...]’s financial performance to decline, and to exclude from
its damages claim losses resulting from any other likely cause”.'*°

1122. The Tribunal notes in particular that[...]’s financial situation had started to deteriorate prior
to HAKOM’s unlawful conduct. As early as August 2011, eighteen months ahead of
schedule, [...] commenced its national roll-out which led to a significant increase of its
costs.'8? Moreover, due to[...]’s decision to shift the full amount of the acquisition cost
finance to [...] in the middle of 2011,[...]’s finances were put under additional strain. In
addition to the fact that Claimant has not put forward a separate calculation for the damages
incurred as a result of HAKOM’s conduct, the Tribunal also considers that Claimant has
not adequately separated the financial effects of these strategic business decisions on[...]’s
liquidity.

1123. The Tribunal also recalls that Claimant’s case (including its claim for damages) is premised
upon its submission that[...]’s discounts were predatory and thus in breach of the Croatian
Competition Act. The Tribunal has found no breach of the Treaty as regards the conduct
of the CCA. Indeed, both the 2012 and the 2015 Decisions were found to be in compliance
with the standards of protection set out in the Treaty. For this reason, the Tribunal did not
review the substantive correctness of the CCA’s findings. Thus, the legality of[...]’s
discounts was conclusively established by the CCA in its 2012 and 2015 Decisions.
Since[...]’s discounts were found by the CCA to be in line with the Croatian Competition
Act, HAKOM’s lack of supervision thereof could only have had a limited effect on[...],
whose loss of revenues and customers was simply the normal, to be expected result of
competition on the merits, of market forces at play. The Tribunal reiterates that Claimant

185 Ty, Day 9, 30: 4-25; 31-1-25; 32: I-11.
186 Reply, at 879.
187 Jd, at 80, 81; Navigant Second Expert Report, at 85, 86.

117

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

has failed to put forward an assessment of damages specifically for the losses caused by
HAKOM’s conduct.

1124. Finally, the remainder of the actions and omissions challenged by Claimant in this
arbitration have been found by the Tribunal to be in compliance with the provisions of the

Treaty. Consequently, they cannot form the basis of an award of damages.

1125. For all these reasons, the Tribunal hereby dismisses Claimant’s claim for damages.

X. COSTS

Claimant’s position

1126. [...]
B. Respondent’s position
1135. [...]

Cc. The Tribunal’s analysis
1140. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

“Tn the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise
agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings, and
shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of
the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such
decision shall form part of the award.”

1141. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention grants the Tribunal significant discretion in the
allocation of costs. The Parties appear to be in agreement that costs should follow the event,
if there are no indications that a different solution is better suited to the case at hand. The
Tribunal agrees that, to the extent possible, the allocation of costs should be done on the
basis of this principle.

1142. The Tribunal has dismissed in full three out of the four jurisdictional objections raised by
Respondent and granted the fourth in part. The Tribunal has also concluded that Claimant
has established Respondent’s liability under Article 3(1) of the Treaty on account of
HAKOM’s complete abdication of its duties as the postal services market regulator and of
HAKOM’s and the Ministry of Transport’s bad faith attempt, in the first half of 2013, to
re-monopolize a part of the postal services market. While Claimant has not succeeded to
establish liability for any other conduct, or on the basis of Article 6 of the Treaty, and has

118

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1143.

1144.

1145.

1146.

1147.

not put forward a calculation of damages for the conduct identified by the Tribunal to be
in breach of the Treaty, the fact that the Tribunal has found that Respondent has breached
the Treaty without ordering any compensation because of the absence of a proof of a causal
link, constitutes a compelling reason for the Tribunal to make use of its discretion and order
that Respondent bear all the costs of this arbitration and reimburse Claimant for its costs.

The Tribunal notes, in this connection, that Claimant referred to an arrangement between
[...], which provides for a success fee in the eventuality that the Tribunal awards Claimant
damages (among other conditions). Since the Tribunal has not awarded damages, there is
no need to decide whether Claimant should be reimbursed for such success fee.

Therefore, Respondent should reimburse Claimant the following costs for its legal
representation, which the Tribunal deemes reasonable in light of the complexity of this

case:

- Legal fees and expenses:[

 

- Expert fees and expenses:[...
- Other costs: [...] translation costs; [...] in-house management travel expenses.

The Tribunal notes that the costs of these arbitration proceedings, including the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal and the Tribunal’s Assistant, ICSID’s administrative fees and
direct expenses, amount to (in USD):

- Arbitrator fees and expenses: [...];

- Tribunal assistant fees and expenses: [...];
- ICSID administrative fees: [...];

- Direct expenses (estimated):!** [...];

- Total: [...]

The above expenses have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties in equal
parts.'®° As a result, each Party’s share of the costs of the arbitration amounts to
USD 554,616.31.

Bearing in mind the considerations above, the Tribunal decides that Respondent shall
reimburse Claimant the amount of USD 554,616.31 for the expended portion of Claimant’s

'88 This amount includes estimated charges (courier, printing and copying) in connection with the dispatch of the

Award.

'8° The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to

ICSID.

119

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

1148.

advances to ICSID and EUR 3,659,607.49 to cover the costs of Claimant’s legal
representation.

The Tribunal notes that Claimant has not requested interest on this amount, but only on
any amount awarded by the Tribunal as damages.

120

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Codperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

XI.

DECISION

For all the reasons developed in this Award, the Tribunal decides as follows:

(a)

(b)

(c)
@
(e)
(

(g)

Finds that it does not have jurisdiction ratione temporis over events that took place
prior to 1 April 2011;

Finds that it has jurisdiction to hear Claimant’s claims pertaining to events that took
place subsequent to 1 April 2011;

Finds that Respondent, the Republic of Croatia, breached Article 3(1) of the Treaty;
Dismisses Claimant’s claim that Respondent expropriated its investment;
Dismisses Claimant’s claim for damages;

Orders Respondent to pay Claimant the amounts of USD 554,616.31 and
EUR 3,659,607.49 as compensation for Claimant’s costs in this arbitration;

Dismisses all other claims.

* The page numbers in the Table of Contents of these Excerpts do not correspond to the original page numbers of the

Award.

121

EXCERPTS
B3 Croatian Courier Coéperatief U.A. v. Republic of Croatia (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/5)

 

[Signed] [Signed]
Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov Prof. Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 03/04/2019 Date: 28/03/2019
[Signed]

Prof. Bernard Hanotiau
President of the Tribunal

Date: 03/04/2019

122

