International Centre for Settlement of Investment

Disputes

 

BAYINDIR INSAAT TURIZM TICARET VE SANAYIA.S.

CLAIMANT

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN

RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of:

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President
Sir Franklin Berman, Arbitrator

Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, Arbitrator

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

THE RELEVANT FACTS REGARDING THE ISSUE OF JURISDICTION...........

A. The parties
a. The Claimant
b. The Respondent

B. Background facts
a. The M1 Motorway Project
b. The origin of the present dispute
c. Related litigation
d. The BIT

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 

A. Initial phase
B. The written phase on jurisdiction

C. The hearing on jurisdiction

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

 

A. Bayindir’ position
B. Pakistan’s position
DISCUSSION

Introductory matters
a. The relevance of previous ICSID decisions or awards
b. Uncontroversial matters
c. The law applicable to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the relevant issues

A. Has Bayindir failed to comply with formal requirements preventing it to submit

the present dispute (Article VII of the BIT)?

B. Has Bayindir made an investment?
a. Investment under Article (2) of the BIT
aa. Bayindir’s contribution in terms of know how, equipment and personnel
bb. Bayindir’s financial contribution
ec. Conclusion

a

aan

NOODD

12

15

17

18

18

19

21

21

22
23

25

30
30
32
32
33

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

b. Investment under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
aa. The object of the contract
bb. The so-called “Salini Test”

Are Bayindir’s Treaty Claims in reality Contract Claims?
a. Bayindir’s Treaty Claims
b. The difference between Treaty Claims and Contract Claims
c. The specific circumstances of the case
aa. The “ingredients” of Bayindir's claims
bb. The quantum of Bayindir's claims
d. Pakistan’s subsidiary arguments
aa. Abuse of Process
bb. Conflict of Conventions
e. The question of ‘puissance publique’

Are Bayindir’s Treaty Claims sufficiently substantiated for jurisdictional
purposes?
a. The relevant test
aa. The onus of establishing jurisdiction
bb. The relevant standard
. Bayindir’s most favoured nation claim
aa. Expulsion for reasons of costs and local favouritism
bb. More favourable timetables were accorded to Pakistani contractors
cc. Selective tendering
Bayindir’s fair and equitable treatment claim
aa. Is there an obligation of equitable treatment?
bb. Alleged failure to provide a stable framework for Bayindir's investment
cc. The allegedly unfair and inequitable expulsion
d. Bayindir’s expropriation claims
e. Conclusion

a

9

Should the Tribunal stay the current proceedings?

Costs

 

33
34
35

37
38
40
a4
42
42
45
45
46
48

49
50
50
51
53
55
56
58
59
60
61
63
66
69

69

72

73

Arbitration Rules
Bayindir
BIT

1997 Contract

C-Mem. J.
Contract

EOT

Exh. [Bay.] B
Exh. [Bay.] CX
Exh. [Bay.] CLEX
Exh. [Pak.] C
Exh. [Pak.] D
Exh. [Pak.] L
Exh. [Pak.] RL
ICSID

ICSID Convention

M1 Project
Mem. J.

MFN

NHA

PMC JV

RA or Request
Rejoinder J.

Reply J.

Tr. P.
Tr. J. [page:line]

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. A.S.

Bilateral investment treaty; specifically “Agreement Between the Republic
of Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan Concerning the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments” of 16 March 1995

Agreement for the Revival of Contract Agreement for the Construction of
Islamabad-Peshawar Motorway of 29 March 1997

Bayindir’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 31 March 2005
1993 Contract as revived by the1997 Contract

Extension of time

Bayindir’s Exhibit [Request for arbitration]

Bayindir’s Exhibit (Documentary Evidence)

Bayindir’s Exhibit (Legal Materials)

Pakistan’s Exhibit (Principal Contractual Documents) [Volume 2 of Mem. J.]
Pakistan’s Exhibit (Documentary exhibits) [Volume 7 of Mem. J.]
Pakistan’s Exhibit (Legal Materials) [Volume 3 to 6 of Mem. J.]
Pakistan’s Exhibit (Legal Materials) [Volume 3 to Reply.]
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States

Pakistan Islamabad-Peshawar Motorway

Pakistan’s Objections to Jurisdiction dated 31 December 2004
Most favoured nation clause

National Highway Authority of Pakistan

Pakistani Motorway Contractors Joint Venture

Bayindir’s Request of Arbitration of 15 April 2002

Bayindir’s Rebuttal (on Jurisdiction) dated 17 June 2005

Pakistan’s Reply on Bayindir’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of 9 May
2005

Transcript of the preliminary hearing

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction

THE RELEVANT FACTS REGARDING THE ISSUE OF JURISDICTION

This Chapter summarizes the factual background of this arbitration in so far as it is
necessary to rule on the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction.

THE PARTIES

The Claimant

The Claimant, Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. A.S. (“Bayindir’) is a
company incorporated and existing under the laws of the Republic of Turkey. Its
principal office is situated at Tunus Caddesi No. 24, Kavaklidere, Ankara, Turkey.

The Claimant is part of the Bayindir group of companies. It is engaged in the business
of construction of motorways and other larger infrastructure projects in Turkey and
abroad.

The Claimant was initially represented in this arbitration by

e Dr. Michael Buhler and Mr. Jonathan Eades; JONES Day; 120, Rue du Faubourg
Saint Honoré; 75008 Paris; France, and

e Mr. Farrukh Karim Qureshi; WALKER MARTINEAU SALEEM; 40-B, Street 30, Sector F-
8/1; Islamabad; Pakistan.

On 1% July 2005, Claimant informed the ICSID Secretariat that it had retained new

counsel and that it would be represented by

e Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard; SHEARMAN & STERLING LLP; 114, avenue des Champs-
Elysées; 75008 Paris; France, and

e Mr. John Savage; SHEARMAN & STERLING LLP; 6 Battery Road, #25-03; 049909
Singapore, Singapore.

On 14 July 2005, Prof. Gaillard and Mr. Savage advised the ICSID Secretariat that
SHEARMAN & STERLING LLP had ceased to represent the Claimant with immediate
effect.

On 18 July 2005, Claimant informed the ICSID Secretariat that it had retained new
counsel and would be represented at the jurisdictional hearing by Mr. Farrukh Karim
Qureshi and

e Mr. Gavan Griffith, QC; ESSEX COURT CHAMBERS; 24 Lincoln's Inn Fields; London
WC2A 3EG; United Kingdom.

The Respondent

The Respondent is the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“Pakistan*).

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by

e The Hon. Makhdoom Ali Khan; Attorney General for Pakistan; Supreme Court
Building; Islamabad; Pakistan, and

e Mr. V. V. Veeder QC, Prof. Christopher Greenwood CMG, QC and Mr. Samuel
Wordsworth; ESSEX COURT CHAMBERS; 24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields; London WC2A 3EG;
United Kingdom, and

e Mr. Rodman R. Bundy and Ms. Loretta Malintoppi; EVERSHEDS Avocats a la Cour
de Paris; 8, Place d’léna; 75116 Paris; France,

e Mr. Iftiknaruddin Riaz; Bhandari; Nagvi & Riaz; 5 Miccop Centre; 1 Mozang Road;
Lahore; Pakistan, who replaced Mr. Umar Atta Bandial, UMAR BANDIAL &
ASSOCIATES, Lower Ground Floor, LDA Plaza Egerton Road; Lahore; Pakistan; and

e Mr. Khurram M. Hashmi; Barrister-at-Law; 24 Mezzanine Floor, Beverley Centre,
Blue Area, Islamabad, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND FACTS
The M1 Motorway Project

The National Highway Authority (“NHA”) is a public corporation established by the
Pakistani Act No XI (National Highway Authority Act) of 1991 to assume responsibility
for the planning, development, operation and maintenance of Pakistan’s national
highways and strategic roads. Although controlled by the Government of Pakistan, NHA
is a body corporate in Pakistan with the right to sue and to be sued in its own name
(Section 3(2) National Highway Authority Act 1991).

Among other projects, NHA has planned the construction of a six-lane motorway and
ancillary works known as the “Pakistan Islamabad-Peshawar Motorway” (the “M1

Project”).

In 1993, NHA and Bayindir entered into an agreement for the construction of the M1
Project (the “1993 Contract”) (Exh. [Pak.] C-1). The 1993 Contract was a two page

6

agreement incorporating, inter alia, Addenda No.1-9 (Exh. [Pak.] C-1), the Conditions of

Contract - Part | and II (Exh. [Pak.] C-4), General Specifications, Special Provisions and

Addenda to General Specifications, Drawings, Priced Bill of Quantities (BOQ), as well

as the Bid and Appendices “A to M”. In particular, it bears noting that:

(i) Part | incorporated the FIDIC General Conditions of Contract for Works of Civil
Engineering Construction (1987 edition).

(ii) Part Il, entitled “Conditions of Particular Applications’, incorporated the
amendments and supplements to Part | as negotiated by the Parties.

Disputes arose in connection with the 1993 Contract, which NHA and Bayindir resolved
in 1997. As part of their settlement, on 29 March 1997 the parties executed a
Memorandum of Agreement “with the objective of reviving The Contract Agreement
dated 18 March 1993” (Exh. [Pak.] C-5). Under Clause 8 of this Memorandum of
Agreement, the Parties agreed “to apply to the arbitration tribunal in the appropriate
manner to seek the decision of the tribunal on only the issue of the quantum of

expenses incurred by Bayindir as specified in Bayindir's claim for expenses only"’.

On 3 July 1997, the Parties entered into a new contract, the “Agreement for the Revival
of Contract Agreement for the Construction of Islamabad-Peshawar Motorway” (the
“1997 Contract”) (Exh. [Pak.] C-6). The 1997 Contract incorporated the 1993 Contract
“in its entirety” with some “overriding conditions” agreed by the parties in the
Memorandum of Agreement signed on 29 March 1997.

For the sake of simplicity, the Tribunal will simply use the term “Clause of the Contract”
to mean the relevant clause of the (FIDIC) General Conditions of Contract (Conditions
of Contract — Part | incorporated in the 1993 agreement), as possibly supplemented by
the Conditions of Particular Applications (Conditions of Contract — Part II incorporated in
the 1993 agreement), as revived and possibly amended by the 1997 Contract. The
Tribunal will refer to the (revived) contractual relationship between the parties as the
“Contract”.

The Contract is governed by the laws of Pakistan.

By an arbitral award of 30 June 1999, Bayindir was ordered to pay USD 12,909,935 to NHA but
was declared entitled to retain USD 10,721,595 of the advance payment made under the Contract
in 1993 (Exh. [Pak.] L-27).

20.

It was a term of the Contract that NHA would pay to Bayindir 30% of the Contract price
as an advance payment (the “Mobilisation Advance”). Thereafter, NHA paid to Bayindir
an amount of USD 159,080,845 as Mobilisation Advance (namely two separate
amounts of USD 96,645,563.50 and PKR 2,523,009,751.707).

It was a further term of the Contract that Bayindir would provide a bank guarantee
equivalent to the amount of the Mobilisation Advance. On 9 January 1998, a consortium
of Turkish banks (comprising Turkiye is Bankasi A.S., Turkiye Vakiflar Bankasi T.A.O.,
Turkiye Halk Bankasi A.S., Finansbank A.S., DenizbanktheA.S. and Kentbank A.S.,
which subrogated its rights to Bayindirbank A.S.) issued two guarantees on behalf of
Bayindir to secure the Mobilisation Advance in accordance with the Contract (the
“Mobilisation Advance Guarantees”). Consistent with the Contract, the Mobilisation
Advance Guarantees were payable to NHA “on his first demand without whatsoever
right of objection on [the Bank’s] part and without his first claim[ing] to the Contractor”.
The amounts of the Mobilisation Advance Guarantees were to decrease, as interim

payments were made for work in progress®.
The performance of the Contract was to be supervised by an Engineer.

The Contracts set forth a multi-tier mechanism for “Settlement of Disputes”, which may
be sketched as follows:

e Any “matter in dispute shall, in the first place, be referred in writing to the Engineer”
(67.1(1) of the Contract).

e Either of the parties dissatisfied with any decision of the Engineer” “may give notice
to the other party of his intention to commence arbitration” (67.1(3) of the Contract).

e The parties “shall attempt to settle such dispute amicably” and, unless the parties
otherwise agree, arbitration cannot be commenced on or after the fifty-sixth day
after the day on which notice of intention to commence arbitration was given.

e The dispute shall then be “finally settled under the rules and provisions of the
Arbitration Act 1940 as amended or any statutory modification or re-enactment
thereof for the time being in force”.

Aw,

The parties seem to agree on a relevant exchange rate of 40.41 PKR to 1 USD.

The final terms of the reimbursement were set in Addendum No. 09 (see infra No. 23; Exh.
[Bay.] CX-12 at 3).

The same applies “if the Engineer fails to give notice of his decision on or before the eighty-
fourth day after the day on which he received the reference”.

8

21.

22.

23.

24.

The origin of the present dispute

On 3 June 1998, the Engineer issued the order to proceed to the construction with

original completion dates foreseen on 31 July 2000.°

Between September 1999 and 20 April 2001, Bayindir submitted several claims
regarding payment and four claims for extension of time (EOT) invoking different
omissions on the part of Pakistan (in particular delays in the construction work resulting
from late hand over of the land by Pakistan and/or NHA°).

The first two EOT claims (EOT/01 and EOT/02) were settled by agreement among the
parties during a meeting held on 18 February 2000. This agreement’ led to the
execution of Addendum No. 9 of 17 April 2000 to the Contract, which set out, among
other things, that “the revised Contract Completion Date shall be 31°' December 2002”
and that “NHA will hand over the remaining land as expeditiously as possible but not
later than 4 months from the signing” of Addendum No. 9. The detailed schedule
attached to Addendum No. 9 provided that two priority sections had to be completed
before 23 March 2003 (the Priority Sections).

Asserting primarily that NHA failed “to give the Possession of Site as per Addendum
No. 9”, on 15 January 2001 Bayindir submitted its third EOT claim (EOT/03) for
completion of the two “Priority Sections” by October 2001 (Exh. [Bay.] B-15). On 3 April
2001 the Engineer’s representative granted Bayindir a limited extension of time of
twenty-seven and ten days respectively (Exh. [Bay.] B-17).

See 1997 Contract. This date was extended till 31 December 2002 though Addendum No. 9
dated 17 April 2000 (see infra No. 23-24).

During the same period, Bayindir also issued several claims for delay in the settlement of
Bayindir’s monthly progress payments (interim payment certificates).

Under the agreement reached during the meeting of 18 February 2000, it was decided, inter alia,
that "December 2002 as the new completion date for the Project with about one year advance
completion of two sections from Islamabad to Burhan and Indus to Mardan" (Exh. [Bay.] B13).
Among other new conditions that were not contemplated by the agreement of 18 February 2000,
Addendum No. 9 provided that Bayindir had to “complete the two Priority Sections mentioned
therein by 23 March 2001”. It is Bayindir’s contention that it accepted this new demand by NHA
“[a]s a result of the pressure, coercion and duress exercised by Pakistan” (RA p. 5 {| 13).

9

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

By letter of 6 April 2001 Bayindir disputed this extension of time (Exh. [Bay.] B-18) and
referred the matter to the Engineer for his decision under Clause 67.1 of the Contract

reiterating its entitlement to an extension under EOT/03.°

On 19 April 2001 NHA informed Bayindir that liquidated damages would be imposed
on Bayindir for late completion of the two Priority Sections with effect from 20 April
2001; that is, the end of the limited extension granted on 3 April 2001 (Exh. [Bay.] B-
20).

The same day, Bayindir wrote to NHA to refer the decision to impose liquidated
damages to the Engineer pursuant to Clause 67.1, in particular on the ground that
EOT/03 was “still pending with the Engineer for decision” (Exh. [Bay.] B-25).

On 20 April 2001, Bayindir wrote to NHA to inform that it had been unable to complete
the Priority Sections “due to reasons beyond [its] control” and requested that “the
procedure [that is the submission of EOT/03 to the Engineer for decision under Clause
67.1] be allowed to follow to determine [its] entitlement for Time extension” (Exh. [Bay.
B-21).

On 23 April 2001 — before the engineer issued its determination — NHA served a “Notice
of Termination of Contract” upon Bayindir requiring the latter to hand over possession of
the site within 14 days (Exhibit [Bay.] B-26). Thereafter, the Pakistani army surrounded

the site and Bayindir’s personnel were evacuated.

On 23 December 2002 NHA concluded a contract for the “Completion of Balance
Works of Islamabad — Peshawar Motorway (M-1) Project with “M/s Pakistan Motorway
Contractors Joint Venture (PMC JV)” providing for a completion term of 1460 days
(Exh. [Bay.] CX29).

Related litigation

From January to July 2001, Bayindir served several Notices of Intention to Commence
Arbitration pursuant to Clause 67.1 of the Contract. The matters were not settled but the
arbitration was not pursued.°
The Engineer rendered its decision on EOT/03 on 28 June 2001 granting an extension of time
until 19 and 1% April respectively.

10

32.

33.

34.

35.

On 30 April 2001, Bayindir filed a constitutional challenge against the notice of
termination served by NHA before the Lahore High Court (Exh. [Pak.] D-15). On 7 May
2001, the Lahore High Court dismissed Bayindir’s constitutional challenge on the
ground that the Contract contained an arbitration clause (Exh. [Pak.] D-16, in particular
pp. 17-18)".

Between 2001 and early 2003, NHA raised a series of claims against Bayindir and
served a notice of arbitration. On 31 March 2003, NHA sought Bayindir’s concurrence in
the appointment of a sole arbitrator. On 10 April 2003, Bayindir informed NHA that it
had already submitted the matter to ICSID jurisdiction and requested to await the
decision on Bayindir’s request for ICSID Arbitration (Exh. [Pak.] D-23).

On 5 January 2004, NHA applied for the appointment of an arbitrator in Pakistan under
section 20 of the Arbitration Act 1940. On 28 May 2004, the Court of Civil Judge in
Islamabad appointed Mr. Justice (Retd.) Afzal Lone as arbitrator. The court
subsequently upheld an objection of NHA (claiming that Mr. Lone was too closely linked
with the previous government of Pakistan; that is the government that decided the
revival of the contract in 1997) and appointed Mr. Justice (Retd.) Zahid. Following a
request by Pakistan, NHA moved for an extension of time limits in such a manner that
the arbitration would not proceed prior to this Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction (see
infra No. 45).

In the meantime, on 24 April 2001, NHA called for payment under the Mobilisation
Advance Guarantees of approximately USD 100,000,000. Bayindir then obtained an
order from the Turkish courts enjoining the Banks from paying. This injunction was lifted
on 12 September 2003. Execution proceedings against the Banks, to which Bayindir is
not a party, are currently stayed following this Tribunal’s Procedural Order N° 1 (PO#1)
that Pakistan take steps to ensure that NHA does not enforce any final judgment it may
obtain from the Turkish courts with regard to the Mobilisation Advance Guarantees (see
infra No. 46).

 

With specific regard to a claim introduced on 7 September 2001 concerning escalation payment,
Bayindir filed an application under Section 20 of the 1940 Arbitration Act for the appointment of
an arbitrator on 19 April 2001 (Exh. [Pak.] D-13). The application was dismissed as premature
(failing notice under Clause 67.4 of the Contract) on 24 March 2003 (Exh. [Pak.] D-17). An
appeal against this decision was dismissed as withdrawn (Exh. [Pak.] D-19).

An appeal against this decision was dismissed as withdrawn by the Supreme Court of Pakistan
on 16 November 2003.

11

36.

37.

38.

The BIT

The present proceedings are based on the "Agreement Between the Republic of Turkey
and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan Concerning the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments" of 16 March 1995 (the “BIT”), which entered into force on 3
September 1997.

Article VII of the BIT contains a dispute settlement provision with respect to investments
between one of the parties and an investor of the other party (see infra N° 80).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

INITIAL PHASE

On 15 April 2002, Bayindir submitted a Request for Arbitration (the “Request” or “RA”)
to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the
“Centre”), accompanied by 15 exhibits (Exh. [Bay.] B-1 to B-15). In its Request Bayindir
invoked the provisions of the BIT and sought the following relief:

(i) payment of outstanding Interim Payment Certificates US$62,514,554.00;

(ii) | payment of additional financial claims related to the Works completed by
Bayindir provisionally quantified as US$27,000.000.00;

(iii) | reimbursement of all costs incurred in anticipation of completing the
Project by Bayindir US$19,071,449.00;

(iv) payment against all fixed and movable assets expropriated by Pakistan
US$43,050,619.00;

(v) | compensation for mobilisation and demobilisation costs US$7,444,854.00;

(vi) compensation for profits lost through Pakistan’s unlawful acts and
omissions provisionally quantified as US$107,154,634.00;

(vii) compensation for damage to Bayindir's reputation resulting from Pakistan's
unlawful acts and omissions provisionally quantified as
US$150,000,000.00;

(vii) [...] compensation and costs on account of the following items:

(i) the reimbursement of all costs incurred by Bayindir in pursuing the
resolution of the claims brought in this arbitration, including but not
limited to the fees and/or expenses of the arbitrators, ICSID, legal
counsel, experts and Bayindir's own experts and staff;

(ii) compounded interest on all amounts awarded at an appropriate rate
or rates and over an appropriate period or periods;

(iii) compensation for opportunities lost as a direct result of Pakistan's
unlawful acts and omissions;

12

39.

40.

a.

(iv)

compensation for losses and damages suffered by Bayindir in Turkey
as a direct consequence of Pakistan's unlawful acts and omissions;

(v’

any other relief that the Arbitral Tribunal may deem fit and appropriate
in the circumstances of this case.

(RA, 1939-40)

On 16 April 2002, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the “Institution
Rules”), acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the RA to Pakistan and to the
Pakistani Embassy in Washington D.C.

After a long and extensive exchange of correspondence between Bayindir'’,
Pakistan”, NHA"® and the Centre, on 1 December 2003, the Secretary-General of the
Centre registered Bayindir's RA, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the
“ICSID Convention” or “the Convention”). On the same date, the Secretary-General, in
accordance with Institution Rule 7, notified the parties of the registration of the request
and invited them to proceed, as soon as possible, to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal.

In the absence of agreement between the parties, on 6 February 2004, Bayindir elected
to submit the arbitration to a panel of three arbitrators, as provided in Article 37(2)(b) of
the ICSID Convention and appointed Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, a national of

In particular, on 10 February 2003, Bayindir supplemented its RA by the submission of a Volume
HL

In particular, on 23 May 2002, the republic of Pakistan stated that “[t]he nomination of Secretary
Communication by [Bayindir] is without any relevance to the terms of Contract. In view of
provisions of Contract Agreement and various guarantees given by [Bayindir] to NHA for faithful
performance of [Bayindir]'s obligations and against Mobilization Advance; NHA is the party to the
Contract and not the Secretary Communication. The alleged dispute is manifestly outside the
jurisdiction of the Centre, pursuant to sub-para 1 Article 25, sub-para 3 of Article 36, sub-para
1(b) of Rule 6 of INSTITUTION RULE of the Centre. The contents of the requests by [Bayindir]
are in contravention to Rule 2 of the INSTITUTION RULE of the Centre” (Pakistan's submission
of 23 May 2002). The Government of Pakistan further “requested that all future communication
and notices if required, regarding the subject issue, are to be sent to the [NHA]” (Pakistan's
submission of 19 February 2003).

In particular, on 22 August 2003, NHA submitted its “Observation and Reply to ICSID” with
reference to Bayindir’s RA. In its submission NHA concluded that “[t]he documented statements.
as given in this submission provide further material to conclude the fact that Bayindir had never
been an Investor neither the dispute referred to ICSID has any bearing with the relevant
provision of BIT. Therefore, the ‘Request for Arbitration’ submitted by Bayindir to ICSID is void of
merits at its own account and manifestly beyond the jurisdiction of ICSID. Therefore, the
Secretary General is requested to refuse the registration of Bayindir's ‘Request for Arbitration’
pursuant to Article 36(3) and institution Rule 6(1)(b) of the Convention” (NHA’s submission of 22
August 2003, p. 2, emphasis in the original).

13

42.

43.

44.

45.

Germany. On 26 February 2004, Pakistan appointed Sir Franklin Berman, a national of
the United Kingdom, as arbitrator. On 27 April 2004, the parties agreed to appoint Prof.
Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a national of Switzerland, as the President of the Tribunal.

On 15 June 2004, the Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), notified the
parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal
was therefore deemed to be constituted and the proceedings to have begun on that
date. The same letter informed the parties that Mr. José-Antonio Rivas, Counsel, ICSID,
would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal'*.

On 20 July 2004, Bayindir submitted a Request for Provisional Measures, seeking in
substance recommendations by the Tribunal that the Respondent stay all proceedings
pending before the Courts of Pakistan and Turkey. On 27 August 2004, Pakistan filed
its Response to Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures.

The Arbitral Tribunal held a first hearing on 24 September 2004, at the offices of the
World Bank in Paris. At the outset of the preliminary hearing, the parties expressed
agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted (Arbitration Rule 6) and
stated that they had no objections in this respect. The parties further agreed on a set of
procedural rules to apply to the present proceedings. The preliminary hearing was tape-
recorded, a verbatim transcript was taken and later distributed to the parties (Tr. P.).

During the course of the preliminary hearing, the parties’ counsel also presented oral
arguments on Bayindir’s request for provisional measures. At the end of the preliminary
hearing, Bayindir withdrew its request seeking a stay of the arbitration pending in
Pakistan between NHA and Bayindir before the sole arbitrator, Mr. Justice (Retd.)
Zahid, '® as a result of an offer by Pakistan to request NHA to move for an extension of
the time limits fixed in the latter in such a manner that the Pakistani arbitration would

In the course of the Proceedings, Mr. Rivas was replaced by Ms. Martina Polasek, Counsel,
ICSID, on 11 May 2005.

As amended at the hearing, this request reads as follows: “1. The Parties immediately take all
steps required to obtain a temporary stay of all proceedings brought under the Pakistan
Arbitration Act 1940 and pending before the Courts of Pakistan and/or before an arbitrator”
(Bayindir's_ amended Request _for provisional submitted at the hearing on 24
September 2004).

14

46.

47.

48.

49.

not proceed before this Tribunal rendered its decision on jurisdiction (Tr. P. 153:17-
155:25).

On 29 November 2004, the Tribunal rendered its Decision on Claimant’s Request for
provisional measures (PO#1), which reads as follows:

Having reviewed the Claimant's and the Respondent's written submissions and
having heard oral argument, the Tribunal issues the following order:

(i) The Tribunal acknowledges that Bayindir withdrew the request seeking a
stay of the Pakistani arbitration as a result of an offer of Pakistan to
request NHA to move for an extension of time limits in such a manner that
that arbitration will not proceed prior to this Tribunal’s decision on
jurisdiction.

(ii) The Tribunal recommends that Pakistan take whatever steps may be
necessary to ensure that NHA does not enforce any final judgment it may
obtain from the Turkish courts with regard to the Mobilisation Advance
Guarantees. This recommendation remains in effect until: (a) an arbitral
award declining jurisdiction is issued; or (b) an arbitral award is rendered
on the merits; or (c)-any other order of the Tribunal amending the
recommendations is issued; whichever comes first.

(iii) The Tribunal dismisses Pakistan’s request to recommend, as a matter of

principle, that Bayindir should provide security for Pakistan’s costs.

The Tribunal will rule on the costs of this application in its decision on
jurisdiction or, if it asserts jurisdiction, in its decision on the merits of the
dispute.

(PO#1, at No. 78)

(iv

 

As a threshold matter in the Tribunal’s decision on provisional measures, the Tribunal
emphasized that the reasons contained in that decision were “without prejudice to a
later decision of this Tribunal on Pakistan’s objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal”

(PO#1, at No. 40).

THE WRITTEN PHASE ON JURISDICTION

In accordance with the timetable agreed during the preliminary hearing, on 31
December 2004, Pakistan submitted its Memorial on jurisdictional objections (Mem. J.)
accompanied by one volume of contractual documents (Annexes C-1 to C-13), four
volumes of legal materials (Annexes L-1 to L-43) and one volume of Documentary
Exhibits (Exhibits 1 to 35). Pakistan did not append any witness statement or expert
opinion.

In accordance with the timetable agreed during the preliminary hearing, on 31 March
2005, Bayindir submitted its Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction (C-Mem. J.) accompanied

15

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

by one volume of documentary evidence (CX 79 to CX 124) and five volumes of legal
materials (Exhibits CLEX 18 to CLEX 55). Bayindir did not append any written witness
statement or expert opinion.

In accordance with the timetable agreed during the preliminary hearing, on 9 May 2005,
Pakistan submitted its Reply to Claimant's Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction (Reply J.)
accompanied by one volume of documentary exhibits (Exhibits R-1 to R-74) and one
volume of legal materials (Exhibits RL-1 to RL-22).

Within the extension of time allowed by the Tribunal, on 17 June 2005, Bayindir
submitted its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction (Rejoinder J.) accompanied by one volume of
documentary exhibits (Exhibits CX 125 to CX 156)"® and one volume of legal materials
(Exhibits CLEX 56 to CLEX 61).

On 5 July 2005, pursuant to Article 19 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal
invited Pakistan to file a written response limited to the new factual allegations
contained in JJ] 101 to 104 of Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction on or before 15 July
2005.

On 7 July 2005, the Tribunal held a preparatory telephone conference to organize the
hearing on jurisdiction for which the dates of 25 and 27 July 2005 had previously been
retained. None of the parties having submitted witness statements or expert opinions, it
was agreed that the hearing on jurisdiction would be limited to oral arguments.

On 11 July 2005, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the parties that the
jurisdictional hearing would be held on 25, 26 and 27 July 2005 and transmitted the
agenda for the hearing.

At the outset of the hearing on jurisdiction, Pakistan pointed out that some of these exhibits —
namely Exh. [Bay]CX127, an internal letter dated 4 November 2000; Exh. [Bay]CX131, an
internal letter dated 2 May 2001; Exh.[BaylCX145, an internal letter of June 2001; Exh.
Bay]CX146, an internal letter dated May 200; Exh. [Bay]CX151, an internal letter of April 2001;
Exh. [Bay]CX152, a confidential letter from the World Bank dated 26 May 2000 to the
Government of Pakistan; Exh. [Bay]CX153, a confidential letter from the World Bank to the
Government of Pakistan dated 5 June 2000 — constituted “confidential and privileged legal
materials which have apparently been taken from the files of the Government of Pakistan” (Tr.
J., 18:3-16). Pakistan did not however object to their production in this arbitration (see infra No
248).

 

16

55.

56.

On 22 July 2005, Mr Bundy wrote to the Tribunal to inform it that Pakistan had ratified
the New York Convention and attached the ratification instrument dated 9 June,
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 14 July. Mr. Bundy’s
letter also informed the Tribunal that Pakistan had enacted the New York Convention in
the form of the Recognition of Enforcement of Arbitration Agreements and Foreign
Arbitral Awards Ordinance of 2005, which came into force with retroactive effect on 14
July 20057”.

THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION

The Arbitral Tribunal held the hearing on jurisdiction from 25 July 2005, starting at
11:00 am to 26 July ending at 4:15 pm, at the Salons des Arts et Metiers, 9 bis avenue
d'lena, Paris. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal’®, and the Secretary, the
following persons attended the jurisdictional hearing:
(i) On behalf of Bayindir:

e Mr. Gavan Griffith QC, Essex Court Chambers

e = Mr. Farrukh Karim Qureshi; Walker Martineau Saleem

e Mr. Sadik Can; Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi AS

e Mr. Zafer Baysal; Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi AS

e Ms. Gokce Cicek Bicioglu

e Ms. Nudrat Ejaz Piracha

(ii) On behalf of Pakistan:
e Mr. Aftab Rashid; Ministry of Communications of Pakistan
e Mr. Raja Nowsherwan Sultan; NHA
e Lt. Col. (Ret'd.) Muhammad Azim; Consultant, NHA
e Mr. Iftikharuddin Riaz; Bhandari, Naqvi & Riaz
e Prof. Christopher Greenwood, CMG, QC; Essex Court Chambers
e Mr. V.V. Veeder, QC; Essex Court Chambers
e Mr. Samuel Wordsworth; Essex Court Chambers

e Mr. Rodman R. Bundy; Eversheds

At the hearing on jurisdiction, the Tribunal granted Pakistan’s formal application to introduce
these legal materials into the file (Ir. J.. 17:30-32).
With the agreement of the parties, Dr. Antonio Rigozzi, an attorney practising in the law firm of
the President of the Tribunal, attended the hearing.

17

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

e Ms. Loretta Malintoppi; Eversheds

e Mr. Charles Claypoole; Eversheds

e Ms. Cheryl Dunn; Eversheds

e Ms. Victoria Forman Hardy; Eversheds

e Mr. Nicholas Minogue; Eversheds

During the jurisdictional hearing, Messrs. Veeder, Greenwood, Wordsworth and Bundy
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of Pakistan and Mr. Griffith addressed the Tribunal on
behalf of Bayindir.

The jurisdictional hearing was tape-recorded, a verbatim transcript was taken and later
distributed to the parties (Tr. J.). It ended earlier than scheduled, both parties having
fully presented their arguments and agreeing to such change of schedule.

It was agreed at the close of the jurisdictional hearing that the Tribunal would issue a
reasoned decision on the preliminary questions of jurisdiction and admissibility. If the
decision were negative, the Tribunal would render an award terminating the arbitration;
if the decision were affirmative, the Tribunal would render a decision asserting
jurisdiction and issue an order with directions for the continuation of the procedure
pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4).

The Tribunal has deliberated and thoroughly considered the parties’ written
submissions on the question of jurisdiction and the oral arguments delivered in the
course of the jurisdictional hearing. Before reaching a conclusion on the question of
jurisdiction, the present decision summarizes (Ill) and discusses (IV) the position of the
parties.

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

BAYINDIR’S POSITION

In its written and oral submissions, Bayindir advanced the following four main
contentions:

18

62.

63.

64.

65.

(iv)

Bayindir made an “investment” under both the BIT and the ICSID Convention;
Bayindir has prima facie claims against Pakistan for breaches of the BIT, namely
for breaches of the treaty provisions on national and most favoured nation
treatment, fair and equitable treatment and expropriation without compensation
(hereinafter generally referred to as “Treaty Claims”);

The Treaty Claims are distinct and autonomous claims which Bayindir can assert
against NHA (and or Pakistan) independently from those claims which arise out of
the Contract (hereinafter generally referred to as Bayindir’s “Contract Claims’).
Finally, as an independent argument, Bayindir claims that the Tribunal also has
jurisdiction over the Contract Claims.

On the basis of these contentions, Bayindir requested the Tribunal to decide:

[t]hat this Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the claims for breach of the BIT, but in
addition also claims that would be only contractual in nature. The requirements
for this Tribunal to exercise its jurisdiction under the BIT over the Parties and
over Bayindir's claim have been satisfied.

(C-Mem. J., p. 88, 1312)

At the outset of the jurisdictional hearing, Bayindir withdrew its independent argument

that the Tribunal has jurisdiction also over the Contract Claims:

[I]t appears to us that our claim for treaty breaches is so strongly expressed that
it is not necessary for us to turn to alternative and fall-back mechanisms to
pursue our claims by asserting as we did in Part VI of our counter memorial that
even if there is no treaty BIT breaches made out nonetheless we can make a
freestanding contract claims as the basis of our jurisdiction under ICSID and
under the BIT.

(Tr. J., 7:12-19)

Accordingly, Bayindir resiles from pressing purely contractual claims (Tr. J., 60:2-4).

 

PAKISTAN’S POSITION

In its written and oral submissions, Pakistan advanced the following six main

arguments:

Bayindir has not made an investment within article (2) of the BIT or Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention.

The basis of Bayindir’s claims is alleged breach of the Contract. The Contract is
governed by the law of Pakistan and, pursuant to the law of Pakistan, the
Employer (NHA) is a separate legal person, distinct from Pakistan. The Tribunal
has no jurisdiction in respect of alleged breaches of the Contract as such
breaches are not attributable to Pakistan.

19

66.

67.

68.

(iii) The Contract Claims are inadmissible in the light of the agreement of the
Employer and the Contractor to refer their disputes to arbitration, and the
proceedings should be stayed pending resolution of the contractual dispute by
arbitration.

(iv) To the extent that Bayindir’s claims are based on an alleged breach of the BIT,
ie., to the extent that they are Treaty Claims, they are entirely artificial and
advanced solely for purposes of expediency.

(v) Since Bayindir’s Treaty Claims are dependent upon the claims for breach of the
Contract that have to be settled in another forum, the Tribunal cannot exercise
jurisdiction over the Treaty Claims, at least until that other forum has reached a
conclusion with regard to the alleged breach of the Contract.

(vi) Insofar as Bayindir’s Treaty Claims are distinct from the alleged breach of the
Contract, these allegations “have no colourable basis” and are insufficient for this
Tribunal to assert jurisdiction.

In reliance on these arguments, Pakistan invites the Tribunal:

[tlo declare that it has no jurisdiction in respect of the whole of Bayindir's claim,
and that the claim is accordingly to be dismissed. Insofar as the Tribunal
considers that the claim is not to be dismissed in its entirety for want of
jurisdiction, Pakistan invites the Tribunal to make alternative declarations to
reflect restrictions on its jurisdiction and/or on the admissibility of Bayindir's
claims, namely:

a. That it has no jurisdiction in respect of Bayindir's allegations of breach of the
Contract, alternatively that such claims are inadmissible before this
Tribunal;

b. That, insofar as the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine Bayindir's claims
characterised as breaches of the BIT, such claims should not be heard
pending resolution of the disputes pursuant to the Arbitration Agreement in
the Contract.

(Mem. J., p. 2)

Following Bayindir’s above-mentioned change of position at the outset of the
jurisdictional hearing, on 16 August 2005 Pakistan requested the Tribunal to:

[d]eal with the issues of principle and apportionment relating to costs in its
award/decision, including the wasted costs due to Bayindir’s late change in
position, and to award the Government of Pakistan its costs and expenses
incurred as a result of these proceedings. °

On 26 August 2005, Bayindir submitted in response “that the issue of costs should be a

matter for submission after the award on objections to jurisdiction””°.

See letter of Mr. Bundy to the Secretary of the Tribunal of 16 August 2005.
See letter of Mr. Farrukh Karim Qureshi to the Secretary of the Tribunal of 26 August 2005.

20

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

On 29 August 2005, “in the light of the above[-mentioned change in Bayindir’s position],
Pakistan request[ed] the Tribunal’s permission to withdraw its offer to request NHA to
move for an extension of the time limits in the Pakistani arbitration so that this does not

proceed prior to a decision on jurisdiction in the present case” (see supra N° 46).

On 20 September 2005, Bayindir opposed such request, asked that it “be declined and
taken up for consideration after the decision on jurisdiction and upon consulting the
parties on opportunity to make written and oral submissions.”

In support of their position on jurisdiction, both parties have relied on rules of
international law, decisions of courts and arbitral tribunals, and opinion of learned
authors. In the course of the following discussion, the Tribunal will review the law
pleaded by the parties and its applicability to the facts of the present case. The Tribunal
adds that while Part Ill of this decision summarizes the main arguments of the parties,
other arguments were made and considered by the Tribunal, and will be referred to in
Part IV to the extent the Tribunal considers them relevant.

DISCUSSION

INTRODUCTORY MATTERS

Before turning to the actual issues, the Tribunal wishes to address certain preliminary
matters, i.e., the relevance of previous ICSID decisions (a), some uncontroversial
matters (b), the law applicable to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the relevant issues for
determination (c).

The relevance of previous ICSID decisions or awards

In support of their position, both parties relied extensively on previous ICSID decisions
or awards, either to conclude that the same solution should be adopted in the present
case or in an effort to explain why this Tribunal should depart from that solution.

In particular, part of the parties’ oral and written submissions was devoted to discussing
the relevance, the scope and the ‘appropriateness’ of the recent decision on jurisdiction

21

76.

77.

78.

in the arbitration between Impregilo S.p.A. and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan

(hereinafter the Impregilo case)*'.

For instance”, in its Rejoinder on jurisdiction, Bayindir submitted:

As a final point, Bayindir again submits that this Tribunal is not bound to follow
the decisions of other investment Tribunals deciding different cases on the basis
of similar, yet distinctly worded treaties. Nevertheless, this Tribunal will be asked
in the Rebuttal to carefully consider the very recent decision of /mpregilo v.
Pakistan. Contrary to the Reply, rather than assisting Pakistan, the /mpregilo
decision actually exposes several of the major flaws in Pakistan's arguments, as
shall be hereafter discussed.

(Rejoinder J., p. 3, 1.9)

The Tribunal agrees that it is not bound by earlier decisions”*, but will certainly carefully
consider such decisions whenever appropriate.

Uncontroversial matters

There is no dispute as to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal to decide the jurisdictional
challenges brought by Pakistan (Article 41 of the ICSID Convention).

Pakistan’s jurisdictional objections are related to the nature of the dispute and to the
legal characterization of the claims. In other words, Pakistan contests the
jurisdiction of the tribunal ratione materiae. Pakistan raises no jurisdictional
objection ratione personae or temporis**.

Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, |CSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005, {| 108; available at http:/Awww.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/impregilo-
decision.pdf (Exh. [Pak]RL-1 = Exh. [Bay]CLEX 57).

Pakistan expressed a similar view for instance as regards the most favoured nation clause of
Article II(2) of the BIT. After having relied upon Siemens v. Argentina [infra Fn. 80] to contend
that “[pJursuant to its ordinary meaning, the more favourable protection that Bayindir seeks falls
outside the scope of Article II(2) of the 1995 Treaty”, Pakistan felt compelled to add the
following: “The Tribunal is not, of course, bound by the decisions of previous ICSID tribunals on
the extent of most favoured nations provisions in other treaties. However, if necessary, Pakistan
will submit that, in the absence of express wording, it would be wrong to find that the rights of an
investor under a most favoured nation provision could extend to benefiting either from an
agreement to arbitrate where there was no such agreement” (Mem. J., p. 65, 91 5.9).

AES Corporation v. the Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/17, Decision on jurisdiction
of 13 July 2005, {[f] 30-32; available at http:/Awww.investmentclaims.com/decisions/AES-
Argentina_Jurisdiction.pdf.

Inasmuch as they involve objective requirements, these conditions shall be analysed by the
Tribunal motu propio (see SCHREUER, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Cambridge (UK),
2001, para. 4-45 ad Article 41, pp. 535-536). The Tribunal notes that the Parties to the dispute
are a State (Pakistan), and a Turkish company (Bayindir) and that both Pakistan and Turkey are
Contracting States within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

22

The law applicable to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the relevant issues

This Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione materiae depends in the first instance upon the
requirements of the BIT and of the ICSID Convention.

Article VII of the BIT contains the following dispute settlement clause:

1. Disputes between one of the Parties and an investor of the other Party, in
connection with his investment, shall be notified in writing, including a
detailed information, by the investor to the recipient Party of the investment.
As far as possible, the investor and the concerned Party shall endeavour to
settle the disputes by consultations and negotiations in good faith.

2. If these disputes cannot be settled in this way within six months following the
date of the written notification mentioned in paragraph 1, the dispute can be
submitted, as the investor may choose, to:

(a) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
set up by the ‘Convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and nationals of other States’; [in case both Parties
become signatories of this Convention]

(b) an ad hoc court of arbitration laid down under the Arbitration Rules of
Procedure of the United Nations Commission for International Law
(UNCITRAL), [in case both Parties are members of UN]

(c) the Court of Arbitration of the Paris International Chamber of Commerce,

provided that, if the investor concerned has brought the dispute before the
courts of justice of the Party that is a party to the dispute and a final award
has not been rendered within one year.

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out
of an investment between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or
agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no
party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

The Tribunal notes that Pakistan has not objected to its jurisdiction on the ground that
the dispute is not legal or that it does not involve a Contracting State and a national of
another Contracting State.

In order to establish the jurisdiction of this Tribunal under Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention, Bayindir relies upon (1) the consent of Pakistan to arbitration as contained
in the BIT combined with (2) its own consent as contained in the Request for arbitration.
As the tribunal held in /mpregilo, according to a now “well established practice, it is
clear that the coincidence of these two forms of consent can constitute ‘consent in

23

84.

85.

86.

87.

writing’ within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention [...] if the dispute
falls within the scope of the BIT.”*° This is not disputed by Pakistan.

Pakistan has objected to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and/or to the admissibility of
Bayindir’s claim.

Pakistan’s objection to jurisdiction is based on the following grounds:

(i) Bayindir has not made an investment within Article I(2) of the BIT or Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention.

(ii) | There are no freestanding treaty breaches capable of being alleged by Bayindir.

(iii) | Insofar as there are alleged breaches of the Treaty distinct from the alleged
breaches of the Contract, these allegations “have no colourable basis”, i.e., they
are not “sustainable”.

Pakistan’s objection to the admissibility of the claim is based on the following grounds:

(i) To exercise jurisdiction would raise a potential conflict between two very
important treaties, the 1958 New York Convention and the 1965 Washington
Convention.

(ii) | Insofar as there are alleged breaches of the Treaty distinct from the alleged
breaches of the Contract, Bayindir is barred from raising them as it has
previously characterized these breaches as contractual.

(iii) | Insofar as there are alleged breaches of the Treaty distinct from the alleged
breaches of the Contract, the ICSID proceedings should be stayed pending the
resolution of the contractual dispute by arbitration.

(iv) Bayindir has failed to comply with the formal requirements of Article VII of the

The Tribunal will examine Pakistan’s objections in turn, without distinguishing between
objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and objections to the admissibility of the
claims”®. For the sake of logic, the Tribunal will begin with Pakistan’s objection that
Bayindir has failed to comply with the pre-conditions to arbitration in Articles VII(1) and
(2) and that, accordingly, Bayindir is not entitled to submit any dispute to arbitration
under Article VII(2) of the 1995 Treaty.

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], J 108.

Consortium Groupement L.E.S.I. - DIPENTA v. République Algérienne Démocratique et
Populaire, Award of 27 December 2004, {2(Exh. [Bay|CLEX 57); available at
http:/www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/lesi-sentence-fr.pdf.

24

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

HAs BAYINDIR FAILED TO COMPLY WITH FORMAL REQUIREMENTS PREVENTING IT TO
SUBMIT THE PRESENT DISPUTE (ARTICLE VII OF THE BIT)?

Pakistan’s first, “fundamental and principled objection” is that Bayindir did not satisfy the
“prerequisites for jurisdiction” set forth in Article VII of the BIT (Tr. J., 73:17-26). More

 

specifically, Pakistan contends that Bayindir has failed to give notice of any claim for
alleged breaches of the BIT and/or to negotiate in respect of such a claim as provided
by Article VII of the BIT “and that, accordingly, Bayindir is not entitled to submit any
dispute to arbitration under Article VII(2) of the 1995 Treaty” (Mem. J., p. 67
115.10).

In its relevant part, Article VII of the BIT provides that the investor can submit disputes
to arbitration only "if these disputes cannot be settled in this way within six months
following the date of the written notification" of the dispute. It further specifies that:

Disputes between one of the Parties and an investor of the other Party, in
connection with his investment, shall be notified in writing, including a detailed
information, by the investor to the recipient Party of the investment. As far as
possible, the investor and the concerned Party shall endeavour to settle these
disputes by consultations and negotiations in good faith.

Bayindir contends that it has complied with the requirement of notice under Article VII of
the BIT by disputing the validity of various decisions of the Engineer (RA, p. 7,921)
and, by serving the Government of Pakistan with the “Constitutional Petition” on 26 April
2001 (Exh.[Bay.]CX 35, referred to in C-Mem. J., p. 51, $178). In substance, Bayindir
admits that this notice could be framed “more perfectly”, but contends that it “effectively
glalve notice” (Tr. J., 180:1 et seq.).

As shown at the jurisdictional hearing by Pakistan (Tr. J., 42:13 et seqg.), the notices
referred to in Bayindir’s RA were purely contractual notices to the Engineer with a view
to commencing arbitration under clause 67.1 of the Contract and cannot be assimilated
to a notice under Article VII(2) of the BIT?”.

As regards the Constitutional Petition, it is Bayindir’s contention that it “provided 20
pages of detailed information concerning the dispute between Bayindir and Pakistan”
(C-Mem. J., p. 51, 1 179). More specifically, Bayindir points out that in the Constitutional

The Tribunal notes that Bayindir seems to abandon the argument that it complied with the
requirement of notice by disputing the validity of various decisions of the Engineer (Ir. J.
180:13-18).

25

93.

94.

95.

96.

Petition it complained that it had been treated "unilaterally, arbitrarily and illegally [...]
without [...] due process of law" and that the expulsion "appears to have been taken
under the dictates of [the Government of Pakistan] for ulterior motives" (C-Mem. J., p.
51, 9.180 referring to Exh. [Bay.] CX-35, p. 19 at xv).

Pakistan did not address this contention in its Reply. At the hearing on jurisdiction, it
adopted the following position:

But it is an interesting question in theory whether a constitutional petition in the
courts of a state is capable of amounting to the necessary notification as a
prelude to a good faith attempt to settle a dispute by negotiation. But this is a
constitutional petition that does not refer to the BIT. It could not remotely be
described as a notification in writing of a dispute under the BIT accompanied by
the appropriate detailed information.

(Tr. J., p. 74:25-33)

Although it is true that — unlike other treaties and in particular NAFTA — “[t]here is no
requirement in the BIT that such written notice refer either to the BIT or BIT breaches”
(C-Mem. J., p. 51, 9180), the fact remains that the Constitutional Petition was not filed
in view of a dispute under the Treaty. Moreover, as correctly pointed out by Pakistan,
the Constitutional Petition could hardly rely on the BIT since the BIT itself is not part of
the law of Pakistan (Tr. J., 216.15-16 referring (implicitly) to Tr. J., 192:3-5).

 

 

 

This being said, the Tribunal does not need to make a definitive ruling on the
‘theoretical’ question of whether a constitutional petition in the courts of a State may
serve as a notice under a BIT. Nor does the Tribunal need to rule on the more practical
question whether, in Bayindir’s terms, “when one looks closely at the constitutional
petition one can spell out” the necessary information required under Article 7 of the BIT
(Tr._J., 182:13-16) or, more generally, whether these requirements constitute “a
necessary ingredient of the notice provision” (Tr. J., 182:20-21). In the Tribunal’s view,

 

the requirement of notice contained in Article VII of the BIT should not be interpreted as
a precondition to jurisdiction.

Determining the real meaning of Article VII of the BIT is a matter of interpretation.

Pursuant to the general principles of interpretation set forth in Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, and consistently with the practice of previous ICSID

26

97.

98.

tribunals dealing with notice provisions”, this Tribunal considers that the real meaning
of Article VII of the BIT is to be determined in the light of the object and purpose of that

provision.

The parties made extensive submissions on what the correct interpretation of Article VII
of the BIT should be:

(i) In Pakistan’s view, the notice requirement constitutes a “carefully crafted”
limitation of the consent given by the parties to the BIT offering the foreign
investor a direct right of recourse to international arbitration against the
defendant state (Tr. J., 72:3-12). Hence, Article VII is a mandatory provision
and the parties have a “real obligation” to endeavour to settle their dispute
within the six months periods (Tr. J.. 213:16 et seg.). Accordingly the notice
requirement is to be interpreted as a precondition to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal, which if it is not met, bars the non-complying party from commencing
arbitration: it is not only a procedural matter, “it does go to jurisdiction” (Tr. J..
71:37-72:2).

 

(ii) According to Bayindir, the purpose of the notice requirement is “to allow the
possibility of an agreed settlement before formal proceedings” (Tr. J., 184:15-
17) “in a way rather of exhortation than compulsion for the parties to see
whether they can resolve the dispute by negotiations” (Ir. J., 186:21-23).
Accordingly, “[t]hese provisions should be regarded as ones that do not disable
the next level in the process" (Tr. J., 186:38-187:17"). In other words, the non
fulfilment of the notice requirement should “not b[e] regarded as a bar” (Tr. J..
188:3) to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

 

 

The Tribunal notes that Pakistan has not denied that the main purpose of Article VII of
the BIT is to provide for the possibility of a settlement of the dispute. In the Tribunal’s
view, the purpose of the notice requirement is to allow negotiations between the parties
which may lead to a settlement. Significantly, Article VII(2) does not read, if these
disputes “are not settled” within six months but "cannot be settled” within six months,
which wording implies an expectation that attempts at settlement are made. Faced with
a similar situation, the tribunal in Salini v. Morocco refused to adopt a formalistic

See, for instance, L.E.S./. v. Algeria [supra Fn. 26], 932. In L.E.S./. v. Algeria the tribunal
considered the purpose of the notice provision to hold that one could not require that the notice
contains more than the general framework of the claim: “// n'est nulle part exigé que cette
requéte comprenne d'autres éléments, qui seraient de toute fagon étrangers au but poursuivi par
la régle” (see L.E.S.I. v. Algeria [supra Fn. 26], J] 32(iii)).

Referring to SGS v. Pakistan [infra Fn. 32], specifically | 184 quoted hereinafter at No. 99.
27

99.

100.

101.

approach and stated that an attempt to reach amicable settlement implies merely “the
existence of grounds for complaint and the desire to resolve these matters out-of

court’?,

Pakistan itself admits that the notice requirement cannot constitute a prerequisite for
jurisdiction when the necessary “steps [...] are impossible to take in the circumstances

 

of the case” (Ir. 72:20-24). In the specific setting of investment arbitration,

 

international tribunals tend to rely on the non-absolute character of notice requirements
to conclude that waiting period requirements do not constitute jurisdictional provisions
but merely procedural rules that must be satisfied by the Claimant*’:

Compliance with such a requirement is, accordingly, not seen as amounting to a
condition precedent for the vesting of jurisdiction.

The Tribunal agrees with the view that the notice requirement does not constitute a
prerequisite to jurisdiction. Contrary to Pakistan’s position, the non-fulfilment of this
requirement is not “fatal to the case of the claimant” (Tr. J.. 222:34). As Bayindir pointed

 

out, to require a formal notice would simply mean that Bayindir would have to file a new
request for arbitration and restart the whole proceeding, which would be to no-one’s
advantage (Tr. J.. 184:18 et seq.).

The Tribunal is reinforced in this conclusion by the undisputed fact that on 4 April 2002,
Bayindir notified the Government of Pakistan that it was compelled to commence ICSID
arbitration regarding the "serious disputes in connection with the investments made by
Bayindir" given that its efforts to negotiate had "failed to bear fruit" (Exh. [Bay.] B-40).
Pakistan did not respond to this letter by pointing to the requirement of notice and the
obligation to endeavour to reach a settlement contained in Article VII of the BIT.
Similarly, in its first response to Bayindir’s RA, Pakistan did not rely on Article VII of the
BIT but heavily insisted on the fact that Bayindir “had already filed three (3) suits in the

Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4,
Decision on Jurisdiction of 23 July 2001, J] 20 as translated in 42 ILM 609 (2003); (Exh. [Pak]L-6
= Exh. [Bay]CLEX 15); also available at http:/Awww.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/salini-decision.pdf.
Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Final Award, 3 September 2001, {| 187
(Exh. [Bay]CLEX 30); available at http://www.mfcr.cz/cps/rde/xber/mfcr/FinalAward_pdf.pdf.

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, |CSID Case No.
ARB/01/13, Decision on Jurisdiction of 6 August 2003, J] 184 (Exh. [Bay|CLEX 9 = Exh. [Pak]L-
7), 42 ILM 1290 (2003); also available at http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/SGS-
Pakistan-Jurisdiction-6Aug2003.pdf.

28

102.

103.

courts of law in Pakistan”®*. It was the ICSID Secretariat, on 14 June 2002, which
raised the issue asking Bayindir to provide further information and documentation
regarding “the fulfilment of the condition set forth at the beginning of Article VII(2) [...]
as it appears that the first notice mentioning the BIT was made on April 4, 2002”**. Two
weeks later, on 28 June 2002, Pakistan wrote to the Centre to challenge its jurisdiction
without making any mention of the requirements of Article VII of the BIT®.

The Tribunal further notes that Pakistan made no proposal to engage in negotiations
with Bayindir following Bayindir’s notification of 4 April 2002, which made an explicit
reference to the failure of the efforts to negotiate. In the Tribunal’s view, if Pakistan had
been willing to engage in negotiations with Bayindir, in the spirit of Article VII of the BIT,
it would have had many opportunities to do so during the six months following the
Notification of 4 April 2002°°. Along the lines of the award rendered in Lauder v. The
Czech Republic, the Tribunal is prepared to find that preventing the commencement of
the arbitration proceedings until six months after the 4 April 2002 notification would, in
the circumstances of this case, amount to an unnecessary, overly formalistic approach
which would not serve to protect any legitimate interests of the Parties®” and hold “that
the six-month waiting period in [the BIT] does not preclude it from having jurisdiction in

the present proceedings”.

As a result of this conclusion, the Tribunal will not discuss Bayindir’s additional
argument pursuant to which it would be entitled to disregard the notice requirement of
Article VIl of the BIT by virtue of the operation of the most favoured nation clause
contained in Article II(2) of the BIT.

Letter of Pakistan to the Centre of 23 May 2002.

Letter of the Centre to Bayindir of 14 June 2002.

Letter of Pakistan to the Centre of 28 June 2002. In fact, Pakistan invoked Article VII of the BIT
for the first time in a letter of the Attorney General of 22 December 2003 requesting the Centre
to recall the decision to register the RA. [Following the Centre’s letter of 14 June 2002, on 8 July
2002 NHA filed an unsolicited response referring for the first time to Article VII of the BIT noting
that “no mention of the BIT was ever made by Bayindir ‘the Contractor’ in their correspondence
regarding amicable settlement of disputes” and emphasizing that Bayindir letter of 4 April was
addressed to Pakistan, “and not to NHA”. It was only in the beginning of 2003 that NHA relied for
the first time on Article VII of the BIT (see letter of NHA to the Centre of 2 January 2003).]

The Tribunal notes that in /mpregilo, “immediately after the registration of Impregilo’s first
request for arbitration by ICSID, negotiations took place between the Parties on the initiative of
the Pakistan Minister of Finance” (Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], {| 44).

Lauder v. Czech Republic [supra Fn. 31], I] 189-190.

Lauder v. Czech Republic [supra Fn. 31], | 191.

29

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

HAs BAYINDIR MADE AN INVESTMENT?

Pakistan’s first objection to jurisdiction is based on the alleged lack of an investment
within the meaning of Article I(2) of the BIT (a) and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention

(b) (Mem. J., p. 1 at (iv)).
Investment under Article I(2) of the BIT

It is common ground between the parties that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is contingent
upon Bayindir having made an investment within the meaning of the BIT. Article I(2) of
the BIT defines investment as follows:

The term “investment, in conformity with the hosting Party's laws and
regulations, shall include every kind of asset, in particular, but not exclusively:

(a) Shares, stocks or any other form of participation in companies

(b) returns reinvested, claims to money or any other rights to legitimate
performance having financial value related to an investment,

(c) moveable and immoveable property, as well as any other rights in rem such
as mortgages, liens, pledges and any other similar rights,

() [1]

(e) business concessions conferred by law, or by contract, including

concessions to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources on
the territory of each Party as defined hereinafter.

The parties first disagree on the meaning of the phrase “in conformity with the hosting
Party's laws and regulations” following the “investment* in Article I(2). On the one hand,
Bayindir argues that the requirement of conformity is meant “to exclude investments
that have been made in violation of local law from the treaty’s protection” and has no
bearing on the definition of the term investment itself (C-Mem. J.. p. 20). By contrast,
Pakistan contends that this phrase limits the definition of investment under the BIT to
“investment within the laws and regulations of Pakistan” (Mem J., p. 10 {| 2.6).

Pakistan further asserts that Bayindir has obtained the authorisation by the Pakistan
Board of Investment to engage in the construction work upon an express representation
that it was not making an investment (Mem. J., p. 11-13), so that “there has been no
investment for the purposes of the laws and regulations of Pakistan as required by

Article |(2)” of the BIT (Mem. J., p. 14, 1.2.12).

For the purpose of deciding on its jurisdiction, the Tribunal does not need to determine
the exact legal significance of Bayindir's statements before the Pakistan Board of

30

109.

110.

111.

112.

Investment (as well as Pakistan’s own statements that Bayindir did actually invest in
Pakistan*). In and of itself the representation that Bayindir was not making an
investment given for the purposes of obtaining an authorisation by the Board of
Investment does not mean that the activity of Bayindir does not qualify as an investment
under Pakistani laws. Moreover, Pakistan does not set forth any domestic laws or
regulations providing for a specific definition of investment.

In any event, the Tribunal cannot see any reason to depart from the decision of the
tribunal in Salini v. Morocco holding that “this provision [i.e., the requirement of
conformity with local laws] refers to the validity of the investment and not to its
definition’’’. The mere fact that in Salini the phrase “in accordance with” qualified the
words “assets invested” and not the term “investment” is not a sufficient basis to
distinguish Salini, contrary to Pakistan’s suggestion (Mem. J., p. 10, Fn. 17). Indeed,
the Salini holding refers explicitly to the “investment” and not to the “assets invested”.

Since Pakistan does not contend that Bayindir’s purported investment actually violates
Pakistani laws and regulations, the Tribunal considers that the reference to the “hosting
Party's laws and regulations” in Article I(2) of the Treaty could not in any case oust the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction in the present case.

Accordingly, the question boils down to whether Bayindir made an investment within the
meaning of Article (2) of the BIT. Before listing a non exhaustive series of examples,
Article |(2) provides as a general definition that investment “shall include every kind of
assets”.

Quoting a publication by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD)"", Bayindir contends that the indication “that investment includes ‘every kind

See the instances cited by Bayindir in C-Mem. J., pp. 25-26, 1 85.

Salini v. Morocco [supra No. 98], 9/46. Neither the fact that the regularity-validity of the
investment under the host state law is specifically dealt with in another provision of the Treaty
(namely Article 1I(1) and (2)) nor the fact that in Salini the provision qualified the words ‘assets
invested’ and not ‘the term investment’, provides sufficient grounds to depart from the Salini
reasoning.

United National Conference On Trade And Development, Scope and Definition, UNCTAD Series
on issues in international investment agreements (1999) (Exh. [Bay] CLEX 47); available at
http:/www.unctad.org/en/docs/psiteiitd11v2.en.pdf. In the relevant passage of this paper,
UNCTAD refers to Article 1(3) of the ASEAN Agreement for the Promotion and Protection of

31

113.

114.

aa.

115.

116.

117.

bb.

118.

of asset’ suggest[s] that the term embraces everything of economic value, virtually

without limitation” (C-Mem. J., p. 17, 1.57).

The Tribunal agrees with Bayindir that the general definition of investment of Article I(2)
of the Treaty is very broad. On a comparative basis, it has been suggested that the
reference to “every kind of asset” is “[p]ossibly the broadest” among similar general
definitions contained in BITs”.

Bayindir submits that its contributions in terms of know-how, equipment and personnel
(aa) and financing (bb) qualify as a Treaty investment under this broad definition.

Bayindir’s contribution in terms of know-how, equipment and personnel

Bayindir alleges that it has trained approximately 63 engineers, and provided significant
equipment and personnel to the Motorway.

On the facts of the case, this cannot be seriously disputed. Bayindir’s contribution in
terms of know how, equipment and personnel clearly has an economic value and falls
within the meaning of “every kind of asset” according to Article I(2) of the BIT.

Indeed, Pakistan’s objections concern mainly the purely financial contribution of
Bayindir.

Bayindir’s financial contribution

According to Pakistan, Bayindir did not make any significant injections of funds that
could be considered as an investment. Referring to Clause 60.8 of the Contract's
Conditions of Particular Application (as amended by Addenda Nos. 6 and 8 [of
1993]) and to Clause 3 of Addendum No. 9 of 17 April 2000, Pakistan relies upon the
following considerations:

[Bayindir] received almost one-third of the Contract price up front, which more
than adequately covered mobilisation costs. In this respect, it is recalled that as
of April 2001, Bayindir had retained approximately $100 million of the

 

Investment, according to which, exactly as in the BIT at hand, the term investment shall mean
“every kind of asset”.

N. RuBINS, The Notion of ‘Investment’ in International Investment Arbitration, in: N. Horn (ed),
Arbitrating Foreign Disputes, The Hague, 2004, p. 292.

32

119.

120.

ce.

121.

122.

123.

124.

mobilisation advance. At the same time, the risk engaged was minimal because
Bayindir had received such a substantial mobilisation advance, which it was to
retain (proportionally reduced) until the end of the Contract (Mem. J., pp. 15-16).

The very fact that a part of the price is paid in advance has in and of itself no bearing on
the existence of a financial contribution. In any event, Pakistan’s contention overlooks
the fact that Bayindir provided bank guarantees equivalent to the amount of the
Mobilisation Advance payable to NHA “on his first demand without whatsoever right of
objection on our part and without his first claim[ing] to the Contractor” (see supra No.
18). Specifically, Pakistan did not dispute Bayindir’s allegation that it “has incurred bank
commission charges in excess of USD 11 million” (C-Mem. J., p. 19 1.33).

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal concludes that Bayindir made a substantial
financial contribution to the Project.

Conclusion

Considering Bayindir’s contribution both in terms of know how, equipment and
personnel and in terms of injection of funds, the Tribunal considers that Bayindir did
contribute “assets” within the meaning of the general definition of investment set forth in
Article |(2) of the BIT.

Investment under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention

It is common ground between the parties that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is further
contingent upon the existence of an “investment” within the meaning of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention (be it as an independent requirement or as a specification of the
concept of investment under the BIT).

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention provides the following:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out
of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or
agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre.

The Tribunal notes that Bayindir claims that Pakistan has breached various rights
conferred on it by the BIT with respect to its investment. Hence, the current dispute is a
dispute with Pakistan, as required by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

33

125.

126.

aa.

127.

128.

Pakistan did not contest that the current dispute is a “legal dispute” within the meaning
of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention**. Irrespective of the possible nexus
between Bayindir’s claims under the BIT and the issues to be determined under the
underlying Contract, the fact remains that the present dispute is clearly legal in
nature as it concerns, in the words of the Report of the Executive Directors of the
World Bank on the Convention, “the existence or scope of [Bayindir's] legal rights”
and the nature and extent of the relief to be granted to Bayindir as a result of
Pakistan's violation of those legal rights“*.

Whether the rights asserted by Bayindir in the end are found to exist must await the
proceedings on the merits. Subject to determining whether Bayindir made an
investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, which will be
discussed below, the Tribunal holds that the assertion of said rights has given rise to a
dispute that comes within the jurisdiction of the Centre as set out in Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention.

The object of the contract

First of all, Pakistan objects that, in the absence of express wording, a straightforward
highway construction contract does not constitute an investment under within Article 25
of the ICSID Convention (Mem. J., p. 8 referring to SCHREUER, op. cit. [supra Fn. 24], p.
139, footnote 158).

The Tribunal is unpersuaded by this objection. The construction of a highway is more
than construction in the traditional sense. As noted by the tribunal in Aucoven, the
construction of a highway, “which implies substantial resources during significant

In fact, Pakistan disputes the characterization of the legal dispute (see, for instance, Tr. J. 207:7-
17: “We do not conceal the fact that there is a real dispute between Bayindir and NHA about
this, there is not question about that at all. But it is not a dispute about breach of treaty; it is a
dispute about whether the exercise of a contractual power was justified under this term of the
contract, or whether instead the contracting party should have acted under a different
contractual provision and on payment of compensation. With the very greatest respect to
Bayindir and its representatives, there is no way of turning that into a claim for breach of treaty”).
Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and Nationals of Other States; International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, March 18, 1965, {] 26; available at http:/Awww.worldbank.org/icsid/basicdoc/partB-
section05.htm#03.

 

34

129.

bb.

130.

131.

132.

periods of time, clearly qualifies as an investment in the sense of Article 25 of the ICSID

Convention”®.

The Tribunal is reinforced in this conclusion by the fact, referred to by Bayindir, that in
the recent Impregilo case, which regarded a similar dispute concerning the construction
of a dam, Pakistan did not challenge the existence of an investment under Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention.“

The so-called “Salini Test”

Both parties relied upon previous decisions by ICSID Tribunals to define the notion of
investment under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and in particular upon the decision
in Salini v. Morocco’”, The Tribunal in Salini held that the notion of investment
presupposes the following elements: (a) a contribution, (b) a certain duration over which
the project is implemented, (c) sharing of the operational risks, and (d) a contribution to
the host State’s development, being understood that these elements may be closely

interrelated, should be examined in their totality,“

and will normally depend on the
circumstances of each case“®. In the following paragraphs the Tribunal will examine

these conditions in turn.

Firstly, to qualify as an investment, the project in question must constitute a substantial
commitment on the side of the investor. In the case at hand, it cannot be seriously
contested that Bayindir made a significant contribution, both in terms of know how,
equipment and personnel and in financial terms (see supra Nos. 115 et seq.).

Secondly, to qualify as an investment, the project in question must have a certain
duration. The element of duration is the paramount factor which distinguishes
investments within the scope of the ICSID Convention and ordinary commercial

Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela v. Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/5, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 27 September 2001, 4101 (Exh. [BaylCLEX 14); also available at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/decjuris.pdf.

See /mpregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], J 111(a).
Salini v. Morocco [supra No. 98], passim.
Id. See also L.E.S.1. v. Algeria [supra Fn. 26], {| 13 (iv).

Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/11,
Decision on jurisdiction of 6 August 2004, § 53 in fine (Exh. [Pak]L-11); available at
http:/www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/joy-mining-award.pdf.

35

133.

134.

135.

transactions. When denying the qualification of investment to an ordinary sales contract
(even if complex), the Tribunal in Joy Mining expressly distinguished Salini v. Morocco
on the ground that “[i]n that case, however, a major project for the construction of a
highway was involved and this indeed required not only heavy capital investment but

also services and other long-term commitments.”

Bayindir points out that the Contract had an initial duration of three years followed by a
defect liability period of one year and a maintenance period of four years against
payment. It is further undisputed that the project had been underway for three years
and that Bayindir was granted a contractual extension of an additional twelve months.
Contracts over similar periods of time have been considered to satisfy the duration test
for an investment®'. Since Pakistan has not contended that the project was not
sufficiently extended in time to qualify as an investment, the Tribunal considers that this
requirement is met. More generally, as mentioned by the tribunal in L.E.S./. v. Algeria,
one cannot place the bar very high, as (a) experience shows — and a preliminary
assessment of the facts of the case seem to confirm — that this kind of project more
often than not requires time extensions, and (b) the duration of the contractor's
guarantee should also be taken into account”.

Thirdly, to qualify as an investment, the project should not only provide profit but also

imply an element of risk. Pakistan’s argument in this respect is that “the risk engaged

was minimal because Bayindir had received such a substantial mobilisation advance,

which it was to retain (proportionally reduced) until the end of the Contract” (Mem. J.
2.19, p. 16).

 

Bayindir contested this argument, inter alia, on the ground that it had placed itself at
considerable risk by securing first demand bank guarantees, and by opening itself to
the danger of an unlawful call on the guarantees. More generally (C-Mem. J., 9.41
p. 13). Bayindir relied on the following passage of the Salini decision:

Joy Mining v. Egypt [supra Fn. 49], J] 62.

Salini v. Morocco [supra No. 98], {1 54-55, citing D. CARREAU ef al., Droit International
Economique, pp. 558-78 (3d ed., 1990); C.H. SCHREUER, Commentary on the ICSID Convention
(1996) 11 ICSID Rev - FILJ 318 et seq).

L.E.S.1. v. Algeria [supra Fn. 26], | 14(ii) in fine: “On ne peut de toute fagon pas se montrer
excessivement rigoureux tant l’expérience apprend que des objets du genre de celui qui est en
cause justifient souvent des prolongations, sans parler de la durée de la garantie.”

36

136.

137.

138.

139.

It does not matter in this respect that these risks were freely taken. It also does
not matter that the remuneration of the Contractor was not linked to the
exploitation of the completed work. A construction that stretches out over many
years, for which the total cost cannot be established with certainty in advance,
creates an obvious risk for the Contractor.°°

The Tribunal cannot agree with Pakistan’s objection. Besides the inherent risk in long-
term contracts, the Tribunal considers that the very existence of a defect liability period
of one year and of a maintenance period of four years against payment, creates an
obvious risk for Bayindir. Under these circumstances, the Tribunal is of the opinion that
Bayindir's participation in the risks of the operation was significant.

Lastly, relying on the preamble of the ICSID Convention, ICSID tribunals generally
consider that, to qualify as an investment, the project must represent a significant
contribution to the host State’s development. In other words, investment should be
significant to the State’s development. As stated by the tribunal in L.E.S./, often this
condition is already included in the three classical conditions set out in the ‘Salini test’®>.
In any event, in the present case, Pakistan did not challenge the numerous declarations
of its own authorities emphasising the importance of the road infrastructure for the
development of the country.

For all the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Bayindir made an investment
both under Article 1(2) of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. Accordingly,
Pakistan’s jurisdictional challenge that there is no investment fails.

ARE BAYINDIR’S TREATY CLAIMS IN REALITY CONTRACT CLAIMS?

It is Pakistan’s “primary submission” (Ir. J., 209:36) that “Bayindir’s (treaty) claims,

 

however skilfully repackaged, are inextricably bound up with the Contract” (Reply J.
p. 3 2.2) and that “the only rights which Bayindir claims have been violated are rights
which it asserts are derived from the Contract” (Reply J., p. 21, 4.2.44). In other words,

regardless of how they have been formulated in this arbitration, Bayindir’s Treaty

Salini v. Morocco [supra No. 98], {| 56 referred to in C-Mem. J.

The significance of the contribution, an element that was not contemplated in Salini, was added
in Joy Mining v. Egypt [supra Fn. 49], 7 53.

L.E.S.1. v. Algeria [supra Fn. 26], J] 13(iv) in fine.

See for instance CX 122 referred to in C-Mem. J. p. 14 46.

37

140.

141.

142.

143.

Claims “are in reality contract claims [...] and thus beyond the scope of this tribunal's
jurisdiction” (Tr. J., 45:24-27).

 

In response, Bayindir relies on the above-mentioned ‘precedent’ in the /mpregilo case,
in which Pakistan was unsuccessful with this very same argument to object to
jurisdiction®’. As pointed out by Bayindir, the tribunal in Impregilo held, inter alia, as
follows:

The fact that Article 9 of the BIT does not endow the Tribunal with jurisdiction to
consider Impregilo's Contract Claims does not imply that the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction to consider Treaty Claims against Pakistan which at the same time
could constitute breaches of the Contracts. **

And the tribunal added:

[C]ontrary to Pakistan's approach in this case, the fact that a breach may give
rise to a contract claim does not mean that it cannot also — and separately — give
rise to a treaty claim.®°

In substance Bayindir contends that it has laid out in some detail its claims for the
breach of four separate BIT provisions and has thus, in the words of the /mpregilo
tribunal, properly stated a claim "that the alleged damages were a consequence of the
behaviour of the Host State acting in breach of the obligations it had assumed under the
treaty” (Rejoinder J., pp. 18-19, 157°). Before discussing in more detail the difference
between Treaty Claims and Contract Claims (b) under the specific circumstances of the
case (c) and Pakistan’s subsidiary arguments in this respect (qd), it is useful to recall the
actual formulation of Bayindir’s Treaty Claims (a).

Bayindir’s Treaty Claims

In its RA, Bayindir submitted that Pakistan’s conduct in connection with the project
constituted:
[b]latant violation of its obligations to Bayindir under the BIT. In particular,
Pakistan has allegedly:

- failed to promote and protect Bayindir's investment in violation of Article II of
the BIT;

In Impregilo, Pakistan submitted that “the Treaty Claims [t]here c[ould] not be separated from the
Contract Claims and that, consequently, such claims fall outside the scope of the BIT and this
Tribunal has no jurisdiction over them” (see /mpregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], | 77).

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], | 219.
Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], | 258.
Referring to the wording of /mpregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], | 260.

38

144.

145.

146.

- failed to ensure the fair and equitable treatment of Bayindir's investment, in
violation of Article II (2) of the BIT;

- taken measures of expropriation, or measures having the same nature or the
same effect, against Bayindir's investment in violation of Article Ill (1) of the
BIT.

(RA, p. 14 136-37)

In its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Bayindir expanded on the alleged violation of
Article Il (2) of the BIT explaining that this provision contained an obligation of both
national and most favoured nation treatment. Bayindir’s Treaty Claims are of three
types:

(i) claims for violation of Pakistan’s obligation to ensure fair and equitable treatment
(based on the BIT’s preamble and indirectly on Article II(2) of the BIT);

(ii) claims for violations of Pakistan’s obligation to accord most favoured nation
treatment (based directly on Article II(2) of the BIT);

(iii) claims for expropriation (based directly on Article III(1) of the BIT).

At the jurisdictional hearing Bayindir summarized its case in the following terms:

We assert that we entered bona fide a substantial contract for the construction of
a motorway, the contract having been entered with the NHA, in terms which
undoubtedly as it seems to be common ground, would provide a profitable
contractual enterprise for us as a substantial contractor to provide a result which
in the circumstances was at a tender price some 30 per cent less than any other
tender for this substantial project. We expected no more than to be treated fairly
and without discrimination as we executed our contract pursuant to the
arrangements which we made with the NHA. Our complaint is that for reasons
external to our contractual performance it became convenient to the
Respondent, the Republic of Pakistan, acting in its own behalf and also, we say,
through its emanation, NHA, to terminate their contractual arrangement before
the completion of the project.

(Tr. J., 126:16:32)

 

There can be no dispute that these claims are directly stated by reference to Pakistan's
obligations under the BIT. In and of themselves, assuming pro tem that they may be
sustained on the facts, Bayindir’s Treaty Claims fall within the scope of the BIT. This
being so, the following aspects are, however, disputed:

(a) whether Bayindir’s Treaty Claims are in reality Contract Claims or, in other words
whether there is any “credible self-standing Treaty Claim” (Mem. J., p. 5 1.7);

(b) whether Bayindir’s Treaty Claims are sufficiently substantiated;

39

147.

148.

149.

(c) whether the actions about which Bayindir’s complains were taken in the exercise
of puissance publique.

Pakistan summarized its objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear Bayindir’s
Treaty Claims as follows:

Bayindir's claims for breach of the treaty are claims that its rights under the
Contract have been interfered with or abrogated. It follows that in the present
case (and it is not suggested that this will invariably be the case whenever there
is a combination of contract and treaty claims in an investment dispute), if the
claims for breach of contract are unsuccessful, because it is determined that
Bayindir did not possess the rights which it claims or (which amounts to the
same thing) that abrogation of those rights was contractually justified, then the
treaty claims must also fail.

(Reply J., p. 18, 12.39)

The difference between Treaty Claims and Contract Claims

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that Pakistan accepts that “treaty claims are
juridically distinct from claims for breach of contract, even where they arise out of the
same facts” (Reply J., p. 18, 2.38). The Tribunal considers that this principle is now

well established®'. The ad hoc committee in Vivendi v. Argentina described this

962

“conceptual separation””* as follows:

A particular investment dispute may at the same time involve issues of the
interpretation and application of the BIT’s standards and questions of contract.

Whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been a
breach of contract are different questions. Each of these claims will be
determined by reference to its own proper or applicable law in the case of the
BIT, by international law, in the case of the Concession Contract, by the proper
law of the contract.**

The Vivendi ad hoc Committee went on to state:

[W]here “the fundamental basis of the claim” is a treaty laying down an
independent standard by which the conduct of the parties is to be judged, the

See, for instance, Siemens v. Argentina [infra Fn. 80], | 180; AES Corp. v. Argentina [supra No.
76], I] 90 et seq.

B. CREMADES and D.J.A CAIRNS, Contract and Treaty Claims and Choice of Forum in Foreign
Investment Disputes, in: T. Weiler (Ed) International investment law and arbitration: leading
cases from the ICSID, NAFTA, bilateral treaties and customary international law, London, 2005,
p. 331.

Compafia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale
des Eaux) v. Argentine Republic, Decision of Annulment, 3 July 2002, {] 60 (Exh. [Pak]L-5 = Exh.
Bay|CLEX16); ICSID Review (2004), vol. 19, No. 1, 41 ILM 1135 (2002), also available at
http:/www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/vivendi_annul.pdf

Ibid., 1 96.

40

150.

151.

152.

153.

existence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause [or, for present purpose, an
arbitration clause®] in a contract between the claimant and the respondent state
or one of its subdivisions cannot operate as a bar to the application of the treaty
standard.

And:

In a case where the essential basis of a claim brought before an international
tribunal is a breach of contract, the tribunal will give effect to any valid choice of
forum clause in the contract.

In the present case, it is undisputed that the 1997 Contract contains a dispute
settlement clause providing for arbitration under the 1940 Arbitration Act of Pakistan.

As a matter of principle, this arbitration clause is irrelevant for the purpose of the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal over the Treaty Claims®’. However, following the withdrawal
of the Contract Claims, Pakistan argues that, under the particular circumstances of this
case, “to use the language of the award in the Vivendi Annulment case, the essential
basis of [Bayindir’s] claims is purely contractual” (Tr. J.. 45:22-26).

 

The specific circumstances of the case

On Pakistan’s case, the Treaty Claims are purely contractual as they:

[c]oncern [aa.] the interpretation and application of contract provisions, to what
extent and whether the contract was breached by either NHA or Bayindir,
whether and to what extent the engineer's decisions as to which Bayindir's
claims are ultimately directed were justified and [bb.] how any claim should be
quantified under the contract's provisions”.

(Tr. J.. 45:22-26).

In other words, the Treaty Claims are in reality contract claims (over which the Tribunal
does not have jurisdiction) because (aa) their ‘ingredients’ are essentially contractual
which is confirmed by the fact that (bb) the amount of the Treaty Claims corresponds to
the amount of the Contract Claims.

See, for instance 90-91.

Vivendi v. Argentina [supra No. 148], 1101. See also /mpregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74],
7225.

See also Camuzzi International S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/2, Decision
on Jurisdiction of 11 May 2005, available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/camuzzi-
en.pdf, 89, where the tribunal seems to limit the relevance of the contractual forum only to
“purely contractual questions having no effect on the provisions of the Treaty”.

a4

aa. The “ingredients” of Bayindir’s claims

154. In substance, Pakistan’s case is that the Treaty Claims are in reality dependent upon
the existence of a breach of contract:

The right not to be the victim of unfair and inequitable treatment, the right not to
be the victim of expropriation, are both rights that are tied to specific substantive
rights of an investor, and one has to ask what has been interfered inequitably or
unfairly; what has been taken in an expropriation? [...] it is logically and
juridically essential to establish that Bayindir has the rights under the contract
that it claims to have before it will even be possible to determine whether those
rights have been the subject of expropriation.

(Tr. J., 85:3-8; 85:30-34).

155. Bayindir acknowledges that its case arises out of the contractual relationship but insists
on the fact that its claims rest on breaches of the BIT:

[I]t is difficult to contemplate, although one can postulate, a situation for breach
of a BIT obligation that would not be some underlying contractual situation
supporting the circumstances that have given rise to the claim for a breach of the
treaty obligation. So the fact that one can identify a particular contractual
relationship is a usual, one would say almost inevitable, precursor to any aspect
of a claim arising from the breach of a BIT obligation.

(Tr. J., 126:7-15)

156. On the expropriation claim in particular, Pakistan further argues that:

Bayindir's expropriation claim, what it now terms an expropriation claim, as well
as all of its claims which are based on its expulsion from the site, can only be
assessed in the light of the contract's terms and taking into account their actual
application in fact, including an assessment of whether Bayindir was responsible
for insufficient progress on the works, the actions and decision of the engineer
and the contractually based qualification of any amounts potentially owing to
Bayindir for work performed or for its fixed and moveable assets on the site
under the contract, and those are all quintessentially contractual matters as to
which Pakistan respectfully submits this tribunal has no jurisdiction.

(Tr. J., 52:20-33)

157. The Tribunal is however of the opinion that the fact that a State may be exercising a
contractual right or remedy does not of itself exclude the possibility of a treaty breach
(see also infra Nos. 180 et seq.).

bb. The quantum of Bayindir’s claims

158. According to Pakistan, “the most striking indication [of the intrinsically contractual nature
of the Treaty Claims] is that the amount claimed in the present proceedings (US
$416,236,110) is exactly the same as that claimed by Bayindir in the proceedings it has

42

159.

160.

161.

initiated in Pakistan under the contractual provisions for arbitration” (Mem. J, p. 40
14.1) or in other words:

[T]he amount of Bayindir's claim quantified in its request for arbitration is
precisely to the dollar the same amount that Bayindir claim to the Engineer under
clause 53 of the contract. In and of itself that is a test to the fact that the
underlying basis for Bayindir's claims must be contractual.

(Tr. J. 47:17-23)

Bayindir's position is that, following the abandonment of the Contract Claims, “the issue
of what would have happened under the contract, which is not by definition before the
tribunal, is irrelevant”; since Bayindir is pursuing exclusively “treaty breach[es], all these
problems about damages fall away” (Tr. J., 146:14-22).

 

As Bayindir’s original Treaty and Contract Claims clearly arose out of the same set of
facts, it is not surprising that at the stage of the RA Bayindir articulated damages by
reference to the Contract. In the current situation, following the abandonment of its
Contract Claims, Bayindir is required to articulate the damage exclusively by reference
to the Treaty. In Bayindir’s counsel’s terms:

[O]ur complaint is a completely different complaint under a treaty, which has its
own measures of compensations. Once you get to that point we say that you
levitate yourself out of contract issues and come to the issue of if there is a
breach amounting to expropriation, what is the compensation.

(Tr. J.. 146:5-10)

 

At the jurisdictional hearing, Bayindir recognized that it has “not yet articulated” the
requested amount of compensation (Ir. J., 147:23-24) and qualified the articulation “by

reference to the issues about contract claims” as merely “a convenient reference point”
(Tr._J.. 145:16-17). Referring to the principles set out by the Permanent Court of

 

International Justice in the 1928 Chorzéw Factory case, Bayindir contends that
reparation must as far as possible wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and
re-establish the situation which in all possibility would have existed if that act had not
been committed. According to Bayindir, if it concludes that Pakistan breached the BIT,
the Tribunal will have to address the question of compensation according to these
principles. In Bayindir’s view, “it does not involve working through the contractual
provisions” (Tr. J. 143:7-8; see also Tr. J., 168:16-19), the “obvious elements of

 

compensation” being:

[o]ne loss of profit, which we say we can measure exactly here because of the
price at which the contract was let out to other contractors as well as in other
ways. We have the element, we say, of destruction of our corporate business
because of the hardship imposed by reason of this expulsion. We have the

43

162.

163.

164.

165.

issues, we say, of recouping unrecouped expenditure including amounts which
had not even been certified. We do not claim them because they have been
certified here; we just claim the set amounts we have spent and which are
entitled to be recouped as part of our losses. Fifthly, we would say that we
would be entitled to have appropriate orders indemnifying us completely against
a call up of these guarantees of 71.6 million and 1.87 billion rupees and other
customs and guarantees which even recently have been called up to put us in
the position we would have been if there had not been, for the purpose of this
argument, undoubted treaty breaches amounting to reparation.

(Tr. J. 144:28-145:8)

In and of itself, “Bayindir’s contemporaneous characterisation and pursuit of those
claims under the contract dispute resolution mechanism” (see. Tr. J., 54:18-21) — which
was described as “a self evident fact” by Bayindir (Tr. J.. 63:35-38; 64:1-10) — does not

 

 

mean that Bayindir’s current Treaty Claims are in reality Contract Claims.

In support of its case that the Treaty Claims are in reality Contract Claims, Pakistan
puts much weight on “[t]he fact that it is admitted by Bayindir that if they are completely
successful in the ICSID proceedings that will wipe out the totality of their contractual

claim” (Tr. J., 83:27-30).

Indeed, when abandoning its Contract Claims, Bayindir expressed the following views:

[Wle are pursuing our remedies on the basis that there is a treaty breach. If, as
we expect, we are successful in establishing liability with respect to that matter,
we would expect that our relief as claimed would provide complete relief for us
with respect to all matters arising out of the agreements made with respect to the
freeway. That would mean that there would be no outstanding issues to be
resolved.

(Tr. Ji, 12:11-19)

 

Moreover, as will be discussed below, at the jurisdictional hearing Bayindir further
submitted that the Contract Claims are in any event time barred under Pakistani law.
One may ask whether, under these circumstances, Bayindir’s re-articulation of the
claims and of the possible measure of compensation is legitimate. This is a question
that the Tribunal will address more generally when discussing Pakistan’s argument that
Bayindir’s procedural behaviour constitutes qualified “abuse of process” (cf. infra Nos.
169 et seq.). For the present purpose, the Tribunal must assess its jurisdiction on the
basis of the record as it stands. The fact remains that Bayindir is asserting Treaty
Claims and a newly articulated request for compensation, which may include “an

appropriate sum for compensation” (Tr. J., 147:33-38).

 

44

166.

167.

168.

aa.

169.

170.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal holds that the present case is not a case
where the essential basis of the claims is purely contractual. Hence, there is no reason
to depart from the principle of the independence of treaty claims and contract claims as

it was expressed by the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi.

In conclusion, the Tribunal considers that when the investor has a right under both the
contract and the treaty, it has a self-standing right to pursue the remedy accorded by
the treaty. The very fact that the amount claimed under the treaty is the same as the
amount that could be claimed (or was claimed) under the contract does not affect such

self-standing right.

Pakistan’s subsidiary arguments

Having concluded that the Treaty Claims are independent from the Contract Claims, the
Tribunal will now review Pakistan’s two subsidiary objections to its jurisdiction to hear
the Treaty Claims, that is (aa) abuse of process and (bb) conflict of conventions.

Abuse of Process
At the jurisdictional hearing, Pakistan qualified Bayindir’s articulation of claims as an

“abuse of process [...] under international law with the BIT and the ICSID convention”
(Tr. J.. 34:4-32). In particular, Pakistan insisted on the following circumstances:

 

[R]eally almost up until the last minute before this dramatic request for arbitration
in the Spring of 2002 to ICSID, Bayindir treated all its complaints against NHA as
contractual complaints. There is not a hint of any complaint under any BIT
against Pakistan.

(Tr. J., 34:5-10)

Bayindir [became] unhappy with the dispute resolution mechanism it voluntarily
agreed with when it signed the contract and which was an essential part of the
bargain between NHA and Bayindir, and wants to re-write the contract and
effectively substitute this Tribunal for the Tribunal that it hitherto recognised was
the competent Tribunal.

(Tr. J., 65:35-66:3)

Pakistan asserts that there is an “inherent power and duty for an international Tribunal
to guard against this kind of abuse of process, and that that has had jurisdictional or at

least preliminary objections significance” (Tr. J., 83:37-84:2).

 

45

171.

172.

173.

bb.

174.

175.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, one should distinguish between Bayindir's tactical choice to
abandon the Contract Claims at the outset of the jurisdictional hearing and Bayindir’s
fundamental choice to pursue the Treaty Claims. It is evident that Bayindir’s initial
choice to raise Contract Claims and its late withdrawal of these Claims may have
engendered a significant amount of useless work for both the Tribunal and Pakistan.
Whether Bayindir's late abandonment of the Contract Claims should have an incidence

on the allocation of costs will be addressed below (cf. infra Nos. 276 et seq.).

The same can be said of Bayindir’s contention that, on the basis of the “relevant
limitation periods under the law of Pakistan, there are no contract claims being
maintained by the claimant in arbitration or in legal proceedings in Pakistan nor is there
a possibility that any contract claims could be maintained because they are out of time”
(Ir. J., 229:7-11). If the Tribunal can only regret that this submission was made at the

 

very end of the jurisdictional hearing, this does not make Bayindir's pursuit of the Treaty
Claims abusive.

Hence, the Tribunal dismisses Pakistan’s challenge to its jurisdiction to the extent it is

based on an alleged abuse of process.

Conflict of Conventions

At the hearing on jurisdiction, Pakistan put forward a new argument: Pakistan’s recent
ratification of the 1958 New York Convention which brings with it “Pakistan's obligations
to respect and to enforce a private arbitration agreement” under Article Il of the New
York Convention (Tr. J., 28:
the 1958 New York Convention and the 1965 Washington Convention” and argues that

 

-32). Pakistan relies on a “potential conflict between [...]

 

“the New York Convention both historically and because of its specialist terms should
be preferred to the Washington Convention” (Ir. J., 28:34-29:8). It is Pakistan’s
submission that the Tribunal should avoid “creat[ing] a situation where by thwarting the

 

private arbitral process [it] induce[s] a breach of Pakistan's treaty obligations both to
Turkey and to all other ratifiers of the New York Convention” (Tr. J.. 29:11-15).

 

The Tribunal cannot conceal its surprise at the raising of this argument, which it
considers devoid of merit. Along the lines of the /mpregilo decision as quoted by
Pakistan itself, the Tribunal considers that, as the current proceedings are not

46

176.

177.

178.

concerned with the Contract Claims, the issue of “the impact (if any) of competing
arbitration agreements, including all questions as to the viability of such provisions,
does not arise” (/mpregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], ] 85 referred to in Tr. J., 118:9-
119:15)°,

 

In any event, Pakistan’s point regarding a potential conflict of conventions might only
arise if an ICSID tribunal were to order a state to disregard a local arbitration
agreement, contrary to Article Il of the New York Convention which obliges states to
“recognise an agreement in writing under which the parties undertake to submit to
arbitration all or any differences which have arisen or which may arise between them”
. 117:18-21).

 

(see Tr.

 

It is true that, at a time when this arbitration was still concerned with the Contract
Claims, Bayindir applied to obtain preliminary measures in order to stay the Islamabad
arbitration. It then withdrew its request as a result of an offer by Pakistan to request
NHA to move for an extension of time limits in such a manner that that arbitration would
not proceed prior to this Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction (see PO#1, p. 23). It has
always been the common understanding that Pakistan agreed to this measure in a
“spirit of co-operation” (Tr. J., 116:4) and there is no question that Pakistan will not be
bound by its commitment following the Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction. In any event,
the mere stay of the arbitration would not under any circumstances amount to a non-
recognition of the arbitration agreement in violation of Article Il of the New York
Convention.

Moreover, Pakistan's ratification of the New York Convention in the course of the
present proceedings cannot have any bearing on the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in the
present case. The contrary would entail, amongst other things, that a unilateral act by
the respondent to an arbitral proceeding could retrospectively affect (to the
respondent's own benefit) the arbitral tribunal's jurisdiction which, according to the long-
established jurisprudence of international tribunals of all kinds, is fixed as of the time the
proceedings are commenced, and is not subject to ex post facto alteration®.

This Tribunal is aware that a conflict of convention argument was put forward by Pakistan in
Impregilo, but is unable to find any endorsement of such argument in the /mpregilo Tribunal’s
brief remark just quoted.

Again, the Tribunal notes that Pakistan put forward a similar argument in /mpregilo. However, it
observes that, contrary to the present one, /mpregilo was a case in which the allegedly

47

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

As a result, the Tribunal cannot see any merit in Pakistan’s argument regarding the
potential conflict of conventions.

The question of ‘puissance publique’

Having held that a contractual breach may give rise to a separate treaty claim, the
tribunal in /mpregilo added that:

[oJ]nly the State in the exercise of its sovereign authority (“puissance publique’),
and not as a contracting party, may breach the obligations assumed under the
BIT. In other words, the investment protection treaty only provides a remedy to
the investor where the investor proves that the alleged damages were a
consequence of the behaviour of the Host State acting in breach of the
obligations it had assumed under the treaty. ”

On Pakistan’s case, almost all of the allegations which make up Bayindir's claim for
breach of treaty (whether relating to claims of discriminatory treatment, unfair and
inequitable treatment, or expropriation) concern the conduct of NHA, which was
contractual and not sovereign in character. Moreover, Pakistan contends that

[elven if the possibility that some small part of NHA's actions could potentially be
characterised as sovereign, the fact that the overwhelming majority are self-
evidently acts of a contractual character demonstrates the essentially contractual
nature of the claim and the futility of this Tribunal proceeding until the contractual
forum has examined all of the contractual claims and pronounced upon them.

(Reply J.. p. 21, 12.43)

Bayindir’s argues that the record shows the exercise of sovereign power, i.e., a decision
“from the top down”, in which “the element of national interest [...] was the driving force
for the result of our expulsion and expropriation of our contract” (Tr. J., 170:9-23)”".

In the Tribunal’s view, the test of jpuissance publique’ would be relevant only if Bayindir
was relying upon a contractual breach (by NHA) in order to assert a breach of the BIT.”

 

contradictory treaty obligations (BIT versus Geneva Convention) were already binding on both
states well before the arbitral proceedings were brought.

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], J 85.

Similarly, the Tribunal does not have to decide on Bayindir’s argument that the tribunal in “RFCC
v. Morocco, which Impregilo cites, discussed "puissance publique" only in the context of fair and
equitable treatment and expropriation claims before it, while it did not apply the test to the
national treatment and MFN claims” (Reply J.. p. 17, 154 referring to Consortium RFCC v.
Royaume du Maroc, |\CSID N° ARB/00/6, Award of 22 December 2003, {J 52-53 (Exh. [Pak]L-8
= Exh. [Bay]CLEX 59); available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/rfcc-award.pdf).

The Tribunal notes that this view is not contrary to Impregilo and RFCC. The tribunal in Impregilo
referred to the concept of ‘puissance publique’ in respect of the question whether a “breach of an
investment contract can be regarded as a breach of a BIT” (/mpregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74],
{9 259-260). Similarly, RFCC v. Morocco (cited by the tribunal in /mpregilo) was concerned with

48

184.

185.

In the present case, Bayindir has abandoned the Contract Claims and pursues
exclusively Treaty Claims. When an investor invokes a breach of a BIT by the host
State (not itself party to the investment contract), the alleged treaty violation is by
definition an act of ‘puissance publique’. The question whether the actions alleged in
this case actually amount to sovereign acts of this kind by the State is however a
question to be resolved on the merits.

Hence, at this stage the real question is whether the Treaty Claims are sufficiently
substantiated for jurisdictional purposes or, in Pakistan’s words, whether they have a
“colourable basis”.

ARE BAYINDIR’S TREATY CLAIMS SUFFICIENTLY SUBSTANTIATED FOR JURISDICTIONAL
PURPOSES?

Significantly, Pakistan itself assimilates the issue whether the Treaty Claims are in
reality Contract Claims to the question whether the Treaty Claims are in fact sufficiently
substantiated for jurisdictional purposes:

So a Tribunal that is not the Tribunal chosen under the contract should not be
hearing this case, we say, unless it really is a treaty claim that is confronting it
and not a contract claim dressed up to look like something on breach of treaty.

The Impregilo case at paragraph 254 of the award makes very much this point
[...]. Having quoted both Oil Platforms and the arbitration award in
SGS/Philippines [...], at paragraph 254 the Tribunal goes on in these terms.
"The present Tribunal is in full agreement with the approach evident in this
jurisprudence. It reflects two complementary concerns. To ensure that courts
and Tribunals are not flooded with claims which have no chance of success or
may even be of an abusive nature [...] and equally to ensure that in considering
issues of jurisdiction courts and Tribunals do not go into the merits of cases
without sufficient prior debate."

(Tr. J., 81:33-82:15)

 

 

the questions of whether (i) the alleged contract breach could constitute an unfair and
inequitable treatment under the BIT, and (ii) the alleged bad performance of the contract could
amount to interference tantamount to expropriation. RFCC v. Morocco, [supra Fn. 71]: “L’Etat,
ou son émanation, peuvent s’étre comportés comme des cocontractants ordinaires ayant une
divergence d’approche, en fait ou en droit, avec I'investisseur. Pour que la violation alléguée du
contrat constitue un traitement injuste ou inéquitable au sens de |’Accord bilatéral, i! faut qu'elle
résulte d’un comportement exorbitant de celui qu’un contractant ordinaire pourrait adopter.”
(51). And further: “Or un Etat cocontractant n’ « interfére » pas, mais « exécute » un contrat.
Sil peut mal exécuter ledit contrat cela ne sera pas sanctionné par les dispositions du traité
relatives a I'expropriation ou a la nationalisation a moins qu'il ne soit prouvé que I'Etat ou son
émanation soit sorti(e) de son réle de simple cocontractant(e) pour prendre le réle bien
spécifique de Puissance Publique” (Ibid, | 65 ; see also | 69).

49

186.

187.

188.

189.

aa.

190.

To answer the question whether the Treaty Claims are sufficiently substantiated for
jurisdictional purposes, the Tribunal will first define the relevant standard (a). It will then
apply it to the different Treaty Claims, i.e., the most favoured nation (MFN) claim (b),
the fair and equal treatment claim (c) and the expropriation claim (d).

The relevant test

According to Pakistan, Bayindir cannot merely allege breach of the BIT with a view to
establishing the Tribunal's jurisdiction. Referring to previous decisions by international
tribunals, Pakistan submits that:

[i]t is for the Tribunal to interpret each provision of the BIT relied upon (Articles II
(1) and (2), III(1)), and to see whether on the facts alleged that provision could
be breached.

(Mem. J., p. 6, J. 1.9)

Pakistan accepts that the Tribunal need not determine whether Bayindir’s allegations of
breach are well-founded, but maintains that “some broad consideration of the facts may
be appropriate”. Specifically, Pakistan contends that:

Bayindir can only rely on allegations of fact (i) that are credible, (ii) where such
allegations could give rise to a breach of the BIT, (iii) taking into account the
views expressed by Pakistan on such allegations.

(Mem. J., p. 6, | 1.10)

Bayindir seems’* to accept that it has the burden (aa.) to demonstrate that the Tribunal
has jurisdiction (C-Mem. J., p. 3, (6). As to the standard of proof (bb.), Bayindir
seems” to accept that in the jurisdictional phase of this arbitration it has to establish
that “the claims it pleads are sustainable on a prima facie basis” (C-Mem. J., p. 3. 16).

The onus of establishing jurisdiction

In accordance with accepted international (and general national) practice, a party bears
the burden of proving the facts it asserts. In /mpregilo, the tribunal took it for granted

At the hearing, Bayindir expressed the following view: “Now, it is put that there is an onus on us
to establish jurisdiction. We say that is not so. We say that the onus is on Pakistan to establish
there is no jurisdiction but in the context that we have been firstly in our request for arbitration
expressed a tenable basis for putting a claim” (Tr. J., 138:38-140:5).

At the hearing, Bayindir expressed the following view: “We do not have to establish in our
submission a prima facie case, but we say whatever is the test we comfortably clear it” (Tr. J.
151:24-26).

 

50

191.

192.

bb.

193.

194.

that the Claimant had to satisfy “the burden of proof required at the jurisdictional phase”

and make “the prima facie showing of Treaty breaches required by ICSID Tribunals”.”°

At the jurisdictional hearing, Bayindir declared that it did not accept this passage of the
Impregilo decision (Tr. J., 13:34-36). Upon a specific request for clarification by the

 

Tribunal, Bayindir expressed the following view:
[I]t is necessary for this objection to be successful to the Republic of Pakistan to
say on this preliminary documentation that even if [Bayindir] establish the
matters and the characterisation of those matters which [it asserts], it becomes
untenable to make out [the Treaty] breach.

(Tr. J., 156:24-30)

 

In the Tribunal’s understanding, this approach does not alter the fact that, as conceded
in Bayindir's written submissions, Bayindir has the burden of demonstrating that its
claims fall within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

The relevant standard

In their written submissions, the parties formulated the test which the Tribunal is to
apply in determining jurisdictional disputes in various ways. They made extensive
reference to decisions of the International Court of Justice, ICSID tribunals and other
international tribunals. The gap between their positions appeared to narrow down
through that written process and, at the jurisdictional hearing, counsel for both parties
accepted the following test stated by the tribunal in /mpregilo (Tr. J., 157:13 et seq.
Bayindir]; 198:31 et seg. [Pakistan]):

[T]he Tribunal has considered whether the facts as alleged by the Claimant in
this case, if established, are capable of coming within those provisions of the BIT
which have been invoked.”®

The tribunal in /mpregilo went on to explain that, applying the approach set out above,

the tribunal has to determine whether the “Treaty Claims fall within the scope of the BIT,

977

assuming pro tem that they may be sustained on the facts”’’. In other words, the

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], J 79.

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], | 254, emphasis in the original

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], 263. In this respect, the Tribunal agrees with the
observation in United Parcel Service v. Government of Canada that “the reference to the facts
alleged being ‘capable’ of constituting a violation of the invoked obligations, as opposed to their
‘falling within’ the provisions, may be of little or no consequence. (United Parcel Service v.
Government of Canada (NAFTA), Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 November 200, {| 36; available at
http:/www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/UPS-Canada-Jurisdiction-22Nov2002.pdf.)

51

195.

196.

197.

Tribunal should be satisfied that, if the facts or the contentions alleged by Bayindir are
ultimately proven true, they would be capable of constituting a violation of the BIT.

The Tribunal notes that the approach has been followed by several international
arbitration tribunals deciding jurisdictional objections by a respondent state against a
claimant investor, including Methanex v. USA, SGS v. Philippines”®, Salini v. Jordan’®,
Siemens v. Argentina® and Plama v. Bulgaria®’. In the last of these cases, the tribunal
held that “if on the facts alleged by the Claimant, the Respondent's actions might violate

the [BIT], then the Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine exactly what the facts are and

82

see whether they do sustain a violation of that Treaty”™. Likewise, the tribunal in

Impregilo considered that “it must not make findings on the merits of those claims,

which have yet to be argued, but rather must satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction over the

dispute, as presented by the Claimant”®.

The Tribunal is in agreement with this approach, which strikes a helpful balance
between the need “to ensure that courts and tribunals are not flooded with claims which
have no chance of success or may even be of an abusive nature” on the one side, and
the necessity “to ensure that, in considering issues of jurisdiction, courts and tribunals
do not go into the merits of cases without sufficient prior debate” on the other.

Accordingly, the Tribunal’s first task is to determine the meaning and scope of the
provisions which Bayindir invokes as conferring jurisdiction and to assess whether the
facts alleged by Bayindir fall within those provisions or are capable, if proved, of

Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, |\CSID Case No. ARB/02/6,
Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 January 2004, 929 (Exh. [PakjL-9); available at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/SGSvPhil-final.pdf.

Salini Costruttori S.p.A and Italstrade S.p.A v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, |CSID Case
No. ARB/02/13, Award of 15 November 2004, {J 31 et seq. (Exh. [Pak]L-12); also available at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/salini-decision.pdf.

Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction of
3 August 2004 (Exh. [PakjL-10); available at http:/Awww.asil.org/ilib/Siemens_Argentina.pdf,
180: “The Tribunal simply has to be satisfied that, if the Claimant's allegations would be proven
correct, then the Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider them.”

Plama Consortium Limited v. The Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 8 February 2005, {| 119; available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/plama-
decision.pdf.

Plama v. Bulgaria [supra Fn. 81], | 132.

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], | 237.

52

198.

199.

200.

201.

constituting breaches of the obligations they refer to™. In performing this task, the
Tribunal will apply a prima facie standard, both to the determination of the meaning and
scope of the BIT provisions and to the assessment whether the facts alleged may
constitute breaches. If the result is affirmative, jurisdiction will be established, but the
existence of breaches will remain to be litigated on the merits.

Before applying this approach to each specific claim which Bayindir bases on the BIT,
the Tribunal notes that at the jurisdictional hearing Bayindir submitted that Pakistan
should have waited until the memorial on the merits before raising its jurisdictional
objections (Ir. J.. 141:4-5), which “of itself lowers the bar for [Bayindir] to clear” (Tr. J..
151:24-28).

 

It is true that under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41, Pakistan could have waited to raise its
objections on jurisdiction until its counter-memorial. However, this Rule also provides
that jurisdictional objections “shall be made as early as possible”. Moreover, as
Pakistan mentioned, Bayindir has explicitly accepted the way in which these
proceedings have been organised (Tr. J., 197:32-198:2). The reason for the exchange

 

of pleadings on jurisdiction prior to the memorial on the merits was to clear the question
of jurisdiction at an early stage. Bayindir knew the challenges brought forward by
Pakistan and had three opportunities to respond. At the first opportunity, Bayindir
submitted “that this Tribunal should consider whether the claims it pleads in the
jurisdictional phase of this arbitration are sustainable on a prima facie basis” (C-Mem.
J. p. 3,9 6).

The Tribunal therefore sees no reason to “lower the bar for [Bayindir] to clear” and thus
will apply the standard defined in paragraph 197 above.

Bayindir’s most favoured nation claim

Article Il (2) of the BIT states:

Each Party shall accord to these investments, once established, treatment no
less favourable than that accorded in similar situations to investments of its

Contrary to the tribunal in L.E.S./., this Tribunal will not simply verify that the Claimant invokes
treaty breaches (see L.E.S./. v. Algeria [supra Fn. 26], 25.4. The Tribunal observes that a
similar approach was adopted by the Tribunal in Consortium RFCC v. Royaume du Maroc,
Decision on jurisdiction, {| 70-71; available at http:/Awww.investmentclaims.com/decisions/-
Consortium-Morocco-Jurisdiction-16Jul2001 pdf).

53

202.

203.

204.

205.

206.

investors or to investments of investors of any third country, which ever is the
most favourable.

It is Bayindir’s contention that its investment was not given treatment equivalent to the
best treatment accorded to a comparable Pakistani or third country investment.
Specifically, Bayindir alleged that (aa) it was expelled allegedly to save costs and for
reasons of local favouritism, considering in particular that (bb) far more favourable
timetables were accorded to Pakistani and other foreign contractors and that (cc) these
other contractors were not expelled even though they were behind schedule far more
than Bayindir.

Pakistan opposes this claim arguing (i) that Bayindir has not pleaded the MFN claim in
its RA, (ii) that Bayindir’s contentions do not amount to “an MFN national treatment type
claim’, and (iii) that Bayindir has “not show([n] enough to get this tribunal across the
threshold to establish a prima facie breach” (Tr. J., 100:11-24).

 

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal observes that the fact that the most favoured
nation claim was first brought forward only in Bayindir’s C-Mem. J. is not relevant per
se.

Pakistan further contends that MFN claims “are predominantly about regulatory action
where a local investor or a foreign investor is offered better treatment, i.e., a more
preferable regulatory treatment than the foreign investor”, which is clearly not the case
of Bayindir (Tr. J., 100:24-30). In other words, the obligation arising out of the most

 

favourable treatment clause concerns “regulatory protection not the exercise of
discretion where no legal obligation exists”, in particular in contractual matters:

The periods for the completion of the project and the employer's remedies for a
failure to complete on time, just like questions of remuneration, are matters that
fall within the scope of a given construction contract. [...] The fact that NHA may
not have terminated contracts in other cases is wholly irrelevant.

(Tr. J. 96:11-22)

The Tribunal disagrees. The mere fact that Bayindir had always been subject to exactly
the same legal and regulatory framework as everybody else in Pakistan does not
necessarily mean that it was actually treated in the same way as local (or third
countries) investors. In other words, as is evident from the broad wording of Article II(2)

54

207.

aa.

208.

209.

of the BIT, the treatment the investor is offered under the MFN clause is not limited to

“regulatory treatment”®’.

Hence, the Tribunal will verify whether the facts alleged by Bayindir fall within this broad
wording of the MFN clause or would be capable if proved of constituting breaches
asserted. In the following paragraphs, the Tribunal will discuss this point in respect of
each of Bayindir’s contentions referred to above (cf. supra No. 202).

Expulsion for reasons of costs and local favouritism

In support of its allegation that it was expelled for reasons of costs and local favouritism,
Bayindir relies primarily on three articles published by the Pakistani newspaper “Dawn”

e A first article — published on 26 April 2002, that is three days after Bayindir’s
expulsion — quoting a spokesman for the NHA saying that "the project will now be
completed by the Pakistani construction companies [...] by December 31, 2002"

(Exh. [Bay.] CX 104).

e A second article, published on 7 May 2001, observing that the contract put the
country in a “difficult position in respect to foreign reserves” and suggesting that the
Prime Minister at the time of the revival of the contract “took personal interest to
ensure the execution of the project” (Exh. [Bay.] CX 98).

e A third article, published on 17 June 2001, quoting information from “official
sources” that “Islamabad is hoping to save several hundred million dollars by
executing the Islamabad-Peshawar motorway (M-1) project through local

construction firms” (Exh. [Bay.] CX 99).

According to Pakistan, these allegations are “false and unsubstantiated” (Reply J.. p.
70, 4.94). Pakistan did not indicate why and to what extent the information reported in
the press was not true but merely insisted on the fact that these press reports do not
constitute a sufficient basis to substantiate Bayindir's allegation for the purposes of
jurisdiction. Relying on the decisions of the International Court of Justice in the

See also the developments regarding the scope of the obligation of fair and equitable treatment
(see infra NNo. 240-240).

55

210.

211.

bb.

212.

Hostages case® and in Nicaragua®’, Pakistan affirms that international courts and
tribunals invariably treat such press reports with great caution and accept them merely
as corroborative evidence.

This Tribunal notes that the decisions cited in both the Hostages and Nicaragua cases
were concerned with decisions on the merits, to which the corresponding standard of
proof therefore applied. The position is obviously different where, as here, the tribunal is
merely applying a prima facie standard for the purpose of determining whether it has
jurisdiction.

Accordingly, irrespective of the evidentiary weight of these press reports on the merits,
the Tribunal considers that they constitute a sufficient basis for the purpose of
establishing jurisdiction. Additional elements support this prima facie basis. Indeed, in
connection with the Constitutional Petition, Pakistan submitted that the 1997 Contract
was a “bonanza” for Bayindir and was “highly favorable to the petitioner and against the
[...] economic and social interests of Pakistan” (Exh. [Bay.] CX 30). Moreover, Bayindir’s
alleged expulsion appears to have been decided after reports by the World Bank
indicating that the most economic course of action would be to stop the M1 Project (see
infra No. 247). Whatever the weight that they may carry when the Parties will have fully
briefed the merits and presented their evidence, at this preliminary stage these
elements are a sufficient basis to establish jurisdiction.

More favourable timetables were accorded to Pakistani contractors

Bayindir alleges that Pakistan breached the MFN clause because it awarded PMC JV,
the local contractor that replaced Bayindir, a four-year extra ‘time and space’, while it
was itself expelled having requested an EOT for a much shorter period. It also argues
that, although the project is still not terminated, the local contractor remains in place
and continues to benefit from Pakistan’s leniency as to delays.

United States Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Tehran (United States of America v. Iran),
Judgment of 24 May 1980; ICJ Reports 1980, p. 3, 10 (Exh. [Pak]RL-2).

Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of
America), Judgment on the Merits of 27 June 1986; ICJ Reports 1986, p. 14, 40 (Exh. [Pak]RL-
3).

56

213.

214.

215.

216.

217.

Having concluded that the MFN clause is not limited to regulatory treatment (see supra
Nos. 205-206), it is clear that awarding an extended timetable to the local investor can
fall within Article II(2) of the BIT.

Pakistan objects that:

[t]he periods for the completion of the project and the employer's remedies for a
failure to complete on time, just like questions of remuneration, are matters that
fall within the scope of a given construction contract. They are not matters of a
treaty.

(Tr. J., 96:11 et seg.

The Tribunal can certainly agree with the first sentence. However, the very fact that
these questions are governed by specific contractual provisions does not necessarily
mean that they have no relevance in the framework of a treaty claim. One cannot
seriously dispute that a State can discriminate against an investor by the manner in
which it concludes an investment contract and/or exercises the rights thereunder. Any
other interpretation would consider treaty and contract claims as mutually exclusive,
which would be at odds with the well-established principles deriving from the distinction

between treaty and contract claims as discussed above (see supra Nos. 148 et seq.).

Pakistan’s main contention in this respect is that Bayindir’s claim is “untenable”, in
particular because “[o]ther projects must be examined on their merits and in the light of
their factual and contractual context” (Reply J.. p. 71 4.96). Prima facie, this
argument may well apply to Bayindir’s contention that it was the only contractor
expelled when 29 out of 35 projects were delayed as a result of problems very similar to
those faced at M-1, (see in particular the projects listed in C-Mem. J., pp. 34-37.

et _seqg.), but not to the contract with PMC JV, which relates to the very same project
from which Bayindir was expelled. Indeed, and this is not disputed by Pakistan, PMC JV
was awarded the contract for the remaining works on the M-1 Project with a four year
(1460 days) completion deadline (Exh. [Bay.] CX 29).

Moreover, the memorandum of understanding between NHA and PMC JV provided that
the time of completion would be “agreed between the parties depending upon the
situation of NHA cashflow” (Exh. [Bay.] CX 132). The mere allegation that NHA’s
financial difficulties were due to the fact that it “has already paid up to date Bayindir

insofar as the works on the project, and has already paid to Bayindir the very, very

57

218.

ce.

219.

220.

221.

222.

substantial advance mobilisation payment” (Tr. J. 98:28-35) does not appear to explain
the difference in treatment with respect to the completion deadlines.

Failing an explanation or particular insight about the reasons for the extended timetable
agreed with PMC JV, Bayindir's allegation of discrimination with respect to the
construction schedules cannot be considered as untenable under the applicable prima
facie standard.

Selective tendering

Bayindir further contends that Pakistan did not follow a bid procedure to replace it for
the completion of the remaining works. Relying on several press reports, Bayindir
submits that it was only after the memorandum of understanding had been signed with
PMC JV that Pakistan organized a "selective tendering" (limited to two governmental
organizations) as a later stage “cover-up” (C-Mem. J.. p. 46. 159-160).

Again Pakistan does not contest that a selective tendering in favor of local contractors
could constitute a violation of the MFN clause. What Pakistan disputes is the alleged
irregularity of the process. In particular the parties disagree on the interpretation of the
NHA Minutes of Meeting of 13 November 2002, during which NHA's Vigilance Wing
stated:

PMC-JV was the Consortium which was constituted by concerned NHA officials
through negotiations with concerned firms mainly SKB and this aspect was
reported by us at that time. Now through the process of manipulation as reported
by insiders the contract is being awarded to the same.

(Ex. [Pak.] 70)

Pointing out that the Executive Board of NHA did not question the remarkable assertion
that PMC JV was actually "constituted by concerned NHA officials", Bayindir submits
that the wording "at that time" proves that Pakistan already intended to bring in the local
consortium led by SKB, prior to Bayindir's expulsion (Rejoinder J., p. 27. 87-88). At
the jurisdictional hearing, Pakistan strongly challenged Bayindir's reliance on “these
minutes to show that NHA had already organised a replacement consortium of local
contractors prior to Bayindir's expulsion from the site in April 2001” (Ir. J. 97:26-31).

It would be both premature and inappropriate for the Tribunal to express any views as
to the regularity of the tendering process on these (and other) materials. Whatever their

58

223.

224.

225.

226.

weight on the merits, it is clear that NHA informed the press immediately following the
expulsion of Bayindir that a local consortium would complete the works. Under these
circumstances, Bayindir’s allegations as to the openness of the tendering cannot be

deemed untenable for jurisdictional purposes.

The fact remains that, taken together, Bayindir’s allegations in respect of the selective
tender, and that the expulsion was due to Pakistan’s decision to favor a local contractor,
and that the local contractor was awarded longer completion time-limits, if proven, are

clearly capable of founding a MFN claim®.

As a final matter, and irrespective of the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal wishes
to emphasize that it is generally difficult to prove that an objectively different situation is
the result of unequal treatment rather than of the existence of reasons to treat the two
situations differently. At this preliminary stage this reinforces the Tribunal in its
conclusion that it has jurisdiction to hear Bayindir’s most favored nation claims on the
merits.

Bayindir’s fair and equitable treatment claim

In its RA, Bayindir asserted that “Pakistan failed to promote and protect Bayindir's
investment in violation of Article Il of the BIT [and] failed to ensure the fair and equitable
treatment of Bayindir's investment, in violation of Article Il (2) of the BIT (RA, p. 11
137). In summary, Bayindir’s fair and equitable treatment claim is based on Pakistan's
alleged “failure to provide a stable framework for Bayindir's investment” (C-Mem. J., pp.
41-43. 140 et seq.) and on the alleged fact that “Pakistan's expulsion of Bayindir was
unfair and inequitable” (C-Mem. J., pp. 43-47 150 et seq.).

Pakistan’s case is that there is no obligation of equitable treatment in the BIT and, even
if there were, there would be no violation of fair and equal treatment.

At the hearing Bayindir noted that “[i]t is an aggregation of matters which we say if not answered
form a basis for the Tribunal to make inferences” (Tr. J.. 150:19-21); “that is information to the
Tribunal which has not been denied and possibly when we get to the merits we can require
some document to establish that” (Tr. J., 156:12-15).

59

aa.

227.

228.

229.

230.

231.

Is there an obligation of equitable treatment?

In its objections to jurisdiction, Pakistan pointed out that Article Il (2) contains no
requirement of fair and equitable treatment:

Bayindir is presumably seeking to rely upon some form of argument based on
the most favoured nation provisions of Article II(2). If that is the case, then, first
one would have expected that argument to have been pleaded in the Request
and particulars given. Secondly, in the absence of such particulars, all that is
before the Tribunal is the reliance on a provision of the BIT which on its terms
plainly does not impose the duties invoked by Bayindir.

(Mem. J., p. 58, 1.4.53)

Bayindir expanded on the legal basis of the equitable treatment claim in its Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction:

The applicability of a fair and equitable treatment obligation to Bayindir's
investment arises out of both the BIT preamble and the most favored nation
clause.

(C-Mem. J., p. 38, 1129)

The preamble describes the objectives which Turkey and Pakistan pursued in entering
into the BIT as follows:

The Islamic Republic of Pakistan [...] and the Republic of Turkey [...] agre[e] that
fair and equitable treatment of investment is desirable in order to maintain a
stable framework for investment and maximum effective utilization of economic
resources.

Despite the use of the verb “agree”, it is doubtful that, in the absence of a specific
provision in the BIT itself, the sole text of the preamble constitutes a sufficient basis for
a self-standing fair and equitable treatment obligation under the BIT. It remains however
for the Tribunal to consider whether, through the most favoured nation clause contained
in Article 1I(2) of the BIT, Bayindir is entitled to rely on Pakistan’s obligation to act in a
fair and equitable manner contained in other BITs concluded by Pakistan. Article II(2) of
the BIT reads as follows:

Each Party shall accord to these investments, once established, treatment no
less favourable than that accorded in similar situations to investments of its
investors or to investments of investors of any third country, which ever is the
most favourable.

Neither in its Reply nor at the jurisdictional hearing, did Pakistan dispute Bayindir's
assertion that the investment treaties which Pakistan has concluded with France, the
Netherlands, China, the United Kingdom, Australia, and Switzerland contains an explicit
fair and equitable treatment clause (C-Mem. J., p. 38, 131-132).

60

232.

233.

234.

235.

bb.

236.

237.

Under these circumstances and for the purposes of assessing jurisdiction, the Tribunal
considers, prima facie, that Pakistan is bound to treat investments of Turkish nationals

189

"fairly and equitably.

For the event that the Tribunal were to accept an obligation of fair and equitable
treatment, Pakistan disputed that it violated it (Reply J., p. 70, 14.94):

It was Bayindir's default under the Contract and not any alleged unfair or
inequitable treatment on the part of the Government of Pakistan which led to
Bayindir's withdrawal from the site.

(Reply J., p. 67, 14.81)

The fact that an act is, or may be, in accordance with the Contract would not in and of
itself rule out a treaty violation. The real question for present purposes is whether the
facts alleged by Bayindir are capable of constituting a violation of Pakistan's obligation
to treat Bayindir’s investment fairly and equitably.

Accordingly, the Tribunal will review Bayindir’s main allegation, namely that (i) Pakistan
failed to provide a stable framework for Bayindir’s investment and that (ii) Pakistan's
expulsion of Bayindir was unfair and inequitable.

Alleged failure to provide a stable framework for Bayindir’s investment

In summary, Bayindir alleges that NHA was highly unstable for reasons of “lack of
management continuity” as well as “malpractice and corruption” (C-Mem. J.. p. 41
143). More importantly, Bayindir contends that the government of Pakistan itself was
unstable during the project:

[E]ach time there was a change of government, Pakistan's attitude towards
Bayindir's investment changed, commencing with the initial contract in 1993, its
cancellation in 1994, the contract renewal in 1997, and finally the expulsion in
2001.

(C-Mem. J., p. 42, 1146)

The contents of the obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment were described in
Tecmed v. Mexico, to which both Parties refer (see, for instance, C-Mem. J., p. 39,

As to the general possibility to “import” a fair and equitable treatment provision contained in
another BIT, see, for instance Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada, Decision of 10 April
2001, 49] 111, 1145.

61

238.

239.

240.

134; Tr. J. 101:20 et seq.)*°. Reasoning “in light of the good faith principle established
by international law’, the tribunal held that the concept of fair and equitable treatment
obliges the State:

[tlo provide to international investments treatment that does not affect the basic
expectations that were taken into account by the foreign investor to make the
investment. The foreign investor expects the host State to act in a consistent
manner, free from ambiguity and totally transparently in its relations with the
foreign investor, so that it may know beforehand any and all rules and
regulations that will govern its investments, as well as the goals of the relevant
policies and administrative practices or directives, to be able to plan its
investment and comply with such regulations. Any and all State actions
conforming to such criteria should relate not only to the guidelines, directives or
requirements issued, or the resolutions approved thereunder, but also to the
goals underlying such regulations. The foreign investor also expects the host
State to act consistently, i.e., without arbitrarily revoking any preexisting
decisions or permits issued by the State that were relied upon by the investor to
assume its commitments as well as to plan and launch its commercial and
business activities. The investor also expects the State to use the legal
instruments that govern the actions of the investor or the investment in
conformity with the function usually assigned to such instruments, and not to
deprive the investor of its investment without the required compensation.

Pakistan does not dispute that it has an obligation to maintain a stable framework for
investment, but it argues that governmental instability as such does not amount to a
breach of the obligation to afford fair and equitable treatment (Ir. J., 102:9-21). The

 

Tribunal agrees thus far, and endorses Pakistan’s submission that “[a]n investor can

never have an expectation that governments or government personnel would not

  

change over the course of a given project” (Tr. J.. 103:6-8). However, Bayindir claims
that the changes in government had a direct influence upon Pakistan's conduct towards
Bayindir's investment, which is a question that should clearly be decided on the merits.

The Tribunal considers that, in the light of the above-quoted terms of the BIT’s
preamble and for purposes of establishing jurisdiction, it cannot prima facie be ruled out
that Pakistan’s fair and equitable treatment obligation comprises an obligation to
maintain a stable framework for investment.

It is true that Pakistan asserted that the obligation to afford fair and equitable treatment
as expressed in Tecmed v. Mexico™' relates to “changes to the regulatory framework in

The Tribunal further notes that at the hearing this approach was implicitly endorsed also by
Pakistan when declaring: “What matters so far as fair and equitable treatment is concerned is
the actions of the government and whether there was an arbitrary refusal to grant a licence, or
an arbitrary revocation of an existing permit” (Ir. J., 103:4-7).

62

241.

ce.

242.

243.

which an investment has been made” and that “Bayindir can point to no equivalent
regulatory changes in this case and of course there are none” (Tr. J., 102:7-9).

 

However, the general definition of fair and equitable treatment in Tecmed refers not
only to “all rules and regulations that will govern [the] investments” but also to “the goals
of the relevant policies and administrative practices or directives”®*. Hence, the fact that
in Tecmed the change concerned a failure to renew a necessary operating permit does
not rule out that a State can breach the ‘stability limb’ of its obligation through acts
which do not concern the regulatory framework but more generally the State’s policy
towards investments.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that, if proven, Pakistan’s alleged
change in its general policy toward Bayindir’s investment is capable of constituting a
breach of Pakistan’s obligations to accord fair and equitable treatment.

The allegedly unfair and inequitable expulsion

Bayindir's “central allegation” (Rejoinder_J., p. 20, 62) concerning the fair and
equitable treatment claim is that the expulsion was motivated by “local favouritism” and
that the alleged delays in completion were merely a pretext (C-Mem. J., p. 47, J 164). In
this respect, Bayindir’s fair and equitable treatment claim coincides with its most
favoured nation claim. Hence, the Tribunal refers to the discussion above (see supra
Nos. 208 et seq.).

Besides the allegation of local favouritism, Bayindir contends that “[t]he circumstances
of Bayindir's expulsion and the awarding of the contract to Pakistani contractors further
indicates inequity and bad faith” (C-Mem. J., p. 45, 157) as the “actual motivation for
ending Bayindir’s employment [was] the World Bank’s strong opposition to the Project”
(Rejoinder J., p. 23, 173) and related “budgetary reasons” (Tr. J., 129:3-9):

[T]here is enough to show that these elements of government action for a pre-
determined result to get direct advantages both from the point of view we say of
World Bank inputs and coercion, direct results for the Republic of Pakistan so far
as saving money and its view of national interest is concerned. Real results for
delay when it just did not have the money, particularly did not have US$, real

 

Técnicas Medioambientales, Tecmed S.A., v. The United Mexican States, Case No. ARB
(AF)/00/2, Award of 29 May 2003, {[ 154; unofficial translation (Exh. CLEX 34); ICSID Review
(2004), vol. 19, no. 1, also available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/laudo-051903%20-
English.pdf.

Tecmed v. Mexico [supra No. 237], {| 154.

63

244.

245.

246.

247.

248.

results for its desire to establish local industry, real saving of over $100m on the
contract price at a later date, and an attempt which is still being actively pursued
to recover $104m of money from our guarantees that we will be responsible to
fund the roadway.

(Tr. J., 150:4-17)

In conjunction with the selective tender process discussed above, Bayindir further
suggests that “it is now public knowledge that the award of Bayindir's investment to the
Pakistani consortium was riddled with corruption” (C-Mem. J., p. 46, 9157).

Pakistan does not contest that the expulsion could amount to a violation of fair and
equitable treatment. It alleges, however, essentially that “any suggestion that Bayindir
was expelled from the site at gunpoint in implementation of some Pakistan political or
economic agenda is simply wrong” (Reply J., p. 68, | 4.84). More specifically, it insists
that (i) Bayindir’s allegations are largely based on press reports, (ii) Bayindir’s claim
presupposes corruption on the part of Pakistan — which cannot be readily inferred by an
international tribunal, and (iii) the delays were real and NHA had a right to expel

Bayindir (Tr. J., 106:32-107:10).

Whether Bayindir’s contested allegations are true or wrong, is a question for the merits.
At this stage, the only relevant issue is whether it cannot be ruled out, at least prima
facie, that the alleged unfair and inequitable expulsion is, if proven, capable of falling
within the Scope of Pakistan’s obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment.

With specific regard to the actual reasons for the alleged expulsion, Bayindir relies on
two letters of the World Bank recommending that the Project to be stopped (letter dated
26 May 2000, (Exh. [Bay.] CX 152); letter dated of 5 June 2000, (Exh. [Bay.] CX 153))
and on two notes of the Ministry of Communication and Railways (note dated 4
November 2000) (Exh. [Bay.] CX 127); note dated 2 April 2001, (Exh. [Bay.] CX 151).
The letters from the World Bank emphasized that the M1 Project was financially
unattractive and considered that stopping it appeared to be the most economic course
of action. The notes of the Ministry appear to show that, following these letters, the
financial status of the contract was addressed “at the highest level”.

At the outset of the hearing on jurisdiction, Pakistan pointed out that these documents
constitute “confidential and privileged legal materials which have apparently been taken
from the files of the Government of Pakistan” (Tr. J., 18:3-5) and reserved all its rights

 

64

249.

250.

251.

252.

in this regard (Tr. J., 17:21-24). Upon a specific request by Pakistan to clarify how these

 

documents were obtained, Bayindir explained that these document “turned up in the
files of the claimant being files removed on its expulsion from Pakistan” but had “no
further capacity to explain how they got there” (Tr. J., 38:29-33). Insisting on the fact

 

that the veracity of the documents was not at stake, Bayindir informed the Tribunal that
in the event Pakistan should formally challenge these documents, it would reply “by
making an application under rule 34.2 that the tribunal call upon the respondent to
produce these documents” (Tr. J., 39:16-19). As already mentioned, Pakistan did not

 

formally request the Tribunal to strike these documents from the record®®. Hence, the
Tribunal considers that the documents referred to in paragraph 247 above are part of
the record in this arbitration.

On this basis, the Tribunal considers that Bayindir’s claim does not appear prima facie
untenable.

Having considered that the allegedly unfair motives of expulsion, if proven, are capable
of founding a fair and equitable treatment claim under the BIT, the Tribunal concludes
that it has jurisdiction to hear Bayindir’s claims based on Pakistan's obligation to accord
fair and equitable treatment to foreign investment.

Hence, there is no need for the Tribunal to discuss Bayindir’s additional allegations of
corruption at this stage. In any event, it bears noting that the question would not be — as
erroneously suggested by Pakistan — whether the Tribunal is ready or not to infer
corruption and/or conspiracy in the decision to expel Bayindir and to replace it with a

 

local contractor (see Tr. J., 106:24-32). The question would simply be whether,
assuming that corruption and/or conspiracy were proven, this would fall within the

scope of the fair treatment guarantee.

As a final matter, the Tribunal notes that Bayindir’s “concerns about the independency
of the Pakistani judiciary” (Rejoinder J.. p. 24, 78) and “its lack of confidence in

receiving due process in Pakistan” (Rejoinder J., p. 25, 1 81) has become moot, insofar

Later during the jurisdictional hearing, Pakistan’s Counsel maintained the reservation over these
documents and added: “they are obviously before the tribunal for what they are worth and we
shall have to get instructions from the Government of Pakistan as to what our next steps should
be” (Tr. J. 39:7-11). To this date, the Tribunal did not receive any request regarding these
documents.

65

253.

254.

as the possible pursuit of the Contract Claims in the Pakistani arbitration is concerned.
As to the allegation of lack of due process in respect of the Constitutional Petition (see
for instance (Rejoinder J., p. 25, 81), the Tribunal finds that Bayindir cannot infer a
breach of due process simply from NHA’s Chairman writing to the Minister of
Communication that “[oJur legal counsel will defend the case and get [a favourable
outcome] after appearing in Court” (Exh. [Bay.] CX 131). Moreover, as correctly pointed
out by Pakistan, a claim based on failure of natural justice in judicial proceedings must
take into account the system of justice as a whole, not only an individual decision in the
course of proceedings (Tr. 108:13-19 referring to Waste Management. v. Mexico™). In
the present case, there is no evidence whatsoever supporting, even on a prima facie
basis, Bayindir’s allegation that “the lack of independence of Pakistan's judiciary is

notorious” (Rejoinder J., p. 24. ] 77).
Bayindir’s expropriation claims

Article Ill (1) of the BIT states the following in connection with expropriation:

Investments shall not be expropriated, nationalized or subject, directly or
indirectly to measures of similar effects except for a public purpose, in a non-
discriminatory manner, upon payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation, and in accordance with due process of law and the general
principles of treatment provided for in Article II of this Agreement.

Bayindir contends that the following actions of Pakistan constitute an expropriation
within the meaning of Article III (1) of the BIT:

(i) | Pakistan's expulsion of Bayindir from the site, enforced by armed units of the
Frontier Works Organization, was “a large-scale taking of Bayindir's Motorway
investment [including a right to payment for several months of Interim Payment
Certificates and works in progress], for the purpose of transferring property and
interests into government hands before being passed along to PMC N” (C-Mem.
J. pp. 49-50, 4173).

(ii) On the ground that Bayindir did not re-export equipment within the time limit set
by the applicable Pakistani regulation, Pakistan's Customs services encashed
bank guarantees issued by Standard Chartered Bank ("SCB") securing unpaid
import customs duties on behalf of Bayindir (Rejoinder J., pp. 30-31, 101-102).

Waste Management, Inc. v. The United Mexican States, |CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award
of 30 April 2004, 997 (Exh. [Pak]L-15 = Exh. [Bay]CLEX 54); available at
http://www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/WasteMgmt-Mexico-2-FinalAward-30Apr2004. pdf.

66

255.

256.

257.

258.

It is not disputed that expropriation is not limited to in rem rights and may extend to
contractual rights. More generally, the Tribunal considers that, in the absence of a
specific definition in the BIT, expropriation can take place also where the measure is not
technically a regulatory act. As it has been consistently held in investment cases,
expropriation may arise out of a simple interference by the host State in the investor's
rights with the effect of depriving the investor — totally or to a significant extent — of its
investment (RFCC v. Morocco, [supra Fn. 71], | 64)

Again, Pakistan’s main contention is that the alleged taking of the investment was a
mere contractual termination and that “there was no appropriation of rights or interests
by the Government of Pakistan” (Reply J., p. 75, 4.108). At the jurisdictional hearing,
Pakistan summarized its case as follows:
[I]n terms of the taking of contractual rights, a party which maintains that its
contractual partner has failed to perform its bargain and therefore purports to
exercise its power to repudiate a contract or to terminate it is doing what any
contractual party does. [...] It is not acting in a sovereign capacity at all. It is quite
different from something like the legislative abrogation of contractual rights which
one had in Iran in 1980, which one found, for example, with the Libyan legislation
abrogating concession contracts in the early 1970s.

(Tr. J., 78:12-24)

 

It is common ground, as the tribunal in /mpregilo explicitly held, “that only measures
taken by Pakistan in the exercise of its sovereign power (“puissance publique”), and not
decisions taken in the implementation or performance of the Contracts, may be

considered as measures having an effect equivalent to expropriation’®®.

True it is that the tribunal in /mpregilo considered that the claims based on ‘unforeseen
geological conditions’ did “not enter within the purview [of the expropriation clause of
the BIT]’ and declined jurisdiction in this regard®®. Geological conditions, let alone when
unforeseen, are — by their very nature — not attributable to an act of State. Thus, the
tribunal in Impregilo had no hesitation over excluding them from its jurisdiction®’. It is
clear that, in counsel for Pakistan’s words, this kind of claim “would fail at the

 

jurisdictional threshold” (Tr. J., 75:23-31).

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], J 281 (referred to, for instance, in Tr. 75:23-31).
Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], J] 282.
Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], J 283.

67

259.

260.

261.

The situation is very different where, as in this case, a party invokes an action by the
State, which may or may not have been taken in puissance publique. Unlike the case of
geological conditions, it is difficult to rule out puissance publique upon a prima facie
analysis at the jurisdictional stage. Significantly, the tribunal in /mpregilo asserted
jurisdiction over Impregilo’s other claims based on “alleged breaches of contract”
because it was not then in a position to decide whether or not these could be

98

considered as breaches of Article 5 of the BIT [i.e., expropriation]’™”. Similarly, the

tribunal in Siemens considered that “the issue whether the breach of the Contract may
or may not be an act of expropriation is a matter related to the merits of the dispute”®.
Indeed, Pakistan’s argument that “expropriation of contract rights [...] goes beyond the
exercise or purported exercise of contractual powers and capacities” relies on the

Waste Management case (Tr. J. 202:16-33), which was an award on the merits'®°.

 

In the present case, and without in any manner prejudging its eventual determination of
the relevant facts, the Tribunal cannot rule out that there may have been a sufficient
involvement by the State in the alleged taking of Bayindir’s investment so as to amount
to an expropriation under the BIT.

The Tribunal is reinforced in this conclusion by the unchallenged fact that Bayindir's
equipment was retained on site following the expulsion. In the Tribunal’s understanding,

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], {| 284. The tribunal concluded this passage noting that
“only after a careful examination of those alleged breaches will the Tribunal be able to determine
whether the behaviour of Pakistan went beyond that which an ordinary Contracting party could
have adopted”.

Siemens v. Argentine [supra Fn. 80], J] 182.

Waste Management. v. Mexico [supra Fn. 94], | 174; in the relevant section the tribunal was
dealing with the question “Was there conduct tantamount to an expropriation of Acaverde’s
contractual rights?”. This Tribunal observes that this question was not dealt with in the Decision
on Jurisdiction (see Waste Management, Inc. v. Mexico |CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2,
Decision on Jurisdiction of 2 June 2000; available at
http:/www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/WasteMgmt-Mexico-2-Jurisdiction-26Jun2002.pdf).
For the sake of completeness, it is useful to observe that at the jurisdictional stage the tribunal
held that “it is clear that one and the same measure may give rise to different types of claims in
different courts or tribunals. Therefore, something that under Mexican legislation would
constitute a series of breaches of contract expressed as non-payment of certain invoices,
violation of exclusivity clauses in a concession agreement, etc., could, under the NAFTA, be
interpreted as a lack of fair and equitable treatment of a foreign investment by a government
(Article 1105 of NAFTA) or as measures constituting “expropriation” under Article 1110 of the
NAFTA. In any case, it is not the mission of the Tribunal, at this stage of the proceedings, to
make an in-depth analysis of alleged breaches of the NAFTA invoked by the Claimant, since that
task, should it become necessary, belongs to an analysis of the merits of the question” (ibid.,
127/(a)).

68

262.

263.

264.

265.

Bayindir’s claim for taking of its investment includes the retention of the equipment.
Pakistan objects that this retention was provided for in the Contract (Reply J., pp. 69-
70. 487-491), including a mechanism for compensating Bayindir for the equipment:

Any issue relating to amounts due to Bayindir for the value of such equipment, if
any, shall be calculated and paid after the completion of the project in
accordance with Clause 63.3 of the Conditions of Contract.

(Reply J., p. 70, 14.91)

Here again, this argument neglects the principle of the possible coincidence of treaty
and contract claims. Moreover, in the Tribunal’s view, such a payment may qualify as
“compensation” within the meaning of Article Ill of the BIT. Whether such compensation
would be “prompt, adequate, and effective”, which may render an expropriation of the

equipment lawful under the BIT, is a question for the merits.

Conclusion

For all these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that it has jurisdiction over the Treaty
Claims raised in these proceedings. The Tribunal emphasizes that this decision is not
equivalent to joining the question of jurisdiction to the merits as contemplated by Rule
41(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules'*'. Rather, it holds that Bayindir’s claims are
capable of constituting a violation of the BIT. As it emphasized on several occasions,
the threshold at the jurisdictional level, which implies a prima facie standard, is different
from the standards which the Claimant will have to discharge on the merits to show an
actual treaty breach.

SHOULD THE TRIBUNAL STAY THE CURRENT PROCEEDINGS?

Pakistan finally asserts that even if quod non the Tribunal would have jurisdiction to
determine the Treaty Claims, because of their intrinsic contractual nature, the current
proceedings for breach of treaty should be stayed until the arbitral tribunal provided in

the Contract has determined the contractual issues.

This approach has been adopted in the much-debated SGS v. Philippines case. Faced
with the situation where the Philippines’ responsibility under the BIT — a matter which

From this point of view, the Tribunal cannot share the approach adopted by the tribunal in
Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], J] 285.

69

266.

267.

268.

did fall within its jurisdiction — was subject to "the factual predicate of a determination”
by the Regional Trial Court of the total amount owing by the respondent, the tribunal
held that:

[t]hat being so, justice would be best served if the Tribunal were to stay the
present proceedings pending determination of the amount payable, either by
agreement between the parties or by the Philippine courts in accordance with
Article 12 of the CISS Agreement.‘

The view that an ICSID tribunal has the power to stay proceedings pending the
determination, by some other competent forum, of an issue relevant to its own decision,
explicit in SGS v. Philippines, is also present, though impliedly, in the discussion in SGS
v. Pakistan’. The Tribunal agrees with Pakistan’s view that this “course of action [...]
would not involve a refusal to exercise jurisdiction (of the kind condemned by the ad
hoc committee in the Vivendi Annulment decision)” (Reply J., p. 23, 1 2.49; see also Tr.

 

Pakistan recognizes that its position was rejected by the tribunal in Impregilo (Reply J.
rs} 2.50) where, “drawing upon the approach that was adopted in SGS v.

Philippines'™, Pakistan submit[ed] that th[at] Tribunal should stay these proceedings, in

order to allow the contractual dispute resolution mechanisms to take their course” ‘>.

In Impregilo, the tribunal held, inter alia, that:

[wJhilst arguably justified in some situations, a stay of proceedings would be
inappropriate here, for a number of reasons. Firstly, such a stay if anything,
would confuse the essential distinction between the Treaty Claims and the
Contract Claims as set out above. Since the two enquiries are fundamentally
different (albeit with some overlap), it is not obvious that the contractual dispute
resolution mechanisms in a case of this sort will be undermined in any
substantial sense by the determination of separate and distinct Treaty Claims.
Indeed, this is all the more so in a case such as the present, where (unlike SGS
v. Philippines) the parties to these proceedings (Impregilo and Pakistan) are
different from the parties to the contract arbitration proceedings (GBC and
WAPDA).

Further, if a stay was ordered, as Pakistan has sought, it is unclear for how long
this should be maintained; what precise events might trigger its cessation; and
what attitude this Tribunal ought then to take on a resumed hearing to any
proceedings or findings that may have occurred in the interim in Lahore. '°°

 

SGS v. Philippines [supra Fn. 78], 1] 174-175
SGS v. Pakistan [supra Fn. 32], J] 185-189.
SGS v. Philippines [supra Fn. 78].

Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], | 234.
Impregilo v. Pakistan [supra No. 74], J] 289-290

70

269.

270.

271.

272.

According to Pakistan, on the facts of the present case, there are compelling reasons
for departing from the solution adopted by /mpregilo. This allegedly “follows both from
considerations of logic and a practical concern for the orderly settlement of disputes”
(Reply J., p. 22 2.48). As to the latter, Pakistan contends that the (contractual)
arbitral tribunal sitting in Pakistan is already seized of the dispute between NHA and
Bayindir and that (subject to a stay in these ICSID proceedings and to the latter
tribunal's own decision on Bayindir's challenge to jurisdiction), it is obliged to proceed to
the merits, regardless of extraneous factors.

In the Tribunal’s view its jurisdiction under the BIT allows it — if this should prove
necessary — to resolve any underlying contract issue as a preliminary question. Exactly
like the arbitral tribunal sitting in Pakistan, this Tribunal should proceed with the merits
of the case. This is an inevitable consequence of the principle of the distinct nature of
treaty and contract claims. The Tribunal is aware that this system implies an intrinsic
risk of contradictory decisions or double recovery. In this respect, in Camuzzi v.
Argentina — a case where it was explicitly held that “the claim was [...] founded on both
the contract and the Treaty” — the tribunal noted that “this is an issue belonging to the
merits of the dispute” and for which “international law and decisions offer numerous

mechanisms for preventing the possibility of double recovery” "””.

In any event, accepting that it has discretion to order the stay of the present
proceedings as requested by Pakistan, that discretion is to be exercised only if there
are truly compelling reasons. In the present case, the Tribunal cannot see any
compelling reason to stay the current arbitration.

The Tribunal is sympathetic towards the efforts of the tribunal in SGS v. Philippines “to
give effect to the parties’ contracts while respecting the general language of BIT dispute

settlement provisions”'™.

However, to do so raises several practical difficulties. In
particular, it may be very difficult to decide, at this preliminary stage, which contractual

issues (if any) will have to be addressed by the Tribunal on the merits.

Camuzzi v. Argentina [supra Fn. 67], | 89.
SGS v. Philippines [supra Fn. 78], J 134.

71

273.

274.

275.

276.

277.

278.

Moreover, as a leading commentator recently put it, in practice the decision to stay the
ICSID proceedings “results in the BIT tribunal having jurisdiction over an empty shell

and depriving the BIT dispute resolution of any meaning”'®.

Costs

In its Counter-Memorial, Bayindir made the following submission with respect to costs:

Before both the courts in Pakistan and Turkey, the GOP has sought to benefit
from the fact that Bayindir had seized ICSID, without revealing that it would be
resisting ICSID's jurisdiction regarding Bayindir's claims. Under the
circumstances, it would seem unfair that Bayindir should bear the costs of this
first part of the proceedings. While Bayindir accepts that the Tribunal may wish
to reserve its decision on costs until the Final Award, it submits that the costs for
the jurisdictional phase of the arbitration should be borne by Pakistan.

(C-Mem. J. p. 89 1314)

In a letter of its counsel dated 16 August 2005, Pakistan drew the Tribunal’s attention to
the waste of costs due to Bayindir’s late abandonment of its Contract Claims and
requested the following relief:

[D]eal with the issues of principle and apportionment relating to costs in its
award/decision, including the wasted costs due to Bayindir’s late change in
position, and to award the Government of Pakistan its costs and expenses
incurred as a result of these proceedings.

At the jurisdictional hearing (Tr. J.. 13:2-4), Pakistan noted that Bayindir’s decision to
abandon its Contract Claims in this arbitration after a double exchange of written
submissions, has engendered a substantial waste of costs. It also submitted that a
significant amount of preparation work in view of the jurisdictional hearing became
redundant, not only for Pakistan but also for the members of the Tribunal.

When invited to respond, Bayindir submitted that “the issue of costs should be a matter
for submission after the award on objections to jurisdiction” (letter of counsel dated 26
August 2005).

At this stage, the Tribunal takes due note of the parties’ positions and requests with
respect to costs. It decides, however, to deal with costs at the merits stage, which will
allow it to make an overall assessment of costs. It will then also take into account the
E. GAILLARD, Investment treaty Arbitration and Jurisdiction Over Contract Claims — the SGS
Cases Considered, in: T. Weiler (Ed) International investment law and arbitration: leading cases

from the ICSID, NAFTA, Bilateral Treaties and Customary International Law, London, 2005, p.
334.

72

consequences of Bayindir’s initial choice to raise both Treaty and Contract Claims and
of its late decision to abandon the Contract Claims.

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal makes the following decision:

a) The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute submitted to it in this
arbitration.

b) The Tribunal denies Respondent's application to suspend these proceedings.

c) The Tribunal will, accordingly, make the necessary order for the continuation of the
proceedings on the merits.

d) The decision on costs is deferred to the second phase of the arbitration on the
merits.

Done on 14 November 2005

[signed] [signed]
Sir Franklin Berman Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel
[signed]

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler

73

