INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES
(ADDITIONAL FACILITY)
Washington D.C.

(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/05/1)
Bayview Irrigation District et al.

(Claimants)

versus

United Mexican States
(Respondent)

AWARD

Before the Arbitral Tribunal
constituted under Chapter XI

of the North American Free Trade
Agreement, and comprised of:

Professor Vaughan Lowe
Professor Ignacio Gémez-Palacio
The Honorable Edwin Meese III

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila

Date of dispatch to the parties: June 19, 2007

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY, 3

Il. SUMMARY OF PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS.....

 

A. THE CHALLENGE TO JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

 

1. The ’s M ial on Jurisdicti 7

(a) The claim falls outside the scope of NAFTA ..
(b) The claims are untimely......
(c) The Claimants have not complied with mandatory procedural requirements.

 

 
 

 

2. The Claimant’s Counter- Memorial on Jurisdiction ...

(a) The claim does not fall outside the scope of NAFTA...
(b) The claims are not untimely ...
(c) The Claimants have complied with mandatory procedural requirement:

 

 

 

3. TheR ’s Reply on Juri:

 

(a) There is no investment within the meaning of NAFTA Chapter Eleven
(b) It is not proved that the Irrigation Districts suffered cognizable loss.
(c) The Claimants have not complied with mandatory procedural requirements

  
 

 

4. The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction...

 

 

5. The United States submissi 16
Tih. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSI!
Iv. COSTS. 27

 

Vv. DECISION ON JURISDICTION.

 

Page 2 de 28

IL

2)

3)

4)

5)

6)

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or
“the Centre”) received on 20 January 2005, under cover of a letter of 19
January 2005, a request for the institution of arbitration proceedings under the
Additional Facility Arbitration Rules (“the Request”) by Bayview Irrigation
District et al. (“the Claimants”) against the United Mexican States (“Mexico”
or the “Respondent”). The Request was filed by forty six Claimants including
seventeen Irrigation Districts, sixteen individuals, two trusts, two limited
partnership, two estates, four corporations and three general partnerships. | A
list describing the nature of each Claimant, its address and place of
incorporation, was attached to the Request.

The Request for Arbitration states that each of the individual Claimants is or
was a resident of Texas and a national of the United States of America (“United
States”) and not a national of Mexico, and that each of the legal persons was
organized and exists under the law of Texas.

On 27 January 2005, the Centre confirmed its receipt of the Request and the
prescribed lodging fee pursuant to Regulation 16 of the Centre’s Administrative
and Financial Regulations for lodging notices for the institution of proceedings,
and transmitted a copy to the Mexican Government and the Mexican Embassy
in Washington D.C.

The Request was supplemented by four letters from counsel for the Claimants,
dated 7 March, 7 April, 13 April and May 20, 2005, respectively. By letter of
20 May 2005, Claimants Timothy Reid, Estate of Norman Reid, N.H. Kitayama
and Bernadette M. Oeser were withdrawn from the Request for Arbitration.
The Respondent filed a letter on 4 March 2005 arguing that the Request should
be rejected.

On 1 July 2005, the Secretary-General of the Centre approved access to the
Additional Facility and notified both Parties of the registration of the Request
as provided for in Article 4 of the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules.
Additionally and as required by Article 5(e) of the Additional Facility
Arbitration Rules, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to constitute an
Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with Chapter III of those rules.

By letter of 26 July 2005 the Claimants appointed The Honorable Edwin Meese
III (an American national) as arbitrator in this proceeding. On 6 October 2005,
the Respondent appointed Mr. Ignacio Gémez-Palacio (a Mexican national) as
arbitrator. The Respondent by letter of 2 December 2005 and Claimants by

The Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction refers in paragraph | to “the 42 investor

Claimants”. The Tribunal regards the detailed list of Claimants in the Request for Arbitration, as amended by
the letter of 20 May 2005 referred to in paragraph 4), below, as the definitive list of Claimants in the absence
of any other formal notice of amendment to that list.

Page 3 de 28

7)

9)

10)

letter of 5 December 2005, agreed on the appointment of Professor Vaughan
Lowe (a British national) as President of the Arbitral Tribunal. On 15
December 2005, the Tribunal was deemed to be constituted and the
proceedings to have begun. Pursuant to Rule 25 of ICSID’s Administrative and
Financial Regulations, the parties were notified that Ms. Gabriela Alvarez
Avila, ICSID Senior Counsel, would act as Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

In this arbitration proceeding, Claimants have been represented by Ms. Nancie
G. Marzulla, Mr. Roger J. Marzulla, of the law firm of Marzulla & Marzulla,
and by Professor Don Wallace Jr. The Respondent has been represented by Mr.
Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Ms. Alejandra G. Trevifio Solis and Luis Alberto
Gonzdlez Garcia, all of them from the Direccién General de Consultoria
Juridica de Negociaciones de la Secretaria de Economia.

The Tribunal held its First Session with the parties on 14 February 2006 in
Washington D.C. (“the First Session”). The Claimants were represented at the
session by Ms. Nancie G. Marzulla, Mr. Roger J. Marzulla, and Ms. Barbara A.
Wally from Marzulla & Marzulla and Prof. Don Wallace, Jr., Chair,
International Law Institute. The Respondent was represented at that session by
Mr. Hugo Perezcano Diaz and Ms. Alejandra G. Treviiio Solis, from the
Secretaria de Economia, Mr. Salvador Behar Lavalle and Mr. Carlos Kessner,
from the Embassy of Mexico in the United States of America, Mr. Arturo
Barrio, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, Mr. Gerardo Gordoa Marquez,
from the National Water Commission, Mr. Stephan Becker and Mr. Sanjay
Mullick, from Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP, and finally Mr. Cameron
Mowatt, from Thomas and Partners. Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Secretary of the
Tribunal and Natali Sequeira Navarro, were present during the session on
behalf of ICSID.

At the First Session, the Parties agreed that the Tribunal had been properly
constituted and that they had no objections to the appointment of any of its
members. It was also agreed that the proceedings would take place in
accordance with ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules in force since 1
January 2003, as modified by Section B of Chapter XI of NAFTA.

At this session, the Tribunal resolved, after consultation with the Parties, that
the question of jurisdiction would be considered as a preliminary issue. The
Tribunal decided that the Respondent should file a Memorial on Jurisdiction by
19 April 2006 and Claimants should file their Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction by 23 June 2006. The Tribunal also decided that the Respondent
would file its Reply by 26 July 2006 and that the Claimants would file their
Rejoinder by 28 August 2006. The Tribunal also stated that pursuant to
NAFTA Article 1128, the NAFTA parties would be invited to submit their
comments by 18 September 2006. The hearing on jurisdiction was scheduled
to be held on 14, 15 and 16 November 2006 in Washington D.C., while the
dates for further hearings would be set by the Tribunal following consultation
with the Parties.

Page 4 de 28

11)

12)

13)

14)

15)

16)

The Respondent submitted an electronic copy of its Memorial on Jurisdiction
on 19 April 2006, and the Claimants filed an electronic copy of their Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction on 23 June 2006.

By letter of 31 August 2006, the Tribunal invited the NAFTA partice to file by
ber 2006 any issions in the present p’ di

with NAFTA Article 1128. On 15 September 2006, the Government of Canada

informed the Tribunal that it did not intend to file any submissions prior to the

hearing on jurisdiction, but reserved its right to make them at the hearing.

 

On 26 September 2006, the Centre acknowledged receipt of a letter dated 20
September 2006 from Kathleen Harnett White, Chairman of the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality, and transmitted it to the Parties and the
Tribunal. The letter concerned the scope of the provisions of the 1944 Water
Treaty and of the negotiations over Mexico’s water debt. It stated that the
claims of water districts and individual water users were not within the scope of
the negotiations and settlement concerning the water debt between the United
States and Mexico.

On 31 October 2006 the Tribunal wrote to the Parties recalling that it is for
each Party to decide how it wishes to present its case and use the time available
to it at the hearing but, without encroaching upon that fundamental principle,
the Tribunal said that there were certain issues which it hoped that the Parties
would address at the hearing. These issues were:-

First, two points concemed with the question of the applicable law under NAFTA Article
1131:
a) What is the role, if any, of national law, and in particular (i) Texas law, and (ii) Article
27 of the Constitution of the Republic of Mexico?
b) What is the role, if any, of principles of private international law?

Second, what is the meaning and significance in this case of the term "investment" in
NAFTA Article 1139, and in particular the meaning and significance of NAFTA Article
1139(g), and specifically the word "property"?

Third, what is the meaning and significance in this case of the term "in the territory of the
Party" in NAFTA Article 1101?

These issues, and the arguments set out in the written pleadings, were
addressed by the parties at the hearing on jurisdiction held at the World Bank in
Washington DC on 14 and 15 November 2006.

At that hearing on jurisdiction the Claimants were represented by Ms. Nancie
G. Marzulla, Mr. Roger J. Marzulla, and Ms. Barbara A. Wally from Marzulla
& Marzulla and Prof. Don Wallace, Jr., Chair, International Law Institute. The
Respondent was represented at that session by Mr. Hugo Perezcano Diaz and
Mr. Luis Alberto Gonzalez Garcia, from the Secretaria de Economia, Mr.
Salvador Behar Lavalle from the Mexican Embassy in the United States, Mr.
Stephan Becker and Mr. Sanjay Mullick, from Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw
Pittman LLP, and Mr. Christopher Thomas and Mr. Cameron Mowatt, from
Thomas and Partners. The Secretariat was represented by Gabriela Alvarez
Avila, Secretary of the Tribunal and Natali Sequeira Navarro, ICSID, Counsel.

Page 5 de 28

17)

18)

19)

20)

21)

Transcripts of that hearing were made in English and Spanish and were
distributed to the Tribunal and the Parties at the end of each day of the hearing
(the Transcripts”).

By letter of 16 November 2006, and as announced during the hearing on
jurisdiction, the Tribunal invited the NAFTA Parties to file by 27 November
2006, written submissions on: a) the question of the standing of the Irrigation
Districts as Claimants under NAFTA, and b) the question of the concept of
territoriality in relation to Articles 1102 and 1105 of NAFTA. The Tribunal
requested the NAFTA Parties to limit their representations to the question of
treaty interpretation and not to comment on the facts of the case.

Also on 16 November 2006 the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit by 11
December 2006: a) any observations on the issues addressed by the NAFTA
Parties, i.e. the standing of the Irrigation Districts as Claimants under NAFTA,
and the concept of territoriality in relation to Articles 1102 and 1105 of
NAFTA; b) any further observations or comments in addition to what was
included in their existing submissions, on the case of the City of San Marcos v.
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Court of Appeals of Texas,
Third District, Austin, dated 8 January 2004; and c) any observations on the
concept of water as a good in commerce in Mexico and in Texas, as discussed
during the hearing.

The Tribunal further requested the Parties to provide a brief explanation as to:
a) what, if any, action the State of Texas could take in the event of non-
compliance with conditions attached to the exercise of water rights of the kind
held by the Claimants; b) whether it is possible under Texas law for the owner
of the water rights to sue the Irrigation Districts for non-fulfillment of whatever
the obligations of the Irrigation Districts may be under the relevant Texas
legislation; and c) the availability of copies of resolutions of the board of
directors of the water districts authorizing the initiation of these arbitral
proceedings. Finally the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit their respective
statements of costs. The parties were asked to deliver all of these submissions
by 11 December 2006.

On 27 November 2006 the representatives of the United States of America filed
their submission on the matters addressed in the Tribunal’s letter of 16
November 2006. By letter of 5 December 2006, Claimants requested a four-day
extension to respond to the matters addressed by the Tribunal in its letter to the
Parties of 16 November 2006. On 7 December 2006, the Tribunal granted both
parties an extension, permitting them to file their post-hearing submissions by
15 December 2006.

On 15 December 2006, Greg Abbott, the Attorney General of Texas, Kent C.
Sullivan, First Assistant Attorney General of Texas, and R. Ted Cruz, Solicitor
General of Texas, made a submission on behalf of the State of Texas and in
support of the Claimants. On the same date both Parties filed their post-hearing
submissions.

Page 6 de 28

IL.

24)

By letter of 18 December 2006 Susan Combs, Commissioner of the Texas
Department of Agriculture also filed a letter in support to Claimants’
arguments.

SUMMARY OF PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

The challenge to jurisdiction and admissibility

The Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction

The Respondent submitted its Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 19 April 2006. It
raised three main objections to jurisdiction and admissibility:-
a) that the claim falls outside the scope of NAFTA in light of NAFTA’s
object and purpose and of the nature of the treaty;
b) that the claim is untimely and thus inadmissible;
c) that there are deficiencies in the individual claims, in respect of the proof
of the eligibility of each claimant.

(a) The claim falls outside the scope of NAFTA

25)

26)

27)

The Respondent argued that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is confined by the
limits of the consent of the parties,” and that this consent is under NAFTA
Article 1122 confined to “arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out
in this Agreement.”® It said that the claim must pertain to an investment within
the scope of NAFTA Chapter Eleven, and within the scope of Respondent’s
consent to arbitration.*

The Respondent, referring to NAFTA Articles 102, 201, 301, 501, 901, 1213,
1601, 1701, and 1802, among others, argued that NAFTA is based upon a
territorial principle of jurisdiction.* It pointed in particular to NAFTA Article
1 101,° which reads in material part as follows:
“Article 1101. Scope and Coverage.
1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating
to:

(a) investors of another Party;
(b) investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party...”

The Respondent cited the holding in the Methanex award that

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 67.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 69.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 72.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 78-81.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 80, 82-100.

Page 7 de 28

28)

29)

30)

31)

“\..the phrase ‘relating to’ in Article 1101(1) NAFTA signifies something more
than the mere effect of a measure on an investor or an investment and ... requires a
legally significant connection between them...””

The Respondent emphasized that in its view NAFTA Chapter Eleven applies to
protect investors of one NAFTA State Party or their investments in the territory
of another NAFTA State Party.* It noted that the Claimants had stated that each
one of them is “an Investor and owner of an integrated Investment” which
includes “rights to water located in Mexico.”

The Respondent referred’” to the definition of an investment in NAFTA Article
1139, which reads in material part as follows:-
“jnvestment means:

(g) real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, acquired in the expectation
or used for the purpose of economic benefit or other business purposes;
investment of an investor of a Party means an investment owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by an investor of such Party;

investor of a Party means a Party or state enterprise thereof, or a national or an
enterprise of such Party, that seeks to make, is making or has made an
investment.”

The Respondent argued that the Claimants do not and cannot have property
tights in Mexico in the waters of the Rio Bravo / Rio Grande or its tributaries,
even if they have ownership rights in the water when it is within the United
States"!

The Respondent argued further that the claim was based on allegations that
Mexico had breached the bilateral Treaty between the United States of America
and Mexico relating to the Utilization of the Waters of the Colorado and
Tijuana Rivers and of the Rio Grande, signed on 3 February 1944 (‘the Water
Treaty’ or ‘the 1944 Treaty’).’? It pointed to statements in the Request for
Arbitration in which the Claimants referred to violations of the 1944 Treaty by
Mexico," and concluded that
“the only basis the Claimants could have for any expectation of receiving any
volume of water from the Mexican tributaries of Rio Bravo is the Bilateral Treaty
of 1944, and it is precisely the alleged non-compliance with that international
agreement on which the claimants assert a purported breach of the NAFTA.”"*

The Respondent considered that under the 1944 Treaty each State Party is free
to distribute, pursuant to its own laws, the water assigned to it by the Treaty, ’*
and that, as the US Government memorandum submitted in the case of Consejo

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 84, quoting Methanex v. United States, Preliminary Decision of
the Tribunal, paragraph 147; <
ims.con/Disputes/US. liminary dJurisdiction.pdf>
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 80, 86, 93, 95, 96.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 86, quoting the Request for Arbitration paragraph 53.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 91, 94 fn 75.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 88-89.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 101-105.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 102,103, 104.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 105.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 109.

Page 8 de 28

32)

33)

de Desarrollo Econénomico de Mexicali put it, “the 1944 Treaty did not create
private rights of action for individuals.”'®

The Respondent argued further that the situation regarding the Mexican water
deficit does not constitute a breach of the 1944 Treaty, '” and that the United
States does not claim that there is any such breach.'*

In relation to the 1944 Treaty the Respondent quoted the United States’ Reply
Memorial in the Methanex case:
“Numerous treaties, many of which have either no mechanism for resolving
disputes between States or highly specialized mechanisms, are in effect among the
NAFTA Parties. The limited consent to arbitration granted in Chapter Eleven
cannot reasonably be extended to the international law obligations embodied in
those treaties.”!?
And the Respondent said that “[t]he same can be said with respect to the
claimed breaches of Articles 1102 and 1110 based on alleged breaches of the
Water Treaty.””°

(b) The claims are untimely

 

34) The Respondent also said that “acts or omissions of Mexico that occurred
before the entry into force of the NAFTA on 1 January 1994 are beyond the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis.””!

35) NAFTA Article 1116(2) provides that

“2. An investor may not make a claim if more than three years have elapsed from
the date on which the investor first acquired, or should have first acquired,
knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss
or damage.”

36) The Respondent noted that the Request for Arbitration was submitted on 20
January 2005, and said that all of the alleged acts and omission on which the
claim was based occurred more than three years prior to that date.

(c) The Clai have not plied with d Y procedural

requirements

37) The Respondent submitted that in addition to the foregoing arguments which

point to the lack of jurisdiction in the Tribunal over this dispute, there is a
further reason why these particular claims should be held to be inadmissible. It
said that NAFTA Article 1119, read with Articles 1116, 1120, 1121 and 1139,
and with Article 3 of the Arbitration Rules, requires that information and

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 111.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 112.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 113.

Reply Memorial of Respondent United States of America on Jurisdiction, Admissibility and the
Proposed Amendment (12 April 2001), pp. 32-33.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 114.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 90 fn 90, citing Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United States of
Mexico, \CSID case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Award 16 December 2002, paragraphs 60-63.

Page 9 de 28

38)

39)

Nn

40)

41)

42)

documents that identify each claimant must be provided and must prove that
each claimant is a United States investor.

The Respondent asserted that it had no way to verify that each of the claimant
water users met the NAFTA nationality requirements, and that there is no
evidence that the claimant Irrigation Districts had obtained the consent of those
whom they represent to the submission of this claim.”

The Respondent also said that it was not proven that Messrs Marzulla and
Professor Wallace were properly authorized by those Claimants who are
juridical persons to represent them.”

The Claimant’s Counter- Memorial on Jurisdiction

The Claimants submitted a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 23 June
2006. In it they alleged that “[b]eginning in 1992, Mexico set about a course of
purposeful and systematic capture, seizure, and diversion of the water
belonging to Claimants while it was located in Mexican territory, for use by
farmers located in Mexico.””*

Claimants asserted that their ownership of the water at issue in this arbitration
may be traced back to a 1969 court decree issued in the Texas court case of
State v. Hidalgo County Water Control & Improvement Dist. No. 18, 443
S.W.2d 728 (Tex. Civ. App. 1969).”°

The Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction addressed the objections to jurisdiction
and admissibility raised by the Respondent in a different order from that
adopted in the Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction. For the sake of clarity,
this description of the Claimants’ arguments adheres to the order used in the
Memorial on Jurisdiction.

(a) The claim does not fall outside the scope of NAFTA

43)

The Claimants asserted that their claim concerns a measure taken by Mexico in
relation both to investors of another Party?” and to an investment located in
Mexican territory.”* They said that the relevant measure was the impounding
by the Respondent of their water while that water was in transit to the
Claimants’ fields in Texas, and its diversion by the Respondent for use by
Mexican farmers in Mexico.”

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 126.

Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 131, 132.
Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 137, 144, 145.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 6.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 12.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 48.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 52.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 46.

Page 10 de 28

44)

45)

46)

47)

48)

The Claimants pointed to differences in the wording of Articles 1102 (National
Treatment), 1105 (Minimum Standard of Treatment) and 1110 (Expropriation
and Compensation) of NAFTA and argued that Articles 1102 and 1105 (in
contrast to Article 1110) apply to all measures taken by Mexico relating either
to investors of another Party or to their investments, whether or not those
investments are located in Mexican territory.” They pointed out that NAFTA
Article 1102 contains no requirement conceming the location of the investor or
the investment,’ and neither does Article 1105.

Moreover, Claimants argued that under the 1944 Treaty Mexico had
relinquished ownership of the Claimants’ irrigation water, and that this water
was an investment located in Mexico and within the scope of NAFTA Article
1101(1)(b).*? They said that the water rights were “transferred from Mexico to
the United States in 1944, and from the United States to Claimants under the
national law of the United States.”**

The Claimants referred to a Joint Statement issued by the three NAFTA States
on 2 December 1993,** and said that it recognized that water that has entered
into commerce (as contrasted with water in its natural state) falls within the
provisions of NAFTA. Claimants said that this Joint Statement is an
interpretation of NAFTA binding on the Tribunal under NAFTA Article
1131(2).** Claimants said further that water becomes a commercial good or
product when an investment of human industry converts it into a tradable
commodity, and that Claimants’ water,
“which flows within courses of the six ... Mexican tributaries before reaching the
Rio Grande, where it is stored in Falcon and Amistad reservoirs, sold on the Water
Market, and delivered through a complex of irrigation works, is clearly a good or
product in commerce”.

Claimants quoted a statement concerning the 1906 Mexico-US Water
Convention, which they said is equally applicable to the 1944 Treaty. That
statement includes the following passages:
“The 1906 Water Convention equitably distributes the surface waters of the Rio
Grande above Fort Quitman. Other than the waters to which it is entitled under the
1906 Water Convention, Mexico has waived all claims to the waters of the Rio
Grande for any purpose. ..... Rights to utilize the water resources within the
boundaries of each nation are controlled by their respective domestic laws.”**

In the Claimants’ view, “[flollowing the conclusion of the [1944] Treaty, each
nation owned the water resources allotted to it, and relinquished ownership of

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 49.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 49.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 51.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 52.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 57.

< http://scics.gc.ca/cinfo99/83067000e. htmi#statement >.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 53.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 55.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 67, quoting Darcy Alan Frownfelter, ‘The
International Component of Texas Water Law’, 18 St Mary’s L. J. 481, 512 (1986), who is in turn
quoting a United States’ Legal Advisor.

Page 11 de 28

49)

50)

51)

the water allotted to the other nation.”*? They said that “[t]he 1944 Treaty was

.. more than a promise to deliver water. The 1944 Treaty consisted of an actual
fixing of water rights in the Rio Grande and its tributaries, much like the fixing
of the territorial boundary between the two nations”, and that “Respondent ...
retains no greater ownership of the waters of the Conchos, San Diego, San
Rodrigo, Escondido and Salado Rivers and the Las Vacas Arroyo than it does
of lands conveyed to the United States.”*°

The Claimants said that under United States’ law it is the sovereign states of the
union and not the federal government which hold legal title to water, with the
authority to apportion its use among their residents," and that the United States
court in the 1969 Hidalgo case “took judicial custody of the American waters
of the Rio Grande” and “made substantial quantities of water available to Texas
residents (including Claimants), even though the 1944 Treaty itself did not
apportion these rights”.*

The Claimants said further that Mexico is not free to seize property which a
United States or Canadian investor owns in Mexico simply on the ground that
Mexico did not create (sc., property) rights over the property in question, and
pointed by way of analogy to the NAFTA obligation to respect ownership of
tegistered vehicles, intellectual Property and intangible property created and
registered in the US or Canada.”

The Claimants denied that they were asking the Tribunal to rule on the rights
and obligations of Mexico and the United States under the 1944 Treaty, and
said that their claim was based upon alleged breaches of NAFTA.“*

(b) The claims are not untimely

52)

The Claimants said that because Article 4(B)(c) of the 1944 Water Treaty
provides that the United States’ share of the flow “shall not be less, as an
average amount in cycles of five consecutive years, than 350,000 acre-feet
(431,721,000 cubic meters) annually”, the US’ minimum allotment was strictly
speaking a right to 1,750,000 acre-feet (as a minimum) every five years, rather
than a right to demand 350,000 acre-feet each and every year.**

Accordingly, the Claimants said, there was no violation of their water rights
until after the end of Cycle 26 on 30 September 2002, because it was on 1
October 2002 that Respondent” 's obligations under both Cycle 25 and Cycle 26
became delinquent.“© That date, 1 October 2002, falls within the NAFTA
Article 1116(2) three-year period of limitations.“”

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 71.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 74.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 76
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 77.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 78.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 83.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 29.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 34.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 32.

Page 12 de 28

(c) The Clai have plied with datory procedural
requirements

54) The Claimants considered that they had put forward ample evidence, in the
form of passports, birth certificates or other proof, of the nationality of each of
the Claimants,“* and (while they questioned whether either NAFTA or the
Additional Facility Rules requires such proof) of the authority of the Claimants
who had themselves authorized Messrs Marzulla and Professor Wallace to
represent them.*”

3. The Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction
55) The Respondent submitted a Reply on Jurisdiction dated 26 July 2006.
(a) There is no investment within the meaning of NAFTA Chapter Eleven

56) The Respondent reasserted its view that NAFTA is based upon the principle of
territorial jurisdiction.*° It accepted that all legal systems recognize property
tights created abroad, and that the property in question can be moved across
borders,*! but says that when that property is in Mexico it is governed by
Mexican law.”

57) The Respondent said that the rights that Claimants argued had been affected by
Mexico “are only valid in U.S. territory, once the waters leave Mexican
territory, and, in fact, the international channels, and are distributed under
applicable U.S. law.”*

58) The Respondent said that the 1993 Joint Statement of NAFTA States Parties
does not support the Claimants’ contention that their water is a good or product
in commerce.® It said that the water is governed by the legal system
established by the 1944 Treaty and not by NAFTA;* and further that water is
in its natural state and not a good or product in commerce until it is “taken out
of its natural source, for example to be bottled or stored in bulk in other types
of containers.”*"” The Respondent said that the Claimants “confuse the water
that flows in the rivers with ‘water rights’ that may or may not be
marketable.”**

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraph 36.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 42, 43.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 14-16.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraph 22.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraph 23.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraph 24.

See paragraph 46) above.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraph 25.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraph 27

Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraph 29.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraph 30.

  

Page 13 de 28

59) The Respondent also reasserted its contention that the Tribunal was being asked
to rule upon rights and obligations under the 1944 Treaty, and noted that both
the United States and Mexico had agreed on the manner in which Mexico’s
water debt during the period to which this case relates should be paid.”

(b) It is not proved that the Irrigation Districts suffered cognizable loss.

60) The Respondent raised the further objection that the Claimants had not proved
that the Irrigation Districts had suffered any cognizable loss. It said that the
Irrigation Districts are middlemen, whose role is the transfer of the water from
the State to those who use it.

 

(c) The Clai have not plied with datory procedural
requirements
61) The Respondent renewed its objection that the Claimants had not complied

with mandatory procedural requirements under the NAFTA. It said that because
of doubts about the authority of the officers of the Irrigation Districts to initiate
this arbitration, it was concerned that the Irrigation Districts might later
disclaim responsibility for initiating the arbitration and that this might affect the
recoverability of any costs awarded against the Claimants.*!

4. The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

62) The Claimants submitted a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, dated 28 August 2006.

63) The Claimants asserted that the Respondent bears the burden of demonstrating
that the Tribunal should not hear the claim, and that in this context the Tribunal
should assume that the facts alleged by the Claimants are true. They said that
“This means that [the Tribunal] must interpret, definitively, Article 1101(1) and
decide whether, on the facts alleged by the claimant, Chapter 11 applies.”®

64) Claimants then said that much of the argument in the Respondent’s Reply on.
Jurisdiction is irrelevant because it concems the merits of the case, and (citing
Methanex™) that the Tribunal “must hold in abeyance Respondent’s merits
arguments”, i.e., the arguments that (a) Mexico owns and controls all water
within its boundaries, (b) Mexico is not obliged to recognize that ownership of
the water rights has lawfully passed from the United States to the Claimants, (c)
ownership of the right to water in the six rivers located wholly within Mexico is
not ownership of an ‘investment in Mexico’, and (d) Claimants do not have an

Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraph 35.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 37-41.
“ Reply on Jurisdiction, paragraph 43.

° Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 2.
° Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 3.

Methanex, Preliminary Award, paragraph 109.

Page 14 de 28

65)

66)

67)

68)

69)

70)

investment in their farmland, crops, irrigation facilities and water rights. These
issues, they said, must be joined to the merits.

In the Claimants’ view, “the sole question at this stage in the proceedings is
whether Respondent’s capture and diversion of water located in Mexico and
owned by Claimants falls within the ambit of Chapter Eleven of NAFTA.”

The Claimants reasserted that they owned water in Mexico. They drew an
analogy between the 1944 Treaty and the treaties by which the United States
acquired title to its landmass.*’ They concluded that “for the purposes of the
jurisdictional challenge pending before this Tribunal, it must be assumed that
Claimants are rightful owners of an investment located in Mexico, and
therefore this claim is within the competence of this Tribunal under Chapter
Eleven of NAFTA.”

The Claimants said that

“the United States has the right to determine who owns the water
rights allocated to it by Mexico in the 1944 treaty (in this case,
employing the law of Texas), and that Mexico has the same right
with respect to the water rights it owns. When Mexico relinquished
these water rights by treaty, it relinquished the right to dictate who
owns them, but retained the right to decide who owns its share of
those rights, as well as the 1.5 million acre-feet per year allotted to
Mexico from the Colorado River under the same treaty.”°

The Claimants said further that the dispute settlement provisions in the 1944
Treaty apply only to government-to-government disputes and did not apply to
the present case. ° Claimants also said that they had referred to the 1944 Treaty
“only to help identify the extent and location of their water rights”,” and that
the Treaty “merely lays the factual predicate of their claim.”’~ They said that
“Claimants will be required to produce more precise evidence of their water
loss at the merits and damages stages of this proceeding.”

As far as the qualification of the Claimants to initiate the claim is concerned,
Claimants said that the “Respondent now appears to concede that all Claimants
are nationals of the United States.””

The Claimants said that it was untrue that the Irrigation Districts are
‘middlemen’: the districts sell water both to their members and to others
outside the district.”*

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 6.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 7.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 14
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 16.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 25.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 17.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 18.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 19.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 18.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 20.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paragraph 22.

Page 15 de 28

5.

71)

72)

16
n

The United States submission

On 27 November 2006 the United States made a submission pursuant to
NAFTA Article 1128. In that submission it addressed the question of the scope
of the protections afforded to investors and investments by Articles 1102 and
1105 of NAFTA. It argued that
“all of the protections afforded by the NAFTA’s investment chapter
extend only to investments that are made by an investor of a NAFTA
Party in the territory of another NAFTA Party, or to investors of a
NAFTA Party that seek to make, are making, or have made an
investment in the territory of another NAFTA Party.””
In support of this view it pointed to the role of NAFTA Article 1101 as the
‘gateway’ to the dispute resolution provisions of Chapter Eleven.” It noted the
statement in Article 1101(1)(b) that Chapter Eleven applies to measures adopted
or maintained by a Party relating to “investments of investors of another Party
in the territory of the Party” that has adopted or maintained those measures, and
said that this defined the scope of the protection of investments in Article
1105. While the scope of Article 1102, in protecting “investors”, is not
expressly limited to the protection of investors with respect to investments in
the territory of the State adopting the measures of which complaint is made, the
United States submitted that it is clear that Article 1102 is so limited and that
any other conclusion would be absurd.” It would, for example, result in
situations where there was an obligation to accord national treatment to an
investor even though there was no obligation to accord national treatment to the
investment itself." The United States’ submission noted that Canada had taken
the same position on the interpretation of Chapter Eleven in the SD Myers case.

The Tribunal also received a letter dated 14 December 2006 from the Attorney
General, the First Assistant Attorney General, and the Solicitor General of
Texas, in which it was asserted that the Claimants’ claim is within the concept
of territoriality under NAFTA Chapter Eleven and is not inconsistent with the
interpretative position provided in the submission made by the United States on
27 November 2006.

United States Submission, paragraph 3.
United States Submission, paragraph 2, citing Methanex Corp. v. United States of America, (First

Partial Award) 2002 WL 32824210 at 4 106 (Aug. 7, 2002) (“‘[Article 1101(1)] is the gateway leading to the
dispute resolution provisions of Chapter 11. Hence the powers of the Tribunal can only come into legal
existence if the requirements of Article 1101(1) are met.”)

p
80
81

United States Submission, paragraph 5

United States Submission, paragraph 8.

United States Submission, paragraph 10.

United States Submission, paragraph 14, citing S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Canada, Government of Canada

Counter Memorial, $f] 218-52 (Oct. 5, 1999) (arguing that because the claimant did not have an investment in
Canada the claim was not within the scope of Chapter Eleven); id, at 259 (‘“The [Article 1102(1)] obligation
does not mean that the national treatment obligation applies to the investor’s activities in its home country.
The obligation only applies to the investor with respect to its investment in the foreign country .. ..”).

Page 16 de 28

73)

74)

75)

76)

77)

78)

2

The Tribunal received a post-hearing submission from each of the Parties, both
submissions being dated 15 December 2006.

 

 

The Clai post-hearing submission, entitled 1 Memorial’,
addressed all of the matters on which the Tribunal had invited submissions.”
Of central relevance at this stage are the submissions concerning the scope of
the NAFTA protections. The Supplemental Memorial reviewed the drafting
history of NAFTA Chapter Eleven and focused upon the absence from NAFTA
Articles 1102 and 1105 of an explicit territorial limitation such as is found in
NAFTA Article 1110. It argued that this omission was not inadvertent and that
the result of the omission is that i and i d by
Chapter Eleven whenever a measure of one NAFTA State Party affects an
investment of an investor of another State Party, whether or not the affected
investment is in the territory of the NAFTA State applying the measure in
question.*?

Further, Claimants said that the omission from NAFTA Article 1101(1)(a) of
an explicit territorial limitation, such as is found in Article 1101(1)(b) and (c),
has a similar effect.“* They said that both those protections afforded to
‘i ” and those p ions afforded to ‘i ” by Chapter Eleven
apply to the Claimants, and that this is in accordance with the design and
purpose of NAFTA which, in their view is to eliminate economic boundaries
between Mexico, Canada and the United States.*°

 

On the question of water as a good in commerce, the Claimants argued that the
Rio Grande has long ceased to be a naturally flowing river, and observed that
water from the Rio Grande is bought, sold, traded and stored for use in the
agricultural commercial activities of farmers on both sides of the River.*®

Claimants stated that the 17 Irrigation Districts among the Claimants are
creatures of Texas law but do not act as agents of the state of Texas or the
federal government.*’ On the questions of Texas water law the Supplemental
Memorial outlined the provisions of Texas law that permit the cancellation of
unused water rights in certain circumstances.** Claimants regarded the City of
San Marcos case as irrelevant because it relates to ground water rather than
surface water.®°

The Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction reaffirmed the
Respondent’s view the Claimants may present a claim against Mexico under
NAFTA Chapter Eleven only if they have made an investment in Mexico.’ In
particular, it was argued that under NAFTA Article 1101(1)(a) an ‘investment’

The Supplemental Memorial was accompanied by copies of resolutions of the Boards of Directors of

the Texas Water Districts authorizing the initiation of this arbitration.

Supplemental Memorial, pp. 2-9.

Supplemental Memorial, pp. 9-11.

Supplemental Memorial, pp. 10-14.

Supplemental Memorial, pp. 16-19.

Supplemental Memorial, pp. 14-16.

Supplemental Memorial, pp. 20-24.

Supplemental Memorial, pp. 19-20.

Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 5-20.

Page 17 de 28

79)

80)

is protected only if it is an investment of an investor of another NAFTA Party
in the territory of the NAFTA Party applying the measure. Further, because an
‘investor’ is defined by Article 1139 as one who “seeks to make, is making or
has made an investment”, it follows that an ‘investor’ under Article 1101(1) is
one who seeks to make, is making or has made an investment in the territory of
another NAFTA Party, because only those investments are covered by Chapter
Eleven.*' The Respondent observed that its interpretation of these provisions
of the NAFTA conforms to the interpretations adopted by the United States and
Canada, and argued that this interpretation is in conformity with the purposes of
the NAFTA.

The Respondent’s Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction sought to give
precision to the concept of an investment by pointing to the contrast between,
on the one hand, ‘investments’ and, on the other hand, ‘cross-border services’
which are an example of a form of economic involvement, with the economy of
another NAFTA Party that is distinct from an investment.”*

On the question of water as a good in commerce, the Respondent reaffirmed the
inalienability, under Mexican law, of the waters of rivers flowing through
Mexico,™* and argued that the waters of the tributaries of the Rio Bravo remain
subject to Mexican law and also in their natural state, and hence are neither
United States property nor “in commerce”.°> Like the Claimants, the
Respondent regarded the City of San Marcos case as being of limited relevance
because it applies to underground water rather than surface water. °6 On the
questions of Texas water law, the Respondent argued that the fact that Texas
law prevents the taking of water in certain circumstances where the terms of the
permit are violated confirms the contingent nature of water rights in Texas.”
The Respondent further asserted that as a matter of Texas law the Irrigation
Districts are subdivisions of the State of Texas.”*

Til. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

81)

82)

This claim is made under NAFTA Chapter Eleven, and is based more
specifically upon Articles 1120 and 1122, which permit the arbitration of
disputes under the Additional Facility Rules of ICSID.

The jurisdiction of the Tribunal to adjudicate upon the merits of this claim is
created by, and accordingly limited by, the NAFTA. The right to initiate claims
is established in Section B of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA. Articles 1115 and
1116 read as follows:-

Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 8-14.
Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 15, 16.
Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 17-20
Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 21-23.
Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 24-29 and 30-32.
Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 33-36.
Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 37-40.
Post-Hearing Submission on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 41-44.

Page 18 de 28

83)

84)

85)

86)

Article 1115: Purpose

Without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under Chapter
Twenty (Institutional Arrangements and Dispute Settlement Procedures), this
Section establishes a mechanism for the settlement of investment disputes that
assures both equal treatment among investors of the Parties in accordance with the
principle of international reciprocity and due process before an impartial tribunal.

Article 1116: Claim by an Investor of a Party on Its Own Behalf

1. An investor of a Party may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim that
another Party has breached an obligation under:
(a) Section A or Article 1503(2) (State Enterprises), or
(b) Article 1502(3)(a) (Monopolies and State Enterprises) where the
monopoly has acted in a manner inconsistent with the Party's obligations
under Section A,
and that the investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of,
that breach.
2. An investor may not make a claim if more than three years have elapsed from
the date on which the investor first acquired, or should have first acquired,
knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss
or damage.

The Tribunal accordingly has jurisdiction to adjudicate upon claims made by an
investor of one NAFTA Party that another NAFTA Party has breached Section
A (i.e, Articles 1101 ~ 1114) of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA (and also of
certain alleged breaches of Article 1503, which is not relevant here). It has no
jurisdiction over claims that do not arise from such alleged breaches. In order to
determine whether the claims fall within Articles 1115 and 1116 it is therefore
necessary to determine whether the Claimants are ‘investors’, and whether their
claims are within the scope and coverage of Chapter Eleven Section A.

NAFTA Article 1101 reads as follows:-

Article 1101: Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
(a) investors of another Party;
() investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party;
and
(c) with respect to Articles 1106 and 1114, all investments in the territory
of the Party.

The role of Article 1101 in determining the scope of the jurisdiction of tribunals
established to hear Chapter Eleven claims is clear from the title of the Article. It
defines the ‘scope and coverage’ of the entirety of Chapter Eleven, including
both the scope and coverage of the substantive protections accorded to
investors and investments by Chapter Eleven Section A and the scope of the
rights to submit disputes to arbitration under Chapter Eleven Section B.

No claim is made in this case in respect of NAFTA Articles 1106 or 1114, and
Article 1101(c) is accordingly not relevant. The question is therefore whether,
in the terms of Article 1101, the claim concerns
“measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
(a) investors of another Party;
(b) investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party.”

Page 19 de 28

87)

88)

89)

90)

91)

92)

99

The Tribunal will at this stage assume for the sake of argument that the claims
concern “measures adopted or maintained” by the Republic of Mexico. The
claims concem alleged violations of NAFTA Chapter Eleven Articles 1102,
1105, and 1110.” The first question is therefore whether the claims concern
“(a) investors of another Party; and / or (b) investments of investors of another
Party in the territory of the Party.”

The definition of an “investor” for the purposes of NAFTA Chapter Eleven is
set out in Article 1139. It reads as follows:
“investor of a Party means a Party or state enterprise thereof, or a national or an
enterprise of such Party, that seeks to make, is making or has made an
investment.”

Doubts have been raised as to whether all of the Claimants are qualified
investors, in terms of their nationality. For the present, however, the Tribunal
sets those doubts to one side, because it is clear that there are at least some
Claimants who meet the requirement that they be nationals or enterprises of a
Party, in this case the United States, That takes us to the question whether there
is a Claimant who “seeks to make, is making or has made an investment.”

That question must be answered by reference to the definition of an
“investment” that applies in the context of Chapter Eleven. That definition is
set out in NAFTA Article 1139. Article 1139 stipulates that
“investment of an investor of a Party means an investment owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by an investor of such Party;”

There is no doubt that the Claimants include persons who have invested in
farms and irrigation facilities within the State of Texas. There is also no doubt
that the Claimants include persons who own or control directly or indirectly
those farms and facilities in Texas. The initial question is whether those farms
and facilities in Texas qualify not simply as an ‘investment’ in general terms
but as an ‘investment’ which entitles the owner to initiate under the NAFTA the
specific claims against Mexico in this case. We come thus to the question
whether there is indeed, for the specific purposes of a claim under NAFTA
Chapter Eleven, an “investment” in this case.

Article 1139 defines “investment” as follows:
“investment means:

(a) an enterprise;

(b) an equity security of an enterprise;

(c) a debt security of an enterprise
(i) where the enterprise is an affiliate of the investor, or
(ii) where the original maturity of the debt security is at least
three years,
but does not include a debt security, regardless of original
maturity, of a state enterprise;

(@) a loan to an enterprise
(i) where the enterprise is an affiliate of the investor, or
(ii) where the original maturity of the loan is at least three years,
but does not include a loan, regardless of original maturity, to a
state enterprise;

Request for Arbitration, paragraph 59.

Page 20 de 28

93)

94)

95)

too

(e) an interest in an enterprise that entitles the owner to share in income
or profits of the enterprise;
(f an interest in an enterprise that entitles the owner to share in the assets
of that enterprise on dissolution, other than a debt security or a loan
excluded from subparagraph (c) or (d);
(g) real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, acquired in the
expectation or used for the purpose of economic benefit or other business
urposes; and
(hb) interests arising from the commitment of capital or other resources in
the territory of a Party to economic activity in such territory, such as
under
(i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in
the territory of the Party, including tumkey or construction
contracts, or concessions, or
(ii) contracts where remuneration depends substantially on the
production, revenues or profits of an enterprise;
but investment does not mean,
(i) claims to money that arise solely from
(i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a
national or enterprise in the territory of a Party to an enterprise
in the territory of another Party, or
(ii) the extension of credit in connection with a commercial
transaction, such as trade financing, other than a loan covered by
subparagraph (d); or
(j any other claims to money,
that do not involve the kinds of interests set out in subparagraphs (a) through (h).”

The first issue that divides the Parties is the question whether, as the
Respondent argues, the ‘investment’ must be one that the Claimants were
seeking to make, were making, or had made in Mexico, or whether, as the
Claimants argue, the undisputed fact that they had made an investment in Texas
is sufficient.

It is possible that the States Parties to the NAFTA might have given investors
who are nationals of one NAFTA State and who had made an investment in
that same State of which they are nationals, the right to bring a claim against
another NAFTA Party in respect of a measure of that other Party which had
adversely affected their investments in their national State. Such a right would,
for example, entitle all Mexican business owners who had invested in Mexico
by building up their own businesses there (and similarly all Canadian business
owners who had invested in Canada) to bring actions against the United States
in respect of any United States measure that affected their Mexican (or
Canadian) businesses in violation of NAFTA provisions such as the ‘fair and
equitable treatment’ provision in Article 1105.'°° Such a right would be likely
to give those Mexican and Canadian business owners much wider remedies in
respect of injurious United States legislation than any United States investor
would have against its own government; but such may sometimes be the effect
of treaties that protect foreign investors and their investments.

If, however, the NAFTA were intended to have such a significant effect one
would expect to find very clear indications of it in the travaux préparatoires.
There are no such clear indications, in the travaux préparatoires or elsewhere;

The same position would, of course, apply in respect of other combinations of NAFTA Parties and

nationals of other Parties.

Page 21 de 28

96)

97)

98)

99)

100)

and the Tribunal does not interpret Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA, and in
particular Articles 1101 and 1139, in that way.

While NAFTA Article 1139 defines the term “investment” it does not define
“foreign investment”. Similarly, NAFTA Chapter XI is named “Investment”,
not “Foreign Investment”. However, this Tribunal considers that NAFTA
Chapter XI in fact refers to “foreign investment” and that it regulates “foreign
investors” and “investments of foreign investors of another Party”. The
ordinary meaning of the text of the relevant provisions of Chapter Eleven is that
they are concerned with foreign investment, not domestic investments. What
then makes an investment “foreign”?

An investor of one NAFTA State Party wishing to make an investment in the
economy of another NAFTA State Party is necessarily concerned with the law
and the governmental authorities who are making the law, applying the law and.
solving the conflicts, in a State other than its own. The NAFTA Parties
negotiated and executed a free trade agreement, in order to provide the
international legal framework necessary to assure the foreign investor that its
investment will be treated in accordance with certain minimum standards
(national treatment, minimum standard of treatment, protection against
expropriation and others), and providing a mechanism for the settlement of
investment disputes whereby foreign investors may submit to an impartial
Tribunal claims that their investments have been affected by governmental
measures that violate the obligations which the States Parties assumed in the
NAFTA.

While this Tribunal does not purport to lay down a comprehensive and
definitive test of what constitutes an investment covered by the protections of
NAFTA Chapter Eleven, it is evident that a salient characteristic will be that
the investment is primarily regulated by the law of a State other than the State
of the investor’s nationality, and that this law is created and applied by that
State which is not the State of the investor’s nationality.

When an investment is made, such as the investments in farms and irrigation
equipment, etc., in the present case, the investor makes its decision in the light
of its appraisal of the law and of the authorities who are making, creating and
applying the law to that investment._When the investment is made in the
investor’s State, it is made in the light of the investor’s understanding of laws,
institutions and procedures that are familiar to the investor. When the
investment is made in a different country which has concluded an investment
protection treaty covering that investment, the investor is entitled to rely upon
the fact the States Parties to the treaty have decided to commit themselves to
give a minimum level of legal protection to such foreign investments.

The USA Government submission, dated 27 November 2006, stated that:
“The aim of international investment agreements is the protection of
foreign investments, and the investor who make them. This is as
true with respect to the investment provisions of free trade
agreements (FTAs) as it is for agreements devoted exclusively to
investment protection, such as bilateral investment treaties (BITs).

Page 22 de 28

101)

102)

103)

104)

101

NAFTA Chapter Eleven is no different in this regard. One of the

objectives of the NAFTA, expressly set forth in Article 102(1)(c) is

to “increase substantially investment opportunities in the territories

of the Parties” which refers to, and can only sensibly be considered

as referring to, opportunities for foreign investment in the territory

of each Party made by investors of another Party....”
In the view of the Tribunal, this is the clear and ordinary meaning that is borne
by the text of NAFTA Chapter Eleven.

The Tribunal considers that in order to be an “investor” within the meaning of
NAFTA Art. 1101 (a), an enterprise must make an investment in another
NAFTA State, and not in its own. Adopting the terminology of the Methanex v.
United States Tribunal, it is necessary that the measures of which complaint is
made should affect an investment that has a “legally significant connection”
with the State creating and applying those measures." The simple fact that an
enterprise in one NAFTA State is affected by measures taken in another
NAFTA State is not sufficient to establish the right of that enterprise to
protection under NAFTA Chapter Eleven: it is the relationship, the legally
significant connection, with the State taking those measures that establishes the
tight to protection, not the bare fact that the enterprise is affected by the
measures.

While the effect of the NAFTA may in some respects be close to the effect of
the elimination of economic boundaries between the three States Parties, and
while it is certainly true that the purpose of NAFTA was to strengthen the
economics link between their economies, the three States Parties remain three
distinct sovereign States with three distinct nationalities. Therefore, when an
investor of one NAFTA Party makes an investment that falls under the laws
and the jurisdiction of the authorities of another NAFTA Party, it will be
treated as a foreign investor under Chapter Eleven. It is not NAFTA’s purpose
to give every investment in any NAFTA State the protections set out in Chapter
Eleven.

In the opinion of the Tribunal, it is quite plain that NAFTA Chapter Eleven was
not intended to provide substantive protections or rights of action to investors
whose investments are wholly confined to their own national States, in
circumstances where those investments may be affected by measures taken by
another NAFTA State Party. The NAFTA should not be interpreted so as to
bring about this unintended result.

In this case the Tribunal does not consider that the Claimants were ‘foreign
investors’ in Mexico. Rather, they were domestic investors in Texas. The
economic dependence of an enterprise upon supplies of goods — in this case,
water — from another State is not sufficient to make the dependent enterprise an
‘investor’ in that other State.

Methanex v United States, Preliminary Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 7 August 2002,

paragraph 147.

Page 23 de 28

105)

106)

107)

108)

109)

102

Article 1101(1)(b) stipulates that Chapter Eleven applies to “investments of
investors of another Party in the territory of the Party.” It is true that the text of
the definition of an “investor” in Article 1139 does not explicitly require that
the person or enterprise seeks to make, is making or has made an investment in
the territory of another NAFTA Party. But the text of the definition does
require that the person make an “investment”; and although investments can of
course be made in the investor’s home State such domestic investments are, as
was explained above, not within the scope of Chapter Eleven. Chapter Eleven
applies to “investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the
Party”: Article 1101(1)(b). It is clear that the words “territory of the Party” in
that phrase do not refer to the territory of the Party of whom the investors are
nationals. It requires investment in the territory of another NAFTA Party -the
Party that has adopted or maintained the measures challenged. In short, in order
to be an “investor” under Article 1139 one must make an investment in the
territory of another NAFTA State, not in one’s own.

The interpretation adopted here is supported by the fact that it is the
interpretation publicly adopted by the NAFTA Parties themselves prior to this
litigation. The Tribunal notes the terms of the United States Statement of
Administrative Action submitted to Congress in connection with the conclusion
of the NAFTA,’ the report on NAFTA prepared prior to the approval of the
NAFTA by the Mexican Senate, 13 ‘and the Canadian Statement on
Implementation of the NAFTA.’

In particular, this interpretation of the scope of NAFTA is consistent with that
adopted by Mexico before the Tribunal and by the United States in its
submission dated 27 November 2006; but it is an interpretation which the
Tribunal would have reached in any event, even if the United States had made
no intervention in these proceedings.

Accordingly, in the context of the present case it is not enough that the United

States’ Claimants have made an investment in the United States. They must

demonstrate that they were seeking to make, were making, or had made, an

investment in Mexico. If they cannot demonstrate that, they will not qualify as
“investors” for the purposes of these claims. '°

In the present case Claimants say that they do indeed have an investment in
Mexico, in the form of their rights to water located in Mexico which was
wrongfully seized by the Respondent.

North American Free Trade Agreement, Implementation Act, Statement of Administrative Action,

HR. Doc. No. 103-159, Vol. 1, 103d Cong., 1 Sess., 589 (1993).

Senate of the Republic. North American Free Trade Agreement, Dictamen de las Comisiones

Unidas de Comercio y Fomento Industrial, de Relaciones Exteriores, de Hacienda, de Desarrollo Econémico
y Social, de Plancacién Democratica de Desarrollo, de Puntos Constitucionales de Asentamientos Humanos y
Ecologia, y del Sector Social del Trabajo, November 18, 1993.

Department of External Affairs, North American Free Trade Agreement: Canadian Statement on

Implementation, Extract, Canada Gazette, Part I, 147 (January 1, 1994).

The Tribunal also notes that in this case it appears that the allegation is that measures were taken by

Mexico “relating to” the investments of the investors, and not that Mexico took measures “relating to” the
investors themselves. It is, however, not necessary to settle this point, for reasons that will become apparent.

Page 24 de 28

110)

111)

112)

113)

114)

115)

116)

Mexican law provides for the grant by the Republic of Mexico of legal rights to
extract water from rivers in Mexico for defined periods, in defined amounts,
and for defined purposes. Similarly, the law of Texas provides for the grant by
the State of Texas of legal rights to extract water from rivers in Texas for
defined periods, in defined amounts, and for defined purposes. The Claimants
assert that they derive their rights that underlie the present claims from the
adjudication of water rights by the Texas courts in the 1969 Hidalgo litigation
and the subsequent issuing to them of water rights certificates by the Texas
authorities.

The Tribunal considers that those water rights fall within the definition of
“property” in Article 1139 (g). It further considers that water rights acquired for
agricultural purposes are “acquired in the expectation or used for the purpose of
economic benefit or other business purposes”.

That brings us to the crucial question: whether the Claimants have an
investment “in the territory of [Mexico]”.

In our view it is clear that they do not. They have substantial investments in
Texas, in the form of their businesses and, in the context of these proceedings,
more particularly in the form of the infrastructure for the distribution of the
water that they extract from the Rio Bravo / Rio Grande. They have
investments in the form of the water rights granted by the State of Texas. They
are certainly “investors”; but their investments are in Texas, and they are not
investors in Mexico or vis-d-vis Mexico.

The Tribunal does not accept that the Claimants own water in Mexico, in the
sense of the ownership of personal property rights in the physical waters of
rivers flowing in Mexican territory.

There is an evident and inescapable conceptual difficulty in positing the
existence of property rights in water up-river in Mexico in a context where the
entitlement of each Claimant depends upon the apportionment of a certain
volume of water, measured over a five-year period (or possibly longer, if the
possibility of repayment of water debts in subsequent cycles is taken into
account), which can be determined only by reference to the volume of water
that actually reached the main channel of the Rio Bravo / Rio Grande.

One owns the water in a bottle of mineral water, as one owns a can of paint. If
another person takes it without permission, that is theft of one’s property. But
the holder of a right granted by the State of Texas to take a certain amount of
water from the Rio Bravo / Rio Grande does not ‘own’, does not ‘possess
property rights in’, a particular volume of water as it descends through Mexican
streams and rivers towards the Rio Bravo / Rio Grande and finds its way into
the right-holders irrigation pipes. While the water is in Mexico, it belongs to
Mexico, even though Mexico may be obliged to deliver a certain amount of it
into the Rio Bravo / Rio Grande for taking by US nationals.

Page 25 de 28

117)

118)

119)

120)

121)

Thus, the Claimants do not own any of the water within Mexico. Nor do the
Claimants possess any water rights in Mexico and enforceable against the State
of Mexico. Their water rights are granted by the State of Texas. Those rights
are created in Texas and exercised in Texas.

Furthermore, it is plain that under the Mexican Constitution and Mexican law,
the Claimants could have no such property rights in water in Mexican rivers.
Article 27 of the Mexican Constitution stipulates that the ownership of waters
within the boundaries of the national territory originally belongs to the Nation,
and that water from its rivers and tributaries are the property of the nation.
Exploitation or use of those waters can only be carried out through concessions
granted by the Federal Executive. The Mexican Law of National Waters
confirms the need for the grant of a concession for the exploitation or use of
waters, and specifies that a concession does not guarantee the existence or
permanence of the water that is the subject of the concession. And Mexico’s
General Law of National Assets stipulates specifically, in Article 16, that
concessions do not create ownership rights (derechos reales) but simply grant a
right of use and exploitation, without prejudice tod third parties, and subject to
conditions imposed by law and by the concession.

The Claimants sought, with arguments of considerable subtlety and ingenuity,
to identify a supervening right that overcame all such problems, by saying that
in the 1944 Treaty Mexico alienated or relinquished title to one-third of the
waters in the ‘six rivers’, just as States sometimes relinquish land territory in
treaties. According to this view, approximately one-third of the water in the ‘six
rivers’ belongs to Mexico, and approximately two-thirds belongs to the United
States — although who owns what cannot be accurately determined at any given
moment because the sharing formula under Article 4 of the 1944 Treaty applies
a combination of fixed amounts and percentage shares measured over periods
of several years.

The Tribunal can find no evidence in the 1944 Treaty to suggest that this
imaginative interpretation of the Treaty, whose legal coherence and practical
operability are open to considerable doubt, was intended by the Parties. The
ordinary reading of the Treaty is that it is an agreement to apportion such
waters as arrive in the international watercourse — the Rio Bravo / Rio Grande —
between Mexico and the United States; and the Tribunal sees no reason
whatever to doubt the correctness of that reading.

Any improper diversion of river flows prior to the flow joining the main flow
of the Rio Bravo / Rio Grande is a different matter. If such a diversion were to
occur, it may or may not amount to a breach of the 1944 Treaty. That would be
a matter for the two States, who are the only Parties to that Treaty. If the
interests of US nationals were thought to be prejudiced by any action alleged to
amount to a violation of the Treaty, that is an issue which could be taken up by
the US Government under the dispute resolution procedures in the 1944 Treaty.
But the 1944 Treaty does not create property rights amounting to investments
within the meaning of the NAFTA which US national themselves may protect

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, paragraphs 46-50.

Page 26 de 28

122)

123)

124)

IV.

125)

by action under NAFTA Chapter Eleven. The Tribunal expresses no views on
the interpretation or application of the 1944 Treaty in the circumstances of this
case.

In the view of the Tribunal it has not been demonstrated that any of the
Claimants seeks to make, is making or has made an investment in Mexico. That
being the case, the Tribunal does not have the jurisdiction to hear any of these
claims against Mexico because the Claimants have not demonstrated that their
claims fall within the scope and coverage of NAFTA Chapter Eleven, as
defined by NAFTA Article 1101.

Having reached this conclusion it is unnecessary to consider further issues,
because it is plain that the Tribunal cannot have jurisdiction over these claims.

For these reasons the Tribunal finds that it lacks jurisdiction over all of the
claims.

COSTS

The Tribunal has considered the question of the allocation of costs. The claims
were not frivolous, and they were pursued in good faith and with all due
expedition. The claims were, equally, defended in good faith and with due
expedition. Both sides agreed to the separation of the jurisdictional issue, and
this proved a sensible and economical step. The Tribunal does not consider that
there is any reason to depart from the normal practice in such cases, according
to which each Party shall bear its own costs, and the costs of the Tribunal shall
be divided equally between the Parties.

Page 27 de 28

V. DECISION ON JURISDICTION

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal has decided:

a) The Arbitral Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the dispute
submitted to it in this arbitration;

b) Each Party shall bear its own costs, and the costs of the Tribunal
shall be divided equally between the Parties.

Made as at Toronto, Cangda, in English and Spanish, both versions

   

Lr
Hon, Edwin Meese III
Date: , June 2007

le ponte

Professor Vaughan Lowe

Date: " pe 27

472207

