INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
BEIJING URBAN CONSTRUCTION GROUP Co. LTD.

Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/14/30

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Members of the Tribunal
The Honourable Jan Binnie C.C., Q.C., President
Professor Zachary Douglas Q.C.
Mr. John M. Townsend

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Geraldine R. Fischer

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 31 May 2017

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Beijing Urban Construction Representing Republic of Yemen:
Group Co. Ltd.:

Mr. Reza Mohtashami Mr. Benjamin Knowles

Ms. Erin Miller Rankin Mr. Ian Hopkinson

Mr. Sami Tannous Ms. Darcy Beamer-Downie
Mr. Matei Purice Ms. Milena Szuniewicz-Wenzel
Mr. Marcus Starke Clyde & Co. LLP

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP The St. Botolph Building

20 Al Fattan Currency House Tower 2 138 Houndsditch

DIFC, PO Box 506569 London EC3A 7AR

Dubai United Kingdom

United Arab Emirates

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
A. Registration of the Request 1
B. Constitution of the Tribunal

C. First Session and the Written Phase

 

D. Hearing on Jurisdiction
FACTUAL BACKGROUND

 

 

IV. THE JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF ..........0-c0000 6

A. First Objection Ratione Personae - Is the Claimant a “National of Another Contracting
State”?

 

 

(1) The Parties’ Positions

 

a. The Respondent’s Position
b. The Claimant’s Position
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi

B. Second Objection Ratione Materiae - Yemen Contends that it Consented to ICSID
Arbitration Only in Respect of Disputes Limited to the Quantum of Compensation..

7
7
7
7
8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) The Parties’ Positions 14
a. The Respondent’s Position ...........cccccceeeseeesesee es eseseecseeeeseeseeseseeseeteteteseeeeeeees 14
b. The Claimant’s Position 16
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi 16
a. “Lawful” Versus “Unlawful” Expropriations .........0.00ccccce
b. The “Narrow” Versus the “Broad” Interpretation of the Text of Article 10 ........ 19
c. The Context of Article 10 25
d. Object and Purpose of the Treaty... ccc eee cece eeseeeeeeeseteeeteeeteneneees 28
e. Relevance of the History of PRC Investment Treaties to the Interpretation of
Article 10 30
C. Third Objection - MFN Clause Cannot Circumvent Limited Dispute Clause.................. 35
(1) The Parties’ Positions 35
a. The Respondent’s Position ...........cccccceeeseeesesee es eseseecseeeeseeseeseseeseeteteteseeeeeeees 35
b. The Claimant’s Position 35
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi 36

 

D. Fourth Objection - Lack of Qualified Investment... cece cece eee eeeeeeneneeeeeee 38

(1) The Parties’ Positions 38

 

a. The Respondent’s Position .

 

 

 

 

b. The Claimant’s Position 39

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi 39

a. Investment for Purposes of the ICSID Convention ........... cece eee 4l

b. Investments Within the Scope of the BIT... ccc ceneeeeeee eee teeeeeeeeeees 42

E. Fifth Objection - BUCG’s Claim is a Contractual Claim, not a Treaty Claim................. 45
(1) The Parties’ Positions 45

a. The Respondent’s Position ...........cccccceeeseeesesee es eseseecseeeeseeseeseseeseeteteteseeeeeeees 45

b. The Claimant’s Position 45

(2) The Tribunal’s Analysi 45

 

V. DECISION 46

TABLE OF SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINED TERMS

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (10 April 2006)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BIT/Treaty Agreement on the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments Between
the Government of the People’s Republic of
China and the Government of the Republic of
Yemen, which entered into force on 10 April
2002 (CL-001 (Revised))

C-[#] Claimant’s Exhibit

Cl. C-M Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
dated 4 January 2017

Cl. Mem. Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits dated 12
August 2016

Cl. Rej. Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction dated 3
March 2017

CL-[#] Claimant’s Legal Authority

Hearing Hearing on Jurisdiction held on 15-16 March,
2017

ICSID Convention Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

ICSID or the Centre International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

PRC People’s Republic of China

R-[#] Respondent’s Exhibit

Resp. Mem. Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction dated
14 October 2016

Resp. Reply Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction dated 3
February 2017

RL-[#] Respondent’s Legal Authority

 

 

Tr. Day [#] [Speaker(s)] [page:line]

 

Transcript of the Hearing

 

 

 

VCLT Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This jurisdictional ruling is made in the context of a dispute concerning construction by the

Claimant of portions of an international terminal at Sana’a International Airport in Yemen.

The dispute was submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID”) pursuant to the Agreement on the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments Between the Government of the People’s Republic of China and
the Government of the Republic of Yemen, which entered into force on 10 April 2002 (the
“BIT” or “Treaty”), and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the
“ICSID Convention’).

The Claimant, Beijing Urban Construction Group Co. Ltd. (“BUCG” or “Claimant”), is a
corporation incorporated under the laws of the People’s Republic of China (“China” or
“PRC’”). By contract dated 28 February 2006, BUCG undertook to construct the terminal

facility at a contract price in excess of US$100 million.

The Respondent is the Republic of Yemen (the “Government” or “Respondent”). The
Government challenges the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear and dispose of the claim on

the merits.

The Claimant and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The Parties’

representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
REGISTRATION OF THE REQUEST

On 5 November 2014, ICSID received an electronic copy of the request for arbitration
dated 4 November 2014 from Beijing Urban Construction Group Co. Ltd. against the
Republic of Yemen together with Exhibits C-001 through C-043 and Legal Authorities
CL-001 through CL-003 (the “Request”). The Request was supplemented by the
Claimant’s letter of 20 November 2014.

On 3 December 2014, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request, as
supplemented, in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the
Parties of the registration. The Parties were invited to proceed to constitute an arbitral

tribunal as soon as possible.
CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL

The Parties agreed that the Tribunal should consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator
appointed by each Party, and the President of the Tribunal appointed by agreement of the

Parties after exchanging lists of candidates.

On 4 February 2015, Mr. John M. Townsend, a U.S. national, accepted his appointment by
the Claimant as arbitrator. On 10 March 2015, Professor Zachary Douglas Q.C., an

Australian national, accepted his appointment by the Respondent as arbitrator.

On 10 July 2015, The Honourable Ian Binnie C.C., Q.C., a Canadian national, accepted his
appointment by the Parties as President of the Tribunal. That same day, the Secretary-
General of ICSID, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), notified the Parties that all three
arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to
have been constituted on that date. Ms. Geraldine Fischer, ICSID Legal Counsel, was

designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.
FIRST SESSION AND THE WRITTEN PHASE

The first session convened in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1) was postponed
at the Parties’ request. On 11 March 2016, the Tribunal held its first session in London,
United Kingdom.

On 4 April 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 reflecting the Parties’
agreement and the Tribunal’s directions on procedural matters. Procedural Order No. 1
provides, inter alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from
10 April 2006, the procedural language would be English, and the place of proceeding
would be London, United Kingdom.

On 8 November 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 regarding the

Respondent’s representation by counsel in this arbitration proceeding.

On 12 August 2016, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits (“Claimant’s
Memorial”) together with Exhibits C-044 through C-076, Legal Authorities CL-004

through CL-040, and the following eight witness statements and one expert report:

e Witness Statement of Mr. Zhang Jinxun dated 12 August 2016;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Huang Kaibao dated July 2016;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Ji Qiuming dated 12 August 2016;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Ye Ruilin dated July 2016;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Sun Yifei dated 3 August 2016;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Guo Yongbin dated July 2016;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Liang Zhaolong dated July 2016;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Wang Zhiwen dated 12 August 2016; and

e Expert Report of Mr. Robert Chandler of Ernst & Young dated 12 August 2016 with
Appendices 001 through 062 and Exhibits EY-001 through EY-224.

On 14 October 2016, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, the Respondent filed its
Memorial on Jurisdiction (“Respondent’s Memorial’) together with Exhibits R-001

through R-037 and Legal Authorities RL-001 through RL-030.

On 29 November 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 modifying the

procedural calendar as agreed by the Parties.

On 4 January 2017, the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (“Claimant’s
Counter-Memorial”) together with Exhibits C-077 through C-093 and Legal Authorities
CL-041 through CL-087.

20.

21.

On 3 February 2017, the Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction (“Respondent’s
Reply”) together with Exhibits R-038 through R-050 and Legal Authorities RL-031
through RL-069.

On 3 March 2017, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction (“Claimant’s
Rejoinder”), together with Exhibits C-094 through C-096 and Legal Authorities CL-088
through CL-098.

HEARING ON JURISDICTION

On 8 March 2017, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing organizational meeting with the Parties

by telephone conference.

On 10 March 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 setting out arrangements
for the Hearing on Jurisdiction, which was held at the International Dispute Resolution
Centre in London, United Kingdom, from 15-16 March 2017 (the “Hearing”). In addition
to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the Tribunal, the following persons

were present at the Hearing:

For the Claimant:

Ms. Reza Mohtashami Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Mr. Sami Tannous Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Mr. Matei Purice Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Mr. Farouk El Housseny Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Ms. Ruba Ghandour Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Mr. David Merritt Hill International

For the Respondent:

Mr. Benjamin Knowles Clyde & Co LLP
Mr. Patrick Zheng Clyde & Co LLP
Mr. Ian Hopkinson Clyde & Co LLP
Ms. Milena Szuniewicz-Wenzel Clyde & Co LLP
Ms. Saadia Bhatty Clyde & Co LLP
Ms. Enas Al-Shaibi Clyde & Co LLP
Ms. Catherine Wang Clyde & Co LLP

22.

23.

24.

25.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Sana’a International Airport project (“Project”) was a multi-phase and multi-national
project to improve the facilities at the airport, funded by the Respondent and the Arab
Investment Fund.! Phase One of the Project commenced on 14 March 2002. Phase Two,
to which this dispute relates, commenced with the tender for selection of the construction

contractor for a new International Terminal Building, which was won by BUCG. ?

Accordingly, BUCG entered into a construction contract with the Yemen Civil Aviation
and Meteorology Authority (“CAMA”) on 28 February 2006 (“the Contract”) for
US$114,657,262.3

An external consultant, the Netherlands Airport Consultants B.V. (“NACO”), based in The
Hague, was engaged, inter alia, to assist CAMA with managing the administration of the
Contract including disputes concerning the pace and quality of work and the timing of

contractual payments, amongst other issues.

The Claimant alleges that in July 2009, the Respondent unlawfully deprived BUCG of its
investment in Yemen by employing the Respondent’s military forces and security
apparatus to assault and detain BUCG’s employees and forcibly deny BUCG access to the
Project site and thus its ability to perform its contractual obligations. On 22 July 2009, the
Claimant alleges, following weeks of state orchestrated harassment and intimidation,
CAMA gave notice of its intention to terminate the Contract on the basis of BUCG’s failure
to return to the site to complete the works. The Claimant says it was prevented from

performing the Contract by CAMA and the Respondent.

! See Loan Agreement between the Republic of Yemen Government and the Arab Fund for Economic and Social
Development dated 18 April 2001 (R-011).

2 See “Three in race for Sana’a airport,” Middle East Business Intelligence dated 30 September, 2015 (C-081): “The
field has narrowed to three bidders for the contract to build a third terminal at Sana’a International Airport. They are
Beijing Urban Construction Investment Development Company, which submitted a low bid of $114 million when
prices were opened in July, Saudi Binladin Group — which offered the second lowest price of $134 million but ranked
higher technically, and Turkey’s Alarco, which also scored well during technical evaluation.”

3 Contract between CAMA and BUCG dated 28 February 2006 (C-008/R-006).

-5-

26. BUCG states that, but for the Respondent’s denial of access to the site, it would have

completed the Contract and earned a profit.

27. The Respondent replies that BUCG failed in multiple respects to perform the Contract
satisfactorily — as set out in the “Employer’s Claim and Evaluation of the Contractor’s
Claim” dated February 2013,* and, e.g. the Engineer’s (NACO’s) “Report on Default of
Contractor: July 07 — December 08” — including unauthorized removal of materials from
the construction site, importation of equipment without customs authority, lengthy absence

from the site of key BUCG personnel and continuing problems with subcontractors.>
IV. THE JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

28. The Respondent contends that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks jurisdiction both ratione

personae and ratione materiae in the present case.°

4 CAMA Report, “Employers Claim and Evaluation of the Contractor’s Claim” dated February 2013 (R-001).

5 NACO Report, “Engineer’s Report on Default Contractor: July 07 — December 08” dated December 2008 (R-049).
© In its Memorial on Preliminary Objections, the Respondent requests the following relief:

“For the foregoing reasons, the Respondent respectfully requests that the Tribunal issue an award:

(a) dismissing the Claimant's claims in their entirety and with prejudice on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction;
and/or

(b) declaring that the Tribunal lacks rationae personae and / or rationae materiae jurisdiction in the present case;
and / or

(c) ordering the Claimant to pay:
(i) the costs incurred by the Respondent in presenting its jurisdictional defence, including the cost of the
Tribunal, ICSID and the legal and other costs incurred by the Respondent; and
(ii) interest on any costs awarded to the Respondent in an amount to be determined by the Tribunal; and / or
(d) awarding such further and other relief as the Tribunal may consider appropriate” (Resp. Mem., { 182).
In its Counter-Memorial, the Claimant seeks the following relief:

BUCG respectfully requests from the Tribunal the following relief in the form of a Decision on objections to
iction:

 

DISMISS all of the Respondent’s preliminary objections;
DECLARE that the dispute falls within the jurisdiction of ICSID and within the competence of the Tribunal; sand

ORDER the Respondent to pay the costs of the ing related to the *s
including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses, and the cost of BUCG’s legal representation” (C1.C-M, 4 148).

 

-6-

29.

30.

FIRST OBJECTION RATIONE PERSONAE - 1S THE CLAIMANT A “NATIONAL OF

ANOTHER CONTRACTING STATE”?
The Parties’ Positions
The Respondent’s Position

According to the Respondent, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over this dispute because
BUCG does not qualify as “a national of another Contracting State” under the ICSID
Convention Article 25(1). Employing the Broches test, the Respondent asserts that BUCG,
a State-owned entity, is both an agent of the Chinese Government and discharges
governmental functions even in its ostensible commercial undertakings. Accordingly,
BUCG does not qualify as a “national of another Contracting State.” Consequently, the
Respondent submits that BUCG’s claims should be barred, as the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction under ICSID Convention Article 25(1) over State-to-State disputes.”
Moreover, BUCG did not seek to have its rights protected or registered as an investment
under the law of Yemen at the time it entered into the Contract. Yemen contends that
registration was a condition precedent to the investment protection potentially available
under the China- Yemen BIT. Absence of such registration, according to Yemen, is fatal to

the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant counters that it is a “national of another Contracting State” under the ICSID
Convention, and it has standing to bring its claims against Yemen. The Claimant states that
State-owned entities may bring claims under the ICSID Convention when operating as
ordinary commercial entities. Applying the Broches test, the Claimant submits that in
respect of this project it did not act as an agent of the PRC Government nor discharge any
governmental functions in making its investment in Yemen. BUCG asserts it was acting in

a commercial capacity and did not act under the direction or control of the PRC

7 Resp. Mem., {if 33-57; Resp. Reply, {i 6-45.

Government in relation to the Sana’a Airport contract. Accordingly, BUCG is a “national

of another Contracting State” for the purposes of ICSID Convention Article 25(1).®
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis

31. It is common ground that Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is not a State-to-State
dispute resolution mechanism and is not open to State-owned companies as claimants when
acting as agents of the State or when engaged in activities where they exercise
governmental functions. It is common ground that in such circumstances State-owned
enterprises are barred from bringing a claim under Article 25(1).° In this respect, the
Respondent cites Article 5 of the International Law Commission’s Draft Articles on State
Responsibility:

The conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State under
article 4 but which is empowered by the law of that State to exercise
elements of the government authority shall be considered an act of the

State under international law, provided the person or entity is acting in
that capacity in the particular instance.'°

 

The Claimant contends that the emphasis should be on the words “in the particular

instance.”

32. The Tribunal accepts that BUCG is a publicly funded and wholly state-owned entity
established by the Chinese Government. It described itself in the bidder qualification

documents as “one of the top 500 state-owned enterprises” in China.!!

* C1. C-M, {i 20-42; Cl. Rej., $M 9-40.

° Article 25(1) provides in pertinent part: “[T]he jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting
State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw
its consent unilaterally” (emphasis added).

 

© International Law Commission, Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, Art. 5
(emphasis added) (CL-014).
"| BUCG, Qualification for New Terminal Building (TB) at Sana’a International Airport, 2 (R-013).

-8-

33. Both Parties accept as applicable the functional test formulated in 1972 by Aron Broches,
the first Secretary-General of ICSID and one of the principal drafters of the ICSID

Convention, which he framed as follows:

[I]n today’s world the classical distinction between private and public
investment, based on the source of the capital, is no longer meaningful, if
not outdated. There are many companies which combine capital from
private and governmental sources and corporations all of whose shares are
owned by the government, but who are practically indistinguishable from
the completely privately owned enterprise both in their legal
characteristics and in their activities. It would seem, therefore, that for
purposes of the Convention a mixed economy company or government-
owned corporation should not be disqualified as a ‘national of another
Contracting State’ unle: is acting as an agent for the government or
is discharging an essentially governmental function.'? (Emphasis
added)

 

The Tribunal notes the disjunctive “or” in the concluding sentence.

34. The Broches factors are the mirror image of the attribution rules in Articles 5 and 8 of the
ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility. The Broches test lays down markers for the non-

attribution of State status.

35. The Broches test was adopted and applied in Ceskoslovenska Obchodini Banka, A.S. v. The
Slovak Republic (““CSOB’’) as follows:

[I]t cannot be denied that for much of its existence, CSOB acted on behalf
of the State in facilitating or executing the international banking
transactions and foreign commercial operations the State wished to
support and that the State’s control of CSOB required it to do the State’s
bidding in that regard. But in determining whether CSOB, in
discharging these functions, exercised governmental functions, the
focus must be on the nature of these activities and not their purpose.
While it cannot be doubted that in performing the above-mentioned
activities, CSOB was promoting the governmental policies or purposes of
the State, the activi themselves were essentially commercial rather
than governmental in nature."

 

"2C, Schreuer, L. Malintoppi, A. Reinisch and A. Sinclair, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2™ edition, 2009),
161 (RL-003) (emphasis added).

8 Ceskoslovenska Obchodini Banka A.S, v. The Slovak Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on Objections
to Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999 (CL-053), | 20 (emphasis added). See also Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of

-9-

In the result, having regard to the particular facts of the case, CSOB was permitted access
to ICSID. The Respondent argues that the CSOB tribunal misapplied the Broches test,'*
but in the view of the present Tribunal the important point about the CSOB case is the focus
on a context-specific analysis of the commercial function of the investment, a focus with

which the present Tribunal agrees.

36. The Tribunal will examine in turn how each branch of the Broches criteria applies to the

circumstances of this case.

@) Was BUCG Acting on the Project as an Agent for the Chinese Government?

37. The Respondent relies on a variety of Chinese Government publications and directives to
demonstrate that in general BUCG is expected to advance China’s national interest. For
example, BUCG was subject to the overall direction of a Board that was the “representative
of the state interests and the operation decision making organ, which should be responsible
for the value maintenance and increment of the state-owned assets within the scope of
authorisation.” > Similarly, a PRC document entitled Reply to authorise BUCG to operate
and manage the State-owned Assets dated 23 May 1995 emphasises that BUCG shall

“accept the supervision and inspection of Beijing State-owned Assets Supervision and

Administration Bureau and Beijing Finance Bureau.”!®

38. The Respondent relies on evidence that the Communist Party committees in State-owned

enterprises such as BUCG are required to focus not only on supervising human resources,

Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 25 January 2000 (CL-011, “Maffezini”), 1
80 and Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID
Case No. ARB/05/16, Award, 29 July 2008 (CL-067), {| 212.

'4 Resp. Reply, {| 13: “Two criticisms in particular have been levelled at the [CSOB] Tribunal. The first is that the
Tribunal concluded that CSOB was an investor under the ICSID Convention despite finding that it had acted as a state
agent — the first prong of the Broches Test. Second, the Tribunal failed to take into account the real purpose of CSOB’s
activities in determining whether CSOB was performing governmental functions, focusing instead only on the nature
of its activities.” See M. Feldman, State-Owned Enterprises as Claims in International Investment Arbitration, ICSID
Review, Vol. 31, No. 1 (2016) (RL-004) at 628-630.

15 Resp. Mem. {| 47, citing Reply to authorise Beijing Urban Construction Group General Company to operate and
manage the State-owned Assets belonging [to] the relevant Group Entities dated 27 March 1995 (R-020). The
Respondent also relies upon R-013, indicating BUCG’s “Business Scope” as “[aluthorized to undertake the operation
and management of government assets” and BUCG’s Business License dated 10 September 2014 specifying that
BUGG is “[a]uthorized to carry out operations and administration of state-owned assets” (C-007).

16 R-020.

  

-10-

finance and materials but are as well responsible for “monitoring the implementation of the
scientific concepts of development and national policies, to promote enterprises to play a
leading role in carrying out political and social responsibility.”!’ In this respect, the
Respondent cites the statement in Maffezini v. Spain, that:

the test that has been developed [to establish whether a particular entity in

a state body] looks to various factors, such as ownership, control, the

nature, purposes and objectives of the entity whose actions are under

scrutiny, and to the character of the actions taken.'*

39. These corporate controls and mechanisms are not surprising in the context of PRC State-
owned corporations. However, as noted above, the issue is not the corporate framework of
the State-owned enterprise, but whether it functions as an agent of the State in the fact-
specific context.'? The evidence in this case does not establish that, in building an airport
terminal in Yemen, BUCG was acting as an agent of the Chinese State in any relevant

sense of the word “agent.”

40. On the contrary, the evidentiary record discloses that BUCG participated in the airport
project as a general contractor following an open tender in competition with other
contractors. Its bid was selected on its commercial merits. Its contract was terminated,
Yemen contends, not for any reason associated with the PRC’s decisions or policies but
because of BUCG’s failure to perform its commercial services on the airport site to a
commercially acceptable standard. Indeed, as will be seen, the Respondent elsewhere takes
the position that the present dispute is not a treaty case at all but an ordinary garden variety
commercial dispute which should be resolved under the Dispute Settlement Provisions of

Article 67 of the Construction Contract.”°

 

17 Resp. Reply, [ 44 (emphasis in original).

'8 Resp. Reply { 16, citing CL-011, Maffezini, | 76 (emphasis added by the Respondent).

19 See Articles of Association of Beijing Urban Construction Group Co., Ltd. dated 24 August 2005 (C-080), Arts. 6
and 7. In particular, Article 7 reads: “The Company is entitled to all corporate property rights formed by the investor
and lawful civil rights as well as civil liabilities; the Company independently operates, assumes sole responsibility for
profits and losses, performs independent accounting, pays taxes in accordance with the regulations, and assumes
liability for debts of the Company with all its assets.
20 See Sec. IV.E.

 

 

 

-ll-

Al.

42.

43.

In the Tribunal’s view, the evidence establishes that BUCG was performing its work on
the airport site under a construction contract as a commercial contractor and not as an agent

of the Chinese Government.

(ii) Was BUCG in its Work on the Airport Terminal Discharging an Essentially
Governmental Function?

The Respondent’s second ground for denying jurisdiction ratione personae fails for
essentially the same reasons as its “agency” argument. The Respondent’s positioning of
BUCG in the broad context of the PRC State-controlled economy is convincing but largely
irrelevant. As noted above, the appropriate focus is on the functions of BUCG “‘in the
particular instance”, namely the Sana’a International Terminal project. There is no
evidence that in that capacity BUCG was discharging a PRC governmental function rather

than a commercial function.”!

For example, in support of its “government functions” argument, the Respondent refers to
a statement from the PRC Foreign Economic and Trading Department that the foreign
business undertaken by BUCG “shall be administered, coordinated and regulated by [the

Foreign Economic and Trading] Department.”??

Accordingly, the Respondent contends,
“the Chinese State is the ultimate decision maker for key management, operational and
strategic decisions.””° In the Tribunal’s view, the assertion that “the Chinese State is the
ultimate decision maker” for BUCG is too remote from the facts of the Sana’a
International Airport project to be relevant. BUCG was clearly not exercising a Chinese
governmental function on the airport site in Yemen. The alleged military aggression was
not by Yemen against the People’s Republic of China (or the consequences might have
been more severe) but in relation to BUCG as an airport contractor that, CAMA alleges,

fell down on the job.

2! See CL-073, {| 243: “The concept of ‘agency’ should be read not in structural terms but functionally. This means
that whether the ‘agency’ is a corporation, whether and to what extent it is government-owned and whether it has
separate legal personality are of secondary importance. What matters is that it performs public functions on behalf of

the Contracting State or one of its constituent subdivisio1

 

* PRC Foreign Economic and Trading Department, Reply on Approving Beijing Urban Construction Group General
Company to Undertake Foreign Economic and Technological Cooperation Business, W.J.M.Z.S.H.Z. [1994]
No. 1859 dated 17 December 1994 (R-016).

23 Resp. Mem., | 44 (emphasis added).

-12-

44.

4S.

46.

47.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that on the evidence, BUCG was not fulfilling

Chinese governmental functions within the sovereign territory of the Republic of Yemen.

(iii) | Was BUCG Required to Register its Investment in Yemen?

As to BUCG’s alleged failure to register its investment under domestic Yemeni law, there
is no express provision of the China-Yemen BIT that imposes a requirement to obtain
registration for an investment to be protected by the BIT. Some investment treaties do have
such a requirement and that requirement has been characterised as a condition precedent
for treaty protection.“* But no such requirement can be inferred in the absence of an

express provision.

The registration requirement under the Yemen Investment Law is the gateway to the
privileges and protections set out in that law. But it does not serve as the gateway to the
privileges and protections maintained by the China-Yemen BIT. The Tribunal thus agrees
with the ICSID Tribunal in Desert Line v. Yemen:

The Arbitral Tribunal does not accept that a particular certificate from the

Yemen General Investment Authority was necessary to bring the
Claimant’s investment under the Ambit of the BIT.

The [Yemeni Investment Law] does not purport to regulate all investments
in Yemen, but only those whose promoters wish to benefit by license from
its specific advantages, which are not coterminous with those in the BIT.**

The Respondent’s objections ratione personae are therefore dismissed.

» See Philippe Gruslin v. Malaysia, ICSID Case No ARB/99/3, Award, 27 November 2000 (CL-054).

°5 Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award, 6 February 2008 (CL-029),
GH 116, 121.

-13-

B. SECOND OBJECTION RATIONE MATERIAE - YEMEN CONTENDS THAT IT CONSENTED TO
ICSID ARBITRATION ONLY IN RESPECT OF DISPUTES LIMITED TO THE
QUANTUM OF COMPENSATION

qd) The Parties’ Positions
a. The Respondent’s Position

48. The Respondent contends that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae over this
claim as the conditions to Yemen’s consent under the China-Yemen BIT and the ICSID

Convention have not been satisfied.
49. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the
Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which
the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.
When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its
consent unilaterally.?°

50. At the heart of the Respondent’s objection in this respect is Article 10 of the BIT, which
sets out a scheme providing options “‘at the choice of the investor” for the resolution of

investment disputes as follows:

1. Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of the
other Contracting Party relating to an investment shall, as far as
possible, be settled amicably through deliberations and negotiations
between the parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot be resolved by the parties through direct
arrangements for amicable negotiations within six months from the
date on which a request for settlement is submitted in writing, such
dispute may be submitted at the choice of the investor to:

(a) a competent court of the Contracting Party in the territory of
which the investment has been made; or

2 ICSID Convention, Art. 25(1) (emphasis added).

-14-

(b) the International Centre for the Settlement of Disputes
(ICSID) which was established by the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals
of Other States opened for signature at Washington DC on March
18, 1965, for arbitration.

For this purpose, either Contracting Party shall give its irrevocable
consent to the submission of any dispute relating to the amount of
compensation for expropriation for resolution under such arbitration
procedure. Other disputes submitted under such procedure shall be
mutually agreed upon between both Contracting parties.

3. No Contracting Party, being a party to a dispute, may raise any
objection at any stage of the arbitration proceedings or during the
course of the enforcement of an arbitral award on the ground that the
investor, being the other party to the dispute, can receive
compensation that covers all or part of its losses in accordance with an
insurance policy.

4. The arbitral tribunal shall render its awards in accordance with the
domestic laws (including rules relating to the conflict of laws) of the
Contracting Party which is a party to the dispute and which accepts an
investment, the provisions of this Agreement, the provisions of any
special agreements entered into for the purpose of such investment
and principles of international law.

5. The arbitral awards shall be final and binding upon both Contracting
Parties. Each Contracting Party undertakes to enforce such awards in
accordance with its domestic laws.”’

51. The Respondent submits that the reference to “the amount of compensation for
expropriation” in Paragraph 2 are clear words of limitation that apply to the whole of
Article 10. The Contracting Parties gave consent, the Respondent argues, to submit an
expropriation dispute to an ICSID tribunal pursuant to Article 10.2 only as to the
calculations of “the amount of compensation.” According to the Respondent, this
conclusion follows from the rules of interpretation laid down in the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties (“VCLT”) and is supported by the wording and context of Article 10
and the object and purpose of the BIT, as well as the historical and political circumstances

surrounding the conclusion of the Treaty. The Respondent notes that a contrary conclusion

2 CL-001 (Revised), BIT, Art. 10 (emphasis added).

-15-

52.

53.

54.

was reached by the ICSID tribunal in Tza Yap Shum v. Peru,?® but contends that Tza Yap

Shum was wrongly decided and should not be followed.

The Respondent argues, therefore, that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the
requirement of consent in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention (“consent in writing”) to
arbitration of the claims made by the Claimant is not satisfied by Article 10 of the China-

Yemen BIT.”
The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant, relying on a revised unofficial English text of the China-Yemen BIT,*°
submits that the “narrow interpretation” given by the Respondent to Article 10 is
misconceived. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over BUCG’s expropriation claim because
Article 10.2 extends to liability as well as the calculation of compensation. The existence
and unlawfulness of an expropriatory act is a necessary condition precedent to, and
inseparable from, any assessment of the amount of compensation payable. This “broad”
interpretation of Article 10.2 is, according to the Claimant, consistent with the ordinary
meaning of Article 10.2 interpreted in light of the object and purpose of the China-Yemen
BIT. As in its view the meaning of Article 10.2 of the China-Yemen BIT is clear, the
Claimant says there is no need to resort to supplementary means of interpretation under
VCLT Article 32. 3! In any event, the application of Article 32 would lead to the same

result.
The Tribunal’s Analysis

Article 31(1) of the VCLT instructs the Tribunal to look to the text, context and both the
object and purpose of the Treaty to ascertain its correct meaning, in conjunction with the

other elements set out in subsections (2), (3) and (4) of Article 31. Reference is permitted

°8 Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6, Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, 19 June
2009 (CL-033, “Tza Yap Shum”).

2° Resp. Mem., {ff 58-101. Resp. Reply, {if 46-109.
3 CL-001 (Revised), BIT.
5! CL. C-M, 991 88-130; Cl. Rej., MH 41-88.

-16-

to be made to “supplementary means” under Article 32 only where the meaning derived
under Article 31 is otherwise ambiguous, obscure, manifestly unreasonable or absurd.*? As
will be seen, the Tribunal does not consider it necessary in this case to resort to the

“supplementary means” referenced in Article 32.
a. “Lawful” Versus “Unlawful” Expropriations

55. Much of the argument about Article 10 turns on its relationship with Article 4 of the BIT
which provides that “nationalization, expropriation, or any other measures having a similar
effect” will not violate the BIT provided that four stated conditions are satisfied; namely,
that the expropriation is: (i) in the public interest of the contracting state; (ii) done by means
of a “legal procedure”; (iii) without discrimination; and (iv) “against compensation”. A
forcible taking by the state that fails any one of the four conditions will constitute a

violation of the treaty.**

* VCLT (RL-001), Arts. 31 and 32 provide as follows:
“Article 31. General Rule of Interpretation
1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context and in light of its object and purpose.
2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its
preamble and annexes:
(a) Any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties in connection with the conclusion
of the treaty;
(b) Any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty and
accepted by the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

w

. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:
(a) Any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its
provisions;
(b) Any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of the parties regarding
its interpretation;
(c) Any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties.
4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended.
Article 32. Supplementary Means of Interpretation
Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and the
circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to
determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:

(a) Leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or
(b) Leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”
3 CL-001 (Revised), BIT, Art. 4 provides:

-17-

56. In the course of the Hearing, the Respondent insisted on a distinction between lawful
expropriations and unlawful expropriations, and submitted that “unlawful” expropriations

of investments would receive no protection from the BIT.**

57. In this case, the Claimant alleges that it was forced off the worksite in July 2009 by the
Yemini military forces at the airport. There is no doubt that Article 4 requires the Tribunal
to consider the domestic law of Yemen as part of its consideration of whether the alleged
expropriation is compliant with the Treaty. However, the Tribunal was not referred to any
domestic Yemen law authorizing military intervention under the circumstances. Nor was
any compensation offered to BUCG. On the contrary, the Respondent’s position is that

there was no investment and no taking and that no compensation was or is payable.

58. If BUCG establishes the factual elements of its claim, the question will simply be whether
the alleged expropriation, if it occurred, complied with the Treaty. The expropriation
analysis in this case turns on whether there was a “taking” of “an investment” and if so,
whether the taking was done in compliance with Article 4. If the Respondent is correct that
Article 10 deals only with “lawful” expropriations, the consequence would be that the more

egregious a State’s misconduct, the less protection would be available to a foreign investor

“Article 4 Expropriation and Compensation
1. Any measures of nationalization, expropriation, or any other measures having a similar effect or of a similar
nature (hereinafter referred to as ‘expropriation’) against the investments of investors of the other Contracting
Party which might be taken by a Contracting Party shall satisfy all the following conditions:

 

(a) for the public interests;
(b)_ by legal procedur

 

(c) without discrimination;
(d) against compensation.

2. The compensation mentioned in item (d) of Paragraph | of this Article shall be equivalent to the market value
of the investments expropriated immediately before the time when the expropriation takes place or is known to
the public.

3. The determination and payment of compensation shall be made promptly without undue delay. Compensation
shall be paid to investors by means of a convertible currency, and be freely transferable” (emphasis added).

The argument was advanced by Mr. Patrick Zheng (who appeared as one of the Respondent’s Counsel). Mr. Zheng

advised the Tribunal that the same Chinese character translated as “expropriation” in Article 10 is used in Article 4

dealing with “expropriation and compensation”. Having established a linguistic link between Articles 4 and 10, the

Respondent contends that Article 10 is limited to disputes that purport to be “lawful expropriation” under Article 4

but to which an investor objects to non-fulfillment of the Article 4 conditions. See Tr. Day 1, Mr. Patrick Zheng, 112

et seq.

 

- 18 -

59.

60.

61.

62.

under the BIT; a conclusion that is hardly compatible with the “object and purpose” of the

BIT itself, which seeks to encourage the flow of foreign investment.
The “Narrow” Versus the “Broad” Interpretation of the Text of Article 10

Both Parties characterized their opposing interpretations of Article 10 as the Respondent’s
“narrow” interpretation versus the Claimant’s “broad” interpretation of the words “any

dispute relating to the amount of compensation for expropriation.”

The Respondent takes the view that the expression “the amount of compensation for
expropriation” refers to quantum simpliciter. For this purpose, quantum is wholly divorced
from liability. As the Respondent observes, “on the one hand the existence, and lawfulness
of expropriation and on the other hand, the amount of compensation for expropriation are

different and separate legal disputes subject to different legal tests.”*°

The consequence of the “narrow” interpretation is that, if liability is not conceded by the
State, or if an investor wishes to complain about anything other than the State’s monetary

assessment of its alleged loss, ICSID has no jurisdiction.

In these circumstances, counsel for the Respondent indicated to the Tribunal in the course

of argument that the Claimant would have the following options:

In terms of the options for dealing with the issue of liability, it is always
open to the claimant in any event to sue the government, if it chooses, in
its host state...

The other option they would have in terms of our argument, which is that
liability has to be determined separately and naturally prior, is that it would
be open to them to run a contractual arbitration and, in the event that
contractual arbitration established some sort of liability, which liability
fitted within the treaty, then they would be able to bring that finding from
the first arbitration in order to try to get jurisdiction here.

So if they can say that - - if a Tribunal determined, if a contractual Tribunal
determined, as it might do - - it might not, it might do - - that there had
been expropriation, for example, then they could bring that to this

35 Resp. Reply. | 66.

-19-

63.

64.

65.

Tribunal, but the natural way in which they would do it would be to go to

court in Yemen.*°
The Claimant rejects the “narrow” interpretation and contends that the Contracting Party
intended to give investors a real “choice” between recourse to a Yemeni court or to an
ICSID tribunal, as explicitly promised by the language of Article 10. In the Claimant’s
view, the words “relating to the amount of compensation” are sufficient to grant an ICSID
tribunal jurisdiction over liability as well as the calculation of compensation. Liability
“relates” to quantum because without liability there can be no quantum. The two issues are

logically integrated and inseparable.

@) The Text of Article 10

It should be emphasized at this point that the only authentic texts of the China- Yemen BIT
are in Chinese and Arabic. While the Claimant provided the Tribunal with two successive
English translations (CL-001 and CL-001 Revised),*” the translation was “unofficial” and
elements of it are disputed. Indeed, the Respondent states that the English text of the Treaty
is “not relevant at all,” but that is the only text accessible to this Tribunal.** In discussing
the terms of the Treaty in English translation, the Tribunal will use the text of CL-001

Revised unless otherwise indicated.

There is, of course, some irony in having English speaking lawyers making detailed and
nuanced arguments dissecting an English text when the text itself has no official status
whatsoever. The dissection focused on the words “relating to” the amount of compensation
for expropriation. Learned argument was presented as to whether the words “relating to”
constituted an overly broad interpretation of the Chinese character #7 %¢ (“You Guan”). In
the view of the Claimant, the Chinese character has a broad meaning equivalent to
“involving” or “concerning” or “relating to”. The definition of “You Guan” in the Oxford

Chinese Dictionary is very broad:

% Tr., Day 1, Mr. Benjamin Knowles, 87-88.
57 See discussion in Tr., Day 1, Mr. Benjamin Knowles, 82-83.
38 Resp. Reply, 52

- 20 -

66.

67.

68.

69.

[H]ave something to do with: [for example] The disease might have

something to do with smoking.”
As “the amount of compensation” bears a necessary relationship to liability, or at least has
“something to do with it”, the Claimant says the words “relating to” are necessarily broad

enough to support the jurisdiction of an ICSID Tribunal over questions of liability.

The Respondent, on the other hand, says that if such a broad meaning had been intended,
the parties would have used the Chinese character }/# (“She Ji”) in place of “You Guan”.
In response, the Claimant referred to a number of BITs entered into with the PRC, including
the PRC’s BITs with Denmark, Argentina, the United Kingdom, Hungary, Bulgaria,
Guyana, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Malaga and Lithuania, in which the Chinese
character “You Guan” was variously interpreted in an official English version (i.e. not just

an unofficial translation) as “involving” or “concerning” or “relating to”.

The Claimant further points out that the Arabic equivalent to “You Guan” is translated in
an authoritative Arabic-English dictionary as “to pertain to, belong to, relate to, be related
to, concerned, be connected with”, all of which would favour the broad construction

contended for by the Claimant.”

In the Tribunal’s view, it is not realistic to regard as dispositive the textual arguments
relating to an unofficial English translation of Chinese or Arabic characters where, as here,
the Respondent does not dispute the Arabic translation, and the Chinese characters of “You
Guan” and “She Ji’, contrary to the Respondent’s position, appear to be used more or less

interchangeably in treaty texts entered into by the PRC to which the Tribunal was referred.

The real question is whether even accepting as correct the “broad” interpretation of the
words “relating to the amount of compensation”, the text of Article 10.2 is broad enough
to support ICSID jurisdiction in respect of liability as well as quantum, a question which
requires the Tribunal to examine the structure and context of Article 10 in which the

disputed words appear.

8° Oxford Chinese Dictionary (C-089), 911
“0M. Baalbaki and R. Baalbaki, Al-Mawrid Al-Waseet Concise Dictionary: Arabic-English, 325 (C-093).

-21-

70. The opening text of Paragraphs | and 2 of Article 10 is very broad. The opening language

is repeated here for ease of reference:

1. Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of
the other Contracting Party relating to an investment shall, as far
as possible, be settled amicably through deliberations and
negotiations between the parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot be resolved by the parties through direct
arrangements for amicable negotiations within six months from
the date on which a request for settlement is submitted in
writing, such dispute may be submitted at the choice of the
investor to:

(a) a competent court of the Contracting Party in the territory
of which the investment has been made; or

(b) the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID) which was established by the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and Nationals of Other States opened for
signature at Washington DC on March 18, 1965, for
arbitration.“!

71. Notwithstanding the Respondent’s submissions to the contrary,*? the word “or” at the
conclusion of paragraph 2(a) of Article 10 clearly indicates a fork in the road. Confronted
with an unresolved “legal dispute”, Article 10.2 purports to grant an investor the choice
between taking its dispute to a competent court of the Contracting Party, in this case

Yemen, or to ICSID arbitration, but not both.

72. In the English text, the words “any disputes” are followed in paragraph 2 by reference to
“the dispute” followed by the fork in the road. According to orthodox principles of treaty
interpretation, both of the investor’s options must be given meaning and substance. The
principle of effet utile or “effective interpretation” requires that international agreements

be interpreted “‘so as to give them their fullest weight and effect consistent with the normal

+1 CL-001 (Revised), BIT, Art. 10.1, 10.2 (emphasis added).
*2 See Resp. Reply, | 68

-22-

sense of the words and with other parts of the text and in such a way that a reason and
meaning can be attributed to every part of the text.”*? An interpretation that nullifies either

of the choices granted to the investor is to be avoided.

723. The broad scope of the terms in Article 10 was confirmed by Mr. Patrick Zheng, a Chinese-
speaking counsel for the Respondent, who advised the Tribunal that in the Chinese text the
identical character is used for “all disputes” and “the dispute”. In his view, this Chinese
character would more precisely be rendered in English simply as “legal dispute”. In the
view of the Tribunal, the term “legal dispute”, taken in isolation, is a term broad enough to

include both liability and guantum.

(ii) — The Proviso

74. The fork in the road (“or”) is followed by the contentious language at the conclusion of

paragraph 2 which is central to the jurisdictional objection, namely:

For this purpose, either Contracting Party shall give its irrevocable
consent to the submission of any dispute relating to the amount of
compensation for expropriation for resolution under such arbitration
procedure. Other disputes submitted under such procedure shall be
mutually agreed upon between both Contracting parties.**

For convenience this concluding language will be called the “proviso” in this ruling.

75. Taken in isolation, the words that the Contracting Parties “irrevocably” consent to the
submission “of any dispute relating to the amount of compensation’ is open to several
interpretations. It could be argued to broaden the investor’s protection by making the

Contracting Parties’ consent to an ICSID arbitration, at least in relation to quantum, beyond

43 See, for example, the report of the Claimant’s argument in respect of the China-Laos BIT before the Singapore
Court of Appeal in Sanum v. Laos: “Sanum contends that if the submission of the Lao Government is correct and if
an investor must first go to a competent national court to determine whether an impermi le expropriation has
occurred (on the basis of the Narrow Interpretation of Art 8(3)), it would very likely find itself precluded from then
submitting any dispute, on the amount of compensation it claims is due to it, to arbitration since the national court
would already have determined the issue of compensation. This would render Art 8(3) wholly ineffective since,
practically speaking, investors would never be able to bring a dispute to investor-state arbitration under the PRC-Laos
BIT” (Sanum Investments Limited v. Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, [2016] SGCA 57,
Judgment, 29 September 2016 (CL-086, “Sanum”), 128).

“Tr. Day 2, Mr. Patrick Zheng, 308:6-18.

45 CL-001 (Revised), BIT, Art. 10.2 (emphasis added).

  
 

    

 

 

-23-

76.

77.

recall. In other words, arguendo, the proviso could be read in its English translation not to
limit the “choice of the investor” to choose either a Yemeni court or ICSID arbitration but
to enhance protection by assuring investors that whatever be the fate of the remaining
provisions of the Treaty, the consent to jurisdiction over “the amount of compensation” is

irrevocable.

The Respondent contends that the proviso should be read as a limitation on the opening
language of paragraphs 1 and 2. On this reading, the fork in the road leading to ICSID
arbitration is limited to the calculation of compensation for an admitted liability. On the
other hand, the Claimant relies on the ICSID tribunal’s ruling concerning a similarly

worded BIT in Tza Yap Shum*® for the opposite conclusion, as follows:

The Tribunal first refers to the specific wording used by Article 8(3). The
BIT uses the word “involving” which, according to the Oxford Dictionary
means “to enfold, envelope, entangle, include.” A bona fide interpretation
of these words indicate that the only requirement established in the BIT is
that the dispute must “include” the determination of the amount of a
compensation, and not that the dispute must be restricted thereto.
Obviously, other wording was available, such as “limited to” or
“exclusively”, but the wording used in this provision reads “involving.””

The Tribunal concludes, as did a five judge panel of the Singapore Court of Appeal with
respect to another similarly worded BIT in Sanum v. Laos, that the “ordinary meaning” and
scope of the words “amount of compensation” is not conclusive either in favour of the

“broad” interpretation or the “narrow” interpretation.** The task of interpretation therefore

moves to context, object and purpose.

47 CL-033, Tza Yap Shum, J 151.

47 CL-033, Tza Yap Shum, J 151.

48 The Singapore Court of Appeal in Sanum held (i) that the text of the China-Laos BIT, which contained language
similar to the China-Yemen BIT, did not itself resolve the problem of interpretation, but (ii) nevertheless an official
English version that used the word “involving” did not require the narrow interpretation: “With great respect to the
parties, we think the word ‘involve’ is certainly capable of supporting either of the Broad or Narrow Interpretations
and to cavil over the possible dictionary definitions of the word ‘involve’ will not help us interpret Art 8(3) of the
PRC-Laos BIT. Rather, the words in Art 8(3) can only be accurately, and more meaningfully, understood by
considering the context of the provision and it is to this which we now turn” (CL-086, Sanum, J 126).

-24-

c The Context of Article 10

78. When the proviso is read in the context of Article 10 as a whole, and Article 10 is read in
the context of the China-Yemen BIT as a whole, the real issues are brought into sharper
focus. The Respondent’s “narrow” interpretation leads to an internal contradiction,
whereas the Claimant’s “broad” interpretation does not. The “broad” interpretation
advances the object and purpose of the BIT. The Respondent’s “narrow” interpretation

does not.

79. The effect of the “narrow” interpretation, according to the Respondent, is that a claimant
who seeks compensation for an alleged expropriation does not have a choice (despite the
express text in Article 10.2) but must go to the “competent court of the Contracting Party”
unless the Respondent concedes liability. If the Respondent does not concede liability, the

investor’s only recourse is to the courts of Yemen.*”

80. Yemen’s interpretation therefore creates an internal contradiction whereby the Respondent
controls access to the ICSID tribunal even though Article 10 itself states that the choice
between the competent court of Yemen and the ICSID tribunal shall be “at the choice of

the investor.”

81. On the Respondent’s interpretation, Yemen can unilaterally deny a claimant access to an
ICSID tribunal simply by refusing to admit some aspect of liability. If Yemen puts in doubt
the alleged expropriation, the claim must go to the courts of Yemen for determination.*°

However, by reason of Article 4, the Yemeni court would not be able to determine the

*° Tt will be noted that Article 10 paragraph 4 provides for the sources of law to be applied by the Arbitral Tribunal
but is silent on the sources law to be applied by the “competent court of the Contracting Party.”

°0 The Respondent states that in light of the hostilities in Yemen, it has been unable to collect accurate information
about how a Yemeni court of competent jurisdiction would approach the issue of expropriation. As a result, and
without objection on the part of the Claimant, the Respondent developed its argument in this respect by reference to
the applicable laws of China and in particular a codification of Chinese Administrative Law adopted by the 7" National
People’s Congress on 4 April 1989 with effect from October 1, 1990 in respect of which Mr. Patrick Zheng, one of
the counsel appearing for the Respondent, made helpful submissions.

Article 70 of the Chinese law states that “this law shall be applicable to foreign nationals, stateless persons and foreign
organizations...” as well as Chinese nationals. However, Article 72 provides that “if an international treaty concluded
by the [PRC] contains provisions different from those found in [Chinese administrative] law, the provisions of the
international treaty shall apply” (see Tr. Day 2, Mr. Benjamin Knowles, 297:5 et seq.).

-25-

question of expropriation without addressing each of the four conditions listed in Article 4,
including whether effective and appropriate compensation has been paid. The Respondent

agrees that such is the mandate of the Yemeni court. It submits that:

Pursuant to Article 4.4 of the China-Yemen BIT, expropriation is
permitted if it is “against compensation”, which not only includes potential
issues as to the amount of compensation, but also the means of such
compensation and/or whether any compensation has been paid at all. In
contrast, Article 10.2 specifically limits the Tribunal’s scope of
jurisdiction to “the amount of compensation.”>!

However, having regard to the fork in the road, and the issue of guantum having then been
decided by the courts of Yemen, the investor would be precluded from an ICSID arbitration

to re-litigate the amount of compensation.

82. As pointed out by the Renta 4 tribunal, such a process fuels “a central concern of investors

who are averse to allowing the host State to act as judge and party in measuring the

monetary extent of its own liability.”*?

83. In this situation, the ICSID tribunal in Tza Yap Shum interpreted the fork in the road
provision on the China-Peru BIT to necessitate an interpretation of the equivalent provision
to Article 10 to grant to the ICSID tribunal full jurisdiction over the issue of liability as

well as quantum:

The Tribunal concludes that to give meaning to all the elements of the
article, it must be interpreted that the words “involving the amount of
compensation for expropriation” includes not only the mere
determination of the amount but also any other issues normally inherent to
an expropriation, including whether the property was actually
expropriated in accordance with the BIT provisions and requirements, as
well as the determination of the amount of compensation due, if any. In
the opinion of the Tribunal, a contrary conclusion would invalidate
the provision related to ICSID arbitration since according to the final
sentence of Article 8(3), turning to the courts of the State accepting the
investment would preclude definitely the possibility of choosing
arbitration under the ICSID Convention. Consequently, since the
Claimant has filed a prime facie claim of expropriation, the Tribunal,

51 Resp. Reply, 77.
52 Renta 4 S.V.S.A. et al v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V 024/2007, Award on Preliminary Objections,
20 March 2009 (CL-032, “Renta 4”), 4 33.

- 26 -

pursuant to Articles 25 and 41 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 41 of
the Arbitration Rules, considers that it is competent to decide on the
merits of the expropriation claim filed by Claimant.**
84. The result of the Respondent’s argument would be that the “choice” granted to an investor
by paragraph 2 would be reversed by the proviso into a “choice” granted to the Respondent.
The Tribunal agrees with the Tza Yap Shum tribunal that the interpretation urged by the
Respondent “would lead to an untenable conclusion, namely, that the investor would never

actually have access to arbitration” unless the Respondent agreed.**

85. Further, the concluding words of the proviso require the agreement of both parties to an ad
hoc arbitration for “other disputes.” Yet under the Respondent’s argument, the State must

not only give its ad hoc agreement to arbitrate “other disputes” but, in effect, “all disputes.”

86. The Singapore Court of Appeal in Sanum vy. Laos, in its analysis of the China-Laos BIT,*°
concluded that the “fork in the road” provision would, if Article 10.2 were “narrowly”

interpreted, effectively deprive the investor of both choice and protection:

 

...it is entirely open to the host State to avoid arbitration over the amount
of compensation for indirect expropriation simply by not submitting the
dispute on liability to its municipal courts. [...] In such cases, the investor
would then be compelled to bring a claim to a national court for a ruling
that the host State had committed an expropriatory act but in so doing, it
may be barred from bringing a dispute on compensation to arbitration. It
should also be added that even in the rare cases of direct expropriation,
host States would be in a position effectively to avoid arbitration by simply
denying that they had engaged in expropriatory acts. [...] This would once

53 CL-033, Tza Yap Shum, J 188 (emphasis added). The decision was upheld in Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru,

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6, Decision on Annulment, 12 February 2015 (CL-082).

4 CL-033, Tza Yap Shum, J 154.

55 See CL-086, Sanum, J 123. Article 8 of the China-Laos BIT reads:

“Article 8

lL Led

2. If the dispute cannot be settled through negotiation within six months, either party to the dispute shall be entitled
to submit the dispute to the competent court of the Contracting State accepting the investment.

3. Ifa dispute involving the amount of compensation for expropriation cannot be settled through negotiation
within six months as specified in paragraph | of this Article, it may be submitted at the request of either party to
an ad hoc arbitral tribunal. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply if the investor concerned has resorted
to the procedure specified in the paragraph 2 of this Article” (emphasis added).

-27-

again compel the investor to resort to the national courts, thereby barring
acclaim in arbitration.*°

87. Accordingly, the consideration of the disputed text in the context of the whole structure of
Article 10 of the BIT leads this Tribunal to conclude that the Contracting Parties intended
to confer a real choice, not an illusory choice, on investors from their respective countries,
and that the words “relating to the amount of compensation for expropriation” must, in
context, be read to include disputes relating to whether or not an expropriation has

occurred.
d. Object and Purpose of the Treaty

88. Article 31 of the VCLT requires that the terms of the China-Yemen BIT, including the
dispute resolution provisions, be interpreted with due regard to its object and purpose. In
this respect, the Respondent relies on the argument of Professor Yansheng Zhu that “to
create favourable conditions for investment by investors” does not necessarily mean that
the scope of ICSID’s jurisdiction should be artificially expanded to encompass all aspects

of expropriation disputes (rather than simply questions of quantum).>”

89. The object and purpose of the China- Yemen BIT is set out in its Preamble as follows:

56 CL-086, Sanum, J 133. The Singapore Court of Appeal dealt persuasively with this weakness in the Respondent’s
approach: “In our judgment, the Lao Government's interpretation of Art 8(3) of the PRC-Laos BIT is not tenable. The
words of the provision do not seem to us to be capable of accommodating the segregation of an expropriation claim
in the way it was suggested such that the question of liability may be determined by the national courts leaving the
issue of the quantum of compensation to be heard by an arbitral tribunal. In our judgment, the words ‘[t]he provisions
of this paragraph shall not apply if the investor concerned has resorted to the procedure specified in paragraph 2°
means that if any dispute is brought to the national court, the claimant will no longer be entitled to refer any aspect of
that dispute to arbitration. Hence once an expropriation claim is referred to the national court, no aspect of that claim
can then be brought to arbitration. It should be noted that this does not mean that any and every dispute relating to
expropriation may be referred to arbitration. As provided in Art 8(3), this only avails if the dispute does involve a
question as to the amount of compensation,” CL-086, Sanum, J 130 (emphasis in original).

57 Resp. Reply, 86 (citing Y. Zhu, Determination of the Consent to the ICSID Jurisdiction in BITs —A Review on the
Errors Made by the Tribunal Concerning the Determination of the Consent in the Mr. Tza Yap Shum Case, Journal of
international Economic Law, Vol. 17, No. 3, 2010 (RL-047), 118-120).

 

- 28 -

Intending to create favourable conditions for investment by investors of
one Contracting Party within the territory of the other Contracting Party;

Recognizing that the reciprocal encouragement, promotion and protection
of investment will stimulate business communication of investors and
will increase prosperity in both countries;

Desiring to intensify the economic cooperation between both countries
on the basis of equality and mutual benefits;

Have agreed as follows [...]°*

90. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that a “balanced” approach to such general
language is required.*? As stated in the RosInvest award, care must be taken not to use
general aspirational treaty preambles to re-write a narrow jurisdictional clause in favour of

an investor:

As derived from the fact that the protection and promotion of foreign
investment is not the sole aim of investment treaties, particular
emphasis is further placed on the need for a balanced interpretation
rather than an interpretation in favour of the investor [...] Especially
against the background that preambles usually contain broadly worded
object and purpose clauses to protect and promote foreign investments
even in case of investment treaties which do not contain any right to
international arbitration, the interpretative exercise should not be diverted
from the actual wording of Article 8(1) or lead to a re-write of a narrow
jurisdictional clause [...].

91. While acknowledging the need for a “balanced approach,” the overall purpose of the BIT
is nevertheless to stimulate the flow of foreign investment. As the Renta 4 tribunal pointed

out, to “favour the protection of covered investments” is not equivalent to a presumption

that the investor is always right.°!

92. Accordingly, while keeping the Ros/nvest caution in mind, the fact remains that in this

case, the Respondent’s “narrow” interpretation would undermine achievement of the BIT’s

58 CL-001 (Revised), BIT, Preamble (emphasis added).

59 Resp. Reply, | 89.

© RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V 079/205, Award on Jurisdiction, 5 October 2007
(CL-065, “Rosinvest”), | 83 (emphasis added).

&! CL-032, Renta 4, 157.

 

  

-29 -

93.

94.

95.

96.

object and purpose. The lack of investor protection would discourage investment. The BIT
would be seen as a trap for unwary investors instead of an incentive for them to invest in

“the other Contracting Party.”

Relevance of the History of PRC Investment Treaties to the Interpretation of
Article 10

The Respondent points out that tribunals frequently find it helpful to examine the historical
background of a country’s practice in the making of BITs; for example, in the cases where
the Russian Federation prevailed on a “narrow” interpretation of the dispute resolution

provisions in some of its BITs.

Similarly, in the present case the Respondent relies on the writings of Professor An Chen°?
and Professor Yansheng Zhu to demonstrate that the PRC’s intention when concluding
BITs was and has always been to limit the scope of ICSID’s jurisdiction in investment
disputes to quantum only. At the time the China-Yemen BIT was concluded, according to
these scholars, the PRC was a closed socialist economy, with a strong interest in protecting
its political sovereignty. It was not until the China-Barbados BIT (the first of the “later
generation” BITs) that the PRC started moving towards an open-market economy, with a
significantly increased need for inward foreign investment. Accordingly, to this analysis,
largely directed against the decision in Tza Yap Shum, the narrow scope of jurisdiction

provided for by Article 10.2 reflects the PRC’s political circumstances at the time.*

The Parties did not submit the prior practice of Yemen in regard to investment treaties into

evidence.

The issue here is the admissibility of such secondary authority (even if it were otherwise

considered to be relevant) when the Tribunal has already found that the interpretation of

© A. Chen, Queries to the Recent ICSID Decision on Jurisdiction upon the case of Tza Yap Shum v Republic of Peru:
Should China-Peru BIT 1993 Be Applied to Hong Kong SAR under the ‘One Country Two Systems’ Policy?, Journal
of World Investment & Trade, Vol. 10, No. 6 (RL-008), 829-861 .

© Y. Zhu, Determination of the Consent to the ICSID Jurisdiction in BITs — A Review on the Errors Made by the
Tribunal Concerning the Determination of the Consent in the Mr. Tza Yap Shum Case, Journal of International
Economic Law, Vol. 17, No. 3, 2010 (RL-047), 106-121 .

© Resp. Reply, Mf 80-81.

-30-

97.

98.

99.

100.

Article 10 can and should be interpreted under VCLT Article 31, which accordingly

precludes resort to a broader range of external materials under Article 32.

In the Tribunal’s view, the history of the PRC’s position in various BITs over the years is

not relevant to the disposition in this case of the jurisdictional objections.

@) The Russian Federation Cases

The Respondent relies on several tribunal awards that reached varying conclusions with

respect to investment treaties entered into by Russia, and in particular:

e Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader v. the Russian
Federation (SCC Case No. 080/2004), Award, 21 April 2006,
CL-059 (“Berschader’”);

e RosInvestCo UK Ltd. V. the Russian Federation, SCC Case No.
Arb. V 079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction, 5 October 2007, CL-065
(“RosInvest”); and

e Renta 4 SVSA et al v. the Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V
024/2007, Award on Preliminary Objections, 20 March 2009,
CL-032 (“Renta 4”).

Applying similarly-worded treaties, the Berschader tribunal found that it had no
jurisdiction; the Ros/nvest tribunal determined that it had jurisdiction by using the MFN
clause to import the dispute resolution provisions of another Russian treaty; and the Renta
4 tribunal rejected that approach in favour of reading of the dispute resolution provision of

the treaty before it to confer jurisdiction.

In Berschader (award rendered in 2006), a Belgian construction contractor sought
arbitration of a claim against the Russian Federation under an investment treaty concluded
among Belgium, Luxembourg and Russia. The equivalent dispute resolution clause

provided as follows:
ARTICLE 10

1. Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of the
other Contracting Party concerning the amount or mode of

-31-

101.

102.

103.

6 CL-059/RL-019, Berschader, | 47 (emphas

compensation to be paid under Article 5 of the present Treaty shall
be the subject of a written notice, accompanied by a detailed
memorandum, to be submitted by the investor to the Contracting Party
involved in the dispute... °

The primary issue in Berschader was whether “foreign shareholders in a foreign
incorporated company [could] rely upon the terms of a BIT without having made any direct

investment on their own part.”©° However, issues regarding the proper interpretation of the

words “the amount of compensation” were briefly noted, as described below.

In RosInvest (award rendered in 2007), a British investor in the Russian oil company Yukos
complained that its investment was rendered “nearly valueless” by sham “arbitrary
incremental tax assessments” imposed by the Russian Federation. It sought arbitration

under the UK-Russia BIT. The dispute resolution clause in RosInvest provided as follows:
ARTICLE 8
Disputes between an Investor and the Host Contracting Party

(1) This Article shall apply to any legal disputes between an investor of
one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party in relation to
an investment of the former either concerning the amount or
payment of compensation under Articles 4 or 5 of this Agreement,
or concerning any other matter consequential upon an act of
expropriation in accordance with Article 5 of this Agreement, or
concerning the consequences of the non-implementation, or of the
incorrect implementation, of Article 6 of this Agreement.

(2) Any such disputes which have not been amicably settled shall, after a
period of three months from written notification of a claim, be
submitted to international arbitration if either party to the dispute so
wishes.”
In the view of the present Tribunal, the decisions in Berschader and RosInvest are quite
distinguishable. Firstly, there is no opening promise of a procedure to deal with “any
dispute” but is limited from the outset in Berschader to “any dispute ... concerning the

amount or mode of compensation” and in RosInvest to disputes “in relation to an

 

added).

© CL-059/RL-019, Berschader, 135.
© CL-065, Rosinvest, | 23 (emphasis added).

-32-

investment .... concerning the amount or payment of compensation.” Secondly, there was
no choice of forum between the domestic courts or arbitration. The only forum was
“international arbitration”. Consequently, the “fork in the road” problem, which is central
to the present case, could not arise. Thirdly, there was no effet utile issue, because in the
absence of a fork in the road there was no possibility of one branch of the fork being
rendered ineffectual. Fourthly, as the Respondent in RosInvest was able to point out, the
use of the word “consequential” in its clause necessarily required “unambiguously ... a
predicate act of expropriation.”® Fifth, the Berschader tribunal relied in part on the
Russian Federation’s general practice in concluding BITs, a form of external evidence that

in our view is neither necessary nor appropriate in the present case.

104. The Claimant, on the other hand, relies on the later case of Renta 4 v. Russia (award

rendered in 2009), in which the dispute resolution clause provided:
Article 10
Disputes between one Party and investors of the other Party

1. Any dispute between one Party and an investor of the other Party
relating to the amount or method of payment of the compensation
due under Article 6 of this Agreement, shall be communicated in
writing [...]. [The parties shall] as far as possible, endeavour to settle
the dispute amicably.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled thus within six months of the date of
the written notification referred to in paragraph | of this article, it may
be referred to by [sic] either of the following, the choice being left to
the investor:

- An arbitral tribunal in accordance with the Regulations of the
Institute of Arbitration of the Chamber of Commerce in
Stockholm;

- The ad hoc arbitral tribunal established in accordance with the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).”

& CL-065, Rosinvest, {91 57, 80.
 CL-032, Renta 4, 5 (emphasis added).

- 33 -

105. It will be noticed at once that the opening language is directed to “any dispute ... relating
to the amount or method of payment by the compensation due under Article 6 ...”. There

is no opening acceptance of “any dispute” as in the China- Yemen BIT.

106. Secondly, there is a “fork in the road,” but both forks lead to international arbitration, and

neither undermines the other.

107. The Renta 4 tribunal dismissed the Berschader tribunal’s analysis as superficial because in
a few brief conclusory paragraphs, the Berschader tribunal assumed in favour of the
Russian Federation the very point in issue.”° The Renta 4 tribunal observed that, under the
Russian Federation’s view, “the predicate of obtaining any amount of compensation
according to any method would be hostage to the host State’s self-determination as to

whether it is due at all.”7!

108. Ultimately, the Renta 4 tribunal’s decision is consistent with the importance attached by
the present Tribunal to the object and purpose of the BIT, which the Renta 4 tribunal

expressed as follows:

Yet some considerations of purpose have a solid foundation. It must be
accepted that investment is not promoted by purely formal or illusory
standards of protection. It must more specifically be accepted that a
fundamental advantage perceived by investors in many if not most BITs
is that of the internationalisation of the host state’s commitments. It
follows that it is impermissible to read Article 10 of the BIT as vanishingly
narrow internationalisation of either Russian’s or Spain’s commitment.
[...] [I]f there is no obligation to make compensation the arbitration clause
would never operate. The dispute would not be internationalised if the
respondent State could simply declare whether there is an obligation
to compensate. Either signatory State could thus by its fiat (including that
of its courts given the State’s responsibility for their acts under
international law) ensure that there would never be an arbitration under
Article 10. This would be an illusion which the Tribunal cannot accept as
consonant with Article 31 of the Vienna Convention if ever that Article is
to be given full weight.”

7 CL-032, Renta 4, Wf 24-26, 53.
71 CL-032, Renta 4, [ 58 (emphasis in original).
7 CL-032, Renta 4, {| 56 (emphasis added).

-34-

109.

110.

111.

The Tribunal agrees with this aspect of the Renta 4 decision.

In the Tribunal’s view, having regard to its discussion of the elements of Article 31 of the
VCLT relied upon by the Parties, and which in the opinion of the Tribunal are relevant to

the present case, the Respondent’s objections rationae materiae must be dismissed.

THIRD OBJECTION - MFN CLAUSE CANNOT CIRCUMVENT LIMITED DISPUTE CLAUSE

 

The Parties’ Positions
The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent submits that Article 3.1 of the China-Yemen BIT in respect of Most
Favoured Nation Treatment (the “MFN Clause”) cannot circumvent the BIT’s express
limited jurisdiction to incorporate the broader dispute resolution clause in the Yemen-UK
BIT. The Respondent asserts that the MFN Clause at issue was drafted to limit the scope
of the MFN Clause only to substantive rights, and any contrary interpretation would render
the limiting language in the dispute resolution clause in China-Yemen BIT Article 10.2

purposeless. 7?
The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant contends that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear BUCG’s claims as a result
of the MEN Clause, which must be interpreted like any other BIT clause in accordance
with the VCLT principles. The Claimant disputes the alleged “limiting language” in Article
10.2, and therefore denies the Respondent’s suggested impact of Article 10.2 on the
interpretation of the MFN Clause. The Claimant asserts that the second paragraph of the
MEN Clause is not restricted to substance rather than procedure. The Claimant cites a
number of recent investment tribunal decisions that have found the equivalent terms in a

MEN provision to extend to the terms of the access to international arbitration.”

3 Resp. Mem., {ff 102-120. Resp. Reply, 1 110-129.
4 See Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004
(CL-057, “Siemens”), | 103; Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No ARB/O7/17, Award, 21 June

-35-

Consequently, the Claimant argues that the MFN Clause may be used to take advantage of
more favourable dispute resolution mechanisms in other BITs, in particular Article 7 of the

Yemen-UK Treaty.”>
(2) The Tribunal’s Analysis
112. The MEN Clause (Article 3.1) provides as follows:
Article 3 Investment Treatment

1. Each Contracting Party shall ensure that fair and equitable treatment
is given to the investments of the other Contracting Party in its
territory, and such treatment shall, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, be no less favourable than the treatment accorded to
investments of the most favoured nation, if the latter is more
favourable.

Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, ensure that the treatment accorded to investors of the
other Contracting Party in its territory with respect to the activities
relating to their investments shall be no less favorable than the
treatment accorded to its domestic investors or no less favourable than
the treatment accorded to investors of the most favoured nation, with
the more favourable treatment to apply.”°

113. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent’s general proposition that the use of an MFN
provision to extend the scope of the Respondent’s consent to the dispute resolution clause

is controversial. As observed by the tribunal in Plama v. Bulgaria:

[D]ispute resolution provisions in a specific treaty have been negotiated
with a view to resolving disputes under that treaty. Contracting States
cannot be presumed to have agreed that those provisions can be enlarged
by incorporating dispute resolution provisions from other treaties
negotiated in an entirely different context.”

2011 (CL-095, “Impregilo”), {9 99-100; Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan, 1CSID Case No ARB/11/20, Decision
on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent, 3 July 2013 (CL-039, “Garanti Koza”), 4.96.

75 Cl. C-M, 9 131-147; Cl. Rej., 1 89-105.

% CL-001 (Revised), Art. 3.1 (emphasis added).

 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction,
8 February 2005 (RL-015), { 207.

- 36 -

114. However, other tribunals, applying the words of the particular treaty before them, have
concluded that an MEN clause may be used to import the dispute resolution provisions of
one treaty into another.’* This Tribunal sees no need to address in the abstract whether
MEN provisions may in principle be applicable to dispute resolution provisions, but will

turn instead to whether the text of this Treaty lends itself to such an application.

115. In doing so, the Tribunal approaches the interpretation of the MFN terms of Article 3 by

starting with the ordinary meaning of its terms as directed by Article 31 of the VCLT.

116. The argument is, at least in part, that while the word “treatment” in Article 3.1 may be

broad enough to encompass procedural “measures”,”? the accompanying reference in
Article 3.1 to “treatment accorded to investors.... in its territory” plainly invokes
territorial limits that are directed to substantive provisions in relation to local treatment of

the investment, and are not apt to describe international arbitration.

117. Full meaning must be given to the words “‘in the territory”. The Respondent points to the
observation of the Berschader tribunal that “use of the expressions ‘treatment’ and ‘in its
territory’” suggests that the contracting parties intended the MEN clause to address “the
material rights accorded to investors within the territory of the Contracting States”®° and

not international arbitration which “is not an activity inherently linked to the territory of

the respondent State. Just the contrary is true.”*!

118. The context of the words “in the territory” differs between the first paragraph of Article
3.1, dealing with Fair and Equitable Treatment (“FET”) and in the second paragraph of
Article 3.1, dealing with Most Favoured Nation (“MFN”).

8 See, e.g. CL-065, RosInvest at {J 128-133. See general discussion of decisions each way in CL-039, Garanti Koza,
ql 40-41.

7 See CL-057, Siemens, J 103: “The Tribunal concurs that the formulation is narrower but, as concluded above, it
considers that the term ‘treatment’ and the phrase ‘activities related to the investments’ are sufficiently wide to include
settlement of disputes;” and CL-095, Impregilo, { 99: “The Arbitral Tribunal f the opinion that the term ‘treatment’
is in itself wide enough to be applicable also to procedural matters such as dispute settlement.”

8° CL-059/RL-019, Berschader, J 185.

8! ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. Argentine Republic, PCA Case No. 2019-9, Award on Jurisdiction,
10 February 2012 (RL-061), {[ 306.

 

 

-37-

119.

120.

121.

122.

In relation to FET, the words “in the territory” modify “the investments” — which plainly
must be in the territory to attract BIT protection in the first place. In the context of FET,
accordingly Article 3.1 does not limit itself to matters of substance and can apply to the

dispute resolution mechanisms of other BITs to which Yemen is a party.

In respect of the MFN Clause, however, the wording is different. The words “in the
territory” are contained within the provision concerning “treatment accorded to investors
of the other Contracting party in its territory with respect to activities relating to their

investments.

 

”. These words, in the Tribunal’s view, tie the MEN to activities that take
place “in the territory” associated geographically with the investment. This limitation is
not consistent with the Parties giving their consent to the use of the MEN to expand the
scope of international arbitration beyond the provisions of Article 10. As pointed out in
IRC v. Argentina, supra paragraph 117, international arbitration is not itself an activity

“inherently linked to the territory of the [R]espondent.”

The Tribunal therefore concludes that Article 3.1, properly interpreted, does not enlarge

the dispute resolution provision of Article 10 of the China-Yemen BIT.
FOURTH OBJECTION - LACK OF QUALIFIED INVESTMENT
The Parties’ Positions

The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent contends that the Claimant has failed to prove that its claim arises out of
a qualified investment as, in the Respondent’s view, the Claimant’s submissions on when
and what was invested, and by whom, are vague and somewhat contradictory. The
Respondent asserts that the Claimant was purely a paid construction contractor that had to
provide a performance guarantee — which the Joy Mining tribunal found was not an
“investment” — and that consequently BUCG never did make a qualified investment in
Yemen. Respondent further submits that there is no evidence that any alleged investment
was made “in accordance with the laws and regulations of’ Yemen, which required

registration to gain protection under the BIT, nor was a qualified investment made “in the

- 38 -

123.

Q)

124.

125.

territory” of Yemen. Consequently, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction under Article 25(1) of

the ICSID Convention and BIT Article 1.1.
The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant contends its claims arise out of a qualifying investment in Yemen. Contrary
to the Respondent’s allegations, the Claimant submits that its investment consists of rights
acquired under the Contract (together with all plan, equipment and materials imported by
BUCG in connection with its works, as well as the bank guarantees), which fall under the
“investment” definition under BIT Article 1.1. Moreover, the Contract would also qualify
as an investment under the ICSID Convention as interpreted and applied in the Salini test.
The Claimant further argues that the availability of investment registration under Yemeni
law is irrelevant to BUCG’s claims as there is no obligation under Yemeni law to register
an investment and no illegality attaches to failure to do so. BUCG’s investment was made
in the territory of Yemen because the Contract was required to be, and was in fact,

performed there.**
The Tribunal’s Analysis

In order for the Tribunal to accept jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claim, the burden of
proof is on the Claimant to satisfy the Tribunal that it is an “investor” and that it made an

“investment”:

(i) within the meaning given to those terms in the BIT, which defines the framework

of the consent given by the Respondent; and also
(ii) within the meaning given to those terms in the ICSID Convention.

The Joy Mining tribunal emphasised the pre-eminence of the ICSID Convention over the

terms of the BIT in jurisdictional terms:

® Resp. Mem., {ff 122-168. Resp. Reply, 1 130-158.
8 Cl. C-M, 4947-81; Cl. Rej., i 106-118.

-39-

126.

127.

128.

* Joy Mining Machin

The parties to a dispute cannot by contract or treaty define as investment,
for the purpose of ICSID jurisdiction, something which does not satisfy
the objective requirements of Article 25 of the Convention.**

This passage was explicitly endorsed by other ICSID tribunals.

This is a so-called “double-keyhole” test — the Claimant must meet the requirements of
both the Convention and the BIT in order for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction over its

claim.

However, the approach taken by the tribunal in Joy Mining has not been universally
accepted. Some tribunals posit that as the ICSID Convention did not attempt to define
“investment,” this task is left to the parties to delineate in their instruments of consent,
including treaties. The ad hoc annulment committee in Malaysia Historical Salvors
expounded the wisdom of looking primarily to the text of the relevant BIT:

It is those bilateral and multilateral treaties which today are the engine of

ICSID’s effective jurisdiction. To ignore or depreciate the importance of

the jurisdiction they bestow upon ICSID, and rather to embroider upon

questionable interpretations of the term “investment” as found in Article

25(1) of the Convention, risks crippling the institution.**
A middle ground between these two approaches has developed. While many tribunals have
felt that “It would go too far,” in the words of the tribunal in SGS v. Paraguay, “to suggest
that any definition of investment agreed by states in a BIT [...] must constitute an

‘investment’ for purposes of Article 25(1),”*°

many tribunals have adopted the approach
of defining the relevant question as whether the definition of “investment” in the BIT

exceeds what is permissible under the ICSID Convention.

y Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Award on Jurisdiction, 6

 

August 2004 (RL-026, “Joy Mining”), I 49-50.

85 Mala

16 April

 

ian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia, (CSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Decision on Annulment,
2009 (CL-070), 4 73.

%© SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/29, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 12 February 2010 (CL-094), { 93 (emphasis in original).

- 40 -

a. Investment for Purposes of the ICSID Convention

129. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention makes the facilities of ICSID available only to resolve
disputes arising out of a protected investment. As instructed by Article 31 of the VCLT,
Article 25 is to be interpreted according to the “ordinary meaning” of the terms “in their

context and in the light of its object and purpose.” Article 25(1) provides:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State [...] and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute
consent in writing to submit to the Centre.

130. The drafters of the ICSID convention left the term “investment” undefined. One widely
(but not universally) applied analysis of the term “investment” is derived from Salini v.

Morocco, which identified a series of elements that constitute an investment:

The doctrine generally considers that investment infers: contributions, a
certain duration of performance of the contract and a participation in the
risks of the transaction [...] In reading the Convention’s preamble, one
may add the contribution to the economic development of the host State
of the investment as an additional condition.

In reality, these various elements may be interdependent. Thus, the risks
of the transaction may depend on the contributions and the duration of
performance of the contract. As a result, these various criteria should be
assessed globally even if, for the sake of reasoning, the Tribunal considers
them individually here.*”

131. The so-called “Salini test” therefore contemplates:

(a) acontribution;**

8) Salini Construttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001 (RL-020, “Salini”), | 52

88 RL-020, Salini, { 53: “The contributions made by the Italian companies are set out and assessed in their written
submissions. It is not disputed that they used their know-how, that they provided the necessary equipment and qualified
personnel for the accomplishment of the works, that they set up the production tool on the building site, that they
obtained loans enabling them to finance the purchases necessary to carry out the works and to pay the salaries of the
workforce, and finally that they agreed to the issuing of bank guarantees, in the form of a provisional guarantee fixed
at 1.5% of the total sum of the tender, then, at the end of the tender process, in the form of a definite guarantee fixed
at 3% of the value of the contract in dispute. The Italian companies, therefore, made contributions in money, in kind,

-41-

(b) a certain duration of the economic operation;*?
(c) the existence of a risk of sovereign intervention assumed by the investor; and
(d) a contribution to the host State’s economic development.

132. The contribution, when the Salini test is applied, need not only be financial; some tribunals

90
have held that it can mean a transfer of know-how or of equipment derived from the

dedication of resources which themselves have an economic value.
b. Investments Within the Scope of the BIT
133. The preamble to the BIT makes it clear that its very object and purpose is to:

. create favourable conditions for investment by investors of one
Contracting Party within the territory of the other Contracting Party.

134. In the same vein, Article 2 emphasizes the territorial aspect of a protected investment:

1. Each Contracting Party shall encourage investors of the other
Contracting Party to make investments in its territory and accept such
investments in accordance with its laws and regulations.

2. Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall be accorded
fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy full and complete
protection and security in the territory of the other Contracting
Party subject to any measures which are necessary for maintaining
public order. [...]°!

and in industry.” See also Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22,
Award, 24 July 2008 (CL-030).

8° RL-020, Salini, { 54: “Although the total duration for the performance of the contract, in accordance with the CCAP,
was fixed at 32 months, this was extended to 36 months. The transaction, therefore, complies with the minimal length
of time upheld by the doctrine, which is from 2 to 5 years.”

° See Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, (CSID Case No. ARB/03/29,
Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005 (CL-020, “Bayindir”), 1 131.

°! CL-001 (Revised), BIT, Art. 2 (emphasis added).

-42-

135. The BIT contains a detailed definition of what constitutes an investment, under which the
commitment of resources under a contract to be performed in the other Contracting State

explicitly qualifies as an investment.
Article 1 Definitions
In this Agreement,

1. The term “investment” means, every kind of asset and capital invested
directly or indirectly by investors of one Contracting Party in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the other Contracting
Party in the territory of the latter, including in particular but not limited
to:

(a) movable and immovable property as well as any other property
rights such as mortgages, pledges, real securities, usufructs and similar
rights;

(c) creditor’s rights and claims to any performance having an
economic value; [...]°”

136. In the opinion of the Tribunal, the definition of “investment” in the Treaty does not exceed
what is permissible under the ICSID Convention. BUCG’s contribution to the Sana’a
International Terminal project resulted in it now asserting “claims to any performance
having an economic value” within the meaning of Article 1 of the Treaty. In the view of
the Tribunal, that is sufficient to bring the Claimant’s claim within the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal under both the Treaty and the ICSID Convention. Moreover, to the extent to
which it may be necessary or useful to apply the Salini test, that contribution clearly
exposed BUCG, a foreign investor, to risks posed by the sovereign power and otherwise

as described in Salini itself:

With regard to the risks incurred by the Italian companies, these flow from
the nature of the contract at issue. The Claimants, in their reply memorial
on jurisdiction, gave an exhaustive list of the risks taken in the
performance of the said contract. Notably, among others, the risk
associated with the prerogatives of the Owner permitting him to

°2 CL-001 (Revised), BIT, Art. 1 (emphasis added).

-43-

prematurely put an end to the contract, to impose variations within certain
limits without changing the manner of fixing prices; the risk consisting of
the potential increase in the cost of labour in case of modification of
Moroccan law; any accident or damage caused to property during the
performance of the works; those risks relating to problems of co-
ordination possibly arising from the simultaneous performance of other
projects; any unforeseeable incident that could not be considered as force
majeure and which, therefore, would not give rise to a right to
compensation; and finally those risks related to the absence of any
compensation in case of increase or decrease in volume of the work load
not exceeding 20% of the total contract price.

It does not matter in this respect that these risks were freely taken. It also
does not matter that the remuneration of the Contractor was not linked to
the exploitation of the completed work. A construction that stretches out
over many years, for which the total cost cannot be established with
certainty in advance, creates an obvious risk for the Contractor.”

 

137. Ina similar vein, turning to other elements of the Salini test:

e It was pointed out in Toto v. Lebanon (Jurisdiction) that a construction contract in
which the execution of the works extends over a substantial period of time involves

by definition an element of risk.**

e It is obvious that construction of an international air terminal worth in excess of a

hundred million dollars contributes to the host State’s economic development.

138. In summary, the Tribunal has no difficulty in concluding that BUCG did make an
investment in Yemen that qualified for protection under both Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention and Article 1(1) of the China-Yemen BIT.

°3 RL-020, Salini, {| 55-56 (emphasis added).
° Toto Construzioni Generali S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/12, Decision on Jurisdiction,
11 September 2009 (CL-072), 78

-44-

139.

140.

Q)

141.

142.

FIFTH OBJECTION - BUCG’s CLAIM IS A CONTRACTUAL CLAIM, NOT A TREATY
CLAIM

The Parties’ Positions
The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent asserts that a review of the facts demonstrates that the Claimant’s claim
is a purely contractual commercial claim, which is subject to resolution pursuant to the
Contract’s dispute resolution mechanism. Consequently, the Respondent submits that the

Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to decide this dispute.°°
The Claimant’s Position

The Claimant submits that its claims arise under the China- Yemen BIT, and are not merely
contractual in nature. The Claimant asserts that it is common ground that the Tribunal
should apply a prima facie test to the facts presented by the Claimant in its Memorial when
considering the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections. The Claimant further contends that
a review of those facts demonstrates that its claims are capable of constituting BIT breaches

and the Tribunal therefore has jurisdiction to deal with them.*°
The Tribunal’s Analysis

A factual distinction of great importance between the BUCG claim and an ordinary
commercial contract dispute is the alleged intervention of the Respondent’s military forces
to exclude BUCG workers from the construction site and, allegedly, to render the Contract

incapable of performance.

The Treaty to be applied in this case does not contain a so-called “umbrella clause,” so the
question before the Tribunal is simply whether the Claimant is asserting breaches of the

Treaty. The Claimant is not asserting claims for breaches of contract in this proceeding;

°5 Resp. Mem., {f 169-181. Resp. Reply, i 159-161.
96 Cl. C-M, Wf 82-85; Cl. Rej., $91 123-125.

-45-

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

were it to do so, this Tribunal would have no jurisdiction to hear such claims and would
decline to entertain them given the limited consent to arbitration in Article 10 of the BIT

to “any dispute relating to the amount of compensation for expropriation.”””

For that reason, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to resolve the claims and counterclaims
alleged by the Parties in the document filed by the Respondent entitled “Employer’s Claim
and Evaluation of the Contract’s Claims,” which involves claims for compensation well in

excess of the current Treaty claims.°® Nor is the Tribunal being asked to do so.

In this proceeding, the Claimant is limited to the relief to which it may or may not be
entitled under the Treaty. The tribunal in Bayindir observed that “treaty claims are
juridically distinct from claims for breach of contract, even where they arise out of the
same facts,” and “when the investor has a right under both the contract and the treaty, it

has a self-standing right to pursue the remedy accorded by the treaty.”°?

This Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the Claimant’s claims to the extent that they arise
under the Treaty. If the Claimant is unable to establish a claim under the Treaty in the

course of the merits phase of this arbitration, the proceedings will be dismissed.
DECISION

The Respondent’s jurisdictional objection to enlargement of the dispute resolution
provision by reference is to the MFN clause is allowed. Consequently, the Tribunal has
jurisdiction in this arbitration to hear only those claims related to the Claimant’s allegations

of expropriation.

The Respondent’s jurisdictional objections are otherwise dismissed. With respect to the
Respondent’s jurisdictional objections raised, the Tribunal concludes (a) that the Claimant
is a national of another Contracting State within the meaning of the ICSID Convention, (b)
that it has jurisdiction ratione materiae to hear the Claimant’s claims insofar as they allege

and seek compensation for the alleged expropriation of the Claimant’s investment in breach

°” CL-001 (Revised), BIT, Art. 10(2) (emphasis added).
°8 CAMA Report, “Employers Claim and Evaluation of the Contractor’s Claim” dated February 2013 (R-001).
® CL-020, Bayindir, {9 148, 167

- 46 -

148.

of the Treaty, and (c) that the Claimant has a claim arising out of an investment that

qualifies for protection under the Treaty and the ICSID Convention.

Any award of costs is reserved to the merits phase of these proceedings after hearing

submissions from the Parties.

-47-

[—— AEA ea

Professor Zachary Douglas Q.C. Mr. John M. Townsend
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Ke

The Honourable Ian Binnie C.C., Q.C.
President of the Tribunal

 

- 48 -

