INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

BERNARDUS HENRICUS FUNNEKOTTER AND OTHERS
(CLAIMANTS)

AND

REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID CasE No. ARB/05/6)

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal:

HLE. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President
Dean Ronald A. Cass, Arbitrator
H.E. Mr. Mohammad Wasi Zafar, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:

Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Representing the Claimants: Representing the Respondent:
Mr. Charles Owen Verrill, Jr. Mrs. Fatima C. Maxwell,

Wiley Rein LLP

Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
and

Mr. Matthew Coleman

Steptoe & Johnson LLP

London, United Kingdom

Date of dispatch to the parties: 22 April 2009

Mrs. Virginia Mabiza
Civil Division
Attorney General’s Office
Harare, Zimbabwe

and
Mr. Philip Kimbrough,
Mr. Tristan Moreau
Kimbrough & Associés
Paris, France

CONTENTS

I. PROCEDURE
Il. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ....
A. THE CLAIMANTS’ MEMORIAL

THE LAND ACQUISITION PROGRAM IN ZIMBABWE.
THE ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF THE BIT.

B. THE RESPONDENT’S COUNTER-MEMORIAL
C. THE CLAIMANTS’ REPLY
D. THE RESPONDENT’S REJOINDER:
E. THE HEARING

I. ©THE DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
A. JURISDICTION
B. ALLEGED BREACHES OF THE BIT
C. EVALUATION OF THE DAMAGES.
D. INTERESTS AND COSTS

 

26

26
29
39
46

 

IV. DISPOSITIVE PART OF THE AWARD.

48

 

L PROCEDURE

1. On 4 June 2003, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or
“the Centre”) received from Bernadus Henricus Funnekotter and others, a request for arbitration,
dated 30 May 2003, against the Republic of Zimbabwe (‘“Zimbabwe” or the “Respondent”). The
Claimants, who were said to include natural persons and other entities, were also identified as

variously having Dutch and Italian nationalities.

2. On 4 June 2003, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (‘the Institution Rules”) acknowledged
receipt of the request and on the same day transmitted a copy to Zimbabwe and to its Embassy in

Washington, D.C.

3. Following exchange of various correspondence between the Centre and counsel for the
Claimants, it was determined that the Claimants are the following natural persons, all of whom
were said to be Dutch nationals, and a copy of the Dutch passport for each individual Claimant

was provided:

 

 

 

 

Claimants: Farms:

Mr. Bernardus Henricus Funnekotter: Remaining Extent of Warren farm
Cadnam Farm (Private) Limited; [hereinafter R/E Warren farm];
Kegworth Farm (Private) Limited; Anwa Farm
Warren Farm (Private) Limited

Mr. Hermannes van Duren (Junior): Bimi Estate farm
Yangsey Farm (Private) Limited

Mrs. Margareta van Duren: Bimi Estate farm;

Yangsey Farm (Private) Limited;
Watercombe Enterprises (Private)
Limited

Warren A farm

 

Mrs. Dicky Roelanda Breytenbach: Faroe Estate farm

 

 

 

 

Mrs. Romelia Gwendolyn Fisher:
Farways Farm (Private) Limited

Farways Farm

 

Mr. Max Willem Arthur Graaf
van Rechteren Limpurg:
Chiripiro Farm (Private) Limited

Chiripiro Farm

 

Mr. Rolf Jan Philip Walraven:
Springdale Farm (Private) Limited

Springdale Farm

 

Mr. Wessel Johannes Weller:
Stratford Properties (Private) Limited;
Msonneddi Estate (Private) Limited

Remaining Extent of Ruia Ranche farm
[hereinafter R/E Ruia Ranche farm]

 

Mrs. Loekie Weller:
Stratford Properties (Private) Limited;
Msonneddi Estate (Private) Limited

R/E Ruia Ranche farm

 

Mr. Johan Pieter Weller:
Stratford Properties (Private) Limited;
Msonneddi Estate (Private) Limited

R/E Ruia Ranche farm

 

Mr. Lion Hellmut Benjamins:
Sezlin Investments (Private) Limited

Remaining Extent of Roscommon of
Lancaster Park farm; [hereinafter R/E
Roscommon farm]

Remaining Extent of Preston Estate farm
[hereinafter R/E Preston Estate farm]

 

Mr. Carel Frederik des Tombe:
Millham Enterprises (Private) Limited

Rio Dora farm

 

Mrs. Erica Hansen:
Whindale Ranch (Private) Limited

 

 

Whindale Ranch

 

 

4. The Request for Arbitration, as supplemented by the Claimants’ letters of 23 April 2004, 28
October 2004, 10 November 2004, 10 November 2004, 18 November 2004, 11 February 2005, 22
February 2005, 14 March 2005, 18 March 2005, 8 April 2005, was registered by the Centre on 15
April 2005, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. On the same day, the Secretary-
General of ICSID, in accordance with Rule 7 of the Institution Rules, notified the parties of the

registration and invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

5. On7 July 2005, the parties having not agreed on the number of arbitrators and the method of
constituting the Tribunal, and sixty days having elapsed since the registration of the Request for
Arbitration, the Claimants invoked Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, under which the
Tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators, one appointed by each party and the third, who shall be
the President of the Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the parties. On 15 November 2005, the
Claimants appointed Dean Ronald A. Cass, a U.S. national, as arbitrator and on 20 June 2006, the

Respondent appointed the Minister of Justice of Pakistan, H.E. Mr. Mohammad Wasi Zafar.

6. The parties having failed to appoint a presiding arbitrator, and more than 90 days having
elapsed since the registration of the request for arbitration, the Claimants, by letter of 27 July
2006, requested the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council to appoint the presiding
arbitrator, pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention. On 25 October 2006, the Chairman of
the ICSID Administrative Council, in consultation with the Parties, appointed H.E. Judge Gilbert

Guillaume of France as the presiding arbitrator.

7. All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Secretary-General of ICSID, by
letter of 1 November 2006, informed the Parties of the constitution of the Tribunal, consisting of
HE. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, Dean Ronald A. Cass and H.E. Mr. Mohammed Wasi Zafar, and
that the proceeding was deemed to have commenced on that day, pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the

ICSID Arbitration Rules.

8. The first session of the Tribunal was, with the agreement of the parties, held on 15 December
2007, at the World Bank’s Office in Paris, France. Present at the session were:

Members of the Tribunal:

1. H. E. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President of the Tribunal
2. Dean Ronald A. Cass, Arbitrator
3. H.E. Mr. Mohammad Wasi Zafar, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat;

 

4. Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Secretary of the Tribunal

Representing the Claimants:
5. Mr. Charles Owen Verrill, Jr., Wiley Rein LLP
6. Mr. Mathew Coleman, Africa Legal

Representing the Respondent:
7. Mrs. Virginia Mabiza, Attorney General’s Office, Zimbabwe
8. Mrs. Mandinika, Deputy Director, Ministry of Lands, Land Reforms
9. Mr. Mischeck C. Hove, Minister Counselor, Embassy of Zimbabwe, Paris
10. Mr. Cavins N. Mugaviri, Minister Counselor, Embassy of Zimbabwe, Paris

9. Various aspects of procedure were determined at the session, including a schedule for the

submission of written pleadings.

10. In line with the agreed procedure, the Claimants’ Memorial was filed on 16 March 2007,
followed by the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on 6 July 2007, followed by the Claimants’

Reply on 14 August 2007.

11. On 14 September 2007, the Tribunal held a procedural conference with the parties by

telephone.

12. By letter of 11 October 2007, the Respondent notified the Centre that it had appointed Mr.

Philip Kimbrough of the law firm of Kimbrough & Associés as counsel.
13. The Respondent’s Rejoinder was filed on 24 October 2007.

14. In accordance with a schedule agreed after several exchanges of correspondence between the
Tribunal and the Parties, and in consultation with the Centre, an oral hearing of the parties was
held at the offices of the World Bank in Paris, on 29-31 October 2007. The Parties were
represented by their respective counsel who made presentations to the Tribunal. Present at the

hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal:
1. H.E. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President of the Tribunal
2. Dean Ronald A. Cass, Arbitrator
3. H.E. Mr. Mohammad Wasi Zafar, Arbitrator

ICSID
4.

Secretariat:
Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Secretary of the Tribunal

Attending on behalf of the Claimants:

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
1S.
16.
17.
18.
19.

Mr. Charles Owen Verill, Jr., Wiley Rein LLP

Mr. Mathew Coleman, Steptoe & Johnson LLP

Mr. Bernardus Henricus Funnekotter, Claimant, Fact Witness
Mr. Lion Benjamins, Claimant, Fact Witness

Mr. Johan Pieter Weller, Claimant, Fact Witness

Mr. Graham Mullet, Valuator, Redfern Mullet, Expert Witness
Mr. Boyd Carr, Counsel, Coghlan, Welsh & Guest, Fact Witness
Mr. Hermannes van Duren, Claimant

Mrs. Margareta van Duren, Claimant

Mr. George Robert Luis Fernandes, AgricAfrica, Ltd.

Mrs. Deborah Funnekotter, Spouse of Claimant Funnekotter
Mr. Allan Higgins, Valuator, Redfern Mullet

Ms. Alexandra Landis, Legal Assistant, Wiley Rein LLP

Mr. Duncan Owen, AgricAfrica, Ltd., Fact Witness

Mr. Carel Frederik des Tombe, Claimant

Attending on behalf of the Respondent:

20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

15. As agreed during the hearing, on 13 November 2007, the Respondent filed a further affidavit
of Mr. Sifelani Moyo, and on 29 November 2007, at the invitation of the Tribunal, the Claimants

filed comments on the Respondent’s submission in the form of a statement by Mr. Graham

Mullet.

Mr. Philip Kimbrough, Kimbrough & Associés

Mr. Tristan Moreau, Kimbrough & Associés

Cde. Didymus Noel Edwin Mutasa, Minister of State for National Security, Lands,
Land Reform and Resettlement, Fact Witness

Cde. Sobusa Gula-Ndebele, Attorney General of Zimbabwe, Fact Witness

Mrs. Sophia Christine Tsvakwi, Secretary for Lands, Fact Witness

Mrs. Fatima C. Maxwell, Acting Director, Civil Division, Attorney General’s Office
Mrs. Virginia Mabiza, Chief Law Officer, Attorney General’s Office

Mrs. Elizabeth Sumowah, Chief Law Officer, Attorney General’s Office

Mr. Tadeous Manyati, Principal Land Officer, Ministry of Lands

Mr. Sifelani Moyo, Ministry of Lands, Expert Witness

HLE. Mr. David Hamadzripi, Embassy of Zimbabwe, Paris

Mr. Cavins Nduna Mugaviri, Embassy of Zimbabwe, Paris

Mr. Simon Monife, Ministry of Lands, Zimbabwe

The Tribunal invited the Respondent to comment on the Claimants’ submission of 29

November 2007, but the Respondent did not file any comments.

16. Following the hearing, Members of the Tribunal deliberated by various means of

communication, including a meeting for deliberations in Paris on 25 June 2008.

17. On 25 February 2009, the Tribunal declared the proceeding closed pursuant to ICSID

Arbitration Rule 38(1).

18. The Tribunal has taken into account all pleadings, documents and testimony in this case.

Il. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

A. THE CLAIMANTS’ MEMORIAL

19. In their Memorial, dated 16 March 2007, the Claimants submit that each of them had direct
or indirect investments in large commercial farms in Zimbabwe. They contend that they have
been deprived of their property in violation of the bilateral investment treaty (the BIT) concluded
on 11 December 1996 between the Netherlands and Zimbabwe.' They request the Tribunal to
declare Zimbabwe responsible for its unlawful action and to order Zimbabwe to compensate them

for all the damages suffered.

20. In this context, they first describe the land acquisition program developed by the Government
of Zimbabwe from 1992 and “the political issues that led Respondent to commit the violations of

the Dutch investment agreement against” them.”

The Land Acquisition Program in Zimbabwe

21. The Claimants state that, in March 1992, the Land Acquisition Act authorized the

Government of Zimbabwe to acquire compulsorily any rural land when the acquisition was

' t on E and i Il Protecti

n of
Zimbabwe and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, 11 Dec. 1996 [hereinafter BIT].
? Claimants’ Memorial, 16 March 2007, p. 34.

Between the Republic of

deemed reasonably necessary for agricultural settlement purposes. Under section 5 of that Act,
the first step for such an acquisition is the issuance for the targeted property of a preliminary
notice by the Ministry of Lands and Agriculture. The owner of the land could not dispose of the
land, while the notice remained in effect, without the permission of the Acquiring Authority.
Originally such notices were to remain in force for two years unless withdrawn or the land
acquired under section 8 of the Act. However an amendment to the Act in 2000 suppressed the
two-year limit. The amendment was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of
Zimbabwe which imposed a one-year limit on the effectiveness of Section 5 notices, but this one-

year limitation was later eliminated in 2001 by the Court, this time differently composed.*

22. Under Section 8 of the Act, the Acquiring Authority is authorized to issue an acquisition of
land order which has the immediate effect of divesting the owner of its interests in the property.
Under Section 7 of the Act such orders must be authorized by the Administrative Court. However
the Zimbabwe Supreme Court held that “the fact that Section 7 requires the Land Authority to
submit Section 8 orders to the Administrative Court for confirmation does not stay the acquisition
or limit the exercise of the rights of ownership by the Land Authority during the pendency of the
proceedings.”* In fact, according to the Claimants, the Administrative Court was unable to

handle the large volume of applications filed by the Ministry of Lands.

23. Section 16 of the Act adopted in 2000 requires the Acquiring Authority to pay “fair

compensation” to the “owner of any agricultural land required for resettlement purpose and to any

oS

other person whose right or interest in land has been acquired in terms of this Act.”” A procedure

was established to that effect. According to the Claimants, “there were occasional efforts to

5 [bid., para. 112.
* Tbid., para. 116.
* Ibid., para. 117 (quoting Consolidated Land Acquisition Act § 16, 2002, CAP 20:10 (Zimb.)).

comply with these requirements,” but “such efforts were usually only token gestures. In any

event, no Claimant received any compensation whatsoever for his or her investments.”°
24. Beginning in 1997, the Ministry of Lands issued Section 5 notices and Section 8 orders to
each of the Claimants. These actions had no effect, since all of the notices and orders were

withdrawn or suspended after submission of objections by the land owner or judicial review.

25. The Government then proposed a new Constitution which, inter alia, provided for the
acquisition of land without compensation. This proposal was defeated in a referendum in

February 2000.

26. According to the Claimants, “[t]he defeat of this referendum immediately led to illegal
invasions of commercial farms by war veterans which the Zimbabwe Courts later found were
encouraged and supported by the Respondent.” This was the case for Wellers’ R/E Ruia Ranch
farm, Walraven’s Springdale Farm, des Tombe’s Rio Dora Farm, Funnekotter’s R/E Warren
Farm, van Durens’ Bimi Estate farm and van Duren’s Warren A Farm. The other Claimants
escaped invasion in early 2000, but were “subjected to invasions and harassment in the following
two years.”® Throughout this period, the “Claimants received little if any protection from the
police.” In fact “the invasions were encouraged by politicians of the ruling political party and had

the support of the army.”°

27. The Commercial Farmers’ Union challenged the occupation of the farms before the Courts.
On 17 March 2000, the High Court granted an Order which, according to the Claimants, “was

consented to by all the parties after negotiations in which they all participated.”' That Order

© Tbid., para. 119.
7 Tbid., para. 126.
8 Tbid., para. 134.
°  Tbid., para. 140.
10 Tbid., para. 141.

 

declares the occupation unlawful and provides that the unlawful occupiers must vacate the land.
It requires “the Police Commissioner to carry out the terms of the Order and to disregard any

nll

contrary instructions or directives by the [G]overnment of Zimbabwe or its Executive. Some
days later, the Court dismissed an application from the Commissioner of Police to remove part of
the order. However, according to the Claimants, both war veterans and the police ignored the

order of the Court and the invasions continued.

28. Following the defeat of the proposed Constitution in February 2000, an amendment to the
existing Constitution was adopted effective 19 April 2000. Section 16A(1)(c) of this text
provides that “the former colonial power has an obligation to pay compensation for agricultural
land compulsorily acquired for resettlement” and that, if the former colonial power fails to pay,
then “the Government of Zimbabwe has no obligation to pay compensation for agricultural land

compulsorily acquired for resettlement.”

The amendment of the Constitution was followed by
adoption of conforming amendments to the Land Acquisition Act which provided in its Section
29C that “compensation shall only be payable for any improvements on or to the land.” An

accelerated Land Reform and Resettlement Plan, known as “Fast Track Programme” was then

initiated.

29. In the fall of 2000, the Commercial Farmers’ Union sought from the courts a series of
declaratory orders relating to the legislation thus enacted. The Supreme Court of Zimbabwe
found that the Fast Track Programme could not be considered as meeting the requirement of the
Constitution and “that the farm invasions are, have been and continue to be unlawful.” The Court

added that the presence of the invaders “must be legalised, or they must be removed.” '*

'" Tbid., para. 145.

"2 Tbid., para. 153 (quoting Constitution of Zimbabwe, § 16A(c)(i), (ii), (2000)).

8 Tbid., para. 154 (quoting Consolidated Land Acquisition Act § 29C(1), 2002, CAP 20:10 (Zimb.)).
'4 Tbid., para. 159-160 (quoting CFU v. Minister of Lands, 2000 (2) ZLR at 486-87).

30. Subsequent to 23 May 2000, Section 5 notices had been published as to each of the farms in
this arbitration. In addition, Section 8 orders were issued in most cases. In a number of instances,
applications were made by the Ministry of Lands to the Administrative Court for confirming
those Section 8 orders. In most cases no decision was taken by the Court. Some applications
were withdrawn and in the proceeding involving Claimant van Rechteren Limpurg, the Court
eventually entered a consent order vacating Section 8 orders concerning Chiripiro Farm.

However this order was not implemented.

31. The Claimants add that the Dutch Embassy in Harare repeatedly advised the Government of
Zimbabwe of its obligations under the BIT concluded between the Netherlands and Zimbabwe.
In response to these interventions, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs sent to the Embassy a Note
Verbale, dated 21 November 2000, stating that property protected by investment agreements
would be exempt from acquisition. Following that note, a number of the farms were delisted, but
those delistings were all followed by relistings. Moreover nothing was done to abate the violence
and harassment that most of the Claimants were suffering, in spite of many protests from the

Embassy.

32. In June 2001, the Parliament of Zimbabwe enacted the Rural Law Occupiers (Protection
from Eviction) Act. Under that Act, any qualified person occupying rural land on 1 March 2001
could not be evicted by Court order. “Such persons were relieved of liability for damages or
trespass, and were entitled to continue occupation during the period when Section 5 and Section 8
notices were in effect and up to a year after any denial by the Administrative Court of an order
confirming a Section 5 notice or approving a Section 8 notice.”

33. Then, in December 2001, the Zimbabwe Supreme Court, whose composition had been

changed, decided that the police could not be held in contempt of Court for refusal to obey the

8 Tbid., para. 174.

consent order issued by the Court in March 2000. It held that the Land Reform Programme was
constitutional and found that there was no breach of the rule of law concerning actions taken on

farms.

34. Finally, on 14 September 2005, the Zimbabwe Constitution was again amended. In
implementation of the amended Section 16A of the new text, all the agricultural land owned by

the Claimants were “acquired by and vested in the State with full title therein . . . 27'S In fact

 

however, the Claimants had all effectively been deprived of their properties at a much earlier date,

either by Section 8 orders or through the invasion of their farms by war veterans and settlers.

The Alleged Violations of the BIT

35. The Claimants then recall that the BIT was concluded between Zimbabwe and the

Netherlands on 11 December 1996 and entered into force on 1 May 1998.

36. They stress that the Tribunal should rely on the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties in
interpreting and applying the BIT and the ICSID Convention. They submit that the Vienna

Convention reflects customary international law, in particular in its Articles 26, 27, 31 and 32.

37. According to the Claimants,

[eJach of the Claimants is, and was at all times relevant to this arbitration, a citizen of the
Netherlands, thereby fulfilling the nationality requirements of Article 1(b)(i) and the jurisdiction
requirement of Article 9(1) of the Dutch Investment Agreement and Article 25 of the Convention.
In some instances, Claimants have been assigned the claims of companies that owned farms. Each
of the companies that has assigned claims was controlled by Dutch national(s) and is to be treated
as a Dutch national pursuant to Article 1(b)(iii) of the Agreement.

 

 

 

'© Tbid., para. 180 (quoting Constitution of Zimbabwe, § 16B(2)(a), (2005)).
'" Tbid., para. 12; see also ibid., paras. 216-219.

38. Moreover, the Claimants submit that their “interests fall within the definition of

‘investments’ contained in Article 1(a) of the [BIT,] which broadly covers ‘every kind of

asset.’”!*

39. According to the Claimants, Zimbabwe violated the terms of the BIT in several ways. They

recall first that under Article 6 of the Treaty:

Neither Contracting Party shall subject nationals of the other Contracting Party to any measures
depriving them, directly or indirectly, of their investments unless the following conditions are
complied with:

(a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of the law;

(b) the measures are not discriminatory or contrary to any undertaking which the former
Contracting Party may have given;

(c) the measures are accompanied by provision for the payment of just compensation.”

40. In this respect, the Claimants contend that they “were deprived of their investments by

v2

Respondent by actions that were tantamount to expropriation. ° They recall that “final Section 8
orders were issued with respect to all of the properties involved in this arbitration except R/E
Warren farm (Funnekotter), Bimi Estate farm (van Duren), R/E Preston Estate farm and R/E
Roscommmon farm (Benjamins) and Chiripiro Farm (van Rechteren Limpurg). Even before
those orders were issued, however, Respondent’s actions effectively deprived nearly all of the
Claimants of the use, benefit and reasonably to be expected return from their investments.”?!
“After the defeat of the new Constitution in a February 2000 referendum, Respondent encouraged
and supported the invasion of commercial farms including all of those that are investments of

9922

Claimants,” as recognized by Zimbabwe Courts. “Even where there was no invasion prior to

the issuance of a Section 8 order (which was the case with Claimant Funnekotter’s Anwa Farm

and Claimant Breytenbach’s Faroe Estate [farm]), the actions of Respondent after February 2000

Ibid., para. 13 (quoting BIT Art. 1(a); see also ibid., para. 215).
Ibid., para. 220, (quoting BIT, Art 6).
29 ‘Tbid., p. 100.
2! Tbid., para. 223.
» Tbid., para. 224.

were responsible for creating a climate of fear and apprehension on the part of all the

Claimants.””*

41. The Claimants then submit that none of the conditions provided for in subparagraphs (a), (b)

and (c) of Article 6 are fulfilled in the present case.

42. They note in this regard that Section 8 orders issued with respect to a number of Claimants
deprived them of their investment as covered by the terms of the order, ie., “land and
improvements, such as dams and irrigation systems, houses, farms and other immoveable
assets,.””4 They note that “the Ministry of Lands filed a number of petitions with respect to
Section 8 orders . . . with respect to Claimants’ investments.” But they state that the
Administrative Court which had to consider those petitions “did not reach a final decision with
respect to any of them.” They conclude that “the acquisitions under Section 8 of the [Land
Acquisition] Act were made by Zimbabwe without following due process of law.”?6 They submit
moreover that “it was the presence of war veterans and settlers that forced these Claimants to

92!

vacate their farms.”?” This invasion was de facto substitute for the procedures before the Court.

In any event, the first requirement of Article 6 of the BIT was not met.

43. The Claimants add that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, in its Note Verbale of
21 November 2000 informed the Dutch Embassy that the properties protected by the BIT would
not be subject to taking under the Land Acquisition Act. The deprivation of Claimants’
investment was contrary to this undertaking and the second requirement of Article 6 of the BIT is

no more met.

® Tbid., para. 239.
Ibid., para. 244.
> Tbid., para. 245.
°6 Thid., p. 110.

Ibid., para. 247.

44. In addition, no compensation was paid to Claimants after the deprivation of their investments

contrary to Article 6(c) of the BIT.

45. In sum, they assert that the Respondent’s actions did not constitute “legal expropriations” of
the Claimants’ investments pursuant to Article 6, even where the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act were utilized by the publication of Section 5 notices in the Gazette and the
issuance of Section 8 order.””*

46. Furthermore, the Claimants submit that Zimbabwe denied them the fair and equitable
treatment required by Article 3(1) of the BIT. They stress that “fair and equitable treatment in the
context of the Agreement and in order to fulfill the object and purpose of the Agreement means

992!

treatment in a just and appropriate manner in order to encourage foreign investment. ° They
detail the elements of this fair and equitable treatment in the light of ICSID case law. They
contend that “[b]y encouraging the invasion of commercial farms by war veterans and settlers,
and then enacting legislation condoning their acts, Zimbabwe failed to meet its obligation.
Moreover [it also] failed to provide full security and protection to Claimants and their investments

as [required] by Article 3(1).”*° In this respect, they provide details of the circumstances which

forced them to abandon their farms.

47. The Claimants conclude that the responsibility of Zimbabwe is engaged, not only for its own
acts, but also for the acts of the ZANU PF Ruling Party and the war veterans and occupiers of
Claimants’ properties*! in conformity with Articles 1, 8 and 11 of the Articles on State
Responsibility for International Wrongful Acts prepared by the International Law Commission.

They recall that under Article 6(c) of the BIT, the compensation for expropriation “shall represent

8 Tbid., para. 250.
® Ibid., para.264.
°° ‘Tbid., para. 277.
 Tbid., paras.291-294.

  

the genuine value of the investments affected” which “shall include, but not exclusively, the net
asset value” of the investments.*” They add that this is the standard applicable in case of lawful
expropriation, but that, in case of unlawful expropriation, customary international law is
applicable. In this respect they stress that actual restitution of the properties would in the present
case be neither practicable, nor possible. Thus the compensation due to Claimants “must

correspond to what a restitution in kind would yield.”

48. They state that restitution being impracticable, they “undertake to return to Zimbabwe all
shares, deeds or other indices of ownership of their investments upon receipt of payment in full in

currency of their selection, of damages, plus interest, awarded by the Tribunal.”

49. The Claimants’ land and improvements have been valued by the Valuation Consortium

(“Valcom”) under the direction of Mr. Graham Mullet.** Under this appraisal:

For Claimant Funnekotter, the value of R/E Warren farm is 1,050,000 Euros and
that of Anwa Farm 1,070,000 Euros and the value of moveable assets 568,898

a

Euros;°°

b) For Claimants van Duren, the value of Bimi Estate farm is 940,000 Euros,” the

value of Warren A farm 780,000 Euros*® and the value of moveable assets
195,958 Euros;”

c

For Claimant Breytenbach, the value of Faroe Estate farm is 1,030,000 Euros and
the value of moveable assets 149,811 Euros;“°

d

For Claimant Fisher, the value of Farways Farm is 1,130,000 Euros and the value

of moveable assets 31,733 Euros;*!

* Tbid., para.295 (quoting BIT, Art. 6(c)).

8 Tbid., p. 137.

™ Tbid., para. 305.

5 Tbid., para. 306.

°6 Tbid., para. 28; ibid., Annex A, Tabs A-5-A; A-5-B.
*) Tbid., para. 36; ibid., Annex B-1, Tab B-1-E.

*8 Tbid., para. 44; ibid., Annex B-1, Tab B-2-D.

* Tbid., para. 36; ibid., Annex B-1, Tab B-1-E.

* Tbid., para. 50; ibid., Annex C, Tab C-2.

 

e

For Claimant van Rechteren Limpurg the value of Chiripiro Farm is 680,000
Euros;*?

f) For Claimant Walraven, the value of Springdale Farm is 770,000 Euros;*

For Claimants Weller, the value of the remaining extent of R/E Ruia Ranche farm

is 640,000 Euros and the value of moveable assets 86,628 Euros;

g

h

For Claimant Benjamins, the value of R/E Roscommon farm and R/E Preston

Estate farm is 550,000 Euros and the value of moveable assets 246,668 Euros;*

i) For Claimant des Tombe, the value of Rio Dora farm is 910,000 Euros and the
value of moveable assets 92,490 Euros;“°

j) For Claimant Hansen, the value of Whindale Ranch is 1,410,000 Euros and the

value of moveable assets 38,198 Euros.*”

50. Moreover, according to Valcom, a uniform disturbance claim of USD40,000 is justified.**

51. The Claimants also request “interests on their damages determined at the rate of ten (10)
percent compounded monthly from February 2000." They “reserve the right to seek their costs
(including the fees and costs registered by counsel and experts) in the event they are successful in

this arbitration.”*°

52. On those bases, they “request the Tribunal to find in their favor and order the Respondent to

pay their damages, interest and costs.”*!

 

4" Tbid., para. 58; ibid., Annex D, Tab D-7.

® Tbid., para. 66; ibid., Annex E, Tab E-6.

* Tbid., para. 75; ibid., Annex F, Tab F-16.

“* Tbid., para. 84; ibid., Annex G, Tab G-1-X; Updated Summary Table of Claimants’ Moveable Assets, filed
as an attachment to Claimants’ letter of 19 Oct. 2007.

‘5 Thid., para. 92; ibid., Annex H, Tab H-9.

“© Tbid., para. 99; ibid., Annex 1, Tab LG.

“7 Tbid., para. 109; ibid., Annex J, Tab J-9.

+8 Tbid., paras. 28, 36, 44, 50, 58, 66, 75, 84, 92, 99, 320. The amount of the disturbance claim was restated
by the Claimants at the hearing as 37,440 Euros per Claimant. See Hearing Transcripts, Day 1, 29 Oct. 2007, p. 116.

* Tbid., para. 321.

© ‘Tbid., para. 326.

5! Tbid., para. 327.

B. THE RESPONDENT’S COUNTER-MEMORIAL

53. In its Counter-Memorial of 6 July 2007, the Republic of Zimbabwe addresses the issues

raised in each paragraph of the Claimants’ Memorial.

54. It recalls that “[t]he Lancaster House Agreement that brought about Zimbabwe’s
independence had an entrenched clause guaranteeing the pattern of land ownership for the next
ten years from 1980. During this period land could only be acquired on a willing seller, willing

buyer basis. Very little land was acquired through this method as the whites, who owned large

tracks of land, clung to their farms.”°?

55. The Respondent adds that “[t]his necessitated the promulgation of laws after the 10 years

period . . . to change the unjust land ownership in favour of the masses of Zimbabwe. A Land

953

Reform Resettlement Programme was put in place to guide the acquisition process. In this

context, Section 5 notices and Section 8 orders were issued to the Claimants under the Land
Acquisition Act. “Where the process was defective, the notices and orders were withdrawn,”>* as
testified by the Funnekotter and Walraven’s cases. Moreover, the Claimants were able to seize

“the Administrative Court which was fully functional”®° and continued to function up until 2005.

The acquisitions of land were thus “done in accordance with law.”*°

56. The Respondent then submits that the farm invasions which followed the referendum of

2000, “were a spontaneous reaction by the landless people of Zimbabwe. They were not

57

instigated in any way by the Government. “The police did their best with the resources

*? Respondent's Counter-Memorial, 6 July 2007, p. 1.
3
Id.

* Ibid., p.7; see also ibid., pp. 11-12.
* Tbid., p. 13.

Ibid., p.8.

Ibid., p.7.

available to them to end the farm invasions. Unfortunately due to insufficiency of manpower, it

was not easy to cope with the numerous reports in the circumstances.”**

57. In fact the Government responded to those invasions “by putting in place an accelerated land

959.

reform program,””” which was later amended to conform with Section 16(A) of the Constitution

and was finally found lawful by the Supreme Court.

58. However, the Respondent still encountered obstacles in the acquisition of agricultural land

and the Constitution was accordingly amended in 2005.

59. With respect to the alleged violations of the BIT concluded between the Netherlands and
Zimbabwe, the Respondent first notes that “[t]he Claimants have merely averred that they are
Dutch nationals without furnishing any proof to that effect. The Claimants will therefore be put
to the strictest proof thereof.”

60. It then submits that Article 9(3) of the BIT “provides for the laws that should be applicable in
the event the parties do not agree on which law to apply. Since there is no agreement between the
parties as to which law should apply Respondent submits that its laws should apply.”°!

61. Zimbabwe then contends that the measures it took in depriving Claimants of their properties

were taken in conformity with the Land Acquisition Act and the Constitution.

62. Moreover, according to the Respondent, Article 6 of the BIT was not violated. The measures
concerning the Claimants were taken “in the public interest and under due process of law. They

were not discriminatory.”

 

63. The Respondent adds that its “acquiring authority took heed of the Royal Netherlands
Embassy’s concerns and delisted the properties [concerned] . . . . However the high demand for
land by the landless resulted in re-listing. The police could not contain the spontaneous invasions
due to shortage of manpower.”

64. Zimbabwe, however, “accepts that the deprivation [of property] was not accompanied by . . .
payment of compensation” as provided for by Article 6(c) of the BIT. It “submits that this is the
only issue for arbitration.”

65. Turning to Article 3(1) of the BIT, the “Respondent denies subjecting the Claimants to
treatment that was not fair and equitable.” It recognizes that “Claimants may have encountered
some of the experiences they complain of.”% But it adds that it was confronted with “an
explosion resulting in [a great number] of land occupations.” In the context, it could not do
more to ensure the physical security and protection of the Claimants. To arrest the situation, it
“reacted by putting in place legal instruments to enable the acquisition of more land for

redistribution.”

66. The Respondent illustrates its position by describing the circumstances in which the

Claimants were expropriated and concludes that those expropriations were lawful.

67. Zimbabwe, however, “accepts that Article 6(c) of the agreement provides for payment of

compensation” and notes that “Respondent’s laws provide for compensation for improvements

 

 

only. However, the Respondent intends to fully honour its obligation to pay compensation in

terms of the Agreement.”

68. It adds that it “is in position to restore the claimants to their properties and has already
restored other owners of bilaterally protected investments to their properties,” and as
demonstrated by four cases mentioned in the Counter-Memorial, “restitution is practicable and
possible.””°

69. The Respondent further submits that “[i]f the Claimants do not accept restitution the property
belongs to the State” and “shares, deeds and other indicia” of former ownership cease “to be of
value, even to the Respondent.””!

70. Zimbabwe finally notes the Claimants’ valuation of immovable and moveable properties. It
submits that there is no provision for compensation for disturbance in the Agreement. It contends
that “[t]he principle of compound interest has a punitive element which is not justified in

Claimants’ case since the acquisition was lawful.”””

71. It concludes that it is “aware of its obligations in terms of the Agreement. However, despite

Claimants’ misgivings the Respondent is willing and able to make restitution.””?

© Tbid., p. 22.

Ibid., p. 27 (listing four cases).
™ Tbid., p. 28.

” Tbid., pp. 28-29.

® Tbid., p. 30.

20

Cc. THE CLAIMANTS’ REPLY

72. In their Reply dated 14 August 2007, the Claimants first answer an objection raised by the
Respondent relating to their nationality in producing relevant documents and information. They
observe that Zimbabwe did not raise any other objection with respect to the jurisdiction of the

Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

73. They note that the “Respondent claims that, pursuant to Article 9(3)” of the BIT, “the
applicable law is domestic law,” and that “[h]aving made that assertion, however, the Counter-
Memorial fails to identify in what contexts or as to what issues domestic law should be
applied.” Moreover, “Respondent accepts that ‘generally international law should prevail over
domestic law.”””> Thus, according to the Claimants, “there is no issue concerning applicable law

before the Tribunal.””°

74. The Claimants then submit that “the expropriation . . . was not consistent with Article 6 of

TT

the Dutch Investment Agreement. In this respect, they develop the arguments already

presented in their memorial. They add that, “[b]y supporting the farm invasions, the Government

78

of Zimbabwe acted contrary to public interest. They stress that the land acquisition

programme was “part of the larger effort to expel white farmers and to allocate their properties to

979)

native Zimbabweans” and was thus discriminatory. They submit that “[t]he failure to observe

the commitment of the Note Verbale” sent to the Dutch Embassy in 2000 “was also a breach of

the umbrella clause of Article 3(4) of the Agreement.”*°

Claimants’ Reply, 14 Aug. 2007, para. 11.
Ibid., para. 12 (quoting Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, p. 17).
Ibid.

Ibid., para. 13.
8 Tbid., p.8.

Ibid., para. 21.
© Tbid., para. 24.

21

75. The Claimants note that, in its Counter-Memorial, the Respondent states that, “‘even though
[it] had not immediately computed the payment to be paid to claimants, the Respondent has
always been willing to pay as and when it is able to do so.’”*! However, Article 6(c) of the BIT
specifies that “compensation must ‘be paid and made transferable without delay, to the country
designated by the claimants concerned .. . 28 The Agreement does not define “delay”, but
according to the Claimants, “the Tribunal would be justified in finding that ‘without delay’ means

“83 “To date, the Claimants have

payment no later than three months after the expropriation.
waited at least five years [for] compensation.” No effort has ever been made by Zimbabwe to

compute the payment to be made. In this respect too, Article 6 has been violated.

76. The Claimants reiterate that “the encouragement of the invasions [by the Executive], the
failure to obey Court orders and the enactment of the Land Occupiers Act manifestly demonstrate

a denial of physical security and protection”*> in violation of Article 3(1) of the BIT.

77. They also reaffirm that Zimbabwe did not ensure fair and equitable treatment of their

investments. It did not maintain a stable business environment and abused its authority.*°

78. Furthermore, according to the Claimants the Respondent “is responsible for the acts of its

executive, the ZANU-PF ruling Party; the war veterans and the occupiers of Claimants’

property.”°

79. The Claimants note that the “Respondent claims [to be] in a position to restore [them] to their

property and cites four examples of farms that are currently operated by foreign investors

Ibid., para. 25 (quoting Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, p. 6).
Ibid. (emphasis added in the Claimants’ Reply).

® [bid., para. 26 (emphasis added).

Ibid., para. 27.

Ibid., p. 29.

86 Thid., paras. 69-70.

87 Tbid., p. 34.

22

‘protected’ by investment agreements.”**

However, according to the Claimants, two of those
farms have in fact been invaded and their owners forced to leave. In any case, the Claimants

would not accept restitution for the reasons already set forth in their memorial.

80. They finally contend that compound interest is justified in the circumstances of this

arbitration in the light of the most recent case law relating to expropriation.”

81. In conclusion, the Claimants “urge the Tribunal to find that the actions of Respondent
violated its obligations pursuant to Articles 3 and 6 of the Dutch Investment Agreement for the

reasons detailed in the Claimants’ Memorial and this Reply.”

D. THE RESPONDENT’S REJOINDER

82. In its Rejoinder of 24 October 2007, the Respondent maintains its previous submissions.
However, it states that finally it “does not object to the jurisdiction of the Centre” and that it

“withdraw[s] the offer for restitution” it previously made.*!

83. The Respondent contends that it did not violate articles 3, 6 and 7 of the BIT. It first “denies
that the farms occupations [sic] were instigated and supported by the Respondent’s Executive and

Officials.” It adds that “[t]he situation was riotous and chaotic . . . similar to what is envisaged

993

in Article 7 of the Agreement”” and that the police did its best in such situation. According to

Respondent’s contention, Article 3(1) of the BIT was not violated.”

Ibid., para. 8 (citing Respondent's Counter-Memorial, p. 27).
Ibid., paras. 73-80.
” ‘Tbid., para. 81.
Respondent's Rejoinder, 24 Oct. 2007, p. 5.
° Tbid., p. 3.
® Ibid., p. 13.
Ibid., p. 3.

23

84. With respect to Article 6, the Respondent submits that the conditions set out in paragraphs (a)
and (b) are met. In this respect, it stresses that it “acquired land to address the need of the
landless and Liberation War veterans. The acquisition affected all holders of land and thus was
not discriminatory.” Moreover the undertaking vis-a-vis the Dutch Embassy “did not preclude
the Government of Zimbabwe from acquiring land at any time as long as it was in the public

interest.”°°

85. With respect to article 6(c) the Respondent contends that “[n]on-payment of compensation by
the Respondent is due to the fact Claimants never instituted the Zimbabwe law valuation and

”°” Tt takes note of the

certification procedures pursuant to Zimbabwean publications . . .
evaluation of the damages provided for by the Claimants, and it furnishes its own valuation.
However, it submits that under its construction of Article 6, the net value of the Claimants’
property must be “‘certified by an independent firm of auditors’””? and adds that “until a date of
valuation is determined, Respondent is not in a position to complete its submission on
valuation.” '°° It adds that “Domestic Zimbabwean law should apply in the interpretation of the

Agreement and the calculation of compensation . . . viol

It requests the Arbitral Tribunal to
designate an independent auditor as provided in the BIT to assess the genuine value of the

investments. |

95

p.3.
Ibid., p. 4; ibid., Annexure J-2: Affidavit Statement of Mr. Sifelani Moyo, 24 Oct. 2007, and its annexes

 

® Ibid. (quoting BIT, Art. 6(c) (emphasis omitted); ibid. pp. 13-14.
1 Thid., p. 6.
1 Thid., p. 4.
'® Thid., p. 7.

24

E. THE HEARING

86. At the hearing, held on 29 to 31 October 2007, the Claimants confirmed their submissions

and arguments.

87. In relation to quantum of damages, they stressed that they did not have to submit valuations
according to Zimbabwean legislation to be entitled to compensation under the BIT. Moreover,
the parties could finalize their expert valuation evidence before determination by the Tribunal of
the date of valuation. The Claimants added that this valuation has to be made in most instances at

the date of Section 8 notices.

88. The Claimants then stressed that, in case of lawful expropriation, the compensation must
correspond to the genuine value of the investment expropriated as provided for in Article 6(c) of
the BIT. This genuine value, in the present case, does not correspond to the net asset value of the
investment as certified by auditors, but to the market value. The Claimants further noted that
other BITs concluded by Zimbabwe do not impose certification by auditors. Thus and in any
case, no obligation of certification could be imposed on the Claimants who benefit from the most
favored nation clause. Moreover in case of unlawful expropriation, an additional sum of 37,440
Euros must be paid for disturbance of each Claimant, as requested in the Memorial and re-stated
at the hearing,’ and for moral damages (evaluated at 100,000 Euros for each Claimant), as

requested for the first time at the hearing.'™

89. At the hearing, the Respondent also maintained its previous submissions and arguments. It
recalled the history of British colonization in Zimbabwe and in particular the conditions in which,
in “1930, the Land Apportionment Act . . . set aside 51% of the fertile arable land for the white

minority.” !°> It contended that the Note Verbale sent by the Ministry of Foreign affairs to the

8 Hearing Transcripts, Day 1, 29 Oct. 2007, p. 116.
' Tbid., Day 1, 29 Oct. 29, 2007, pp. 96-97, 109, 115-116; ibid., Day 3, 31 Oct. 2007, pp. 20, 38.
5 Thid., Day 2, 30 Oct. 2007, p. 159.

25

Dutch Embassy cannot be considered as an undertaking of the Government of Zimbabwe.' It
added that compensation must, in the present case, be calculated on the basis of the market value
in 1999.'°’ However account must be taken of the investment initially made, of the date of such
an investment and of the profit resulting in the past of investment. Account must also be taken of

the fact that discounting from the market value is to be made in case of large scale nationalization.

Il. THE DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL

90. The Claimants are Dutch nationals who directly or indirectly owned large commercial farms
in Zimbabwe. It is not disputed that they were deprived of their properties sometime between
2001 and 2003 through invasion of their farms by settlers and veterans of the 1980 war for
Zimbabwean independence and/or through various orders taken by the Government of Zimbabwe
under the Land Acquisition Act of 1992. Finally an amendment to the Zimbabwe Constitution in

2005 formalized the expropriation of their farms. They received no compensation.

A. JURISDICTION

91. The Claimants submit that Zimbabwe, in acting the way it did, breached its obligations under
Articles 3 and 6 of the BIT and request the Tribunal to order the Respondent to pay them
damages, plus interest and costs. They invoke the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over these claims under
the terms of the Article 9(1) of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.'°° Article 9(1)
states that “[a]ny legal dispute between a Contracting Party and a national of the other
Contracting Party arising directly out of an investment of that national in the territory of the
former Contracting Party . . . [if not] settled within six months of the date when it is raised by one

of the parties to the dispute, . . . shall, at the request of the national concerned, be submitted for

'°6 Thid., p. 231.
'°" Ihid., Day 3, 31 Oct. 2007, pp. 64-65.
*°8 Claimants’ Memorial, 16 March 2007, para. 12.

26

settlement by conciliation or arbitration.”'” Article 25 of the ICSID Convention extends ICSID
jurisdiction to “any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting

State . . . and a national of another Contracting State.”!!°

92. The Claimants have asserted all of the elements to bring themselves within the jurisdictional
provisions of these agreements. As noted earlier, the Claimants assert that they are all Dutch
nationals or entities controlled by Dutch nationals and that their interests in Zimbabwe that are at
issue in this dispute qualify as “investments” within the meaning of the BIT.!!! They also assert
that there has been no settlement of the matter within the relevant time frame specified in the BIT.

Thus, the Claimants state, their claims fulfill the jurisdictional requirements of these accords.

93. The Respondent, however, initially contested one basis for this Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial states that the Claimants did not furnish proof of Dutch
nationality, a factor essential to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction. "2 The Claimants, having previously
supplied the necessary documentation in their request for arbitration, reproduced that
documentation in their Reply and included additional information respecting the Claimants’

113

nationality. ~ In its Rejoinder, the Respondent declared that it “does not object to the jurisdiction

of the Centre.”!' And in his opening statement for Respondent at the hearing on the merits,

Respondent’s counsel Mr. Kimbrough confirmed that position.'!>

94. In light of the importance of jurisdiction as a foundation for arbitral decisions and the special
competence granted to arbitral tribunals to determine their jurisdiction, the Tribunal considers it

important to address, albeit briefly, the question of jurisdiction despite the current agreement

1 BIT, Art. 9(1).

"© Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States
{hereinafter ICSID Convention], Art. 25(1).

"! Memorial, paras. 12-1

'? Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 6 July 2007, p. 1.

‘3 Claimants’ Reply, 14 Aug. 2007, paras. 9-10; ibid., Annex 4.

"4 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 24 Oct. 2007, p. 5.

"5 Hearing Transcripts, Day 2, 30 Oct. 2007, p. 34.

 

27

between the parties. It is the Tribunal’s judgment that jurisdiction under the BIT and ICSID

Convention has been established: all three requisites for jurisdiction have been met.

95. First, the Claimants have established that they are Dutch nationals and, thus, are within the
provisions of both the BIT and ICSID Convention as nationals of a Contracting Party (BIT) or
Contracting State (ICSID). It is also not alleged, nor does the Tribunal have any reason to
believe, that the Claimants were also nationals of Zimbabwe. Second, the subject matter of the
dispute before this Tribunal clearly arises directly out of an investment by the Claimants in the
territory of the Respondent. As the Claimants note, the BIT uses a very broad definition of
investment to include property of all kinds, rights derived from shares in firms, and title to assets,
among other things.'!° The physical properties, shares in companies, and other assets at issue in
this dispute plainly are within that definition. Although the Respondent suggested during the
hearing on the merits that a different valuation might be required for investments that were the
products of monies brought into Zimbabwe some years ago, Respondent also acknowledged that
the investments nonetheless fall within the BIT’s scope.!!7 Finally, the Claimants have brought
claims within the appropriate time frame. Their claims are for deprivations that occurred well
after the BIT entered into effect, eliminating any question whether the BIT’s terms are applicable
to the dispute over these investments. Further, the BIT applies to investments made before the

8

date at which the treaty entered into force.!'® For all of these reasons, the Tribunal concludes

that it has jurisdiction over the Claims before it.

"6 BIT, Art. I(a); Claimants’ Memorial, 16 March 2007, paras. 215-219.
‘7 Hearing Transcripts, Day 2, pp. 186-189.
"S BIT, Art. 10.

28

B. ALLEGED BREACHES OF THE BIT

96. Turning to the substance of the case, the Tribunal will first consider the submissions of the

Claimants based on Article 6 of the BIT. Under that Article,

[nJeither Contracting Party shall subject nationals of the other Contracting Party to any measures

depriving them, directly or indirectly, of their investments unless the following conditions are

complied with:

a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of law;

b) the measures are not discriminatory or contrary to any undertaking which the former
Contracting Party may have given;

e

the measures are accompanied by provision of just compensation. Such compensation shall
represent the genuine value of the investments affected and shall, in order to be effective for
the claimants, be paid and made transferable, without delay, to the country designated by the
claimants concerned and in the currency of the country of which the claimants are nationals or
in any free convertible currency accepted by the claimants. The genuine value of the
investments shall include, but not exclusively, the net asset value thereof as certified by an
independent firm of auditors.'”

The Claimants submit that the expropriations of their properties were in violation of

subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Article 6.

97. Zimbabwe, although it denies any responsibility in the farm occupation by settlers and war
veterans “concede[s] that compulsory acquisition . . . done in terms of the Land Acquisition Act
and the Constitution of Zimbabwe . . . is tantamount to expropriation.” !2° It contends however

that the measures it then took did not violate Article 6.

98. The Tribunal observes that the conditions enumerated in Article 6 are cumulative. In
other terms, if any of those conditions is violated, there is a breach of Article 6. The Tribunal will
first examine whether or not subparagraph (c) relating to the provisions of a just compensation
has been breached. If it arrives to the conclusion that it has, it will not be necessary for it to
consider whether, as alleged by the Claimants, the other conditions provided for in that Article or

the provisions of Article 3 have also been breached.

‘BIT, Art. 6.
2° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 6 July 2007, p. 20.

29

99. With respect to subparagraph (c), Zimbabwe in its Counter-Memorial does not deny that
the deprivation of properties complained of was not accompanied by the provision of payment of
compensation as contemplated by that subparagraph. '! However, in its Rejoinder and at the

hearing it justifies this lack of compensation on three following grounds.

100. | Zimbabwe contends first that “Non-payment of compensation by the Respondent is due
to the fact that Claimants never instituted the Zimbabwe law valuation and certification
procedures pursuant to Zimbabwean [law].”'?? The Tribunal will observe that Zimbabwe Law
provided only for compensation for the fixed improvements on or to the land expropriated. The
Claimants were not ready to accept such compensation and, in conformity with article 9(1) of the
BIT, they requested full compensation from the Government of Zimbabwe before going to
arbitration. There was no obligation on them to exhaust local remedies before doing so, and the

argument of Zimbabwe on this point cannot be upheld by the Tribunal.

101. | Second, Zimbabwe submits that the delay in payment is due to the fact that “the net asset
value of the Claimants’ properties has not been certified by an independent firm of auditors as

provided in Article 6(c) of the Agreement.”!”

The Tribunal will note that, before the present
proceedings, the Government of Zimbabwe never considered paying full compensation for the
damage suffered by the Claimants in the terms of Article 6(c) and never asked for the certification

contemplated by that Article. It is only before the Tribunal!

that the Respondent declared that it
“intends to fully honour its obligation to pay compensation in the terms of the agreement.” Thus
the Respondent cannot claim that the delay in payment was justified by the absence of the

certification contemplated by Article 6(c).

1! Counter-Memorial, p. 16.
2 Respondent's Rejoinder, 24 Oct. 2007, p. 3.
13
Id., p.3.
4 Counter-Memorial, p.22

30

102. Zimbabwe then invokes the defense that a state of necessity or emergency existed, which,
in its submission, relieved Respondent of responsibility for complying with otherwise applicable
provisions of the BIT. It submits that such state “began on 20 March 2000 and continued until 13
September 2005,” and that “[t]his rightfully suspended Respondent’s obligation to evaluate

\5 77125

compensation at the date of such evaluation until 14 September 200: In this respect, it

invokes Zimbabwe domestic law, Article 7 of the BIT and customary International Law.

103. The Tribunal observes that, Zimbabwe domestic law may in this respect provide the
Tribunal useful information on the situation which prevailed in Zimbabwe from 2002 to 2005.
However, the Tribunal also notes that during that period there had been no state of emergency
declared in that country. In any event, it is on the basis of the applicable rules of International
Law that, in conformity with Article 9(3) of the BIT, the Tribunal must decide whether or not
there was at the time a state of necessity which could have made lawful deprivation of property
without compensation. In other words, ultimately international law, not the domestic law of
Zimbabwe, must determine the effect any state of emergency would have on the dispute before

the Tribunal.

104. The Tribunal recalls that Article 7 of the BIT provides that “[n]Jationals of the one
Contracting Party who suffer losses in respect of their investment in the territory of the other
Contracting Party owing to war or other armed conflict, revolution, a state of national emergency,
revolt, insurrection or riot shall be accorded by the latter Contracting Party treatment, as regards
restitution, indemnification, compensation or other settlement, no less favourable that that which
that Contracting Party accords to its own nationals or nationals of any third State, whichever is

4.718

more favourable to the nationals concerne Thus, and contrary to what the Respondent

submits, Article 7 does not exonerate Contracting Parties from their obligation under Article 6 in

5 Rejoinder, p. 4.
°° BIT, Art. 7.

31

case of national emergency or riot. It only provides in such a case for a further guarantee of equal

treatment with nationals of the Contracting Party or nationals of Third Parties.

105. By contrast, according to the International Court of Justice, “the state of necessity is a
ground recognized by customary international law for precluding the wrongfulness of an act not
in conformity with an international obligation.” !7” However “the state of necessity can only be
invoked under certain strictly defined conditions which must be cumulatively satisfied; and the

State concerned is not the sole judge of whether those conditions have been met,” 178

106. In the present case, Zimbabwe is invoking state of necessity, first, to explain its
difficulties to face the situation resulting from the invasion of commercial farms by settlers and
war veterans; second, to justify the measures of expropriation it took in the public interest.
However, it never explains why such a state of necessity prevented it from calculating and paying
the compensation due to the farmers in conformity with the BIT. The argument drawn on that

point by the Respondent from the alleged state of necessity, therefore, cannot be upheld.

107. | As a consequence, the Tribunal concludes that Zimbabwe breached its obligation under
Article 6(c) of the BIT to pay just compensation to the Claimants. Accordingly, as stated in
paragraph 98 above, the Tribunal does not need to consider whether other provisions of the BIT

have been violated.

108. ‘It remains for the Tribunal to fix the damages due to the Claimants. In this respect
Zimbabwe submits that the damages must be calculated as specified in Article 6(c). For their
part, the Claimants contend that the standard of compensation provided for in Article 6(c) is the

standard applicable in case of lawful expropriation. By contrast, compensation due in case of

7 Gabéikovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary v. Slovakia), Judgement of 25 Sept. 1997, LC.J. Reports 1997,
para. 51, p. 37.
"8 Thid.

32

unlawful expropriation must be calculated according to customary international law as decided by

the Permanent Court of International Justice in the Chorzow Factory case. 129

109. In that case, the Permanent Court made a distinction between lawful and unlawful
expropriation. It held that, in case of lawful expropriation, the damages suffered must be repaired

through the “payment of fair compensation” or “the just price of what was expropriated” at the

0

time of the expropriation. '° By contrast, it decided that, in case of unlawful expropriation,

international law provides for restitutio in integrum or, if impossible, its monetary equivalent at

the time of the judgment.

110. In recent years, there has been some debate on that distinction. The Iran-United States
Claims Tribunal in the Amoco case observed in 1987 that, in spite of the fact that the Chorzow

Factory case “is nearly sixty years old, this judgment is widely regarded as the most authoritative

131

exposé of the principles applicable in this field and is still valid to day. More recently an

ICSID Tribunal similarly held that the BIT’s standards of compensation apply only to lawful
expropriations and that those standards “cannot be used to determine the issue of damages

payable in the case of an unlawful expropriation.” However, the contrary opinion has also

134;

been advanced'** and case law is not perfectly clear in this respect, ~~” in particular in case of lack

of compensation.

° Case Concerning the Factory at Chorz6w (Claim for Indemnity) (Germany v. Poland), 1928 P.C.LJ. (ser.
A) No. 17 (13 Sept.) [hereinafter Chrozow Factory].

180 7d., para. 47.

5! Amoco Inter’l Fin. Corp. v. Iran, Partial Award, Iran-U.S. Cl. Trib., No. 310-56-3 (14 July 1987).

"2 ADC Affiliate Ltd and ADC & ADMC Mgmt Ltd v. Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16), Award of 2
Oct. 2006, para. 481.

* See e.g., Michael W. Reisman and Robert D. Sloone, Indirect expropriation and its valuation in the BIT
Convention, 2004 British Y.B. Int'l L., p. 133; Audley Sheppard, The distinction between Lawful and Unlawful
Expropriation, in the Investment Arbitratory and the Energy Charter Treaty, 2006, p. 172.

See, e.g., CME Czech Republic B.V. (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, 14 March
2003; Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Award of 8 December 2000;
Metalclad Corp. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1) Award of 30 Aug. 2000; Middle East
Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/6), Award of 12
April 2002.

33

111. As the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal rightly observed in the Amoco case,
“Obviously, the value of an expropriated enterprise does not vary according to the lawfulness or
the unlawfulness of the taking .... The difference is that, if the taking is lawful the value of the
undertaking at the time of the dispossession is the measure and the limit of the compensation,
while if it is unlawful, this value is or may be, only a part of the reparation to be paid.”!5 In
general, as the same Tribunal stated in the Phillips Petroleum case, “the lawful/unlawful taking
distinction . . . is relevant only to two possible issues: whether restitution of the property can be
awarded and whether compensation can be awarded for increase of the value of the property
between the date of the taking and the date of the judicial or arbitral decision awarding

compensation.” 186

112. In the present case, both Parties finally exclude restitution of the farms expropriated. '*7
Moreover, it is not alleged that there was some increase of the value of those farms between the
date of the taking and the date of the present award. Therefore, the major points of difference that
distinguish computation of damages for lawful expropriation from computation of damages for

unlawful expropriation are not here in issue.

113. | However, the Parties diverge on the date of the evaluation of the damages suffered and on

the method to be applied for such an evaluation.

114. On the first point, the Claimants submitted in their memorials that the damages must be
evaluated at the date the investment was lost, i.e., the date of invasion of their farm by settlers and

war veterans. However, at the hearing, they amended those submissions and accepted that when

5 Amoco Inter’l Fin. Corp., para. 197.

86 Phillips Petroleum Co. Iran v. Iran, Partial Award, Iran-U.S. Cl. Trib., No. 425-39-2 (28 June 1989), para
122.

87 Claimants’ Memorial, 16 March 2007, paras. 298-301; Respondent's Rejoinder, 24 Oct. 2007, p. 5.

34

Section 8 orders were issued, the dates of such orders be retained as the date of dispossession.'**
The Respondent, for its part, contends that, due to the state of necessity or emergency which
prevailed from 2000 to 2005, there is no taking attributable to the State before 14 September
2005, date of the Constitution amendment. !*? However, it adds that “there was no market for land

after 2000”'*° in Zimbabwe and that, as a consequence, the date of valuation must be 1999.

115. The Tribunal is of the opinion that the damages suffered by the Claimants must be
evaluated at the date of dispossession. This is the rule both under general international law and
under Article 6(c) of the BIT and the Respondent has not established that there was at the time
any state of necessity precluding the application of such a rule (see paragraph 106, above). The
identity of calculation under the BIT and general international law reinforces the Tribunal’s
conclusion that arguments respecting the treatment of a violation of Article 6(c) as a lawful or
unlawful expropriation need not be reached. The Tribunal is, however, called upon to fix the

dates of dispossession which are in dispute.

116. In most cases, the Zimbabwe authorities issued in 2001 or 2002 orders under Section 8 of
the Land Acquisition Act divesting the Claimants of their interest in their property. The
Claimants ask the Tribunal to fix the date of evaluation of the damages at the date of those
Orders, even when they had previously been forced to abandon their farms due to its invasion by
settlers and war veterans. In these cases, accordingly, the Tribunal does not have to decide on the
impact of those invasions. In all cases where Section 8 orders had been issued, it will retain the
date of issuance of those orders in 2001 or 2002 as the date at which the damages are to be

valuated.

8 Hearing Transcripts, Day 1, 29 Oct. 2007, pp. 101-103.

'° Hearing Transcripts, Day 2, 30 Oct. 2007, pp. 177-178.
‘40 Examination of Mr. Sifelani Moyo, ibid., p. 87.

35

117. However, in the case of Mr. van Duren (for Bimi Estate farm) and Mr. Benjamins (for
R/E Preston Estate and R/E Roscommon farms), no Section 8 orders were issued. For Mr.
Funnekotter (for R/E Warren farm), a Section 8 order was issued, but later withdrawn. Those
Claimants, accordingly, submit that they were deprived of their property at the date of invasion of
their property by settlers and war veterans in 2001 or 2002 and they contend that the Government
of Zimbabwe is responsible for those events. The Respondent denies its responsibility for those
invasions and maintains that the interests of those farmers were expropriated only in 2005 as the

result of the amendment of the Constitution.

118. The Tribunal observes that, in those three cases, the Claimants were not deprived of their
property or were only temporarily deprived of those properties by Section 8 orders taken under
the Land Acquisition Act of 1992. However they were dispossessed of their farms under the Rural
Land Occupiers (Protection from Eviction) Act of 2001. That Act qualified rural land occupiers
as “Protected Occupiers.” It specified in its Article 3(2) that “[nJotwithstanding anything to the
contrary in any other law, but subject to this Act, no Court shall issue any order for the recovery
of possession from a protected occupier... .” ‘S| Under the same Article, ejection therefrom of a
protected occupier and payment of damages by such occupier was also excluded. Those
provisions were applicable to any rural land for which a Preliminary Section 5 notice had been

issued. Similar provisions applied in case of issuance of Section 5 notices after June 2001.

119. In the case of R/E Warren farm, Section 5 notices were issued in June 2000 and June
2001. The first notice concerning that farm was withdrawn in November 2001 and a new notice
was issued in March 2002. For Bimi Estate farm, a notice was issued in October 2000 and
withdrawn in September 2002, at a date at which Mr. Van Duren and his family had already left
their property. Notices concerning R/E Preston Estate and R/E Roscommon farms were issued in

September 2001. It thus appears that the settlers and war veterans who occupied those three

‘4! Rural Land Occupiers (Protection from Eviction) Act, s. 3(2) (2001).

36

estates in 2001 were “protected occupiers” within the meaning of the Land Occupiers Act of
2001. Under that Act, the Claimants were unable to recover the possession of their land. In those
circumstances, the Tribunal does not have to pronounce itself on the responsibility of Zimbabwe
in the initial occupation of the farms. It is enough for the Tribunal to note that, under the Act, the
Claimants have in fact lost the possession of their property in 2001. The Respondent is
responsible for such a dispossession. The damage resulting from appropriation of these lands

must be evaluated as of the date of entry into force of the Act, i.e. 5 June 2001.

120. In addition to their disagreement on the period over which the loss is to be calculated, the
parties also disagree on the method of calculation of the damages. In this respect, the Claimants
urge the Tribunal “to apply the standard of compensation set out in the Chorzow Factory case and
use a measure of damages that ‘wipes out all the consequences of the illegal acts’” of
Zimbabwe.'” For that purpose, they produce valuations of their property on the basis of market

value at the date of dispossession.

121. | The Respondent recalls that, under Article 6(c) of the BIT, the compensation to be paid in
case of expropriation “shall represent the genuine value of the investments affected.” Article 6(c)
further declares that this value “shall include, but not exclusively, the net asset value thereof as

certified by an independent firm of auditors.”!*7

Zimbabwe requests the appointment of an
independent firm of auditors to certify the net asset value of the farms, before determination by
the Tribunal of the damages according to Article 6(c). However, Zimbabwe also provides the

Tribunal with a valuation based on the market value of the lands expropriated and of the

permanent improvements made to those lands.

‘© Memorial, para. 296 (quoting Chrozow Factory).
‘8 BIT, Art. 6(c).

37

122. The Tribunal first notes that compensation under Article 6(c) must represent the “genuine
value of the investment [].” In certain cases, the net asset value, i.e., the value as recorded in the
accounts, will not correspond to the genuine value. If the net asset value is lower than the

genuine value, compensation will be higher than the net asset value.

123. In the present case, the Claimants assume that the net asset value of the investments is
lower than the market value as they evaluate it.’ The Respondent does not challenge this
position and the Tribunal equally agrees with it. Thus, even if, as contended by Zimbabwe,
Article 6(c) of the BIT was applicable to the calculation of the damages, it would not be necessary
to obtain the certificate contemplated by that article before making that calculation. Whatever
may be the basis of evaluation — general international law or Article 6 — the damages must
correspond to the genuine value of the properties at the time of expropriation. The Tribunal,
therefore does not have to consider whether, as submitted by the Claimants, the corresponding
provisions of Article 6(c) could be put aside under the most favoured nation clause incorporated

in the BIT.

124. At the hearing, the Respondent, however, contended that, in this calculation, account
must be taken of the investment initially made, of the date of that investment and of the profit
resulting in the past from the investment. It also submitted that discounting from the market value
must be made in case of large scale nationalizations. The Tribunal observes that, under general
international law as well as under the BIT, investors have a right to indemnities corresponding to
the value of their investment, independently of the origin and past success of their investment, '*°
as well as of the number and aim of the expropriations done. 46 Tt will accordingly proceed to the
evaluation of the damages suffered in each case at the date of dispossession on the basis of the

market value at that date.

‘4 Hearing Transcripts, Day 1, 29 Oct. 2007, pp. 136-37.
'5 See Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18), Award of 26 July 2007.
M6 See Fedax N.V. v. Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3), Award of 9 March 1998.

38

Cc. EVALUATION OF THE DAMAGES

125. In order to proceed to those evaluations, the Tribunal has at its disposal experts’ reports

from both parties.

126. The Claimants have produced a report from Mr. Graham Charles Mullett, Managing
Director of Redfern, Mullett & Company and Chairman of the Valuation Consortium, which
recorded details of farms expropriated in terms of the current action. Mr. Mullett, in his report,
gives information on the development and agricultural characteristics of Zimbabwe, as well as its
economics history. He then summarizes the international and local practices for valuation of
land. Using a data basis developed by the Consortium, he finally proceeds to an evaluation of

each estate along the following lines: M47

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OWNER FARM DESCRIPTION VALUATION
(in Euros)
B. H. Funnekotter R/E Warren farm 1,050,000
B. H. Funnekotter Anwa Farm 1,070,000
H. van Duren Bimi Estate farm 940,000
M. van Duren Warren A farm 780,000
D. R. Beytenbach Faroe Estate farm 1,030,000
R. G. Fisher Farways Farm 1,130,000
impure G. van Rechteren | Cisipiro Farm 680,000
R. J.P. Walraven Springdale Farm 770,000
W. J. Weller, L. Weller and | Rye Ruia Ranch farm 640,000

J. P. Weller

 

R/E Roscommon farm and

R/E Preston farm 550,000

L. H. Benjamins

 

 

 

 

 

‘7 See supra notes 36-47.

39

 

C. F. des Tombe Rio Dora farm 910,000

 

E. Hansen Whindale Ranch 1,140,000

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL| — 10,690,000

 

127. | The Respondent produces an affidavit statement signed by Mr. Sifelani Moyo, Acting
Deputy Director Valuation and Estate Management for the Ministry of Lands, Land Reform and
Resettlement in which he explains the methods used by the Zimbabwe Authorities for valuation
of rural lands and permanent improvements to those lands. On those basis, he evaluates the

expropriated properties, as follows: 48

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OWNER FARM DESCRIPTION VALUATION
(in Euros)
B. H. Funnekotter R/E Warren farm 261,964
B. H. Funnekotter Anwa Farm 51,507
H. van Duren Bimi Estate farm 99,168
M. van Duren Warren A farm 109,329
D. R. Breytenbach Faroe Estate farm 52,819
R. G. Fisher Farways Farm 20,157
Linu G. van Rechteren | Cisipiro Farm 36,917
R. J.P. Walraven Springdale Farm 52,819
W.J. Weller, L. Weller and R/E Ruia Ranch farm 45,000

J. P. Weller

 

R/E Roscommon farm and

LH. Benjamins RZ Preston farm

45,716

 

C. F. des Tombe Rio Dora farm 51,000

 

 

 

 

 

4 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 24 Oct. 2007, Affidavit Statement of Mr. Sifelani Moyo, 24 Oct. 2007, and its
annexes 2-14,

40

 

E. Hansen Whindale Ranch 46,551

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL 872,947

 

128. Although the valuations advanced by the parties are very different, the Tribunal does not
deem it necessary to have recourse to further expertise, which, in the circumstances of the case,

would most probably not provide more useful information.

129. The difference appearing in the valuations results first of all from the fact that the experts
of the parties do not use the same method. Mr. Mullett values each farm as a production unit at
its market value in 2001/2002. Mr. Moyo evaluates first the arable land as such and then the
permanent improvements made to the land, such as homestead, compound housing, other farm
buildings, plantations, fencing, cattle, handling facilities, greenhouses or roads. He proceeds to
this last valuation in calculating the Current Replacement Costs of those installations in
1999/2000 and in applying to those costs a depreciation rate. At the hearing, he justified this

approach by reference to Zimbabwe domestic law. He recognized that “if the values had been

combined, the amount was going to be more.” !”

130. Tribunal observes that the genuine value of the properties does not correspond to the
value of the arable land plus the estimated value of the various buildings and equipments which
are necessary for the operation of the farms. Genuine value must be determined on the basis of
the market value of the whole farm at the time of expropriation. Thus the figures advanced by
Mr. Moyo are not computed properly according to law and arrive at computations of value that

are obviously too low.

131. For his part, the Claimants’ expert based his computations on a correct starting point in
respect of the valuation of a market value for the properties as a whole. There are, however,

questions raised about his computations as well. Claimants’ expert, Mr. Mullett, submits that

Hearing Transcripts, Day 2, 30 Oct. 2007, pp. 96-97.

41

there was still in 2001/2002 a market for rural properties in Zimbabwe and that the price of those
properties on that market had increased by around 15% from 1999 to 2002.'°° The Respondent
denies it. The Tribunal observes that Mr. Mullett is basing his appreciation of the evolution of the
prices in rural areas on the evolution of the prices in urban areas and in particular in Harare during
those years. The Tribunal, however, is not convinced that, in the situation of Zimbabwe at that

time, such a comparison is valid.

132. The Tribunal has carefully examined the various elements at its disposal for the
evaluation of the properties concerned. For each of them, it considered the natural region in
which it falls and the quality of the soils (dry arable land, good or rough grazing, irrigated land).
It also took into account the production of the farms (tobacco, maize, wheat, flowers, vegetables,
fruits, cattle, etc). It finally considered the equipments, their importance and their state
(homestead, farm buildings, roads, fencing, irrigation systems, water and electricity facilities,
greenhouses, etc.). It concludes that the damages suffered by the Claimants for loss of their
immovable property is to be fixed as follows in Euros (currency of the nationality of the

Claimants, as required in the present case by Article 6(c) of the BIT):

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OWNER FARM DESCRIPTION DAMAGES
(in Euros)
B. H. Funnekotter R/E Warren farm 690,000
B. H. Funnekotter Anwa Farm 700,000
H. van Duren Bimi Estate farm 620,000
M. van Duren Warren A farm 510,000
D. R. Breytenbach Faroe Estate farm 680,000
R. G. Fisher Farways Farm 740,000

 

M. W. A. G. van Rechteren

. Chiripiro Farm 450,000
Limpurg

 

 

 

 

 

'50 Thid., Day 1, 29 Oct. 2007, p. 145.

42

 

 

 

 

 

 

R. J. P. Walraven Springdale Farm 500,000

W. J. Weller, L. Weller and ey Ruia Ranche farm 420,000

J.P. Weller

oe R/E Roscommon farm and

L. H. Benjamins R/E Preston farm 360,000

C. F. des Tombe Rio Dora farm 600,000

E. Hansen Whindale Ranch 930,000
TOTAL 7,200,000

 

 

 

 

 

133. | Some of the Claimants also request compensation for moveable assets left behind when
their farm was abandoned. They produce certificates emanating from the Valuation Consortium

evaluating those assets as follows: '*!

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OWNER FARM DESCRIPTION DAMAGES

(in Euros)
B. H. Funnekotter R/E Warren farm 568,898
H. and M. van Duren Bimi Estate farm 195,958
D. R. Breytenbach Faroe Estate farm 149,811
R. G. Fisher Farways Farm 31,733
re Ww nee L. Weller and | RvB Ruia Ranche farm 86,628
L. H. Benjamins Ne poscommon farm and 246,668
C. F. des Tombe Rio Dora farm 92,490
E. Hansen Whindale Ranch 38,198

TOTAL 1,410,384

 

'S! See supra notes 36-41, 44-47.

4B

 

134. | The Respondent’s expert, Mr. Moyo considers that those “figures substantially overstate
actual value of such moveables in Zimbabwe.” Accordingly, he “divid[ed] Claimants’ figures by

3 to arrive at a realistic value.”

135. | The Tribunal carefully considered the elements provided by the parties. It notes that
some of the figures advanced by the Claimants seem too high, taking into account the economic
situation prevailing in Zimbabwe in 2001/2002. It also observes that, in the valuation of the
Consortium submitted on behalf of the Claimants in connection with Mr. Mullett’s report, no
indication is given on the age and state of a number of moveables (such as tractors or vehicles).
Finally, the Tribunal notes that some of the equipment mentioned as moveable assets must be

3

considered as immoveable assets! and that their loss already has been compensated on that

ground.

136. In the light of those considerations the Tribunal evaluates the damages of the Claimants

for loss of moveable assets as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OWNER FARM DESCRIPTION DAMAGES
(in Euros)

B. H. Funnekotter R/E Warren farm 358,000
H. and M. van Duren Bimi Estate farm 100,000
D. R. Breytenbach Faroe Estate farm 100,000
R. G. Fisher Farways Farm 17,000
Po wae” L. Weller and R/E Ruia Ranch farm 58,000

R/E Roscommon farm and 167,000

L. H. Benjamins RZ Preston farm

 

 

 

 

 

'S? Respondent's Rejoinder, 24 Oct. 2007, Tab 3: Affidavit Statement of Sifelani Moyo, Annex 18A; see also
ibid., Annex 18B for the figures of “Zimbabwean Valuation” of moveable assets.
'53 See statement by Mr. Mullett, Hearing Transcripts, Day 1, 29 Oct. 2007, p. 148.

44

 

C. F. des Tombe Rio Dora farm Nil

 

E. Hansen Whindale Ranch Nil

 

TOTAL 800,000

 

 

 

 

 

137. In their Memorial, the Claimants finally submit that they must be compensated for the
disturbance to them and their family from the decisions taken by Zimbabwe Authorities. They
produce an analysis of those damages made by Mr. Mullett and each of them asks, on that basis,
for USD40,000. The Respondent for its part, submits that “[t]he Claimants’ claims for

disturbances . . . are not justified.”'**

138. | The Tribunal considers that the Claimants must obtain reparation for the disturbances
resulting from the taking over of their farms and for the necessity for them to start a new life often
in another country. It evaluates the damages suffered in this respect for each Claimant at 20,000

Euros.

139. At the hearing, the Claimants for the first time asked for 100,000 Euros for moral

damages. 'SS The Respondent contends that those claims are not justified. '*°

140. The Tribunal considers that those new claims partially concern damages already
compensated by the allocation of a disturbances indemnity. In any event, those claims were
formulated briefly and only at a very late stage of the proceedings and are, therefore, for that

reason inadmissible. *”

'S4 Hearing Transcripts, Day 3, 31 Oct. 2007, p. 62.

85 Tbid., Day 1, 20 Oct. 2007, pp. 96-97, 109, 115-116; ibid., Day 3, 31 Oct., 2007, pp. 20, 38.

'86 Thid., Day 3, 31 Oct. 2007, p. 62.

'57 See Case Concerning the Legality of Use of Force (Serbia and Montenegro v. Netherlands), Order of 2
June 1999, C.J. Reports 1999, para. 43, p. 556.

45

D. INTERESTS AND Costs

141. The parties agree that interest must be awarded on the sums granted by the Tribunal.
They diverge on the date of departure of the interest and on their rate. Moreover, the Claimants
are contending that compound interest is required in the circumstances of this arbitration, which is

denied by the Respondent.

142. The point of departure of the interest is not February 2000 as submitted by the
Claimants,'** nor 2005 as contended by the Respondent. It is the date at which the Claimants
have been dispossessed of their property, determined in each case calculated as decided in

paragraphs 116 and 119, above.

143. The Claimants produce a witness statement from a Chartered Accountant, Mr. Duncan
Owen, determining “the interest rate that the claimants could expect to earn on their foreign
invested money if they had invested it in Zimbabwe over the period that their farms and other
property were taken by the Respondent.”'” Mr. Owen considers that a fair return on that money
would be at minimum 16.87%. He confirmed this appreciation at the hearing without this figure
being then contested by the Respondent. '° The Claimants however are only asking for a 10%
rate of interest “based on the LIBOR rate plus a political risk.”!°' The Respondent did not
mention any rate. It only briefly stated that “[t]he interest to be applied should be the legally

19162

recognized interest rate applicable to the currency of payment, which was denied by Mr.

Owen. '®

'58 Claimants’ Memorial, 16 March 2007, para. 303.

'5° Witness Statement of Duncan Owen, 23 Oct. 2007, para. 3.

‘© Hearing Transcripts, Day 2, 30 Oct. 2007, pp. 20-27.

'S! Tbid., Day 1, 29 Oct. 2007, p. 115 (referring to London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), “the rate of
interest at which . . . international banks borrow funds from each other.” Mr. Duncan Owen’s Witness Statement, 23
Oct. 2007).

'© Thid., Day 3, 31 Oct. 2007, p. 62.

13 Thid., Day 2, 30 Oct. 2007, p. 29.

46

144. The Tribunal observes that, if Zimbabwe had in due time paid to the Claimants the
indemnity due to them, they would have been able to invest that sum in the currency of their
choice. But this is not the case: compensation was not paid promptly at the time of dispossession,
and the Claimants were therefore not able to make any investment outside of Zimbabwe. Thus,
the Tribunal must use a rate of interest taking into account the situation in that country. A 10%

rate seems in this respect reasonable.

145. The Claimants are requesting compound interest on a monthly basis. 164 The Respondent
contends that “the principle of compound interest has a punitive element” which is not justified in

the present case. 165

146. The Tribunal does not share that appreciation. As stated rightly by an ICSID Tribunal,
“[i]t is not the purpose of compound interest to attribute blame to, or to punish, anybody for the
delay in the payment made to the expropriated owner; it is a mechanism to ensure that
compensation awarded to the Claimant is appropriate in the circumstances.”!°° This explains
why, in many ICSID cases, such compound interests have been granted. ‘67 Tn the present case, it
seems to the Tribunal appropriate to decide that the 10% interest will be compounded every six

months.

147. In different circumstances, the Tribunal would be minded to follow the general practice
in international arbitration that, as submitted by the Claimants, successful party under an award
should recover its legal costs. However, such an approach would not be completely appropriate,

in the present case, taking into account the situation in Zimbabwe in 2001/2002. In the exercise

'4 Thid., Day 3, 31 Oct. 2007, p. 22.

‘65 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 6 July 2007, p. 29.

‘66 Compaiiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A. v. Costa Rica (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/1), Award of 17
February 2000, para. 104.

167 See, e.g., Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case
No. ARB/99/6), Award of 12 April 2002, para. 175.

47

of its discretion, the Tribunal therefore decides that:
(a) _ the costs of the parties’ own representation before the Tribunal will remain at
their charge;
(b) _ the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and charges of ICSID will be borne by the
Respondent, who will reimburse the Claimants of the sums advanced by them in

this respect.

IV. DISPOSITIVE PART OF THE AWARD

148. For the reasons set out earlier in this award, the Tribunal decides that :
1. The Respondent has breached its obligations under Article 6(c) of the BIT;
2. The Respondent shall pay the Claimants within three months of the date of

dispatch of this Award the following amounts, in Euros:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OWNER FARM DESCRIPTION DAMAGES
(in Euros)
B. H. Funnekotter R/E Warren farm 1,058,000'%
B. H. Funnekotter Anwa Farm 710,000
H. van Duren Bimi Estate farm (immoveable 640,000
property and disturbance)
Warren A farm (immoveable 530,000
M. van Duren .
property and disturbance)
H. and M. van Duren Bimi Estate farm and Warren A 100,000
(moveable assets)
D. R. Breytenbach Faroe Estate farm 800,000
R. G. Fisher Farways Farm 777,000

 

 

 

 

‘8 The indemnity of 20,000 Euros for disturbance has been split equally between the two farms owned by
Mr. Funnekoter.

48

 

M. W. A. G. van Rechteren

 

 

. Chiripiro Farm 470,000
Limpurg
R. J.P. Walraven Springdale Farm 520,000
W. J. Weller, L. Weller and | aye Ruia Ranche farm 498,000

J. P. Weller

 

R/E Roscommon farm and

 

 

LH. Benjamins R/E Preston Estate farm 347,000
C. F. des Tombe Rio Dora farm 620,000
E. Hansen Whindale Ranch 950,000

 

 

TOTAL] 8,220,000

 

 

 

 

3. The Respondent shall pay 10% interest compounded every six month on such

amounts from the following dates, until full payment of those amounts.

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. H. Funnekotter (for R/E Warren farm) 5 June 2001

B. H. Funnekotter (for Anwa Farm) 16 September 2002
teen) M. van Duren (for Bimi Estate farm and moveable 5 June 2001

M. van Duren (for Warren A farm) 12 December 2001
D. R. Breytenbach (for Faroe Estate farm) 26 April 2002

R. G. Fisher (for Farways Farm) 14 May 2002

 

M. W. A. G. van Rechteren Limpurg (for Chiripiro Farm) | 18 January 2002

 

R. J. P. Walraven (for Springdale Farm) 30 October 2002

 

 

W. J. Weller, L. Weller and J. P. Weller (for R/E Ruia

Ranche farm) 31 December 2002

 

 

 

49

 

 

 

 

L. H. Benjamins (for R/E Roscommon farm and |
B/E Preston Estate farm) > June 2001

po _--________|
C. F. des Tombe (for Rio Dora farm) 26 November 2001 |
E. Hansen (for Whindale Ranch) 31 July 2 2002 |

 

4. The parties shall bear all their respective expenses and fees related to this

proceeding.

5. The Respondent shall bear the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges

of ICSID. It will therefore reimburse the Claimants the sum of USD225,000

advanced by them, in this respect.

 

H.E. JUDGE GILBERT GUILLAUME

Date: €_ (i 1 Galen

BOAprd 2209

7

DEAN RONALD A. Cass

Date: LE pet JooF

50

NL —A -

‘HLE. Mr. Mo MAD WASI ZAFAR |

 

 

 

Date: O/-— oY-ot

