INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

In the arbitration proceeding between

Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd.

The Claimant

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

 

AWARD

 

Arbitral Tribunal:
Mr. Christer Séderlund, President
Prof. George Bermann
Ms. Loretta Malintoppi

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms. Sara Marzal Yetano

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 26 April 2017

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Blue Bank International & Trust
(Barbados) Ltd:

Mr. Pedro J. Martinez-Fraga

Mr. C. Ryan Reetz

Mr. Giovanni Angles

Bryan Cave LLP

200 South Biscayne Boulevard, Suite 400
Miami, Florida 33131

United States of America

and

Ms. Emma Lindsay

Bryan Cave LLP

1290 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10104
United States of America

Representing the Bolivarian

Venezuela:

Republic of

Mr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
Guglielmino & Asociados

Cerrito 1320 - Piso 9
(C1010ABB) Buenos Aires
Argentina

Mr. Diego Brian Gosis
Guglielmino & Asociados
175 SW 7th Street,

Suite 2110

Miami, FL 33130

United States of America

and

Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Mujioz Pedroza
Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela
Viceprocurador General de la Republica

Av. Los Ilustres, cruce con Calle Francisco Lazo
Marti

Edificio Sede
Republica
Urb. Santa Monica, Caracas 1040
Venezuela

Procuraduria General de la

1d
1.2

41
42

5.1
5.2
5.3

6.1
6.1.1
6.1.2

6.1.3

6.2
6.2.1

6.2.2

6.2.3

6.3

6.3.1

6.3.2
6.3.3

7A

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

THE PARTIE: 1
The Claimant. 1
The Respond I
PROCEDURAL HISTOR’

 

BACKGROUND
POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES AND THEIR REQUESTS FOR RELIEF ...8

The Respondent’s position and requests for relief.

 

 
 
 

The Claimant’s position and requests for relie!
THE BURDEN OF PROOF IN THE JURISDICTIONAL PHASE
The Claimant’s position... we
The Respondent's position Bt
The Tribunal’s analysis see
HAS THE RESPONDENT CONSENTED TO ARBITRATION
(JURISDICTION RATIONE VOLUNTATIS)?
The Respondent's position

 

 

 

 

Venezuela is not a party to the ICSID Convention....

Venezuela’s consent to arbitration terminated upon its denunciation of the
Convention IS
Venezuela was no longer a party to the ICSID Convention on the date the

   

 

Request was registered. seseeeeessereeee 7
The Claimant’s position... 18
Venezuela’s consent to ICSID arbitration in Article 8 of the Treaty remains in
effect 19

 

Under Article 71 Venezuela remained a Contracting State at the time of the
Claimant’s filing I

 

Article 72 of the ICSID Convention permits an investor to accept a host State’s
unilateral offer of ICSID arbitration after denunciation of the Convention...20

The Tribunal’s analysis 21
The normative framework

 

The chronology
The Tribunal’s
DOES THE TRIBUNAL HAVE JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE
UNDER THE TREAT 26
The Res dent’s position 26

 

 

 

 

7.2
7.3

8.1

8.2
8.2.1
8.2.2
8.2.3
8.3

10
11

 

The Claimant’s position... 228
The Tribunal’s analysis 29
HAS BLUE BANK MADE AN “INVESTMENT” PURSUANT TO
ARTICLE 1(A) OF THE TREATY?.. 184
Does Blue Bank as trustee have legal ownership of the assets of the Qatar
Trust? 34
The legal nature of the Qatar Trust...

 

 

The Re dent’s position 38

 

 

iF
The Claimant’s position 39
The Tribunal’s i 41

 

Did Blue Bank act with the independence associated with a beneficiary
trust?
OTHER JURISDICTIONAL ARGUMENTS.
ALLOCATION OF COSTS.....
DECISION 48

 

 

 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS

 

Ansbacher

Ansbacher (Bahamas) Limited, Bahamas

 

BIT or the Treaty

Agreement between the Government of
Barbados and the Government of the Republic
of Venezuela for the Promotion and Protection
of Investments dated 15 July 1994, Exhibit C-

135

 

Blue Bank or Claimant

Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados)
Ltd.

 

 

 

Brighton Brighton Preferred Equity Investments Ltd.

BVI Companies GIM Tour Ltd (BVI) and Western Hemisphere
Hotels Ltd (BVI)

Centre or ICSID The International Centre for Settlement of

Investment Disputes

 

Claimant’s Memorial

Claimant’s Memorial on Jurisdiction and the
Merits submitted on 7 September 2014

 

Commentary

Christopher H. Schreuer et al, The ICSID
Convention. A Commentary, Cambridge
University Press 2009

 

Convention or the ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States

 

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
dated 8 June 2015

 

Eligible Person

Hampton Latin American Holdings, Ltd.

 

 

Escrow Agreement

 

Stock and Dividend Escrow Agreement, dated 1
April 2005, Exhibit R-112

 

 

 

Exhibit C- [No.]

Claimant’s exhibits

 

Exhibit CLA- [No.]

Claimant’s legal authorities

 

Exhibit R- [No.]

Respondent’s exhibits

 

Exhibit RLA- [No.]

Respondent’s legal authorities

 

 

 

 

Fourth Trust Deed Amended and Restated Trust Deed of 16 March
2006, Exhibit R-115

GIM Tour GIM Tour Ltd (BVI)

Hampton Hampton Latin American Holdings, Ltd

Hemesa Corporacién Hotelera Hemesa S.A.

 

ICSID Arbitration Rule(s)

Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes in force since 2006

 

ICSID Institution Rule(s)

The Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings of
ICSID

 

 

 

 

 

 

ITC Inversora Turistica Caracas S.A.

Memorial on Objections to | Respondent’s Memorial on Objections to

Jurisdiction Jurisdiction submitted on 23 March 2015

Original Trust Deed Irrevocable Authorised Purpose Trust Deed,
created by Jaime Castillo (the “Settlor”) and
Ansbacher (Bahamas) Limited (the “Trustee”)
on 21 April 2005, Exhibit R-116

Pledge Agreement Collateral Pledge Agreement dated 1 April
2005, Exhibit R-113

Qatar Trust The Qatar International Authorised Purpose

 

Trust

 

 

 

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

The Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, dated
14 January 2016

 

Request for Arbitration or Request

The Request for Arbitration submitted by
Claimant on 22 June 2012

 

Venezuela or Respondent

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

 

 

Respondent’s Reply The Respondent’s Reply on Objections to
Jurisdiction of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, dated 9 November 2015

Second Trust Deed Deed of Retirement, Appointment and

Indemnity, dated 1 July 2005, Exhibit R-161

 

Settlor, or Original Settlor

Jaime Castillo Ledesma, a Venezuelan citizen

 

 

 

Third Trust Deed Deed of the Qatar Trust, dated 15 March 2006,
Exhibit R-114

Trust Deed Deed of Amended and Restated Trust, made on
8 June 2006, Exhibit C-99

VCLT Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,

signed at Vienna, 23 May 1969

 

Venezuelan Companies

The Venezuelan companies Inversora Turistica
Caracas S.A. and Corporacion Hotelera Hemesa
S.A., related to the Mezerhane Group

 

Waterstone

Waterstone Protector Services Corporation

 

 

Western Hemi: e

Western Hemisphere Hotels, Ltd (BVI)

 

 

 

 

11

1.2

THE PARTIES
The Claimant

The Claimant is Blue Bank International and Trust (Barbados) Ltd., a corporation
incorporated under the laws of Barbados on 7 June 2002, having its head offices
at Braemar Court, Deighton Road, St Michael BB14017, Barbados.'

The Respondent

The Respondent is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (jointly with the
Claimant, the “Parties”).?

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 25 June 2012, the Centre received a Request for Arbitration filed by the
Claimant against the Respondent dated 22 June 2012. The Request concerned the
alleged expropriation and other violations of the obligations under the BIT? in
relation to Claimant’s tourism and hospitality business in Venezuela.

In the Request, the Claimant invoked Venezuela’s consent to dispute settlement
through ICSID arbitration provided in Article 8 of the BIT. Also in the Request,
the Claimant made a proposal as to the number of arbitrators and the method of
their appointment.

The Request, as supplemented by the Claimant’s letter of 27 July 2012, was
registered by the Secretary-General of ICSID on 7 August 2012 pursuant to
Article 36(3) of the Convention. On the same day, the Secretary-General, in
accordance with Rule 7(c) of the ICSID Institution Rules, notified the Parties of
the registration and invited them to proceed to constitute the Tribunal.

By letter dated 8 October 2012, the Claimant invoked the procedure for the
constitution of the Tribunal established in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention. In the same letter, the Claimant appointed Mr. José Maria Alonso (a
Spanish national) as an arbitrator and proposed Prof. George A. Bermann (a US
national) as presiding arbitrator.

' Claimant’s Memorial, § 66.
? Venezuela submitted its note of denunciation of the Convention on 24 January 2012

® Exhibit C-135.

On 22 October 2012, Mr. José Maria Alonso accepted his appointment as co-
arbitrator.

By letter dated 5 November 2012, the Respondent appointed Dr. Santiago Torres
Bernardez (a Spanish national) as an arbitrator and proposed that the President of
the Tribunal be appointed by agreement of the co-arbitrators. In a separate letter
of the same date, the Respondent indicated its intention to propose the
disqualification of Mr. José Maria Alonso pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 9 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. In a letter of 9 November
2012, the Centre informed the Parties that the Centre would transmit the
disqualification proposal to the Tribunal as soon as it was constituted.

On 15 November 2012, Dr. Torres Bernardez accepted his appointment as co-
arbitrator.

On 4 May 2013, the Claimant filed a request for the Chairman of the
Administrative Council to appoint the presiding arbitrator pursuant to Article 38
of the ICSID Convention. By letter of 23 May 2013, the Secretary-General
proposed five candidates to the Parties to be considered as the presiding arbitrator.
None of these proposals resulted in a mutually agreeable candidate.

By letter of 12 June 2013, the Claimant indicated its intention to propose the
disqualification of Dr. Torres Bernardez pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.

On 2 July 2013, the Centre communicated to the Parties its understanding that the
intent of both Parties was to treat the Respondent’s 5 November 2012 letter and
the Claimant’s 12 June 2013 letter as a proposal for disqualification of the
majority of the members of the Tribunal, which would be decided by the
Chairman of the Administrative Council in accordance with Article 58 of the
ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9. Both Parties agreed with the
Centre’s understanding.

By letter of 31 July 2013, the Centre informed the Parties of its intention to
propose to the Chairman of the Administrative Council the appointment of Mr.
Christer Séderlund, a Swedish national, as the presiding arbitrator. By letter of 7
August 2013, the Respondent objected to the proposal of Mr. Séderlund as the
presiding arbitrator. The Claimant did not submit observations. By letter of 13
August 2013, the Centre transmitted to the Parties Mr. Séderlund’s reply to the
Respondent’s objections. Having carefully considered the correspondence
exchanged on this matter, the Centre informed the Parties that it would proceed

20.

with the appointment of Mr. Séderlund. Mr. Séderlund accepted his appointment
on 15 August 2013.

By letter of 16 August 2013, the Centre informed the Parties that all the arbitrators
had accepted their appointments and that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule
6(1), the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted and the proceedings to
have begun on that date. Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco, ICSID Legal Counsel, was
designated by the Secretary-General of ICSID to serve as the Secretary of the
Tribunal.

On the same date, the Centre transmitted copies of the proposals to disqualify Mr.
Alonso and Dr. Torres Bernardez to the three members of the Tribunal, declared
the proceeding suspended in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6), and
established a procedural calendar for the Parties’ submissions on the
disqualification proposals.

On 23 August 2013, the Respondent submitted additional observations to its
disqualification proposal of Mr. José Maria Alonso.

On 2 September 2013, Dr. Torres Bernardez submitted a letter to the Centre (i)
furnishing explanations in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3) and (ii)
submitting his resignation in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 8(2). The
Centre circulated this letter to the Parties, to Mr. Alonso, and to Mr. Séderlund on
6 September 2013.

On 9 September 2013, Mr. Alonso furnished explanations in accordance with
ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3). The Centre circulated Mr. Alonso’s explanations to
the Parties and to Mr. Séderlund on the same date.

On 9 September 2013, the Parties were invited to submit simultaneous
observations on any of the documents filed regarding the proposals to disqualify
Mr. Alonso and Dr. Torres Bernardez by 19 September 2013. On 19 September
2013, the Respondent submitted its observations. On the same date, the Claimant
submitted its observations in two separate documents: one document dealing with
the resignation of Dr. Torres Bernardez and another document relating to the
proposed disqualification of Mr. Alonso.

On 4 October 2013, the Parties were invited to submit reply observations by 11
October 2013.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Following an extension of the deadline granted by the Centre to both Parties, the
Respondent submitted its reply observations on 24 October 2013. No additional
comments were received from the Claimant.

On 12 November 2013, the proposal for disqualification of arbitrator Mr. Alonso
was upheld by the Chairman of ICSID’s Administrative Council. Given Dr.
Torres Bernardez prior resignation, the Claimant’s proposal for his
disqualification was dismissed by the Chairman of ICSID’s Administrative
Council. The Secretary-General notified the Parties of a vacancy on the Tribunal
following the disqualification of Mr. Alonso and that the proceeding would
remain suspended pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 10(2).

 

On 13 November 2013, the Claimant appointed Prof. George A. Bermann as
arbitrator, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 11(1). Prof. Bermann
accepted his appointment on 21 November 2013.

On 27 November 2013, the Tribunal consented to the resignation of arbitrator Dr.
Torres Bernardez pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 8(2), and the Centre notified
the Parties thereof.

On 29 November 2013, the Respondent appointed Ms. Loretta Malintoppi (an
Italian national) as arbitrator, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 11(1).
Ms. Malintoppi accepted her appointment on 6 December 2013.

By letter of 9 December 2013, the Centre informed the Parties that the Tribunal
had been reconstituted and that, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 12,
the proceeding was resumed.

The first session of the Tribunal was held by teleconference on 27 January 2014.
The following persons participated in the conference call:

For the Tri

Mr. Christer Sdderlund (president)
Prof. George Bermann (arbitrator)
Ms. Loretta Malintoppi (arbitrator)

 

For the ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco, Secretary of the Tribunal

28.

29.

For the Claimant:

Mr. Pedro J. Martinez-Fraga
Mr. C. Ryan Reetz

Mr. Juan C. Garcia

Mr. Kamal Sleiman

For the Respondent:

Mr. Osvaldo Guglielmino
Mr. Facundo Pérez Aznar
Mr. Guillermo Moro

Mr. Diego Brian Gosis
Ms. Yarubith Escobar

On 25 February 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 concerning
procedural matters and including a schedule of the proceedings.

In accordance with the schedule fixed by the Tribunal, on 7 September 2014, the
Claimant filed its Memorial.

On 28 October 2014, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to suspend the
proceedings on the merits and to determine the Tribunal’s jurisdiction as a
preliminary matter.

 

On 22 December 2014, the Claimant filed observations on the Respondent’s
request for bifurcation.

On 13 January 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 granting the
request for bifurcation and thus suspending the proceeding on the merits.

On 28 January 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 fixing a
procedural calendar for the proceedings on jurisdiction.

Pursuant to the said calendar, the Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction
on 23 March 2015, and the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
on 8 June 2015.

On 18 August 2015, each party filed a request for the Tribunal to decide on
production of documents.

By letter dated 21 August 2015, the Centre informed the Parties that Ms. Sara
Marzal Yetano, ICSID Legal Counsel, would replace Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco
as Secretary of the Tribunal.

40.

Al.

42.

On 9 September 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 concerning the
requests for production of documents.

On 20 October 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, likewise
concerning the requests for production of documents and extending the deadline
for the submission of the Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction.

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s instructions in Procedural Order No. 5, on 9 November
2015, the Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction. In accordance with an
extension granted by the Tribunal on 2 January 2016, the Claimant filed its
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction on 14 January 2016.

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s instructions, both Parties filed their documentary
evidence for impeachment purposes on 3 February 2016. Neither party filed any
documentary evidence for impeachment rebuttal purposes.

On 27 January 2016, both Parties identified the witness: id experts they wished
to examine during the hearing on jurisdiction. By email dated 29 January 2016,
the Claimant objected to the examination at the hearing on jurisdiction of four of
the witnesses requested by the Respondent. On 5 February 2016, the Tribunal
issued its Procedural Order No. 6, in which it called upon the Claimant to produce
two of the four witnesses requested by the Respondent.

 

From 15 through 18 February 2016, the Tribunal and the Parties held a hearing
on jurisdiction at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. The following
persons attended the said hearing in whole or in part:

 

For the Tribun:

Mr. Christer Sdderlund (president)
Prof. George Bermann (arbitrator)
Ms. Loretta Malintoppi (arbitrator)

For the ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Sara Marzal Yetano, Secretary of the Tribunal

For the Claimant:

Mr. Pedro J. Martinez-Fraga, Bryan Cave LLP
Mr. C. Ryan Reetz, Bryan Cave LLP

Ms. Emma Lindsay, Bryan Cave LLP

Mr. Giovanni Angles, Bryan Cave LLP

Ms. Catherine Driscoll, Bryan Cave LLP

43.

44,

45.

Mr. Ian St. Clair Hutchinson, Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados)
Ltd.

Ms. Camille Rieber, Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd.

Ms. Gilda Pabon, Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd.

For the Respondent:

Mr. Osvaldo Guglielmino, Guglielmino & Asociados
Mr. Diego B. Gosis, Guglielmino & Asociados

a, Guglielmino & Asociados

Mr. Quinn Smith, Special Counsel

Mr. Guillermo Moro, Guglielmino & Asociados

Mr. Nicolas J. Caffo, Guglielmino & Asociados

Mr. Alejandro Vulejser, Guglielmino & Asociados
Mr. Joaquin Coronel, Guglielmino & Asociados

Ms. Erika Fernandez, Procuraduria General de la Republica Bolivariana de
Venezuela

  
 

During the hearing, the following persons were examined:

On behalf of the Claimant:

Mr. Ian St. Clair Hutchinson, Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados)
Ltd.

Mr. Jaime Castillo Ledesma, Settlor of the Qatar International Authorised
Purpose Trust

Mr. Andrew Ferreira, Chancery Chambers LLP

Ms. Leyda Martinez Quintana

Mr. Luis Alejandro Lopez Carabafio

Mr. Peter David Hutson Williams QC, Retired Judge of the Supreme Court
of Barbados

On behalf of the Respondent:
Mr. David John Brownbill QC, XXIV Old Buildings

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s instructions, each party submitted its respective
statements on costs on 18 April 2016, and its observations on the other party’s

statements on costs on 3 May 2016.

The Tribunal declared the proceeding closed on 26 April 2017 pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 38(1).

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

41

Sl.

BACKGROUND

The Claimant, Blue Bank, engages in international banking business including, of
particular importance in this case, the administration and management of trust
assets. Its primary business concerns the provision of fiduciary services to third
parties. In this latter respect, the Claimant establishes and administers trusts and
discharges functions as trustee. Based on the Trust Deed (as most recently
amended)‘, the Claimant was appointed trustee of the Qatar Trust — a trust under
the laws of Barbados — for the purpose of administering and managing the assets
of that trust. Among those assets figure shareholdings in two BVI Companies
which, in their turn, are indirect shareholders in two Venezuelan companies, ITC
and Hemesa.

 

According to the Claimant, Venezuela has, by frustrating the business of the
Venezuelan companies and destroying valuable rights belonging to those
companies, breached the protections afforded by the BIT, causing significant
harm to the investments made by it as trustee of the Qatar Trust. On this basis the
Claimant brings this claim for compensation under the BIT.

The Respondent, which has not enunciated a position on the merits of the
Claimant’s prayers for relief, has contested ICSID’s jurisdiction and the
Tribunal’s competence to adjudicate the complaints brought by the Claimant.

As notified to the Parties in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 2 of 13 January
2015, the Tribunal decided to deal with the matter of jurisdiction as a preliminary

issue. As a consequence, the proceedings were bifurcated for this purpose and the
proceedings on the merits suspended pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3).°

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES AND THEIR REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

The following paragraphs set forth the Parties’ positions with respect to the matter
of the jurisdiction of ICSID and the competence of this Tribunal.

The Respondent’s position and requests for relief

In summary, the Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of ICSID and the
competence of this Tribunal in the following terms:

‘The Trust Deed,” Exhibit C-99.
Paragraph 32 supra.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

The Respondent is not a party to the ICSID Convention and did not have
that status at the time when this proceeding was filed. At the time,
Venezuela had already voluntarily exercised its right to denounce the ICSID
Convention and, thus, had withdrawn its consent to the submission of
disputes to the jurisdiction of the Centre.° In addition, the Respondent
argues that, once its notice of denunciation of the Convention was given
under Article 71 on 24 January 2012, its unilateral consent to submit to
arbitration also lapsed pursuant to Article 72 of the Convention;’ Venezuela
was not in any event a party to the Convention on the date of registration of
the Request.®

The Tribunal has no jurisdiction ratione personae because Blue Bank is not
the investor under the Treaty. It is the Qatar Trust, and not Blue Bank, that
owns the investment. The Qatar Trust has no legal personality and cannot
be regarded as a “national of another Contracting State” under Article
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, nor as an “investor” according to the
definition contained in Article 1(d) of the BIT.’

The real investors, if any, are Venezuelan nationals, and, as such, they are
not protected under the Convention or the BIT.!°

The Claimant underwent restructuring and established the Qatar Trust with
the sole purpose of seeking protection under the ICSID Convention and the
BIT after the dispute had arisen and thus the Claimant has engaged in
conduct constituting an abuse of process.!!

Even if the Tribunal were to find that the Claimant indirectly controls an
im inV la, indirect investments do not enjoy p ion under
the Treaty.!?

52. On this basis, the Respondent has requested that the Tribunal:

(a)

© Memorial on Objections to Juris

* Whid., 419 & seq.
* Ihid., 19 26-30.

Declare that the Centre has no jurisdiction and that the Tribunal has no
competence over the case brought by the Claimant, and that the claim put
forward by the Claimant is inadmissible;

 

ion, | 14.

° Ibid., $9] 32-41; Respondent's Reply, §§ 196-198.
"° Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, 44 58-86.
" [hid., §§ 87-89; Respondent's Reply, $9 324-365.
” Respondent's Reply, {¥] 200-207.

42

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

(b) Alternatively, to reject each and every claim made by the Claimant; and

(c) To order the Claimant to bear all costs relating to these proceedings,
including any expense incurred by the Respondent in relation to its legal
representation, plus interest.

The Claimant’s position and requests for relief

On the matters of the jurisdiction of ICSID and the competence of the Tribunal,
the Claimant’s position and requests for relief are the following.

The Claimant contends that Venezuela’s denunciation of the ICSID Convention
does not affect its consent to this arbitration. Accordingly, the Claimant maintains
that ICSID has jurisdiction over this case and that the Tribunal is competent to

  

adjudicate it.!>

The Claimant further contends that the four criteria required in order to have
ICSID jurisdiction over a case according to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
are present, i.e.: (1) a nationality criterion involving a dispute between a
Contracting State and a foreign national of another Contracting State; (2) a dispute
having a legal character; (3) a dispute arising out of an investment; and (4) an
agreement to arbitrate supported by the written consent of the parties.'4

The BIT contains similar jurisdictional requirements. The instant case meets all
of the requirements necessary to establish ICSID’s jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s
competence under both instruments.!*

The Claimant rejects all the jurisdictional objections raised by the Respondent for
reasons which will be dealt with in greater detail below.

The Claimant requests that the Tribunal:

(a) Declare that it has jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims and that such
claims are admissible;

(b) Direct the arbitration to proceed to a hearing on the merits of the Claimant’s
claims; and

"8 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, $9 23-38.
 Claimant’s Memorial, 511

S Ibid.

5.1

59.

60.

61.

5.2

62.

(c) Order Venezuela to bear the costs associated with the jurisdictional phase
of the arbitration, including the Claimant’s legal fees and expenses.'¢

THE BURDEN OF PROOF IN THE JURISDICTIONAL PHASE
The Claimant’s position

The Claimant has submitted that in the jurisdictional phase it does not bear the
burden of proving that the prerequisites for jurisdiction are met. It suffices,
according to the Claimant, that the facts alleged by the Claimant as establishing
jurisdiction be accepted pro tem so that the burden of proof of refuting jurisdiction
lies with the Respondent.

 

Essentially, the Claimant submits as follows:

20. In the context of jurisdictional objections in an investor-State
arbitration, then, the claimant is required to set forth a prima facie
case of jurisdiction under the relevant treaty or treaties, including
jurisdiction ratione materiae, ratione personae, ratione temporis
and ratione voluntatis. Once the claimant has established this
prima facie case, the burden shifts to the respondent to establish
that that [sic] there is not jurisdiction ratione materiae, ratione
personae, ratione temporis or ratione voluntatis. If the
respondent carries that burden, the objections may be granted. If
the respondent fails to carry that burden, the objections are
denied. If the tribunal is unable to make the determination on the
evidence before it, the issue should be joined to the merits. [...]!7

In support of its position, the Claimant relies upon the separate opinion by Judge
Higgins in the Oil Platforms Case,'*
jurisdiction in investor-State arbitrations.'°

as well as a number of decisions on

The Respondent’s position

The Respondent disagrees with the Claimant’s position on the burden of proof. It
takes the view that a person invoking the jurisdiction of an international tribunal
must positively demonstrate that the requirements for establishing jurisdiction are
met.?°

"© Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 136; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 101

” Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 20.

'S Case Concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v United States of America), Preliminary Objection, Judgment, L.C.J. Reports
1996, p. 803, Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins, 4¥] 32-34, Exhibits CLA-146, RLA-063.

 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {fj 12-14 and footnote 11

*" Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, § 5

63.

64.

5.3

65.

66.

67.

The Respondent maintains that, in accordance with the principle “actori incumbit
probatio”, and as confirmed by a number of international courts and tribunals, the
person invoking the jurisdiction of an international court or tribunal must
demonstrate that the requirements enabling such jurisdiction to be exercised are
met. In other words, the Claimant must prove that all of the necessary
jurisdictional prerequisites are satisfied.

 

 

A lack of evidence necessarily leads to a lack of jurisdiction on the part of the
Tribunal. In effect:

 

[...] The burden of proof for the issue of consent falls squarely on
a given claimant who invokes it against a given respondent.
Where a claimant fails to prove consent with sufficient certainty,
jurisdiction will be declined.”!

The Tribunal’s analysis

The Claimant argues that, in order for the Tribunal to establish whether it has
jurisdiction, it need consider whether the facts as alleged by the Claimant, if
proven, could give rise to a Treaty breach. When setting forth this position, the
Claimant has not distinguished between facts that have relevance specifically to
the jurisdictional question only and facts that are also relevant for establishing the
existence of claims that go to the substance of the dispute.”

However, in the Tribunal’s view, it is necessary to distinguish between these
different sets of facts with regard to the burden of proof. All facts that are
dispositive for purposes of jurisdiction must be proven at the jurisdictional stage.
In this regard, the Claimant bears the burden of proving the facts required to
establish jurisdiction, insofar as they are contested by the Respondent. By
contrast, facts that are relevant to the merits of the Claimant’s claims, such as
whether there has been a Treaty breach, whether liability has been incurred,
whether the Claimant has suffered indemnifiable damages and, if so, what is the
amount of liability (quantum), are all matters on which the Claimant does not need

 

to discharge a burden of proof at the jurisdictional stage.

At the present jurisdictional stage of the proceedings, the Tribunal has before it
only the Parties’ submi: iction and a limited evidentiary record,
reflecting the arguments as to which the Parties sought to adduce factual support-

   

sions on juris

2" ICS Inspection and Control Services Ltd (United Kingdom) v Argentina, PCA Case No. 2010-9, 10 February 2012, § 280, cited at 4 6 of
the Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, Exhibit RLA-O14.
* See, for instance, Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 20, and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 16

68.

69.

70.

insofar as they have considered that those factual matters relate to jurisdiction. In
addition to the Claimant’s statement of claim, which also includes a submission
on the merits of the dispute, the Tribunal has been provided only with the Parties’
views on the matters that in their respective opinion have a bearing on the matter
of jurisdiction.

A number of tribunals have echoed the oft-quoted approach of Judge Rosalyn
Higgins’ separate opinion in the Oil Platforms Case to the effect that the only way
that a claim may be accepted as “plausible” on jurisdiction is for a tribunal “to
accept pro tem the facts as alleged by [a claimant] to be true and in that light to
interpret [the treaty] for jurisdictional purposes — that is to say, to see if on the
basis of [a claimant’s] claims of fact there could occur a violation of one or more
of them.”

However, while it is true that matters that have a bearing on the merits of a dispute
will not need to be conclusively established at the jurisdictional phase (something
which may require a full-blown merits review of the case in its entirety), the
matter of establishing a jurisdictional threshold is fundamentally different.

In this regard, the Tribunal shares the view of the SGS v. Paraguay tribunal which
held as follows:

52. [...] A determination that a given set of alleged facts, even if
proven, would not constitute a violation of a legal right is, in
effect, a holding on the merits [...].

53. A fundamentally different approach is required, however, for
issues that are directly determinative of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
— such as, for example, issues of consent, nationality, covered
investment, territoriality, or the temporal scope of treaty
protection. If the Tribunal is to make jurisdictional determinations
on such issues in a threshold jurisdictional stage (rather than
joining them to the merits), the Tribunal must reach definitive
findings of fact and conclusions of law. Without such
determination, the Tribunal cannot satisfy itself that it has
jurisdiction to hear the merits of the dispute.**

2 Gil Platforms (Iran v US), Sep. Op. Higgins, paragraph 32.
* Société Géneralé de Surveillance S.A. v Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29, $4 52-53, Decision on Jurisdiction, 12
February 2010, Exhibits RLA-027, CLA-074.

72.

73.

6.1

74.

The matter of the burden of proof in the jurisdictional stage was also clearly
explained in the Decision on Jurisdiction in the Philip Morris v Uruguay case in
the following terms:

 

Regarding burden of proof, it is commonly accepted that at the
jurisdictional stage the facts as alleged by the claimant have to be
accepted when, if proven, they would constitute a breach of the
relevant treaty. However, if jurisdiction rests on the satisfaction
of certain conditions, such as the existence of an “investment” and
of the parties’ consent, the Tribunal must apply the standard rule
of onus of proof actori incumbit probatio, except that any party
asserting a fact shall have to prove it. 7°

 

The Tribunal also concurs with the following statement by Sir Franklin Berman
in the Industria Nacional de Alimentos et al v. Peru case:

[I]f particular facts are a critical element in the establishment of
jurisdiction itself, so that the decision to accept or to deny
jurisdiction disposes of them once and for all for this purpose,
how can it be seriously claimed that those facts should be
assumed rather than proved? 76

It follows that matters that are decisive for purposes of establishing jurisdiction,
such as whether a particular claimant qualifies
investment falls under the protection of the relevant treaty, must be proven and
decided at the jurisdictional stage. In the present instance, the burden of proof that
all the jurisdictional requirements of the case are met, insofar as they are contested
by the Respondent, lies with the Claimant.

an investor or whether an

 

HAS THE RESPONDENT CONSENTED TO ARBITRATION
(JURISDICTION RATIONE VOLUNTATIS)?

The Respondent’s position

The Respondent has objected to the jurisdiction of ICSID and to the competence
of the Tribunal on the ground that the Request for Arbitration was submitted at a
time when the Respondent had already denounced the ICSID Convention.?”
According to the Respondent, even assuming that the Respondent’s consent
would have remained in effect six months after the date of denunciation under

* Philip Morris Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products S.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A. v Oriental Republic of Uruguay, CSID Case No.
ARB/10/7, Decision on Jurisdiction, § 29, 2 July 2013, Exhibit CLA-148. See, also, the case law cited at footnotes 3 and 4 therein.

2° Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Peru S.A. v Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Decision on Annulment,
5 September 2007, Dissenting Opinion of Sir Franklin Berman, at § 17

2” Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, §§ 14-25.

75.

6.1.1

76.

77.

78.

6.1.2

79.

Article 71 of the Convention, that period of six months had elapsed by the time
the Request was registered. °°

On these two points the Respondent has developed its position as follows.
Venezuela is not a party to the ICSID Convention

In accordance with Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, a State must be a
Contracting State of that Convention in order for the Centre to have jurisdiction
or for any tribunal established thereunder to have competence over a given
29 By the time this proceeding was filed, Venezuela had already
voluntarily exercised its right to denounce the ICSID Convention and, by so
doing, had withdrawn its consent to submit disputes to the jurisdiction of the
Centre. *°

dispute.

In sum, Venezuela is not a party to the ICSID Convention and did not have that
status at the time when this proceeding was filed.

According to the Respondent, the absence of jurisdiction and competence became
evident at two points in time: first, when the Claimant filed its Request for
Arbitration to the Centre, as the Respondent had by that time already notified the
depositary of its denunciation of the Convention; second, on the date when the
Request was registered, since, even assuming that the six-month’s notice
requirement would apply during the period provided for in Article 71 of the
Convention, that period had already elapsed, thus making the Respondent’s
consent moot. In view of those facts, the Respondent contends that there is no
remaining basis for the jurisdiction of the Centre or the competence of the
Tribunal. *!

Venezuela’s consent to arbitration terminated upon its denunciation of the
Convention

By reference to Article 72 of the ICSID Convention, Venezuela further argues
that, once a notice of denunciation is given under Article 71, consent can no longer
be perfected through acceptance of an offer contained in a BIT or a law since the
offer has become ineffective.** Article 72 provides that:

* Tbid., $$ 26-31
» [hid., 415; Respondent's Reply, $9 60, 61
* Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, 14.

* [bid., 416.
° [bid., 421

80.

81.

82.

Notice by a Contracting State pursuant to Articles 70 or 71 shall
not affect the rights or obligations under this Convention of that
State or of any of its constituent subdivisions or agencies or of
any national of that State arising out of consent to the jurisdiction
of the Centre given by one of them before such notice was
received by the depositary.

The Respondent relies on, inter alia, publications by Prof. Schreuer who has
opined that, once a denunciation of the Convention has been notified, consent to
submit a dispute to the Centre cannot be perfected.** Prof. Schreuer explains that
his position does not deprive the six-month period provided for in Article 71 of
effet utile, because that period applies to other obligations incumbent upon a
Contracting State under the Convention, such as respect for the Centre’s
immunities and privileges (Articles 18-24) and recognition and enforcement of
awards (Article 54). 54

The Respondent further argues that Prof. Broches was unequivocal in stating that
consent may not be perfected once the denunciation of the Convention has been
notified, ** and cites an exchange to that effect that was made in the course of the
drafting of the Convention, where Prof. Broches explained that:

[i]f the State withdraws its unilateral statement by denouncing
the Convention before it has been accepted by any investor,
no investor could later bring a claim before the Centre.**

Thus, according to the Respondent, once a notice of denunciation of the
Convention has been given under Article 71 — in this case, on 24 January 2012 —
consent can no longer be perfected by way of acceptance by an investor of an
offer to arbitrate contained in an investment treaty or a law, since such offer to
arbitrate will have ceased to be effective and thus capable of acceptance. In other
words, there is no longer an offer to submit disputes to an ICSID tribunal on the
part of the denouncing State.

® [bid., $9 20, 23.

* Ibid., 424.

* [hid., $22; Respondent's Reply, $9 64, 65.
* History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. II, p. 1010, Exhibit RLA-O85

6.1.3

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

Venezuela was no longer a party to the ICSID Convention on the date the Request
was registered

Venezuela denounced the Convention on 24 January 2012. Even assuming that
the Claimant still enjoyed a six-month period within which to institute
proceedings, that period ended on 24 July 2012.

The Claimant submitted its Request to ICSID on 25 June 2012. Although that
n took place within the six-month period following denunciation, the
Request was not in fact registered until 7 August 2012. The delay was due to the
fact that the request filed on 25 June 2012 did not meet the requirements for
registration. As a result, the ICSID Secretariat asked the Claimant for documents
and information, which were provided only on 27 July 2012, following which —
on 7 August 2012 — the Request was finally registered. Thus, both the Claimant’s
n of the additional information and the Secretariat’s registration of the
claim occurred after the six-month period had elapsed.

 

submi:

 

submi:

The Respondent alleges that, in order to establish the existence of international
jurisdiction, the critical date for determining the fulfilment of jurisdictional
requirements is the date of commencement of the proceedings and that
proceedings cannot be considered as having been commenced until the Request
is registered. It points to ICSID Institution Rule 6(2), which provides that “[a]
proceeding under the Convention shall be deemed to have been instituted on the
date of the registration of the request.”

According to the Respondent, this means that the critical date on which all
jurisdictional requirements for a given dispute must be deemed to have been met
is the date of registration which, in this case, was 7 August 2012, well after expiry
of the six-month period. 37 The Secretary-General may not register a request for
arbitration where, on the date of registration, the State against which the
proceeding is instituted is not a Contracting State to the Convention. ** Even if
institution of the proceedings could be deemed to have occurred on 27 July 2012,
which is when the Claimant met the necessary requirements in order for the
request to be registered, that date is also more than six months later than the date
of denunciation of the Convention by the Respondent.

In conclusion, the Tribunal must decline its competence and deny the jurisdiction
of the Centre over this dispute, since Venezuela did not give its consent to submit

* Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, § 27.

® [bid., 430.

6.2

88.

89.

90.

this dispute to the Tribunal. It was not a party to the Convention because its
consent had expired on the date of denunciation. Even if Article 71 could be
interpreted as giving the Claimant an additional six months following
denunciation in which to institute proceedings, the Claimant failed to do so within
that period.

The Claimant’s position

The Claimant agrees with the Respondent that consent to arbitration by the
Contracting State which is a party to the dispute is required. The Claimant
disagrees, however, with Venezuela’s contention that it did not consent to
arbitrate this dispute.” In the Claimant’s view, Venezuela’s assertion that it was
no longer a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention following the notice of
denunciation is irrelevant to whether Venezuela’s offer of ICSID arbitration
contained in the BIT remained in existence and capable of acceptance at the time
of the Claimant’s consent.

Significantly, Venezuela did not (and cannot) unilaterally withdraw its consent to
arbitration under the BIT; what it did was to denounce the ICSID Convention.
Pursuant to Article 71, that denunciation did not take effect for a period of six
months. During that time period, the Claimant accepted Venezuela’s offer to
arbitrate, which was provided in the Treaty, not in the ICSID Convention. Even
if the Claimant had not accepted Venezuela’s offer within the six-month period,
nothing in the Treaty or the Convention provides that the denunciation affects the
Respondent’s obligation to arbitrate according to the Treaty’s terms. Article 72
affirmatively provides that Venezuela’s denunciation does not affect its obligation
arising out of consent given by Venezuela before the notice of denunciation. *°

The Claimant consented to arbitrate its dispute with Venezuela upon submitting
its Request on 22 June 2012. At that time, Venezuela’s consent to arbitrate was
still in effect. The Request was transmitted to Venezuela by email and
international courier by the ICSID Secretariat on 6 July 2012. These dates pre-
date 24 July 2012, which, under Article 71’s six-month period, is the date when
Venezuela’s denunciation would have taken effect. #!

» Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 23.

“ Thid., 426.

" [bid., §§ 25, 46. Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, | 55

6.2.1

91.

92.

93.

6.2.2

94.

Venezuela’s consent to ICSID arbitration in Article 8 of the Treaty remains in
effect

The Claimant relies on the fact that Venezuela expressly consented to arbitration
under the auspices of ICSID in Article 8 of the Treaty, which provides as follows,
in relevant part:

(1) Disputes between one Contracting Party and a national or
company of the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation
of the former under this Agreement in relation to an investment
of the latter shall, at the request of the national concerned, be
submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes for settlement by arbitration or conciliation under the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and national of other States, opened for signature at
Washington on March 18, 1965.

[J

(4) Each Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent
to the submission of disputes as referred to in paragraph 1 of this
Article to international arbitration in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.

The Treaty, including Venezuela’s unconditional consent to ICSID arbitration,
entered into force on 31 October 1995 and remains in effect.

Venezuela’s notice of denunciation of the ICSID Convention on 24 January 2012
does not nullify its consent to this arbitration. As noted above, Venezuela’s
consent to arbitrate is contained in the Treaty, which remains in force. Its
denunciation of the Convention only affected its status as a Contracting State
under the Convention, pu
consented to ICSID arbitration. 4

ant to the Convention’s terms, not whether it has

 

Under Article 71 Venezuela remained a Contracting State at the time of the
Claimant’s filing

Even, were the Tribunal to find Venezuela’s consent to ICSID arbitration in
Article 8 of the Treaty insufficient to establish Venezuela’s consent to this
arbitration, the Claimant contends that Venezuela’s consent to this arbitration
follows from the application of Article 71 of the ICSID Convention. Article 71
provides that a Contracting State may denounce the Convention by providing

* Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 30.

95.

6.2.3

96.

97.

98.

® Thid., 31
“Ibid. 4

 

written notice and that “[t]he denunciation shall take effect six months after
receipt of such notice.” Under Article 71, Venezuela’s denunciation of the
Convention did not take effect until 25 July 2012, six months after notice of
denunciation was provided on 24 January 2012.

Venezuela remained a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention during this
period because it is only “[a]fter the denunciation becomes effective [that] a
signatory will cease to be a Contracting State, which is one of the conditions
required under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.” + Therefore, as Professor
Gaillard has explained, “[w]hen the investor has accepted the state’s general
consent... within the six-month period set forth in Article [71], the effectiveness
of the existing rights and obligations should raise little difficulty as the host state
is still a contracting party at th[at] time.”

 

Article 72 of the ICSID Convention permits an investor to accept a host State’s
unilateral offer of ICSID arbitration after denunciation of the Convention

Although, in the Claimant’s view, the application of Article 71, combined with
the terms of the BIT, disposes of Venezuela’s objection to jurisdiction ratione
voluntatis in this case, Claimant notes that Venezuela also relies on Article 72 to
assert that mutual consent to arbitration by both parties is required to have been
given before Venezuela’s notice of denunciation was submitted to ICSID.
However, this “perfected consent” theory ignores the plain language of the
Convention. “

Article 72 of the ICSID Convention covers the situation in which a denouncing
State has unilaterally consented to ICSID jurisdiction prior to giving notice of its
denunciation of the Convention.*”

The reference to “consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre given by one of them”
in Article 72 plainly refers to consent given by only one of the entities listed,
namely a denouncing State, one of its constituent subdivisions or agencies, or one
of its nationals — i.e. unilateral consent. The provision does not require consent
given by more than one party and thus by its terms does not require mutual
consent. “

1g J. Rodner and J.M. Estevez, BITS in Pieces: The Effectiveness of ICSID Jurisdiction after the ICSID Convention Has

Been Denounced, J. OF INT’L ARB., Vol. 29, Issue 4, 437-51, Exhibit CLA-109
‘°F, Gaillard, The Denunciation of the ICSID Convention, NYLS, Vol. 237, No. 122 (26 June 2007), Exhibit CLA-096.
“ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 35.

* Thid., 436.
® Thid., 436,

99.

100.

6.3

101.

6.3.1

102.

103.

® Ibid., 437,

Accordingly, pursuant to Article 72, a State’s notice of withdrawal from the
ICSID Convention does not affect its obligations under the Convention in a case
in which it has given consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre before its notice of
denunciation is received by ICSID. It is the unilateral consent of the State to
ICSID jurisdiction — in this case by means of the BIT — that is relevant under
Article 72.

Thus, the continued validity of Venezuela’s consent to arbitration in this case is
not dependent upon the application of Article 72. Nevertheless, Article 72
provides additional support for the proper assumption of jurisdiction by the
Tribunal, as Venezuela’s unilateral offer of ICSID arbitration in the Treaty — with
a promise of continued validity for ten years after any denunciation of the Treaty
— was made well before it denounced the Convention. *°

The Tribunal’s analysis

In order to establish whether it has jurisdiction ratione voluntatis, i.e. whether
Venezuela’s consent to jurisdiction was still valid and effective when the
Claimant’s Request for Arbitration was filed, notwithstanding Venezuela’s
written notice of denunciation of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal’s analysis
must both identify the appropriate normative framework and take account of the
basic facts, more specifically, the chronology of this case. While the three
members of the Tribunal have reached the same result regarding the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction ratione voluntatis, and agree on this conclusion unanimously, the
President of the Tribunal has adopted a different approach to this issue and
appends a separate opinion to this Award in this regard.

The normative framework

Pursuant to Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal “shall be the
judge of its own competence”. This provision codifies the universally accepted
principle of kompetenz-kompetenz, whereby, if a respondent challenges the
jurisdiction of the Centre or the competence of a tribunal, the tribunal must be
satisfied that the Centre has jurisdiction and the tribunal is competent to hear and
decide a dispute.

The jurisdiction of the Centre extends only to Contracting States and nationals of
other Contracting States of the Convention and its substantive scope of application

© Ibid., 432, Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 59.

104.

105.

6.3.2

106.

107.

is limited to “investments”. These basic criteria are laid down in Article 25 of the
Convention which, in relevant part, provides:

Article 25

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State
(or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their
consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

Pursuant to this provision, one of the requirements for ICSID jurisdiction is that
both parties to a legal dispute consent in writing to submit that dispute to the
Centre. Moreover, the last sentence of the first paragraph of Article 25 of the
Convention expressly states that, once consent is given by the parties, it cannot be
withdrawn unilaterally.

A Contracting State can nevertheless denounce the Convention under Article 71,
which provides as follows:

Article 71

Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by written
notice to the depositary of this Convention. The denunciation
shall take effect six months after receipt of such notice.

The chronology

The relevant chronology of the present case is as follows: the Respondent filed a
written notice of denunciation of the ICSID Convention to the World Bank (as
Convention depositary) on 24 January 2012. On 25 June 2012, the Claimant filed
the Request for Arbitration dated 22 June 2012. ICSID forwarded a copy by
courier and email under cover letter of 6 July 2012 to the Respondent, informing
it that ICSID had received the Request on 25 June 2012.5! The Request was
received by the Respondent on 7 July 2012.

On 18 July 2012, ICSID wrote to counsel on record for the Claimant requesting
additional clarification of the Request.°* The Respondent’s denunciation of the
ICSID Convention became effective on 25 July 2012 pursuant to Article 71 of the

*' Exhibit C-150,
° Exhibit C-151

6.3.3

108.

109.

110.

111.

Convention. On 27 July 2012, counsel of record for the Claimant replied to ICSID
providing the clarifications sought.*> The Request was registered by the Centre on
7 August 2012.

The Tribunal’s conclusion

The Parties devote attention in this regard to both Articles 71 and 72 of the ICSID
Convention. The majority of the Tribunal considers that the starting point of the
analysis is Article 71, the provision that contemplates denunciation and designates
its date of effectiveness, rather than Article 72, whose purpose is to preserve from
the consequences of denunciation the rights and obligations under the Convention
arising out of consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre given by the denouncing
State before the notice of denunciation is communicated to the depositary. If,
as the majority finds, an agreement to arbitrate was formed between the Claimant
and the Respondent before denunciation under Article 71 took effect, there is no
reason to inquire further into Article 72, inasmuch as Article 72 deals only with
the post-termination survival of certain of a State’s rights or obligations.

The majority finds, and the Parties so assumed in their pleadings, that the first
inquiry in connection with the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione voluntatis concerns
whether, at the time the agreement to arbitrate was formed, Venezuela’s
denunciation of the ICSID Convention had, or had not, taken effect.

The existence of an agreement between the Parties to arbitrate the present dispute
depends on whether the Respondent had made an offer to arbitrate such a dispute
and whether the Claimant accepted that offer while the offer was still in effect.

The offer relied upon by the Claimant for purposes of this arbitration is contained
in Article 8 of the BIT, dealing with the “Settlement of disputes Between one
Contracting Party and Nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party”
which states:

(1) Disputes between one Contracting Party and a national or
company of the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation
of the former under this Agreement in relation to an investment
of the latter shall, at the request of the national concerned, be
submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes for settlement by arbitration or conciliation under the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between

S Exhibit C-152.
S Schreuer et al., op. cit., p. 1280, § 5.

112.

113.

114.

115.

States and national of other States, opened for signature at
Washington on March 18, 1965.

[J

(4) Each Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent
to the submission of disputes as referred to in paragraph 1 of this
Article to international arbitration in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.

According to its Article 13, the BIT was to remain in force for an initial period of
ten years and thereafter continue in force until the expiration of twelve months
after either Party’s notice of termination. For investments made during the term
of the BIT, a sunset period of ten years applies starting with the date of
termination. The BIT had not been terminated at the time when the Claimant
submitted its Request for Arbitration on 25 June 2012, and it remains in force
today.

In order for the Claimant to accept the Respondent’s offer to arbitrate, it must
signify its consent to arbitrate. It is upon the Claimant’s doing so that an
agreement to arbitrate is formed between the Claimant and the Respondent. ICSID
Institution Rule 2(3) specifically defines the “date of consent” as follows:

‘Date of consent’ means the date on which the parties to the
dispute consented in writing to submit it to the Centre; if both
parties did not act on the same day, it means the date on which
the second party acted.

ICSID Institution Rule 2(3) thus suggests that the date when the Claimant’s
consent was given is the date on which the Claimant first filed its Request, i.e.
“the date on which the second party acted.” This is the date when the investor’s
consent to the offer by the host State was expressed and the consent to arbitration
was perfected.

Under the ICSID Convention, it is necessary to distinguish the date of institution
of an arbitration from the “date of consent”. The former event is governed by
ICSID Institution Rule 6(2), according to which “[a] proceeding [...] shall be
deemed to have been instituted on the date of the registration of the request.” As
the tribunal in Venoklim v. Venezuela found, the date of registration depends only
on the ICSID Secretariat and not on a claimant’s procedural conduct, and a
claimant should not be prejudiced in its filing of a request of arbitration for any
delays that may accrue in connection with the registration. This is so, even in

circumstances where the Secretariat requests additional information in order to

register a request. The Venoklim tribunal remarked:

 

[...] la fecha del registro de la Solicitud depende exclusivamente
del Secretariado del CIADI y no de una actuacién juridico-
procesal de la Demandante. Seria ilogico concluir que aunque la
Demandante presentara su solicitud de arbitraje antes de que
hubiera transcurrido el periodo de seis meses establecido en el
Articulo 71, podria resultar perjudicado por el transcurso del
lapso indefinido que podria existir entre la presentacién de la
solicitud y el registro de esta.*>

116. It is also worth noting that, at the time the Claimant originally filed the Request,
it reasonably appeared that it had the authority to do so. When the ICSID
Secretariat asked for further details as to the Claimant’s internal corporate
documents authorizing the filing, the Claimant filed a resolution of the Claimant’s
Board of Directors that authorized the granting of the power of attorney. It would
make little sense to hold that the Claimant’s consent did not take effect until such
formalities were observed.

117. As for the date of effectiveness of a denunciation, Article 71 of the ICSID
Convention, as noted, provides:

Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by written
notice to the depositary of this Convention. The denunciation
shall take effect six months after receipt of such notice.

118. Article 71 must be interpreted in conformity with the terms of Article 31 of the
VCLT,* in accordance with its ordinary meaning, in light of its object and
purpose, and in order to ensure its effet utile. Under Article 32 of the VCLT,

recourse to the travaux préparatoires of a treaty may be made in order to avoid a
29 57

 

result which is “manifestly absurd or unreasonable’

119. Ona plain reading of Article 71, there exists a six-month period of time following
receipt of a written notice of denunciation by the depositary before the

ch
estal

[T]he date of registration of the Request depends solely on the ICSID Secretariat and not on a juridical-procedural action by the
mant. It would be illogical to conclude that although the Claimant submitted its request for arbitration before the six-month period

 

  

hed in Article 71 has elapsed, it could be prejudiced by the lapse of an indefinite period that could exist between the filing of the
request and the registration of the same.” [Tribunal translation] Venoklim Holding B.V. v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Award, 3
April 2015, Exhibits CLA-157, RLA-084, 4/78.

*° Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1155 U.N.T'S. 331, 8 LL.M. 679 (entered into force Jan. 27, 1980). It is undisputed that
Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT reflect customary international law and thus apply in this case even though the ICSID Convention predates
the VCLT and Venezuela is not a party to the VCLT.

denunciation becomes effective. The relevant language is mandatory: “The
denunciation shall take effect six months after receipt of such notice” (emphasis
added). It follows that a denunciation of the ICSID Convention takes effect only
after the expiry of six months from the date of receipt of the notice of denunciation
by the depositary. Any other interpretation of this provision would render the
reference to a six-month time period devoid of any meaning, and would run
directly contrary to the principle of effet utile (ut res magis valeat quam pereat),
which is one of the fundamental tenets of treaty interpretation.** If the intention
was for the denunciation to take immediate effect, it would have made no sense
to specify, in the second sentence of Article 71, that there should be a further
ing period of six months after receipt of the notice before the denunciation
becomes effective.*?

 

wi

120. If the Claimant filed its Request for Arbitration on 25 June 2012, and if
Venezuela’s denunciation did not take effect until six months following its 24
January 2012 notice of denunciation (i.e. until 24 July 2012), then the agreement
to arbitrate was formed before the expiry of the six-month period during which
Venezuela, despite its denunciation, was still party to the ICSID Convention.
Accordingly, the majority of the Tribunal finds that the question whether, under
Article 72 of the ICSID Convention, consent given by the Respondent prior to
denunciation remained valid even after the denunciation took effect and the

  

Respondent was no longer a State party to the ICSID Convention, does not need
to be addressed.

7 DOES THE TRIBUNAL HAVE JURISDICTION RATIONE PERSONAE
UNDER THE TREATY?

7A The Respondent’s position

121. The Respondent disputes that the Claimant qualifies as an investor under the
Treaty.

S* Free Zones of Upper Savoy and the District of Gex, Order of 19 August 1929, P.C.LJ., Series A, No. 22, p. 13; Corfiu Channel, Judgment
of 9 April 1949, C.J. Reports 1949, p. 4, at p. 24; Territorial Dispute (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya/Chad) Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1994, p.
6, at p. 25; Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian
Federation), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, LC.J. Reports 2011, p. 70, at p. 125.

® For a similar analysis and conclusion, see the Judgment of the International Court of Justice in Alleged Violations of Sovereign Rights
and Maritime Spaces in the Caribbean Sea (Nicaragua v Colombia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment of 17 March 2016, §§ 34-40 and
48.

© See also Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 26, where the Claimant acknowledges that “the Tribunal need not decide the issue under
Article 72”.

122. The Respondent notes that Blue Bank claims to be “the sole legal registered holder
of the property and assets that constitute the Trust Fund of the Qatar Trust”.*!
Nonetheless, available records indicate that the shares in the BVI Companies
belong to the Qatar Trust and not to Blue Bank. For the Respondent, Blue Bank
is the trustee of a trust created for the sole purpose of affording protection
illegitimately to persons who would not otherwise be protected under the ICSID
Convention and the BIT.

123. The BIT only deals with investments made by nationals or companies of a
Contracting Party within the territory of the other Contracting Party. Article 1 of
the Treaty states that investment means “every kind of asset invested by nationals
or companies of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party”. Thus, Article 1 of the Treaty provides that the assets making up the
investment must be “invested” by the investor. This is not the case here because
the s invested by Blue Bank belong to the trust, not to the Claimant. In any
event, given that the Qatar Trust does not have legal personality, is not a national
of the other State and is not a company, it cannot be afforded protection under the
BIT.%

 

124. Both the ICSID Convention and the Treaty provide that a foreign investor may
submit a dispute to the jurisdiction of the Centre under certain circumstances.
However, in the instant case, there is no foreign investor, given that a trustee is
not the owner of the shares that are the subject-matter of the trust. Therefore, Blue
Bank cannot be deemed to be the owner of the alleged investment to which this
dispute refers. In the absence of this decisive element for the purpose of
jurisdiction, this Tribunal has no competence over this case.

125. Moreover, even if the description provided by Claimant of the corporate structure
including GIM, Humboldt, Hemesa, and ITC were correct, the decisive issue is
who really controls the Qatar Trust. That will determine whether the Centre may
exercise its jurisdiction and the Tribunal its competence. For the Respondent, even
if, quod non, the Tribunal were to conclude that Blue Bank is the investor because
it is the trustee of the Qatar Trust, the Tribunal would still lack jurisdiction over
this dispute because Venezuelan nationals or a Qatari sovereign fund appear to be
hiding behind the Qatar Trust and in any case dominating the Claimant.®>

© Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, 37, referring to the Claimant's Memorial, ¢ 70 and the witness statement of Mr Ian StClair
Hutchinson, §| 24.

© Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, 4 33.

© Dhid., 438

Wid. 441

© Thid., 448

7.2

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

The Claimant’s position

Blue Bank contends that it is a protected investor under the Treaty and the ICSID
Convention.

Blue Bank meets the requirements of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention in
respect of disputes submitted to arbitration between a Contracting State and a
national of another Contracting State.°’ As a “juridical person”, Blue Bank also
satisfies the nationality requirement provided in Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention.®*

Blue Bank, not the Qatar Trust, is the claimant in this arbitration and it is Blue
Bank’s status as an investor under the Treaty and the Convention that is
determinative for the claimant’s jus standi.

Blue Bank is a “company” under Article 1 of the Treaty. Article 1(d) additionally
provides that “‘companies’ means, in respect of each Contracting Party,
‘corporations’, firms and associations incorporated or constituted under the law
in force in that Contracting Party [...]” In the Barbados-Venezuela BIT there is
no restriction on the nationality of a protected investor’s shareholders for the
purposes of determining that company’s nationality. As tribunals have recognised,
such an omission indicates that the parties intended not to impose additional
restrictions on a company’s nationality.

Blue Bank is incorporated under the laws of Barbados and was a national of
Barbados on all dates relevant to this dispute, including the dates on which the
Treaty breaches occurred and the date on which Blue Bank consented to
arbitration. Blue Bank is physically located in Barbados, and Barbados is its sole
place of business.”°

Consequently, Blue Bank is a “National of another Contracting State” under the
first clause of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, which defines a
“National of another Contracting State” as “any juridical person which had the
nationality of a Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute on the
date on which the parties consented to submit the dispute to conciliation or
arbitration.” Blue Bank fits within this definition because, as noted above, it was

© Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 48, in fine.
© Claimant’s Memorial, 512.

Ibid. 4513,

© Ibid., 4 156-157.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 60.

132.

133.

73

134.

135.

136.

a company incorporated under the laws of Barbados on the date that the Request
for Arbitration was filed (and indeed remains so).”!

There is no basis under the Treaty or the Convention to look to anything other
than Blue Bank’s place of incorporation to determine its nationality as an investor.
It is not, therefore, possible to impugn Blue Bank’s status as the legal owner of
the trust property, including the investments at issue in this case. The Treaty does
not require that an investor hold a beneficial interest in the investment. Investor-
State tribunals have recognised that ownership of the investment is not limited to
beneficial ownership, and they have accepted that claims may be brought by the

 

trustees on behalf of a trust.”

Any attempt to suggest that Blue Bank is not the owner of the investment is
unavailing. It does not matter if the Escrow Agreement and the Pledge Agreement
or the share purchase agreements list the Qatar Trust as the owner of the
investment or the purchaser of the shares in GIM Tour and Western Hemisphere
in view of the fact that the Trust Deed and Barbados law establish Blue Bank, as
trustee, as the legal owner of the trust property.”

The Tribunal’s analysis

A few fundamental facts and documents relating to the Qatar Trust and to Blue
Bank need to be recalled at the outset to place the discussion in the proper context.

Blue Bank brings the action as trustee for the Qatar Trust. It does not invoke an
investment made for its own account or on its own behalf, the alleged investment
being the acquisition of the two BVI Companies. This is stated, for instance, in
the Request for Arbitration, under “I. Introduction”, as follows:

Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. (“Blue Bank”),
a Barbados corporation, as trustee of the Qatar International
Authorised Purpose Trust (“Qatar Trust”), submits to arbitration
at the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID”) certain claims against the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela (“Venezuela”).”4

In its Memorial, the Claimant explains its role in the following terms:

™ Ibid, 458; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 4 63.

* Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, ¥ 55; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 65
® Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 66.

™ Request for Arbitration, J 1

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

Blue Bank serves as Trustee of the Purpose Trust titled Qatar
International Authorised Purpose Trust (“the Qatar Trust”). On
June 8, 2006, the Qatar Trust was established as an international
trust under the International Trusts Act of the Laws of
Barbados.”

 

 

Further, the Claimant states that the Qatar Trust is the “substantial investor””° and
describes its role in submitting the claim in this arbitration in the following terms:

Blue Bank brings this action as Trustee for the Qatar Trust
because as a matter of law, this purpose trust under the laws of
Barbados has no beneficiary and no other natural person or
juridical entity as a matter of law who can bring this claim arising
from damage to the Qatar Trust assets. 7”

This fundamental premise, i.e. that Blue Bank brings this claim as trustee of the

Qatar Trust, is undisputed between the Parties, and has, consequently, formed the
point of departure for their respective positions in this arbitration.

Formation and Modification of the Qatar Trust

The documents and facts regarding the formation and amendments affecting the
Qatar Trust which are constitutive of the Claimant’s trusteeship are outlined
below.

The Original Trust Deed of 21 April 2005

According to the Original Trust Deed of 21 April 2005,”8 the Settlor, i.e. an
individual identified as “Jaime Castillo of Caracas, Venezuela”, has settled
property on the trust “set out in Schedule A” in an amount of USD 5,000.

The Qatar Trust was set up in Bahamas. The trustee at the time was Ansbacher, a
provider of trust services in Bahamas under the Banks and Trust Companies Act.

The “Authorized Purposes of the Trust,” according to Article 3(1) of the Original
Trust Deed, was “to acquire and procure certain shareholdings and act as

shareholders in various Venezuelan enterprises.””?

*§ Claimant’s Memorial, 4 69.

% Ibid. 41
” Whid., 479.

* Exhibit R-116.
® The paperwork that brought about this situation is indicated by the Claimant in a footnote in the Claimant's Memorial of the following
tenor: “42 See Exhibit C-100, a true and correct copy of the Share Purchase Agreement executed on April 27, 2005, and pursuant to which

The Second Trust Deed of I July 2005

143. In the Second Trust Deed,*° the purpose of the Trust is described in Article 3(1)
somewhat more generically as the acquisition of “certain negotiable instruments,
shareholdings and act as the shareholder in various enterprises”. As in the
Original Trust Deed, the shares were to be pledged for purposes of satisfying
“obligations under [t]he Agreements” (sub-littera c) (despite capitalization, not a
defined term). To the Second Trust Deed was appended a “Schedule A,” listing
the amount of “US$ 5,000”.

The Third Trust Deed of 15 March 2006

144. The Third Trust Deed*! concerns the appointment of the Claimant as the new
trustee in replacement of Ansbacher under its previous company name, Oceanic
Bank and Trust (Barbados) Limited.

The Fourth Trust Deed of 16 March 2006

145. In the preambular language (Article 4) of (the Fourth Trust Deed,*? it is provided
that the governing law be changed to that of Barbados, that the Original Trust
Deed be made consistent with the International Trusts Act of Barbados as well as
generally “vary the terms of the Trust for the better protection of the purposes
therein stated”.

The Trust Deed of 8 June 2006

146. The Trust Deed,** described by the Claimant as the current version at the time of
the arbitral proceedings, is in essential respects a restatement of its prior versions.

147. It is also important to recall the facts regarding the purchase by the Qatar Trust of
the BVI companies

The Purchase of the BVI Companies

148. A few days after the formation of the Qatar Trust, on 27 April 2005, the BVI
Companies were purchased by the Qatar Trust for an aggregate amount of USD

Blue Bank (Qatar Trustee) agreed to purchase all of the issued and outstanding shares of: (i) GIM TOUR LTD and (ii) WESTERN
HEMISPHERE HOTEL LTD”.

® Exhibit R-161, pp 18-36, which includes a compilation of the existing trust deeds in the case.

® Exhibit R-114.

© Exhibit R-IIS.

® Exhibit C-99.

156 million (of which USD 60 million was contingent on a certain future event).
Through the BVI companies, the Qatar Trust had ownership interests in the
Venezuelan companies ITC and Hemesa, which are said by the Claimant to be
part of the investment it made in this case.*4 It was agreed that payment of the
entire purchase sum was to be on deferred terms.®*

149. The funds required to meet these payment obligations appear to have been
borrowed — or intended to be borrowed at a future date — from Brighton, which,
according to the Escrow Agreement*® and a Collateral Pledge Agreement*? of 1
April 2005 between Brighton and the Qatar Trust, was to be given the shares of
the BVI Companies as collateral.

150. By the Escrow Agreement, Brighton undertook to deposit into an escrow an
amount of USD 250 million in favor of the Qatar Trust in return for the pledge of
the shares in the BVI Companies.

151. All of these transactions took place before the Claimant was appointed trustee of
the Qatar Trust and were performed by the trustee at the time, Ansbacher,
Bahamas*®. Thus, Ansbacher had the Qatar Trust purchase the BVI Companies
pursuant to the two share purchase agreements dated 27 April 2005. *°

152. With this background in mind, the Tribunal will now move to consider whether it
has jurisdiction ratione personae under the ICSID Convention and under the BIT.

153. The ICSID Convention does not contain a definition of “investor.” Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention provides that “jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to
any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting
State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated
to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the
parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.” This provision
defines the outer demarcation lines for subjective and substantive access to ICSID

“ To be clear, the Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, at § 92, states as follows: “Blue Bank’s investment includes its ownership interests
in Venezuelan companies ITC and Hemesa, which were purchased for US$156,000,000; its interest in the sums—totalling over
US$100,000,000—that ITC and Hemesa invested in the Teleférico, Hotel Humboldt and Hotel Puerto La Cruz; and its interests in the
Concession Contracts.” Those may constitute investments of ITC and Hemesa, but not of any foreign investor, let alone Blue Bank.

S Exhibit C-100.

%© Exhibit R-112.

© Exhibit R-113.

“The Tribunal attaches no significance to the fact that it was Blue Bank’s predecessor, Ansbacher, that acted on behalf of the Qatar Trust
when making the investment.

® The paperwork that brought about this situation is indicated by the Claimant in a footnote in the Claimant's Memorial of the following
tenor: “42 See Exhibit C-100, a true and correct copy of the Share Purchase Agreement executed on April 27, 2005, and pursuant to which
Blue Bank (Qatar Trustee) agreed to purchase all of the issued and outstanding shares of: (i) GIM TOUR LTD and (ii) WESTERN
HEMISPHERE HOTEL LTD.”

     

154.

155.

156.

157.

arbitration. The Claimant in this case is a “national of another Contracting State.”
This is in principle sufficient from the point of view of nationality under the ICSID
Convention.

Nevertheless, when it comes to the specific delimitation of competence conferred
upon an arbitral tribunal in any given instance, recourse must additionally be had
to the instrument on which jurisdiction is ultimately based, in this case an
investment protection treaty.

Article 8(1) of the BIT provides as follows:

Disputes between one Contracting Party and a national or
company of the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation
of the former under this Agreement in relation to an investment
of the latter shall, at the request of the national concerned, be
submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes for settlement by arbitration or conciliation under the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, opened for signature at
Washington on March 18, 1965. (Emphasis added).

  

There is no definition of “investor” in the underlying BIT in this case either.
Instead, the term “companies” is defined as follows under Article 1(d) of the BIT:

“companies” means, in respect of each Contracting Party,
corporations, firms and associations incorporated or constituted
under the law in force in that Contracting Party;

Pursuant to the above provisions of the BIT, and given that Blue Bank is a
company incorporated under the laws of Barbados, i.e. of one of the Contracting
States to the BIT, the nationality requirement under the BIT is satisfied. However,
the BIT defines the ambit of persons and investments protected under the treaty
in the following terms (Article 1(a)):

ARTICLE I

Definitions

 

For the purposes of this Agreement, “investment” means every
kind of asset invested by nationals or companies of one
Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party
and in particular, though not exclusively, includes: [non-
exhaustive list of asset classes]

158.

159.

8.1

160.

161.

162.

In light of the relevant provisions of the BIT, including Articles 8(1) and 1(a), the
central question to be determined for purposes of jurisdiction is whether the
Claimant, found to have the requisite nationality, has made an “investment”
pursuant to Article 1(a).

HAS BLUE BANK MADE AN “INVESTMENT” PURSUANT TO
ARTICLE 1(A) OF THE TREATY?

The Claimant contends that the Tribunal has competence because Blue Bank, as
trustee of the Qatar Trust, is the legal owner of the assets of the Qatar Trust. The
Tribunal will therefore address this question first.

Does Blue Bank as trustee have legal ownership of the assets of the Qatar
Trust?

By way of introduction, it is worth noting that, in the case of the Qatar Trust, the
sole asset that has been settled on the trust consists of the USD 5,000 allegedly
contributed by the “Original Settlor,” a Venezuelan national by the name of James
Castillo Ledesma.

The fundamental feature of a trusteeship under the Barbados International Trusts
Act is that the trustee may not have any interest in the fortunes of the entrusted
assets. The trustee does not manage the trust assets on its own behalf and does not
have an interest of any nature whatsoever in those assets. The trust assets are
separate from the equity of the trustee and do not form part of the trustee’s estate.

The characteristics of a trust and the nature of a trusteeship under Barbados law
are set forth in the following terms in the Barbados International Trusts Act:

(1) In this Act, the expression “trust” means the legal relationship
created when assets have been placed under the control of a
trustee for the benefit of a beneficiary or for a specific purpose.

(2) A trust has the following characteristics

(a) the assets of the trust constitute a separate fund and are not a
part of the trustee’s own estate;

(b) title to the assets of the trust is held in the name of the trustee
or in the name of another person on behalf of the trustee;

(c) the trustee has the power and the duty to manage, employ or
dispose of the assets of the trust in accordance with the terms
thereof and the special duties imposed upon him by law; and

(d) the trustee is accountable for the management and
administration of the assets of the trust.”°

163. Applying these provisions to the case at hand, in relation to the trust assets, Blue
Bank exercises the function of a trustee — a sui generis legal construct — and as
such it acts in its own name but on behalf of the trust in furtherance of certain
third party interests (whether for a person or a purpose). As trustee, Blue Bank
does not own the assets, but simply manages and administers them for a particular
purpose (in the case of a so-called “purpose trust”) or to the benefit of a third party
(in the case of a customary beneficiary trust). It follows that, by acting in its
capacity as trustee, the Claimant cannot be considered as having committed any
assets in its own right, as having incurred any risk, or as sharing the loss or profit
resulting from the investment. As appears from the Trust Deed, the emolument
flowing to the Claimant for its discharge of services as the Trustee of the Qatar
Trust is an annual fixed fee and nothing else:

 

The Trustee shall be entitled to be paid out of the Trust Fund, an
annual fee of One Hundred Thousand United States Dollars
(US$100,000.00), (the “Annual Trustee Fee”) in respect of the
Trustee acting in the capacity as Trustee of this Trust, and for all
services provided hereunder. *!

164. The plain and ordinary meaning of Article 8(1) of the BIT makes it clear that the
Tribunal’s ratione personae jurisdiction is predicated on the Claimant having
made an “investment.” An “investment” is defined in Article 1(a) of the BIT as
“every kind of asset invested by [...] companies of one Contracting Party.”
Determinative for Blue Bank’s standing is therefore the question whether it has
made an investment.

165. Blue Bank brings a claim in its capacity of trustee on behalf of the Qatar Trust
and not on its own behalf, does not own the alleged investment and is not bringing
aclaim in relation to an investment that it has made itself. As for the Qatar Trust,
it lacks personality (as acknowledged by both Parties) and it is not a company.
Moreover, the ordinary meaning of the words “nationals” or “companies”
provided in the BIT does not extend to a “trust”, whether this absence exists by
chance or by design.

°° Exhibit CLA-129,
° Article 17.1 of the Trust Deed, Exhibit C-99.

166. By way of example, in the Renta et al. v. Russia case,” two of the claimants were
pension funds without legal personality, the assets of which were managed by
management companies. These funds display, in relevant respects, great
similarities with a trust. The Renta tribunal in particular held as follows:

122. Russia argues that Emergentes and Eurofondo are not
corporate bodies. Spanish law (specifically: Article 3 of Law
35/2003 of 4 November 2003) treats them as collective
investment funds without legal personality. It follows in Russia’s
submission that they are not investors as defined in the Spanish

 

[J

127. [...] It requires a juridical leap to allow the funds to qualify
as investors by absorbing a corporate identity which is not their
own.

167. Moreover, under the Trust Deed, the trustee’s powers over the trust assets are
extremely limited, as can be clearly seen from clauses 9.1.2, 9.2.1, 9.3, 18 and 20.
At bottom, the trustee (Blue Bank) simply performs a service to third party
interests — ultimately the beneficiary or the purpose of the Qatar Trust, as the case
may be — in exchange for a fee.”

168. The Tribunal notes that the Parties’ arguments have occasionally centered around
such concepts as “legal owner,” “beneficial or nominal ownership,” “legal title,”
“nominee ownership” and the like.°* However, this is a mere matter of semantics.
In actual fact and law, Blue Bank is not an owner in any relevant sense of the
word.

169. It follows that the Claimant’s repeated references to Blue Bank as the “legal
owner” of the trust assets is inapposite. It may be noted that the Barbados
International Trusts Act is carefully drafted so as not to describe the legal
relationship created between the trustee and the trust assets in terms of
“ownership,” “legal title” or the like. Instead, the Act takes care to refer to the

trust assets as a “separate fund,” not part of the trustee’s “own estate” and provides

* Renta 4 S.V.S.A et al. v Russian Federation, SCC Case No. Arbitration V (24/2007), Award on Preliminary Objections, dated 20 March
2009.

° As observed at § 199 below, the President of the Tribunal does not attach importance on the matter of limited control

° Claimant’s Memorial, {| 1: “Blue Bank as Trustee is the absolute legal owner of the trust fund”; Respondent's Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction, j 49: “Blue Bank is the legal owner of the assets that comprise the trust fund”; Zbid., 51: “... the trustee is the legal owner
of the trust fund under applicable Barbadian law”; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 4] 49: “... the placing of property into trust results in the legal
ownership of that property being transferred to the trustee”.

 

 

that title to the trust assets is held “in the name of the trustee,” not that the assets
are “owned” by the trustee.

170. The party that would come closest to satisfying the requirements of “ownership”
with regard to the assets of the Qatar Trust is what the trust deeds refer to as the
“Eligible Person” (which is not a term of art but one that the Tribunal — for reasons
given in paragraphs 190 to 194 below — considers to be a beneficiary). It is the
“Eligible Person”, in this case Hampton, that enjoys ultimate control over the trust
assets and that will ultimately enjoy or suffer, as the case may be, the fortunes of
the trust assets.

171. Under Schedule I of the Trust Deed, Hampton is also the “Protector”, jointly with
another company, Waterstone. Section 16 of the Trust Deed lists the powers and
duties of the Protector, who is “responsible for ensuring that the terms of [the]
Trust Deed are complied with and are given effect to” and has, inter alia, the
power to remove the trustee.?5 For its part, the trustee has no power and no
discretion over the trust assets. As noted by the Respondent’s expert, David
Brownbill QC:

  

[Under the terms of the trust] [t]he trust property belongs, in
equity, exclusively to Hampton. This situation can change only if
Hampton itself effects that change in its capacity as Protector. The
trustee has no material power or discretion which could be
exercised so as to diminish or prejudice Hampton’s position. [...]
As the entire beneficial interest vests, indefeasibly, in a single
beneficiary the Trustee is a nominee or bare trustee for
Hampton.*°

 

 

172. In conclusion, Blue Bank, as a trustee holding the assets of the Qatar Trust for the
ultimate benefit of third party interests, does not own the assets of the Qatar Trust,
did not invest these assets for its own account and cannot, therefore, ground
jurisdiction on any investment made by it as required by Articles 1(a) and 8(1) of
the BIT.

173. The Tribunal has thus reached the conclusion that Blue Bank has no ownership
rights in respect of the assets of the Qatar Trust, that it has not brought a claim on
its own behalf — whether as a nominal or beneficial owner — and that, accordingly,
Blue Bank has not invested the relevant assets under the terms of the BIT.

° Clauses 16.1.1 and 16.2.1 respectively
* David Brownbill QC Expert Report, § 28.

8.2 The legal nature of the Qatar Trust

174. Although for purposes of determining whether the Claimant has made an
“investment” in Venezuela, as required under Article 1(a) of the BIT, it is not
necessary to determine the nature of the Qatar Trust, given the significance
attached by the Parties to this question for purposes of jurisdiction, the Tribunal
addresses the question here.

175. The Claimant contends in this regard that — as trustee of the Qatar Trust — it is the
legal owner of its assets. It specifically characterizes the Qatar Trust as a “purpose
trust.” The Claimant further asserts that — as legal owner of the property of the
Qatar Trust and the only entity that may advance claims with regard to that
property — it is the proper claimant in this case.°” For its part, the Respondent
argues that the Qatar Trust is a conventional beneficiary trust which does not
belong to the trustee (whose capacity is very limited) but to the Eligible Person.°®

176. The Parties’ arguments may be summarized as follows:
8.2.1 The Respondent's position

177. The Respondent contests the assertion that the Claimant’s actions as trustee for
the Qatar Trust confer investor status on the Claimant. For the Respondent, the
Qatar Trust is not a purpose trust. The International Trusts Act 1995 of Barbados,
which would apply to the Qatar Trust, includes in Part III the definition of
“purpose trusts”:

In this Part, "purpose trust" means

(a) a trust, other than a trust that is for the benefit of particular
persons, whether or not immediately ascertainable, or

(b) a trust that is [not] for the benefit of some aggregate of persons
ascertained by reference to some personal relationship”

178. In order to determine whether a trust is a purpose trust or a customary, beneficiary
trust, its object has to be analyzed in order to establish whether it has been created
for the benefit of a particular person or an aggregate of persons. When no person
or aggregate of persons can be identified as the beneficiary, this is constitutive of
a purpose trust.

* Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, {| 510.

° Respondent's Reply, $9) 103-113.

® Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, j 95; Exhibit R-13. The Respondent argues that this provision of the Trusts Act should be read
to include the word “not” between “is” and “for” in letter (b). See, for instance, Transcript, Day 3, page 532, line 3

  

179.

180.

181.

8.2.2

182.

183.

The Qatar Trust was created for the benefit of a person, Hampton, which is both
the Eligible person and Protector of the Qatar Trust. The very purpose of the Qatar
Trust is to provide benefits to Hampton, independently of the obligation of the
Qatar Trust to repay the loans obtained in exchange for the issue of Qatar Notes.

In addition to distributing earnings to the Eligible Person, the only other purpose
of the assets described in the trust deeds is the satisfaction of merely
administrative needs. Therefore, the Qatar Trust is not a purpose trust, but an
ordinary trust created for the benefit of a particular person. No part of the assets
or income is distributed or allocated to a specific purpose other than acquiring
companies in order to repay the loans obtained and distribute the remainder to
Hampton. All operating companies of the Qatar Trust are Venezuelan.

In this respect, the Original Trust Deed explains that the purpose of the trust was
the following:

[...] acquire or procure certain shareholdings and act as the
shareholder in various Venezuelan enterprises (hereinafter the
“Enterprises”) in order to irrevocably pledge such assets and
income from such assets to Brighton Preferred Equity
Investments Ltd. (hereinafter “Brighton”) in form of a Promissory
Note (the “Note”) in order raise sufficient funds [...]!°

The Claimant’s position

The Claimant explains its role as trustee of the Qatar Trust in the statement of
claim as follows:

Blue Bank serves as Trustee of the Purpose Trust titled Qatar
International Authorised Purpose Trust (“the QatarTrust”). On
June 8, 2006, the Qatar Trust was established as an international
trust under the International Trusts Act of the Law of Barbados.'°!

The Claimant describes the Qatar Trust as follows.

[a]s a purpose trust, the Qatar Trust is a special genus of trust that
under the laws of Barbados is a statutory product of the
International Trusts Act. As a principle of law, a person who
derives a direct or consequential benefit (whether’ financial or
non-financial), through the proper exercise by the Trustee of the
stated purpose of the trusts has no beneficial interest in the trust

‘Exhibit R-116,
' Claimant’s Memorial, § 69.

184.

185.

186.

187.

188.

"© [bid 471

property or trust fund. Such an individual has no property or
proprietary interest in the trust in the technical sense that, for
example, would allow the person to take legal action on the trust’s
behalf. [Emphasis omitted].!°?

The Claimant has made the following remarks with respect to its role as investor
under the BIT.

The non-charitable purpose trust is a statutory creation in
Barbados, a product of the International Trusts Act. The Qatar
Trust satisfies the essential requirements for validity of an
international purpose trust under section 10 of the Act.!%

The Qatar Trust satisfies the four requirements for a purpose trust under the
Barbados International Trusts Act:

The stated purposes are properly construed specific, reasonable
and capable of fulfillment, and are not immoral, unlawful or
contrary to public policy. There is a First Protector to enforce the
Trust and provision for the appointment of a successor-protector.
The Qatar Trust specifies the event upon the happening of which
the Qatar Trust terminates (defined as the “Termination Date’)
and provides for the disposition of surplus assets of the Qatar
Trust upon its termination [...]!

The distributive elements of the Qatar Trust for the benefit of the Eligible Persons
are intended to give effect to the stated purposes and do not create a separate
beneficial interest in the Eligible Persons. Rather, the residual distributive element
of the Qatar Trust, stated in Section 7.1(k), is required for a purpose trust under
section 10(d) of the International Trusts Act and is in the nature of a contingent
contractual obligation owed by the trustee to the Eligible Persons. It does not
reflect the creation of a trust for the benefit of Eligible Persons or any one Eligible
Person.

The creation of the Qatar Trust was for purposes of facilitating access to capital
by enabling the securitization of the Trust’s assets.
Blue Bank became trustee and reorganized the Qatar Trust under Barbados Law

for commercial reasons. The Qatar Trust was restructured under Barbados law in
2006 primarily to get the benefit of a bilateral tax treaty between Barbados and

"® Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, § 32.
'°! Quoted from the Claimant's expert’s written statement, Second Witness Statement of Peter David Hutson Williams, § 27.

189.

8.2.3

190.

191.

192.

193.

"® As noted above, the negation

Venezuela that provided benefits that were unavailable in the Bahamas in respect
of any income from the trust property.

Blue Bank is the legal owner of the property of the Qatar Trust and the only entity
that may claim in respect of the trust property. It is a basic legal principle in
common-law jurisdictions that the placing of property into trust results in the legal
ownership of that property being transferred to the trustee. All legal interest in the
trust assets is held by the trustee.

The Tribunal’s conclusion

Although, as noted (paragraph 179 supra), the characterization of the Qatar Trust
as a beneficiary or a purpose trust is not dispositive of this case, the Tribunal, in
consideration of the attention paid to the matter by counsel, has considered the
matter and concludes that the Qatar Trust is not a purpose trust.

The International Trusts Act 1995 of Barbados, which would apply to the Qatar
Trust, includes in Part III, Section 9, the following definition of “purpose trusts”:

 

9. In this Part, “purpose trust” means

(a) a trust, other than a trust that is for the benefit of particular
persons, whether or not immediately ascertainable, or

(b) a trust that is [not] for the benefit of some aggregate of persons
ascertained by reference to some personal relationship. !°°

In order to determine whether a trust is a purpose trust or a beneficiary trust, its
object has to be analyzed. When no particular person or aggregate of persons can
be identified as the beneficiary, the trust may be characterized as a purpose trust.
The concept of purpose trust must, consequently, be negatively defined.

As discussed at paragraphs 179 - 180 above, the Qatar Trust was created for the
benefit of a person, i.e. Hampton, which is both the Eligible Person and the
Protector of the Qatar Trust. The very purpose of the Qatar Trust is to provide
benefits to Hampton, independent of the obligation of the Qatar Trust to repay the
loans obtained in exchange for the issue of Qatar Notes which of course is not a
beneficial but an onerous obligation.

 

ithin hard brackets is added by reason of Mr Brownbill’s remark that its omission is a drafting mistake

(Transcript, Day 3, page 532, lines 2 and 3). The Tribunal finds this remark logically compelling, although this is ultimately of no
consequence for the Tribunal’s conclusion

194,

8.3

195.

196.

The only other purpose of the assets described in the Qatar Trust Deed is the
satisfaction of merely administrative needs. Therefore, the Qatar Trust is not a
purpose trust, but a customary beneficiary trust created for the benefit of a
particular person.

Did Blue Bank act with the independence associated with a beneficiary trust?

 

Although the preceding discussion establishes that the Claimant cannot assert
jurisdiction in the absence of an investment of assets that it has made, the analysis
would not be complete (according to the majority) if consideration were not at all
given to the terms of the Trust Deed according to which Blue Bank was to perform

its functions as trustee. This question is addressed below.

 

Although a trustee in a beneficiary trust must without doubt act for the benefit of
the beneficiary, a trustee must be in a position to act with some independence in
pursuing that purpose. An examination of the Trust terms reveals that in
performance of its tasks, Blue Bank cannot perform many essential trustee
functions independently, but, with respect to them, is under the control of
Hampton, as both the Eligible Person and the Protector of the Qatar Trust. It is
true that the Trust Deed purports generally, in Clauses 9 and 10.1-10.3, to
guarantee the Trustee’s independence, but it also conditions a great many
meaningful exercises of authority by Blue Bank to the consent of the Hampton as
both Protector and “Eligible Person.” Illustrative are the following:

e Clause 8.1: “The Trustee shall not be held liable for any breach of duty or
loss or damage to any third party caused by virtue of or as a result of any
distribution made pursuant to the direction of the Protector. The Trustee shall
not have the responsibility or any duty to investigate or ascertain whether any
discretion directed to be made by the Protector is properly in furtherance of
the purposes hereof.”

e Clause 8.2: “The Trustee [...] may pay or apply the whole or any part or parts
of the capital or income of the Trust Fund to or for the benefit of the Eligible
Persons, in such manner as the Protector shall in its direction think fit.”

e Clause 8.3: “With the consent of the Protector, the Trustee may pay or
transfer the whole or any part of the capital or income of the Trust Fund to
the trustees for the time being of any other trust wheresoever established or
existing [...]”

Clause 8.4: “[...] [A]ny settlement made by the Trustee under this present
power upon or for the benefit of the Eligible Persons [...] may contain such
trusts, powers and provisions whatsoever [...] as the Protector in its absolute
discretion shall determine.”

Clause 9.4.2: “The Trustee shall not without the consent of the Protector [...]
take or execute any of the following actions [among which] (d) the sale,
exchange, assignment, pledge or hypothetication of any Enterprise or all or
substantially all of the assets forming part of the Trust Fund.”

Clause 13.1: “The Protector, shall have power at any time or times during the
Trust Period to add to the class of Eligible Persons such one or more persons
[...] as the Protector shall in its absolute discretion determine.”

Clause 13.2: “The Protector, may in a declaration by Deed, made at any time
or times during the Trust period declare that any persons or member of a class
named or specified [...] in such declaration who is would or might but for this
clause be or become entitled to any distribution [...] or be otherwise able to
benefit hereunder as the case may be, shall: (a) be wholly or partially
excluded from future benefits hereunder [...]”

Clause 13.4: “The Protector in exercising any of the powers conferred in
favour of any particular person is hereby expressly authorised to ignore
entirely the interests of any other person interested or who may become
interested under this Trust.”

Clause 16.1.1: “In the manner provided for in this Trust Deed, the Protector
shall be responsible for ensuring that the terms of this Trust Deed are
complied with and are given effect to. The Protector shall not except as
expressly provided for by law, be responsible to the Trustee [or] the Eligible
Persons [...] for the manner in which he exercises his duties and discretions
hereunder, or for any omission or failure to act, except to the extent that in
any circumstance there has been willful negligence, willful default or
dishonesty on the part of the Protector.”

Clause 16.2.1: “The Protector shall have the following powers vested in him:
[...] (b) to remove the Trustee or any Trustee at any time from time to time;
and (c) to do all such other acts and things incidental to the foregoing and to
exercise all powers necessary or useful to carry on the business of the Trust,

197.

198.

199.

"© Exhibit C-99.

to promote any of the purposes for which the Trust is formed, and to carry
out the provisions contained herein.”

e Clause 16.3.1: “Notwithstanding the provisions of the Applicable Law, the
Protectot

 

all have an absolute and uncontrolled discretion in exercising and
in deciding whether or not to exercise any power here conferred, and in
deciding whether to give or to withhold any consent to any act or thing
requiring hereunder the consent of the Protector. The Protector may exercise
such discretion upon consideration of such facts or information and in such
manner for the benefit of the Eligible Persons or any one or more of them
exclusively of the others or other of them as the Protector may think fit and
the Protector shall not be liable or accountable in any manner for any exercise
of or non-exercise of such discretion.”!°

In other words, Hampton essentially has full control over Blue Bank’s
management of the Qatar Trust. It decides the way in which earnings are
distributed after Qatar Notes are paid, it has the power to remove the trustee and,
in its capacity as Eligible Person (not a term of art), it is the beneficiary of the
earnings distributed at its own discretion, without being accountable to anyone. It
is, for all intents and purposes, the “real” owner of the purported investment in
the BVI Companies.

The President of the Tribunal differs as to the relevance of control:

The President agrees with the majority as concerns the factual situation that Blue
Bank’s discretion to act as trustee under the terms of the Trust Deed was totally
circumscribed, giving it no control over the management of the trust assets.
However, whether this was so or not is without relevance for the question whether
Blue Bank may assert jurisdiction under the BIT. Determinative for this question
is whether it made the investment on which it relies in its own behalf or not.

 

However, the unanimous conclusion of the Tribunal is that Blue Bank did not
make the investment in its own behalf.

OTHER JURISDICTIONAL ARGUMENTS

The Tribunal’s holding that the Claimant lacks standing for failure to have
invested assets in the host State compels dismissal of the Claimant’s claims for
lack of jurisdiction. It also implies that the other arguments adduced by the
Respondent, including that jurisdiction was fabricated by the Claimant in the face

10

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

205.

206.

207.

of an existing or imminent dispute for the sole purpose of obtaining protection
under the BIT (abuse of process),!°’ do not need to be addressed separately.

ALLOCATION OF COSTS

On 18 April 2016, the Parties filed their respective Statements of Costs.
Comments were exchanged on 3 May 2016.

Each of the Parties has requested to be reimbursed for the legal costs incurred in
these proceedings including, in the case of the Respondent, interest.

The Claimant has submitted that it incurred a total of USD 1,924,345.06 in legal
fees and expenses. It has effected an advance on costs to ICSID in the amount of
USD 850,000.00.

The Respondent has submitted that it incurred a total of USD 1,709,295.00 in
legal fees and expenses. It did not contribute by way of advance on costs to ICSID.

As regards costs, Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:
Article 61

Oyen

(2) In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall,
except as the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred
by the parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide
how and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the
facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part
of the award.

An arbitral tribunal has the discretionary power to allocate the arbitration costs
and the legal fees and expenses between the parties, including by ordering the
losing party to bear in full the costs of the arbitration and the legal fees and
expenses incurred by both parties.

Both Parties to this arbitration have submitted requests for reimbursement in
respect of their respective legal costs.

The Tribunal is well aware of the practices of certain arbitration tribunals not to
make any order for legal costs. However, there is an increasing trend to

' Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, 4] 87-135.

208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

acknowledge that a successful party should not normally be left out of pocket in
respect of the legal costs reasonably incurred in defending its legal rights.

The Tribunal favors the approach taken by the Parties — which is implicit in their
requests for cost orders — that as a general principle the successful party should be
paid its reasonable legal costs by the unsuccessful party.

In light of the Tribunal’s finding that the Claimant does not prevail on the
preliminary question of jurisdiction, the Tribunal considers it appropriate for the

Claimant to bear in full its legal fees and expenses, as well as the arbitration costs.

The costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal,
ICSID’s administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in USD): !°

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Christer Séderlund USD 314,441.12
George Bermann USD 115,595.99
Loretta Malintoppi USD 144,820.86
ICSID’s administrative fees USD 128,000.00

Direct expenses (estimated)! USD 90,044.27

Total USD 792,902.24

For the same reason as explained above, the Tribunal considers it appropriate that
the Claimant also be ordered to reimburse the Respondent’s legal fees and
expenses in the amounts requested. The Tribunal finds the Respondent’s request
for such costs reasonable.

Consequently, the Claimant is ordered to pay to the Respondent the amount of
USD 1,709,295.00, representing the Respondent’s legal fees and expenses.

The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account once all invoices are received
and the account is final.
® This amount includes estimated charges relating to the dispatch of this Award (courier, printing and copying)

213.

214.

As for interest on the Respondent’s legal costs, the Tribunal considers that any
delay in respect of the Claimant’s reimbursement of costs shall attract interest.
The Respondent has not specified from which date it considers that interest shall
accrue or at what rate. The Tribunal will therefore base these parameters on

reasonableness and fix the commencement date at 30 days from the date of this

 

Award applying an annual simple interest rate of 5 per cent.

As for the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for
the use of ICSID facilities, these costs will be defrayed out of the advances made
by the Claimant. Having regard to the Tribunal’s decision that the Claimant shall
be ultimately liable for arbitration costs, there will be no order for those costs.

il

215.

DECISION

For the foregoing reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal unanimously:

1) Declares that the Centre does not have jurisdiction and the Arbitral Tribunal
does not have competence to adjudicate the present dispute;

2

Declares that the Claimant shall bear in full its legal costs and expenses, the
costs of this arbitration, as well as the Respondent’s legal costs and expenses;

3

Orders the Claimant to pay to the Respondent the amount of USD
1,709,295.00, representing the Respondent's legal costs and expenses, within
30 days from the date of this Award, together with interest thereon calculated
from the 30" day following the date of this Award at the rate of 5% per annum.

ARR RRR RR

Loretta Malintoppi | an Bermann

Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: Jo [3] 21? Date: € Ape zal Ft

ChystertSdderlun
President of the Tribunal

Date: $ Apri | 2o\F

