INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between
BLUE BANK INTERNATIONAL & TRUST (BARBADOS) LTD.
Claimant
and
BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
Respondent

ICSID CasE No. ARB/12/20

 

DECISION ON THE PARTIES' PROPOSALS TO DISQUALIFY
A MAJORITY OF THE TRIBUNAL

 

Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council
Dr. Jim Yong Kim

Secretary of the Tribunal
Alicia Martin Blanco

Representing the Claimant:

Mr. Pedro J, Martinez-Fraga
Mr. Ryan Reetz

Mr. Harout Jack Samra

Mr. Kamal H. Sleiman
DLA Piper LLP (US)

200 South Biscayne Boulevard,

Suite 2500
Miami, Florida 33131
United States of America

Date: November 12, 2013

Representing the Respondent:

Dr. Manuel Enrique Galindo
Procurador General (E) de la Republica
Dra. Magaly Gutiérrez

Dra. Yarubith Escobar

Procuraduria General de la Republica
Paseo Los Ilustres c/e Av. Lazo Marti
Santa Monica, Caracas

Venezuela

Mr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
Mr. Diego Brian Gosis

Mr. Facundo Pérez Aznar
Guglielmino & Asociados

175 SW 7th Street, Suite 2110
Miami, Florida 33130

United States of America

TABLE OF CONTENTS

A. THE PARTIES. 1
B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
C. POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES AND OBSERVATIONS BY MR. ALONSO AND DR.
TORRES BERNARDEZ
I. Mr. José Maria Alonso
1. dent’s
2. Observations by the Claimant.
3. Explanations by Mr. Alonso

 

 

Il. Dr. Santiago Torres Ber

 

1. Claimant’s ai

2. Observations by the R di

3. Explanations by Dr. Torres Bernardez
D. DECISION BY THE CHAIRMAN...

 

 

 

 

 

I. The i legal standard. 10
Il. Timelit 12
III. The chall of Mr. Alonso 12

 

 

IV. The challenge of Dr. Torres Bernardez........ on
E. CONCLUSIONS 13

 

- Page | -
ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

A. THE PARTIES

1. The Claimant is Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. (“Blue Bank”), a
company incorporated under the laws of Barbados. The Respondent is the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela (“Venezuela”).

B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

2. On June 25, 2012, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received a Request for Arbitration filed by Blue Bank
against Venezuela.

3. In its Request, the Claimant alleged that Venezuela breached the 1994 Agreement
between the Government of Barbados and the Government of the Republic of
Venezuela for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, in force since 1995.

4. The Secretary-General registered the Request for Arbitration on August 7, 2012.

5. By letter of October 8, 2012, the Claimant appointed Mr. José Maria Alonso, a national
of the Kingdom of Spain, as arbitrator. Mr. Alonso accepted his appointment on
October 22, 2012. Copies of Mr. Alonso’s declaration, statement and curriculum vitae
were circulated to the Parties on October 24, 2013, pursuant to Rule 6(2) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”). Mr. Alonso’s
statement indicated as follows:

“As of March 2012, I have been a Partner at Baker & McKenzie
Madrid, S.L.P. in charge of the Dispute Resolution department in
Madrid (Spain).

Baker & McKenzie Madrid, S.L.P. is a firm belonging to Baker &
McKenzie International (Swiss Verein). All the firms that form part of
Baker & McKenzie International are independent and the remuneration
of Partners therefore depends mainly on the turnover of each particular

firm.

Neither myself nor Baker & McKenzie Madrid, S.L.P. have or have had
any relationship with the parties of the proceedings.

Notwithstanding the above, I am aware of arbitration proceedings
before the ICSID against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in an
unrelated matter initiated by Baker & McKenzie New York and Baker &
McKenzie Caracas in 2011, in which they represented a company called
Legreef [sic] Investments. As stated above, in spite of belonging to
Baker & McKenzie International, both firms are independent from
Baker & McKenzie Madrid, S.L.P. and there is no relationship
whatsoever between myself or Baker & McKenzie Madrid, S.L.P. and

- Page 2 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

Legreef [sic] International or the aforementioned arbitration
proceedings. Therefore I will not be provided with any information,
intervene or take part in said proceedings.

I therefore consider myself completely independent and impartial to act
as an arbitrator in this [sic] proceedings.”

By letter of November 5, 2012, the Respondent appointed Dr. Santiago Torres
Bernardez, a national of the Kingdom of Spain, as arbitrator. Dr. Torres Berndrdez
accepted his appointment on November 15, 2012. Copies of his declaration, statement
and curriculum vitae were circulated to the Parties on November 16, 2012. Dr. Torres
Bernardez’s statement indicated as follows:

“Por la presente declaro ser en la actualidad drbitro designado por la
Reptiblica Argentina en dos casos CIADI, a saber “Abaclat and others
vy. Argentine Republic” (caso CIADI No.ARB/07/5) y “Giordano Alpi
and others v. Argentine Republic (caso CIADI No.ARB/08/9)".

No he tenido ni tengo ninguna [sic] tipo de relacién con el Demandante
o la Demandada en el presente caso y ni yo ni mi familia tenemos
inversiones u otros intereses econdmicos en VENEZUELA y/o
BARBADOS.”

On November 5, 2012, Respondent submitted a proposal to disqualify Mr. Alonso
pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“Convention”) and Rule 9 of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules (“Respondent’s November 5 Letter”). This proposal was
filed before the constitution of the Tribunal. The Centre confirmed receipt on
November 9, 2012.

On May 3, 2013, the Centre reminded the Parties that no steps had been taken towards
the constitution of the Tribunal, since the appointment of Dr. Torres Bernardez.

On May 4, 2013, the Claimant requested that the President of the Tribunal be
designated by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council (“Chairman”). By
letter of May 23, 2013, the Secretary-General proposed five candidates to the Parties to
be considered as the presiding arbitrator. None of these proposals resulted in a mutually
agreeable candidate.

On June 12, 2013, and before the Tribunal had been constituted, the Claimant submitted
a proposal to disqualify Dr. Torres Bernardez pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 (“Claimant’s June 12 Letter”). In this
letter, the Claimant indicated that Mr. Alonso and Dr. Torres Bernardez would be a
majority of the members of the tribunal (once constituted) and, accordingly, requested

- Page 3 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

that the Chairman decide the challenges in accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.

On July 2, 2013, the Centre informed the Parties of its understanding that the intent of
both Parties was to treat Respondent’s November 5 Letter and Claimant’s June 12
Letter as a proposal for disqualification of the majority of the members of the tribunal,
which would be decided by the Chairman in accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9. Venezuela confirmed the Centre’s
understanding by letter of July 3, 2013. No further comments were received from the
Claimant.

By letter of July 31, 2013, the Centre informed the Parties of its intention to propose to
the Chairman the appointment of Mr. Christer Séderlund, a national of the Kingdom of
Sweden, as the presiding arbitrator. By letter of August 7, 2013, the Respondent
objected to the proposal of Mr. Séderlund as the presiding arbitrator. The Claimant did
not submit observations.

By letter of August 13, 2013, the Centre transmitted to the Parties Mr. Séderlund’s reply
to Respondent’s objections. Having carefully considered the correspondence
exchanged on this matter, the Centre informed the Parties that it would proceed with the
appointment of Mr. Séderlund. Mr. Séderlund accepted his appointment on August 15,
2013.

The Tribunal was constituted on August 16, 2013 in accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of
the ICSID Convention. On the same date, the Centre transmitted the proposals to
disqualify Mr. Alonso and Dr. Torres Bernardez to the three members of the Tribunal,
declared the proceeding suspended in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6), and
established a procedural calendar for the Parties’ submissions on the disqualification
proposals.

On August 23, 2013, the Respondent submitted additional observations to Respondent’s
November 5 Letter (“Respondent’s August 23 Observations”). The Claimant did not
submit additional observations.

On September 2, 2013, the Parties requested an extension to file their second round of
observations until September 12, 2013. The Parties’ request was granted on September
3, 2013.

On September 2, 2013, Dr. Torres Bernardez submitted a letter to the Centre
(i) furnishing explanations in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3)
(“Dr. Torres Bernardez’s Explanations”) and (ii) submitting his resignation in

- Page 4 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

20.

21.

22.

23.

accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 8(2). The Centre circulated this letter to the
Parties, to Mr. Alonso, and to Mr. Séderlund on September 6, 2013.

On September 9, 2013, Mr. Alonso furnished explanations in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9(3) (“Mr. Alonso’s Explanations”). The Centre circulated
Mr. Alonso’s explanations to the Parties and to Mr. Séderlund on the same date.

On September 9, 2013, the Parties were invited to submit simultaneous observations on
any of the documents filed regarding the proposals to disqualify Mr. Alonso and
Dr. Torres Bernardez by September 19, 2013. On September 19, 2013, Respondent
submitted its observations (“Respondent’s September 19 Observations”). On the
same date, the Claimant submitted its observations in two separate documents: one
document dealing with the resignation of Dr. Torres Bernardez and another document
relating to the proposed disqualification of Mr. Alonso (“Claimant’s September 19
Observations”).

On October 4, 2013, the Parties were invited to submit reply observations, including
arguments regarding the standard for disqualification under Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention and its application to the present case by October 11, 2013.

On October 10, 2013, the Claimant requested an extension of time to submit its reply
observations. The Centre granted an extension of time to both Parties until October 24,
2013. Respondent submitted its reply observations on October 24, 2013
(“Respondent’s October 24 Observations”). No additional comments were received
from Claimant.

POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES AND OBSERVATIONS BY MR. ALONSO
AND DR. TORRES BERNARDEZ

The facts, arguments and observations presented in relation to Mr. Alonso (I) and
Dr. Torres Bernardez (II) are summarized below.

Mr. José Maria Alonso

Respondent’s arguments

Respondent’s proposed disqualification of Mr. Alonso is based on his position at Baker
& McKenzie, a firm that represents the claimant investor in the case Longreef
Investments A.V.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/5)
(“Longreef v. Venezuela”) through its offices in New York and Caracas.

In particular, Mr. Alonso is (i) a Managing Partner of the Litigation and Arbitration
Department of Baker & McKenzie Madrid and (ii) a Member of the Steering Committee

- Page 5 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

of the Global Arbitration Practice Group and the Steering Committee of the Baker &
McKenzie International European Dispute Practice Group. In addition, Respondent
alleged that the office of Baker & McKenzie in Caracas represents complainants in
administrative proceedings against the State.'

Respondent noted that Baker & McKenzie is structured and publicized as a global legal
practice, and that each office cannot be considered as a separate legal person for the
purposes of a challenge application. It argued that this conclusion is reinforced by the
facts that Mr. Alonso is a member of international or global committees within the
global law firm and that part of his remuneration depends on the global returns of the
firm.”

Respondent argued that the fact that Longreef Investments A.V.V. is a current client of
the law firm where Mr. Alonso is a partner is sufficient to give rise to reasonable doubts
as to Mr. Alonso’s independence and impartiality, even if Mr. Alonso received minimal
remuneration from this client.> Respondent contended that Mr. Alonso has direct and
indirect economic interests in the outcome of these two cases against Venezuela, given
that part of his remuneration depends on the results of other firms (including income
derived from the Longreef v. Venezuela case), and that a favorable result in Longreef v.
Venezuela in addition to a vote favorable to the Claimant in the present case would
contribute to the expansion of the practice of Baker & McKenzie in the investment
arbitration community.

Respondent argued that Mr. Alonso’s interests are adverse to Venezuela’s interests
(“relacién adversa”) because Baker & McKenzie represents interests against
Venezuela, and Mr. Alonso is a partner and co-manager of Baker & McKenzie’s global
arbitration practice.”

Respondent noted that in this case Mr. Alonso would be deciding issues similar or
identical to those which Baker & McKenzie would be arguing against Venezuela in
Longreef v. Venezuela

Respondent argued that the potential to challenge judges or arbitrators where there are
doubts about their independence or impartiality exists in most legal systems and

' Respondent’s November 5 Letter, p. 2

? Respondent’s September 19 Observations, §] 3; Respondent’s October 24 Observations, {7
* Respondent’s September 19 Observations, {] 4

* Respondent’s October 24 Observations, J 3-5

* Respondent’s August 23 Observations, §§ 7-10

® Respondent’s August 23 Observations, § 7

- Page 6 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

30.

31.

32.

33.

35.

constitutes a general principle of law under Article 38 of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice.’

Respondent contended that Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID Convention establish the
conditions for the disqualification of arbitrators. Article 14(1) requires that arbitrators
“may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment™.*

Respondent contended that any reasonable person would have justifiable doubts as to
whether an arbitrator that coordinates the global arbitration practice of a firm could sign
an award rejecting arguments that are being defended by other partners of the same firm
against the same respondent.”

Accordingly, Respondent requests that Mr. Alonso be disqualified from the Tribunal.

Observations by the Claimant

The Claimant stated that no principle of law compels the Chairman to disqualify
Mr. Alonso.'?  In_ particular, the Claimant contended that Respondent had
mischaracterized the facts and the legal standard.

The Claimant submits that Articles 14(1) and 57 of the ICSID Convention provide for
an objective standard, “presumably reasonableness”'', to establish “manifest lack of
impartiality or independence”.'2 However, it is claimed that Venezuela had not
established any facts demonstrating that Mr. Alonso manifestly lacked impartiality or
independence. In addition, it argued that Venezuela could not meet the standard

established by the term “manifest”.

According to the Claimant, Venezuela has mischaracterized the structure and
functioning of the Verein structure of Baker & McKenzie International, Mr. Alonso’s
status as a partner, and his title and functions as a member of Baker & McKenzie’s
International Arbitration Steering Committee."

The Claimant further contends that the legal authorities cited by Venezuela undermine
its position because they all emphasize the arbitrator's direct involvement in cases

7 Respondent’s November 5 Letter, p. 8-12; Respondent’s October 24 Observations, { 11

‘ Respondent’s November 5 Letter, p. 4; Respondent's October 24 Observations, {€ 12-13

° Respondent’s November 5 Letter, p. 6; Respondent’s October 24 Observations, {414 and 22
'° Claimant’s September 19 Observations, p. |

"Td, p.3

2 Td, p.5

8 Id. p.9-13

- Page 7 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

37.

40.

against the State party, whereas no such direct involvement existed or exists with
respect to Mr. Alonso."

Accordingly, the Claimant requests that the Chairman deny Respondent’s proposal to
disqualify Mr. Alonso.

Explanations by Mr. Alonso

Mr. Alonso states that there is no reason to disqualify him from serving as an arbitrator
in this case. In particular, he notes that the firm where he is a partner, Baker &
McKenzie Madrid, and the firms that represent Longreef Investments A.V.V. against
Venezuela, Baker & McKenzie New York and Caracas, are separate legal entities that
function independently, and that he does not lead the global arbitration practice of
Baker & McKenzie. Mr. Alonso states that his partnership in Baker & McKenzie
Madrid and his membership in Baker & McKenzie’s International Arbitration Steering
Committee do not meet the standard for disqualification under the ICSID Convention or
the IBA Guidelines.

Mr. Alonso states that Baker & McKenzie Madrid, Baker & McKenzie New York and
Baker & McKenzie Caracas are members of the Swiss Verein Baker & McKenzie
International. As explained in the t to his declaration, these firms

independent legal entities.'®

 

Moreover, Mr. Alonso states that his income as a partner depends primarily on the
results achieved by Baker & McKenzie Madrid, and that the impact on his income of
any profit derived by Baker & McKenzie New York and Caracas from the Longreef v.
Venezuela case would be nonexistent or insignificant.

41. Mr. Alonso further states that Baker & McKenzie Madrid operates with absolute
autonomy and does not receive instructions from any other firm.'”

42. Mr. Alonso explains that he is a member of Baker & McKenzie’s International
Arbitration Steering Committee. However, he states that he does not co-manage this
Committee and that his membership does not mean that he manages Baker &
McKenzie’s global arbitration practice. Furthermore, this Committee gives no
instructions on the management of individual cases.'*

Td, p.13

1S Mr. Alonso’s Explanations, § 1

"6 Id.,92

" 1d.,93

- Page 8 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

43.

Mr. Alonso states that the standard for disqualification under the ICSID Convention and
the IBA Guidelines are different.'? Whereas the ICSID Convention requires manifest
lack of impartiality or independ the IBA Guidelines require only justifiable doubts.
He states that neither of these standards is met in this case.

Mr. Alonso concludes that there is no basis to find reasonable doubt as to his capacity to
act impartially, especially given that he does not or has never personally represented
any of the Parties, he has never acted in any case against the Respondent and he has no
economic or other interest in the result of the Longreef v. Venezuela case.”°

Il. Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez

1. Claimant’s arguments

45. The Claimant’s proposed disqualification of Dr. Torres Bernardez is based on (i) repeat
appointments by the Argentine Republic, and by Venezuela when represented by the
former Attorney General (Procurador del Tesoro) of the Argentine Republic; and on
(ii) Dr. Torres Bernardez’s alleged systematic findings in favor of States.”!

46. In particular, the Claimant contends that: (i) in five of the seven investment arbitration
cases in which Dr. Torres Bernardez has been appointed as an arbitrator, current counsel
for Venezuela represented the appointing party; (ii) each one of these seven
appointments was made by a respondent State;” and (iii) there is no published decision
on any significant issue in which Dr. Torres Bernardez has ruled against the party that
appointed him.”*

47. According to the Claimant, the reference to “independent judgment” in Article 14(1) of
the ICSID Convention has been interpreted as including a requirement of impartiality,
and the term “manifest” in Article 57 of the ICSID Convention is generally
acknowledged to mean “obvious” or “evident”, and imposing a relatively heavy burden
of proof on the challenging party,?>

48. The Claimant relies on the IBA Guidelines and on several decisions issued by ICSID
tribunals to determine whether the facts in the present case could lead a reasonable

14,495

” 1d.,98

2! Claimant’s June 12 Letter, p. 1

® Id.,p. 17-22

? Id. p.3

+P.
4 Td. p. 3, 22-27
5 Td.,p. 4-7

- Page 9 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

person to conclude that an arbitrator lacks independence or impartiality.** The Claimant
contends that the present case differs from the cases it refers to”’ because the facts in the
present case demonstrate actual bias as opposed to the appearance of bias that was
argued but not substantiated in those other cases."

49. Accordingly, the Claimant requests that Dr. Torres Bernardez be disqualified from the
Tribunal.

2. Observations by the Respondent

50. The Respondent contends that no comments are necessary in light of Dr. Torres
Bernardez’s resignation from the Tribunal.””

3. Explanations by Dr. Torres Bernardez

51. Together with his resignation, Dr. Torres Bernardez submitted explanations to the
Claimant’s proposal for his disqualification.

52. Regarding repeat decisions in favor of respondent States, Dr. Torres Bernardez states
that most of those decisions and awards were made unanimously with the other
members of the Tribunal® and that there is no rule that prevents him from issuing
dissenting opinions whenever he disagrees with the tribunal.

53. Dr. Torres Bernardez also states that appointments are made by the parties to the
proceedings and not by counsel representing those parties, and that the ICSID
Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules do not limit the number of times that a
party may appoint the same arbitrator”? In any case, Dr. Torres Bernardez states that
Mr. Guglielmino was representing the appointing party in only three of the seven cases
where Dr. Torres Bernardez was appointed as an arbitrator.*®

54. Dr. Torres Bernardez states that he is independent® * and that he has never had any
personal, professional or other kind of relationship with Respondent's counsel.**

© Id. p. 8-10

2” Respondent’s August 23 Observations, §¥] 1, 4 and 5; Respondent’s September 19 Observations, {fj
6-11; Respondent’s October 24 Observations, {J 16-17

?* Claimant’s June 12 Letter, p. 15

?° Respondent’s September 19 Observations, § 2

*° Dr. Torres Bernardez’s Explanations, {fj 7-9

1d, 9 14-15

2 Id. 9 21-24

3 Id. 9] 26-27

* Id., 99 12, 29-30

- Page 10 -
ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

D. DECISION BY THE CHAIRMAN
I The applicable legal standard

55. Article 57 of the ICSID Convention allows a party to propose the disqualification of any
member ofa tribunal. It reads as follows:

“A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the
disqualification of any of its members on account of any fact
indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1)
of Article 14. A party to arbitration proceedings may, in addition,
propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that he
was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of
Chapter IV.”

56. The disqualifications proposed in this case allege a manifest “lack of the qualities
required by paragraph (1) of Article 14” of two of the members of the Tribunal.
dingly, it is y to address di: ification “on the ground that [an
arbitrator] was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of Chapter

Vv’.

57, Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high
moral character and recognized competence in the field of law,
commerce, industry or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment. Competence in the field of law shall be of
particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of
Arbitrators.”

58. While the English version of Article 14 of the ICSID Convention refers to “independent
judgment,” the Spanish version requires “imparcialidad de juicio” (impartiality of
judgment). Given that both versions are equally authentic, it is accepted that arbitrators
must be both impartial and independent.”

 

5 1d.,49 26

°° The French version refers to “indépendance dans I''exercice de leurs fonctions”

37 Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Cases Nos.
ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19), Decision on the Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the
Arbitral Tribunal (October 22, 2007), | 28 (“Suez”); OPIC Karimum Corporation v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/14), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify
Professor Philippe Sands, Arbitrator (May 5, 2011), § 44; Getma International and others v.
Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/29), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of
Arbitrator Bernardo M. Cremades (June 28, 2012), § 59 (“Getma”); ConocoPhillips Company et al.
v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30), Decision on the Proposal to

- Page II -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

59.

Impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a_ party.

Independence is characterized by the absence of external control.** Independence and
impartiality both “protect parties against arbitrators being influenced by factors other
than those related to the merits of the case”? Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID
Convention do not require proof of actual dependence or bias; rather it is sufficient to
establish the appearance of dependence or bias.*°

60. The applicable legal standard is an “objective standard based on a reasonable
evaluation of the evidence by a third party”.*' As a consequence, the subjective belief
of the party requesting the disqualification is not enough to satisfy the requirements of
the Convention.”

61. Finally, regarding the meaning of the word “manifest” in Article 57 of the Convention,
a number of decisions have concluded that it means “evident” or “obvious,” and that it
relates to the ease with which the alleged lack of the qualities can be perceived.**

62. The Chairman notes that the Parties have referred to other sets of rules or guidelines in
their arguments, such as the IBA Guidelines. While these rules or guidelines may serve
as useful references, the Chairman is bound by the standard set forth in the ICSID
Convention. Accordingly, this decision is made in accordance with Articles 57 and 58
of the ICSID Convention.

 

Disqualify L. Yves Fortier, Q.C., Arbitrator (February 27, 2012), { 54 (“ConocoPhillips”), Alpha
Projektholding GmbH v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/16), Decision on Respondent’s
Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator Dr. Yoram Turbowicz, (March 19, 2010) § 36 (“Alpha”);
Tidewater Inc. et al. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5), Decision on
Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator (December 23, 2010), § 37;
Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Europe v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/13), Decision on Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Gabriel Bottini from the Tribunal
under Article 57 of the ICSID Convention (February 27, 2013), { 55 (“Saint-Gobain”)

** Suez, supra note 37, § 29; Getma, supra note 37, 59; ConocoPhillips, supra note 37, § 54

* ConocoPhillips, supra note 37, § 55; Universal Compression International Holdings, S.L.U. v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/9), Decision on the Proposal to
Disqualify Prof. Brigitte Stern and Prof. Guido Santiago Tawil, Arbitrators (May 20, 2011), § 70
(“Universal”); Urbaser S.A. and Consorcio de Aguas Bilbao Bizkaia, Bilbao Biskaia Ur
Partzuergoa v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/26), Decision on Claimants’ Proposal
to Disqualify Professor Campbell McLachlan, Arbitrator (August 12, 2010), {43 (“Urbaser”)

*° Urbaser, supra note 39, § 43
“" Suez, supra note 37, 1 39-40
° id.

*® Suez, supra note 37, § 34; Alpha, supra note 37, § 37; Universal, supra note 39, | 71; Saint-Gobain,
supra note 37, {59

“ C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, Second Edition (2009), p. 1202, 4] 134-154 on the
interpretation of manifest in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention

- Page 12 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

I.

63.

64.

66.

67.

68.

69.

Timeliness

ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1) requires that the party proposing a challenge under Article
57 of the ICSID Convention must do so “promptly, and in any event before the
proceeding is declared closed”.

In a number of ICSID cases, the disputing parties d their i ion to chall

an arbitrator before the tribunal had been constituted. In these instances, the Centre

reminded the parties that the tribunal is not constituted, and the proceeding does not

begin, until the Secretary-General has notified the parties that all arbitrators have
d their appoi 4S A. chall t ive only after this

notification has been made.

 

In this case, the Parties filed their proposals to disqualify Mr. Alonso and Dr. Torres
Bern4rdez before the Tribunal was constituted. While these challenges did not become
effective until the Tribunal was constituted, there is no doubt that both challenges were
filed “promptly” in the sense of ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1).

The challenge of Mr. Alonso

The following facts are undisputed: (i) Mr. Alonso is a partner in Baker & McKenzie
Madrid; (ii) Baker & McKenzie New York and Baker & McKenzie Caracas represent
the claii in a parallel p ding against the Resp (Longreef v. Venezuela);
(iii) Mr. Alonso has no direct involvement in the parallel Longreef v. Venezuela case;
and (iv) Mr. Alonso is a member of Baker & McKenzie’s International Arbitration
Steering Committee.

 

The sharing of a corporate name, the existence of an international arbitration steering
committee at a global level, and Mr. Alonso’s statement that his remuneration depends
“primarily” but not exclusively on the results achieved by the Madrid firm imply a
degree of connection or overall coordination between the different firms comprising
Baker & McKenzie International.

In addition, given the similarity of issues likely to be discussed in Longreef v. Venezuela
and the present case and the fact that both cases are ongoing, it is highly probable that
Mr. Alonso would be in a position to decide issues that are relevant in Longreef v.
Venezuela if he remained an arbitrator in this case.

In view of the above, the Chairman concludes that it has been demonstrated that a third
party would find an evident or obvious appearance of lack of impartiality on a

** ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1)

- Page 13 -

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20

Iv.
70.

71.

    
 

reasonable evaluation of the facts in this case. Accordingly, the Chairman finds that
Mr. Alonso manifestly lacks one of the qualities required by Article 14(1) of the ICSID
Convention in this particular case.

The challenge of Dr. Torres Bernardez

Dr. Torres Bernardez has resigned from the Tribunal. As a result, it is no longer
necessary to address the proposal for his disqualification, which is accordingly
dismissed.

CONCLUSIONS
For the reasons above, the Chairman decides as follows:

i, Respondent’s proposal to disqualify Mr. Alonso pursuant to Article 57 of the
ICSID Convention is upheld.

ii. Claimant’s proposal to disqualify Dr. Torres Bernardez pursuant to Article 57
of the ICSID Convention is dismissed.

‘SID Administrative Council

