International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

BLUSUN S.A., JEAN-PIERRE LECORCIER AND MICHAEL STEIN

Applicants

ITALIAN REPUBLIC

Respondent

(ICSID CASE NO. ARB/14/3)
ANNULMENT PROCEEDING

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez, President of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Prof. Hi-Taek Shin, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee: Ms. Ella Rosenberg

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: April 13, 2020

Representation of the Parties

Representing Blusun S.A., Jean-Pierre
Lecorcier and Michael Stein:

Mr. Barton Legum

Mr. Jean-Christophe Honlet
Ms. Anne-Sophie Dufétre
Ms. Marie-Héléne Ludwig
Dentons Europe LLP

5, boulevard Malesherbes
75008 Paris

France

Representing the Italian Republic:

Avv. Carlo Sica
Avv. Giacomo Aiello
Avv. Pietro Garofoli
Avv. Andrea Giordano
Avv. Laura Delbono
Avv. Sergio Fiorentino
Avvocatura dello Stato
Via dei Portoghesi, 12
00186 Roma (1)
Italy
and
Prof. Avy. Maria Chiara Malaguti
External Counsel to the Legal Service of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Piazzale della Farnesina
00135 — Roma (1)
Italy

ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINED TERMS

Application for Annulment Blusun S.A., Jean-Pierre Lecorcier and
Michael Stein’s application for annulment
dated April 21, 2017

Arbitration Rules ICSID rules of procedure for arbitration
Proceedings

Award Award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal

on December 27, 2016

Background Paper Updated Background Paper on Annulment
for the Administrative Council of ICSID
dated May 5, 2016

BIT Bilateral Investment Treaty

Brindisi DIAs DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the
Municipality of Brindisi

Claimants Blusun S.A., Jean-Pierre Lecorcier and
Michael Stein
Committee The ad hoc Committee composed of

Professor Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez
(President), Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan,
and Professor Hi-Taek Shin

COREPER Comité des représentants permanents (Permanent
Representatives Committee)

Counter-Memorial on Annulment ‘The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial
on Annulment dated March 16, 2018

Declaration

DIA

ECT

EU

FET

FIT

Fourth Energy Account

GSE

Hearing

IC)

ICSID

ICSID Convention

ILC

22 EU member states signed a declaration
stating that which they draw from application

of the European Law, inter alia, on the
interpretation of the ECT as confirmed by the
Court of Justice of the European Union in the
Achmea decision.

Dichiarazioni di Inizio Attivita (Declaration of
Initiation of Activity)

Energy Charter Treaty

European Union

Fair and Equitable Treatment

Feed-in Tariffs

Fourth energy account dated May 5, 2011
(Award, para. 107(b) (Tab A))

Gestore dei Servizi Energitici (Manager of Electricity
Services)

Hearing on Annulment held on April 11
and 12, 2019 at the World Bank, Paris
Office, Paris

International Court of Justice

International Centre for Settlement of
of Investment Disputes

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States

International Law Commission

iii

Memorial on Annulment

Mesagne DIAs

Rejoinder on Annulment

Reply on Annulment

Request

Respondent/Italy

Romani Decree

Third Energy Account

Tr. Day [#], [page: line]

Tribunal

‘The Claimants’ Memorial on Annulment dated
November 3, 2017

DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the
Municipality of Mesagne

The Respondent’s Rejoinder on Annulment
dated July 20, 2018

‘The Claimants’ Reply on Annulment dated May
18, 2018

Ttaly’s request for an award declaring immediate
termination of the Annulment proceeding
pursuant to EU Member States Declaration on
the legal consequences of Achmea Judgement

‘The Italian Republic
Romani Decree of 3 March 2011 (CL-51)

The third energy account adopted by ministerial
decree on August 6, 2010 (CL-55, Decreto
Ministeriale 6 agosto 2010)

English transcript of the Hearing before the
Committee

Arbitral Tribunal composed of Prof. James
Crawford AC (President), Dr. Stanimir
Alexandrov and Professor Pierre-Marie
Dupuy

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

I. PARTIES 1
I. INTRODUCTION 1
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3

 

Iv. THE AWARD OF THE TRIBUNAL

 

A. The Tribunal’s reasoning concerning the three claims advanced by the Claimants in the
original proceedings as set forth in the Award

 

(@) Legal Instability Claim: Breach of Article 10(1), first sentence of the ECT...

 

(ii) Legitimate Expectations Claim: Breach of Article 10(1), second sentence of the ECT
12

 

(ii) The Expropriation Claim: Breach of Article 13(1) of the ECT...

V. THE PARTIES’ INTERPRETATION OF THE AWARD REGARDING THE DIA
CERTIFICATES OF CONFORMITY...

 

 

A. DIA Certificates of Conformity within the Legitimate Expectations Claim...

 

 

 

 

(ji) The Clai: » Position 14

(ii) The Respondent's Position 18
B. The Tribunal addressed only the DIAs issued by the Municipality of Mesagne

(@ ‘The Clai ? Position 21

(ii) The Respondent's Position 27

 

VI. OVERVIEW OF THE MATTERS BEFORE THE AD HOC COMMITTEE...
VII. GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT UNDER ARTICLE 52(1) OF THE ICSID

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CONVENTION 32
A. Scope of the Annul 32
B. The core element in this Application for A L 33
a. Analysis of the core element 34
b. Structure and fi ioning of the Award 36
i. Claims under ECT Article 10(1). 36
c. Conclusi 40
C. Article 52(1)(e): The Tribunal Failed to State Reasons on Which the Award is Based....42

(ji) The Clai: » Position 42
i) The Respondent's Position 49
(iii) The Committee’s Analysis 57
D. Article 52(1)(b): The Tribunal Manifestly E ded Its Powers 59
(@ ‘The Clai ? Position 59

 

Gi) = TheR dent’s Position 63

P

(iii) The Committee’s Analysis

E. Article 52(1) (d): The Tribunal Seriously Departed from a Fundamental Rule of
Proced

 

 

 

 

 

69
@) The Clai ? Position 70
i) The Respondent's Position 75
(iii) The Committee’s Analysis 79

VIII. | THE RESPONDENT'S REQUEST FOR IMMEDIATE TERMINATION OF

THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS 0

 

Ix. COSTS.

 

A. The Parties’ Positions on Cost
B. The Committee’s Decision on Costs....

X. DECISION.

 

I.

on

PARTIES

The disputing parties are the Italian Republic (the “Respondent” or “Italy”) and the
Claimants in the original arbitration proceeding: Blusun S.A. (“Blusun”), Jean-Pierre

Lecorcier and Michael Stein (collectively, the “Claimants” or the “Applicants”).

The Respondent and the Claimants are hereinafter collectively referred to as the

“Parties.”

INTRODUCTION

This case concerns an application for annulment by the Claimants (“Application for
Annulment”) for the alleged dismissal of claims on their merits pronounced by the

Award dispatched to the Parties on December 27, 2016 (the “Award”).

The Award related to a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (““ICSID”) on the basis of the 1994 Energy Charter Treaty (the
“ECT”), as well as the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between

States and nationals of other States (the “ICSID Convention”).

The Claimants argued that the Tribunal which rendered the Award (the “Tribunal”),
decided that it had jurisdiction over the claims brought by the Claimants against the Italian
Republic, dismissed those claims on merits, and in doing so, the Tribunal inexplicably
failed to consider the measure at the heart of one of those claims and on which the other

claims relied in important respects.

Central to each claim advanced by the Claimants lies certain investments made concerning
a solar energy project in the Puglia region of Italy: a 120-megawatt project, where plants
were to be connected with each other by a medium-voltage grid, with electricity sub-
stations constructed to connect that grid to the high-voltage grid. The project consisted
of uniting approximately 120 individual solar plants of one megawatt each. 114 of the 120
plants were to be built in the municipality of Brindisi and the remaining six in the
municipality of Mesagne. The project also required the construction of a network of
underground cables spread over 370 kilometers. These cables formed two tings
connecting the solar plants to each other, and to two substations. The Claimants acquired

the shares of 12 local development companies which hold all of the relevant rights and

10.

permits for the plants via Eskosol S.R.L (“Eskosol”), an Italian company owned and

controlled by Blusun (the “Project” or “Puglia project”).

The dispute in the underlying arbitration related to certain regulatory and judicial
measures adopted by the Italian Government, which in the Claimants’ view frustrated

their investments in the Puglia project.

The Claimants advanced three distinct legal claims in the original arbitration proceedings:
(a) the first claim was for an alleged breach of Article 10(1), first sentence, of the ECT:
such claim was advanced on the basis that in the Claimants’ view, the Italian Government
failed to encourage and create stable, equitable, favorable, and transparent conditions for
the Claimants’ Investments in the Puglia project (the “Legal Instability Claim”); (b) the
second claim was for an alleged breach of Article 10(1), second sentence, of the ECT: this
claim was advanced on the basis that in the Claimants’ view, Italy failed to accord fair and
equitable treatment to their investments, namely regarding certain legitimate expectations
(the “Legitimate Expectations Claim’); and (c) the third claim was advanced on the
basis that in the Claimants’ view the regulatory measures and judicial decisions adopted
by the Italian Constitutional Court, the Italian Government and the Commune had an
effect equivalent to nationalization or expropriation within the meaning of Article 13(1)

of the ECT (the “Expropriation Claim”).

The Claimants seek annulment of the entirety of the Award’s alleged dismissal of the
Claims on their Merits, on the basis of Article 52(1) (b), (d) and (e) of the ICSID
Convention. Such grounds of Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention respectively state as
follows: (i) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers; (ii) the Tribunal seriously
departed from a fundamental rule of procedure; and (iii) that the Award has failed to state

the reasons on which it is based.

The Application for Annulment submitted by the Claimants mainly rests on the foregoing
legal grounds. Each one of the legal grounds of Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention,
in the present Annulment proceedings, has the exact same factual basis.' These are the
alleged dismissal of the Tribunal by not considering and addressing the DIA Certificates

of Conformity issued by the Municipality of Brindisi, while adjudicating the Legitimate

1 Memorial on Annulment, para. 100.

Ill.

Expectation claim. This is precisely the omission addressed by the Claimants in their
Application for Annulment and it is central to the second claim brought by the Claimants
in the original arbitration proceedings, their Legitimate Expectations Claim.* This,
according to Claimants, breaches Article 52(1) (b) (d) and (e) of the ICSID Convention.

The Committee will, therefore, examine these grounds.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On February 4, 2014, ICSID received a request for arbitration from Blusun against Italy

(the “REA”.

On February 21, 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the REA in accordance
with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the registration.
In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to
constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of ICSID’s

Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

On June 12, 2014, a Tribunal composed of Prof. James Crawford, a national of Australia,
President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov, a national of
Bulgaria, appointed by the Claimant; and Prof. Pierre-Marie Dupuy, a national of France,

appointed by the Respondent, was constituted.
On July 28, 2014, the Tribunal held its first session by telephone conference.

On July 30, 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1. The Parties subsequently

filed the following submissions:

¢ The Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits on July 31, 2014;
e The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits on December 19, 2014;
© The Claimants’ Reply on the Merits on May 8, 2015; and

e The Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits on October 16, 2015.

2 Application for Annulment, para. 5.

16.

20.

21,

22.

23,

24,

25.

26.

27.

On October 23, 2015, the European Commission (the “Commission”) filed an

application to file a written submission pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2).

On October 28, 2015, both Parties filed observations on the Commission’s application.
In its observations, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal bifurcate the proceedings

and address jurisdiction as a preliminary matter.

On October 30, 2015, the Tribunal granted the Commission permission to supplement

its application, which it duly did on November 12, 2015.
On November 13, 2015, the President held a pre-hearing conference with the Parties.

On November 18, 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 in which it decided,
inter alia, to suspend the hearing then schedule for November 30 through December 4,

2015 in order to address the Commission’s application.

On January 22, 2016 and February 26, 2016, the Respondent and the Claimants,
respectively, filed further observations on the Commission’s application. In its

submission, the Respondent reiterated its request for the bifurcation of the proceedings.

On March 19, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 admitting the

Commission’s submission of November 12, 2015 into the record.

On March 19, 2016, the Tribunal also issued Procedural Order No. 4 in which it rejected

the Respondent’s request to bifurcate the proceedings.

From April 25 through April 28, 2016, the Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction and the

merits in Paris.

On June 21, 2016, Eskosol S.p.A. in liquidazione (“Eskosol”), an Italian subsidiary of
Blusun, filed an application to intervene as a non-disputing party pursuant to ICSID

Arbitration Rule 37(2).

On June 21 and 22, 2016, the Tribunal held a further hearing on jurisdiction and the
merits in Paris. During the final day of the hearing, the Tribunal invited the Parties to

ptovide their comments on Eskosol’s application.

On June 30, 2016 (the Respondent) and July 1, 2016 (the Claimants), both Parties asked

that the Tribunal deny Eskosol’s application to intervene.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,

On July 8, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, rejecting Eskosol’s

application to intervene as a non-disputing party.
On August 1, 2016, the Claimants filed a submission for costs.

On November 22, 2016, the Tribunal declared the proceedings closed in accordance with

ICSID Arbitration Rule 38(1).
On December 27, 2016, the Tribunal rendered its award.

On April 21, 2017, ICSID received an Application for Annulment (the “Application”)
from Blusun. The Application for Annulment was made within the time-period provided
in Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention. Blusun sought annulment of the Award based

on the following three grounds:

¢ The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers because it was part of the Tribunal’s
mandate and jurisdiction ratione materiae to consider, when adjudicating
Claimants’ legitimate expectations claim, the DIA certificates of conformity
relevant to that claim, ie. those from the municipality of Brindisi, and it

manifestly failed to do so.

© The Tribunal departed from the fundamental rules of procedure because it appeared from
paragraph 379 of the Award that the Tribunal considered only the first page of
Exhibit C-24, and that it failed to consider the translation of a template of a
translation of 48 certificates of conformity from the Municipality of Brindisi. Yet
these certificates were part of the same exhibit and included the mention that
“[t|bis activity is in accordance with general urban planning instruments.” These certificates
were at the center of the Claimants’ claim on legitimate expectations, and no

reasonable review of the record could possibly overlook this.

¢ The Tribunal failed to state reasons because it did not address the DIA certificates

in its analysis of the Claimants’ legitimate expectations claim.

On May 2, 2017, the Acting Secretary-General registered the Application.

By letter of June 7, 2017, ICSID informed the Parties that it intended to recommend to

the Chairman of the Administrative Council the appointment of Prof. Donald McRae, a

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

national of Canada and New Zealand, as President of the ad hoc Committee (the
“Committee”), with Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, a national of Pakistan, and Prof. Hi-Taek
Shin, a national of the Republic of Korea, serving as co-members. The Centre invited the

Parties to provide any comments on the proposed appointments by June 14, 2017.

By letter of June 15, 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID noted that no objections to
the proposed Committee members had been received and stated that the Chairman would

therefore proceed to the appointment the candidates.

By letter of June 16, 2017, the Centre confirmed that the Chairman had appointed the

ptoposed Committee members.

On June 20, 2017, the Acting Secretary-General informed the Parties that the Committee
was constituted in accordance with Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention. Its members
were: Prof. Donald McRae (Canadian, New Zealand), President; Mr. Makhdoom Ali
Khan (Pakistani); and Prof. Hi-Taek Shin (Korean).

By letter of June 23, 2017, the Committee invited the Parties to provide their availability

for a first session.

By letter of June 28, 2017, the Claimants provided their availability for the first session.
By email of the same date, the Respondent stated that it was unavailable during any of the
ptoposed times and asked the Committee to postpone the first session until September

2017.

By email of July 5, 2017, the Claimants informed the Committee that the Parties had
agreed, subject to the Committee’s approval, to forego a first session and reach an
agreement on the text of Procedural Order No. 1 between themselves. By email of the
same date, the Respondent confirmed its agreement with the Claimants’ email. The

Respondent reiterated its agreement by email of July 10, 2017.

By letter of July 10, 2017, the Committee transmitted a draft Procedural Order No. 1 to
the Parties and invited them to provide their comments and any points of disagreement

by July 26, 2017.

6

42.

43,

44,

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

By email of July 26, 2017, the Claimants requested, on behalf of both Parties, an extension
until August 4, 2017 to provide comments on Procedural Order No. 1. By email of July

27, 2017, the Committee granted the requested extension.

On August 3, 2017, the Parties provided an agreed-upon version of Procedural Order

No. 1.

By letter of August 25, 2017, the Committee asked the Parties to officially confirm that
they had no need of a first session. By email of August 26, 2017, the Claimants provided
their confirmation. By email of August 28, 2017, the Respondent provided its

confirmation.

On August 28, 2017, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1 recording the
agreement of the Parties on procedural matters. Procedural Order No. 1 provides, inter
alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from April 10, 2006,
that the procedural language would be English, and that the place of proceeding would
be Paris, France. Procedural Order No. 1 also set out the agreed schedule for the

ptoceedings, which was later modified by agreement of the Parties.

On November 3, 2017, the Claimants filed their Memorial on Annulment (the

“Memorial”) with supporting documentation.

On March 16, 2018, the Respondent files its Counter-Memorial on Annulment (the

“Countet-Memorial”) with supporting documentation.

By letter of March 23, 2018, the Centre informed the Parties that Prof. Donald McRae
had submitted his resignation from the Committee and that, pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 10(2), the proceedings would be suspended until a replacement

appointment had been made.

By letter of May 4, 2018, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that she intended to
ask the Chairman of the Administrative Council to appoint Professor Ricardo Ramirez
Hernandez as President of the Committee and invited the Parties to provide any

comments by May 11, 2018.

By email of May 5, 2018, the Claimants asked for confirmation that Prof. Ramirez
Hernandez was available to attend the hearing scheduled for October 2018. By email of

May 9, 2018, Prof. Ramirez Hernandez confirmed his availability.

By letter of May 14, 2018, the Secretary-General confirmed that she would proceed to ask

the Chairman of the Administrative Council to appoint Prof. Ramirez Hernandez.

By email of May 18, 2018, the Claimants asked for confirmation of Prof. Ramirez
Hernandez’s appointment to allow for the official resumption of the proceedings so the

Claimants could submit their Reply on Annulment.

By letter of May 18, 2018, ICSID informed the Parties that Prof. Ramirez Hernandez had
accepted his appointment and the Committee had been reconstituted with the

ptoceedings resuming as of that date.

On May 18, 2018, the Claimants submitted their Reply on Annulment (the “Reply”) with

accompanying documentation.

By letter of June 28, 2018, Prof. Shin provided a disclosure regarding his involvement in
JGC Corporation v. Kingdom of Spain (CSD Case No. ARB/15/27) and confirmed that it

would not affect his independence and impartiality in these proceedings.

On July 20, 2018, the Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on Annulment (the

“Rejoinder”’) with accompanying documentation.

By letter of August 23, 2018, the Committee provided a draft agenda for the organization
of the hearing and invited the Parties to agree to its contents by email; should they be
unable to do so, the Committee provided a proposed date and time for a telephone

conference to discuss outstanding issues.

By email of August 31, 2018, the Claimants submitted the Parties’ joint agenda and stated
that there would be no need for a pre-hearing conference. By email of the same date, the

Respondent confirmed its agreement.

By letter of September 12, 2018, the Claimants stated that they would be unable to pay
the second advance, requested on August 22, 2018, before the end of the year. In light of

this, they asked that the hearing be rescheduled for the first quarter of 2019.

60.

66.

By letter of September 17, 2018, the Committee took note of the Claimants’ letter of
September 12, 2018 and proposed April 11 and 12, 2019 as new dates for the hearing. By
emails of September 21, 2018, the Parties confirmed their availability for the proposed

dates.

On February 4, 2019, the Respondent submitted its “Request for an award declaring
immediate termination - EU Members States Declaration on the legal consequences of
Achmea” (the “Request for Termination”) along with a declaration on the consequences
of the Achmea award issued by Member States of the European Union (the “Achmea

Declaration”).

By letter of February 5, 2019, the Claimants provided their comments on the Request for

‘Termination.

By letter of February 12, 2019, the Committee took note of the Parties’ submissions on
the Request for Termination and stated that it would hear further arguments on the matter

at the upcoming hearing.

On March 12, 2019, the Centre provided the Parties with a draft hearing agenda based on
the agreed-upon version for the originally scheduled hearing and asked them to provide
any comments by March 21, 2019. By email of March 13, 2019, the Claimants confirmed
that they had no comments. By email of March 18, 2019, the Respondent confirmed that

it had no comments.

By email of April 9, 2019, the Claimants stated their assumption that the agenda circulated
on March 12, 2019 should be considered final in absence of comments from the Parties

and asked the Committee to correct them if this was not the case.

On April 11 and 12, 2019, a Hearing on Annulment was held in Paris (the “Hearing”).

The following persons were present at the Hearing:

Ad hoc Committee:
Prof. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez President
Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan Member
Prof. Hi-Taek Shin Member

69.

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Ella Rosenberg

For Blusun:
Counsel
Mr. Jean-Christophe Honlet
Mr. Barton Legum
Ms. Anne-Sophie Dufétre
Ms. Marie-Héléne Ludwig
Ms. Juliette Musso
Parties
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lecorcier

Mr. Michael Stein

For Italy:
Counsel

Avv. Sergio Fiorentino

Prof. Maria Chiara Malaguti

Court Reporters:
Mr. Ian Roberts

Ms. Lisa Barrett

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee

Dentons Europe LLP
Dentons Europe LLP
Dentons Europe LLP
Dentons Europe LLP

Dentons Europe LLP

Claimant

Claimant

Avvocatura dello Stato

Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation (external
consultant)

By email of April 16, 2019, the Committee invited the Parties to provide their corrections

to the transcripts by April 23, 2019 and their statements of costs by June 7, 2019.

On June 7, 2019, the Claimants filed a submission on costs.

On June 19, 2019, the Respondent filed a submission on costs. On July 3, 2019, the

Respondent filed its revised statement on costs.

70.

Iv.

71.

72.

73.

 

é

On April 3, 2020 the proceeding was closed.
THE AWARD OF THE TRIBUNAL

The Tribunal’s reasoning concerning the three claims advanced by the Claimants
in the original proceedings as set forth in the Award

On December 27, 2016, the Tribunal rendered its Award. The Tribunal’s reasoning with

respect to the three claims made by the Claimants is described below.
Legal Instability Claim: Breach of Article 10(1), first sentence of the ECT

The Claimants contended that they did not claim that Italy’s legislation had to remain
immutable, unchanged, or written in stone and that their case was not about regulatory
change, but about regulatory turbulence. Rather, they contended that the legal framework
for a solar energy project in the Puglia region of Italy constantly fluctuated between the
legally permissible and impossible, for two years, leaving no period of stability in which

the requisite capital investment for a project of this size could be realized.’

The Claimants contended that a series of measures adopted by the Italian Government in
relation to the Puglia project amounted to a breach of the legal stability standard set out
in the first sentence of Article 10(1) of the ECT.* Such measures, as stated by the
Claimants, are the following: (a) the Constitutional Court decision and its aftermath; (b)
the Romani Decree and the Fourth Energy Account; (c) the uncertainties associated with
the publication of multiple lists of eligible plants by GSE; and (d) the Brindisi stop-work

order and related events.”

ward, para. 320.

+ Article 10(1): Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty, encourage and
create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to
make Investments in its Area. Such conditions shall include a commitment to accord at all times to
Investments of Investors of other Contracting Parties fair and equitable treatment. Such Investments shall
also enjoy the most constant protection and security and no Contracting Party shall in any way impair by
unreasonable or discriminatory measures their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment ot disposal. In no
case shall such Investments be accorded treatment less favourable than that required by international law,
including treaty obligations. Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligations it has entered into with an
Investor ot an Investment of an Investor of any other Contracting Party.”

> Tbid., 321.

74,

75.

76.

77.

78.

The Tribunal observed, in this regard, that the Claimants did not suggest that these events
were directly linked or that the sequence was the result of any design on the part of the
Italian State. This, according to the Tribunal, was no conspiracy but a series of
disconnected acts of alleged disregard for the Claimants’ rights.°

(ii) Legitimate Expectations Claim: Breach of Article 10(1), second sentence of the
ECT

In accordance with the Award “[t]he Claimants present an alternative formulation of an
Article 10(1) claim based essentially on legitimate expectations. In effect, it is argued that
persons in the Claimants’ position had a legitimate expectation that the Third Energy

Account would be maintained for the term envisaged:

the Claimants had legitimate expectations that the Third Energy
Account would remain in place for its entire duration according to its
terms; that is, until the end of 2013. However, the Romani Decree
frustrated the Claimants’ legitimate expectations in this respect.”
The Tribunal noted that this argument had the effect of treating the law not as a general
command but as an individual commitment, at least where the law is enacted for the

benefit of a determinate class of persons.*

The Tribunal observed that so far, tribunals have declined to sanctify laws as promises,”
and that “there is still a clear distinction between a law, i.e. a norm of greater or lesser
generality creating rights and obligations while it remains in force, and a promise or

0

contractual commitment.

The Tribunal also observed that “in the absence of a specific commitment, the state has
no obligation to grant subsidies such as feed in tariffs, or to maintain them unchanged,

once granted.”"!

6 Ibid.
7 Award, para. 365, citing Reply, paras, 217, 298-319; Arbitration Tr. Day 5, 71:12-17 (Dufetre).

8 Award, para. 365.

° Ibid., 367, citing Charanne B.V/., Construction Invesments S.A.R.L. v. Kingdom of Spain, SCC Case No. 062/2012, Final
Award, January 21, 2016, para. 510, Legal Authority CL-208; E/ Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine
Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Award, October 31, 2011, para. 372, Legal Authority CL-109 (“E/ Paso
Award”).

© Award, para. 371.

4 Tbid., para. 372.

79. | The Tribunal concluded by stating, “the Respondent made no special commitment to the
Claimants with respect to the extension and operation of FIT's, nor did it specifically
undertake that relevant Italian laws would remain unchanged. For these reasons the

Claimants have not established a breach of Article 10(1), second sentence, of the ECT.”
(iii) The Expropriation Claim: Breach of Article 13(1) of the ECT

80. In the alternative, the Tribunal addressed Claimants’ indirect expropriation claim under
Article 13 of the ECT” “the Italian measures resulted in the indirect expropriation of the

investment, given its total loss of value, contrary to Article 13 of the ECT.”"*
81. The Tribunal recalled previous case law on the subject:

As regards indirect expropriation, the Tribunal considers that the
wording of Article 13(1) ECT requires Electrabel to establish that the
effect of the PPA’s termination by Hungary was materially the same as
if its investment in Dunamenti had been nationalised or directly
expropriated by Hungary. In other words, Electrabel must prove, on

2 Tbid., para. 374.
5 “Article 13: Expropriation

(1) Investments of Investors of a Contracting Party in the Area of any other Contracting Party shall not be
nationalised, expropriated or subjected to a measure or measures having equivalent to nationalisation or
expropriation (hereinafter referred to as “Expropriation”) except where such Expropriation is:

@) fora purpose which is in the public interest;

(b) not discriminatory;

(©) carried out under due process of law; and

(@) accompanied by the payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation.
Such compensation shall amount to the fair market value of the Investment expropriated at the time immediately
before the Expropriation or impending Expropriation became known in such a way as to affect the value of the
Investment (hereinafter referred to as the “Valuation Date”).
Such fair market value shall at the request of the Investor be expressed in a Freely Convertible Currency on the
basis of the market rate of exchange existing for that currency on the Valuation Date. Compensation shall also
include interest at a commercial rate established on a market basis from the date of Expropriation until the date of
payment.
(2) The Investor affected shall have a right to prompt review, under the law of the Contracting Party making the
Expropriation, by a judicial or other competent and independent authority of that Contracting Party, of its case, of
the valuation of its Investment, and of the payment of compensation, in accordance with the principles set out in
paragraph (1).
(3) For the avoidance of doubt, Expropriation shall include situations where a Contracting Party expropriates the
assets of a company or enterprise in its Area in which an Investor of any other Contracting Party has an Investment,
including through the ownership of shares.”
4 Tbid., para. 396.

 

82.

83.

84.

the facts of this case, that its investment lost all significant economic
value with the PPA’s early termination.”

The Tribunal decided that, “in the present case, the Respondent, by non-discriminatory
Jaws, ostensibly passed in the public interest, significantly changed the terms laid down in
the Third Energy Account for investment in the green energy sector. These changes,
combined with operational decisions made by the investors, and the lack of prearranged
Project financing, meant that the Project remained radically incomplete, never qualified
for feed-in tariffs, and inevitably went into liquidation. As a general matter the situation

9916

was not analogous, still less tantamount, to expropriation of the Project by Italy.

THE PARTIES’ INTERPRETATION OF THE AWARD REGARDING THE
DIA CERTIFICATES OF CONFORMITY

DIA Certificates of Conformity within the Legitimate Expectations Claim
The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants begin by explaining that the Tribunal decided that it had jurisdiction over
the claims brought by the Claimants against Italy, without restriction, but dismissed those

claims on merits.'”

The Claimants contend that the Tribunal correctly understood the Claimants’ three
distinct claims, as such.'* They submit that “[t]he Tribunal also correctly understood one
of the Claimants’ two bases of its Legitimate Expectations Claim, i.e. the expectations
that legitimately arose from the DIA Certificates of Conformity and were later dashed by

19

measures adopted by the municipality of Brindisi.

'5 Tbid., para. 398 citing Metalelad Corporation v. United Mexican States, CISD Case No. ARB(AF)/97/I, Award, August
30, 2000, para. 103, Legal Authority CL-32.

6 Award, pata. 401, at footnote 652, “In closing, counsel for the Claimants also cited Biloune v Ghana as bearing
‘some similarities’ to the present case: [Arbitration] Tr. Day 6, 34:8-19 (Barrier), citing Bilonne and Marine Drive
Complex: Ltd v. Ghana Investments Centre and the Government of Ghana, UNCITRAL Award on Jurisdiction and Liability,

October 22, 1989.

Although Biloune involved a municipal stop order, what was crucial was the combination of

 

actions taken by various Ghanaian entities — partial demolition of the works, refusal to allow resumption,
deportation and refusal of return, The temporary judicial stay here is in obvious contrast.”

Memorial on Annulment, para, 51.

'S Memorial on Annulment, para, 53.

© Tbid., para. 54.

85.

86.

87.

88.

The Claimants contend that the Tribunal also correctly recalled, at paragraph 165 of the
Award, the multiple representations made by the Italian Government. According to these
representations, as per the Claimants, the construction of specific plants was in
accordance with the procedures set out in Regional Law n. 31/2008 and was within the

scope of general urban planning instruments.”

The Claimants contend that the Tribunal also recalled the assertion made by them in the
original proceedings that “for at least two years after having granted the DIA
authorisations, the municipality ‘took no step to suggest that it had any doubt about the
validity of the authorisations granted.””' “This, in the Claimants’ view, amounted to an

9922

implicit representation that gave rise to legitimate expectations,” and that in recognition
of such situation, the Tribunal cited in footnote the Claimants’ Memorial at paragraph
446, and referenced in that footnote the Claimants’ factual exhibit upon which they based

their assertion, Exhibit C-24."

The Claimants contend that in paragraph 167 of the Award, the Tribunal recalled the
Claimants’ assertion that the stop-work order “‘was contrary to the very regional law with
which [the municipality of Brindisi] had previously certified [the construction of the solar
plant’s] compliance,” and, thus, emphasized the importance for the Claimants of the
representations made in the DIA Certificates of Conformity reproduced as Exhibit C-

2424

The Claimants submit that the Tribunal reviewed each of the Claimants’ three separate
claims one by one.” The Legitimate Expectations Claim is dealt with in paragraphs 365
to 374 of the Award, in a section entitled “B. Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment
Standard: ECT Article 10(1), second sentence (legitimate expectations).”** The Claimants
contend that the Tribunal recalled the Claimants’ position that the DIA Certificates of

Conformity had created legitimate expectations, protected under Article 10(1), second

2 Thid., para. 57.

21 Thid., para. 60.

2 Ibid., para. 61.

% Ibid., para, 58. See also footnote 257, Award.
2 Ibid., para. 62. Footnote omitted.

% Ibid., para. 63.

26 Ibid., para. 64.

89.

90.

91.

sentence, of the ECT; it was thus expected that the Tribunal would adjudicate this claim
in paragraphs 365 to 374 of the Award.” However, in the Claimants’ view, a reading of
the Award discloses that the Tribunal did not discuss the DIA Certificates of Conformity
at all in this section, nor did it mention the 48 certificates from the municipality of Brindisi

or the five certificates from the municipality of Mesagne.*

The Claimants submit that the only question the Tribunal discussed in this section is
whether the Claimants had a legitimate expectation that the “Third Energy Account
would be maintained for the term envisaged [...].”°” The Claimants assert that the Third
Energy Account was also relied upon by the Claimants as a separate prong of their
Legitimate Expectations Claim, but it was unrelated to the DIA Certificates of
Conformity. They contend that the DIA Certificates of Conformity concerned the
authorizations to build the solar plants, while the Third Energy Account related to the

price at which electricity would be sold.”

The Claimants refer to the prior discussion concerning whether they had a legitimate
expectation that the Third Energy Account would be maintained for the term envisaged
within section B. Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard: ECT Article
10(1), second sentence (legitimate expectations), instead of the discussion of legitimate
expectations concerning the DIA Certificates of Conformity, as it should have been. The
Claimants assert that the Tribunal could not have been confused and mixed the two
together as they had addressed the DIA Certificates of Conformity first at page 6 of their
opening presentation at the hearing, while the Third Energy Account was addressed
subsequently at slide 35 of the presentation and thereafter. As the Tribunal could not have
confused the two categories of measures, it obviously failed to consider the DIA

Certificates of Conformity in adjudicating the Legitimate Expectations Claim.”

The Claimants submit that it is not until the reader reaches the next section, “C,” ie., issue

of Causation in relation to ECT Article 10(1), that they can, for the first time, see a

> Ibid., para. 65.
28 Ibid., para. 66.

» Ibid., para. 67. Footnote omitted.
» Ibid., para. 68.

3! [bid., para. 69. Footnote omitted.

92.

93.

 

 

Section C is a

 

mention of the DIA Certificates of Conformity in the Tribunal’s analy.
separate section from prior Section B. The Claimants also argue that Section C does not
deal with the Legitimate Expectations Claim but with causation in relation to the first two
sentences of Article 10(1) ECT, which, according to them, is a conceptually distinct

question.

Within Section C regarding the subject of causation, in the Annulment Proceeding, the
Claimants rely heavily on paragraph 379 of the Award within this section. It states as

follows:

The Claimants relied on the DIAs as amounting to a definitive

authorization for the individual plants. They refer by way of example

to a Notice of the Municipality of Mesagne with the notation “The local

development companies obtain the 53d DIA Certificate of Conformity,

stating that the construction of the given solar plants was in accordance

with the relevant regulations.’ In fact the Notice states in its operative

clause that the DIA procedure ‘is to be regarded as complete’, which is

not at all the same thing.”
Based on paragraph 379 of the Award, the Claimants contend that the Tribunal quoted
only from the first page of the PDF of Exhibit C-24. According to Claimants, the
Tribunal correctly characterized it as a certificate from the municipality of Mesagne
(which had issued five Certificates of Conformity only). The Claimants submit that the
Tribunal, however, completely failed to consider the 48 certificates issued by the
municipality of Brindisi and which were translated in template form on the third page of
the PDF of Exhibit C-24. According to the Claimants, only the DIA Certificates of
Conformity issued by the Municipality of Brindisi were relevant to the Legitimate
Expectations Claim. The municipality of Mesagne never instituted  self-redress
ptoceedings or stop-work orders, or otherwise questioned the legality of the DIAs it
represented to be complete. It was the measures adopted by the municipality of Brindisi
that were alleged, in the Legitimate Expectations Claim, to have violated the ECT by
directly contradicting representations specifically made with respect to the construction

of the very plants at issue. Yet, inexplicably, according to the Claimants, nowhere in the

Ibid., para. 70. Footnote omitted.
Award, para. 379.

94,

95.

96.

Award did the Tribunal address the DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the
Municipality of Brindisi, in spite of the fact that these were relevant to the claims before
in

(ii) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent begins by asserting that the Claimants have made an unwarranted
inference from an isolated reading of one paragraph of the Award, i.e. paragraph 379. The
Respondent submits that the Claimants are reading what is, in fact, a reproach made in
passing (directed at an inaccuracy in their own Memorial and Reply) as evidence of the
Tribunal’s negligence. The Respondent disputes that there was an oversight or that that
the alleged oversight had wide-reaching repercussions which undermined the viability of

the Award.*

The Respondent submitted that “the Claimants asserted that the Tribunal ha[d] not given
adequate consideration to the fraction of their Legitimate Expectations Claim that relied
on certain documents of certification issued by the municipality of Brindisi (the
‘Dichiarazioni di Inizio Attivita? or DIAs, which authorised the construction of solar
plants).” It contended that “this assertion is groundless, but the gateway question is rather
whether it would even matter in annulment proceedings, even if it were true.” According
to the Respondent, it would not, but the Claimants nevertheless seek, on this basis, the

9936

annulment of “the entirety of the Award’s dismissal of the claims on their merits.
According to the Respondent, the Claimants’ case rests on two arguments:””

(a) First, the Tribunal allegedly “failed to address the DIA Certificates of

2938

Conformity ... when adjudicating the Legitimate Expectations Claim.

 

* Memorial on Annulment, para. 72.

55 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 4.
% Ibid., para. 5.

5 Ibid., para. 12.

% Ibid., para. 13.

97.

98.

99.

» Ibid,
4 Thid.
4! Thid.
® Thid.
43 Thid.
44 Thid.

(b) Second, the Tribunal allegedly addressed only the DIA Certificates issued by
the municipality of Mesagne (the “Mesagne DIAs”), failing to consider the

DIA Certificates issued by the municipality of Brindisi (the “Brindisi DIAs”).”

The Respondent contends that these arguments are ill-founded in fact and in law.” It also
contends that the factual premises for the submission of the Claimants is mistaken for

the following reasons:

(a) First, the Tribunal did address the DIA Certificates. In the Award, an entire

 

section of the part on causation is dedicated to “/t/he status of the DIAs and the

Project as a unified scheme.” This part of the Award, highlighting the absence of
legitimate expectations and the lack of causation between Italy’s acts and the
Applicant’s business misfortunes, is an integral part of the reasons why the

Legitimate Expectations Claim did fail....

(b) Second, the Tribunal did not “refer... only” to the DIA Certificates issued by the
municipality of Mesagne. To the contrary, it did mention them “by way of example.”
‘The obvious implication is that the Tribunal considered all DIA Certificates, and

singled out some of them to point out an inaccuracy in the Claimants’ Reply....“'

‘The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ argument that the Tribunal did not address
the DIA Certificates of Conformity is plainly incorrect.” According to the Respondent,
the Tribunal “located,” “read” and by all appearances “consider[ed]” the Brindisi DIAs.
Paragraph 165 of the Award, as the Claimants readily conceded, discusses precisely those
documents and includes a footnote pointing to the correct Exhibit (C-24). Besides, the
Tribunal also dutifully noted the Claimants’ argument that these documents “gave rise to

9943

legitimate expectations.

The Respondent contends that the Tribunal addressed the merits of the Claimants’ claim

in part X of the Award.“ Specifically, the Tribunal addressed the two claims based on

., para. 14.
., para. 17.
., para. 17. Footnotes omitted.
., para. 23.
., para. 24.
., para. 25.

100.

101.

102.

103.

Article 10(1) of the ECT (namely, the “Legal Instability Claim” in Section A and the
“Legitimate Expectations Claim” in Section B), as well as the Expropriation Claim (in

Section D).*

Italy submits that the two claims based on Article 10(1) of the ECT ((i) Legal Instability
Claim; and (ii) Legitimate Expectations Claim) were also discussed jointly with respect to

“6 Tt also submits that in order

one aspect that they had in common: the issue of causation.
“[tJo entertain the claim under Article 10(1) ECT the Tribunal needed to be satisfied that
Italy’s acts caused the failure of the Project. The Award dedicated a specific section to
this determination (Section C of Part X), which applied to both Article 10(1) ECT claims

— the Legal Instability and Legitimate Expectations claims — but treated these jointly to

avoid repetition.”

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal addressed the Legitimate Expectations Claim
in Part X, in Sections B and C, the latter addressing a specific aspect — the causal link —

that was critical to this specific claim’s chances of success.

The Respondent recalls that when addressing the causation element, the Tribunal
discussed the Claimants’ reliance on the DIAs (which had been introduced earlier, in para.
165) along with the other documents and acts that allegedly generated their legitimate
expectations. According to the Respondent, the Tribunal noted that the DIAs did not
represent a firm assurance that the plants would receive FIT’s at any fixed rate:**
379. The Claimants relied on the DIAs as amounting to a definitive
authorization for the individual plants ...

380. At no stage did the Claimants obtain unconditional assurances
from the central Government as to their plants’ entitlement to FITs, or
to the level of such FIT.”

Regarding the prior cited paragraphs, the Respondent submits that paragraph 380 shifts

the focus from the DIAs to the critical aspect of the Claimants’ lack of entitlements in

# Ibid., para, 26. See also footnotes 15, 16 and 17, Counter-Memorial on Annulment.
46 Tbid., para. 27.

# Ibid. See also footnote 18, Counter-Memorial on Annulment.

48 Tbid., para, 31. See also paras. 379 and 380 of the Award.

# See footnote 22, Counter-Memorial on Annulment.

20

104.

@

105.

106.

the FIT.” Italy also contends that even accepting, for the sake of argument, that the
Tribunal failed to countenance the reassuring function of the Brindisi DIAs, this would
be a matter of merits and should not engage the review of an annulment committee.
Further, the point would remain that the Claimants never received any specific assurances

that they would receive any FIT, at any specific rate.

The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ submissions with regard to the Tribunal’s
failure to consider the Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity are based both on a
misreading of paragraph 379 itself and on reading it in isolation. According to the
Respondent, the Tribunal not only addressed the DIAs while discussing the Legitimate
Expectations Claim, but it also did so when analyzing one specific aspect thereof:
causation.” The Respondent also contends that “it is also very clear that the Tribunal did
not consider the DIAs to be particularly meaningful, as they did not generate any

legitimate expectation with respect to a specific rate of FITs.

. The Tribunal addressed only the DIAs issued by the Municipality of Mesagne

The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants base their assertion on the Tribunal’s alleged failure to consider a series of
documents central to the Claimants’ claim on Legitimate Expectations, second prong.
They specifically refer to the DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the Municipality
of Brindisi. They draw attention to paragraph 379 of the Award. The Claimants submit
that this document was cited no less than 30 times by the Claimants in the original
arbitration. They also argue that this was repeatedly referred to before the Tribunal at the
hearing. The Tribunal implicitly observed, in paragraph 165 of the Award, that it would

address this document. It, however, failed to do so."

The Claimants contend that the Tribunal only considered the template of the five

Certificates issued by the municipality of Mesagne, but completely failed to consider the

> Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 32.
> Ibid., para. 33.

» Ibid., para. 35.

3 Ibid., para. 36.

+ Reply on Annulment, para. 2.

21

48 certificates issued by the municipality of Brindisi and translated in template form on
the third page of the PDF of Exhibit C-24. The Claimants submit that in a separate and
different part of the Award, other than the one discussing the Legitimate Expectations
Claim,* specifically Section C regarding causation, at paragraph 379, the Tribunal
discussed the five DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the municipality of Mesagne.
According to the Claimants, the Tribunal, however, inexplicably failed to address the 48
DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the municipality of Brindisi. This, the Claimants
submit, was in spite of the fact that the Tribunal had announced, in paragraph 165 of the

Award, that it would do so.*°

107. According to the Claimants, the document which the Tribunal completely failed to
consider is a template form, on the third page of Exhibit C-24, which was a translation
of the 48 Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity. “Each of those certificates sets out a
positive representation that the construction of the solar plant, at issue, conformed with
local law. Each representation was specific in that it was made to the special-purpose
investment company owning the plant and concerned only the plant that constituted the
investment. The municipality of Brindisi reneged on that representation, at a crucial time

in the chronology, resulting in the loss of the Claimants’ investments.

108. The Claimants argue against Italy’s contention that Section C, Part X of the Award, deals
with the Legal Instability Claim and the Legitimate Expectations Claim regarding
causation, saying that, “[a]s is clear from its text, paragraph 379 addresses certain DIA
Certificates of Conformity issued by the municipality of Mesagne. Those certificates,”
according to the Claimants, “were not part of any claim of breach or causation pleaded
by” them. The Claimants submit that Italy incorrectly “asserts that the discussion of these
certificates in this paragraph must be read to imply that the Tribunal considered all DIA
Certificates of Conformity, including the Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity that
served as the basis for the Legitimate Expectations Claim.” According to the Claimants,

they suffered injury from this breach.

5 Award, Part X, B, Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard: ECT Article 10(1), second sentence
(legitimate expectations).

% Reply on Annulment, para. 37, Footnote omitted,

> Reply on Annulment, para. 3.

* Ibid., para. 50.

22

109.

110.

111.

112.

* Ibid., para.

The Claimants further contend, in this regard, that paragraph 379 refers to a “Notice of
the Municipality of Mesagne” and quotes the language from the first page of the PDF of
Exhibit C-24, that is, from the five DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the
municipality of Mesagne. However, it is plain that this paragraph does not quote or
discusses the language from the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity, issued by the

59

municipality of Brindisi, on the third page of that exhibit.

The Claimants draw attention to the difference between the DIA Certificates of
Conformity issued by the municipality of Brindisi and those issued by the municipality of
Mesagne by quoting the language used by both.” Given the emphasis put on this point
by the Claimants and its importance for both parties, the Committee quotes verbatim
from both certificates:

() This activity [construction of the solar plant] is in accordance with

the procedures set out in Regional Law n. 31/2008 and with general

urban planning instruments." (This is the language used by all 48 DIA
Certificates of Conformity issued by the Municipality of Brindisi.)

 

@) Simplified Authorization File Number ... is to be regarded as
complete [...]. Hence, the aforementioned Simplified Authorization shall
become applicable for all intents and purposes [...]° (Language used by

the Mesagne DIAs.)

The Claimants contest Italy’s argument that the DIA Certificates of Conformity from
Mesagne were discussed, by way of example, on paragraph 379 of the Award. They submit
that the expression “by way of example” has nothing to do with the Tribunal’s reasoning.
They contend that it is also plain from paragraph 379 that the “example” was presented

by the Tribunal as being offered by the Claimants, not by the Tribunal.”

They also argue that the expression “they” in the text of the second sentence of paragraph
379 does not refer to the DIAs as contended by the Respondent, but to the Claimants

themselves as mentioned in the first sentence, i.e., “The Claimants relied on the DIAs as

 

© Thid., paras. 53-54.
6! Reply on Annulment, para. 53, citing Exhibit C-24, DIA Certificates of Conformity, p. 3 of PDF (March 5, 2009-
May 21, 2010).

© Reply on Annulment, para. 54, citing Exhibit C-24, DIA Certificates of Conformity, p. 1 of PDF.

63 Reply on Annulment, para. 55. Parenthesis added.

23

113.

114.

115.

amounting to a definitive authorization for the individual plants. They refer by way of
example to a Notice of the Municipality of Mesagne” (the Mesagne DIA Certificates of
Conformity). The language of paragraph 379 of the Award, therefore, does not support
Italy’s inference that the Tribunal considered not only the Mesagne DIA Certificates of
Conformity but must also have reviewed the Brindisi ones.“ They also contend that it
would not be rational to cite them, as an example, when the 48 DIA Certificates of
Conformity issued by the municipality of Brindisi were the only ones on which a claim of

breach and causation was founded.

The Claimants allege that “the wording of paragraph 379 does not support Italy’s
suggestion that ‘the tribunal simply wished to stress how the Claimants had conveniently

99366

mischaracterized some of the DIAs in their briefing.” They argue that paragraph 379
refers not to an assertion in the text of any submission by the Claimants but to a
chronology of key events provided as an annex, to the Reply, for the convenience of the
Tribunal. The entry, in paragraph 379, referred to Exhibit C-24, which aggregated five
DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the Mesagne municipality (and the template

translation on the first page of the Exhibit) and 48 such certificates issued by the Brindisi

municipality (and the template translation on the third page of the Exhibit).””

The Claimants argue that “[iJt was the Tribunal that in paragraph 379 referred to the
template translation of the Mesagne Certificates of Conformity in the exhibit as part of a
discussion of causation. ... But it had nothing to do with causation or breach, because
the municipality of Mesagne took no action inconsistent with the representations in its
DIA Certificates of Conformity and the Claimants never presented a claim based on those

representations.”

In addition, the Claimants contend that the “Tribunal’s dismissal of that Claim was
founded entirely on the Tribunal’s inability to identify in the record a positive

representation attributable to the State with respect to the specific investments at issue.”

64 Thid., para. 56.
6 Ibid., para. 57.

66 Ibid., para. 58, citing Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 44.
© Reply on Annulment, para. 59.

68 Tbid., para. 60.

© Thid., para. 64.

24

116.

117.

118.

In that regard, the Claimants argue that the second prong of their Legitimate Expectations
Claim was based on the indisputably specific representations made concerning the specific
investments present in the 48 Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity.” Thus, the
Claimants allege that “[t]he inapposite discussion of the Mesagne DIA Certificates of
Conformity in paragraph 379 can be understood only as confirming that the Tribunal
missed the template translation of the 48 Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity a page

al

Jater in that exhibit.

The Claimants also contest Italy’s contention that the mention of the Mesagne
Certificates, at paragraph 379 of the Award, was an obiter dictum. The Claimants submit
that obiter dictum implies that elsewhere the decision states reasons for the holding around
which that dictum can orbit. There is no such reasoning as concerns the Legitimate

Expectations Claim founded on the 48 Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity.”

Another element on which the Claimants base their argument against the alleged failure
of the Tribunal to consider the DIA Certificates of Conformity, issued by the Municipality
of Brindisi, is the distinction between an internationally wrongful act and causation. The
Claimants argue that an international wrongful act and causation are two different things.
These are separate and independent conditions for reparation which cannot be confused
with each other.”* The Claimants submit that considering the expertise of the arbitrators,
on this particular subject, it is not possible that they confused the prior notions.” That is
why, in the Claimants’ view, the only possible explanation for the lack of analysis in the
Award of the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the Brindisi municipality is

that the Tribunal missed them in the record.”*

The Claimants further contend that several consequences flow from the Tribunal’s alleged

failure to consider the Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity.”

% Tbid., para. 65.
7 Tbid., para. 67.
% Ibid., para. 68.
* Ibid., para. 70.
4 Tbid., para. 71.
% Ibid., para. 72.
7% Ibid., para. 4.

25

119. ‘The Claimants submit that the first conclusion which can be drawn from it is that the
Award lacks any analysis of the document.” Also, the Claimants recall that Italy noted
that in paragraph 379 of the Award, the Tribunal discussed the translation of five different
DIA Certificates of Conformity, issued by another municipality, Mesagne. This discussion
of different documents appeared in the Award’s treatment of causation, not the breach
of Article 10(1), second sentence, of the ECT. No claim of breach or causation, however,

was ever based on the Mesagne DIA Certificates of Conformity.”

120. The second consequence drawn from the Tribunal’s alleged failure to consider the
Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity, according to the Claimants, is that the failure

impacted the Tribunal’s reasoning regarding the Legitimate Expectations Claim.

121. The Claimants further contend that neither paragraph 379 nor paragraph 165 of the
Award considered the DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the Municipality of
Brindisi when adjudicating the Legitimate Expectations Claim. Contrary to what Italy
contends regarding the discussion by the Tribunal of the Brindisi DIA Certificates, when
rejecting the Legitimate Expectations Claim, the Tribunal merely summarized the
Claimants’ position in this regard. This is made clear by paragraph 165 of the Award. It

reads as follows:

The Claimants allege that the Italian Government made multiple
representations ‘that the construction of specific plants was “in
accordance with the procedures set out in Regional Law n. 31/2008
and with general urban planning instruments.” They also argue that for
at least two years after having granted the DIA authorizations, the
municipality ‘took no step to suggest that it had any doubt about the
validity of the authorizations it had granted.’ This, in the Claimants’
view, amounted to an implicit representation that gave rise to legitimate
expectations. The Claimants further contend that Italy represented, in
the Second Energy Account, that it would gradually change the level of
feed-in tariffs every two years.”

122. ‘The Claimants contend that paragraph 165 of the Award does not deal with adjudicating

the Legitimate Expectations Claim based on the Brindisi Certificates, for several reasons.

7 Ibid., para. 5.
% Ibid., para. 6.
” Award, para. 165, Footnote omitted.

123.

124,

125.

First, because paragraph 165 is part of Section VI, titled “Positions of the Parties on
Liability,” under Heading A titled “the Claimants’ position” and sub-heading (b) titled
“TItaly’s alleged breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard.”* Second, this
paragraph includes no review or analysis on the part of the Tribunal itself, but a mere
recital of the Claimants’ argument based on Exhibit C-24, and in particular on the third

page thereof, i.e., the translation of the 48 Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity.”

The Claimants dispute Italy’s contention that Part X of the Award deals with all of the
Claimants’ claims on merits, including the Legitimate Expectations Claim in Section B.
They submit that Part X, Section B of the Award goes from paragraph 365 to 374, where
the Tribunal focused on the Claimants’ position that persons in their position had a
Legitimate Expectation that the Third Energy Account would be maintained, for the term
envisaged.” They contend that the Tribunal only addressed the first prong of the
Legitimate Expectations Claim, i.e., the argument that the Claimants had legitimate
expectations that the regulatory regime for solar projects would remain stable, in part

based on representations made to all potential investors in the Second Energy Account.

In view of the foregoing, the Claimants submit that nowhere in Section B of Part X of
the Award, did the Tribunal address the second prong of the Claimants’ Legitimate
Expectations Claim concerning the representations made by the municipality of Brindisi
in the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity. According to the Claimants, these

representations were later violated by the Brindisi stop-work order.®.
(ii) The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent contends that the first sentence of paragraph 379 is sufficient to reject
the Claimants’ alleged reading of the Award. The Tribunal dutifully noted the Claimants’

reliance on the DIAs without limiting its remarks to any subset thereof.“

8 Reply on Annulment, para. 40. Footnote omitted.

8! Thid., para. 41.
®2 Thid., para. 43.
83 Thid., para. 45.
*4 Thid., para. 39.

27

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

 Ibid.,
%6 Ibid.,
* Ibid.,
88 Ibid.,
® Ibid.,
0 Thid.,
° Thid.,
2 Ibid.,

‘The Respondent contends that the first sentence of paragraph 379 referred to the DIAs,
and in the absence of any indication to the contrary, it is clear that it referred to all of

them, including those issued by the municipality of Brindisi.

According to the Respondent, after that first sentence, paragraph 379 refers to a Notice
of the Municipality of Mesagne, and contains the reasoning, of the Tribunal, “by way of
example.” In this vein, the Respondent submits that by definition, such wording cannot

be taken as a benchmark of the completeness of the Tribunal’s reasoning.”

The Respondent contends that the mention of the DIAs issued by the Municipality of
Mesagne, by way of example, is only because the Tribunal wished to stress how the

Claimants had conveniently mischaracterized some of the DIAs in their briefings.”

The Respondent contends that the drafting of paragraph 379 of the Award and mainly
the mention of DIAs issued by the Municipality of Mesagne by way of example, is nothing
more than an obiter dictum: It also submits that reference to the Mesagne DIAs did not

undermine the Award’s reasoning, much less compromise it.”

Italy submits that the Claimants, when submitting their reply in the original proceedings,
accompanied it with a chronology of key events, indicating, for each listed event, the

relevant Exhibit.”

Italy refers to an entry dated May 21, 2010, where the Claimants referred to the event
“The local development companies obtain the 53d [sic] DIA Certificate of Conformity,
stating that the construction of the given solar plants was in accordance with the relevant
regulations,” and it indicated that the document with all DIAs was a supporting
document.” Italy asserts that the Claimants clearly referred to all DIAs, issued both by
Mesagne and Brindisi, together, as is evidenced by the reference to the total combined

number (53) and the Exhibit that contains both.” “Yet, according to this entry, these 53

para.
para.
para. 44,
para, 50.
para. 51.
para.
para, 53, Footnote omitted.
para, 55.

 

 

28

132.

133.

134,

135.

136.

137.

°3 Thid.
°4 Thid.
° Thid.
°6 Thid.
7 Thid.
°8 Thid.

DIAs stated that the plants were constructed ‘in accordance with the relevant

regulations.””*

According to the Respondent, the description is wrong as it mischaracterizes the five
DIAs issued by the Municipality of Mesagne — which are plainly included in the sample

but do not fit the description.”

Italy contends that the Claimants’ description of Exhibit C-24 glosses over this distinction
and that the Claimants conveniently but inaccurately attached all 53 DIAs under the

95

matginally more positive light of the Brindisi DIAs.

The Respondent submits that the mistake is also made, for example, in paragraph 446 of
the Memorial and paragraph 308 of the Reply, which again referred to the whole set of
DIAs as pertaining to the Brindisi municipality and all containing the “in accordance”

language, allegedly amounting to an “explicit representation.””°

Italy contends that the Award’s reference to the DIAs issued by Mesagne highlighted a
mistake in the Claimants’ Memorial and Reply and did not suggest nor imply, a contrario,
that the Tribunal had failed to “consider” or even “read” the DIAs issued by the

municipality of Brindisi.”

The Respondent submits that in its view, “[aJll DIAs on which the Applicant [sic] allegedly
relied were considered by the Tribunal, which found them to be of marginal value — as
they did not provide any reassurance as to the Claimants’ plan to receive FIT at a specific

rate.””*

The Respondent notes that in the Claimants’ Reply on Annulment, they took issue with
the Respondent’s view that the Tribunal had selected the “example” and maintained that
the Tribunal, instead, referred to the “example” selected by the Claimants in their

pleadings.” The Respondent submits that it “has no trouble accepting this as a possible

. para, 56,
., pata, 57.
., para, 60.
., para. 61.
., para, 65.
., para, 66,

°° Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 25.

29

138.

139,

alternative construction: the text of the Award is ambiguous and accommodates both
readings. Yet, nothing changes for the purpose of the Claimants’ case. According to both
constructions, the Tribunal expressly acknowledged that the Mesagne Certificates are a
sample selected ‘by way of example’ from a wider set of documents — most obviously, the

entire set collected in document C-24.”'"

In addition to the foregoing, the Respondent states that the Tribunal did not miss part of
C-24 by referring to the Mesagne documents, as an example. The Tribunal expressly
alluded to a wider class to which the Mesagne documents belonged, i.e., the entire class
of C-24 documents. It included the Brindisi certificates. “Crucially, since the Brindisi
Certificates are the only other documents collected in C-24, the mere mentioning of the
Mesagne Certificates by way of example implies — inescapably — awareness of the Brindisi”

Certificates."

AAs a consequence of the foregoing, the Respondent contends that “the
para-deduction of Claimants (that the Tribunal mentioned the Mesagne Certificates
because it had not found the Brindisi ones) is logically untenable, irrespective of whether
the Tribunal meant that the “example” had been selected by the Tribunal itself or by the

Claimants."

The Respondent submits that the Claimants glossed over the Respondent’s explanation
of why the Tribunal mentioned the Mesagne DIA Certificates at paragraph 379 of the
Award. The Tribunal, quite simply, took the opportunity to highlight an inaccuracy in the
Claimants’ Memorial, when it dismissed the relevance of all certificates in establishing any
legitimate expectations. The Respondent submits that the Claimants’ pleadings are

punctuated with inaccuracies. It quotes from their Reply:

The Municipality of Brindisi explicitly represented on no less than 53
occasions that the construction of specific plants was “in accordance
with the procedures set out in the Regional Law n. 31/2008 and with
general urban planning instruments.[”]'"°

100 Tbid., para. 26.
101 Tbid., para. 27.

2 Tbid., para. 28.

108 Thid., para. 32 citing Reply, para, 308, ‘The text is almost identical to paragraph 446 of the Memorial: “The
Municipality of Brindisi, notably, represented on no less than 53 occasions that the construction of specific plants
was ‘in accordance with the procedures set out in Regional Law n. 31/2008 and with general urban planning
instruments.’ See also paragraph 152 of the Memorial and paragraph 101 of the Reply, which mistakenly reported
that all 53 DIA Certificates confirmed that the permits were in “accordance with Regional Law n. 31/2008.”

30

140.

141.

142.

143,

144,

104 Thid., para.
105 Tbid., para.
106 Tbid., para.
107 Tbid., para.

The Respondent takes issue with this pleading. It submits that this is wrong. Only 48
Brindisi Certificates were submitted with C-24, not 53 or more. Further, not all the 53
Certificates in C-24 are of the “in accordance” kind. Only 48 are. They submit that
confusion is caused by the Claimants through C-24. It is not caused by either the
Respondent or the Tribunal. Moreover, these statements are misleading. These are
designed to favor the Claimants. According to the Respondent they inflate the number of
the “in accordance” certificates from 48 to 53. These mistakes, the Respondent submits,

call for public rectification."

Derived from the foregoing, according to the Respondent, is the fact that
the Tribunal picked up on the Claimants’ misstatements. This is in and of itself sufficient
evidence that the Tribunal was familiar with the contents of C-24, otherwise, it would
have taken the erroneous 53-Brindisi-Certificates and the 53-compliance-certificates

105

stories at face value.

The Respondent argues that the Tribunal was aware that the Legitimate Expectations
Claim relating to the stop-work order concerned only the Brindisi Certificates. This,
according to the Respondent, “emerges from the Tribunal-made interpolation in a quote

from the Claimants’ own pleadings.”

Claimants assert that the stop-work order “was contrary to the very

regional law with which [the municipality of Brindisi] had previously

certified [the construction of the solar plant’s] compliance."

Italy contends that “the wording chosen by the Tribunal to synthesise the position of the
Claimants, and in particular the intervention between square brackets, demonstrate [sic]
that the Tribunal was aware of the relevance of the Brindisi Certificates and that the stop-

work episode related to them, rather than to the Mesagne Certificates.”""”

Ultimately, Italy argues that “the appearance of the Mesagne Certificates in paragraph 379
of the Award is not an indication of the Tribunal’s negligence, but of the Claimants’

mistakes.”""*

citing Award, para. 167.

 

108 Thid., para. 45.

VI.

145,

VI.

146.

147.

148.

OVERVIEW OF THE MATTERS BEFORE THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

In this annulment proceeding, this Committee must decide upon the Claimants’ request
for annulment and the Respondent’s request to terminate the proceeding. The first task
assigned to this Committee was the Application for Annulment. The Committee will,
therefore, treat each of these requests in turn.

GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT UNDER ARTICLE 52(1) OF THE ICSID
CONVENTION

‘The Committee observes that the Claimants raise three grounds for annulment due to the
same alleged omission, each ground is different and independent; hence the Committee

will analyze each of these three grounds.
Scope of the Annulment

This Committee will begin by examining the scope of annulment set out in Article 52 of

the ICSID Convention before analyzing the merits of the Application for Annulment.
The common elements identified by previous ad hoc committees are, infer alia, the
following:

- The annulment is not an appeal

It bears reiterating that an ad hoc committee is not a court of appeal.'”

It is important to note, at this juncture, that within the ICSID system of Arbitration there
is no appeal or any other remedy against an award except those provided for in the

CONVENTION.”

- The ad hoc committee has discretion

An Ad Hoc Committee retains a measure of discretion in its ruling on applications for
annulment. This is clearly implied in the CONVENTION through the use of terms, such

as “manifest,” “serious” and “fundamental”. This discretion is not unlimited and should

\ Compania de Aguas del Aconguija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 64, Legal Authority CL-259 (“Vivendi P”). Emphasis added.
10 Ameo Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Annulment,
December 17, 1992, para. 1.14, Legal Authority ARL-29 (“Ameo”), Emphasis added.

not be exercised to the point of defeating the object and purpose of the remedy of
annulment. The Ad Hoc Committee may refuse to exercise its authority to annul an
Award if and when annulment is clearly not needed to remedy procedural injustice and

annulment would unwarrantably erode the binding force and finality of ICSID Awards.'""
- The task of an ad hoc committee is limited

An Ad Hoc Committee, in annulment proceedings, is not entitled to decide which one of
several possible interpretations of an annulment decision, among which the Tribunal
could choose, was preferable. It has simply to ascertain whether the Tribunal whose award

is challenged acted in manifest breach of its competence.'”

- The ad hoc committees have the task to “protect the integrity of the system”

The role of an ad hoc committee is to ensure the stability of the ICSID arbitration system,

not to overthrow awards because of its disagreement with the arbitral tribunal. Otherwise,

the annulment mechanism of Article 52 would slide into an appeal."

149. The exceptional character of annulment proceedings is confirmed by the decision of the

ad hoc committees. As the Respondent pointed out in “[o]nly 8 times out of the 50

sold

attempts until 2016”! was the applicant successful.

B. The core element in this Application for Annulment

150. The fundamental issue raised by the Claimants is that the Tribunal erred by not

considering and addressing the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the

Municipality of Brindisi, contained in Exhibit C-24,''° when considering the Claimants

11_Ameo, para. 1.20, Legal Authority ARL-29. Emphasis added.

12_Amco, para. 8.08, Legal Authority ARL-29.

13 Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1 Ltd. v. Republic of Peru, ICSUD Case No. ARB/03/28, Decision of
the ad hoc Committee, March 1, 2011, para. 165, Legal Authority CL-267 (“Duke”), See also Hussein Nuaman Sonfraki
v. United Arab Emirates, SID Case No. ARB/02/7, para. 23, Legal Authority CL-261 (“Soufraki’).

44 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, footnote 40.

45 Exhibit C-24, contains 57 pages. The first is an English non-official translation of a template of the certificates
of conformity (DIA) of the municipaliity of Mesagne. The second page is blank. The third page contains an English
non-official translation of a template of the certificates of conformity (DIA) of the municipality of Brindisi.
Following, these are 53 numbered pages in Italian, Pages 1 through 47, 49 and 51 through 53 are copies of Italian
certificates issued by the Municipality of Brindisi. Pages 48 and 50 are copies of Italian certificates issued by the
Municipality of Mesagne.

 

Legitimate Expectation Claim. Such omission, according to the Claimants, had a direct

impact on such claim.'"

151. In the words of the Claimants, “the question presented is one of the Tribunal failing to
consider a key element of a party’s case.”'"’ The grounds for Annulment are based
ptecisely on that issue. Accordingly, the first task of this Committee is to determine

whether the Award did or did not address the Brindisi DIAs.

152. The second issue argued by Claimants “concerns the impact of the Tribunal’s error on
the outcome of the case.”'' The second issue will arise for consideration only if this

Committee concludes that the Brindisi DIAs were not discussed in the Award.
a. Analysis of the core element

153. The Claimants acknowledge that the Award described the DIA Certificates of Conformity

and their functioning:

- “The DIA procedure is correctly described in Section IV.C.1. of the

Award”:'”

- “the Tribunal correctly understood that the DIA Certificates of Conformity

99,120

were at the heart of the Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations Claim’

46 “(T]he Tribunal inexplicably failed to consider measures at the heart of one of the claims and on which the other
claims relied in important part” (Memorial on Annulment, para. 2); “{t]he omission ... concerns measures central
to ... the Legitimate Expectations Claim” (Memorial on Annulment, para. 5); “the Tribunal disregarded the DIA
Certificates of Conformity in its analysis of the Legitimate Expectations Claim” (Memorial on Annulment, para.
32); “Yet, surprisingly, the Tribunal did not discuss the DIA Certificates of Conformity af alin this section [Section
B, Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment]. None of the 48 certificates from the municipality of Brindisi or the
five certi from the lity of Mesagne is d” (Memorial on Annulment, para. 66); “the Award’s
shortcomings — fundamentally, its complete failure to deal with the DIA Certificates of Conformity in the section
of the Award addressing the Legitimate Expectations Claim” (Memorial on Annulment, para. 100); “It is based on
a fundamental procedural mistake made by the Tribunal, ic. failing to read one-page document central to the second
prong of the Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations Claim” (Reply on Annulment, para. 2) “The first and most obvious
consequence is that the Award lacks any analysis of the document” (Reply on Annulment, para. 5); “the issue is the
Tribunal’s failure to consider a key part of the Claimants’ evidence and, therefore, address a claim based on that
evidence” (Reply on Annulment, para. 149); “This case concerns a single failure of an award to address an important
claim” (Tr. Day 2, 6:15-16).

17 Memorial on Annulment, para. 8.

48 Reply on Annulment, para. 77.

49 Memorial on Annulment, para. 17, citing the following paragraphs of the Award: 66, 67, 68, and 71.

120 Memorial on Annulment, para, 30.

154.

Certificates. This

- “The Tribunal also correctly understood one of the Claimants’ two bases of
its Legitimate Expectations Claim, i.e. the expectations that legitimately arose
from the DIA Certificates of Conformity and which were later dashed by

measures adopted by the municipality of Brindisi”;'*'

- “The Tribunal therefore correctly recalled, at paragraph 165 of the Award,
that:
...the Italian Government made multiple representations ‘that the construction

of specific plans was “in accordance with the procedures set out in Regional Law
n, 31/2018 and with the general urban planning instruments””;!2

- “The Tribunal also correctly referenced in that footnote the Claimants’ factual

exhibit upon which they based their assertion, Exhibit C-24”;'?

-  “.,. the Tribunal again correctly recalled the Claimants’ argument that:

[Flor at least two years after having granted the DIA authorisations, the
municipality ‘took no step to suggest that it had any doubt about the validity of

the authorizations it had granted” ;'**

- “The Tribunal also correctly recalled ... the Claimants’ argument that ‘[t]his.
in the Claimants’ view, amounted to an implicit representation that gave rise

o> 125

to legitimate expectations.

In this Committee’s view, the Tribunal referred to the DIA Certificates issued by the
Municipality of Mesagne only as an example of the contents and scope of these
Certificates and the promises, if any, incorporated in them. This example does not

establish that the Tribunal was either unaware of or failed to consider the Brindisi DIA

“ommittee is of the view that the Tribunal considered the entire class

 

of C-24 documents. It was not required to and did not commit an error by not discussing

each DIA Certificate individually. It was not required to divide them so or to discuss them

121 Memorial on Annulment, para. 54. The footnote 63 to paragraph 54 refences, infer alia, to paragraph 165 of the

Award which reads as follows: “the Italian Government made multiple representations ‘that the construction of

specific plans was
urban planning instruments.

‘in accordance with the procedures set out in Regional Law n. 31/2018 and with the general

122 Memorial on Annulment, para. 57.

 

 

Memorial on Annulment, para. 58.
Memorial on Annulment, para. 60.
Memorial on Annulment, para. 61.

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

separately, as suggested by the Claimants. It performed its function adequately by looking
at the entire set of documents together and concluding that these could not provide the

basis for an award in favor of the Claimants.

In light of the above, this Committee is of the view that the DIA Certificates of

Conformity and their functioning were addressed in the Award.

The above conclusion is also supported by fact that Claimants themselves recognized that
“the Tribunal reviewed each of the Claimants’ three separate claims, one by one.”!”
b. Structure and functioning of the Award

At the outset, this Committee recognizes that an award is the result of a lengthy process
which amalgamates and summarizes many elements. Each piece of the Award is
intertwined. For this reason, the Award should be read carefully and holistically. Nothing
prevents a tribunal from crafting an award in the manner that such tribunal considers the

best way to shed light on the claims and arguments.
i. Claims under ECT Article 10(1)

Article 10(1) of the ECT states:

Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of this
Treaty, encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and
transparent conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to
make Investments in its Area. Such conditions shall include a
commitment to accord at all times to Investments of Investors of other
Contracting Parties fair and equitable treatment. Such Investments shall
also enjoy the most constant protection and security and no
Contracting Party shall in any way impair by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures their management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal. In no case shall such Investments be accorded
treatment less favourable than that required by international law,
including treaty obligations. Each Contracting Party shall observe any
obligations it has entered into with an Investor or an Investment of an
Investor of any other Contracting Party.

Regarding the merits on ECT Article 10(1), the Tribunal, in its Award, stated that the

Claimants’ second claim relating to “legitimate expectations argument is thus a frank

126 Memorial on Annulment, para. 63.

160.

161.

162.

163.

o9127

alternative to its more nuanced argument based on degree of legislative change,””’ and that
“Claimants present an alternative formulation of an Article 10(1) claim based essentially on
legitimate expectations.”'** In this vein, the Award addressed the main issues regarding
Article 10 in Section X.A, which is more elaborate than Section X.B. It covered the

measures in a broader way, although not in a disconnected fashion, and finally discussed

the causation part in Section X.C.

The Tribunal saw the second claim as a “more nuanced argument based on degree of

99129

legislative claim,”'” and, based on such reading, considered that it was not necessaty to

revisit the issue in Section X.B. This understanding of the Tribunal’s reasoning indicates

a close relationship between claims under ECT Article 10(1).

In Section X.A, The Legal Instability Claim: ECT Article 10(1), subsection 1, The

interpretation of Article 10(1), the Tribunal referred to the second sentence of such article:

In effect, as various tribunals have pointed out, the obligation to create
stable conditions is conceived as part of the FET standard which is
generally applicable to investments by virtue of the second sentence.
The Respondent in effect agrees:

the obligation of FET ... already contains the requirements of stability
and transparency of the treatment. The FET standard represents the
mandatory specification of the general provision contained in the first
sentence. On the other hand, it is not clear which state conduct could
be considered lawful on the basis of the FET standard and unlawful on
the basis of Art. 10.1 first sentence.

On the basis that Article10(1), first and second sentences, of the ECT apply to a ‘legal

 

instability’ claim said to arise in the course of an existing investment, the next question is
the scope of the host state’s obligation in that regard.'”
The Tribunal noted that the disputing parties saw such close relationship:

“the Respondent further argues that ‘[iJf it is true that the second
sentence [of Article 10(1)] is strictly related to the first, this does not
prevent the second sentence from having a different normative force,

127 Award, para. 366. Emphasis added.
128 Award, para. 365. Emphasis added.
129 Award, para. 366. Emphasis added.
130 Award, paras, 315-316. Footnotes omitted. Emphasis added.

that is being specifically binding and directly enforceable by the

investor.”

164. In Section X.A of the Award, the Tribunal not only addressed the first sentence of Article

10(1), but also addressed other sentences, in particular the second sentence:

(1) The five sentences of Article 10(1) embody commitments towards

investments, in accordance with their terms ...

(3) But the core commitment is that in the second sentence, expressly
included in the first, ‘to accord at all times to Investments of Investors
of other Contracting Parties fair and equitable treatment’ ... ."

In applying to the Romani Decree and the Fourth Energy Account the
standard of legal stability incorporated in Article 10(1), first and second
sentence, of the ECT (paragraph 319 above).'*

 

the fair and equitable treatment standard which, by virtue of the second
sentence, is at the core of the obligation of stability under the first
sentence has a relatively high threshold.'*

 

165. ‘Turning to the core of the Application for Annulment, this Committee observes that the
Tribunal analyzed the measures described in a broader manner in the Award (paras. 321

.c. the

 

et seq.). These are interrelated to broader and more comprehensive measures
Constitutional Court Decision, the Romani Decree and the Fourth Energy Account, and
the Brindisi stop-work. All these are intertwined and related and/or have an impact on

the DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the Brindisi Municipality.

166. The Claimants argued that the claim regarding the second sentence referred to the
construction of the plants and not to the FITs. At paragraph 351 (ef seq.) of the Award’s

Section X.A, the Tribunal refers precisely to the construction:

The Claimants argue that the stop-work order was the final blow to the
Project, preventing the construction even of the two projected plants

41 Award, footnote 276.

182 Award, para. 319. Emphasis added.
153 Award, para. 342. Emphasis added.
14 Award, para. 363. Emphasis added.

by the deadline laid down in the Fourth Energy Account and thereby
ensuring the bankruptcy of the project companies.'”

167. The Tribunal also analyzed the failure of the Project due to the stop-work episode.'”

168. The Award addressed the issue of legitimate expectations arising from the DIA:

The Claimants emphasise the due diligence done on the Project, in
particular through the Preliminary Due Diligence Report. They go on
to assert that ‘[t]he report identified no particular issue with respect
either to the construction and connection authorizations held by the
companies ...’ But this is not the case: the Preliminary Report focuses
perhaps more on this potential problem than any other. Moreover, a

 

due diligence exercise (and this one was avowedly incomplete) is or
should be carried out for the client prior to the investment; it does not
shift any risk to the state. Nor could it form the basis for a legitimate
expectation vis-a-vis the state that the DIA ‘authorizations’ were secure
against challenge.'”

169. In the opinion of this Committee, these findings relate to the legitimate expectations claim
and cover the DIA authorizations issued by the Brindisi as well as the Mesagne

municipalities.

170. The Committee is of the view that, as explained above, the Award made a general

determination on the claims under Article 10(1). The following quote illustrates the point:

In the Tribunal’s view, the Claimants have not discharged the onus of
proof of establishing that the Italian state’s measures were the operative
cause of the Puglia Project’s failure. Of far greater weight was the
continued dependence on project financing, and the failure to obtain it
was due both to the size of the Project and to justified concerns about
the scope of DIA authorisation, on which the legality of the Project
depended. That being so, the claim under Article 10(1) for loss of the
Project would fail in any event,'*

171. It is noteworthy that the general conclusion covers (1) the claim under Article 10(1), even

if this is just a “claim,” and not “claims,” as suggested. It could be explained in light of

155 Award, para. 351. Emphasis added. The subsequent paragraphs of the Award refer to the construction of the
plants.

136 See Award, paras. 358-360.

157 Award, para. 383. Emphasis added.

138 Award, para. 394. Emphasis added.

the Tribunal’s view, that the second sentence was a “legitimate expectations argument is

thus a frank alternative to its more nuanced argument based on degree of legislative

change”;'” and (2) the DIA authorization scheme either under the Brindisi or Mesagne

municipalities.

172. With regard to ECT Article 10(1), the Tribunal developed its analysis in Section C with
the Issue of Causation in Part X, The Merits: The Tribunal’s Appreciation. The first paragraph

of this section reads:

Central to the Claimants’ case as pleaded under Article 10(1) is a claim
of fact - viz., that the real reason for the complete failure of the Project
was the legal instability in Italy arising from a series of events ... But
even if all (or some of them) constituted breaches of the ECT, if they
did_not cause the failure of the Project, the Claimants cannot
recover.627

627 For the requirement of causation as a condition for a claim of
breach of an obligation, see ILC Articles on State Responsibility, 2001,
Exhibit CL-4, Art. 31 and commentary."
173. After such introduction, the Tribunal extensively analyzed the DIA Certificates of

Conformity in Section X.C.

c. Conclusion

174. The Committee in TECO correctly recognized that “a tribunal cannot be required to

old

address within its award each and every piece of evidence,”™' and the Committee in Swez

found that “it is not for an_ad hoc committee ... to determine whether the Tribunal

 

assessed each and every piece of evidence that the Parties considered relevant to their
case.”'” Finally, in the context of the subparagraph (e) of Article 51 the Committee in

Enron observed that:

...the tribunal is required only to give reasons for its decision in respect
of each of the questions. This requires the tribunal to state its pertinent

59 Award, para. 366. Emphasis added.

440 Award, para. 375.

Ml TECO Guatemala Holdings LLC v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No. ARB/10/23, Decision on Annulment,
April 5, 2016, para. 131, Legal Authority CL-272 (“TECO”).

\ Syex, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/03/19, Decision on Argentina’s Application for Annulment, May 5, 2017, para. 299, Legal Authority CL-284
(“Suez”), Emphasis added.

   

40

175.

176.

177.

178.

43 Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, LP.

findings of fact, its pertinent findings as to the applicable legal
principles, and its conclusions in respect of the application of the law
to the facts. If the tribunal has done this, the award will not be annulled
on the basis that the tribunal could have given more detailed reasons
and analysis for its findings of fact or law, or that the tribunal did not
expressly state its evaluation in respect to_each individual item of
evidence or each individual legal authority or legal provision relied upon
by the parties, or

 

did not expressly state a view on every single legal and factual issue
raised by the parties in the course of the proceedings. The tribunal is

required to state reasons for its decision, but not necessarily reasons for
its reasons.'?

The Tribunal, in this case, addressed Exhibit C-24 as mentioned supra. The Claimants’
complaint is not that the Award did not address it but that the Award did not address it

in the section the Claimants consider more appropriate.

This

 

ommittee finds that the Award analyzed the claims and the evidence — including
Exhibit C-24 — in a coherent and not in a segmented manner. The Tribunal did not omit
consideration of any issue or any material evidence although the measures alleged to be
contrary to the ECT Article 10(1) were interrelated, contained different pieces and some
of them operated in an integrated manner. The complete analysis is developed in Part X

of the Award through its three different Sections.

In the view of the Committee, the Claimants’ complaint is in essence not about an
omission to consider pivotal evidence but about the weight the Tribunal gave to such

evidence, i.e., Exhibit C-24.'*

 

In view of the above discussion, the answer to the question — whether the Tribunal has
considered a key element of a party’s case, i.e., 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity — is in
the affirmative’. This Committee will, therefore, now turn to address each of the grounds

of annulment.

1, The Argentine Republic,

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, July 30, 2010,
para, 222, Legal Authority CL-265 (“Enron”). Emphasis added.

M4 See for example Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 163 (“What transpires from the Award, if anything, is
the Tribunal’s lack of conviction regarding the alleged value of the DIAs issued from the municipality of Brindisi”);

para, 193 (“Claimants, in their submissions, invoke instead a (very much alleged) error in judicando, They asserted
that the Tribunal has mistakenly given insufficient weight to the Brindisi DIAs.”)

41

C. Article 52(1)(e): The Tribunal Failed to State Reasons on Which the Award is
Based

¢

\) The Claimants’ Position

179. The Claimants begin by addressing the legal standards applicable to Annulment under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. According to them Article 48(3) of the ICSID
Convention provides that “[t]he award shall deal with every question submitted to the
Tribunal, and shall state the reasons upon which it is based.” They submit that a violation

of this duty is a ground for annulment of the award.'*

180. The Claimants argue that this ground for annulment is designed to protect “she integrity of
the award — meaning that the reasoning presented in the award should be coherent and not
contradictory, so as to be understandable by the Parties and must reasonably support the

solution adopted by the tribunal (Article 52(1)(@).”"°

181. In support of the legal standard applicable to Annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the

ICSID Convention, the Claimants cite the TECO ad hoc Committee, as follows:

[T]he requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award
enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to
Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of
fact or of law.'”

182. The Claimants also cite C.

 

where the ad hoc committee annulled part of the award in
light of the “significant lacuna” in the award on a specific point, ie., how the claimant

was entitled to bring a claim under a contract to which it was not a party by virtue of an

45 Memorial on Annulment, para. 76.

M6 Ibid., para. 77, citing Soufraki, para. 23, Legal Authority CL-261.

447 Tbid., para. 78, citing Maritime Int'l Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Government of Guinea, \CSID Case No.
ARB/84/4, Decision on the Application by Guinea for Partial Annulment, December 14, 1989, para. 5.09, Legal
Authority CL-257 (“MINE”). See also Wena Hotels Ltd, v. Arab Republic of Egpt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/4,
Decision on the Application by the Arab Republic of Egypt for Annulment of the Arbitral Award dated December
8, 2000 in the Above Matter, February 5, 2002, para. 81, Legal Authority CL-258 (“Wena Hotels”) (“Neither Article
48(3) nor Article 52(1)(e) specify the manner in which the Tribunal’s reasons are to be stated. The object of both
provisions is to ensure that the Parties will be able to understand the Tribunal's reasoning.”); TECO, para. 87, Legal
Authority CL-272 (“[AJnnulment of an award for failure to state reasons can only occur when a tribunal has failed
to set out the considerations which underpinned its decision in a manner that can be understood and followed by
a reader.”).

  

 

 

42

umbrella clause. The award made it “impossible for the reader to follow the reasoning on
this point.”"*

183. They also cite part of the reasoning of Wena Hotels ad hoc Committee, in this regard. The
ad hoc committee, in that case, decided that annulment will be justified if “the Tribunal

failed to observe evidence which at least had the potential to be relevant to the final

outcome of the case.”"”

184. The Claimants also cite another part of the reasoning of the TECO ad hoc Committee,
where that Committee partially annulled the award on the ground of Article 52(1)(e) of
the ICSID Convention. The TECO Committee took “issue with the complete absence of
any discussion of the Parties’ expert reports within the Tribunal’s analysis of the loss of

value claim.” In the TECO Committee’s words:

While the Committee accepts that a tribunal cannot be required to
address within its award each and every piece of evidence in the record,
that cannot be construed to mean that a tribunal can simply gloss over
evidence upon which the Parties have placed significant emphasis,
without any analysis and without explaining why it found that evidence
insufficient, unpersuasive or otherwise unsatisfactory.'””

185. The Claimants contend that as a consequence of the foregoing “[a] tribunal is duty bound
to the parties to at least address those pieces of evidence that the parties deem to be highly

relevant to their case[.]”"™

186. After setting out the legal standards applicable to annulment under Article 52(1)(@) of the

152

ICSID Conventions, the Claimants apply those legal standards to the Award in this case.

48 Memorial on Annulment, para. 79, citing CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. The Argentine Republic, SID Case No.
ARB/01/8, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic,
September 25, 2007, para. 97, Legal Authority CL-263 (“CMS”). See also Soufraki, para. 122, Legal Authority CL-
261 (“[E]ven short of a total failure [ro state reasons], some defects in the statement of reasons could give rise to
annulment.”). See also Enron, para. 384, Legal Authority CL-265.

49 Tbid., para. 80, citing TECO, para. 135, Legal Authority CL-272. Emphasis added.

50 Memorial on Annulment, para. 81, citing ibid., para. 137 (“The Committee is therefore left guessing as to the
Tribunal’s actual line of reasoning, which cannot be ascertained from the rest of the Tribunal’s analysis either.”);
Ibid., para. 131, See also ibid., para. 130 (“[T]he Tribunal did not discuss af all the Parties’ respective expert reports
..), Emphasis in original.

'51 Memorial on Annulment, para. 82, Footnote omitted,

152 Tbid., para. 98.

 

 

43

187.

188.

189.

190.

'53 Ibid., para. 101, citing See e.

The Claimants allege that nowhere did the Tribunal address the DIA Certificates issued
by the Municipality of Brindisi in its analysis of the Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations
Claim. As such, the Tribunal failed to state reasons on which the Award is based. The

following arguments are advanced by the Claimants to support this contention.

1. The Tribunal Nowhere Addressed the Certificates of Conformity in Its
Analysis of the Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations Claim and, as Such,

Failed to State Any Reasons for Dismissing This Claim!’

They argue that in Section X.B of the Award, entitled “Breach of the Fair and Equitable
Treatment Standard: ECT Article 10(1), second sentence (legitimate expectations),” the
Tribunal didn’t address the DIA Certificates of Conformity that appeared at Exhibit C-
24 either.'* The only question the Tribunal addressed in Section X.B of the Award is
whether the Claimants had a legitimate expectation that the Third Energy Account

“vould be maintained for the term envisaged.”

The Claimants recalled that their Legitimate Expectations Claim was divided into two
ptongs. The first prong related to legitimate expectations based on the Third Energy
Account, while the second prong related to legitimate expectations based on the DIA
Certificates of Conformity issued by Brindisi. They also recalled that the Tribunal
correctly understood the difference between the two prongs of the Claimants’ Legitimate

Expectations Claim and had no confusion about them.'”

The Claimants contend that “focusing on the Third Energy Account to the exclusion of

the DIA Certificates of Conformity led the Tribunal to make findings regarding the lack

  

of ‘specificity’ vis-a-vis any given investor of a decree of general application such as the
Third Energy Account. The Tribunal contrasted it with the specificity required, in its view,
for a finding of breach of representations made to investors, creating legitimate

expectations, in the context of Article 10(1), second sentence, of the ECT.”

Award, para.165 & n. 257 (citing among others Exhibit C-24) (Tab A).

  

4 Thid., para. 102, citing Award paras. 365-74 (Tab A).
'55 Memorial on Annulment, para. 103, citing Ibid., para. 365 (Tab A).

156 Memorial on Annulment, para. 104, Footnote omitted.

'57 Memorial on Annulment, para. 105, citing See Award, paras. 365-74 (Tab A).

44

191. As a consequence of the findings of the Tribunal regarding the lack of specificity, the
Claimants contend that “[hJad the Tribunal analyzed the 48 DIA Certificates of
Conformity from the municipality of Brindisi as part of its adjudication of the Legitimate
Expectations Claim — which it had implicitly announced it would do, because it had
correctly recalled the Claimants’ argument in respect of this claim — the Tribunal would
necessarily have observed that these DIA Certificates of Conformity could hardly be more
specific to the Claimants’ investments, because the only topic each DIA Certificate of
Conformity addressed was the construction of a particular solar plant (which the

99158

Claimants were to finance) ona specific parcel of land (which the Claimants acquired).

192. ‘They argue that they had anticipated this situation, so they addressed it as part of their
closing submissions at the hearing, highlighting the fact that Italy made “specific”
commitments. '” However, the Claimants argue that the analysis of the specific
representation in the DIA Certificates of Conformity, which would logically follow from
the Tribunal’s approach to “specificity,” is completely absent in the Award, and without

any reason.

193. ‘The Claimants contend that as a consequence of the foregoing, the Tribunal omitted to
review and, thus, to adjudicate the Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations Claim, to the
extent, that this claim related to the DIA Certificates of Conformity.” They contend that
“such omission had a direct bearing on the outcome of the case, given that those
certificates contained specific representations by the municipality of Brindisi, on which
the Claimants relied in making the bulk of their investment, and which the municipality
subsequently reneged on (when initiating the self-redress proceedings and adopting the

stop-work order).”"*!

194. ‘The Claimants contest Italy’s argument that the Tribunal addressed the DIA Certificates

of Conformity from Brindisi when rejecting the Legitimate Expectations Claim.

158 Memorial on Annulment, para. 106.

1 Thid., para. 107, citing Claimants’ Closing Statement, which can be found at Tab M of the procedural documents
from the arbitration.

160 Memorial on Annulment, para. 110.

161 Thid., para. 111.

45

196.

197.

The Claimants allege that the Tribunal solely focused on the first page of the PDF of
Exhibit C-24, which is a template translation of the five Certificates of Conformity,

issued by the municipality of Mesagne. According to them, “the Tribunal completely

  

failed to consider the 48 Certificates of Conformity issued by the municipality of Brindisi,

and their template translation displayed on the third page of the PDF of Exhibit C-24.”'

‘The Claimants contend that “three aspects of the record place this omission into context.
First, the vast majority of the plants in the Claimants’ project, were located in Brindisi,
and Exhibit C-24 primarily consisted of the 48 certificates from the municipality of
Brindisi reproduced in that exhibit." “Second, only the municipality of Brindisi adopted
measures culminating in the stop-work order that violated the expectations that had
legitimately arisen from the Certificates of Conformity issued by that municipality. The
municipality of Mesagne at no point questioned the validity of the construction permits
it had granted, and the Legitimate Expectations Claim addressed only measures by the

municipality of Brindisi, not Mesagne.”' “Third, the texts of the Certificates of

99165 166

Conformity issued by the respective municipalities were different,”'® as noted before.

“The Tribunal correctly observed that the Mesagne municipality’s certificates did not

's certificates that the Claimants

 

contain the key text found in the Brindisi municipality
relied on in making their investment and repeatedly quoted in their submissions.
However, that observation is of no consequence because only the municipality of Brindisi
was alleged to have contradicted explicit representations by adopting measures
diametrically opposed to the specific representations made in the certificates it had

issued"

The Claimants further contend that “[t]he Tribunal not only did not address the 48 DIA
Certificates of Conformity issued by the Municipality of Brindisi prominently featuring in
Exhibit C-24 but it also failed to state any reasons for disregarding them. It appears that

the Tribunal only read the first page of a 53-page long exhibit, as if the exhibit had

1 Thid., para. 114,
16 Thid., para. 115.

164 Thid., para. 116.

165 Tbid., para. 117.

166 See supra para. 119.

'67 Memorial on Annulment, para. 117.

198.

199,

200.

201.

included only one template translation of the DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by
the municipality of Mesagne on page 1 of the PDF and not a second page consisting in

the template translation of the municipality of Brindisi on page 3 of the PDF."

The Claimants contend that they “have discharged their burden of proof based on Article
52(1)(d), because it is plain that the Tribunal implicitly announced at paragraph 165 of the
Award that the question of the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the Brindisi
municipality was important for the Claimants and for the Tribunal itself. Yet, the Tribunal
nowhere analyzes, in the Award, the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the
Brindisi municipality and on which the second prong of the Legitimate Expectations

Claim was based."

The Claimants also submit that because of the evidence overlooked by the Tribunal, it is
impossible to follow the Tribunal’s reasoning “from Point A to Point B” to recall the

standard of the MINE ad hoc committee.'”

The Claimants argue that “Italy misses the mark with its separate assertion that ‘[a]
tribunal’s failure to address a specific question does not render the resulting award
annullable as such.””'” Furthermore, the Claimants contend that by doing so, Italy relies
on the history of the ICSID Convention and the fact that “the ICSID Convention
ptovides another remedy where a Tribunal fails to address a question: the dissatisfied
party may request that the same Tribunal issue a supplementary decision [under Article

49(2) of the ICSID Convention] concerning the question not addressed.”

Regarding the remedy of supplementary decision, the Claimants submit that “ICSID
jurisprudence has rejected the notion that Article 49(2)’s provision for a supplemental
decision provides the exclusive remedy, or a remedy that must be exhausted, when an
award fails to address a question. Summarizing this jurisprudence, Schreuer, Malintoppi,

Reinisch and Sinclair state in their treatise on ICSID practice as follows:

168 Thid., para. 118.
16 Reply on Annulment, para. 153.

1 Thid., para. 154, citing MINE

 

para, 5.09, Legal Authority CL-257; Memorial on Annulment, paras. 78, 101-121.

"1 Reply on Annulment, para. 155, citing Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 88. Footnote omitted.
"2 Reply on Annulment, para. 156, citing ICSID, Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council
of ICSID, May 5, 2016, para. 103, Legal Authority ARL-19. Footnote omitted.

47

202.

203.

This case law on Art. 49(2) confirms the limited relevance of the

remedy of supplementation. It is useful for unintentional omissions of

a technical nature ... It is not a sufficient remedy for a failure to address

major facts and arguments which go to the core of the tribunal’s

decision. In the latter case, a party must seek annulment if it can

demonstrate one of the grounds listed in Art. 52(1). The Wena Hotels

Committee observed that ‘the ground for annulment under Article

52(1)(e) includes therefore the case where the Tribunal omitted to

decide upon a question submitted to it to the extent such supplemental

decision may affect the reasoning supporting the Award.’ In that case a

prior exhaustion of the lesser remedy of supplementation under Art.

49(2) is not necessary."
‘The Claimants argue that the problem in this case is different. It is that the Tribunal failed
to review the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity issued by the Brindisi municipality. This
was in spite of the fact, according to the Claimants, that the Tribunal had itself implicitly
announced, in paragraph 165, that it would review these to properly adjudicate the second
prong of the Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations Claim.'” As a consequence, they claim,
that the problem in the present case is not simply that the Tribunal failed to address “a
question,” which was one among many other questions.'” According to the Claimants,
the question that the Tribunal failed to address, that of the 48 Brindisi DIA Certificates
of Conformity, was the only question that was at the heart of the second prong of the
Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations Claim.’ They also submit that the Tribunal also did
not fail to address that question because it deemed it unimportant or irrelevant. It is clear
from paragraph 165 of the Award, among others, that the Tribunal realized that this
question was important. It simply failed to address it in the Award because it failed to
locate in the record, the template translation of the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity

issued by the municipality of Brindisi at the third page of the PDF in Exhibit C-24.'”

The Claimants note that the ICSID Background Paper on Annulment (the “Background
Paper”) cites the TECO annulment decision’s finding that “the failure to address certain

evidence relevant to the determination of damages amounted to a failure to state the

"3 Reply on Annulment, para. 157, citing Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention—A Commentary, p. 864,
Legal Authority CL-279 (quoting Wena Hotels, para. 101, Legal Authority CL-258). Footnote omitted.

"4 Reply on Annulment, para. 159.

"5 Tbid., para. 160.

"6 Ibid., para. 161.

"7 Thid., para. 162.

48

204,

205.

reasons.” They submit that “Italy itself draws the Committee’s attention to this decision,
noting that the award in that case was partially annulled because ‘the tribunal had not
explained why it had bypassed and substantially ignored the evidence provided by the

oo178

parties about [a specific] claim.

The Claimants argue that “the Tribunal failed to explain why it ‘bypassed’ and
‘substantially ignored the evidence’ provided at the third page of Exhibit C-24 (i.e., the 48

179

Brindisi DIA Certificates of Conformity).

The Claimants allege that because of all of these arguments, the Tribunal’s omissions
rendered its reasoning on the Legitimate Expectations Claim impossible to understand.
‘That “[iJn sum, the absence of any analysis of the DIA Certificates of Conformity in the
section of the Award addressing the Legitimate Expectations Claim, and the failure to
deal with the relevant DIA Certificates of Conformity (those of Brindisi) reproduced in
Exhibit C-24 in the Award’s section on causation, is a failure to state reasons. It follows
that the Award should be annulled pursuant to Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID

Convention.”'*”

(ii) The Respondent’s Position

206.

The Respondent begins by addressing the Legal Standards. It cites MIN

 

the requirement that an award has to be motivated implies that it must
enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the Tribunal on points of
fact and law. It implies that, and only that. The adequacy of the
reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review under paragraph
(1)(e) [Article 52], because it almost inevitably draws an ad hoc
Committee into an examination of the substance of the tribunal’s
decision, in disregard of the exclusion of the remedy of appeal by
Article 53 of the Convention."*!

"8 Tbid., para. 164, citing TECO, paras. 123-139, Legal Authority CL-272; see Counter-Memorial on Annulment,

paras. 90-92,

9 Reply on Annulment, para. 165.

'80 Memorial on Annulment, para. 120.

'8t Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para, 78.

49

207. The Respondent argues that an award warrants annulment if it does not enable the reader

to follow and understand its reasoning."

208. ‘The Respondent contends that “the Applicant [sic] bears the burden of proving that the
Tribunal’s reasoning on a point which is essential to the outcome of the case was either
unintelligible or contradictory or frivolous or absent.”" A “tribunal’s failure to address a

specific question does not render the resulting award annullable as such."

209. ‘The Respondent notes that “certain committees have considered an award annullable if
the question overlooked was critical to the outcome of the case.”"* “In one case, the ad
hoc committee commented on the award’s failure to discuss several pieces of evidence
submitted by the parties in the calculation of damages.”'*’ “The committee, in the TECO
v. Guatemala case, noted that the tribunal’s claims that the evidence was either insufficient
or missing altogether were factually wrong, since the parties had made several submissions
that the tribunal failed to mention.”"” “Ultimately, it annulled the tribunal’s determination
of a claim regarding the loss of value of the investment, as the tribunal had not explained

why it had bypassed and substantially ignored the evidence provided by the parties about

that claim.”'**

210. The Respondent contends also “that the absence of reasons must be critical, that is, it

must affect the outcome of the case:

even where an absence of reasons is found, in order for a failure to state

reasons to justify an annulment, the error must relate to an issue that

was outcome-determinative.”"”

82 [bid., para, 82, citing Total S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01, Decision on Annulment,
February 1, 2016, para. 264, Legal Authority ARL-03; Venoklim Holding B.V. . Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/12/22, Decision on Request for Annulment, February 2, 2018, para. 282, Legal Authority ARL-02.
'83 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 87, citing Alapli Elekirié BV. v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/08/13, Decision on Annulment, July 10, 2014, para. 202, Legal Authority ARL-16 (“Alapi?’).

84 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para, 88.

185 Ibid., para. 89.

'86 Ibid., para. 90, citing TECO, paras. 123-139, Legal Authority CL-272.

'87 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 91, citing TECO, sce in particular paras. 130-134, Legal Authority CL-
272.

'88 Tbid., para. 92, citing TECO, para, 139, Legal Authority CL-272.

189 Tbid., para. 93, citing Poitond banka, a.s. and Istrokapital SE. v. Hellenic Republic, SID Case No. ARB/13/8,
Decision on Postova Banka’s Application for the Partial Annulment of the Award, September 29, 2016, para. 143,
Legal Authority ARL-18 (“Postord banka”). See also Alapli, pata. 202, Legal Authority ARL-16; Vivendi I, para. 65,
Legal Authority CL-259; E/ Paso Energy International Company v. The Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/03/15,

 

211.

212,

213.

214,

215.

Furthermore, the Respondent contends that “an annullable award must have a non sequitur
that affects its operative part. Conversely, a logical gap or flaw that affects an obiter dictum

cannot by definition give rise to annulment.”"”

The Respondent notes that “the Claimants’ entire challenge hinges on the alleged failure
by the Tribunal to give weight to the Brindisi DIAs, while rejecting the Legitimate

oot

Expectations Claim.”"' The Award, however, tells a different story, one which, according

to the Respondent, is quite simple to understand.’

The Respondent submits that Article 52(1)() of the ICSID Convention requires that the
conclusion of the Tribunal on a specific question is impossible to square with its
supporting reasons.'”* It submits that, “therefore, it is worth starting from the Tribunal’s
conclusions on the Article 10(1) ECT claims, including the Legitimate Expectations
Claim.”'"* One is provided at paragraph 380 of the Award: the “Absence of Legitimate
Expectations” conclusion. The other is provided at paragraph 394: the “Absence of

Causation” conclusion.'*

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal explained why the Legitimate Expectations
Claim did not stand in light of the fact that the Claimants never received any reassurance
that they would benefit from the FITs at any specific rate. The DIAs clearly could not

fulfil that function."

In addition, Italy contends that “immediately after referring to the Claimants’ alleged

reliance on the DIAs, the Tribunal cut to the bone of the Legitimate Expectations Claim:

Decision of the ad hac Committee on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, September 22,
2014, para. 169, Legal Authority ARL-06 (“E/ Paso Decision on Annulment”); Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil
Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, CSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Decision of the ad hoc
Committee, para. 81, Legal Authority ARL-17; Wena Hotels, para. 58, Legal Authority CL-258.

8 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 94.

1 Tbid., para. 95.

12

Ibid., para. 98.

8 Tbid., para. 99.
4 Thid., para. 100.
5 Tbid., para. 101.
6 Ibid., para. 102, citing Award, para. 380.

216.

217.

218.

219,

[a]t no stage did the Claimants obtain unconditional assurances from
the central Government as to their plants’ entitlement to FITs, or to
the level of such FITs."”

The Respondent, in support of this contention, argues that “the Claimants had only
suffered from a very circumscribed incident with respect to the exercise of that right: the
stop-work order that, in January 2012, blocked the construction works for two days with
respect to two plants.” These were two plants out of 120 that were never even
commenced." According to the Respondent, thus, “the Claimants’ assertion advanced

in the Memorial that Italy’s actions relating to the two plants in Brindisi ‘frustrated the

»9199

 

project in its entirety’ is ostensibly an exaggeration.

The Respondent recalls that “the Tribunal attributed the failure of the Claimants’ project
to its inherent financial and regulatory risks. The dubious legality of the DIAs was one of
them: the risk was ultimately overcome, but could not be discounted or minimised. The
Claimants could not harbor a legitimate expectation that there would be no glitch in that
regard.””” Italy further contends that these regulatory risks, when they surfaced, were
effectively overcome by the efficient system of judicial review administered by the Italian
courts. The Claimants, according to the Respondent, suffered what was perhaps a minor
setback in the construction schedule. The Respondent submits that the Claimants’
expectation that construction would steer clear of any minor bump in the road was not
legitimate. The more plausible expectation of having the right to build the plants was

indeed met by Italy’s actions."

The Respondent recalls that the Claimants criticized the Tribunal’s reading of the due
diligence report, which they said would have been more approving had the arbitrators
considered the Brindisi DIA Certificates, as the Claimants’ consultants had when they

prepared it.”

The Respondent contends that “the zoom-in on the due diligence report deliberately

neglected to mention that both the Brindisi Certificates and the due diligence report had

7 Thid., para. 103; and Award paras. 379-380.
18 Thid., para. 105.

© Tbid., para. 106, citing Memorial, para. 452.
2 Rejoinder on Annulment, para, 54,

201 Yhid., para. 5
2” Ybid., para. 60, ci

 
 

ting Reply on Annulment, para. 83.

been submitted to several potential funders, partners and lenders, all of which gave the
Claimants a cold shoulder. In other words,” Italy submits, “if really the combination of
the Brindisi Certificates and the subsequent due diligence report should have dispelled all
regulatory risks — something that the Claimants asserted — it becomes inexplicable why
the construction project attracted no interest.” According to Italy, “the Claimants found
themselves trying to build a tiny portion of the project without external funding, in a last
ditch-effort to avoid the application of Romani Decree to their plans. This scenario does
not speak highly of the project’s popularity and the Tribunal’s alleged failure to read the

99203,

Brindisi Certificates, therefore, had nothing to do with it.

220. Now, regarding the stop-work order, which in the Claimants’ views was the final blow to

204

the project, the Respondent cites a part of the reasoning of the Tribunal in this regard,

which is as follows:

In the Tribunal’s view, the stop-work episode did not involve any
breach of the ECT. Nor (for that matter) was it a function of ‘legal
instability.’ ...7°
221. In addition, the Respondent submits that “[e]vidently, the Tribunal recognised that the
stop-work order’s illegality under Italian law was remedied quickly and effectively and
could not give rise to any ECT breach. The Claimants’ entire fantasy about the ‘smoking
gun’ effect of the Brindisi Certificates cannot be entertained [for] it boils down to a simple
refusal to accept that the Tribunal attributed to them a much lower evidentiary weight

than the Claimants would now want them to have.””"

222. Italy notes that another of the Claimants’ arguments, in favor of the importance of the
DIA Certificates of Conformity from Brindisi for their Legitimate Expectations Claim, is
related to land use regulations. On this particular subject, the Respondent alleges that after

the Tribunal rejected the Legitimate Expectations Claim stating that the Claimants had

207

no legitimate expectations in the FIT'’s that phased out prematurely,” the Claimants

attempted to divert attention away from this bleak but plain conclusion by asserting that

208 Rejoinder on Annulment, para, 62.

204 Thid., para. 64.

28 Tbid., para. 64, citing Award para. 357. Footnotes omitted.
206 Tid., para. 66.

207 Thid., para. 68, Footnote omitted.

223.

224,

the object of their expectations was not the access to a specific rate of FIT's, but the more

liberal regime of use of agricultural land that prevailed before the limitations imposed by

Romani Decree entered into effect."

In support of its contention, Italy cites the following excerpt from the Claimants’ Reply

on merits:

the Municipality’s stop-work orders frustrated the Claimants’ legitimate
expectations. ... The temporary suspension of the stop-work orders by
the President of the Administrative Court did not change this state of
affairs. ....S.wch decision came too late for the project to be completed on time to

qualify for feed-in tariff. ..°”
The Respondent cites another excerpt from the Claimants’ Memorial in support of their

contention, which states as follows:

the Claimants made substantial investments only after they had
prepared a business plan on the basis of the Third Energy Account’s
feed-in tariffs and established that the project was attractive based on

those tariffs.”"”

In addition, the Respondent argues that stressing the link between the reassuring function
of Brindisi Certificates and the goal to accede Conto Energia III, the Claimants

synthesized their Legitimate Expectations Claim as follows:

The Claimants committed the bulk of their funds only after Watson
Farley had conducted a due diligence review of the authorizations for
the plants [which included the Brindisi Certificates]. That due diligence
was based in substantial part on the representations made by the
Municipality that the construction of the plants was authorized in
accordance with regional law, and the absence of any objection by the
Municipality or anyone else to the plants’ construction. Similarly, the
Claimants made substantial investments only after they had prepared a
business plan on the basis of the Third Energy Account’s feed-in tariffs
and established that the project was attractive based on those tariffs.”"'

208 Tid., para. 69.
2 Thid., para. 70, citing Reply on Annulment, para. 318. Emphasis added. The entire paragraph does not mention
the land requirements.

20 Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 72, citing Memorial, paras. 438 to 454, labelled “Italy Frustrated Legitimate
Expectations and Failed to Accord Fair and Equitable Treatment.”

21! Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 73, citing Memorial, para. 449.

54

226.

227.

228.

229,

The Respondent submits that zoning restrictions, established under Romani Decree, were
discussed in another section of the claim, under Article 10(1) ECT, i.e., the one relating
to Italy’s alleged failure to provide stable conditions for investors. That, according to the
Respondent, is an altogether different claim from the Legitimate Expectations claim. The
Tribunal also dismissed this claim. That dismissal, according to the Respondent, is not

before this Committee.””

The Respondent also submits that the fate of the two plants in Brindisi amounts to a tiny
fraction of the Claimants’ project, the only one that they could attempt to carry out after

coming to terms with the inability to secure external funding.”

The Respondent contends that “even if the DIAs from Brindisi had been neglected, and
even if they were capable of creating certain specific legitimate expectations, these
expectations would concern only and exclusively the right to build plants.”?'4 “The
Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations claim concerned instead the access to a specific
generation of FITs.” According to Italy, “[iJt was therefore natural for the Tribunal to

99215

briefly dispose of the DIAs argument as it bore little relevance to the core of the claim.

The Respondent recalls that the Claimants “remarked without ambiguity that the
uncertainty over the right to build the plants, caused by the stop-work order, was only
challenged insofar as it disrupted their rushed attempt to meet the deadline for a specific

generation of FITs:

The Regional Administrative Tribunal annulled the stop-work order as
an illegal excess of authority. But the damage to the Claimants’
investments was already done. No_part of the project_could_be

completed before the deadline imposed by the Romani Decree of 29
March 2012.”""°

212 Ybid., para. 74.

 

 

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 107.

214 Tbid., para. 108.
218 Ybid., para. 109.
216 Yid., para. 111, citing Memorial, para. 452. Footnotes omitted. Emphasis added.

230.

231.

232.

233,

234,

The Respondent contends that when the Tribunal discarded the assertion that the
Claimants had any expectations, relating to FITs, that was worth protecting, the stop-

work order episode and the relevance of the DIAs was ultimately considered irrelevant.”

Italy also submits that in the Award, the Tribunal also explained a second reason why the
Legitimate Expectations Claim could not succeed.”"* It recalls that the Tribunal noted that
the Legitimate Expectations Claim would fail “in any event.’”’"” “The Tribunal explained
that, even if — hypothetically — Italy had generated some legitimate expectations in the
Claimants, and even if it had frustrated them by its subsequent actions, there was no causal

link between such frustration and the Claimants’ business’ demise.””””

In support of the foregoing, Italy cites part of the Tribunal’s reasoning regarding

causation, as follows:

In the Tribunal’s view, the Claimants did not discharge the onus of
proof of establishing that the Italian state’s measures were the operative
cause of the Puglia Project’s failure. Of far greater weight was the
continued dependence on project financing, and the failure to obtain it
was due both to the size of the Project and to justified concerns about
the scope of DIA authorisation, on which the legality of the Project
depended. That being so, the claim under Article 10(1) for loss of the
Project would fail in any event.””!

The Respondent also recalls that, thus, the Tribunal considered that a claim could not be
upheld without causation, irrespective of any prima facie conduct contradicting an
international obligation:

.. even if all (or some of [Italy’s actions}) constituted breaches of the

ECT, if they did not cause the failure of the Project, the Claimants
cannot recover.”

The Respondent contends that the reasons why DIAs did not matter in the end are

explained in paragraphs 379 and 380 of the Award. These, simply put, are that the

217 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 115.
218 Yid., para. 116.

219 Ybid., para. 117.

2 Thid., para. 119.

2 Ibid., para. 120, citing Award, para. 394,

22 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 128, citing Award, para. 375.

Claimants had no legitimate expectations of the kind that could found a successful claim

under Article 10(1) ECT.

235. The Respondent further contends that “in any event,” if the Tribunal had really failed to
consider the Brindisi DIAs either deliberately or by mistake, and such mistake led to the
failure to disregard some effective expectations worth protecting, the Award itself

contains the alternative reasons why the conclusion would remain exactly the same.”

236. As argued by the Respondent, the claim could not succeed because there was no factual

link between Italy’s action and Claimants’ business’ failure.”

237. — Italy argues that “the specific weight that the Tribunal gave (or should have given) to the
DIAs was (or would have been) incapable of affecting the outcome of the Legitimate

Expectations Claim.””**

238. The Respondent also argues that the Claimants’ allegations that the relevance of Brindisi
DIAs was overlooked is difficult to understand.” This in essence, according to the
Respondent, is a plea that the Tribunal should have decided differently on the existence

of legitimate expectations.”*

239. In conclusion, Italy argues, any informed reader could understand and follow the A7B

logical sequence of the Award’s reasons.”
(iii) The Committee’s Analysis

240. The Claimants’ basic argument is that by failing to review the 48 DIA Certificates of
Conformity contained in Exhibit C-24, the Tribunal failed to address the second prong

of their legitimate expectations claim based on the second sentence of Article 10(1). For

23 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 131.

Ibid., para. 132.

25 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 133.

26 Ybid., para. 137.

2 Thid., para. 140.

28 Tbid., para. 141, stating that this is the specific point that the Claimants make in Memorial on Annulment, para.
124, when they stress that the Tribunal should have decided “whether the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity issued
by the municipality of Brindisi ... had created legitimate expectations on the Claimants’ part that were dashed by the
Brindisi measures.”

2° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 148.

   

that reason, Claimants contend that it is “impossible to follow the Tribunal’s reasoning

‘from Point A to Point B.””*”

 

241. Subparagraph (e) of Article 52 (1) sets out, as a ground for annulment, “that the award
has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.” In the view of this Committee, the
Award stated the reasons on which it is based.

242. With respect to the Exhibit C-24, the Claimants acknowledged that the Award described
the DIA Certificates of Conformity and their functioning.”' Moreover, this Committee
recalls its previous conclusion that the Tribunal analyzed the DIA Certificates of
Conformity of Brindisi — including Exhibit C-24 — in a coherent manner.’” The Tribunal
addressed them and was conscious that those certificates were important for the
Claimants’ case.”*

243. With respect to the legitimate expectations claim, the Committee concluded that the
Tribunal saw the second claim as a “frank alternative to its more nuanced argument based
on degree of legislative claim,” Moreover, the Tribunal specifically referred to the
second sentence of Article 10(1).?® Finally, the Tribunal extensively analyzed and made a
finding on the claims under Article 10(1).°

244. The cases cited by the Claimants refer to certain situations that are qualified as “significant
lacuna,” *” “impossible for the reader to follow,” ** “complete absence of any
discussion.”*” For the reasons stated, this Committee is of the view that the Award is far
from being tainted with any of such defects. The Award complies with the TECO
committee’s requirement, quoted by the Claimants, “... to state reasons is satisfied as long

20 Reply on Annulment, para. 153.

21 See paragraphs 150-156.

232 Thid.

233 Tid.

24 Award, para. 366.

25 See paragraph 157-178.

256 Thid.

257 Memorial on Annulment, para. 79 citing CMS, Legal Authority CL-263.

258 Memorial on Annulment, para. 79 citing CMS, Legal Authority CL-263.

   

Memorial on Annulment, para. 81, citing TECO, Legal Authority CL-272.

245,

246.

¢

~~

247,

248.

as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A to Point B

and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law.”*”

The committee in Enron observed:

the tribunal is required only to give reasons for its decision in respect
of each of the questions. ... the award will not be annulled on the basi

 

that the tribunal could have given more detailed reasons and analysis
for its findings of fact or law, or that the tribunal did not expressly state
its evaluation in respect to each individual item of evidence or each
individual legal authority or legal provision relied upon by the partie:
or

 

 

did not expressly state a view on every single legal and factual issue
raised by the parties in the course of the proceedings. The tribunal is
required to state reasons for its decision, but not necessarily reasons for

its reasons."

Consistent with this criterion, the Tribunal evaluated the specific evidence, i.e. Exhibit C-

mmittee is of

 

24 and adjudicated the claim which stemmed from it. Thus, this ad hoc
the view that the Tribunal did not fail in its duty to state the reasons for the Award. For
the abovementioned reasons, this Committee dismisses the Annulment Request under

ICSID Convention Article 52(1)(e).
Article 52(1)(b): The Tribunal Manifestly Exceeded Its Powers
The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants begin by arguing that the excess of power includes failure to exercise

jurisdiction ratione materiae and to fully discharge its mandate.”

The Claimants note and argue that as recalled by Professor Schreuer, “[a]n arbitral tribunal
derives its power from the parties’ agreement [to arbitrate].” He further notes that “[t]he

most important form of excess of powers occurs when a tribunal exceeds the limits of its

20 TECO, para. 78, Legal Authority CL-272. The Committee further observes that, according to the TECO
standard, by its use of the adverb “eventually” this criterion allows certain leeway to tribunals, The language also
suggests that in the view of the TECO committee a mere “error of fact or of law” alone cannot be equated with a
failure to state the reasons on which an award is based. Given that the this Committee considers that it did not
identify any error of fact or law, this Committee does not find it necessary to test the boundaries of this standard.
24 Enron, pata. 222, Legal Authority CL-265. Emphasis added.

242

Memorial on Annulment, para. 84.

jurisdiction” but that “[a] tribunal may also exceed its power by failing to exercise a
jurisdiction it does have.” This is in line with the case law of ICSID ad hoc committees,

which often refer to the work of Professor Schreuer.”

249. The Claimants argue that the manifest excess of powers ground for annulment also
envisages a ““Manifest’ failure to exercise jurisdiction and to fully discharge mandate.
Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention requires not only there to be an excess of

powers, but also that such excess be manifest. As explained by Professor Schreuer, the

28 Tbid., para. 84, citing Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention=A Commentary (2° ed., 2009), p. 938,
paras. 132-133, Legal Authority CL-256; See, e.g, Vivendi I, para. 86, Legal Authority CL-259 (“[A]n ICSID tribunal
commits an excess of powers not only if it exercises a jurisdiction which it does not have under the relevant
agreement or treaty and the ICSID Convention, read together, but also if it fails to exercise a jurisdiction which it
possesses under those instruments.”); CDC Group PLC 1. Republic of Seychelles, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14,
Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment of the Republic of Seychelles, June 29, 2005,
para. 40, Legal Authority CL-260 (“CDC”) (“Common examples of such ‘excesses’ are a Tribunal deciding questions
not submitted to it or refusing to decide questions properly before it.”); Soufraki, para. 43, Legal Authority CL-261
(“The manifest and consequential non-exercise of one’s full powers conferred or recognized in a tribunal’s
constituent instrument such as the ICSID Convention and the relevant BIT, is as much a disregard of the power as
the overstepping of the limits of that power.”); Industria Nacional de Alimentos, SA. and Indalsa Peni, S.A, v, Republic
of Pern, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Decision on Annulment, September 5, 2007, para. 99, Legal Authority CL-262
(‘Where a tribunal assumes jurisdiction in a matter for which it lacks competence under the relevant BIT, it exceeds
its powers. The same is true in the inverse case where a tribunal refuses or fails to exercise jurisdiction in a matter
for which it is competent under the BIT.”); Malaysian Historical Salvors Sdn, Bhd v. Government of Malaysia, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/05/10, Decision on the Application for Annulment, April 16, 2009, para. 80, Legal Authority CL-264
(The ad hoc committee found that “the Tribunal exceeded its powers by failing to exercise the jurisdiction with
which it was endowed by the terms of the Agreement and the Convention, and that it ‘manifestly’ did so ....”); Duke,
para. 97, Legal Authority CL-267 (“[A] failure to decide a question entrusted to the tribunal and requiring its decision
may also constitute an excess of powers, since the tribunal has also in that event failed to fulfil the mandate entrusted
to it by virtue of the parties’ agreement... .”); AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erimii Kft. v. Hungary,
ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, June 29, 2012,
para. 17, Legal Authority CL-268 (“[T]he ordinary meaning of a manifest excess of power is either an obvious
transgression of a tribunal’s mandate or its obvious non-execution.”); Malicorp Lid. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/08/18, Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited, July 3, 2013, para. 47,
Legal Authority CL-270 (“Malicorp”) (“The most significant excess of powers ... occurs when the Tribunal exceeds
the limits of its jurisdiction. This may be the case where a tribunal ‘exercises a jurisdiction which it does not have
under the relevant agreement or treaty and the ICSID Convention, read together, but also if it fails to exercise a
jurisdiction which it possesses under those instruments.” (quoting Vivendi I, para. 86) (footnotes omitted); Caratube
International Oil Company LLLP 1. Republic of Kazakhstan, YCSID Case No. ARB/08/12, Decision on the Annulment
Application of Caratube International Oil Company LLP, February 21, 2014, para. 75, Legal Authority CL-271
(“[An] excess of power can be committed both by over reach and by defect. Awards can be annulled if tribunals
assume powers to which they are not entitled, and also if arbitrators do not use the powers that have been vested
upon them by the parties.”); TECO, para. 77, Legal Authority CL-272 (“{T]he Committee finds that a tribunal
commits an excess of powers: (i) if it goes beyond the parties’ consent by either exercising jurisdiction it does not
have or by failing to exercise a jurisdiction which it possesses; or (ii) if it fails to apply the law agreed by the patties.”)

 

 

ordinary meaning of the term ‘manifest’ is “plain”, “clear”, “obvious”, “evident” and

easily understood or recognized by the mind.” This is not disputed by Italy.”

250. The Claimants contend that if a tribunal has jurisdiction to answer a question, has

announced that it would do so and ultimately fails to do so, as shown above, such a failure

is “plain,” “clear,” “obvious,” “evident” and “easily understood or recognized by the

247

mind” and thus, manifest.“ They also contend that Italy does not dispute this.

251. The Claimants note that the Parties agree that this ground for annulment includes a

tribunal’s failure to exercise jurisdiction ratione materiae and to fully discharge its
mandate.”

252. The Claimants quote part of the reasoning of the Vivendi I ad hoc Committee in support

of their contention in this regard:

It is settled, and neither party disputes, that an ICSID tribunal commits
an excess of powers not only if it exercises a jurisdiction which it does

not have under the relevant agreement or treaty and the ICSID
Conventions, read together, but also if it fails to exercise a jurisdiction

32”

which it po: under those instrument:

  

One might qualify this by saying that it is only where the failure to
exercise a jurisdiction is clearly capable of making a difference to the
result that it can be considered a manifest excess of power.””

[I]t is only where the failure to exercise a jurisdiction is clearly capable
of making a difference to the result that it can be considered a manifest
excess of power.”

24 Memorial on Annulment, 85, citing ICSID Convention, art.52(1)(b); Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID
Comvention=A Commentary, p. 938, paras. 134-135, Legal Authority CL-256.

25 Reply on Annulment, para. 113.

24% Memorial on Annulment, para. 86.

2 Reply on Annulment, para. 114.

248 Reply on Annulment, para. 112, citing Memorial on Annulment, para. 84; and Counter-Memorial on Annulment,
para, 153.

2 Claimants’ Opening Statement, slide 41, citing Vivendi I, para. 86, Legal Authority CL-259.

250 Memorial on Annulment, para. 87, citing Vivendi I, para. 86, Legal Authority CL-259.

251 Reply on Annulment, para. 139, citing Vivendi I, para. 86, Legal Authority CL-259.

 

253.

254,

256.

257.

 

Claimants’ Opening Statement, slide 42, citing Malicorp, para. 47, Legal Authorit
Claimants’ Opening Statement, slide 43, citing Soufraki, para. 44, Legal Authority an 261.

The Claimants also advance the argument that “[iJt is not within the tribunal’s powers to
refuse to decide a dispute or part of a dispute that meets all jurisdictional requirements of

Art, 25.77

In addition, they quote that “a manifest excess of power would consist ... in answering

only a part of a question in fact raised by the parties.

The Claimants further manifest that “ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1) leads to the same
result. If an ad hoc committee finds that a failure to exercise jurisdiction is capable of
leading to a different outcome, it should annul the award and leave it to the resubmission

tribunal to decide the case on its merits.”

They also contest the Respondent’s contention regarding the similarity between the
present case and Sovfraki, saying that the present case “differs from Soufraki, where the
tribunal, after having considered specific documents, rejected claimant’s contention that
they established the claimant’s nationality. Here, as the Award reveals, the Tribunal did
not analyze the relevant documents at all; nor did it at all review the second prong of the
Legitimate Expectations Claim in rejecting that claim as a whole. Italy’s allegation that the
Tribunal ‘discharged its arbitral duty by taking into account the arguments of the parties

and the evidence submitted, including the DIAs’ is simply unsupported.””*

The Claimants once again recall the distinction between their Legitimate Expectations

Claim which is in two prongs.” They contend that as observed by the Tribunal, “this

second prong was based on explicit and specific representations made by the Italian
authorities in the DIA Certificates of Conformity that were later repudiated by Brindisi’s

illegal self-redress proceedings and stop-work order.””*”

 

24 251 Reply on Annulment, para. 140.

255 Reply on Annulment, para. 173, citing Counter-Memorial on Annulment paras. 165-168 (discussing Sonfraki, para.
5, Legal Authority CL-261); and Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 169. Italy fails to show where in the Award
the Tribunal “did not consider the DIAs from Brindisi ‘as conclusive’ in ascertaining the existence of legitimate
expectations[.]” Ibid., para. 170.

256 See supra, 189.

257 Memorial on Annulment, para. 123, citing Award, paras. 163-68 (Tab A).

258. The Claimants allege that “it was a part of the Tribunal’s mandate and undisputed
jurisdiction ratione materiae to decide whether the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity issued
by the municipality of Brindisi, and produced at Exhibit C-24, had created legitimate

expectations on the Claimants’ part that were dashed by the Brindisi measures.”?*

259. They contend that the Tribunal, however, “only addressed the second prong of the
Legitimate Expectations Claim in paragraphs 365 to 374 of the Award, ie. the Third
Energy Account, but failed to adjudicate the first prong based on DIA Certificates of

99259

Conformity.

260. The Claimants argue that “in doing so, the Tribunal refused to decide a question properly
put before it and more so a question which it had expressly and properly recalled at
paragraph 165 of the Award. In short,” according to them, “the Tribunal declined to use
the powers vested in it by the Parties and to fully discharge the mandate which it had itself
acknowledged. Such a defect is an excess of powers.” The Claimants submit that the
defect is manifest for two reasons. First, because it is textually obvious from the evident
Jacuna in the Tribunal’s analysis. Second, because it is substantively serious as it went to
the heart of one of the Claimants’ claims. As a result, they submit the Award be annulled

under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.”
(ii) The Respondent’s Position

261. The Respondent begins by arguing that in order for an award to be annulled, the tribunal

must have acted in excess of its conferred powers, and must have done so in a manner

which is manifest.

262. The Respondent further contends that an excess of power can occur “when the tribunal

disregards the applicable law or grounds its decision in the award on a law other than the

99262

Jaw applicable under Article 42 of the ICSID Convention.

258 Memorial on Annulment, para. 124,

289 Tbid., para. 125.

260 Tbid., para. 126.

26! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 151.

282 Ybid., para. 154, citing Gambrinus, Corp. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/11/31, Decision
on Annulment, October 3, 2017, para. 163, Legal Authority ARL-20.

263. The Respondent notes that “[wJhereas certain committees have remarked on the effect
on the award’s outcome that such excess of power would inevitably entail, that is more a

99263

consequence of this ground rather than an essential element.

264. It also notes that “[t]o ascertain whether an excess of power is ‘manifest,’ tribunals have
routinely referred to a test of self-evidence: the excess of power must be obvious and

cannot depend on an elaborate or searching analysis of the award.”?

265. The Respondent alleges that if the excess of power does not leap to the eye of the award’s
reader, it may be there, but it would not be manifest and, therefore, the award would not

be annullable.”®”

266. The Respondent contends that contrary to what the Claimants claim regarding the alleged
failure of the Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction, the Tribunal duly answered the Legitimate

266

Expectations Claim. Besides that, the Respondent submits, what transpires from the

Award is that the Tribunal was not persuaded about the alleged value of the DIAs issued

 

by the municipality of Brindisi.” They argue that, in any event the foregoing does not

transgress the boundary of the arbitral mandate.

 

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 156.
264 Tbid., para. 157, citing ICSID, Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Conncil of ICSID, paras.
82-83, Legal Authority AR-19, and cases cited therein, In particular, see Wena Hotels, para. 25, Legal Authority CL-
258: “The excess of power must be self-evident rather than the product of elaborate interpretations one way ot the
other”; Mr. Patrick Mitchell r. Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1CSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on the Application
for Annulment of the Award, November 1, 2006, para. 20, Legal Authority ARL-21 (the excess is manifest if found
“with certainty and immediacy, without it being necessary to engage in elaborate analyses of the award”); Enron, para.
69, Legal Authority CL-265 (quoting MTD Equity Sdn, Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/01/7, Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007, para. 47, Legal Authority ARL-22: “not arguable”); Repsol YPF
Ecuador §.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petrileos del Ecnador (Petroecnador), ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10, Decision on
Annulment, January 8, 2007, para. 36, Legal Authority ARL-23 (“Repsol”) (quoting Christoph H. Schreuer et al, The
ICSID Convention: A Commentary, p. 933, Legal Authority CL-256: [manifest means] discerned with little effort and
without deeper analysis”); Agurix Corp. . The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Decision on
Annulment, September 1, 2009, paras. 48, 68, Legal Authority ARL-24; CDG, para. 41, Legal Authority CL-260:
“Any excess apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct, if susceptible ‘one way or the other’, is not manifest”; Sempra Energy
International v. The Argentine Republic, (CSD Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2010, para. 213,
Legal Authority ARL-25: “quite evident without the need to engage in an elaborate analysis”; M.C.l. Power Group LC.
and New Turbine, Inc. v. Republic of Eenador, ICSUD Case No. ARB/03/6, Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009,
para, 49, Legal Authority ARL-26 (“M.CI.”): “the manifest excess requirement in Article 52(1)(b) suggests a
somewhat higher degree of proof than a searching analysis of the findings of the Tribunal”; E/ Paso Decision on
Annulment, para. 142, Legal Authority ARL-06 “obvious, evident, clear, self-evident and extremely serious”).

288 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 158.

266 Tbid., para. 162.

257 Thid., para. 163.

268 Tbid., para. 164.

 

267.

268.

269.

270.

The Respondent submits that there is no such failure and, in any event, such failure would

have been immaterial to the conclusion reached. As noted in the Vivendi I case:

No doubt an ICSID tribunal is not required to address in its award
every argument made by the parties, provided of course that the
arguments which it actually does consider are themselves capable of
leading to the conclusion reached by the tribunal and that all questions
submitted to a tribunal are expressly or implicitly dealt with.”

 

The Respondent cites, in support of their contention regarding the present ground for
annulment, the Soufraki case. In that case, the claimant argued in annulment proceedings

the certificates of

 

that the tribunal should have inferred from a set of documents, ie.,
nationality, a legal consequence, the proof of nationality, which was necessary to establish
jurisdiction.” The ad hoc committee considered that the tribunal, in doing otherwise, far
from exceeding its jurisdiction, discharged its jurisdictional mandate dutifully, irrespective

of the correctness of its conclusions on the point:

 

The ad hoc Committee believes that in not considering the national
documentation on nationality as conclusive and in ascertaining on its
own the nationality of the Claimant, the Tribunal did not manifestly
exceed its powers, but on the contrary asserted a power which it was
bound to exercise in order to verify its competence under the ICSID
Convention and the [applicable] BIT."

 

 

Thus, the Respondent contends that “[t]he same reasoning applies here. Called to
discharge its jurisdiction, on the merits of the case, the Tribunal needed to assess whether
the Legitimate Expectations Claim had any merits.”*” “It discharged its arbitral duty
taking into account the arguments of the parties and the evidence submitted, including

the DIAs.”””*

On the foregoing bas ‘when the Tribunal did not

 

the Respondent contends that
consider the DIAs from Brindisi ‘as conclusive’ in ascertaining the existence of legitimate

expectations, it ‘did not manifestly exceed its powers, but on the contrary asserted a power

28 Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 113.
20 Respondent’s Opening Statements on Grounds for Annulment, slide 62.

77! Tid.

  

Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 168.
® Tbid., para. 169.

271.

272.

273.

which it was bound to exercise in order to verify’ whether the Claimants had any

expectations to begin with.”””

Furthermore, the Respondent contends that, “[i]Jn any event, the Claimants’ attempt to

create a discrete Legitimate Expectations sub-claim that only regarded Brindisi’s DIAs

9927!

and the stop-work order is not viable.”~” First, the stop-work order related to the

276

construction of two plants, out of the around 120 initially planned.” Second, the stop-

work order remained in effect for only two days and was definitively annulled less than

 

 

two months after it was issued.

Italy further contends that if the Claimants’ point about the legitimate expectation to build
a couple of plants, was genuine it would be sufficient to note how that expectation
encountered no more than a mete glitch. But for this insignificant bump on the road the
actions of the Respondent did not interfere with the legitimate expectation of the
Claimants which was presetved.?* The Respondent further contends that in this respect,
the Tribunal in its award sufficiently address the matter. According to the Respondent it
cannot, therefore, be reasonably contended that the Tribunal fell short in exercising its
jurisdiction.””

The stop-work order — the only measure taken specifically in relation

to the Project — was granted and revoked in a timely manner and in

accordance with rule of law standards.”

In addition, the Respondent contends that the stop-work order is exploited to create a
storyline to serve the Claimants’ case regarding the FITs. According to the Respondent,

in this regard, the Claimants’ own words could not be clearer:

[the annulment of the stop-work order] came down on 7 March 2012
and confirmed the validity of the authorizations at issue. Unfortunately,
there was not enough time to build the project’s plants between the
decision of the Administrative Court on 7 March 2012 and the

24 Thid., para. 170.

 

Ibid., para. 172.

26 Ybid., para. 173.

 

   

Ibid., para. 174, citing Award, para. 119.
Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 175.

2 Thid., para. 176.
280 Ybid., para. 177.

66

274,

275.

276.

277.

278.

expiration of the 29 March 2012 deadline imposed by the Romani
Dectee.™!

The Respondent submits that the foregoing establish that the Award was very clear about
the lack of merit of the Legitimate Expectations Claim relating to FITs. It is final in that
respect. Therefore, the instrumental argument of the delay caused by the stop-work order
is immaterial to the Award’s conclusion even without mentioning the all-encompassing

causation finding.”

Regarding the specific issue of outcome-determinativeness, the Respondent submits that
the controlling testis the “manifest” nature of a tribunal’s excess of authority, as
stipulated by Article 52 of ICSID Convention. The impact of this circumstance on the

award is just an obvious consequence and a heuristic rather than a legal benchmark.”

Italy further contends that it is unclear why the Vivendi I decision, according to which an
excess of power is manifest when it is “clearly capable of making a difference,” should assist
the Claimants. Italy advances three main reasons why this dictum, according to it, does

not support the Claimants.

First, the emphasis of this dict is obviously on the word “clearly” which qualifies it. An
excess of power that is not “clearly” capable of making a difference does not warrant
annulment. This has to be read together with the word “manifestly” in Article 52(1)(b) of
the ICSID Convention, which sets the threshold requirement by qualifying the words
“exceeded its powers.” This stipulates that instances of excess of powers that are not prima

285

facie decisive in the tribunal’s ultimate finding will not render the award annullable.

“Second, the ad hoc committee in Vivendi I produced two versions of the decision, one in
Spanish and one in English, ‘both versions being equally authoritative.’ A quick glance at
the Spanish text reveals that ‘clearly capable of making a difference’ must not be construed
to include a mere possibility. The Spanish text reads ‘claramente importa una diferencia

significativa para el resultado’ and does not feature the nuance of potentiality that the

281 Ybid., para. 178.

282 Ybid., para. 179.

283 Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 114, citing Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 156.

28! Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 114, citing Reply on Annulment, para. 139; Vivendi I, para. 86, Legal Authority
CL-259, Emphasis added by Claimants.

285 Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 116.

279.

280.

281.

Claimants ... read in the word ‘capable.’ To the extent that the English version retained

 

some ambiguity in the use of the word ‘capable,’ its meaning is clearly established by
comparison with the other official text, which expressly mentions only an excess of power
that ‘clearly makes a meaningful difference.’ Because of the ‘clearly’ qualifier, there is
actually no difference between the two versions: what matters is not just the 4f but the

‘how much’ of outcome-determinativeness.””*’

“Third, two lines below this formula the committee rephrased the same notion, and the
suggestion of potentiality is lost, in both languages. The English text refers to
‘circumstances where the outcome of the inquiry [of the Tribunal] is affected as a result
[of the excess of power].’ The Spanish version reads: ‘circunstancias donde se veta afectado el

resultado de su examen,””°*

Furthermore, the Respondent argues that “a review of the outcome-determinativeness of
the alleged excess of power must reveal that it has produced a material impact on the
conclusion reached by the tribunal. To warrant annulment, the impact must be such that
it can be reasonably argued that the result would have likely been different but for [such]
excess. Without such material impact, it becomes virtually impossible to meet the

‘manifest’ requirement of Article 52 of the ICSID Convention.”

The Respondent alleges that “there is nothing in the Award that evinces or suggests that
the Tribunal committed an excess of power, let alone manifest, let alone outcome-

determinative, let alone materially so.”

(iii) The Committee’s Analysis

282.

  

The Claimants’ principal contention is that it was within the mandate of the Tribunal to
address the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity as well as the corresponding legitimate

expectations claim.” By failing to do so, the Tribunal exceeded its power. Moreover, the

286 Ybid., para. 117, citing Vivendi I, para. 86, Legal Authority CL-259.
” Ibid., para. 118.
® Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 119.

289 Thid., para. 120.

200

Memorial on Annulment, para. 124-125.

Claimants contend that this was “manifest” because it was a “lacuna” in the Tribunal’s

analysis and the omission goes “to the heart” of one of the Claimants’ claims.”

283. | Subparagraph (b) of Article 52(1) provides a ground for annulment where “the Tribunal
has manifestly exceeded its powers.” The adverb “manifestly” means “in a way that
everyone can easily understand.” In the particular case of subparagraph (b), it is not

sufficient to find that the tribunal exceeded its powers, it has to be “manifestly” so.

284. With respect to the failure to address Exhibit C-24 the Claimants acknowledged that the
Award described the DIA Certificates of Conformity and their functioning.”” Moreover,
this Committee recalls its previous conclusion that the Tribunal analyzed the DIA
Certificates of Conformity of Brindisi — including Exhibit C-24 —in a coherent manner.”*
The Tribunal addressed them and was conscious that those certificates were important

for the Claimants’ case.”

285. With respect to the legitimate expectations claim, the Committee concluded that the
Tribunal saw the second claim as a “frank alternative to its more nuanced argument based

on degree of legislative claim,””’ Moreover, the Tribunal specifically referred to the

296

second sentence of Article 10(1).”” Finally, the Tribunal extensively analyzed and made a

finding on the claims under Article 10(1).””

286. Based on the above, the Committee finds no excess of powers by the Tribunal.
Consequently, it does not need to analyze whether it was manifestly so. The Tribunal
clearly exercised its jurisdiction and ruled on the question raised by the disputing parties.
Accordingly, this Committee finds that the Tribunal has not exceeded its powers. For the
abovementioned reasons, the Committee rejects the Annulment Request under ICSID
Convention Article 52(1)(b).

E. Article 52(1) (d): The Tribunal Seriously Departed from a Fundamental Rule of
Procedure

21 Yhid., para. 126.
‘ce paragraphs 150-156,
28 Thid.

24 Tid.

25 Award, para. 366.

2% See paragraph 157-178.
2 Thid.

 

287.

288.

289.

290.

291.

(i) The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants argue that “the obligation for any ICSID tribunal to properly review the

record, and patticularly those parts of the record principally relied upon by each party in

 

support of their respective cases, is a necessaty corollary of the parties’ right to be heard.
It is a fundamental rule of procedure. This right would be an empty shell if an ICSID
tribunal could disregard its obligation to properly review the key evidence on record,

which is at stake here.”?”*

The Claimants allege that, in the present case, the above obligation was breached by the

Tribunal. They further contend that it is plain from the Award that the Tribunal failed to

 

locate in Exhibit C-24 the 48 DIA Certificates of Conformity

 

ssued by the municipality

of Brindisi and, therefore, to draw any consequence from them in its analysis of the case.””

The Claimants manifest that the Parties agree on a series of criteria regarding the legal

standard applicable to this particular ground for annulment.

First, the Claimants argue that they agree that the departure must be substantial, which
means that the departure must potentially have led the tribunal to issue an award
substantially different from what it would have been, had the fundamental rule of

procedure been observed.*”

Second, the Claimants submit that according to the Fraport ad hoc committee, “a
‘fundamental rule of procedure’ is intended to denote procedural rules which may
ptoperly be said to constitute ‘general principles of law’[.] The Parties also agree that the

treatment of evidence is one of these principles.”*”

2°8 Memorial on Annulment, paras. 94, 127.
2” Memorial on Annulment, para. 128.

30 Reply on Annulment, pata. 118, citing Memorial on Annulment, para. 96; Counter-Memorial on Annulment,

para.

185. The Claimants also quote in the same direction in paragraph 142 of the Reply on Annulment that the

CDC endorsed the Wena Hotels statements in the same terms.

301 Reply on Annulment, para. 119, citing Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 183 (quoting Fraport AG Frankfurt
Airport Servs. Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/25, Decision on the Application for
Annulment of Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide, December 23, 2010, para. 187, Legal Authority
CL-266 (“Frapor?”)); Memorial on Annulment, para. 94; Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 184(iv). Footnote
omitted.

292.

293,

294,

295.

296.

32 Reply on Annulment, para. 121, citing Counter-Memorial on Annulment, paras
38 Reply on Annulment, para. 122, citing Memorial on Annulment, paras. 91-92;

CL-272.

They note, however, that the Respondent disagrees on the issue of whether the departure

from such rule “‘caused the arbitration and the resulting award to lose its judicial

character.’ [Italy] complains that ‘Claimants were unable to point to a single authority
supporting their case.””"”
The Claimants recall in this regard, part of the reasoning of the TECO ad hoc Committee:

The Committee takes issue with the complete absence of any discussion
of the Parties’ expert reports within the Tribunal’s analysis of the loss
of value claim. While the Committee accepts that a tribunal cannot be
required to address within its award each and every piece of evidence
in the record, that cannot be construed to mean that a Tribunal can
simply gloss over evidence upon which the Parties have placed
significant emphasis, without any analysis and without explaining why
it found that evidence insufficient, unpersuasive or otherwise
unsatisfactory.*

As a consequence of the foregoing, the Claimants argue that “an ICSID tribunal cannot

 

‘simply gloss over evidence upon which the parties have placed significant emphasis,’ ...
because it must have reviewed such evidence in the first place. This is part and parcel of

the §udicial character’ that the award must have and that Italy rightly emphasizes.”**

In addition, the Claimants cite in support of their present contention the fact that the Suez
ad hoc committee confirmed that a tribunal is duty-bound to the parties to at least address
those pieces of evidence that the parties deem to be highly relevant to their case. That

committee clarified that “highly relevant” evidence is the kind that “must have the

potential to have an impact on the outcome of the Award.”*”

The Claimants further cite in a different but relevant context, by analogy, the European
Court of Human Rights. They submit that that Court has “repeatedly stated that the right
toa fair trial includes the parties’ right to submit the requests and observations they deem

relevant to their case. That right cannot be seen as effective unless the requests and

188-189,
O, para. 131, Legal Authority

 

 

304 Reply on Annulment, para. 123.
5 Ibid., para. 124; Swez, para. 303, Legal Authority CL-284.

observations of the parties are truly ‘heard, that is to say properly examined by the

tribunal?

297. ‘Thus, the Claimants claim that “a tribunal’s failure to properly examine a party’s evidence
. undoubtedly violates the right to be heard and the right to a fair trial. In that sense, a
tribunal’s failure to consider the essential evidence submitted by a party would ‘cause the

arbitration and the resulting award to lose its judicial character’ to use the language quoted

122907

by Italy in its Counter-Memorial
298. They further quote part of the reasoning of the Pey Casado ad hoc Committee:

The Committee subscribes to the Respondent’s view. The applicant is not
required to show that the result would have been different, that it would have
won the case, if the rule had been respected. The Committee notes in
fact that, in Wena, the committee stated that the applicant must
demonstrate “the impact that the issue ay have had on the award.” The
Committee agrees that this is precisely how the seriousness of the
departure must be analyzed.

36 Reply on Annulment, para. 125, citing Dulanrans v. France, ECtHR (3rd Section) Case No. 34553/97, Judgment,
March 21, 2000, para. 33, Legal Authority CL-276 (unofficial English translation: “The Court reiterates that the
right to a fair trial, guaranteed by Article 6 para. 1 of the Convention, encompasses, infer alia, the right of the parties
to the trial to submit the observations that they deem relevant to their case.... this right can be considered effective
only if these observations are really ‘heard’, i.e. duly examined by the tribunal seized.”) (the French original reads:
“La Cour rappelle que le droit a un proces équitable, garanti par Particle 6 § 1 de la Convention, englobe, entre
autres, le droit des parties au procés a présenter les observations qu’elles estiment pertinentes pour leur affaire.... ce
droit ne peut passer pour effectif que si ces observations sont vraiment ‘entendues’, c’est-d-dire dtiment examinées
par le tribunal saisi.”); Carmel Saliba v. Malta, ECtHR (4th Section) Case No. 24221/13, Judgment, November 29,
2016, para. 65, Legal Authority CL-283 (“T]he right to a fair trial cannot be seen as effective unless the requests
and observations of the parties are truly ‘heard’, that is to say properly examined by the tribunal.”); Idgar Mammadon.
v. Azerbaijan (No. 2), ECtHR (5th Section) Case No. 919/15, Judgment, November 16, 2017, para. 206, Legal
Authority CL-285 (enouncing same principle). See also Mare Fouguet v. France, ECm HR (2nd Chamber) Case No.
20398/92, Commission Report, October 12, 1994, para. 36, Legal Authority CL-275 (unofficial English translation:
“[It is] incumbent on the ‘tribunal’ to conduct an effective assessment of the submissions, arguments and evidence
submitted by the parties... .”) (the French original reads: “{Est] la charge du ‘tribunal’, Pobligation de se livrer a un
examen effectif des moyens, arguments et offres de preuve des parties... .”); ibid., para. 38 (unofficial English
translation: “The Commission is of the opinion that a litigant is not effectively heard if an essential defence is
overlooked.” (the French original reads: “La Commission est d’ avis qu’ un plaideur n’est pas effectivement entendu
lorsqu’un moyen de défense essentiel est méconnu.”), As the Committee is aware, the European Commission of
Human Rights set up in 1954 was replaced by the European Court of Human rights when Protocol No. 11 to the
European Convention on Human Rights came into force on November 1, 1998. Protocol No. 11 abolished the
Commission and allowed individuals to apply directly to the Court, which was given compulsory jurisdiction.

37 Reply on Annulment, para. 127, citing Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 182,

 

 

In the Committee’s view, it has no discretion not to annul an award if a serious
departure from a fundamental rule is established. The Committee exercises its
discretion when it determines whether or not the departure was serious.
Examining the seriousness of the departure implies a review of
seriousness of the act concerned, ie., the deprivation of the legal right
protected by the rule and a review of the seriousness of the
consequence or impact of the departure. The discretion of the
Committee lies in the evaluation of the impact. The impact will most
likely be material and require an annulment if the departure affects the
legal right of the parties with respect to an outcome-determinative
issue. In other words, a finding that if the rule had been observed the
tribunal could have reached a different conclusion. As indicated earlier, the
Committee does not consider, however, that an applicant is required to
prove that the tribunal would necessarily have changed its conclusion
if the rule had been observed. This requires a committee to enter into the realm
of speculation which it should not do... **

299. The Claimants submit that in line with the foregoing, the TECO ad hoc committee opined:

Requiring an applicant to show that it would have won the case or that
the result of the case would have been different if the rule of procedure
had been respected is a highly speculative exercise. An annulment
committee cannot determine with any degree of certainty whether any of these results
would have occurred without placing itself in the shoes of a tribunal, something which
is not within its powers to do. What a committee can determine however is
whether the tribunal’s compliance with a rule of procedure could
potentially have affected the award.*”

300. The Claimants contend that presenting one’s case has two different components.*"’ One
has to do with the right of the parties to introduce factual and legal evidence of their
choice. The other — which is the one at stake in this case — has to do with the obligation
of the tribunal to look at the evidence thus introduced. There is no point in giving a party

the right to introduce evidence if, as a necessary corollary, there is not an obligation for

the tribunal to look at the evidence. Looking at the evidence is one of the key obligations

 

of any tribunal. If no such obligation were to exist, the equality between the parties would

be breached — with one party having its evidence looked at and the other not, wholly or

308 Reply on Annulment, para. 143, citing Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v, Republic of Chile, CSTD
Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Republic of Chile, December 18, 2012,
paras. 78, 80, Legal Authority CL-269 (“Pey Casada”). Footnote omitted, emphasis added.

30 Reply on Annulment, para. 144, citing TECO, para. 85, Legal Authority CL-272. Emphasis added,

310 Reply on Annulment, para. 128.

301.

302.

303.

partly. The Claimants submit that Italy does not appear to disagree with this principle

either."

The Claimants contest the Respondent’s contention that the Claimants allege not an error
in procedendo but an error in judicando, by saying that an error in judicando is an error made by
the Tribunal in the adjudication of the claims,” and that they do not dispute what the
Tribunal decided. They, however, submit that the Tribunal could not have decided what
it did when it failed to review a critical document brought to its attention no less than 30
times. And this too after the Tribunal had itself implicitly announced that it would review
this document. The Tribunal had to announce this because it was the sole foundation of
the second ground of the Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations Claim.*! Yet, this is

ptecisely what the Tribunal failed to do.

The Claimants recall their previous assertion concerning the fact that they referred, in the
course of the arbitration, to Exhibit C-24 or the content of the Brindisi’s DIA Certificates
of Conformity more than 30 times.*'* However, the Claimants contend that “the Tribunal
looked at page 1 of Exhibit C-24 (the template translation of the five certificates of the
municipality of Mesagne) and discussed it at paragraph 379 of the Award, noting that
these certificates were ‘not at all the same thing’ as what was alleged by the Claimants. It
failed, however, to look at page 3 of the PDF document, which precisely evidenced the
specific representations relied upon by the Claimant.” They argue that even “[i]f the
Tribunal did not wish to look at all the 53 DIA Certificates of Conformity in Exhibit C-
24, in their Italian version, it should have at least looked at the two pages of template
translations in English included in that exhibit, as it had itself authorized at paragraph 11.3

of Procedural Order No. 1. This,” they submit, “is the bare minimum that the Parties and

 

315

ICSID as an institution could ask for.

In view of the foregoing, the Claimants allege that “if an ad hoc committee finds a serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, it must also annul the award and leave

311 Thid., para. 129, citing Memorial on Annulment, para. 94; “One would even wonder whether one could speak of
a proper ‘tribunal’ or ‘jurisdiction’ in such a case.”

32-'Tr, Day 2, 34:13 — 15.

313-'Tr, Day 2, 34:21-25 — 35:1 — 3.

314 See supra, 105, Memorial on Annulment, para. 129, and Claimants, citing Memorial on Annulment, para. 56.

315 Memorial on Annulment, para. 130.

316

it to the resubmission tribunal to decide the outcome of the case.””"” As a consequence,
they also contend, that in such circumstances, first, the Tribunal’s complete disregard of
Exhibit C-24 in adjudicating the Legitimate Expectations Claim, second its partial reliance
on selective parts of that exhibit, i.e., the five Certificates of Conformity issued by the
municipality of Mesagne, and, third, its failure to consider the 48 certificates issued by the
municipality of Brindisi, in other parts of its analysis, individually, as well as, and
particularly cumulatively, constitutes a serious departure ftom a fundamental rule of

ptocedure. On these bases they request that the Award be annulled under Article

52(1)(d) 2”
(ii) The Respondent’s Position

304. The Respondent begins its submissions by reviewing the applicable standard of Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. It submits that it replicates, without significant
amendments, Article 35(c) of the Model Rules on Arbitral Procedure prepared by the
International Law Commission (ILC).*'* The Respondent argues that, therefore, “the
commentaty prepared by the ILC about this provision illustrates its function, and applies

without difficulty to the equivalent clause of the ICSID Convention:

the principle that the tribunal must function in the manner of a judicial
body and with respect for the fundamental rules governing the
proceedings of any judicial body. The paragraph is concerned with
error in procedendo, not with error in judicando. It is, further, concerned
with serious departures ftom fundamental procedural rules rather than
minor departures.”*””

305. The Respondent notes that as discussed by the Fraport ad hoc committee, the ILC remarked

on the rationale of this clause endorsing the test formulated by Carlston in the literature:

Does the departure constitute a deprivation of a fundamental right so
as to cause the arbitration and the resulting award to lose its judicial

316 Reply on Annulment, para. 146.
317Memorial on Annulment, para. 131.

318 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 180, citing United Nations, Yearbook of the International Law Commission,
1958, Vol. II, p. 86, Legal Authority ARL~
31 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 181.

 

character? Unless its effect is to prejudice materially the interests of a
party, the charge of nullity should not be open to a party.”

306. The Respondent recalls that committees have identified certain principles a departure

from which could fall under this ground:
@ the equal treatment of the parties;
(ii) the right to be heard;
(iii) an independent and impartial Tribunal;
(iv) the treatment of evidence and burden of proof; and
() deliberations among members of the Tribunal.”!

307. — Italy submits that even a “departure from one of these principles is insufficient to warrant
annulment, if it is not serious. Whilst the ‘seriousness’ requirement is case-specific, several
committees have stated that it is met when the disregard of the rule of procedure

determine[s] the outcome of the award.”

308. The Respondent quotes part of the reasoning of the TECO ad hoc Committee in support
of their contention regarding the applicable standard to the present ground for

annulment, as follows:

The TECO Committee acknowledged that absolute certainty of the
hypothetical outcome could not be obtained, let alone required as
proved, let alone rubber-stamped by the committee. What an ad hoc

320 Ibid., para, 182, citing Fraport, para. 184, Legal Authority CL-266; Kenneth $, Carlston, The Process of International
Arbitration (Columbia University Press, 1946) pp. 38-39, cited in ILC Commentary, Legal Authority ARL-28.

521 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 184, citing ICISD, Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the
Administrative Council of ICSID, para. 99, Legal Authority ARL-19.

32 Ibid., 185, citing ICSID, Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Conncil of ICSID, pata. 100,
Legal Authority ARL-19, referring to the decisions in Wena Hotels, para. 58, Legal Authority CL-258; Repsol, para.
81, Legal Authority ARL-23; CDC, para. 49, Legal Authority CL-260; Fraport, pata. 246, Legal Authority CL-266;
Inpregilo S.p.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment, January 24, 2014, para, 164, Legal Authority ARL-04; F/ Paso Decision on Annulment,
para, 269, Legal Authority ARL-06; Iberdrola Energia, SA. v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5,
Decision on Annulment, January 13, 2015, para. 104, Legal Authority ARL-08; Adem Dagan v. Turkmenistan, ICSID
Case No. ARB/09/9, Decision on Annulment, January 15, 2016, para. 208, Legal Authority ARL-13; Ioan Micula,
Viorel Micnla and others v. Romania, (CSID Case No. ARB/03/20, Decision on Annulment, February 26, 2016, para.
134, Legal Authority ARL-14; TECO, para. 82-85, Legal Authority CL-272. See also the analysis of the Annulment
Committee in Kee Insaat Ithalat Ibracat Sanayi ve Ticaret Anonim Sirketi v. Turkmenistan, CSID Case No. ARB/10/1,
Legal Authority ARL-07.

 

 

309.

310.

311.

312.

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

committee is tasked to do, ultimately, is determining “whether the
tribunal’s compliance with a rule of procedure could potentially have
affected the award.”” The wording of this statement is very clear and
should not occasion confusion: to consider any potential outcome-
determinativeness is indeed the ‘ask of the committee, but it is not the
applicable standard of annulment. This sentence describes the powers of
the committee, not the threshold of seriousness required for this
ground for annulment to operate. Of course, it is within the jurisdiction

of the committee to assess whether there is outcome-

determinativeness, of any magnitude — even none.

The Respondent submits that the Claimants’ argument regarding this ground for

annulment duplicates its submissions about the alleged lack of reasons for the Award.*”

Paraphrasing Carlston’s test, Respondent submits that “the question before the Committee
is whether the tribunal has actually disregarded the procedural guarantees in such a way
as to ‘cause the arbitration and the resulting award to lose its judicial character.”” And it

suggests that the answer is “no.”*

Italy contends that the Claimants were unable to point to a single authority supporting
their case.*”’ It submits that the few cases in which a breach of Article 52(1)(d) caused a

full or partial annulment of the award have nothing in common with this case.**

The Respondent alleges that even admitting, on its face, the Claimants’ erroneous
assumption that the Tribunal has neglected to examine the DIAs issued by the

municipality of Brindisi, cannot be equated with:

a) the tribunal’s failure to allow both parties to present their case on newly

submitted evidence, or

b) the tribunal’s failure to afford the respondent to present its arguments on the

standard applicable to the calculation of damages for a breach of FET, or

Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 123; TECO, para. 85, Legal Authority CL-272.
24 Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 123.
Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para. 186.

26 Ibid., para. 188.

  

Ibid., para. 189.
8 Ibid., para. 190.

313.

314,

c) the tribunal’s failure to fix a time-limit for a party’s submissions in the event of

a request for rectification of the award made by the other party.”

Italy further contends, in this regard, that “[i]n all these cases the ground for annulment
was upheld with respect to errors in procedendo that affected directly the parties’ equality of
arms.”*” Italy claims that the Claimants, in their submissions, invoke instead an alleged
error in judicando, as according to the Claimants the Tribunal has mistakenly given

insufficient weight to the Brindisi DIAs.*!

The Respondent submits that since the Claimants clung onto the TECO decision with
obvious pertinacity or rather to a few sentences of that decision, artfully arranged but
without much context, it might help to distinguish between the present proceedings and
those underlying the TECO annulment decision. The Respondent submits that its views
in the Counter-Memorial on Annulment had no discernible effect on the Claimants’
arguments. It would, therefore, now rely on the words of the ad hoc committee in Sex
(2017), instead. That case, according to Italy, illustrates how, to put it very simply, TECO

is the wrong basket for the Claimants to put all its legal eggs in.

Contrary to the TECO case, the Tribunal in the present case did not
consider that there was “no sufficient evidence” for a certain issue,
without specifying why the expert reports submitted by the parties did
not qualify as such evidence. It can rather be reasonably inferred from
the Tribunal’s reasoning that it did consider the evidence before it and
reached its conclusions on that evidentiary basis, albeit without
discussing in detail any particular item filed by either Party.*”

In addition to the foregoing, the Respondent contends that the case here is the same.
“Contrary to the TECO case,” the Tribunal did not profess that the evidence relating to
the Legitimate Expectations Claim was insufficient. Even without providing a detailed
discussion of all the documents collected in Exhibit C-24, the Tribunal reached a
conclusion on the basis of the available evidence and the parties’ arguments. Anyone

reading the Award can have no problem understanding why the Tribunal rejected the

22 Ibid., para. 191, citing Fraport, para. 230, Legal Authority CL-266; Pey Gasado, para. 269, Legal Authority CL-269;
Ameo, paras. 9.07-9.10, Legal Authority ARL-29.

380 Tbid., para. 192.

381 Tbid., para. 193.

382 Rejoinder on Annulment, para. 126, citing Reply on Annulment, paras, 166-167; Suez, para. 300, Legal Authority
CL-284, Footnote omitted, emphasis added.

Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations Claim, regardless of whether he or she shares the

underlying reason.

(iii) The Committee’s Analysis

316.

317.

318.

319.

320.

Like with their previous claims, the Claimants allege that the complete disregard of
Exhibit C-24 in the respective legitimate expectations claim, to only consider the
Certificates of Conformity issued by the Municipality of Mesagne and, finally, failure to
consider the Certificates of Conformity issued by the Municipality of Brindisi, collectively

and individually, amount to a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

Subparagraph (d) of Article 52(1) refers to the ground of annulment consisting of a
“serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.” The adjective “serious” means

“significant or worrying because of possible danger or risk; not slight or negligible.”

As a general proposition, the disregard of evidence constitutes an infringement of a
fundamental rule of procedure.’ Thus, before addressing whether the departure was

fundamental, the first question is whether such issue arises in this case.

Exhibit C-24 is at the heart of Claimants’ claim. However, this Committee is not satisfied
that there has been any omission or failure to consider relevant evidence. The Claimants
acknowledged that the Award described the DIA Certificates of Conformity and their
functioning. Moreover, this Committee recalls its previous conclusion that the Tribunal
analyzed the DIA Certificates of Conformity of Brindisi — including Exhibit C-24 —in a
coherent manner. ** The Tribunal addressed them and was conscious that those

certificates were important for the Claimants’ case.**°

With respect to the legitimate expectations claim, the Committee concluded that the
Tribunal saw the second claim as a “frank alternative to its more nuanced argument based

on degree of legislative claim,”*” Moreover, the Tribunal specifically referred to the

533 Reply on Annulment, para. 119. Memorial on Annulment, para. 94; Counter-Memorial on Annulment, para.

184(iv).

54 See paragraphs 150-156,

5 Thid.
56 Thid.

597 Award, para. 366.

second sentence of Article 10(1).**. Finally, the Tribunal extensively analyzed and made

a finding on the claims under Article 10(1).°”

321. Thus, Exhibit C-24 was in fact addressed by the Tribunal within the Award, accordingly
the Claimants have not been able to persuade this Committee that there was a “departure”
from a fundamental rule of procedure. That being the case the condition of the departure

being “serious” cannot possibly be met.

322. For the abovementioned reasons, this Committee concludes that the Annulment Request

under ICSID Convention Article 52(1)(d) is not well founded. It is accordingly rejected.

VIII. THE RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR IMMEDIATE TERMINATION
OF THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS

323. On February 4, 2019, the Respondent filed a request for a decision declaring immediate
termination of the Annulment Proceeding pursuant to EU Member States’ Declaration
on the legal consequences of the Achmea Judgement.

324. Both parties filed detailed pleadings and made oral submissions on the issue.”

325. This ad hoc Committee has dismissed the Request for Annulment of the Award. The
Award therefore stands and this particular issue is moot.™" It is, therefore, unnecessary
for it to either record or analyze the submissions of the parties or state its opinion on the
subject. The matter is best left to be determined in proceedings where it squarely arises.

This Committee, therefore, records no finding on it.

  

See paragraphs 157-178.

® Ibid.

4° Respondent’s Request for an award declaring immediate termination dated February 4, 2019; Claimants’ letter
of February 5, 2019 responding thereto; Transcript D1:P78:L14-P80:L15 and D2:P46:L9-P51:L20 (Claimants)
‘Transcript D1:P81:L93-P98:L16 (Respondent).

+41 At the hearing, Respondent submitted to the Committee the Declaration of the Representatives of the
Governments of the Member States on the Legal Consequences of the Judgment of the Court of Justice
in Achmea and on the Investment Protection in the European Union of 15 January 2019. In this regard,
Respondent recognized that this was a new fact affecting the Committee’s jurisdiction but made clear
that it was leaving it open to the Committee’s discretion what to do with such declaration. See
D1:P155:L13-22 and D2:P94:L23-P97:L24.

Ix.

326.

327.

328.

329,

330.

331.

32.C)

COSTS

A. The Parties’ Positions on Costs
The Claimants submitted their statement of cost on June 7, 2019.
The Respondent submitted its statement on costs on June 19, 2019.

By letter dated June 20, 2019 the Claimants argued that the ICSID Rules require that
“each party shall submit to the Tribunal a statement of costs reasonably incurred or borne

99342

by it i the proceeding ... and that the Respondent’s submission does not permit an
assessment of whether the costs claimed are reasonable or whether they were incurred in
these proceedings. By way of example, the Claimants submit that Italy claims
disbursements of EUR 60,000 described as “costs (translation, expertize [sic], other
expenses).” The Claimants state, however, that all of the legal authorities submitted by
Italy in these annulment proceedings, except four, were originally in English. There were
no translations submitted. No expert report was submitted, either. It is not apparent how

such disbursements could qualify as costs borne in these proceedings.

The Claimants also submits that “[t]he same observations hold for other categories of
costs claimed by Italy, which include (i) ‘attendances (personal attendances, telephone,
letters out/e-mail)’ of EUR 250,000, (ii) ‘legal fees’ of EUR 300,000 and (iii) ‘attendance
at hearing’ of EUR 30,000, for a grand total of EUR 640,000. [All of these] are well in
excess of those incurred by the Claimants. These are round numbers, with no indication
as to the basis on which they were calculated or whether the costs claimed have ever been

paid?

AAs a consequence of the foregoing, the Respondent submitted its revised statement on

costs on July 3, 2019.

The Claimants seek to recover the entirety of the costs of these proceedings, including

the fees and expenses of the ad hoc Committee and the Centre, and all reasonable fees and

laimants’ Letter to Committee, June 20, 2019, citing ICSID Arbitration Rule 28(2). Emphasis added. Under

Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 53, this rule applies mutatis mutandis to annulment

proce
343 C)

ceedings.
laimants’ Letter to Committee, June 20, 2019, pp. 1-2.

81

332.

333.

334.

335.

336.

expenses incurred by the Claimants in relation to these annulment proceedings, including
the Claimants’ legal fees and disbursements (USD 375,000.00 for fees and costs paid to
ICSID and €479,616.60 for legal fees and disbursements).

The Respondent seeks to recover their legal fees and costs incurred in these proceedings,
totaling USD 618,065.62 (USD 616,000.00 as legal fees and USD 2,065.62 incurred for

attendance at the Hearing).

The costs of the annulment proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the

Committee, ICSID’s administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in USD):

Committee’s fees and expenses

Prof. Ricardo Ramirez 88,703.86

Hernandez

Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan 53,604.72

Prof. Hi-Taek Shin 58,313.70
ICSID’s administrative fees 116,000.00
Direct expenses 20,214.57
Total 336,836.85

The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Claimants.

. The Committee’s Decision on Costs

The Committee has discretion as for the allocation of cost under Article 61(2) of the
ICSID Convention, applicable to these proceedings in accordance with Article 52(4) of
the ICSID Convention. Additionally, Regulation 14(3)(e) of the Administrative and

Financial Regulations applies. It accordingly decides as follows.

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, as well as Regulation 14(3)(e), grants the
Committee discretion to allocate costs, fees and expenses incurred by (i) the disputing

parties, (ii) ICSID, and (iii) members of this ad hoc Committee. Both disputing parties, by

requesting the recovery of costs, fees and expenses seem to endorse the rule known as

“cost follow the event.”

337. It has been recognized that “there is no uniform practice in treaty arbitration with regard
to the allocation of the costs of the arbitration.”*“ In the context of annulment
ptoceedings it was stated that “[i]n most of the decisions of annulment committees, the
committees have decided that each party should bear its own litigation costs and that the
costs of the proceeding should be borne equally by the parties.” However, in a more
recent decision it was observed that annulment committees have decided that the

applicant should pay the costs when the annulment is refused.*”

338. In these proceedings, the Committee has rejected the Application for Annulment,
accordingly, it decides that the Claimants shall bear the costs, fees and expenses of these
proceedings incurred by (i) the disputing parties, (ii) ICSID, and (iii) members of this ad

hoc Committee.

X. DECISION

339. For the reasons stated supra, the ad hoc Committee decides as follows:

@ Blusun S.A, Jean Pierre Lecorcier and Michael Stein’s Request for Annulment is
denied.
(ii) It is not necessary to rule on the request of Italy for immediate termination of the

proceedings considering the decision of this Committee in subparagraph (i)

abovementioned.

(iii) | The Claimants shall bear the costs, fees and expenses of these proceedings, i.e. those

incurred by the Respondent, ICSID and members of this ad hoc Committee.

34 Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain, CSD Case No. ARB/14/1, Award, May 16, 2018, para.
694, Legal Authority CL-288.

5 Pey Casado v. Chile, para. 352, Legal Authority CL-269. Footnote omitted.

“Cf, Poiter banka, para: 170, Legal Authority ARL-18, (“The Committes has riceted-the Application for Pattial
A A number of ad hoc ites have in such ci allocated the Costs of the Proceeding to
the Apolae For example, in M.C.L,, the Committee stated that a consequence of Regulation 14(3)(©) ‘which imposes
on the party who applies for annulnent the financial burden of advancing the costs, should normally be that the Applicant when

cnnulzent is refused, remains. responsible for these costs.’ ‘The Committee therefore decides that the Applicant shall bear
the Costs of the Proceeding,”) Emphasis added.

 

[Signed] [Signed]

 

Makhdoom Ali Khan Hi-Taek Shin

Ad hoc Committee Member Ad hoc Committee Member
Date: April 11, 2020 Date: April 11, 2020
[Signed]

Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date: April 12, 2020

84

