INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

- AND -

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON THE APPLICANT’S APPLICATION FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES TO
EXCLUDE CONSIDERATION OF THE MERITS IN PARTI

Members of the ad hoc Committees
Dr Veijo Heiskanen, President
Ms Jean Kalicki
Prof. Azzedine Kettani

Secretary of the ad hoc Committees
Ms Jara Minguez Almeida

13 October 2016

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of: Zimbabwe

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — Pr 1g
Table of Contents

I. Proced 3
Il. Summary of the Parties’ P. 4
A. — The Applicant’s Appl 4
B. _ The Respondents’ Resp 8
Ill. The ad hoc C i > Analysis. 11
IV. Decision 14

 

IL.

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and ee v. Republic of an
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — hi Pr

 

PROCEDURE

1.

On 21 October 2015, the Republic of Zimbabwe (the “Applicant”) filed applications for
annulment (the “Annulment Applications”) and requests for stay of enforcement in
respect of the awards in the conjoined cases Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic
of Zimbabwe (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) and Border Timbers Limited and others v.
Republic of Zimbabwe (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) (the “von Pezold Award” and the
“Border Timbers Award,” respectively, and together the “Awards”) pursuant to Article
52 of the ICSID Convention.

. The ad hoc Committees (the “Committees”) in these matters were constituted on 21

December 2015. The Committees conducted a joint first session with the Parties on
1 February 2016 and issued Procedural Order No. 1 on 11 February 2016, setting out the
procedural framework and the timetable for the present annulment proceedings. In
particular, Section 15.1 of Procedural Order No. | provides:

“The proceedings shall consist of two parts. The first part (‘Part I’) shall
deal with the Applicant’s request that the enforcement of the Awards be
stayed for the duration of the annulment proceedings. The second part (‘Part
II’) shall deal with the Applicant’s applications to annul the Awards. Each
part of the proceedings shall consist of a written phase followed by an oral
hearing before the Committees.”

. On 23 February 2016, the Applicant filed an application requesting an order of provisional

measures under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules. Apart from a request for provisional measures, the Applicant also sought an interim
order to preserve the s/atus quo pending the Parties’ filing of further observations on the
matter.

. Bya letter dated 24 February 2016, the ICSID Secretariat wrote to the Parties on behalf of

the Committees, informing the Parties of the Committees’ decision to deny the Applicant’s
request for an interim order and inviting Bernhard von Pezold and others and Border
Timbers Limited and others (the “Respondents” or “VPBs”) to submit their response to
the application by 2 March 2016.

. On2 March 2016, the Respondents filed their response to the Applicant’s application.

. On 17 March 2016, the Committees issued a Decision on the Applicant’s Application for

Provisional Measures. The Committees dismissed the application, while reminding the
Parties of their general obligation to refrain from any conduct that may aggravate the
dispute during the pendency of the annulment proceedings.

Il.

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — Annul Pr di

 

7. Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, on 4 April 2016, the Applicant filed its Memorial in
Support of Continuing the Stay of Enforcement of the Awards (the “Memorial on Stay”),
together with Exhibits ZA-072 to ZA-113 and Legal Authorities ZALEX-061 to ZALEX-
072.

8. On 11 June 2016, the Respondents filed a Counter-Memorial on Stay (the “Counter-
Memorial on Stay”), together with Exhibits VPB-10 to VPB-26 and Legal Authorities
VPBLEX-18 to VPBLEX-57.

9. On 1 July 2016, the Applicant filed a Reply to VPB’s Counter-Memorial on Stay of
Enforcement (the “Reply on Stay”). On 7 July 2016, the Applicant submitted a revised
version of its Reply, together with Exhibits ZA-114 to ZA-151, including witness
statements by Dr J.P. Mangudya, Attorney General Prince Machaya and Mr Zvinechimwe
Churu (ZA-121, ZA-137 and ZA-144, respectively) and Legal Authorities ZALEX-073 to
ZALEX-077.

10. On 31 July 2016, the Respondents filed a Rejoinder on Stay (the “Rejoinder on Stay”),
together with Exhibits VPB-027 to VPB-043, including a witness statement by Mr Heinrich
Bernd Alexander Josef von Pezold (VPB-32), and Legal Authorities VPBLEX-058 to
VPBLEX-068.

11. On 12 September 2016, pursuant to Articles 44 and 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and
Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Applicant filed an Application for Provisional
Measures to Exclude Consideration of the Merits in Part I (the “Application”).

12. In accordance with an invitation from the Committees, on 23 September 2016, the
Respondents filed a Response to Zimbabwe’s Application for Provisional Measures
(References to the Merits) (the “Response”).

13. By letter dated 26 September 2016, the ICSID Secretariat wrote to the Parties advising
them that the Committees would rule on the Application on the basis of the record before
them.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
A. The Applicant’s Application

14. The Application arises out of references made in the Respondents’ Counter-Memorial on
Stay and Rejoinder on Stay to the merits of the Applicant’s Annulment Applications, in
the context of whether or not the applications should be considered dilatory or otherwise
prima facie without any merit. The Applicant requests that the Committees “order and
declare that the consideration of the merits of the Annulment Applications is excluded from

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) - h Pr di

 

 

Part I of these Annulment proceedings and thus fully reserved for Part II of these
Proceedings,” in accordance with Section 15.1 of Procedural Order No. 1.!

15. In support of its Application, the Applicant relies on Articles 44 and 52(4) of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules? The Applicant also refers to the
Parties’ earlier submissions in which they addressed the issue that gives rise to the
Applicant’s Application and requested that the Committees resolve the matter.

16. The Applicant argues that the Application is urgent as there is an “urgent need to protect
the serenity of the proceedings,” the Respondents having confirmed in their Rejoinder on
Stay their “intent ... to debate the merits of the Annulment Applications” in Part I of these
proceedings, contrary to Procedural Order No. 1.4 The Applicant argues that, unless the
Committees grant the requested relief, the remaining steps in this Part I of the proceedings
“promise to be unnecessarily chaotic and disorderly and to prejudice Applicant’s right to
due process.”>

17. The Applicant adds that the Application is timely, as Procedural Order No. 1 “suspended
the calendar during the month of August.”¢

18. As to the rights to be preserved, the Applicant argues that it seeks to protect its “full right
to present the merits concerning the Annulment Applications ... in the manner stipulated
in [Procedural Order No. 1].”” In the alternative, “were the Committees to instruct the
Parties to discuss any part of the merits in Part I of these proceedings,” the Applicant’s
rights to be preserved also include “to know the scope of any such discussion of the merits
in Part I.”8 This is necessary in order for the Applicant to be able to prepare its written and
oral submissions for the remaining steps of Part I of these annulment proceedings.?

19. The Applicant argues that its Application also meets the requirement of necessity, “as
irreparable harm would result” if the scope of the remaining steps in Part I are not
clarified.!° According to the Applicant, “[i]Jn view of VPB’s decision to argue the merits”
in Part I, if the requested provisional measures are not granted, the Applicant’s right to due
process would be harmed as it would not be in a position to respond before a final decision
is given.'! This harm would be irreparable as the “Applicant’s right to know the scope of

' Application, para. 1.

2 Application, para. 2.

3 Application, para. 3 (referring to the Reply on Stay, para. 321, and to the Rejoinder on Stay, para. 49).
* Application, paras. 5 and 6.

5 Application, para. 9.

© Application, para. 10.

7 Application, paras. 11 and 12.
8 Application, para. 13.

> Application, para. 13.

© Application, para. 15.

11 Application, para. 16.

 

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others ¥. Republic of. zimbabiie
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — L Pr 1g

 

 

Skeleton Arguments and Oral Arguments on Stay in due time during the course of these
proceedings, can never be fully remedied by compensation.”!?

20. The Applicant also addresses in detail the Respondents’ submissions that give rise to the
Application. It contends that the Respondents should have raised their argument that the
Annulment Applications are manifestly unfounded under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5),
which requires such arguments to be raised within 30 days of the constitution of the
Committees. As they did not do so, the Respondents are “now foreclosed from doing so.”
In any event, the Respondents’ own lengthy submissions demonstrate that the Annulment
Applications are not manifestly unfounded or dilatory.'4 In the circumstances, the
Respondents’ decision to argue the merits of the case in this Part I of the proceedings
“severely prejudges the merits to an extent that deprives Applicant of its due process right
to serenely present its case on the merits in Part II of these proceedings as stipulated by
[Procedural Order No. 1].”!5

2

. The Applicant contends that the issues raised by its Annulment Applications are “heavy
and substantive” and therefore not suitable for “summary disposition on a prima facie
basis.”!* Citing the decision of the ad hoc Committee in Libananco v. Turkey, the Applicant
submits that the Respondents’ “dilatory test” is not sound; it applies only if a stay
application has been brought without any basis under the Convention.'? According to the
Applicant, “given the universal nature of VPB’s arguments on the merits any prima facie
decision on a less than complete presentation of Applicant’s full case ..., gravely impinges
upon its right to present the merits and would unduly and severely prejudge the case and
its rights, as the issues involved are too heavy a topic to be addressed in a summary
fashion.”'® Citing Amoco Iran International Finance Corporation vy. Iran and AAP y. Sri
Lanka, the Applicant argues that it is not possible to rely on a prima facie test “when a
legal matter should be proven in a conclusive manner.”!?

2

v

. Subsidiarily, were the Committees nevertheless to rely on a prima facie test, the Applicant
argues that in its Annulment Applications it has made “a prima facie showing that establish

2 Application, paras. 17 and 18.

'3 Application, para. 21.

4 Application, paras. 24 and25.

'5 Application, para. 22.

'6 Application, paras. 29-43.

"7 Application, para. 32 (citing Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8,
Decision on Applicant’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 7 May 2012), VBLEX-61.
(Emphasis omitted.)

'8 Application, para. 38.

'° Application, paras. 41 and 42 (citing Amoco Iran International Finance Corporation v. The Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, 15 Iran-US CTR 189, ZALEX-083 and Asian Agricultural Products Limited v. Republic of
Sri Lanka, \CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award (27 June 1990), p. 274, ZALEX-084).

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — Annulment Proceeding

 

proper basis for annulment were the factual allegations and legal analysis to be proven on
the merits.””° Accordingly, the “evidentiary burden shifts to VPB.”?!
23. In lusion, the Applicant that the Ci i “order and declare” that:

(a) “Procedural Order N° 1 is confirmed as written;

(b) VPB’s discussion of the merits of Applicant’s Annulment Applications from pages
14 to 33 of its Counter-Memorial on Stay:

a. is out of sequence,
b. is deemed not written and
c. shall not be discussed in Part I.

(c) The merits shall not be discussed in Part I but shall be addressed only in Part II on
the dates mentioned in PO N° 1. Consequently:

a. The parties are not to brief, submit factual exhibits / legal authorities or
argue the merits in Part I but will be free to brief, submit factual exhibits
/ legal authorities and argue these issues in Part II and

b. The Committees will not consider and / or deliberate on any arguments
and / or factual evidence or legal authorities regarding the merits during
Part I.

(d) VPB’s invitation in Paragraph 28 of its Rejoinder, ‘Before reviewing the following
sub-sections, the Committees may wish to re-read paras 33-69 of the VPBs’
Counter-Memorial on Stay. That is where the VPBs’ arguments that the annulment
applications do not meet the Non-Dilatory Requirement are set out in full’ again
constitutes discussion of the merits of Applicant’s annulment applications from
pages 16 to 21 of its Rejoinder on Stay and consequently:

a. out of sequence,
b. deemed not written and
c. shall not be discussed in Part I.

(e) VPB’s defense in its Rejoinder on Stay of its discussion of the merits in Part I under
the guise of ‘dilatory’ will not be considered in Part | as it is based on the merits of
heavy issues that are to be addressed only in Part II, particularly not in a cursory
manner in Part I.

20 Application, para. 44.
2) Application, paras. 45-47.

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) ~ Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others -¥. Republic Of: Zimbalywe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — li Pr

 

 

(f) The 30 November 2016 Organizational conference call, the Parties Skeleton
Arguments and the December 2016 Oral Argument shall not address the merits.”2?

24. The Applicant further requests “clarification and confirmation of the scope” of Procedural
Order No. 1 as to “(i) the number, sequence and calendar of pleadings specified in Art. 15
of [Procedural Order No. 1], [and] (ii) the right to accompany pleadings with documentary
evidence and legal authorities.”??

25. “Subsidiarily and in the alternative, were the Committees to refuse to grant Applicant’ s
requests set out ... above,” the Applicant requests:

(a) “that the question of Stay be joined to the Merits and decided after the close of the
agreed procedural steps relating to the merits listed in Procedural order N° 1, or

(b) in the extremely unlikely event that the Committees were to wish to consider certain
issues regarding the merits in connection with Part I of these annulment
proceedings, that the Committees:

a. clearly indicate what circumscribed issues the Committees wish the
Parties to address in the Skeleton Arguments and at the Oral Hearing,
so as to:

s

. allow 30 days from PO N° 2 for Applicant to make written submission
regarding any issues on the merits that the Committees consider
relevant for determination in Part I and

°

. allow 15 days to VPB to further rebut Applicant’s position on any issues
on the merits that the Committees consider relevant for determination
in Part 1.724

B. The Respondents’ Response

26. The Respondents state that they agree with the Applicant that the Committees have the
power to order provisional measures under Article 44 of the ICSID Convention, which is
applicable pursuant to Article 52(4) of the Convention, and under ICSID Arbitration Rule
39.25

27. The Respondents further accept that, in order for the Committees to order interim relief,
the Applicant must:

(a) “identify the substantive and procedural right that requires protection;

2 Application, para. 55 (footnotes omitted).
23 Application, para. 56 (footnotes omitted).
° Application, para. 57.

25 Response, para. 6.

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — Annulment Proceeding

 

(b) establish that the measures proposed are urgent; and

(c) show that there is necessity, i.¢., that if the provisional measures are not ordered
there will be irreparable damage to the rights that Zimbabwe seeks to protect.”?¢

28. Furthermore, according to the Respondents, the Committees must have prima facie
jurisdiction over the Applicant’s Annulment Applications. For the purpose of the present
Application, the Respondents accept that this is the case here, while reserving their right to
argue at a later stage of the proceedings that the Applicant’s Annulment Applications “are
not within the confines of Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention.”””

2

©

. As to the rights to be preserved, the Respondents also agree that the Parties’ procedural
rights arising under Procedural Order No. 1, specifically the rights arising under Section
15 which provides that the proceedings shall consist of two phases, “are rights that may be
protected by an order for provisional measures.”?* However, the Respondents deny that
they have breached Procedural Order No. | and therefore request that the Application be
denied.?°

30. The Respondents recall that the Applicant in its Memorial on Stay and Reply on Stay
argued that the Annulment Applications are not dilatory in nature and that this is relevant
in deciding whether or not the stays should be lifted. The Respondents conclude from this
that the Parties in fact agree that the requests for stay should not be granted if the
Committees find that the Annulment Applications are dilatory. According to the
Respondents, under Section 15 of Procedural Order No. 1 neither Party was prevented from
arguing and applying the legal test which determines whether or not an annulment
application is dilatory (the “Dilatory Test”), as “such a test does not prejudge the merits.”°°
The Respondents add that, “[t]o the extent that the VPBs refer to the merits of [the
Annulment Applications],” they do so “only for the purpose of and in accordance with the
Dilatory Test; they do not seek a final determination of the merits as the Dilatory Test
neither requires nor permits such a determination.”>! The Respondents argue that they have
therefore not breached the Applicant’s procedural rights, as they “have merely responded
to the legal argument raised by Zimbabwe as to the application of the Dilatory Test.” 7

3

. The Respondents argue that the Applicant appears to have misunderstood the Dilatory Test.
The Respondents are not seeking a disposal of the Applicant’s Annulment Applications
pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5), as a successful application of Rule 41(5) would

26 Response, para. 7.

27 Response, para. 8.

28 Response, para. 10.

29 Response, paras. 9-12.
3° Response, para. 13.

3! Response, para. 14.

52 Response, para. 14.

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — Annulment Proceeding

 

bring the proceedings to an end, whereas “a finding by the Committees that the Annulment
Applications are dilatory does not.”

32. As to the urgency requirement, the Respondents agree that the Application is urgent as it
seeks protection of a procedural right. However, the Respondents argue that the Applicant
has waived its right to seek protection pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 27. The
Respondents note that they had first addressed the Dilatory Test in their Counter-Memorial
on Stay, which was filed on 11 June 2016. However, the Applicant waited over three
months before filing the Application and thus “has waived its right to object to the manner
in which the VPBs have referred to the merits in their pleadings.”*+ In this connection, the
Respondents refer to ICSID Arbitration Rule 27, which provides that “[a] party which
knows or should have known” that any applicable procedural rule has not been complied
with, but “which fails to state promptly its objections thereto, shall be deemed ... to have
waived its right to object.”°5

33. As to the requirement of necessity, the Respondents accept that “to the extent that
Zimbabwe has the right which it has pleaded (which is denied), ... the breach of that right
could not be remedied by the payment of damages.”?°

34. Finally, in response to the further relief requested by the Applicant, the Respondents argue
that:

(a) The Applicant’s request for “clarification and confirmation of the scope” of
Procedural Order No. | is not a procedural or substantive right and therefore “not
amenable to an order on provisional measures;”37

(b) The Applicant’s alternative request to join Part I to Part II is also not a procedural
or substantive right of the Applicant. The Parties must comply with the procedural
calendar set by the Committees, “unless there are reasonable grounds for not being
able to do so.” According to the Respondents, no such grounds have been argued
by the Applicant;38 and

(c) Finally, should the Committees decide that the Respondents have not breached
Procedural Order No. 1 by addressing the Dilatory Test, there is no need for further
submissions on the merits of the Annulment Applications or guidance from the
Committees as the matters would have been dealt with appropriately in the

33 Response, para. 17.
* Response, paras. 18-20.
35 Response, para. 18,
3© Response, para. 21.
3” Response, para. 23.
38 Response, para. 24,

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No, ARB/10/25) — Annulment Proceeding

 

pleadings to date. Further pleadings in Part I would also jeopardize the procedural
timetable set by the Committees in Procedural Order No. 1.59

35. On this basis, the Respondents request that “the Committees deny the Application.”“°

Hl. ‘THE AD HOC COMMITTEES’ ANALYSIS

36. In their Decision on the Applicant’s Application for Provisional Measures dated 17 March
2016, the Committees noted that the Applicant’s application “raised an issue that has also
arisen before other ad hoc committees, but which has not yet been decided, as to whether
an ICSID ad hoc ittee is comp to r d provisional in the first
place.”*! Having further considered the issue, the Committees noted that, while the Parties
agreed that the Committees “would have, at the very least, an inherent power to recommend
provisional measures necessary to protect the integrity of the present proceedings,” in view
of the conclusions reached in the Decision, the Committees did not consider it necessary
to rule on the issue.’

 

37. As summarized above, the Parties continue to agree in the context of the Applicant’s
present Application that the Committees have the power to order provisional measures
under Article 44 of the ICSID Convention, which is applicable pursuant to Article 52(4) of
the Convention, and under ICSID Arbitration Rule 39. For the reasons set out below, the
Committees do not consider it necessary to take a view on this issue at this time.

3

oo

. The Committees have carefully considered the Parties’ submissions and the supporting
evidence and legal authorities and, for the reasons set out below, have reached the
conclusion that there is no basis to recommend provisional measures, even assuming the
Committees had the power to recommend such measures.

39. The Applicant in its Application argues that the Respondents in their Counter-Memorial
on Stay and Rejoinder on Stay have improperly attempted to argue the merits of the
Applicant’s Annulment Applications, in breach of the Committees’ decision in Procedural
Order No. | to bifurcate the present annulment proceedings and to deal with the Applicant’s
requests for continuation of the stay in Part I of the proceedings.*? The Applicant in
particular objects to the way in which, or the extent to which, the Respondents have argued
the issue as to whether or not the Annulment Applications should be considered “dilatory,
trivial, frivolous and/or abusive.”

40. The Respondents argue, in response, that they have merely replied to the Applicant’s own
argument in its Counter-Memorial on Stay and Reply on Stay, to the effect that its

39 Response, para. 25.

4 Response, para. 26.

*! Decision on the Applicant’s Application for Provisional Measures, 17 March 2016, para. 30.

* Decision on the Applicant’s Application for Provisional Measures, 17 March 2016, para. 32.

® The Applicant refers, specifically, to Counter-Memorial on Stay, paras. 28-69 and Reply on Stay, paras. 28-44.

ll

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others 7 Republic of. Slataidied
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — l Pr

 

Annulment Applications are not dilatory, trivial or frivolous, and do not constitute an abuse
of process.‘*

41. The Committees note that the Applicant raised in its Memorial on Stay the issue of whether
its Annulment Applications meet what it referred to as “threshold criteria” of not being
dilatory, trivial or frivolous, or an abuse of process.‘* The Applicant argued that these
criteria were met in this case. The Respondents then responded to these arguments in the
Counter-Memorial on Stay, agreeing that these were the “threshold criteria” for the
continuation of a stay.“© The Respondents then went on to argue that the Annulment
Applications indeed were, in their view, “dilatory, trivial, frivolous and/or abusive.”*” The
Applicant presented further argument on the issue in its Reply on Stay,‘ and the
Respondents replied in the Rejoinder on Stay.*?

42. More specifically, the Respondents argued in their Rejoinder on Stay that the Applicant
“appear[ed] to acknowledge that an application will be dilatory if it is ‘manifestly abusive,’
‘baseless’ (i.e. no prima facie case) or ‘an abuse of process.’”°° The Respondents indicated
that, “to the extent that the additional two criteria (‘trivial’ and ‘frivolous’) are not covered
by the Non-Dilatory Requirement,” they “take no position on whether or not the
Jurisprudence on stays of enforcement supports them or as to whether or not they have been
met in the present cir Cc quently, in the Respondents’ view, the sole
“threshold criterion” issue that remains before the Committees “is whether or not the Non-
Dilatory Requirement has been met.”*

43. The Committees note that both Parties have taken in their submissions the view that, in
order for the Committees to be able to grant the Applicant’s requests for continuation of
the stay, the Annulment Applications must meet certain “threshold criteria.” While the
Parties do not agree on whether these criteria have been met, they appear to agree that the
application of these criteria will require the Committees to make a preliminary or prima
facie determination as to whether or not the Annulment Applications meet these “threshold
criteria.” Thus, the Applicant in its Memorial on Stay argues:

“Applicant has established in its Annulment Applications that there is prima facie
a reasonable case for seeking annulment, as the grounds and facts on which
Applicant relies in the Annulment Application, if proved, lead to annulment.
Although Applicant does not request and the ad hoc Committees are not in a

4 Response, para. 13 (referring to the Applicant’s Memorial on Stay, paras, 2-12 and Reply on Stay, paras. 279, 295,
298-299, 301 and 359).

45 Memorial on Stay, paras. 2-12.

“© Counter-Memorial on Stay, para. 28.

47 Counter-Memorial on Stay, paras. 33-69.

48 Reply on Stay, in particular paras. 292-301.

#° Rejoinder on Stay, paras. 6-44.

%° Rejoinder on Stay, para. 6 (footnotes omitted).

5! Rejoinder on Stay, para. 7.

5 Rejoinder on Stay, para. 8.

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No, ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — Annulment Proceeding

 

position during this preliminary phase of proceedings to decide on the merits of the
Applicants Annulment Applications, on their face, prima facie, were the facts and
law Applicant presented to be proven, one can reasonably envisage the possibility
that the Awards be overturned.”>>

44, Similarly, the Respondents state in their Counter-Memorial on Stay:

“Tn its Memorial on Stay, Zimbabwe argues that the Annulment Application are not
dilatory in nature, trivial, frivolous or an abuse of process. It groups these matters
under the notion of ‘threshold criteria’ for the continuation of a stay on
enforcement, as indeed they are.

[Where an annulment application is dilatory, trivial, frivolous and/or abusive, a
stay of enforcement will not be ordered; but meeting these low hurdles is not a
factor in favour of ordering such a stay.”°4

45. Therefore, the issue on which the Parties disagree is not whether an annulment application
must meet certain “threshold criteria” for a request for continuation of a stay to be granted,
but whether the Respondents, when responding to the Applicant’s argument on this issue,
have strayed beyond addressing the “threshold criteria” and have argued the merits of the
Annulment Applications. That this is the subject matter of the dispute between the Parties
is evident from the Applicant’s Reply on Stay, where the Applicant contends that “[the
Respondents’] arguments [in the Counter-Memorial on Stay] focus on issues totally outside
the ‘threshold’ tests regarding the stay” and are “directly pertinent to the merits of its case
to be addressed in these proceedings during Phase II.”5° According to the Applicant, “VPB
simply could not resist its urge to counter Applicant’s reasoning in its Annulment
Applications until the time it agreed to do so, as reflected in Procedural Order No. 1.”°¢

46. The dispute between the Parties therefore concerns the legal criteria to be applied by the
Committees in determining whether or not to grant the Applicant’s requests that the stay
of enforcement of the Awards be continued. While the Committees cannot make any
determination on this issue at this stage of the proceedings, they note that, even assuming
the Committees were to conclude that, for the Applicant to be able to prevail on its requests
for the continuation of the stay, its Annulment Applications must meet certain substantive
threshold criteria (and the Committees take no view at this stage on the content or indeed
the existence of any such threshold criteria), the Committees’ decision on any such
threshold criteria would merely be relevant in determining whether the Applicant’s
requests for continuation of the stay may or may not be granted; as a determination on this

*3 Memorial on Stay, para. 3. See also paras. 5, 12.

** Counter-Memorial on Stay, paras. 28, 30 (footnotes omitted).
®5 Reply on Stay, para. 296.

%© Reply on Stay, para. 296.

Bernhard von Pezold and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15) — Annulment Proceeding

Border Timbers Limited and others v. Republic of Zimbabwe
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25) — Annulment Proceeding

 

preliminary issue it would not, and indeed could not, prejudge the Committees’ decision
on the merits of the Annulment Applications, which will be briefed by the Parties and
resolved by the Committees in Part II of these annulment proceedings. In these
circumstances, there cannot be any risk that the Committees’ decision could cause
irreparable harm on the Applicant’s right to present its case on the merits, which is the right
that the Applicant seeks to protect by its Application.

47. Consequently, the Applicant’s Application for Provisional Measures to Exclude
Consideration of Merits in Part I stands to be dismissed.

IV. DECISION

48. For the reasons set out above, the Committees decide that the Applicant’s Application for
Provisional Measures to Exclude Consideration of the Merits in Part I is dismissed.

On behalf of the ad hoc Committees

Dr Veijo Heiskanen
President of the ad hoc Committees
Date: 13 October 2016

