INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENTOF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

DECISION ON PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/13

Pan American Energy LLC, and
BP Argentina Exploration Company
Claimants

v.

The Argentine Republic
Respondent

and
ICSID Case No. ARB/04/8

BP America Production Company,
Pan American Sur SRL,
Pan American Fueguina, SRL and
Pan American Continental SRL
Claimants

v.

The Argentine Republic
Respondent

Before the Arbitral Tribunal composed by:
Prof. Lucius Caflisch (President)
Prof. Brigitte Stern (Arbitrator)

Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg (Arbitrator)

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

Washington, D.C., July 27, 2006

Il.

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3
FAcTS 6
1. Background: The Argentine Economic and Financial Cris’
2. The Claimants’ Position. 7
COMPETENCE OF THE TRIBUNAL 1
1. Relevant Texts at
2. Scope of Examinati 12
(a) itution of the P di 12
(b) Prior Consultation and iati 13
(c) Significance of the Case-law Developed by ICSID and Other Tribunal: 13
(d) What Issues Are Deemed to Be of a Jurisdictional Nature’ 13
3. First Preliminary Objection: The Dispute Does Not Arise Directly out of an Investment..... .17

 

 

(a) The Positions of the Parties
(b) — The Tribunal’s Consi i 20

 

4. Second Preliminary Objection: The Present Dispute Is Not of a “Legal” Nature......
(@) — Introdueti 21
(b) Is the Dispute about Legal Rights?

 

 

 

(i) The Positions of the Parti:
(ii) The Tribunal’s Considerations
(c) Can Rights Based on Contracts Be Considered Legal Rights?

 

 

 

(i) The Position of the Parties.
(ii) The Tribunal’s Considerations
(d) Does the Existence of an “Umbrella” Clau:

 
       
 
 
  

Modify the Tribunal

 

(i) The Position of the Parti
(ii) The Tribunal’s Considerations
5. Third Preliminary Objection: The Claim Must Be Limited with Respect to Tax Mea:

 

(a) The Positions of the Parties ....
(b) — The Tribunal’s Consi i 45

6. Fourth Preliminary Objection: According to the Doctrine of Estoppel, the Claimants Cannot
Refuse to accept the Courts of Argentina as the Exclusive Forum

 

 

(a) The Positions of the Parties
(b) — The Tribunal’s Consi i 52
7. Fifth Preliminary Objection: The Claim Is Hypothetical...

 

 

(a) The Positions of the Parties
(b) — The Tribunal’s Consi i 57

 

8. Sixth Preliminary Objection: The Claimants Have No Jus Standi....

 

(a) The Positions of the Parties
(b) — The Tribunal’s Consi i 66

 

9. Respondent's Request for Further Evidence...

DECISION 72

L PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On 23 May 2003, Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Company,
both companies incorporated in the State of Delaware of the United States of America
(hereinafter “First Claimants”), filed a Request for Arbitration, dated 22 May 2003, against
the Republic of Argentina (hereinafter “Government”, “Argentina” or “Respondent”) with the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (hereinafter “ICSID” or “‘Centre”).
The First Claimants allege that Argentina, through its own actions and omissions and those of
certain of its agencies, has violated several of its obligations under the Treaty Concerning the
Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment between the Argentine Republic and
the United States of America of 14 November 1991 (hereinafter the “BIT’),! as well as

international law and Argentine law.

2. The Acting Secretary-General of the Centre registered the First Claimants’ Request for
Arbitration on 6 June 2003. The parties agreed that the Tribunal would consist of three
arbitrators, one to be appointed by each party, the third arbitrator and President of the
Tribunal to be appointed by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of the Centre.
Accordingly, the First Claimants appointed Professor Albert Jan van den Berg (Dutch) as
arbitrator and the Respondent appointed Professor Brigitte Stern (French) as arbitrator. The
Chairman of the Administrative Council of the Centre, with the agreement of the parties,
appointed Professor Lucius Caflisch (Swiss) as President of the Arbitral Tribunal. On 6
February 2004, the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted, and the proceedings to
have commenced. On the same date, in accordance with ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulation 25, the parties were notified that Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila, Senior Counsel,

ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

3. On 17 December 2003, BP America Production Company, a company incorporated
under the laws of the State of Delaware, and Pan American Sur SRL, Pan American Fueguina
SRL and Pan American Continental SRL, companies incorporated under the laws of
Argentina (hereinafter “Second Claimants”), also submitted a Request for Arbitration against

Argentina. The Second Claimants asked that their Request be considered jointly with the

Bilateral investment treaties in general will be referred to as “BITs”.

Request for Arbitration dated 22 May 2003, filed by the First Claimants, arguing that the two
cases were substantially identical and concerned investments in the hydrocarbon industry.
They claimed also that the Respondent’s actions and omissions and those of certain of its
agencies violated the BIT, international law and Argentine law. The Acting Secretary-

General registered the Second Claimants’ Request for Arbitration on 27 February 2004.

4. By letters of 17 and 18 March 2004, the Respondent and the First and the Second
Claimants (hereinafter collectively “the Claimants”) agreed that the Tribunal should consist of
the same members as the Tribunal in ICSID case No. ARB/03/13 and that both cases, i.e.
ICSID case No. ARB/03/13 and ICSID case No. ARB/04/8 should be consolidated.
Accordingly, the Tribunal was composed by Professor Albert Jan van den Berg, Professor
Brigitte Stern, and Professor Lucius Caflisch as President of the Tribunal. On 25 March
2004, the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted, and the proceedings to have
commenced. On the same date, in accordance with ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulation 25, the parties were notified that Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila, Senior Counsel,

ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

5. Mr. R. Doak Bishop of King & Spalding, Mr. José A. Martinez de Hoz (Jr.) of Pérez
Alati, Grondona Benites, Arntsen & Martinez de Hoz (Jr.) and Mr. Richard J. Spies represent
the Claimants. Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino, Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién

Argentina, represents the Respondent.

6. The first session in both cases was held on 21 April 2004 in Geneva (the “First
Session”). The Claimants were represented at that session by Messrs. R. Doak Bishop, Gary
Paulson, José A. Martinez de Hoz (Jr.), Javier Vinokurov and Martin Stanway Mayers. Mr.
Jorge Barraguirre and Ms. Maria Vallejos Meana of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacion,
Buenos Aires, acting on instructions from the then Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacion, Dr.

Horacio Daniel Rosatti, represented the Respondent.

7. At the First Session, the parties agreed that the Tribunal had been properly constituted
and that they had no objection to any of the members of the Tribunal. It was also noted that
the proceedings would be conducted under the ICSID Arbitration Rules in force since 1
January 2003 (hereinafter “the Arbitration Rules”). The parties further agreed that the two
cases would be considered to form one set of proceedings and that the Tribunal would issue a

single decision on jurisdiction for both proceedings. In respect of the pleadings of the parties,

4

their number, sequence and timing, the Tribunal announced, after consultation with the
parties, that the Claimants would file their Memorial within 90 days of the date of the First
Session, the Respondent its Counter-Memorial within 90 days of the date of receipt of the
Memorial; the Claimants’ Reply would be submitted within 45 days of the date of receipt of
the Counter-Memorial, and the Respondent’s Rejoinder within 45 days of its receipt of the
Reply. It was further agreed that the Respondent had the right to raise any objections it might
have to jurisdiction not later than 45 days from its receipt of the Claimants’ Memorial. If
such objections were made by the Respondent, the Claimants would be entitled to file a
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction within 45 days from their receipt of the Respondent’s
Memorial on Jurisdiction. The Tribunal would decide at a later stage, after having consulted

the parties, whether a second round of pleadings on jurisdiction would be necessary.

8. The Claimants filed their Memorial on the Merits on 21 July 2004. The Respondent
filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction on 21 September 2004 and the Claimants their Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction on 11 November 2004. After having considered the parties’ views,
the Tribunal decided on 2 February 2005 that a second round of pleadings on jurisdiction was

not necessary and fixed the date for a hearing on jurisdiction on 18 March 2005.

9. The hearing on jurisdiction took place in Washington, D.C., on 18 March 2005. The
Claimants were represented by Messrs. R. Doak Bishop, José Alfredo Martinez de Hoz (Jr.),
Martin Sanway Mayers, Craig S. Miles, Ms. Valeria Macchia and Mr. Javier Vinokurov. Mr.
Jorge Barraguirre and Ms. Gisela Makowski, from the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacion,

represented the Respondent.

10. At the Respondent’s request, Mr. Richard Spies testified at the hearing. The Claimants
briefly presented the witness; this was followed by cross-examination from the Respondent
and re-direct from the Claimants. The Tribunal also asked the witness some questions.
Transcripts of the hearing were made in English and Spanish and were distributed to the

Tribunal and the parties on 18 May 2005 (the “Transcript’).

IL. Facts

1. Background: The Argentine Economic and Financial Crisis

11. The background of the present case is the Argentine economic and financial crisis at the
end of the 1990s. The Arbitral Tribunal in the Gas Natural? case described it aptly as

follows:

In 1991, Argentina embarked on a program of economic expansion to be
carried out in significant part through privatization of state-owned
enterprises and attraction of foreign direct investment. Argentina concluded
more than fifty bilateral investment agreements, and undertook by law to
guarantee the convertibility of the Argentine peso. A currency board was
created to maintain the parity between the peso and the United States dollar,
by limiting the local money supply to the amount of Argentina’s foreign
exchange reserves. A major part of the privatization program concerned
selling previously state-owned public utilities, including the entity involved
in the present arbitration.

For a variety of reasons beyond the scope of the present arbitration, the
effort by the government of Argentina to maintain the parity of the peso and
the U.S. dollar came under heavy pressure at the end of the decade of the
1990s. For a time Argentina was able to draw on foreign credits, but by
December 2001 it had become clear that no further credits were available to
Argentina in the near future, and that devaluation was inevitable.

On December 2, 2001, President Fernando de la Rta issued a decree
prohibiting transfers of foreign exchange abroad over a nominal amount. In
the following days the government limited cash withdrawals from banks, a
general strike and riots broke out, and President de la Rtia declared a state of
siege. On December 20, 2001, President de la Rtia resigned. On December
23, 2001, his successor, Adolfo Rodriguez Sad, declared a default on
Argentina’s public debt, estimated at 132 billion U.S. dollars. President
Rodriguez Sad resigned one week later, and (skipping one brief interim
designation), the presidency was assumed on January 1, 2002 by Eduardo
Duhalde. President Duhalde remained in office until an election in May
2003, and many of the measures relevant to the present arbitration were
taken in his administration.

On January 6, 2002, with the consent of Congress in a Ley de Emergencia
(Emergency Law), President Duhalde repealed the legal requirement that 1

Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic, Decision of the Tribunal on Preliminary Questions
on Jurisdiction, of 17 June 2005, ICSID case No. ARB/03/10, §§ 11-15,
http://ita.law.uvi d s DG-Decisi reliminaryQuesti isdiction.pdf.

 

 

peso = 1 U.S. dollar and set a new rate at 1.40 pesos = 1 U.S. dollar. Banks,
which had been closed on December 23, 2001, remained closed. The new
rate did not hold, and by mid-January, the unofficial rate was close to 2
pesos = 1 U.S. dollar. The prohibition on remittances abroad remained in
effect.

On February 2, 2002, the government ordered all banks to turn over their
U.S. dollars to the Central Bank. The prohibition on transfers of foreign
exchange abroad without authorization from the Central Bank was
reconfirmed, with no indication as to how long the prohibition would last or
whether any transfers might be authorized.

2. The Claimants’ Position

12. Pan American Energy LLC (“PAE”) is a company incorporated under the laws of the
State of Delaware, United States of America, with a branch registered in the Republic of

Argentina (“PAE Branch”).

13. BP Argentina Exploration Company (“BP Argentina’) is also a company incorporated

under the laws of the State of Delaware.

14. BP America Production Company (“BP America’) is an entity incorporated under the

laws of the State of Delaware, as well; it owns and controls BP Argentina.

15. BP America and BP Argentina are hereafter collectively referred to as “BP”.

16. BP America indirectly, and BP Argentina directly, own the majority of the equity

interests of PAE.

17. PAE owns all of the equity interests of: Pan American Continental SRL (“PAE
Continental”), Pan American Sur SRL (“PAE Sur’) and Pan American Fueguina SRL (“PAE
Fueguina”). Each of these entities is a limited liability company (sociedad de responsabilidad
limitada) incorporated under Argentine law. Together with PAE Branch, the three companies

will be referred to as the “Argentine Companies”.

18. The Claimants own close to 20% of the shares of Central Dock Sud SA (“Dock Sud”)
and 16% of Gas Nea SA. PAE is also engaged in electric power generation by having
acquired a non-controlling interest in Dock Sud, which had built and operated a thermal

power plant in Buenos Aires.

19. The Claimants’ claims have arisen from their investments in Argentina. The Argentine
Companies were the second largest oil and gas producer in Argentina, and their production
was sold domestically and abroad. The Argentine Companies are holders of a number of
hydrocarbon (i.e. oil and gas) production concessions, exploration permits and production
contracts in Argentina (the “Hydrocarbon Concessions and Contracts”), listed in Annex B to
Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, as well as natural gas export permits, listed in Annex C to
the Memorial. The Argentine Companies carry out operations in the Argentine Provinces of
Tierra del Fuego (both on-shore and off-shore), Santa Cruz, Chubut, Neuquén and Salta, as

well as off-shore Argentina in the South Atlantic.

20. The Claimants allege that the Respondent, through actions and omissions of the

Government and its agencies, violated the BIT, general international law and Argentine law.

21. Among the standards set by the BIT, the following are alleged to have been infringed: (i)
fair and equitable treatment of investments; (ii) full protection of and security for the latter;
(iii) treatment not less favourable than that prescribed by international law; (iv) abstention
from arbitrary or discriminatory interference with the management, operation, maintenance,
use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or disposal of investments; (v) compliance with all
obligations undertaken towards investors, including those relating to tax matters; (vi) freedom
of transfers of currency at the prevailing market rate of exchange; (vii) prohibition of
nationalisation or expropriation, directly or indirectly, except in accordance with certain
conditions (public purpose; absence of discrimination; payment of prompt, adequate and

effective compensation; due process).

22. The BIT standards correspond to those resulting from general international law. In
addition, the Claimants allege that Argentina, by not respecting BIT standards, infringed other

tules of international law, such as pacta sunt servanda.

23. Finally, the Claimants maintain that Argentina, by its conduct, violated rules of its own
law, such as those on: the inviolability of ownership except under certain conditions (Article
17 of the Constitution); the entitlement of all persons to work, trade, make use and dispose of
property (Article 14 of the Constitution); the guarantee that the rights established by the
Constitution will not be altered by laws governing their exercise (Article 28 of the
Constitution); treaties forming part of Argentine law and prevailing over domestic legal

enactments (Articles 31 and 75(22) of the Constitution). Similarly, the Claimants allege that

Argentina violated the Regulatory Frameworks for Oil and Gas and for Electricity, consisting

of various laws, decrees, regulations and model licenses that were adopted in the early 1990s.

24. The Regulatory Framework for Oil and Gas provides, according to the Claimants,
conditions for export by the producers; an exemption from existing or future fees, duties,
rights or withholdings, as well as a prohibition of discriminatory taxes on them, their
businesses and assets; a right freely to dispose of their production; maximum royalties on the
sales proceeds; and protection against discriminatory taxes. These guarantees were
incorporated, directly or by reference, into the production concessions, exploration permits
and production contracts. Moreover, the prices of crude oil and natural gas were de-regulated
in 1991 and 1994, respectively, thus ensuring the freedom to choose the terms of the
transactions agreed upon by the producers. The contractual rights entered into by the
exploration and production companies enjoyed the same protection by the Constitution as that
extended to property rights. Tariffs for the distribution of natural gas were to be calculated in
dollars and expressed in pesos, at the exchange rate applicable on the date of invoicing,
adjustable periodically to ensure a reasonable return, and subject to review every five years.
The aims of all these measures were to encourage competition, to open access to pipelines and

distribution networks, and to induce foreign investors to participate in the oil and gas industry.

25. The Regulatory Framework for Electricity consisted of a series of laws, decrees and
regulations to implement the privatisation of part of the State electricity sector, in particular
with a view to reducing the public debt, to improving the efficiency of services and to
increasing tax revenues. To achieve these aims, the Framework provided, notably, the
regulations and standards according to which producers were to participate in the Wholesale
Electricity Market (WEM), including the following: segregation of different types of activities
(generation, transportation, distribution); promotion of competition in electricity production,
and promotion of investments to guarantee long-term supply; and furtherance of

competitiveness and cost efficiency.

26. The rights and guarantees established in the Oil and Gas Regulatory Framework and in
the Electricity Framework were, according to the Claimants, part of the investment conditions
and accepted as such by the Argentine Companies and the Claimants. They were, according

to the latter, central to their investment decisions.

27. It is unnecessary, at this stage of the proceedings, to enter into the details of the measures
taken in the hydrocarbons and electricity sector by the Government. According to the
Claimants, the measures included a series of laws, decrees, resolutions and communications,
listed in paragraph 32 of the Request for Arbitration and affecting: the exemption of
hydrocarbon exports from export dues, with the express purpose to compensate the banking
sector for asymmetrical “pesification”, i.e. the mandatory conversion of dollar obligations into
peso-denominated ones at a rate of 1:1; the limitation of the royalty rate to 12%; the right
freely to export hydrocarbons and to transfer funds abroad; the right to effect sales and
purchases in dollars, terminated by “pesification”; the freedom to contract impeded by the
elimination of adjustment mechanisms; the ability to depreciate, for tax purposes, investments
funded in dollars at the same level as prior to “pesification”; and, more generally, the

possibility to mitigate losses caused by that process through tax measures.

28. The measures taken by the Government and outlined above are alleged by the Claimants
to have violated the BIT, general international law and Argentine law, as pointed out earlier (§

20).

29. Regarding the BIT, the Government allegedly infringed its Article II(2)(a), which
requires Argentina to grant investments made by US nationals fair and equitable treatment,
full protection and security, and treatment not less favourable than that required by

international law, the same rule applying to Argentine nationals in the US.

30. These measures were also, according to the Claimants, contrary to Article II(2)(b) in that

were arbitrary or discriminatory and impaired the Claimants’ investments.

31. Article II(2)(c) of the BIT prescribes that each Contracting Party shall observe “any
obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments’ (so-called “umbrella clause”),
and Article XII contains certain guarantees in tax matters. The Claimants contend that both
provisions have been violated, as well as Article IV of the BIT, the measures taken by
Argentina being equivalent to expropriation of the Claimants’ investments in Argentina and
their equity interest in the Argentine Companies without prompt, adequate and effective
compensation. The same is true of the measures of interference with contractual rights which,
under Argentina’s Constitution, amount to a taking of property rights. Finally, those

measures allegedly infringed Article V of the BIT guaranteeing the freedom of all transfers

related to an investment in and out of the territory of a State Party, including returns,

compensation, payments made in settlement of an investment dispute, and so on.

32. The measures taken against vested legal and contractual rights of the Claimants are also,
according to the latter, violations of property rights protected by Sections 14 and 17 of the
Argentine Constitution. By the fact that the BIT was approved pursuant to that Constitution,
and thus became part of domestic law though prevailing over the latter, the measures at issue

are alleged to be in violation of Sections 31 and 75(22) of the Constitution as well.

Il. COMPETENCE OF THE TRIBUNAL

1. Relevant Texts

33. The Centre can only have jurisdiction if there is mutual consent. It is now well
established that a general reference to an ICSID arbitration in a bilateral investment treaty can
be considered to form the written consent of a State, within the meaning of Article 25 of the
Convention of 18 March 1965 on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (hereafter “Washington Convention” or “ICSID Convention”), to
jurisdiction of the Centre, and the filing of a request by the investor is considered to form the

investor’s consent.

34. The BIT came into force between the two States on 20 October 1994.

35. Article VII(4) of the BIT provides:

Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment dispute for
settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the choice specified in
the written consent of the national or company under paragraph 3. Such
consent, together with the written consent of the national or company when
given under paragraph 3, shall satisfy the requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of Chapter II of
the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and for purposes of the
Additional Facility Rules; and . . .

36. Pursuant to paragraph 3 of the same Article, the national or company concerned, i.e. the

Claimants, may fulfil that requirement by choosing to consent in writing to the submission of

the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration “(i) to the International Centre for the

Settlement of Investment Disputes ...”.

37. Argentina has consented by becoming a Party to the BIT (Article VII(4)). Pursuant to
Article VII(3)(a)(i), on 20 May 2003, PAE and BP Argentina delivered a letter to the
Government, and on 21 May 2003 to the Secretary-General of ICSID, consenting to ICSID
jurisdiction over the present dispute. On 27 November 2003, BP America, PAE Sur, PAE
Fueguina and PAE Continental delivered a letter to the Government, and on 4 December 2003
to the Secretary-General of ICSID, also consenting to ICSID jurisdiction over the present

dispute.

38. Article VII(2) of the BIT provides:

In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should
initially seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation. If the
dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company concerned may
choose to submit the dispute to resolution . . .

39. In the present case, initial consultation and negotiation were initiated by the Claimants,
which advised the Government on 16 August 2002 formally of the dispute, informing it that
they would solicit international arbitration under the BIT, and seeking settlement by
consultation and negotiation. This communication was followed by several letters to the
President of the Republic of Argentina and the President of its National Bank. The Claimants
repeatedly requested the Argentine authorities, to no avail, to adopt measures preserving the
Claimants’ investments. The six-month period of consultation and negotiation lapsed on 16
February 2003, more than three months before the institution of arbitration proceedings

(Request for Arbitration, §§ 59-60, 62-64).

2. Scope of Examination

(a) Institution of the Proceedings
40. As mentioned, the BIT entered into force on 20 October 1994 (see above, §34) and,
accordingly, Argentina consented to ICSID arbitration on that same date. The Claimants gave
consent by the letters mentioned in § 37 above. The Secretary-General of ICSID registered
the Requests for Arbitration dated 22 May 2003 and 4 December 2003, respectively, on 6
June 2003 and 27 February 2004. The proceedings were therefore instituted on 6 February

12

2004 and 25 March 2004, respectively, pursuant to Rule 6(2) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure

for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

(b) Prior Consultation and Negotiation

41. Under Article VII(2) of the BIT the parties to an investment dispute “should initially
seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation”. The provision goes on to say that,
“Tilf the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company concerned may choose to
submit the dispute for resolution”, inter alia, to ICSID arbitration. This text could give rise a
question of interpretation: is it mandatory to have consulted and negotiated unsuccessfully
prior to submitting a case to arbitration? The conditional “should” in the first phrase of
Article VII(2) suggests that it is not, a view adhered to by the Claimants (Request for
Arbitration, § 87). The second phrase, however, seems to view consultation and negotiation as
a condition for submitting cases, a view supported by the Respondent. The question does not
have to be answered in the present case, however, as the Claimants have made an adequate

effort to consult and negotiate, as is shown by the facts related above (see above, § 39).

(c) Significance of the Case-law Developed by ICSID and Other Tribunals

42. ICSID arbitral tribunals are established ad hoc, from case to case, in the framework of the
Washington Convention, and this Tribunal is not aware of any provision, either in that
Convention or in the relevant BIT, establishing an obligation of stare decisis. It is
nonetheless a reasonable assumption that international arbitral tribunals, including those set
up within the ICSID, will generally take into account the precedents set by other international
tribunals. The present Tribunal will follow that same approach, especially since Claimants
and Respondent, in the written pleadings and oral arguments have heavily relied on those

precedents.

(d) What Issues Are Deemed to Be of a Jurisdictional Nature?

43. The parties disagree as to which questions are to be addressed as jurisdictional ones at
this stage of the present proceedings. The Respondent has generally taken an extensive view
of what belongs to the jurisdictional sphere. The Claimants, by contrast, have been restrictive
on that same point, often contending that certain objections to jurisdiction made by Argentina

belong to the merits of the case.

44. In the Oil Platforms case, the International Court of Justice (hereafter “ICJ”) defined its

task at the jurisdictional level by pointing out that it

must ascertain whether the violations ... pleaded do or do not fall within the
provisions of the [1955] Treaty [of Amity] and whether, as a consequence,
the dispute is one which the Court has jurisdiction ratione materiae to
entertain ($16).°

45. It is, in other words, a question of whether the issues to be considered fall within the
parameters of jurisdiction as defined by the enabling treaty, and not one of examining whether

the Claimants’ allegations should succeed on the merits.
46. As early as in Amco v. Indonesia,* the ICSID Arbitral Tribunal had held that

[t]he Tribunal must not attempt at this stage to examine the claim itself in
any detail, but the Tribunal must only be satisfied that prima facie the claim,
as stated by the Claimant when initiating the arbitration, is within the
jurisdictional mandate of ICSID arbitration, and consequently of this
Tribunal (at p. 405).

47. Here again, the gist of the Tribunal’s decision is that essentially the issue is not whether
the claim is well-founded on the merits, but whether, in the way in which it is stated, it fits

into the jurisdictional framework designed by the relevant arbitration clause.

48. The question examined here has also come up in a recent case involving the Respondent.

In Siemens AG v. Argentina? the Tribunal observed:

At this stage of the proceedings, the Tribunal is not required to consider
whether the claims under the Treaty [between Germany and Argentina
Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments of
9 April 1991] made by Siemens are correct. This is a matter for the merits.
The Tribunal simply has to be satisfied that, if the Claimants’ allegations
would be proven correct, then the Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider them
(§180).

(Iran v. United States), Jurisdiction, Judgment of 12 December 1996, ICJ Reports 1996, pp. 809-
810.

4 Decision on Jurisdiction of 25 September 1983, ICSID case No. ARB/81/1, ICSID Reports, Vol.
1, p. 390.

5

Decision on Jurisdiction of 3 August 2004, ICSID case No. ARB/02/8, ILM, Vol. 44, 2005, p. 137.

49. The question arises whether the Tribunal should go further in its inquiry at this stage of

the proceedings. In Enron 1° the Tribunal observed:

The fact that the Claimants have argued and demonstrated prima facie that
they have been adversely affected by the tax measures complained of is
sufficient for the Tribunal to consider that the claim, as far as this matter is
concerned, is within its jurisdiction to examine such claim on the merits
under the provisions of the Bilateral Investment Treaty (§ 99).

50. The present Tribunal does not retain the requirement that a claimant has the burden of
proof that it has a prima facie claim against the respondent in the sense of such a requirement
for, for example, obtaining interim measures. On the other hand, and that is the manner in
which this Tribunal understands the above-quoted paragraph in Enron I, a claimant should
demonstrate that prima facie its claims fall under the relevant provisions of the BIT for the
purposes of jurisdiction of the Centre and competence of the tribunal (but not whether the
claims are well founded). In that respect, labelling is not enough. For, if everything were to
depend on characterisations made by a claimant alone, the inquiry to jurisdiction and
competence would be reduced to naught, and tribunals would be bereft of the compétence de

la compétence enjoyed by them under Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention.

51. As a consequence, the claims made in the present case must be taken as they are by the
Tribunal at this stage of the proceedings, whose only task it is, in the present phase of the
proceedings, to determine whether, as formulated, they fit into the jurisdictional parameters
set out by the relevant treaty instrument or instruments. This is so because in that phase,
tribunals deal with the nature and scope of claims and not with the question of whether they
are to succeed. If it were otherwise, questions of jurisdiction would have to be addressed at
the same time as, or even subsequently to, the examination of the merits of the case.
Accordingly, the question is here whether the Claimants’ claims, if well founded, a matter to
be examined at the following stage, may denote violations of the BIT and therefore fall within
the Centre’s jurisdiction and this Tribunal’s competence under the relevant provisions of the
BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. This is the perspective from which Argentina’s

objections must be viewed.

° Enron and Ponderosa Assets v. Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction of 14 January 2004, ICSID
case No. ARB/O1/3, http://ita.Jaw.uvic.ca/documents/Enron-Jurisdiction.pdf.

 

52. In theory, the inquiry by the Tribunal at the present stage of the proceedings would also
extend to the question of whether they are not frivolous or abusive. As no objection has been

raised by Argentina, the Tribunal need not engage in that type of inquiry.

53. Argentina has raised six preliminary objections: (i) the dispute does not, contrary to what
is required by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, “arise directly out of an investment”;
(ii) it is not a “legal” dispute as prescribed by that same provision; (iii) the claim must be
limited with regard to tax measures; (iv) the Claimants are estopped from addressing organs
other than Argentine tribunals; (v) the claims relate to conjectural rather than real damages;

and (vi) the Claimants have no right of action (jus standi).

54. As a matter of terminology, Rule 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules contains the
following formulation: “Any objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre or, for other reasons, is not within the competence of the Tribunal...”
(emphasis added; see also Article 41(2) of the Washington Convention).’ In the present
Decision, the terms “jurisdiction” and “competence” shall be used interchangeably, having
regard to the preliminary objections raised by Respondent and debated between the parties.
For the same reason, there is no need to go into the possible — and somewhat controversial —
distinction between jurisdiction and admissibility. Whatever the labelling, the parties have

presented their case on the basis of the six objections raised by the Respondent.

7 The Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment

Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (18 March 1965), Doc. ICSID/2 states at § 22:
“The term ‘jurisdiction of the Centre’ is used in the Convention as a convenient expression to mean the
limits within which the provisions of the Convention will apply and the facilities of the Centre will be
available for conciliation and arbitration proceedings. The jurisdiction of the Center is dealt with in
Chapter II of the Convention (Articles 25-27).” At § 38 the Report pursues: “Article 41 reiterates the
well-established principle that international tribunal are to be the judges of their own competence . . . It is
to be noted in this connection that the power of the Secretary-General to refuse registration of a request
for conciliation or arbitration . . . is so narrowly defined as not to encroach on the prerogative of the
Commissions and Tribunals to determine their own competence and, on the other hand, that registration
of a request by the Secretary-General does not, of course, preclude a Commission or Tribunal from
finding that the dispute is outside the jurisdiction of the Centre.”

  

 

 

 

3. First Preliminary Objection: The Dispute Does Not Arise Directly out
of an Investment

(a) The Positions of the Parties

55. According to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,“[t]he jurisdiction of the Centre shall
extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment . . .”. The Respondent argues
that the Claimants’ claims do not meet Article 25(1) in that they do not arise “directly” out of

an investment.

56. To support its objection, Argentina invokes the travaux préparatoires of Article 25(1),
which initially was intended to refer to “disputes arising out of or in relation to an
investment” (emphasis added), a very wide formula that was subsequently reduced to the
present language, proposed by the Central African Republic and commented on, first by the
Portuguese delegation, according to which the changes made restricted ICSID jurisdiction to
claims for damages suffered as a consequence of certain acts by the State that were directed
particularly at the investor, and, second, by the delegation of Spain, which explained that the
purpose of the new text was “to avoid the triumph of excesses, both of positions that would
inappropriately close the Centre’s jurisdiction, and of positions that would open it
excessively”. “Directly”, according to Argentina, may be equalled to “specifically”

(Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 21-22; see also Transcript, p. 8).

57. According to Argentina, it is not enough for an investor to have been adversely affected
by measures of the host State, even at the jurisdictional stage. The investor must also show
that the adverse measures were directed against him and were not just mere general measures
aimed at everybody: according to the Respondent, if universal measures were considered by
ICSID tribunals, “[t]his would be judging a public policy and not a legal conflict”
(Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 22). However, the Respondent admits that general
measures can, exceptionally, justify ICSID jurisdiction - when “those ... measures are
adopted in violation of specific commitments given to the investor in treaties, legislation or
contracts”, as the Arbitral Tribunal said in its Decision on Jurisdiction of 17 July 2003 in CMS

Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina:* “What is brought under the jurisdiction of the Centre”,

‘ ICSID case No. ARB/O1/8, ILM, Vol. 42, 2003, p. 788.

the Tribunal continues, “is not the general measures in themselves but the extent to which
they may violate those specific commitments” (§ 27). Thus, a “clear and reasonable
interpretative line” on this would be, according to the Respondent, that Claimants must show
specific commitments made to them, negotiated with them and “promised particularly,
specifically and exclusively” to them, allegedly violated by Argentina’s measures:
devaluation of the peso, establishment of a new exchange parity, temporary conversion of

obligations and tariffs into pesos, new fiscal policy.

58. To illustrate its point, Argentina invokes Methanex v. United States of America,? where a
NAFTA rule similar to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention was discussed, namely, Article
1101 of the NAFTA relating to protection against “measures adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to (a) investors of another Party; (b) investments of investors of another Party in the
territory of the Party”. As none of the measures taken by the defendant, the United Sates,
were expressly aimed at Methanex, the question arose whether they were “related” to that
company and, in particular, whether it was sufficient that they were susceptible of affecting
the claimant. On that point the Tribunal, in its Partial Award of 7 August 2002, came to the
conclusion that there had to be a significant threshold to NAFTA arbitration and that the
criterion of any economic impact on the investor did not amount to such a threshold. In other
words, and to quote Argentina’s Memorial on Jurisdiction (§ 34), “[s]imple impact does not
mean legal impact”; the Claimants should have established a “direct, proximate and

immediate connection between the measure and their alleged investment” (ibid.).

59. The Claimants respond that they do not complain of “general” measures, but of violations
of specific commitments entered into by Argentina vis-a-vis the Claimants and subsequently
violated by Argentina. These acts cannot, according to the Claimants, be hidden behind the
label of “general” measures prompted by Argentina’s financial situation. The “general-
measures” argument had been raised already by Argentina, and rejected by the Tribunal, in
the above-mentioned and quoted CMS case (above, § 57). The Claimants contend that,
contrary to the inferences made by Respondent, there have not been, in CMS or in any other
instance, “specific commitments” negotiated directly with the State; nor was there a

requirement to show the existence of such commitments, except if they resulted from treaty

° UNCITRAL (NAFTA) = Arbitration, First Partial Award of 7 August 2002,
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/12613.pdf.

provisions applicable to the States concerned. The Claimants then refer to the passages in
CMS and contend that the measures resorted to violated legally binding commitments made to
them as investors under the BIT, the Regulatory Frameworks, the hydrocarbon concessions
and contracts, the export permits, the Argentine Constitution and Argentine law. These were
general measures directly bearing on the Claimants’ investments and contrary to the BIT; in
the oil and gas sector, there were also a number of measures specifically addressed to that

sector.

60. According to the Claimants, Argentina misinterprets the Methanex decision when it
contends that it stands for the proposition that a “general measure must be directed against
specific commitments undertaken with the investor” and that the Claimants must establish “a
direct, proximate and immediate connection between the measure and the alleged investment”
(Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 34). The Claimants point out; (i) that the Methanex decision
does not pertain to matters covered by the BIT between Argentina and the United States; and

(ii) that Methanex actually supports the Claimants’ views.

61. According to the Claimants, in the Methanex case, the measures taken by the State of
California were aimed at a methanol-based ingredient of gasoline, California having issued an
executive order against using that ingredient. Methanex, the claimant, did not manufacture the
ingredient in question, but produced, transported and marketed methanol, from which that
ingredient was made. Thus California’s Executive Order was not immediately directed at
methanol and had but an indirect impact on Methanex’s investment in methanol. By contrast,
in the present case, the Respondent’s measures were aimed directly at the oil and gas industry
in Argentina. The Government specifically targeted that industry, whereas in Methanex, the

contested Executive Order did not even mention “methanol”.

62. Furthermore, the Claimants contend that, in the Methanex case, the United States objected
to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Article 1101 of the NAFTA, alleging that the measures
taken by the State of California were not “related to” Methanex’s investment. The Tribunal in
that case saw a “relation” between a measure and an investment where there was a “legally
significant connexion” between the former and the latter. The (Canadian) claimant tried to
prove such a connexion by alleging collusion between the lobbyists of the (American)
methanol industry and the Governor of California. The Tribunal found the evidence tendered

by the claimant to be insufficient; it did not however refuse to take jurisdiction but asked the

claimant to adduce more evidence. In the present instance, according to the Claimants, the
relation between the investments and the measures complained of is a straightforward one.
The measures were open ones, specifically aimed at the oil and gas industry, and, contrary to
Methanex, the evidence in the instant case points to a clear “legally significant connexion”

between Argentina’s measures, the BIT and the Claimants’ investments in Argentina.

(b) The Tribunal’s Considerations

63. In this Tribunal’s judgment, general measures of economic policy taken by the host State
are in principle not within the purview of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. In that
sense, and even if the present legal context differs from that of Methanex, it is obvious that
general measures often do not result in a dispute “arising directly out of an investment” in the

sense of Article 25(1).

64. It may well be, however, that, in the context of the commitments assumed by the host
State, “general” measures have a “specific” effect if they appear to violate specific
commitments — as pointed out by Argentina — or if they have a specific impact on the
investment — as emphasised by the Claimants. The expression “arising directly out of an

investment” (Article 25(1)) cannot, therefore, be interpreted as “directed to”.

65. In the CMS case (see above, § 57, cited by both parties), the Tribunal rightly observed
that:

[I]t does not have jurisdiction over measures of a general economic policy
adopted by the Republic of Argentina and cannot pass judgment on whether
they are right or wrong. The Tribunal also concludes, however, that it has
jurisdiction to examine whether specific measures affecting the Claimant’s
investment or general measures of economic policy having a direct bearing
on such investment have been adopted in violation of legally binding
commitments made to the investor in treaties, legislation or contracts (§ 33).

66. The “direct” relationship between the measure and the investment can be established,
according to that Tribunal, “if those general measures are adopted in violation of specific

commitments given to the investments in treaties, legislation or contracts” (§ 27).

67. In the Tribunal’s judgment, it is not enough for the Respondent to state that general
measures are complained of to exclude the Centre’s jurisdiction: the core question is the

existence of specific commitments that these general measures might violate.

20

68. At the present stage of the proceedings, which pertains to jurisdictional questions, the
examination of the issues discussed above can only be of a preliminary character. In essence,
it will be enough for the Claimants to contend that some specific commitments related to their

investments were violated by specific or general measures.

69. The standard to be used, therefore, is whether the Claimants have made out, prima facie,
a good case for there being a “dispute arising directly from an investment”. In the present
instance, the Tribunal is of the view that they have. It is, indeed, in the nature of the
mechanism of preliminary objections that, whenever the latter are somehow connected with
the substance, as is the case here, the matter can only form the subject of a preliminary

review.

70. Thus, the Tribunal finds that the present dispute has arisen directly from an investment in
the sense of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and, accordingly, rejects Argentina’s First

Preliminary Objection.

4. Second Preliminary Objection: The Present Dispute Is Not of a “Legal”
Nature

(a) Introduction

71. This objection aims at establishing that the present dispute is not of a “legal” nature as
required by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. In addition to the basic argument that the
dispute is not about the determination of legal rights and duties, the Respondent contends that
the claims are not related to rights but to “commercial flow” and that the rights claimed, being
contractual in nature (see also Transcript, p. 15), are not of an international character and do
not qualify as rights protected by Article I(1)(a) of the BIT; nor are they the object of an
investment agreement under Article VII(1) of that Treaty. Instead, the claim is about the
alleged non-performance of contractual obligations under Argentine law. And the BIT’s
“umbrella clause” (Article II(2)(c)) cannot be reasonably interpreted as meaning that breaches
of contract are automatically elevated from the domestic to the international level by the
effect of that clause. Finally, the Respondent points to arbitral precedents which bar

jurisdictional access to ICSID tribunals for purely contractual claims.

72. In fact, this Second Preliminary Objection is presented under different aspects. According

to the Respondent, the dispute is not a legal dispute under the Washington Convention for

21

several reasons: the first is that that the dispute is not about the determination of legal rights
and duties, because it merely relates to commercial flows; the second is that it is not legal but
purely contractual, because it only asserts rights and obligations based on agreements and
contracts; the third reason for denying a legal character to the claims presented by the
Claimants is that the existing contractual claims have not been transformed into treaty claims
by the so-called “umbrella clause”. The Tribunal will now endeavour to examine these

different contentions.

(b) Is the Dispute about Legal Rights?

(i) The Positions of the Parties

73. According to the Respondent, under Article 25(1) of the Washington Convention, the
controversy has to be about rights and duties, i.e. legal titles, and not simply one “regarding
certain undesirable consequences”. This, according to Argentina (Memorial on Jurisdiction,
§§ 36-37), is meant to exclude from the Centre’s jurisdiction “mere commercial or political
disputes”. In the framework of the Convention’s travaux préparatoires, the President (sic) of
the IBRD explained that the expression “legal disputes” had the purpose of encompassing
those cases involving differences of opinion with respect to a legal right. This would exclude
cases like, for example, if a company wanted to challenge a system of price control, which
implies issues of equity and not of legal rights.” And, later on, the President (sic) added that
“legal disputes” were those “referring to a legal right or obligation, or referring to a fact

related to the determination of such legal right or obligation”.

74. The Respondent concludes that the legal nature of a dispute cannot depend on the
characterisation made by the Claimants but is, in the words of the ICJ, “a matter for objective
determination” (Advisory Opinion of 30 March 1950 on the Interpretation of Peace
Treaties). (Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 42; it will be noted, in passing, that the Court’s
dictum pertains to the term “international dispute” rather than to the expression “legal
dispute”). Accordingly, the Respondent alleges that this Tribunal has no competence, in the
absence of a legal dispute, within the international framework established by Article 25(1) of

the 1965 Convention, and that it is for the Tribunal to determine what is a legal dispute.

22

75. To this line of argument Argentina adds another, related consideration. Under the above
treaty provision, disputes (or, rather, “legal” disputes) “are in relation to rights, not with
respect to commercial flows”. Yet the Claimants focus the dispute on commercial flows, i.e.
on the freedom of exercising their production and trading activities, rather than on assets
owned or controlled by them. But under Article I(1)(a) of the BIT, protected investments are
conceived as consisting in rights in personam and in rem, as becomes evident from sub-
paragraphs (i), (iv) and (v) of that provision: tangible and intangible ownership rights,
intellectual property, and rights, licences and permits granted pursuant to law. The issue “is
not what happened to such things, but what happened to the investor’s rights on such things”

(Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 45-47).

76. Regarding this first part of the Second Preliminary Objection, the Claimants recall that a
legal dispute is “a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal view or interests
between parties” (ICJ, East Timor case).''! And the Claimants add that a dispute is legal if
“legal remedies such as restitution or damages are sought and if legal rights based on, for

example, treaties or legislation are claimed’(Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 22).

77. That is the case here, according to the Claimants, the issue being whether the measures
taken by Argentina were in violation of the latter’s obligations under the BIT, including the
question of whether those measures in effect amounted to the expropriation of specific legal
and contractual rights and revenue, to unfair and inequitable treatment of the Claimants’
investment, to unfair and discriminatory impairment of that investment, to a failure to provide
full security and protection to the investment, and to a violation of the BIT and other rules of
international law. The case also involves the amount of reparations due and, hence, clearly is
a legal dispute (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 24). In this connexion, the Claimants

invoke a series of six precedents, all involving Argentina, among which Azurix Corp.’ and

 

'© ICJ Reports 1950, p.65, at §74.
"(Portugal v. Australia), Jurisdiction, Judgment of 30 June 1995, ICJ Reports 1995, p. 89, at § 22.

'. ©, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2001, p.
105); see also Fedax v. Venezuela, Decision on Jurisdiction of 11 June 1997, ICSID case No. ARB/96/3,
ILM, Vol. 37, 1998, p. 1378.

8 Decision on Jurisdiction of § December 2003, ICSID case No. ARB/03/30, ILM, Vol. 43, 2004, p. 262,
at § 58.

23

 

LG&E."* As was the case in these precedents, the Claimants have sui ently demonstrated,
in their Memorial, that they were adversely affected by measures of the Respondent against
their “legitimate legal and contract rights”, damaging the Claimants’ investment in Argentina.
There is, accordingly, a controversy over the existence and scope of legal rights or obligations
and over the extent of the reparation due, which means that there is a legal dispute under
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

78. Regarding Argentina’s “commercial-flow” argument (see above, § 71), the Claimants’
reply is that it has been shown that genuine investments were made under the BIT, which
consisted of interests in the Argentine Companies, capital contributions, legal and contractual
rights under the Oil and Gas Regulatory Framework, concessions and contracts, private
hydrocarbon supply contracts, exports permits, and so on. The Claimant Companies in the
US allege that they made substantial capital contributions to allow the Argentine Companies
to exploit the concession areas in Argentina and to export the products thereof. All these
items constitute “investments” within the meaning of the BIT and the Washington
Convention; thus the present instance is an “investment dispute” under Article 25(1) of the

latter.

(ii) The Tribunal’s Considerations

79. The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that it is for it and not for the parties to
determine whether there is a legal dispute. It will now deal with the first argument at the basis
of the Second Preliminary Objection against ICSID jurisdiction, to the effect that the present
dispute is indeed not a “legal” one, as required by Article 25(1) of the Washington
Convention, because it does not involve the determination of rights and obligations, and is

merely a commercial dispute.

80. The Tribunal recalls that the notion of “dispute” generally has been accurately defined by
the Permanent Court of International Justice (PCIJ) in the Mavrommatis case, 'S Where the
Court said that “[a] dispute is a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal

views or interests between two persons” (p.11). This definition was more recently confirmed

Decision on Jurisdiction of 30 April 2004, ICSID case No. ARB/02/I,
http://www. worldbank.org/icsid/cases/lge-decision-en.pdf.

'S (Greece v. Great Britain), Judgment of 30 August 1924, PCH, Series A, N° 2.

24

by the ICJ in the East Timor case (§ 22). '© Tt covers all “disputes”, legal or political, national
or international. “Legal” disputes have generally been defined as “controversies in which the
Parties are in disagreement over a right”, see for example Article | of the Locarno Arbitration
Conventions between Germany, on the one hand, and Belgium, France, Poland and
Czechoslovakia, on the other. What matters here is whether the pretentions of the Claimants
and the arguments of the Respondent are formulated as being based on existing law. This is

what is, in the words of the ICJ (see above, § 74), “‘a matter for objective determination”.

81. Although the Respondent in the present case has contended that the Claimants were
concerned with “commercial flow” and that their claims were of an economic and political,
rather than legal, nature, it seems evident to this Tribunal that the Claimants have framed their
pretentions in legal terms and on the basis of law, and have been answered by Respondents in
legal terms. According to what has been recalled above, what matters at this stage, to
determine whether the dispute is “legal” under Article 25(1) of the 1965 Convention, is
whether the Parties, to justify their claims, are basing themselves on law. Another question,
to be decided at the merits stage, is whether those claims are well-founded in substance. This

Tribunal finds that the present disagreement is clearly a legal dispute.
82. In conclusion, it is beyond doubt, in the Tribunal’s view, that the present dispute involves

the determination of legal rights and obligations of the Claimants as well as of the Argentine

Republic, and that it is not a mere political or commercial dispute.

(c) Can Rights Based on Contracts Be Considered Legal Rights?
83. The second question relates to the second contention of the Respondent, to the effect that

the present dispute is excluded from the Centre’s jurisdiction because it involves only

contractual rights.
(i) The Position of the Parties
84. According to Argentina, the opposition of legal theses and interests, to fit the definition

provided for in Article 25(1) of the Washington Convention, should furthermore pertain to the

'® See above, § 76 and note 11.

25

“provisions establishing international obligations of the State receiving the investment”
(Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 39). This is not the case here, for the rights claimed arise out of
provisions of concessions, exploration permits, contracts and export permits. Disagreements
of this type do not, for the Respondent, qualify as “legal disputes” under Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention and must be brought before the national courts to the jurisdiction of which
the “relevant parties” have “freely consented” (ibid., § 40). The fact that the Claimants assert
that Argentina has breached obligations established by the BIT is not enough to turn their

contractual claims into “legal disputes” under Article 25(1) of the 1965 Convention.

85. Always according to the Respondent, the dispute brought by the Claimants pertains to
alleged violations by Argentina of obligations under contracts and concessions, and not, as
alleged by the Claimants, to violations under the BIT. Hence the appropriate jurisdiction is
that open to the contracts and concessions. This is why the Respondent’s consent to ICSID

jurisdiction under Article VII of the BIT is of no relevance.

86. Thus the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction, as the dispute does not pertain to a violation of the
BIT but to the alleged non-performance of contractual obligations under Argentine law (ibid.,

§ 64).

87. To be protected under the BIT, contractual relationships must be in the form of an
investment agreement, says the Respondent, and this is not the case here, for all the claims
here are of a contractual nature and subject to general laws. The host State has not assumed
obligations vis-a-vis a specific investment, so that, pursuant to the Decision on Jurisdiction of
29 January 2004 in SGS v. Philippines,'" there is no investment agreement in the sense of

Article VII(1) of the BIT (p. 46).

88. Regarding the issue of whether their contractual rights qualify as “investments”, the
Claimants refer to both CMS and Azurix (above, §§ 57 and 77), where it was found, despite
Argentina’s objections, that direct or indirect ownership of shares, interests or concession
gave the US investor a claim under the BIT for its proportionate share of the destruction of the
value of the local company. The former case was about measures taken by the host State

regarding the investment made by CMS in a license for the transportation of natural gas. In

'" ICSID case No. ARB/02/6, www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/SGSvPhil-final.pdf.

26

Azurix, the issue was that company’s indirect investment in a water concession through a local
subsidiary. In both instances it was held that the US interests qualified as investments under
the BIT. The passage extracted by the Claimants from the Azurix decision seems particularly
noteworthy: “a concession contract, such as that entered by ABA [the Azurix subsidiary in
Argentina], qualifies as an investment for purposes of the [Argentina-US] BIT given the wide
meaning conferred upon this term in the BIT that includes ‘any right conferred by law or

contract’ (§ 62).

89. Moreover, the Claimants do not simply invoke breach of contract, they invoke a breach of
the BIT. As is shown in the above-cited passage, the right in issue is, in addition, protected
by the BIT. Always in the Azurix decision, the Tribunal disagreed with Argentina’s argument

that that company’s claim was a purely contractual nature:

The investment dispute which the Claimant has put before this Tribunal
invokes obligations owed by the Respondent to Claimant under the BIT and
it is based on a different cause of action from a claim under the Contract
Documents. Even if the dispute as presented by the Claimant may involve
the interpretation or analysis of facts related to performance under the
Concession Agreement, the Tribunal considers that, to the extent that such
issues are relevant to a breach of the obligations of the Respondent under
the BIT, they cannot per se transform the dispute under the BIT into a
contractual dispute (§ 76).

90. This means, according to the Claimants, that in Azurix, as in the present case, there is, in
addition to a contractual claim, a cause of action under the BIT because the measures taken in
the host State amount to an expropriation of rights held by the Claimants and protected by that

Treaty.

(ii) The Tribunal’s Considerations

91. In this Tribunal’s view, it is not enough to state that a dispute is a contractual one to
disqualify it as a legal dispute. It is well known that ICSID tribunals have been dealing over
the years with contractual as well as non-contractual disputes. The question here is, rather,
the extent of the jurisdiction of this Tribunal, on the basis of the BIT and not of an arbitration
clause in a contract. The Tribunal wishes to make it clear that, at first sight, it has only
jurisdiction over treaty claim, and cannot entertain purely contractual claims which do not

amount to a violation of the BIT.

27

92. In this connexion, it is necessary to decide whether this statement concerning the second
aspect of the Second Preliminary Objection will have to be corrected on account of the

existence of an “umbrella clause” in Article II(2)(c) of the BIT.

93. Article II(2)(c) of the BIT provides that “[e]ach Party shall observe any obligation it may
have entered into with regard to the investments”. In SGS v. Pakistan, 18 it had been alleged
by the Claimant that that clause “elevated” breaches of contract from the municipal to the BIT
level and brought them within the scope of that Treaty. This construction was rejected by the
Tribunal, as it is by the Respondent in the instant case, for it would “entail the incorporation
of many public contracts as well as other municipal law under the umbrella of BITs”. It
would also render nugatory the other protection clauses in the BITs and do away with any
forum-selection and dispute-settlement clauses that may have been agreed upon (Memorial on

Jurisdiction, §§ 67-68).

(d) Does the Existence of an “Umbrella” Clause Modify the Tribunal’s
Conclusions?

94. The next issue to be considered is therefore that of the “umbrella clause” contained in

Article I(2)(c) of the BIT.

(i) The Position of the Parties

95. The effect of the umbrella clause is, according to the Claimants, to place contracts and
other commitments between the investor and the host State under the protection of the Treaty;
according to the Respondent, it cannot have such an effect. In SGS v. Pakistan (above, § 93),
it was held that the umbrella clause of the BIT between Switzerland and Pakistan could not be
taken to convert mere contractual claims into BIT-protected ones. But, according to the
Claimants, the present case is different, involving as it does: the expropriation of legal and
contractual rights; the failure to treat investments fairly and equitably and to comply with
obligations assumed toward the Claimants’ investments; arbitrary and discriminatory
measures taken by the Respondent and resulting in the impairment of the management and

enjoyment of the investments; and the failure to provide full protection and security to those

'8 Decision on Jurisdiction of August 27, 2003, ICSID case No ARB/O1/13, ILM, Vol. 42, 2003, p. 1290,
§§ 163 and 165.

28

investments. The Claimants further rely on the position of the umbrella clause within the
Treaty which, unlike what was the case in the Swiss-Pakistani context, is placed among the
“first-order standard obligations”. This proves, according to the Claimants, that it was the
intention of the Contracting Parties to convert claims based on mere contractual relations
between investors and the host State into treaty claims. This view would seem, in the
Claimants’ view, to be confirmed by the travaux préparatoires. Accordingly, the above case-
law cannot be applied to the present instance. Moreover, the interpretation given to the
umbrella clause in SGS v. Pakistan has been strongly criticised in SGS v. Philippines (above,

§ 87) (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 79-91).

(ii) The Tribunal’s Considerations

96. Considering that the Claimant’s case comprises some claims which concern breaches of
contractual relationships purportedly existing between the foreign investor and the
Respondent — whose existence will be determined at the merits level —, the question for the
Tribunal is whether Article II(2)(c) of the U.S.-Argentina BIT is an umbrella clause whose
effect would be, according to the Claimants, to transform all contractual undertakings into
international law obligations and, accordingly, to turn breaches of the slightest such obligation

by the Respondent into breaches of the BIT.

97. This Tribunal wishes to state clearly at the outset the standards of interpretation of a BIT,
which is an international treaty between two States whose purpose it is to protect the
investments made by the nationals of each of the two States on the territory of the other, as
this question has often been settled through different approaches. On the one hand, some
contend that the treaty should be interpreted so as to favour State sovereignty; on the other, it
has been argued that the interpretation should favour the protection of investors. An example
of the first approach is the position adopted by the United States in the Methanex case. As
stated by the ICSID Tribunal in its Partial Award on Jurisdiction (above, § 58): “The USA
contends that a doctrine of restrictive interpretation should be applied in investor-state
disputes. In other words, wherever there is any ambiguity in clauses granting jurisdiction over
disputes between states and private persons, such ambiguity is always to be resolved in favour
of maintaining state sovereignty” (§ 103). The Tribunal did not accept this approach.

Conversely, investors often contend that, as a BIT’s purpose is to protect them, the

29

interpretation of their treaties for the promotion and the protection of investments, viewed in
their context and according to their object and purpose, leads to an interpretation in favour of
the investors. For example, in the case just cited, the Tribunal underscored that “[flor
Methanex, the phrase ‘relating to’ should be interpreted in the context of a treaty chapter
concerned with the protection of investors; and hence, a broad interpretation is appropriate” (§
137), a broad interpretation being here in favour of the investor, as it opened more broadly the
possibilities to present an international claim. The Tribunal also rejected that broad
interpretation which imposed no limitation on the right of investors to sue the State. It stated
that such an unbalanced interpretation cannot prevail, and adopted instead a balanced
approach. In the Tribunal’s own words, “the provisions of Chapter 11 [of the NAFTA] should
be interpreted in good faith in accordance with their ordinary meaning (in accordance with
Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention), without any one-sided doctrinal advantage built into

their text to disadvantage procedurally an investor seeking arbitral relief’ (§ 105).

98. The position as presented by Methanex, and more generally by investors, has sometimes
been accepted by arbitral tribunals, such as the ICSID Tribunal in the case of SGS v.
Philippines (above, § 87), which stated:

“The BIT is a treaty for the promotion and reciprocal protection of
investments. According to the preamble it is intended “to create and
maintain favourable conditions for investments by investors of one
Contracting Party in the territory of the other’. It is legitimate to
resolve uncertainties in its interpretation so as to favour the protection
of covered investments” (§ 116).

Other tribunals have rejected this approach, as a general approach. One may mention here the

Tribunal in Noble Ventures Inc. v. Romania"? which declared that “it is not permissible, as is

 

too often done regarding BITs, to interpret clauses exclusively in favour of investors”(§ 52,

underlined in the Award), although it used this kind of interpretation in a specific instance.

99. This Tribunal considers that a balanced interpretation is needed, taking into account both
the State’s sovereignty and its responsibility to create an adapted and evolutionary framework
for the development of economic activities, and the necessity to protect foreign investment

" Award of 12 October 2005 ICSID, case No. ARB/OI/I1,

http: si Lai Ventures-Final-Award.pdf.

30

and its continuing flow. It is bearing this in mind that the Tribunal will deal with the
controversial question of the so-called “umbrella clause”; as stated recently by Emmanuel
Gaillard, “[t]his question has divided practitioners and legal commentators and remains

unsettled in the international arbitral case law”.”°

The question is whether, through an
“umbrella clause”, sometimes also called an “observance-of-undertakings clause”, in a BIT,
contract claims of an investor having a contract either with the State or with an autonomous
entity are automatically and ipso jure “transformed” in treaty claims benefiting from the
dispute settlement mechanism provided for in the BIT. There is an ongoing debate on that
question, as divergent positions have been adopted by different ICSID tribunals. Umbrella
clauses are not always drafted in the same manner, and some decisions insist on the variations
in the drafting in order to explain different analyses. This Tribunal is not convinced that the
clauses analysed so far really should receive different interpretations. The broadest clauses
read like the one contained in the relevant clause of Article II(2)(c) in the U.S-Argentina BIT,
which provides: “Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard

to investments.”

100. The first tribunal to be faced with the interpretation of such a clause on the availability
of international arbitration based on the BIT for purely contractual claims was the Tribunal in
SGS v. Pakistan; in the Tribunal’s own words, “[i]t appears that this is the first international
arbitral tribunal that has had to examine the legal effect of a clause such as Article 11 of the
BIT. We have not been directed to the award of any ICSID or other tribunal in this regard,
and so it appears we have here a case of first impression” (§ 164). Indeed, the “umbrella
clause” in the Swiss-Pakistan BIT was Article 11, which stated: “Either Contracting Party
shall constantly guarantee the observance of the commitments it has entered into with respect
to the investments of the investors of the other Contracting Party.” The Tribunal did not
consider, as is well known, that this clause “elevates” all contract claims stemming from a
contract with the State to the level of claims for a breach of the Treaty, in other words that it
transforms any contract claim into a treaty claim. The arguments put forward by the SGS v.
Pakistan Tribunal are, in the view of this Tribunal, more than conclusive. These arguments

can be summarised in the following manner.

°° New York Law Journal, Thursday, 6 October 2005.

31

101. Firstly, Article 11 refers to commitments in general and not only to contractual
commitments. Therefore, if one considers that it elevates the contract claims to the status of
treaty claims, it should result as an unavoidable consequence that all claims based on any
commitment in legislative or administrative or other unilateral acts of the State or one of its

entities or subdivisions are to be considered as treaty claims:

“The ‘commitments’ the observance of which a Contracting Party is to
‘constantly guarantee’ are not limited to contractual commitments.
The commitments referred to may be embedded in, e.g., the municipal
legislative or administrative or other unilateral measures of a
Contracting Party. The phrase ‘constantly [to] guarantee the
observance’ of some statutory, administrative or contractual
commitment simply does not to our mind, necessarily signal the
creation and acceptance of a new international law obligation on the
part of the Contracting Party, where clearly there was none before.
Further, the ‘commitments’ subject matter of Article 11 may, without
imposing excessive violence on the text itself, be commitments of the
State itself as a legal person, or of any office, entity or subdivision
(local government units) or legal representative thereof whose acts
are, under the law on state responsibility, attributable to the State
itself. As a matter of textuality therefore, the scope of Article 11 of the
BIT, while consisting in its entirety of only one sentence, appears
susceptible of almost indefinite expansion” (Decision, § 166, emphasis
by this Tribunal).

102. Secondly, and consequently, if any violation of any commitment of the State is a

violation of the Treaty, this renders useless all substantive standards of protection of the

Treaty:

“Secondly, the Claimant’s view of Article 11 tends to make Articles 3
to 7 of the BIT substantially superfluous. There would be no real need
to demonstrate a violation of those substantive treaty standards if a
simple breach of contract, or of municipal statute or regulation, by
itself, would suffice to constitute a treaty violation on the part of a
Contracting Party and engage the international responsibility of the
Party.” (Decision, § 168).

103. A last point to be made, however, which brings some nuances to its findings in the SGS
v. Pakistan case, is that the Tribunal does not exclude the possibility that States decide to

consider, in a BIT, that the slightest violation of a contract between a State and a foreign

32

investor amounts to a violation of the Treaty, but then this has to be stated clearly and

unambiguously:

“The Tribunal is not saying that States may not agree with each other
in a BIT that henceforth, all breaches of each State’s contracts with
investors of the other State are forthwith converted into and to be
treated as breaches of the BIT. What the Tribunal is stressing is that in
this case, there is no clear and persuasive evidence that such was in
fact the intention of both Switzerland and Pakistan in adopting Article
11 of the BIT” (Decision, § 173).
This general reasoning is quite convincing, keeping in mind that the words “contract” or

“contractual obligations” do not even appear in the so-called umbrella clause.

104. As is also well known, this analysis was strongly criticised by another ICSID Tribunal,
in a similar case, SGS v. Philippines, in its decision on jurisdiction in 2004 (above, § 87), in
which it had also to deal with a so-called “umbrella clause” embodied in Article X(2) of the
BIT: “Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it has assumed with regard to
specific investments in its territory by investors of the other Contracting Party.” Here too, it
seems useful to this Tribunal to summarise the main steps of the reasoning followed. Firstly,
the Tribunal SGS v. Philippines indeed considered that this general provision transformed any

contractual obligation of the State into a treaty obligation:

“Tt uses the mandatory term ‘shall’, in the same way as substantive

Articles III-VI. The term ‘any obligation’ is capable of applying to

obligations arising under national law, e.g., those arising from a

contract ... Interpreting the actual text of Article X(2), it would appear

to say, and to say clearly, that each Contracting Party shall observe

any legal obligation it has assumed, or will in the future assume, with

regard to specific investments covered by the BIT (Decision, § 115,

emphasis by this Tribunal).”
Second, after having underscored the difference in the language of the umbrella clauses in
SGS y. Pakistan and SGS v. Philippines, the Tribunal criticised the reasoning of its
predecessor and emphasised that if it does not elevate the contract claims into treaty claims

the umbrella clause has no really such a far-reaching meaning.

105. This Tribunal should like to stress, on the contrary, that the interpretation given in SGS
v. Philippines does not only deprive one single provision of far-reaching consequences, but

renders the whole Treaty completely useless : indeed, if this interpretation were to be

33

followed — the violation of any legal obligation of a State, and not only any contractual
obligation with respect to investment, is a violation of the BIT, whatever the source of the
obligation and whatever the seriousness of the breach — it would be sufficient to have a so-
called “umbrella clause” and a dispute settlement mechanism, and no other articles setting
standards of protection of foreign investments in any BIT. If any violation of any legal
obligation of a State is ipso facto a violation of the treaty, then that violation needs not
amount to a violation of the high standards of the treaty of “fair and equitable treatment” or
“full protection and security”. Apart from this general and important remark, the Tribunal
also wishes to point to the fact that quite contradictory conclusions have been drawn by the
Tribunal in SGS v. Philippines case: among other things, the Tribunal stated that, although the
umbrella clause transforms the contract claims into treaty claims, first “it does not convert the
issue of the extent or content of such obligations into an issue of international law” (Decision,
§ 128, original emphasis), which means that the “contract claims/treaty claims” should be
assessed according to the national law of the contract and not the treaty standards and, second,
that the umbrella clause does not “override specific and exclusive dispute settlement
arrangements made in the investment contract itself’ (Decision, § 134), which explains that
the Tribunal has suspended its proceedings until the “contract claims/ treaty claims would be
decided by the national courts in accordance with the dispute settlement provisions of the
contract”, stating that “the Tribunal should not exercise its jurisdiction over a contractual
claim when the parties have already agreed on how such a claim is to be resolved, and have
done so exclusively”(Decision., § 155). In other words, the Tribunal asserts that a treaty
claim should not be analysed according to treaty standards, which seems quite strange, and
that it has jurisdiction over the contract claims/treaty claims, but at the same time that it does
not really have such jurisdiction — until the contract claims are decided. This controversy has

been going on ever since these two contradictory decisions.

106. Some have adopted the SGS v. Philippines position but not drawn the same
consequences from it. Thus, in Eureko B.V. v. Poland, (Partial Award, 19 August, 2005), the
Tribunal accepted the idea that, as a result of the umbrella clause of the BIT - Article 3(5) of
the BIT provided that “[eJach Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it may have
entered into with regard to investors of the other Contracting Party” — , the smallest obligation
of a State with regard to investments is protected by the BIT and can give rise to an ICSID

obligation. However, this decision was accompanied by a strong dissent of arbitrator Rajski

34

who emphasised the systemic consequences a broad interpretation of so-called “umbrella

clauses” could entail:

“Tt is worth to note that by opening a wide door to foreign parties to

commercial contracts concluded with a State owned company to

switch their contractual disputes from normal jurisdiction of

international commercial arbitration tribunals or state courts to BIT

Tribunals, the majority of this Tribunal has created a potentially

dangerous precedent capable of producing negative effects on the

further development of foreign capital participation in privatizations

of State owned companies (Dissenting opinion, § 11).
In Noble Ventures Inc. v. Romania (above, § 98), the Tribunal followed the same line of
reasoning, stating quite generally that “[a]n umbrella clause is usually seen as transforming
municipal law obligations into obligations directly cognizable in international law” (§ 53).
The Tribunal, while it considered the umbrella clause as an exception to the “well established
tule of general international law that in normal circumstances per se a breach of a contract by
the State does not give rise to direct international responsibility on the part of the State”,
certainly did not interpret that exception restrictively, as exceptions should be interpreted,
although it mentioned the necessity theoretically to adopt such an interpretation when it
stated : «as with any other exception to established general rules of law, the identification of a
provision as an ‘umbrella clause’ can as a consequence proceed only from a strict, if not
indeed restrictive, interpretation of its terms” (Decision, § 55). In the Tribunal’s words in the
Noble Ventures Inc. v. Romania case, the breach of a contract being assimilated by the
umbrella clause to a breach of the BIT is thus “internationalized” (Decision, § 54). Again, the
problem met by such reasoning, according to this Tribunal, is that, by necessary implication,
all municipal law commitments must necessarily be “internationalised’, as the so-called
umbrella clause does not differentiate among the obligations; it refers to any obligation and
not specifically to contractual obligations, the consequence being that the division between
the national legal order and the international legal order is completely blurred. One of the
arguments presented by the ICSID Tribunal in Noble Ventures was that the “elevation” theory
was compelled by the object and purpose of the BIT and that “[a]n interpretation to the
contrary would deprive the investor of any internationally secured legal remedy in respect of
investment contracts that it has entered into with the host State.” (Decision, § 52). In this
Tribunal’s opinion, this is not a good reason and it can explain why. Either the foreign
investor has a commercial contract with an autonomous State entity or it has an investment

agreement with the State in which some “clauses exorbitantes du droit commun” are inserted.

35

In both cases, it is more than likely that the foreign investor will have managed to insert a
dispute settlement mechanism in the contract; usually, in a purely commercial contract, this
mechanism will be commercial arbitration or the national courts, while in an investment
agreement it will generally be an international arbitration mechanism such as that of ICSID.
In other words, in the so-called State contracts, there is usually an “internationally secured
legal remedy”, while in the mere commercial contracts governed by national law, there is no
reason why such a mechanism should be available, as stated by Judge Schwebel, when he said
that “it is generally accepted that, so long as it affords remedies in its Courts, a State is only
directly responsible, on the international plane, for acts involving breaches of contract, where

the breach is not a simple breach... but involves an obviously arbitrary or tortious element
21

107. Some have adopted the SGS v. Pakistan position, either in insisting on certain
specificities of the case, or in presenting a general approach. In Salini v. Jordan,” decided in
2004 (Salini Costruttori S.p.A. & Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hachemite Kingdom of Jordan, Decision
on Jurisdiction, 15 November 2004), the Tribunal, answered in the negative the question of
the “elevation” of the contract claims into treaty claims, insisting on the generality of the
language used by the so-called umbrella clause in Article 2(4),3 which stated that “[e]ach
Contracting Party shall create and maintain in its territory a legal framework apt to guarantee
the investors the continuity of legal treatment, including the compliance, in good faith, of all
undertakings assumed with regard to each specific investor’. In Joy Machinery Limited v.
Arab Republic of Egypt™', the Tribunal noted that a discussion of the “umbrella clause” was
not necessary for the outcome of the case but, in order to “make certain clarifications”, took a
firm position against the transformation of all contractual claims in treaty claims in the

specific case:

>" International Arbitration: Three Salient Problems, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1987, p.
IL.

 Salini Costruttori S.p.A. & Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hachemite Kingdom of Jordan, Decision on Jurisdiction
of 29 November 2004, ICSID case No. ARB/02/13, http:/Avww.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/salini-
decision.pdf.

 

3 “The Tribunal notes that Article 2(4) of the BIT between Italy and Jordan is couched in terms that are
appreciably different from the provisions applied in the arbitral decisions and awards cited by the Parties”
(Decision on Jurisdiction, § 126).

** Decision on Jurisdiction of 6 August 2004, ICSID case No. ARB/02/I1,
http://www. worldbank.org/icsid/cases/joy-mining-award.pdf.

 

36

“Tn this context, it could not be held that an umbrella clause inserted in

the Treaty, and not very prominently, could have the effect of

transforming all contract disputes into investment disputes under the

Treaty, unless of course there would be a clear violation of the Treaty

rights and obligations or a violation of contract rights of such a

magnitude as to trigger the Treaty protection ” (§ 81).
108. In this Tribunal’s view, it is necessary to distinguish the State as a merchant from the
State as a sovereign. This is not new: in the above case of Joy Machinery Limited v. Arab
Republic of Egypt, the ICSID Tribunal stated: “A basic general distinction can be made
between commercial aspects of a dispute and other aspects involving the existence of some
forms of State interference with the operation of the contract involved” (Decision, § 72). The
same approach was taken by the ad hoc Committee on annulment presided by Mr. Yves
Fortier, in the Vivendi IP? case, where the distinction between contract claims and treaty

claims was clearly stated:

“whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has
been a breach of contract are different questions. Each of these claims
will be determined by reference to its own proper or applicable law—
in the case of the BIT, by international law in the case of the
Concession Contract, by the proper law of the contract, in other
words, the law of Tucuman. For example, in the case of a claim based
on a treaty, international law rules of attribution apply, with the result
that the state of Argentina is internationally responsible for the acts of
its provincial authorities. By contrast, the state of Argentina is not
liable for the performance of contracts entered into by Tucuman,
which possesses separate legal personality under its own law and is
responsible for the performance of its own contracts” (§ 96).

The view that it is essentially from the State as a sovereign that the foreign investors have to
be protected through the availability of international arbitration is confirmed, in the Tribunal’s
opinion, by the language in the new 2004 US Model BIT, which clearly elevates only the
contract claims stemming from an investment agreement stricto sensu, that is, an agreement in
which the State appears as a sovereign, and not all contracts signed with the State or one of its

entities, to the level of treaty claims, as results from its Article 24(1)(a).

5 Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquia S.A. and Compagnie Générale des Eaux (Vivendi Universal) v.
Argentine Republic, Decision on Annulment of 3 July 2002, ILM, Vol. 41, 2002, p. 1135.

37

109. In view of the necessity to distinguish the State as a merchant, especially when it acts
through instrumentalities, from the State as a sovereign, the Tribunal considers that the
“umbrella clause” in the Argentine-US BIT, which states that “[e]Jach Party shall observe any
obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments”, does not elevate any contract
claim into a treaty claim — this does not mean that some contract claims based on
commitments made by the State as a Sovereign give rise to a treaty claim - this results from
Article VII, which clearly includes among the investment disputes under the Treaty all
disputes resulting from a violation of a commitment given by the State as a sovereign State,

either through an agreement, an authorisation, or the BIT:

“an investment dispute is a dispute between a Party and a national or

company of the other Party arising out of or relating to (a) an

investment agreement between that Party and such national or

company; (b) an investment authorization granted by that Parties

foreign investment authority (if any such authorization exists); or, (c)

an alleged breach of any right conferred and created by this Treaty

with respect to an investment”.
Interpreted in this way, the umbrella clause of the BIT in Article II, read in conjunction with
Article VII, will not extend the Treaty protection to breaches of an ordinary commercial
contract entered into by the State or a State-owned entity, but will cover additional investment
protections contractually agreed by the State as a sovereign inserted in an investment

agreement.

110. In conclusion, in this Tribunal’s view, following important precedents decided by
previous Tribunals, an umbrella clause cannot transform any contract claims into a treaty
claim, as this would necessarily imply that any commitments of the State in respect to
investments, even the most minor ones, would be transformed into treaty claims. These far-
reaching consequences of a broad interpretation of the so-called umbrella clauses, quite
destructive of the distinction between the national legal orders and the international legal
order, have been well understood and clearly explained by the first Tribunal which dealt with
the issue of the so-called “umbrella clause” in the SGS v. Pakistan case (above, § 93) and
which insisted on the theoretical problems faced. It would be strange indeed if the acceptance
of a BIT entailed an international liability of the State going far beyond the obligation to
respect the standards of protection of foreign investments embodied in the Treaty and
rendered it liable for any violation of any commitment in national or international law “with

regard to investments”. A well-known specialist of ICSID, Christoph Schreuer, has strikingly

38

described what some of the practical consequences of a broad interpretation of the umbrella

clauses could be:

“Problems could ... arise if investors were to start using umbrella
clauses for trivial disputes. It cannot be the function of an umbrella
clause to turn every minor disagreement on a detail of a contract
performance into an issue for which international arbitration is
available [but, in the view of the Tribunal, this is possible with a broad
interpretation of the umbrella clause]. For example, a small delay in a
payment due to the investor and interest accruing from the delay
would hardly justify arbitration under a BIT [but, in the view of the
Tribunal, nothing could prevent such an arbitration, if a broad
interpretation of the umbrella clause is accepted]. Equally a lease
dispute with the host State that is peripherical to the investment will
not be an appropriate basis for the institution of arbitral proceedings
[but, in the view of the Tribunal, the institution of such proceedings is
possible with a broad interpretation of the umbrella clause]. It is to
be hoped that investors will invoke the umbrella clauses with
appropriate restraint.”
It is the firm conviction of this Tribunal that the investors will not use appropriate restraint
and why should they? if the ICSID tribunals offer to them unexpected remedies. The

responsibility to show appropriate restraint rests rather in the hands of the ICSID tribunals.

111. How does this apply in the present case? Both Parties have discussed the so-called
umbrella clause included in Article II(2)(c) in the U.S.-Argentina BIT, which, as mentioned
earlier, provides: “Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with
regard to investments. The positions of the Parties are contradictory as far as the
interpretation of the so-called umbrella clause is concerned. On the one hand, “the Argentine
Republic states that the best interpretation of contractual claims under the BIT with umbrella
clauses is the interpretation made by the Tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan, which upheld several
reasons according to which contractual claims cannot be submitted to international
arbitration” (Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 67). On the other hand, the Claimants consider that
‘[t]his provision puts contracts between the host State and the investor as well as other
commitments undertaken by the host State under the protection of the US-Argentina BIT. It

adds to the US-Argentina BIT’s substantive standards the observance of contracts or other

°6 “Travelling the BIT Route. Of Waiting Periods, Umbrella Clauses and Forks in the Road”, Journal of
World Investment & Trade, Vol. 5, 2004, p. 255.

39

obligations the host State has entered into with regard to specific investments. It follows that
a breach of such a contract is in violation of Article II(2)(c) of the US-Argentina BIT”

(Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 81).

112. In the Tribunal’s view, this umbrella clause does not extent its jurisdiction over any
contract claims that the Claimants might present as stemming solely from the breach of a
contract between the investor and the Argentina State or an Argentine autonomous entity.
Moreover, in the Tribunal’s view, it is especially clear that the umbrella clause does not
extend its jurisdiction over any contract claims when such claims do not rely on a violation of
the standards of protection of the BIT, national treatment, MNF clause, fair and equitable
treatment, full protection and security, protection against arbitrary and discriminatory
measures, protection against expropriation or nationalisation either directly or indirectly,
unless some requirements are respected. However, there is no doubt that if the State interferes
with contractual rights by a unilateral act, whether these contractual rights stem from a
contract entered into by a foreign investor with a private party, a State autonomous entity or
the State itself, in such a way that the State’s action can be analysed as a violation of the
standards of protection embodied in a BIT, the treaty-based arbitration tribunal has
jurisdiction over all the claims of the foreign investor, including the claims arising from a
violation of its contractual rights. Moreover, Article II, read in conjunction with Article
VII(1), also considers as treaty claims the breaches of an investment agreement between

Argentina and a national or company of the United States.

113. In other words, the Tribunal, endorsing the interpretation of the so-called “umbrella
clause” in the Decision SGS v. Pakistan, confirms what it mentioned above (§ 91), namely,
that it has jurisdiction over treaty claims and cannot entertain purely contractual claims, which
do not amount to a violation of the standards of protection of the BIT. It adds that, in view of
Article VII of the US-Argentina BIT, a violation of an investment agreement entered into by
the State as a sovereign and an American national or company is also deemed to be a violation

of the Treaty and can thus give rise to a treaty claim.
114. In Summary, if and to the extent that the contracts in question can be characterized as

“investment agreement”, the “umbrella clause” does not add anything in terms of the

Tribunal’s competence since they are already expressly provided for in Article VII(1) under

40

(a). If, on the other hand, the contracts in question cannot be characterized as “investment
agreement, the “umbrella clause” does not extend to those contracts between an investor and a

host State that cannot be characterized as an investment agreement.

115. The answer to the question raised in § 92, that is, whether the existence of a so-called
“umbrella clause” changes the Tribunal’s intermediary conclusion to the effect that it has no
jurisdiction over purely contractual claims, and that it can only entertain treaty claims, is
clearly in the negative. Indeed, the Tribunal has jurisdiction only over treaty claims, the latter
including, pursuant to the wording of Article VII(1), the claims based on the violation of an

investment agreement entered into by the foreign investor with the State as a sovereign.

116. The distribution of the numerous claims of the Claimant between the two categories —
purely contract claims which are outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, and contract claims
that amount to treaty claims that which are inside its jurisdiction — will naturally be decided
when dealing with the merits, but it was necessary for the Tribunal to ascertain the theoretical

scope of its competence at the jurisdictional phase.

5. Third Preliminary Objection: The Claim Must Be Limited with Respect
to Tax Measures

(a) The Positions of the Parties
117. Article XII of the BIT provides:
qd) With respect to its tax policies, each Party should strive to accord

fairness and equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and
companies of the other Party.

(2) Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty and in particular
Article VII and VIII, shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to
the following:

(a) expropriation, pursuant to Article IV;
(b) transfers, pursuant to Article V; or
(c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment

agreement or authorisation as referred to in Article VII(1)(a) or (b),

4l

to the extent they are not subject to the dispute settlement provisions of a
Convention for the avoidance of double taxation between the two Parties, or
have been raised under such settlement provisions and are not resolved
within a reasonable period of time.

118. For the Respondent, this provision limits the scope of the protection granted by the BIT
in tax matters in two ways. First, under paragraph [1], the standard of fairness and equity in
the treatment of investments established by Article II(2)(a) of the BIT is restricted by using
the formula “each Party should strive to accord”. This “modified” or “softened” duty of fair
and equitable treatment in the field of taxation excludes recourse to the Treaty’s dispute
settlement system in tax matters, unless the taxation measure complained of: (i) amounts to
expropriation; (ii) pertains to transfers related to an investment under Article V; or (iii)
concerns the observance and enforcement of investment agreements or authorisations under

Article VII(1)(a) or (b).

119. Next Argentina notes that the Claimants have conceded that their claims, specifically as
it pertains to rights to export hydrocarbons, relate to tax matters and, accordingly, are outside
the limits set by Article XII of the BIT. On the one hand, tribunals established under Article
VII of the BIT can examine no claim regarding a tax issue unless that claim is about a breach
of the prohibition of expropriation “for which no compensation is given” (Memorial on
Jurisdiction, § 83). The Claimants’ assertions do not qualify. Nor do they qualify under
paragraph 1 of Article II, because the standard of “fair and equal treatment” set by that

provision for tax issues is not a legal obligation.

120. Accordingly, the only issues this Tribunal may consider under Article XII are those
based on expropriation and those regarding the violation of investment agreements or
authorisations (Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 77-85). None of the contracts or permits

involved qualify as “investment” under Article VII(1)(a) of the BIT (Transcript, p. 120).

121. In their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (§§ 92-110), the Claimants rebut the above
arguments. They begin by noting that the Respondent fails to appreciate that their claim
regarding export withholdings concerns the expropriation by the Government of specific legal
and contractual rights and revenues, the compliance of that Government with investment
agreements (such as concessions and contracts), and, generally, unfair and inequitable

treatment towards the Claimants’ investment (ibid., § 94).

42

122. The Claimants then point out that Argentina’s decision to impose export withholdings,
by itself or in conjunction with other measures, may be “tantamount to expropriation” (Article

IV(1) of the BIT). The claims made, however, go far beyond tax-related issues (ibid., § 95).

123. Even in the latter, limited context, there is a standard of striving for “fair and equitable
treatment” set by Article XII(1) which, according to the Claimants, is more than the
“meaningless reference” Argentina sees in it. This assertion is buttressed by a reference to
Occidental Exploration and Production Co. v. Ecuador," where the Tribunal, with reference
to Article X(1) of the Ecuador-US BIT, similar to Article XII(1) of the Treaty relevant here,

noted that that provision

[i]s not devoid of legal significance. It imposes an obligation on the host
State that is not different from the obligation of fair and equitable treatment
embodied in Article II [which is the same as Article II of the present BIT],
even though admittedly the language or Article X is less mandatory (§ 70).

124. The Claimants thus contend that the obligation enshrined in Article XII is enforceable
and that the Respondent failed to discharge it by violating various commitments such as the
express undertaking to abstain from levying export withholdings, by treating the Claimants in
a discriminatory way by earmarking those withholdings to compensate the banking sector for
losses suffered on account of other Government measures, and by targeting the latter to the
specific nature of the business pursued by the Claimants and in defiance of the Oil and Gas

Regulatory Framework and of the hydrocarbon concessions contracts.

125. What is more, according to the Claimants, the “soft” standard of Article XII(1) does not
deprive them of their right, even in tax matters, flowing from Article XII(2) combined with
Article IV, since what is at stake is an investment pursuant to that provision, and since,
contrary to Article II to which Article IV refers, the investment has not been treated fairly and
equitably, turning the interference into an unlawful expropriation, which brings this aspect of
the case — the export withholdings — into the purview of Article XII(2). In the words of the
Tribunal in Occidental Exploration and Production Co. (above, § 122, Final Award (§§ 75-

77)), the raising of an expropriation claim in relation to a tax matter “brings in the standards

~ UNCITRAL Arbitration, Final Award of 1 July 2004, LCIA case N° UN 3467,
http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Oxy-EcuadorFinalAward_001.pdf.

43

of treatment of Article II, including fair and equitable treatment” (Counter-Memorial on

Jurisdiction, §§ 96-100).

126. For the Claimants, the imposition of export withholdings was contrary to commitments
undertaken by Argentina under the BIT, and this amounts to expropriation. Whenever the
expropriation of specific legal rights is alleged, as in the present case, this should be sufficient
for an ICSID tribunal to assert its competence. What matters is whether the Claimants have
shown, prima facie, the existence of an expropriation claim. Whether there has indeed been
an expropriation of specific legal and contractual rights and revenues is an issue pertaining to
the merits and should be decided at that stage. As the Tribunal stated in Enron I (see above, §

49),

[t]he Claimants have satisfied the requirements of having a present interest
to bring action under the Treaty, particularly in view of the fact that it has
been alleged that the tax assessments resulted in the violation of specific
provision standards of treatment established in the treaty [BIT]. These
allegations can only be considered at the merits phase of the case, but prima
facie they are sufficient to justify the exercise of the right of action by
Claimants (Decision on jurisdiction, § 67).

127. Accordingly, the Respondent’s thesis that this Tribunal’s competence should, under
Article XII of the BIT, be limited as regards the tax aspects of the claims should fail, for the
measures complained of are alleged, under Article XII(2)(a), to amount to expropriations
pursuant to Article IV and, consequently, fall within the competence of this Tribunal (ibid., §§

101-103).

128. According to the Claimants, the hydrocarbon concessions and contracts form part of the
dispute and qualify as an investment agreement under Article XII(2)(c) of the BIT. In
Occidental Exploration and Production Co. (see above, § 122), a tax matter associated with
the performance of an investment agreement had arisen. Although the claimant in that case
had not characterised the dispute as one concerning its contract with the defendant State, the

Tribunal pointed out that

[b]ecause of the relationship of the dispute with the observance and
enforcement of the investment contract involved in this case, it [had]
jurisdiction to consider the dispute in connection with the merits insofar as a
tax matter covered by Article X [in the present instance Article XII] may be
concerned, without prejudice to the fact that jurisdiction can also be
affirmed on other grounds as respects Article X (Final Award, § 77).

44

129. Accordingly, the Tribunal considered that there was an investment agreement for the
purposes of Article X of the BIT between the United States and Ecuador, which is the same as
Article XII of the BIT involved here. In the present case, too, each hydrocarbon concession
and contract can be characterised as an “investment agreement” under Article XII(2) (and, by
reference, Article VII(1)(a)). While the BIT involved here fails to define the notion of
“investment agreement”, there has been, since 1994, in BITs and free trade agreements

concluded by the US, the following definition of that notion:

a written agreement between the national authorities of a Party and a
covered investment of a national or company of the other Party that (i)
grants rights with respect to natural resources or other assets controlled by
the national authorities and (ii) the investment, national or company relies
upon in establishing or acquiring a covered investment.

130. The Claimants find that their hydrocarbon concessions and contracts fall within the
above definition: they constitute written agreements between the Argentine Companies and
the Government; they grant the Companies rights to natural resources belonging to the host

State; and they establish investment obligations for the Companies towards the Government.

Hence they qualify as “investment agreements” under Article XII(2)(c) of the BIT.

(b) The Tribunal’s Considerations

131. Confronted with these opposing views, this Tribunal feels bound to point out once again
that what matters, at the present jurisdictional stage of the proceedings, is whether the claims
submitted, if they were to proven well-founded, would fit into the jurisdictional parameters of

the relevant treaties (see above, §§43-54).

132. Article XII(1) of the BIT provides: “With respect to tax policies, each [State] Party
should strive to accord fairness and equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and
companies of the other Party.” The issue is whether this provision constitutes law, law of a
lesser stringency (“softer” law), or no law at all. The last hypothesis will have to be ruled out,
despite the use of the conditional “should”: if the Parties to the BIT had intended to instill no
meaning at all into Article XII(1), they should and would have said so. Given their silence, the
provision must be considered to carry some legal meaning on account of the rule ut magis

valeat quam pereat (“effet utile”).

45

133. The legal force of the notion embodied in Article XII(1) is not equal to that attributed to
the similarly-worded rule found in Article II(2)(a) of the BIT (“Investment shall at all times
be accorded fair and equitable treatment .. .”). In what manner and to what extent it is not,
the Claimants do not say, and possibly cannot say. The embarrassment of the UNCITRAL
Tribunal in Occidental Exploration and Production Co. (see above, § 22), when confronted
with a similar situation, is evident in the passage cited earlier: on the one hand, it is stated that
the obligation imposed on the host State is “not different from the obligation of fair and
equitable treatment embodied in Article IP’; on the other hand, “admittedly the language of

Article X [in the instant case: Article XII(1)] is less mandatory.”

134. Nonetheless, the Claimants consider that the “fair and equitable treatment” clause in
Article XII(1) is enforceable, though precisely on what basis and to what extent one does not
know. The issue may remain open, however, since, in the view of this Tribunal the question

can be solved on the basis of Article XII(2) of the BIT.

135. According to Article XII(2), the provisions of the BIT, in particular those of its Articles
VII and VIII (dispute settlement), do not apply to matters of taxation, except: (i) if the matter
is connected with, or amounts to, an expropriation under Article IV; (ii) if it is related to the
compliance with an investment agreement or authorisation; or (iii) if it pertains to transfers
pursuant to Article V. Thus, the Tribunal’s competence with respect to taxation is limited to

those instances.

136. The Claimants contend that the claims raised are claims of expropriation under Article
IV and that, as a consequence, the measures taken by the Respondent, including the tax
measures (export withholdings), are within ICSID jurisdiction and the competence of the
Tribunal, Article XII(2) notwithstanding. The Tribunal is of the view that the Claimants have
shown prima facie that the imposition of export withholdings, a tax measure, could possibly
amount to the expropriation of specific legal and contractual rights. In light of the case-law
cited (Enron I, Occidental Exploration and Production Co. (above §§ 49 and 122), an
expropriation claim linked to a tax matter brings in, via Article IV, the standards of treatment
of Article II, including that of fair and equitable treatment, provided that there is direct or

indirect expropriation, which comprises measures tantamount to expropriation.

137. This being the case, the claims, inasmuch as they relate to tax matters, i.e. the export

withholdings practiced by the Respondent, are within the “exception to the exception”

46

provided for in Article XII(2)(a) and fall into this Tribunal’s competence. This does not
mean, however, that the well-foundedness of this aspect of the claims has been established;

this is a matter to be determined in the proceedings on the merits.

138. For the purposes of the present stage of the proceedings, the Tribunal is satisfied that the
Claimants have demonstrated prima facie that the Hydrocarbon Concession and Contracts
could be “investment agreements” within the meaning of Article VII(1)(a) and Article
XII(2)(c) of the BIT and that their claims could possibly fall under those agreements as well.

However, here again, that matter needs to be decided when considering the merits of the case.

139. The Tribunal concludes that it has jurisdiction over tax matters in the present case, but
only insofar as the tax measures complained of are linked to: (a) expropriation, pursuant to
Article IV; (b) transfers, pursuant to Article V; or (c) the observance and enforcement of
terms of an investment agreement or authorisation as referred to in Article VII(1)(a) or (b).

Therefore, Argentina’s Third Preliminary Objection is rejected.

6. Fourth Preliminary Objection: According to the Doctrine of Estoppel,
the Claimants Cannot Refuse to accept the Courts of Argentina as the
Exclusive Forum

(a) The Positions of the Parties

140. The Respondent claims that PAE, through its Argentine instrumentality PAE Branch,
initiated proceedings against Forestal Santa Barbara SRL (hereinafter Santa Barbara), a
Delaware company, before the Supreme Court of Argentina. The claim, brought in answer to
a claim lodged by Santa Barbara against PAE in the State of Delaware, related to concessions
for hydrocarbon exploitation, respectively hydrocarbon transportation, granted in Argentina.
The issue was compensation for work done in the areas of PAE’s concession, and the
Delaware court was asked to issue orders with respect to PAE’s activities in those areas

(Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 86-89).

141. According to the Respondent, PAE’s action was intended to prevent the Delaware
court’s interference and to establish that conflicts over hydrocarbon concessions “must be
submitted to Argentine tribunals”. The Respondent then cited large extracts from PAE’s
claims in which the plaintiff submitted the matter to the Supreme Court’s original jurisdiction

and argued that the matter was directly and exclusively one of Argentine federal jurisdiction

47

and was governed by the Argentina-US BIT, the Washington Convention and the 1969
American Human Rights Convention, as well as the National Constitution and federal laws

and regulations.

142. The action filed before the Supreme Court of Justice was, according to the Respondent,
“about a dispute related to hydrocarbon concessions where... the BIT and the ICSID
Convention are, inter alia, applicable”; “[t]he strict similarity with the dispute the Claimants
want to bring to this tribunal is undeniable, and therefore the jurisdiction principles to be

applied are identical” (ibid., § 94).

143. The Republic of Argentina was requested by the Supreme Court to express its views on
PAE’s request, which it did by agreeing with PAE that the matter was one of federal
jurisdiction, the reason being that the scope and characteristics of the legal relation arising
from the hydrocarbon concession in issue were governed by rules the conflicts over which
had to be solved by the federal national tribunals, including the Mining Code and Law No.
177319. Regarding the latter, the Government asserted that “[t]he disputes arising from the
relationships originat[ing] in Law No. 177319 do not constitute a case giving way to
international jurisdiction”. As all these assertions were consented to by PAE and even made

at its request, PAE

stated that the jurisdiction competent over the disputes arising from the
hydrocarbon concessions is the Argentine jurisdiction exclusively, and also
requested and consented that the Argentine Republic confirmed that
assertion (ibid., § 98).
144. According to the Respondent, the Claimants therefore made a choice in favour of the
host State’s federal court. That choice has created an estoppel: the Claimants made an
assertion on which the other party — the Respondent — subsequently relied to carry out its
activity. It is not open to the Claimants, under general international law (as well as Argentine
law), to change now their position to the Respondent’s detriment. Accordingly, the Claimants

are estopped from presenting their case to this Tribunal (ibid., §§ 86 and 99).

145. The Claimants reply (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 111-139) that the action
brought by PAE before Argentina’s Supreme Court (the local claim) did not amount to a
forum selection for the present claims and did not constitute a forum selection for the purpose

of Article VII(2) and (3) of the BIT. In order to activate what is — somewhat inelegantly —

48

referred to as the BIT’s “fork-in-the-road” provision, the two proceedings must, according to
the Claimants, concern the same dispute and causes of action and involve the same parties. It
is true that, in the course of an investment activity, investors can be drawn into all sorts of
disputes related in some way to the investment, but these disputes will not necessarily be
“investment disputes” for the purposes of Article VII and for making applicable the forum

provision selection of that Article (ibid., §§ 113-115).

146. Pursuant to the Claimants, in the present case, the local claim submitted by PAE to the
Supreme Court aimed at obtaining a declaration from that Court that the action brought by
Santa Barbara before a US court was to be dealt with exclusively by Argentine courts. In that
respect, the case before the Supreme Court is not an investment dispute similar to the present

one before this Tribunal (ibid., § 116).

147. The Claimants contend further that PAE Branch holds a hydrocarbon production
concession and a transportation concession over the Acambuco block in the Argentine
Province of Salta, granted by Argentina pursuant to its Hydrocarbons Law. PAE extracts
hydrocarbons from the block in the framework of a joint venture and is also the operator of
the block. Santa Barbara is a private party not affiliated with the Argentine Government and
owns some of the land on which extraction work takes place. Under the Hydrocarbons Law
and the concession, PAE Branch may perform certain operations on Santa Barbara’s land on
the basis of an easement over the latter in favour of PAE Branch. That easement is evidently
governed by Argentine law. When Santa Barbara, joined by others, went to court in the State
of Delaware, it did so to obtain from the PAE Branch compensation allegedly due on account
of some operations that it had conducted. What PAE Branch sought from the Argentine
Supreme Court was a declaration that the courts of Argentina, not those of Delaware, were

competent to deal with the matter (ibid., §§ 117-118).

148. According to the Claimants, the differences between this local claim before Argentina’s
Supreme Court and the claim brought before this Tribunal under the BIT and the Washington

Convention are substantial:
- The local claim involved private parties. The Government participated in the

procedure without being a party, because it had granted the concession. In the

present instance, Argentina is a direct party and a subject of international law

49

allegedly responsible for violations, vis-a-vis US nationals, of the BIT, the

ICSID Convention and general international law.

- The action instituted by PAE Branch in Argentina had nothing to do with the
“investment dispute” under Article VII(1) and (3)(a) of the BIT; there is no
alleged violation of the BIT or of an investment agreement. Its sole object was
to have the Argentine Supreme Court declare that it was up to Argentine
courts, and no one else, to settle the dispute between Santa Barbara, the
landowner, and PAE Branch, the operator of the oil and gas field. The
international claim, by contrast, serves to determine whether there has been a

violation of the BIT and, if so, to provide an appropriate remedy.

- The issues to be decided by the Supreme Court of Argentina are related to
private real property and jurisdictional issues governed exclusively by
domestic law. The BIT and the ICSID Convention were mentioned by PAE
Branch, before the Supreme Court, only to show that if Santa Barbara had a
claim for unfair treatment of its investment, it should have invoked those two

instruments rather than have turned to a Delaware court.

149. This, according to the Claimants, means that the mention of the two treaties was in no
way intended to trigger a forum selection under Article VII of the BIT, and that it did not ask
the Supreme Court of Argentina to decide an investment dispute under the BIT. What is
more, to provoke a forum selection under Article VII of the BIT, there must be identity of the
parties and of claims in the local action and in that before the ICSID, as is borne out by the
international case-law (ibid., §§ 125-130). Claimants rely on Genin v. Estonia, 8 CMS

(above, § 57), Azurix (above, § 77) and Enron I (above § 49).

150. According to the Claimants, the conclusion drawn from the above is that the strict
similarity of claims alleged by the Respondent does not exist: the parties, the facts, the claims
and the causes of action differ, which is why PAE Branch’s local claim cannot be viewed as a

choice of forum under the BIT’s Article VII (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 131).

8 Award of 25 June 2001, ICSID case No. ARB/99/2, ICSID Reports, Vol.17, p. 395,
http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Genin-Award.pdf.

50

151. Turning to Argentina’s argument of estoppel, the Claimants do not challenge the
applicability of that principle in international law. Referring to the judgment on the merits
rendered by the ICJ on 15 June 1962 in the Temple of Preah Vihear case,” the ICJ laid out
the conditions for an estoppel: (i) a clear statement of fact by one party which (ii) is voluntary,
unconditional and authorised; and (iii) reliance in good faith by another party on that
statement to that party’s detriment or to the advantage of the first party. In the Claimants’
opinion, none of these conditions is met in the instant case (Counter-Memorial on

Jurisdiction, §§ 133-134).

152. In the first place, it has not been established that PAE Branch made before the Supreme
Court of Argentina any statement amounting to a choice under Article VII of the BIT. The
passing reference, in a private dispute over damages due to operations in an oil field in
Argentina, to the BIT and to the ICSID Convention, was only intended to show that it was up
to the Argentine courts rather than those of Delaware to decide the specific easement dispute
opposing Santa Barbara to PAE Branch, and that if Santa Barbara had a claim based on unfair
treatment, it should go before an ICSID jurisdiction rather than a Delaware court. Clearly the
local claim did not result in the submission of the BIT dispute to the Argentine courts (ibid.,

§ 136).

153. Second, Argentina has not shown how it could have relied on the Claimants’ alleged
statement and, hereby, changed its position to its detriment or to the advantage of PAE Branch
— if only because, not being a party to the local dispute, it had no say in the matter. The local
dispute was about alleged damages from the operation of an oil field between two private
actors, to the exclusion of the Respondent, pertaining to the performance of a contract
between them, to the payment of damages and to an environmental issue, all questions
patently outside the investment dispute placed before the present Tribunal. The mention of
the BIT and the ICSID Convention in a specific litigation between two private parties, which
is exclusively governed by Argentine law, could not have “reasonably and effectively”, in
good faith, generated a conviction on the part of Argentina that its own courts rather than the
present Tribunal would have jurisdiction over an investment treaty claim involving different

parties and facts. Moreover, Argentina admitted, in the presentation made by it in the

*” (Cambodia v. Thailand), ICJ Reports 1962, p. 6.

51

framework of the local claim, that the BIT guarantees did not apply to the local dispute

between the concession holder and the landowner (ibid., § 137-139).

(b) The Tribunal’s Considerations

154. Argentina’s Fourth Preliminary Objection appears to rest on two premises: that the
Claimants, having brought, through a local company, a private dispute before the Argentine
courts and, having mentioned the BIT and the ICSID, have opted, in the framework of their
international investment dispute, in favour of those courts pursuant to Article VII of the BIT;
and that, independently of that provision, they are estopped, on account of having done so,

from resorting to dispute settlement under the BIT.

155. The first question to be examined, therefore, is whether the action of PAE Branch in its
local dispute against Santa Barbara, including the reference made by it to the BIT and the
ICSID Convention, amounts to a forum selection, pursuant to Article VII of that Treaty, for
its investment dispute against Argentina. Judging from the case law cited by the Claimants —
the Genin, CMS and Enron I cases (above, §§ 148, 57 and 49) — tribunals do not assume
lightly that choices of forum have been made by claimant parties in favour of the host State’s
judicial system. They are undoubtedly right. If the contrary were true, there would be little
use in setting up international arbitral procedures for investment disputes. To assume that
such a choice was made, it is necessary, first, that the parties to the dispute brought before a
national court be the same as those of the investment dispute. The existing case law — CMS,

Enron I and Azurix (see above, §§ 57, 49 and 77) — shows that this is not often the case.

156. A second condition is the identity of the causes of action. As is shown by the decisions

cited in § 148, this, too, is often not the case.

157. In the present case, there is neither identity of the parties nor identity of the cause of
action. In the local claim, the Government of Argentina is not a party (although it appeared as
an amicus curiae). The cause of action is also different. The local claim is not based on an

alleged violation of the BIT, even though the BIT was referred to in passing.

158. Regarding estoppel — the second leg of Respondent’s argument in favour of its Fourth

Preliminary Objection — this Tribunal can also be brief.

52

159. Estoppel is a recognised general principle of law that has been applied by many
international tribunals.*” Of the essence to the principle of estoppel is detrimental reliance by
one party on statements of another party, so that reversal of the position previously taken by

1

the second party would cause serious injustice to the first party.° None of that has been

shown by Argentina in this case.

160. Furthermore, if the three conditions identified by the ICJ in the Temple of Preah Vihear
case (see above, § 150) are relied upon, the conclusion is: (i) that one can scarcely speak of a
clear statement of fact by one party (if indeed a statement was made at all “by one party”); (ii)
that, there being no such statement, the latter could not possibly be characterised as
“voluntary, unconditional and authorised”; and that (iii) Argentina, which was not a party to
the local dispute, cannot be said to have relied on the choice supposedly made by the
Claimants under Article VII of the BIT and, even less, to have suffered a disadvantage from

this supposed choice.

161. On the basis of the above considerations, this Tribunal rejects Argentina’s Fourth

Preliminary Objection.

7. Fifth Preliminary Objection: The Claim Is Hypothetical

(a) The Positions of the Parties

162. The Respondent contends that an international tribunal can exercise jurisdiction over a
dispute if the latter exists, and that that is the case if the dispute is about compensation.
According to the Respondent, where there is no damage, there is no dispute: proof must be
given of true and actual harm as well as of the latter’s causal relationship with the alleged

breach (Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 102-104).

163. Conjectural, hypothetical or expected damage is not, according to the Respondent,

sufficient to establish the Centre’s jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s competence. A first

See, ¢.g., Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Canada, NAFTA-UNCITRAL, Interim Award of 26 June 2000, at
pp. 39-41, http://www.i pe-Canada-InterimA ward-26June2000.pdf.

 

3 See D.W. Bowett, “Estoppel before International Tribunals and Its Relation to Acquiescence”,
British Year Book of International Law, Vol. 33, 1957, pp. 176-202, at pp. 183-184.

53

category of conjectural damage is that resulting from export withholdings, as no one can say
with certainty what its effect on the Claimants will be, if any. What is more, the damage
forecast by LECG, the Claimants’ valuation expert, does not match the Claimants’

affirmations, which show that the damage alleged is based on mere speculation.

164. According to the Respondent, another, even more conjectural type of damage consists
of “contingencies”, i.e. damage which does not have a factual basis, such as possible claims of
some Argentine provinces that have not even been brought before a court. The consequences
of the “pesification and intervention of the Government in the determination of Pithead
Natural Gas Prices”, of “withholdings” and of “contingencies due to restrictions on natural

gas exports” fall into this category.

165. Moreover, according to the Respondent, restrictions on oil and liquefied petroleum gas
exploitation are clearly identified as hypothetical items in the Claimants’ Memorial (§ 135),
where it is said that despite then lifted restrictions, the delegation of powers to the Energy
Secretariat to impose unilateral restrictions was still valid, thus causing continued uncertainty

among oil-exporting entities such as the Argentine Companies.

166. Compensatory damages can hence not be claimed if the prejudice is uncertain and
hypothetical. A declaratory action should therefore have been formulated by the Claimants

(Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 105-110).

167. In the Deed Additional to the Agreement for the Implementation of a Normalisation
Schedule of the Natural Gas Prices at the Transportation System Income Point provided by

Argentine Decree 181/2004, which is an exhibit to Resolution 208/2004, PAE undertook

not to bring new legal actions and if necessary, to stop, within the scope
established in these presents, all actions and/or proceedings it would have
brought against the Gas Network Distribution Licensees with reference to
financial complaints corresponding to price pesification established by Law
25°561, Decree 214/2002 and Law 25’820; and if necessary the non-
application of the adjustment system established in the mentioned rule and
its decrees, to the natural gas sale agreements.

168. To the Respondent this shows that “the claimed damages were not such damages”, that

the damage expected was absurd and non-existent, and that the above express waiver made by

54

the investor gives the latter no right to transfer the damage to the Government (Memorial on

Jurisdiction, §§ 111-112).

169. While admitting that the present Tribunal has no jurisdiction over purely hypothetical
claims, the Claimants argue that the nature of the damage is a matter for the merits phase
(Transcript, p. 53). They also disagree with the contention that their claims are
“hypothetical”, “conjectural” or “speculative”. The conduct of the Respondent criticised by
the Claimants has violated the former’s commitments and severely affected the latters’
investments. What is more, the Claimants, in their Memorial, have distinguished between
damage that has already occurred and damage that will necessarily accrue in the immediate
future, on the basis of existing laws and regulations, and have distinguished it from
contingencies that may or may not materialise. Some of the damage that is considered to be
“future” in the Claimants’ Memorial has already materialised in the meantime because the

measures causing it have continued in force (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 141-143).

170. According to the Claimants, contrary to the Respondent’s assertion that no one can be
certain whether export withholdings will continue and, if so, for how long, and what will be
their final impact (Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 106), the existence and impact of such
withholdings can easily be determined. This measure is based on laws, decrees and
regulations enacted by the Government that are currently in effect. It already has adversely
affected Claimants’ investment by removing part of its revenues. The amount taken away is
easy to calculate based on the rate of the withholdings and the exports made. Regarding the
duration of the measure, it is impossible to say how long it will last. Article 6 of the relevant
Law (No. 25’561) states that export withholdings will continue for five years, i.e. at least until
February 2007. The rate of withholding, which increases with the passage of time, is known
(see the chart in note 143 to § 146 of the Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction), as are the

exports committed by the Claimants up to 2007 (ibid., §§ 144-146).

171. In addition, and as explained in their Memorial (§ 182), the Claimants have suffered
losses as a consequence of the “pesification” of hydrocarbon sales agreements, which were

dollar-denominated. This damage is not hypothetical; it has occurred.

172. Regarding the export of natural gas, that same Memorial (Section VI.3) shows how the

restrictions imposed by the Respondent have affected the Claimants. The LECG Report

55

explains the consequences of those restrictions, distinguishing between the damage which has

already occurred and the contingencies (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 148).

173. Generally speaking, the Claimants assert that they have distinguished throughout
between damage accrued and contingencies, and that the latter have been calculated
objectively on the basis of the parameters used by LECG. The Claimants at no point have
presented contingencies as damage accrued. For example, regarding royalty payments
claimed from Argentine provinces, they are contingencies which have a reasonable basis in
fact and have been treated as such. If the Claimants have included contingencies, clearly
earmarked as such, they have done so to be able to file additional claims if those

contingencies materialise (Claimants’ Memorial, § 457).

174. In Enron I (above, § 49), where Argentina had raised the same objection, arguing that
the claim was “purely hypothetical”, the object of the claim were provincial stamp tax
assessments which had not yet been collected and were under review by the Supreme Court of

Argentina. On this point, the ICSID Tribunal said the following (§74):

[M]indful of the fact that once the taxes have been assessed and the payment
ordered there is a liability of the investor irrespective of the actual collection
of those amounts. This means that a claim seeking protection under the
Treaty is not hypothetical but relates to a very specific dispute between the
parties. Whether there has been a violation of the terms of the Treaty and its
eventual extent is an aspect that belongs to the merits. The eventuality of an
expropriation and its conditions is still more so. The Tribunal cannot
decline its jurisdiction to examine these various points of fact and law.
Jurisdiction is accordingly affirmed on this point too.

175. The Respondent argues next that, in the Gas Agreement with Argentina, PAE undertook
not to bring new legal actions against gas distribution companies and producers of electricity
with reference to price “pesification” by Law No. 25’561, Decree No. 214/2002 and Law No.
25°820; and that, as a consequence, the Claimants’ claims are “absurd” and “non-existent”.
According to the Claimants, this argument is wrong. First, the only waiver included in a side
letter to the above Agreement related to claims of natural gas producers against gas
distribution and electricity companies for damage caused to them by the “pesification”. It
does not extend to BIT claims against Argentina. Moreover, the Agreement does not
compensate the Claimants for the expropriation of their legal and contractual rights. Second,
the side letter in question provides that the waiver it contains cannot be invoked by the parties

(which includes the Respondent) in connexion with other claims outside the Gas Agreement.

56

176. The Respondent also contends that their acceptance of the Gas Agreement shows that
no damage has occurred and, hence, prevents the Claimants from demanding compensation.
However, according to Claimants, there has been damage. While the Agreement may have
mitigated some future damage, it compensates the Claimants in no way for damage suffered

on account of the measures taken by the Government.

(b) The Tribunal’s Considerations

177. It is, according to this Tribunal, in the nature of disputes such as the present one that
some of the damage is concrete and specific in that it has occurred already, while some, which
may occur later, is not yet specified but is more or less foreseeable under the circumstances.

As shown in Enron I (above, § 49), the threshold of certainty in that respect is relatively low.

178. This fact is easily explained. Many investment disputes arise from situations with
continuing adverse effects on the claimants and these will have to be taken into account by the
arbitral tribunal called upon to deal with those disputes, at least regarding damage that was
uncertain at the jurisdictional phase but crystallised at the merits stage. This is one of the
reasons why the present Tribunal, at this point, dismisses the present objection, all the more
so because the Claimants, prima facie, have demonstrated their assertion that some damage
has occurred. The final amount of damages will of course have to be determined during the
proceedings on the merits if the Respondent is held liable. At that stage, a final assessment
will have to be made, and damage that remains contingent or hypothetical at that moment will

have to be ruled out.

179. It is not possible to limit this Tribunal’s competence to damage that is real and averred
at the time at which the issue of jurisdiction is being examined. If it were otherwise, the part
of the case related to damage that has not materialised yet but may have done so at the merits
stage, would never be decided, save for an unnecessary new arbitration. Doubts are permitted
only in respect of claims patently and entirely based on conjecture, which could be considered

abusive. But this, clearly, is not the case here.

180. On the basis of the foregoing considerations, the Tribunal dismisses the Fifth

Preliminary Objection.

s7

8. Sixth Preliminary Objection: The Claimants Have No Jus Standi

(a) The Positions of the Parties

181. The Respondents open their argument by asking whether the Claimants did make
investments between 1991 and 2001 amounting to more than two billion U.S. dollars for
exploration and exploitation activities. The Claimants describe their investments in terms of
contracts and concessions, associations, joint venture contracts and exploitation permits. A
further characterisation given by them is that of legal and contractual rights, and of rights to
specific performance. Finally, the Claimants contend that PAE “is the indirect owner of two
strategic assets involving the transport, deposit and load of crude oil” and that it “invested in
the natural gas transportation business activity’ (Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 113-116,
referring to the Claimants’ Memorial, §§ 125, 126, 129 and 130). This, according to the
Respondent, makes for vagueness and confusion and “significantly [affects] the Respondent’s
right to due process” in that it is not possible: (i) effectively to determine who has made the
investment; (ii) which is the party bringing legal action to enforce the legal rights acquired by
the capital expenditure; and (iii) what is the scope of the property rights under the relevant
laws, i.e. the legal system of the host State. It is argued next by the Respondent that the issue
of jus standi in this case — if it pertains to the merits — is governed by Argentine law as the law

applicable to the merits (Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 117).

182. The Respondent then invokes Article I(2) of the BIT to show that PAE, as a company
established in Delaware, does not enjoy the advantages of the BIT because it has “no

substantial business activities” in Argentina (ibid., §§ 118-120).

183. Both the BP America Production Company and the BP Argentina Exploration Company
are incorporated under the laws of Delaware, the former owning and controlling the latter.
Having been incorporated on 31 December 2001 and in 2002, respectively, they cannot

possibly have made the investments alleged.

184. After distinguishing direct claims from “derivative” ones, making reference to NAFTA
(Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 123-125), the Respondent defines the former as claims made by
a shareholder in his own right to redress a “special injury”, that is, an injury suffered by him
directly, for instance the refusal of permission to consult the company’s books. The latter are

claims made by shareholders — if the company itself is unwilling to do so — to enforce the

58

company’s cause of action, for instance if a director converts corporate assets. In that case,
the shareholder’s injury is an indirect one: a decrease in his shares’ book value, the direct
injury being inflicted to the company through the loss of the converted assets. Any amount
recovered by the shareholders’ derivative action should, therefore, be added to the assets of
the company. But there is, in this field, a blurred area where both the company and its

shareholders may have been significantly injured (Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 126-132).

185. At any rate, allowing shareholders’ claims amounts to piercing the corporate veil, and
such piercing may be disallowed or allowed on the basis of policy considerations, such as
safeguarding the integrity of the entity, protecting the interests of all stakeholders —
shareholders, to be sure, but also creditors, workers and clients — by allowing only corporate
claims and avoiding premature liquidation. Letting the product of derivative actions flow into
shareholders’ pockets would amount to privileging those shareholders over both the company

itself and all other interested parties (ibid., §§ 134-139).

186. In the cases of BP America and BP Argentina, alleged majority shareholders in the
Argentine Companies, it has not been established so far that they have suffered a special
injury by the allegedly detrimental measures. While there is, here, an issue of double
recovery, to be solved in a timely manner, the present Tribunal will also have to consider,
according to the Respondent, whether, by compensating the shareholders, not the company, it
will not bring about the premature liquidation of the company. If compensation were to go
straight to the shareholders, the creditors of the injured companies, including the federal

Government, “would be mocked” (ibid., §§ 140-141).

187. Allowing this case to proceed to the merits stage will imply that the Tribunal has the
power to order the liquidation of the service companies. According to the Respondent, the
present Tribunal is not competent to determine now the outcome for all interested parties,
which is why the cases of BP America and BP Argentina should not be heard unless they
come up with a genuine claim other than the present one, which is a “derivative claim” in
disguise. In other words, the Respondent asks the Tribunal to decline jurisdiction over the

purely derivative indirect claims of BP America and BP Argentina

188. Finally, regarding PAE Sur, Pan American Fueguina and Pan American Continental, the
Respondent considers that they have not proven their investment and are unable to do so since

their existence only dates back to 1998. Nor are they controlled by an investor because PAE

59

does not qualify as such. Since they have not shown that they are investments in themselves,
and there is no way for the Claimants to modify their position, the Argentine Companies lack
jus standi (ibid., §§ 143-145), and the Tribunal should also decline jurisdiction as far as the

claims of the Argentine Companies are concerned.

189. The Claimants reject the thesis of the Respondent according to which this case is based
on an action by shareholders - BP America and BP Argentina — regarding measures directly
affecting the Argentine Companies and only indirectly themselves. According to the
Respondent, the shareholders have no jus standi to present “indirect” claims in the context of
this arbitration because those claims arise out of breaches of the rights of third parties — the
Argentine Companies — and the measures on which the claim is based were in no way
directed at the investors. This objection, which Argentina advanced in several recent cases

before ICSID tribunals, was rejected every time.

190. In the instant case, the three US entities - PAE, BP America and BP Argentina — are not
bringing claims on behalf of the Argentine Companies, which are themselves claimants as
well, but on their own behalf as US investors with investments qualifying as such under the
BIT. According to the Claimants, “[i]nternational law recognises claims by shareholders” in

the position of the three entities (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 161).

191. The Claimants’ next contention is that the Respondent’s argument, apart from the issue
of its well-foundedness, is one that goes to the merits of the case, whereas, under the rules of
the ICSID Convention (Article 25), the only issues to be dealt with at the present stage of the
proceedings are the jurisdictional ones; jus standi is a point to be debated at the merits phase,

and the Tribunal should decline to examine it at this juncture.

192. The two parties also disagree on the law applicable to the determination of the existence
of jus standi for the different Claimants. Argentina contends that jus standi is determined by
its own laws, which are those governing the merits. The Claimants reply that the law
applicable to the merits is the BIT and international law, not the law of Argentina, which is
why the alleged inability of BP America, BP Argentina and PAE to put forward indirect
claims under Argentine law is irrelevant when examining jus standi; nor is US law or the

NAFTA (ibid., §§ 163-165).

60

193. For the Claimants, the governing law is the BIT, its language and its purpose. The
object and purpose of that Treaty, according to its preamble, is to “stimulate the flow of
private capital” into Argentina. This is accomplished via shareholdings or other types of
investments, without making any distinction between the two. The inclusion of shareholders

is confirmed by Article I(1)(a) of the BIT, which defines the term “investment” as follows:

“investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by national s or companies of the
other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and investment contracts; and
includes without limitation:

(i)...

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or
interests in the assets thereof... .

194. The above text expressly covers “shares of stock or other interests in a company or
interests in the assets thereof’, thus including PAE’s, BP Americas’s and BP Argentina’s
indirect and direct controlling ownership of interests in the Argentine Companies, and this
means that these entities may bring a claim in respect of them. The same BIT provision
determines which investments are regarded as belonging to a protected investor: those
“owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party”. The
meaning of “investment” in the framework of the above BIT provision was commented upon
by the ICSID Tribunal in Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentina, (Decision on Jurisdiction of

8 December 1998):*

The Tribunal finds that the definition of [investment] in the Argentina-U.S.
Treaty is very broad and allows for many meanings. For example, as regards
shareholder equity, the Argentina-U.S. Treaty says nothing indicating that
the investor in the capital stock has to have control over the administration
of the company, or a majority share; thus the fact that Lanco holds an equity
share of 18.3% in the capital stock of the Grantee allows one to conclude
that it is an investor in the meaning of Article I of the Argentina-U.S. Treaty

(§ 10).

195. Moreover, add the Claimants, “claims by shareholders are well recognized in

international law”, which makes sense since the aim of investment protection treaties is to

2 ICSID case No. ARB/97/6, ILM, Vol. 40, 2001, p. 457.

61

encourage foreign investment by offering protection to foreign investors who, for example,
buy shares or interests in local companies of the host State or register a subsidiary in that State
because the host State requires it, as is for instance the case of Argentina, or because this is
the only way to invest. If shareholders such as BP America, BP Argentina and PAE were not
protected by the BIT, the latter could easily be reduced to naught by governments (ibid., §§
167-172).

196. In response to Respondent’s argument that BP America, BP Argentina and PAE are
presenting indirect claims for which they have no jus standi, the Claimants contend that the
rights claimed are not those of the Argentine Companies but their own, namely, those arising
out of the BIT. Thus, all the present Tribunal has to do is to assess whether the Respondent’s
alleged conduct would amount to a violation of that Treaty. The difference between local and
other causes of action and the cause of action resulting from the BIT was stressed by the
ICSID Annulment Committee in Vivendi I.*° That case is particularly relevant for the present
arbitration. It concerned interference by the Argentine authorities with the operation of a
concession agreement. The Claimants were the local concession holder, Compajiia de Aguas
del Aconquija (CAA), and one of its shareholders, the French Compagnie Générale des Eaux
(CGE). The Annulment Committee found that the latter could bring its own claims, which
related to issues under the concession contract, on the basis of the Argentinean-French BIT

because it was a shareholder in CAA. In so doing, the Committee said (§ 50):

In common with other BITs, Article I clearly distinguishes between foreign
shareholders in local companies and those companies themselves. While the
foreign shareholding is by definition an “investment” and its holder an
“investor”, the local company only falls within the scope of Article I if it is
“effectively controlled, directly or indirectly, by nationals of one
Contracting Party” or by corporations established under its laws . . . It
cannot be argued that CGE did not have an “investment” in CAA from the
date of the conclusion of the Concession Contract, or that it was not an
“investor” in respect of its own shareholding, whether or not it had overall
control of CAA. Whatever the extent of its investment may have been, it
was entitled to invoke the BIT in respect of conduct alleged to constitute a
breach of Articles 3 or 5 [i.e. fair and equitable treatment, full protection and
security and no expropriation without compensation].

3

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Compagnie Générale des Eaux v. Argentina, 1CSID
case No. ARB/97/3, Decision of the Annulment Committee of 3 July 2002, /LM, Vol. 41, 2002, p. 1135,
§§ 112-113, http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Eaux-Annulment pdf.

62

197. According to the Claimants, this means that BP America, BP Argentina and PAE may
make claims under the BIT even if the Respondent’s conduct also breaches Argentine

domestic law or specific legal and contractual rights thereunder.

198. Next, the Claimants contend that “claims of shareholders are well recognised in
international law”. To this end, and without addressing the situation under the rules of general
international law, they argue that a long series of decisions by international investment
tribunals have admitted the presentation of “indirect” claims by foreign shareholders,
especially in cases against Argentina (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 180-190). These
decisions concern the following cases: Maffezini v. Spain;* Vivendi I (above, § 196); Goetz
v. Burundi;® Asian Agricultural Products, Ltd. v. Sri Lanka,*° Genin (above, § 148); CMS
(above, § 57; Azurix (above, § 77); Enron I (above, § 49); and Siemens (above, § 48).

199. In connexion with Maffezini and Siemens, the Claimants note that the ICSID tribunals
made it clear that the investor has to make only a prima facie case that it has standing to file
its claim; that in CMS the claim was one of a minority investor in a local company and that
the Tribunal held that it does not matter whether the investor protected by the BIT is also a
party to a concession agreement or a license agreement with the host State to find that there is
jurisdiction under the provisions of that Treaty, as there is a direct right of action of the
investor as a shareholder; and that, in Siemens, the German investor indirectly owned the local

(Argentine) company.

200. As in Azurix, Enron and Siemens, conclude the Claimants, in the present case the
foreign investors directly and indirectly own interests in the Argentine Companies and, thus,
directly or indirectly, own protected investments. It was decided in CMS, Azurix, Enron,
LG&E (above, § 57, 77, 49 and 77) and Siemens (above, § 48) that there was, in the

circumstances, a direct right of action for the American shareholding companies. This

“ Decision on Jurisdiction of 25 January 2000, ICSID case No. ARB/97/7, ICSID Review-FILJ, Vol.
16, 2001 p. 212, §§ 236-238, http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Maffezini-Jurisdiction-English_001.pdf.

35 Award (embodying the parties’ settlement agreement) 10 of February 1999, ICSID case No.
ARB/95/3, ICSID Review-FILJ, Vol. 15, 2000 p. 454; Yearbook of Commercial Arbitration, Vol. 26,
2001, p. 21 at pp. 35 and 24, http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Goetz~Award.pdf.

36 Final Award of 27 June 1990, ICSID case No. ARB/87/3, ICSID Review-FILJ, Vol. 6, 1991, p.
526; ICSID Reports, Vol. 4,1989, p. 246, §§ 20-21, http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/AsianAgriculture-
Award.pdf..

63

conclusion is supported by the intention of the drafters of the Argentina-US BIT, which was
based on a US model draft and in connexion with which one of its authors, Kenneth
Vandevelde, noted that the definition of investments in its Article 1 was, in part, a reaction to
the Judgment of 5 February 1970 in the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Co., Ltd. case,
second phase,*” where the Court held that a company incorporated in Canada but owned by
Belgians could not be protected by Belgium, the State whose nationality the shareholders
possessed, vis-d-vis Spain. It did not rule on the question of whether a State could protect its
nationals shareholders of a company having the nationality of the defendant State (Judgment,
§ 92). The BIT definition of “own or control” renders the Barcelona Traction ruling
inapplicable, and, as long as there is such ownership or control, it does not matter how many
layers separate the national or company from the investment.** This analysis is borne out by
other writers and persons involved with the US BIT Programme. One writer, P.B. Gann,”
went even further by holding that any interest, however minor, was protected (Counter-

Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 189-198).

201. The Claimants point out further that Argentina heavily relies on US law and the Free
Trade Agreement between Chile and the United States of America to argue that what they
really submit are “derivative” claims disguised as “direct” ones. This is not the case,
according to them, for under the Argentina-US BIT these claims are direct; neither Argentine
nor US law applies to them. The Treaty sets an independent standard against which
Argentina’s conduct must be measured, as pointed out by the Annulment Committee in
Vivendi (above, § 196). It follows, for the Claimants, that the Respondent labours under a
fundamental misconception regarding the claims of the three US companies: these claims
arise directly out of the BIT and cannot be regarded as indirect claims. Accordingly, all three

have jus standi before this Tribunal (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction §§ 199-202).

202. The next point made by the Claimants is that the Respondent also questions their status
as investors under the BIT, especially by alleging that the two BP companies, having been

incorporated in 2001 and 2002, respectively, could not have made their investments in

(Belgium v. Spain), ICJ Reports 1970, p. 3.

8 United States Investment Treaties: Policy and Practice, Deventer, Kluwer, 1992, pp. 45-46.

* “The U.S. Bilateral Investment Treaty Program”, Stanford Law Review, Vol. 21, 1985, p. 373, at
pp. 404-405.

64

Argentina. The Claimants recall the evidence submitted in their Memorial (§§ 124-130) and
address this point by showing: (i) that they qualify as investors; and (ii) that their investment

is protected by the BIT.

203. Regarding BP America, the written testimony of D.B. Pinkert shows, according to the
Claimants, that that company was incorporated in Delaware in 1930 under a different name; it
changed names several times and, on 31 December 2001, was renamed BP American
Production Co. That entity has vast business activities in the United States, its outside
activities being performed through subsidiaries. It is therefore a “company” duly organised
and incorporated in the US since 1930. BP Argentina was originally incorporated in 1958 as
Pan American Argentina Oil Co. Its registered office is in Delaware, and it has an operating
office in Buenos Aires. Until 2002, when it acquired its present name, it underwent several
name changes. PAE is also a “company” within the meaning of the BIT, formed in 1977
under Delaware law; it is indirectly and directly controlled by the two BP companies (ibid., §§

203-211).

204. In its Memorial on Jurisdiction (§§ 118-120), the Respondent invokes Article I(2) of the
BIT which entitles each Party to deny the advantages of that Treaty to any company of the
other Party if the latter is controlled by nationals of any third country or by nationals of that
other Party and “has no substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party”. This
provision does not apply here as PAE is directly and indirectly controlled by two US
companies — BP Argentina and BP America — which do have substantial business activities in
the US. In addition, the Claimants point out, the positive declaration of denial to be made by
the host State under Article I(2) of the BIT only applies prospectively from the date on which
it is made (Transcript, pp. 60-63; Plama Consortium, Ltd. v. Bulgaria, Decision on

Jurisdiction of 8 February 2005, §§ 159-165*°).
205. Contrary to the Respondent’s assertion, the Argentine Companies — PAE Sur, PAE
Fueguina and PAE Continental — are owned and controlled by US companies and, for that

reason, can bring claims under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Article
VII(3)(a)(i) and (8) of the BIT (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 212-213).

40 ICSID case No. ARB/03/24, ILM, Vol. 44, 2005, p. 721.

65

206. The Claimants do qualify as investors; their claims relate, not to “cash flows”, but to
different categories of legal and contractual rights protected by the BIT and falling within
ICSID jurisdiction, contrary to the Respondent’s allegations. Further, also contrary to those
allegations, the Claimants could make their investments in Argentina, having been

incorporated in 1930, 1958, and 1977, respectively (see above, § 203).

207. BP Argentina has substantially and directly participated in the exploration and
production activities in Argentina. This participation was, in 1997, transferred to PAE
Branch. After 1997, investments were substantially increased, especially in the period from
1998 to 2001, and channelled through three wholly owned subsidiaries, Pan American Sur,
Pan American Fueguina and Pan American Continental. In sum, the Claimants believe that
they have submitted more than sufficient evidence on each of their investments, all protected

by the BIT and, thus, subject to ICSID jurisdiction.

208. With respect to the Respondent’s argument that the assertions made in the Claimants’
Memorial (§§ 107-108) are false, it was stated that the guarantees of the BIT were an
incentive to invest, yet the investment were made in 1991 and 1997, whereas the BIT became
effective only in 1994. First, the Claimants reply, the Treaty was signed already on 14
November 1991. Second, the BIT does not distinguish between investments prior to the
Treaty’s coming into force and those made subsequently; both are protected. What is more,
reliance on the signed BIT was not the only reason to make the investments, as is shown by

the witness statement of Mr. Spies.

(b) The Tribunal’s Considerations

209. The present Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s arguments on jus standi are, according
to the Claimants, an issue belonging to the merits and should, therefore, be rejected at this
stage of the proceedings. But the Claimants also presented detailed arguments to show that
the Sixth Preliminary Objection is unfounded. Indeed, there is, under general international
law, some doubt on the subject. In Barcelona Traction Light and Power Co., Lid.,! Spain’s
preliminary objection on the jus standi of the Belgian shareholders was joined to the merits

(Judgement, pp. 44-45), although the Court admitted that “the objection clearly has certain

‘|New application: 1962, Belgium v. Spain, Judgment of 24 July 1964, ICJ Reports 1964, p. 6.

66

aspects which are of a preliminary character, or involves elements which have hitherto tended
to be regarded in that light” (ibid., p. 45); some even thought that it belonged entirely to the
merits.” Yet it would seem that, in the rich ICSID case-law — more precisely the precedents
cited by the Claimants — the issue was, in principle, considered as having to be examined
when dealing with jurisdiction, which is what this Tribunal will do as well. Accordingly, the
Tribunal rejects the Claimants’ submission, presented in their Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction (§§ 163-164), that the jus standi objection should not be addressed during the

present phase of this arbitration.

210. The Claimants established their investor status under the BIT and their standing to file a
claim (Maffezini and Siemens, see above §§ 198 and 48) in Annex B (production concessions,
exploration permits and production contracts), Annex C (gas export contracts and permits), F
(crude oil supply contracts) and Annex G (natural gas contracts) to their Memorial on the

Merits.

211. The Claimants have also shown that PAE and BP are US companies existing since
1930, 1958 and 1977, respectively, and that they control the Argentine Companies directly or
indirectly. For this reason, they can, ratione temporis, be considered as investors, all the more
as the BIT covers the investments existing at the time of its coming into force (1994) as well

as those made subsequently (Article XTV(1)).

212. Furthermore, the expansion of the investments occurring between 1991 and 1997 was,
at least partly, motivated by the perspective of that Treaty’s entering into force. Thus the
Claimants have shown that they are investors under the BIT, either as shareholders (U.S.
companies) or as holders of contracts, concessions and permits (Argentine Companies). This

being the case, they would seem to have jus standi before this Tribunal.

213. With respect to the jus standi of the Argentine Companies (PAE Sur, PAE Fueguina and

PAE Continental),* they are owned and controlled by US companies and, for that reason, can

2 Dissenting Opinion of Judge Morelli, ibid., p.85, at pp. 110-114.

8 The Tribunal also includes PAE Branch, although it can be said with equal force that it is to be

identified with the US company PAE.

67

also bring claims under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Article VII(3)(a)(i) and
(8) of the BIT.

214. The Tribunal should like to add the following observations regarding Respondent’s
objection to the jus standi of foreign shareholders in the present case. This problem has a
long but uncertain past in international practice. According to that practice, the home States of
foreign shareholders with direct claims (e.g., concerning the payment of dividends) clearly
had jus standi regardless of the quantity or value of the shares held. Regarding indirect rights,
the situation was more complex. Generally, it was thought that, as long as the company’s
“national” State could claim on the international level, the home State of the shareholders
could not; or, to be more precise, it could do so only if the shareholders’ indirect rights had

become direct ones as a result of the winding up of the company.

215. There was, however, a tendency to allow for an exception in situations, such as the
present one, where the company itself was a “national” of the defendant State: in such cases
the possibility of protecting foreign shareholders was thought desirable — at least if the
shareholdings were of some importance (see for example the El Triunfo case decided by an ad

hoc arbitration commission“) since otherwise there would be no protection at all.

216. By contrast, in Barcelona Traction, the situation was a triangular one: the company was
Canadian, the majority shareholders were Belgian, and the host State was Spain. The
“national” State of the shareholders was considered to have no jus standi on the basis of a
preliminary objection made by Spain and joined to the merits of the case. This was the scope
of the ICJ’s ruling in Barcelona Traction; the Court did not deal with the situation of foreign
shareholders in domestic companies, which was that of E/ Triunfo and is that of the present
case (Judgment, § 92). This hypothesis was in fact left open, although the Court’s Judgment
was considered by many as ruling out, at the level of general international law, claims made

on behalf of foreign shareholders’ indirect interests.

217. But the instant case is not situated at the level of general international law but at that of

treaty law — the BIT and the ICSID Convention — and the Claimants have established that the

“4 United States y. El Salvador, Award of 8 May 1902, United Nations Reports of International

Arbitral Awards, Vol. X, p. 467.

68

applicable Treaty deviates from Barcelona Traction, allowing, inter alia, claims based on
direct or indirect shareholdings of nationals of one Contracting State in companies of another
Contracting State. It appears that the BITs concluded by the United States were meant to

deviate from the Barcelona Traction rule as perceived (see above, § 200).

218. There is, therefore, no doubt on this question, and an impressive string of decisions on
jurisdiction by ICSID tribunals confirm this conclusion. Whether it can be said, as was
suggested by the ICSID Tribunal in CMS (above, § 57), “that the fact is that lex specialis in
this respect is so prevalent that it can now be considered the general rule” (Decision on
Jurisdiction, § 48), is a question which will be left open by the Tribunal. Another question
which may remain open — because it does not arise here — is whether the BITs protect any
shareholding or only shareholdings of a certain importance; there seems to be a widespread
tendency on the part of ICSID tribunals to allow the protection of any foreign shareholding

(see, e.g., LG&E , above, § 77, Decision, at § 63).

219. The situation to be faced here is similar to that dealt with by the Annulment Committee
in Vivendi (above, § 196). In Vivendi, the claim had been presented by both the foreign
company, Compagnie Générale des Eaux (CGE), and the local company controlled by it,
Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija (CAA). The Committee saw no problem in this, because
CGE could have presented its claim for its shareholding in CAA, which was itself an
investment protected by the BIT, whereas CAA, a foreign-controlled company, had suffered
an encroachment upon its contractual rights, which was the main cause of action. But the
Committee recognised CGE’s jus standi to make claims relating to acts prejudicial to both its
shareholding and to the contractual rights of the company of which it was a shareholder. It is
evident, of course, that damages may be claimed only once; but this is an issue to be
considered at the merits phase. The danger of double recovery by the Claimants, and,
conversely, double jeopardy for the Respondent may be rather real. Actually, in the present
case, there may even be triple recovery/jeopardy. The Tribunal expects the parties to address

that issue during the merits phase.
220. Another point raised by the Respondent in its Memorial on Jurisdiction (§§ 135-139) in

connexion with foreign shareholders’ claims is that the latter, in recovering their investment,

do so to the prejudice of other domestic or foreign shareholders, creditors and employees.

69

This may be true; but it does not empower this Tribunal to stray from the path traced by the

Contracting Parties in their BIT, which unquestionably protects shareholdings.

221. With respect to Argentina’s invocation of the “denial of benefits” clause in Article I(2)
of the BIT with respect to PAE — that entity, though being a US company, would not have
substantial business contacts with the United States and is controlled by nationals of a third
country —, the Claimants have convincingly shown that, as a matter of fact, PAE is controlled
by BP America and BP Argentina, which are both US companies and have both substantial

business contacts in the United States.

222. On the basis of the foregoing considerations, the Tribunal also dismisses the Sixth

Preliminary Objection.

9. Respondent’s Request for Further Evidence

223. In its Memorial on Jurisdiction (§ 147), the Respondent complains about the lack of
sufficient evidence regarding ownership of the three US companies, investments made in
Argentina and damages, these matters being addressed only in witness statements. According
to the Claimants (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 228-229), they did file the necessary
corporate documentation and testimony to provide the information required in the Requests
for Arbitration and the Memorial on the Merits; they also provided supplementary evidence

and offered to submit additional evidence if required by the Tribunal.

224. In its Memorial on Jurisdiction (§§ 146-152) the Government first notes that neither the
ownership of the US companies nor the losses allegedly sustained are substantiated, except by
witness statements. This omission cannot now be cured, according to Argentina, “for that
would entail the violation of important procedural standards” (§ 147). The Respondent does
not however develop this assertion. Argentina requests the Tribunal to order the Claimants:
(i) to examine Mr. Richard Spies about the time at which the investments were made —
between 1991 and 2001 according to the Claimants’ Memorial — and about the inconsistency
of this assertion with his own statement according to which the companies concerned (PAE,
BP Argentina, BP America, PAE Sur, PAE Continental and PAE Fueguina) were not
incorporated until between 1997 and 2002; (ii) to provide financial statements showing their
losses since they started up to date; (iii) to instruct Serial de la Torre-Capitacion, Seleccién y

Desarollo, to produce and to transmit to the Respondent all requests for the selection and

70

hiring of personnel of any of the Claimants between January 2002 and October 2004, and to
report to this Tribunal and to Argentina’s Legal Counsel the instructions given by the
Claimants to promise “attractive possibilities for development in the framework of excellent
working conditions”; and (iv) to produce, and to notify the Respondent of, “the personnel

hired, working conditions offered and remuneration agreed upon, during the same period”.

225. Claimants oppose these demands, qualifying them as a “thinly disguised challenge to
the merits”. The “confusing alchemy of merit-based and jurisdictional issues” practiced by
Argentina has, according to the Claimants, forced them to respond at length to merit-based
arguments put forward by Argentina. Allegedly, this technique is meant to harass the
Claimants, to distract the Tribunal from the issues at hand and to delay the discussion on the
merits (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §§ 231-232). Moreover, Argentina’s request is not
in tune with the ICSID Arbitration Rules (Rule 33). It is possibly belated, not precise, does
not indicate “the points to which [the] evidence will be directed” and is not “necessary”.
These allegations are dealt with at some length in the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction (§§ 234-238) and culminate in the conclusion that Argentina’s request is abusive,
designed to harass the Claimants and intended to delay for months a decision on jurisdiction

and a discussion of the merits (ibid., § 239), and thus should be denied.

226. In the Tribunal’s judgment, Claimants have sufficiently shown corporate ownership and
identity for the purposes of the Preliminary Objections. For the remainder, the elements
referred to in Argentina’s Request for Further Evidence are not necessary for reaching a
decision on jurisdiction. Rather, they concern the merits of the case. As a result, the Tribunal
shall not rule on Respondent’s Request at this stage of the proceedings, except regarding

corporate ownership and identity.

71

DECISION

1, For the foregoing reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal:
QQ) REvECTS all ths Preliminary Objections raised by the Respondent;

(2) Hops that the present dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Cenus
and the competence of the Tribunal:

@Q) DsTERMINES that Claimants have shown corporate ownership and
identity for the purposes of the Preliminary Objections, and REJECTS
Respondent's request for further evidence at thie stage of the
proceedings in all other respects; ‘

(#) DETERMINES that the further conduct of the arbitration will be
determined by the Tribunal after consultation with the parties;

(5) RESERVSS all issues (including costs) that are not resolved in the
present Decision for a later stage of the proceedings.

chain fle

Lucius Caflisch
President of the Tribunal

Baile Sea. \_ on
Brigitte Sten Albert Jan van den Berg
Arbitrator Arbitrator

   

 

