INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

BRANDES INVESTMENT PARTNERS, LP
(CLAIMANT)

AND

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID CasE No. ARB/08/3)

 

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTION
UNDER RULE 41(5) OF THE ICSID ARBITRATION RULES

 

Members of the Tribunal:

Dr. Robert Briner, President
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator
Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Michael D. Nolan, c/o Mr. George Kahale III,

Ms. Lesley A. Benn, Mr. Mark H. O’Donoghue

Ms. Elitza Popova-Talty, and Mr. Benard V. Preziosi, Jr. and

Mr. Frédéric Sourgens Ms. Miriam K. Harwood

Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy LLP Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Washington D.C., U.S.A. New York, N.Y., U.S.A.

Mr. Andrés Mezgravis Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

Travieso, Evans, Arria, Rengel & Paz Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Caracas, Venezuela Mexico City, Mexico

2.1.

PROCEDURAL ISSUES

On 14 February 2008, BRANDES INVESTMENT PARTNERS, LP (hereinafter also
“Brandes” or “the Claimant”) filed a Request for Arbitration against THE BOLIVARIAN
REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA (hereinafter also “Venezuela” or “the Respondent.”)

On 24 March 2008, the Secretary-General registered the Request for Arbitration.

On 8 December 2008, the Tribunal was constituted with Dr. Robert Briner, President,
Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, Arbitrator, and Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator.

On 19 December 2008, the Respondent filed Preliminary Objections pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(5).

On 12 January 2009, the Claimant submitted its Observations on the Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections of 19 December 2008.

At the occasion of the First Session of the Arbitral Tribunal, held on 29 January 2009, in
Paris, counsel for both Parties orally presented their positions and answered questions put
to them by the Members of the Arbitral Tribunal.

As discussed during the First Session, the dispositive of the Decision dated 2 February
2009 was notified on 4 February 2009, whereas the present document also contains the
reasons for the Decision.

THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES

The Arbitral Tribunal summarises below, insofar as relevant for the present Decision, the
Claimant’s position as pleaded in its Request for Arbitration, the Respondent’s position as
pleaded in its Objections pursuant to Rule 41(5), the Claimant’s position as pleaded in its
Response to Claimant’s Objections and the positions as presented orally by counsel for
both Parties at the occasion of the First Session.

SUMMARY OF THE CLAIMANT’S REQUEST FOR ARBITRATION

 

In its Request for Arbitration, the Claimant, a United States registered investment adviser,
exposes that prior to the actions challenged in this Arbitration it controlled a substantial
number of American Depository Receipts and shares of Compafiia Anonima Nacional
Teléfonos de Venezuela (hereinafter “CANTV”) that it acquired for and on behalf of its
clients.

Request for Arbitration, 14 Feb. 2008, para. 5.

CANTV is a company registered under the laws of Venezuela and is Venezuela’s largest
ve 2
telecommunications company.”

In 1991, CANTV entered into a Concession Agreement with Venezuela with the right to
“organize and install, as the case may require, and to render, manage, operate and
exploit the telecommunications services” in Venezuela.°

In 2007, the Respondent offered to purchase all the American Depository Receipts and
shares of CANTV. According to the Claimant, the tender offer of the Respondent was
substantially below market value.* The tender offer took place, according to the
Claimant, in a context of nationalization of many private companies by Venezuela.

The Claimant states that the Respondent coerced it into accepting the tender by indicating
its intention to control and manage CANTV after the tender as a “social, national and
regional political tool of the Venezuelan State without regard to economic profitability.””
The Claimant accepted Respondent’s tender and received USD225.5 million in exchange
of its shares.°

The Respondent’s tender expired on May 8, 2007. As a consequence of the tender, the
Respondent became the owner of 86.2% of CANTV.”

In its Request for Arbitration, the Claimant alleges that the Respondent’s conduct was
unlawful and resulted in Brandes’ sale to Venezuela of its shares in CANTV at a loss.
Said shares constitute an investment of the Claimant within the meaning of the ICSID
Convention.*

Respondent’s unlawful measures were tantamount to an expropriation by destroying the
value of Claimant’s investment without proper indemnification.’

The Claimant alleges that the Respondent also violated its obligation not to take arbitrary
and discriminatory measures and to treat Brandes’ investment fairly and equitably.'°

SUMMARY OF THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS UNDER RULE 41(5)

In its objections of 19 December 2008, pursuant to Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the Respondent alleges that the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration omits to
mention many facts of the case.

Id., para. 9.
Id., para. 12.
Id., para. 33.
Id., para. 36.
Id., para. 59.
Id., para. 35.
Id., para. 32.
Id., para. 60.
Id., para. 61.

20.

21.

22.

2.3.

23.

24.

25.

26.

In particular, the Respondent argues that when selling its shares to Venezuela, the
Claimant agreed to waive and release any claims it may have had against the latter in
connection with the tender. According to the Respondent, the waiver and release
expressly covered all claims asserted by the Claimant in the present Arbitration.'!

In addition, the Respondent alleges that the Claimant is not an investor within the

meaning of the ICSID Convention, as it was only acting as an agent and not as an
t

owner.

In the Respondent’s view, the examination of the essential facts omitted by the Claimant
in its Request for Arbitration leads to the conclusion that there is neither a jurisdictional
nor a substantive basis for the claims in this case and that Venezuela did not violate any
duties towards the Claimant."

The Respondent emphasises that ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5) provides for a specific
procedure to address a case where claims are manifestly without legal merit. As these
conditions are fulfilled the Arbitral Tribunal should dismiss the case on an expedited
basis, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5).

SUMMARY OF THE CLAIMANT’S RESPONSE TO THE RESPONDENT’S
OBJECTIONS

In its Response, dated 12 January 2009, the Claimant opposes all the objections raised by
the Respondent.

The Claimant alleges that the objections addressed by the Respondent do not concern the
merits of Brandes’ claims but are a form of “exceptions d’incompétence.”"4

According to the Claimant, the objections fall outside the scope of Rule 41(5) because
they do not concern the merits of the dispute but only the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.'> A
manifest failure of jurisdiction is to be addressed at the registration stage by the Secretary
General, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. The Claimant notes that the
Respondent did not raise any jurisdictional objection at the registration stage.

According to the Claimant, Rule 41(5) applies if the claim is not only without legal merit
but if the lack of legal merit is manifest. A claim shall be qualified or considered as
without manifest legal merit if it “frivolous” or “patently unmeritorious.”'® The
Respondent has the burden to show that a claim is patently without merit and frivolous.
According to the Claimant, the Respondent fails to provide such demonstration.'”

Respondent’s Objections Pursuant to Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, 19 Dec. 2008, para. 17.
Id., para. 19.

Id., para. 25.

Claimant’s Response to Respondent’s Rule 41(5) Objections, 12 Feb. 2009, para. 4.

Id., para. 19.

Id., para. 23.

Id., para. 18.

27.

28.

29.

30.

2.4.

31.

32.

33.

In addition, the Claimant argues that the Respondent raised factual objections rather than
legal objections. Such factual objections do not fall within the scope of Rule 41(5).'8

The Claimant states that the waiver contained in the CANTV tender does not prevent it
from bringing its claim in these proceedings. Firstly, Brandes still controls some CANTV
shares not tendered to Venezuela. Secondly, the waiver does not apply to issues of
compensation for an illegal expropriation and other claims that can be raised in an ICSID
Arbitration. Thirdly, the waiver was coercively obtained by the Respondent. Fourthly,
the waiver argument is not an objection to the merits of Claimant’s claim but rather
concerns the issue whether the Tribunal is competent to consider the subject matter of the
claims raised by the Claimant.'?

Finally, the Claimant claims to have standing to pursue ICSID claims for and on behalf of
its clients. According to the Claimant, it is an investor within the meaning of the ICSID
Convention and the Respondent fails to provide concrete facts showing the contrary. The
Claimant emphasises that the objection with respect to its standing is a jurisdictional
objection not covered by Rule 41(5).”°

The Claimant requests that Respondent’s objections be rejected.

SUMMARY OF THE ORAL SUBMISSIONS

The Respondent in its oral presentation on 29 January 2009 again mentioned that its main
arguments are that the Respondent has waived all claims asserted in this case”! and that it
has no standing as the Claimant is not an investor, it never owned the shares and
everything it did was for and on behalf of clients who are unnamed and the Respondent
does not know how many there are.””

The case does not present any genuine issues of facts and it can be decided on pure legal
principles.”

Reference was also made to the article of Aurelia Antonietti “The 2006 Amendment to the
ICSID Rules and Regulations and the Additional Facility Rules,” where she wrote the
following:

“The expedited objection can be a jurisdictional objection and/or an objection
related to the merits... . The Discussion and the Working Papers did not
necessarily encompass expedited objections to jurisdiction. However, in light of
the discussions which followed the Working Paper and given the comments
received, it has appeared that expedited objections on jurisdiction could not be

Id., paras. 20 et seq.
Id., para. 42.

Id., para. 42.

First Session of the Arbitral Tribunal, 29 Jan. 2009, Transcript, pp. 65, 22, 24.
Id., pp. 69, 7-11.

Id., pp. 69, 22-70, 1.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

ruled out of the scope of Rule 41(5). Accordingly, Rule 41(5) does include
expedited objections to jurisdiction although it was primarily designed to
dismiss frivolous claims on the merit.”

“A respondent might for example challenge, in an expedited manner, the
temporal application of a treaty in which consent to ICSID arbitration is given;
or could object that the claimant had waived its right in writing to bring the
case before an arbitral tribunal.”>

According to the Respondent, the whole discussion whether legal objections to
jurisdiction would be excluded from the application of Rule 41(5) is not really relevant
because the objections which the Respondent raises are not purely jurisdictional in nature.
Waiver is not a jurisdictional issue and standing is a mixed issue and therefore neither a
pure jurisdictional issue.7°

The Respondent agrees that the standard of “manifest” is quite high?’ but “[a]t the end of
the day, either there is a waiver or there is not. Either there is standing or there is not.
You could raise ten objections to that. That does not mean it is inappropriate to decide on
Rule 41(5).”**

The Respondent then discusses the question of the waiver which, according to it, clearly
applies to the claims raised in this case. Furthermore, agents or investment advisers do
not have standing to bring an ICSID case.

In its oral presentation, the Claimant argues that what has been called a waiver is not a
waiver that is applicable with respect to the claims that the Claimant is asserting.

According to the Claimant, the ICSID Convention does not define “investor,” Article 25
of the ICSID Convention speaks of “investment” and of “nationals” but not of “investors.”
Also the investment law of Venezuela, Article 3 at subparagraph 4, defines as international
investor “the owner of an international investment or whoever actually controls it.”

According to the Claimant, “[a] 4/(5) application is appropriate with respect to merit
objections. It is not appropriate with respect to jurisdictional objections.”*!

Aurelia Antonietti, The 2006 Amendments to the ICSID Rules and Regulations and the Additional Facility
Rules, 1CSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL, Vol. 21, No. 2 (Fall 2006), pp. 439-40.

Id., p. 439.

First Session of the Arbitral Tribunal, 29 Jan. 2009, Transcript, pp. 84, 73, 18-23.

Id., pp. 75, 10-11.

Id., pp. 76, 24-77, 3.

Id., pp. 96, 20-22.

Id., pp. 111, 1-8.

Id., pp. 114, 23-115, 1.

3.1.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

3.2.

44.

4S.

46.

DETERMINATION OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
GENERAL REMARKS

In its objections of 19 December 2008, the Respondent asks for the application of Rule
41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides :

“Unless the parties have agreed to another expedited procedure for
making preliminary objections, a party may, no later than 30 days
after the constitution of the Tribunal, and in any event before the first
session of the Tribunal, file an objection that a claim is manifestly
without legal merit. The party shall specify as precisely as possible the
basis for the objection. The Tribunal, after giving the parties the
opportunity to present their observations on the objection, shall, at its
first session or promptly thereafter, notify the parties of its decision on
the objection. The decision of the Tribunal shall be without prejudice
to the right of a party to file an objection pursuant to paragraph (1) or
to object, in the course of the proceeding, that a claim lacks legal
merit.”

It is not disputed that the Parties did not agree to another expedited procedure.
It is also not disputed that the Respondent filed its objection within the deadline of 30
days after the constitution of the Tribunal. Indeed, the Tribunal was constituted on 8

December 2008 and the Respondent filed its Preliminary Objections on 19 December
2008.

THE SCOPE OF THE OBJECTIONS RELATED TO JURISDICTION/MERITS

 

According to the Claimant, objections pertaining to the jurisdiction or competence of the
Arbitral Tribunal cannot constitute the subject matter of a preliminary objection within
the sense of Rule 41(5) as the text only speaks of merit.

According to the Respondent, there exist no such limits as the term “/egal merit”
encompasses all possible objections against claims which manifestly do not have any
basis.

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that Rule 41(1) expressly addresses the issue of objections
regarding the jurisdiction of the Centre or the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal which
have to be raised “not later than the expiration of the time-limit for the filing of the
counter-memorial.” The Tribunal then “may deal with the objection as a preliminary
question or join it to the merits of the dispute” (Rule 41(4)).

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

The Parties are in agreement that the purpose of the introduction of Rule 41(5) in the
course of the 2006 Amendments to the Arbitration Rules is to prevent “patently
unmeritorious claims.” They basically agree with the interpretation given by Antonio R.
Parra, former Deputy Secretary-General of the Centre, in his recent article:

“The Secretariat is powerless to prevent the initiation of proceedings that clear
this jurisdictional threshold, but are frivolous as to the merits. This had been a
source of recurring complaints from some respondent governments. One of the
amendments to the ICSID Arbitration Rules made in 2006 was to introduce a
procedure, in Rule 41, for the early dismissal by arbitral tribunals of patently
unmeritorious claims.”*

According to the Claimant, the change in the ICSID Arbitration Rules was tailored to
address frivolous claims on the merits rather than to open a third avenue to raise
jurisdictional objections in view of the fact that the Secretary-General of the Centre under
Article 36(3) of the Convention already has the authority not to register a Request for
Arbitration if “he finds, on the basis of the information contained in the request, that the
dispute is manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre.”

On the other hand, the Respondent as support for its position that Rule 41(5) also covers
objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal refers to the article by Aurelia Antonietti,*?
according to whom, the objection can be a jurisdictional one and/or one related to the
merits.

The Tribunal first of all notes that Rule 41(5) does not mention “jurisdiction.” The terms
employed are “/egal merit.” This wording, by itself, does not provide a reason why the
question whether or not a tribunal has jurisdiction and is competent to hear and decide a
claim could not be included in the very general notion that the claim filed is “without
legal merit.”

The examination by the Secretary-General of the request under Article 36 of the
Convention is limited to “the information contained in the request.” It is based on this
information that the Secretary-General has to decide whether “the dispute is manifestly
outside the jurisdiction of the Centre.”** The argument of a respondent that “the dispute
or any ancillary claim is not within the jurisdiction of the Centre or, for other reasons, is
not within the competence of the Tribunal’*> can only be filed once the case has been
registered and the procedure put in motion.

Until 2006 the Rules therefore did not provide for any possibility to terminate the
proceedings at an early stage in the case of requests which are patently unmeritorious.
There exist no objective reasons why the intent not to burden the parties with a possibly

 

Antonio R. Parra, The Develoy of the ions and Rules of the 1 Centre for
of Investment Disputes, INTERN’L LAWYER, Vol. 41, No. 1 (Spring 2007), p. 56.

See para. 33, supra.

ICSID Convention, Art. 36(3).

Rule 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

53.

54.

55.

3.3.

56.

57.

58.

long and costly proceeding when dealing with such unmeritorious claims should be limited
to an evaluation of the merits of the case and should not also englobe an examination of the
jurisdictional basis on which the tribunal’s powers to decide the case rest.

The Tribunal agrees that such a finding would mean that there are actually three levels at
which jurisdictional objections could be examined. First by the Secretariat, and if the
case passes that level, it would then be under Rule 41(5), and if it passes that level, it
might still be under Rule 41(1).

In view of the fact that the revision of 2006 introducing Rule 41(5) provides very short
time-limits, as the objection has to be raised “in any event before the first session of the
Tribunal” and the Tribunal has to give the Parties only “the opportunity to present their
observations on the objection” and is then compelled to notify its decision to the parties
“at its first session or promptly thereafter,” this proceeding is not overly burdensome and
if it can avoid cases to go ahead if there is a manifest absence of jurisdiction, it can clearly
fulfil the basic objectives of this Rule which is to prevent the continuation of a procedure
when the claim is without legal merit.

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore interprets Rule 41(5) in the sense that the term “/egal
merit” covers all objections to the effect that the proceedings should be discontinued at an
early stage because, for whatever reason, the claim can manifestly not be granted by the
Tribunal.

THE SCOPE OF THE OBJECTION RELATED TO FACTS/LAW

 

The second question is whether issues of fact can be discussed at this stage and whether a
claim having no factual basis at all could be considered in order to be summarily
dismissed.

The Claimant contends that the objection should be rejected as it is not a proper objection
based on an absence of legal merit, but an objection based on facts:

“The allegations by Respondent also raise factual questions beyond the scope
of Brandes’ Request for Arbitration that cannot be resolved on the expedited
timetable of an application pursuant to Rule 41(5).”*

The Tribunal considers it useful to again turn to the earlier mentioned article of Aurelia
Antonietti, where it is explained why the final adopted rule mentioned a “claim manifestly
without legal merit” while the draft referred to a “claim manifestly without merit:”

“This change was introduced to avoid inappropriate discussions on the facts of
the case at that stage.”

Claimant Response to Respondent’s Rule 41(5) Objections, para. 4; see also id., para. 13: “To the extent
that an objection raises a factual rather than a legal issue, it does not fall within the scope of permissible
preliminary objections .....”

Id., p. 440.

59.

60.

61.

3.4.

62.

63.

The Tribunal has no difficulty to conclude that the objection on an expedited basis should
concern a legal impediment to a claim and not a factual one. This does not mean that the
question of the proper dealing with the facts is ipso facto solved. As said also by Aurélia
Antonietti, “[nJonetheless, one can foresee that the question of whether facts and
evidentiary issues can be discussed by a tribunal at that stage will be highly debatable.”**

As an additional remark, the Tribunal wishes to refer here also to a comment made by the
tribunal in the Trans-Global case, which it shares:

“At this early stage of these proceedings, without any sufficient evidence, the
Tribunal is in no position to decide disputed facts alleged by either side in a
summary procedure. Nonetheless, the Tribunal recognizes that it is rarely
possible to assess the legal merits of any claim without also examining the
factual premise upon which that claim is advanced.” *

It is the Tribunal’s view, that basically the factual premise has to be taken as alleged by
the Claimant. Only if on the best approach for the Claimant, its case is manifestly without
legal merit, it should be summarily dismissed.

THE SCOPE OF THE OBJECTION: THE MEANING OF MANIFESTLY

As mentioned repeatedly above, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the new procedure of
the preliminary objections under Rule 41(5) is intended to create the possibility to dismiss
at an early stage such cases which are clearly unmeritorious. It is a summary proceeding
to be conducted on an expedited basis. The rules of due process, however, should
continue to be respected. A tribunal should therefore uphold such an objection and come
to the final conclusion that all claims are without legal merit only if it concludes that this
is “manifestly” the case. This applies with respect to the merits of the claims but also
when the tribunal examines the question of jurisdiction. The level of scrutiny of
“manifestly” obviously provides a far higher threshold than the prima facie standard
normally applied for jurisdiction under Rule 41(1) where the factual premise for the
decision on jurisdiction is normally taken as alleged by the Claimant.

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore agrees with the analysis as made by the tribunal in the
Trans-Global case:

“The Tribunal considers . . . that the ordinary meaning of the word [manifest]

 

requires the dent to blish its obj clearly and obviously, with
relative ease and dispatch. The standard is thus set high. ... The exercise may
ood

thus be complicated; but it should never be difficult.

Id.
Trans-Global Petroleum, Inc. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/25) [U.S./Jordan
BIT], Decision on the Respondent’s Objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, 12 May
2008, para. 97.

Id, para. 88.

64.

3.5.

65.

66.

67.

In order to respect the due process, “the rule is directed only at clear and obvious
cases,”*' and “as a basic principle of procedural fairness, an award under Rule 41(5) can
only apply to a clear and obvious case, i.e. in Mr Parra’s words cited above, ‘patently

unmeritorious claims.”

THE BURDEN OF PROOF AT A RULE 41(5) OBJECTION STAGE

 

The manner in which a tribunal has to deal with the facts will greatly depend on the role
these facts and the proof of their existence play at the different stages of the procedure. It
appears to the Tribunal, that facts can play three different roles: (i) facts which are the
basis for a finding of responsibility; (ii) facts which are the basis for a finding of
jurisdiction; (iii) facts which even if proven cannot be the basis for a finding of
jurisdiction or responsibility.

If the alleged facts are facts that, if proven, would constitute a violation of the relevant
BIT or investment law, they have indeed to be accepted as such at the jurisdictional stage,
until their existence is ascertained or not at the merit level. If jurisdiction rests on the
existence of certain facts, they have to be proven at the jurisdictional stage, unless the
issue cannot be decided at that stage, in which case it should be joined to the merits.

This double approach is routinely followed by arbitral tribunals. The alleged facts
complained of have to be accepted pro tem at the jurisdictional phase. Recently, the
tribunal in Saipem v. Bangladesh® stated:

“The Tribunal’s task is to determine the meaning and scope of the provisions upon
which [the claimant] relies to assert jurisdiction and to assess whether the facts
alleged by [the claimant] fall within those provisions or would be capable, if proven,
of constituting breaches of the treaty obligations involved. In performing this task, the
Tribunal will apply a prima facie standard, both to the determination of the meaning
and scope of the relevant BIT provisions and to the assessment whether the facts
alleged may constitute breaches of these provisions. In doing so, the Tribunal will
assess whether [the claimant’s] case is reasonably arguable on its face. If the result is
affirmative, jurisdiction will be established but the existence of breaches will remain to
be litigated on the merit.”

 

Id., para. 90.

Id., para. 92 (quoting Antonio R. Parra, The Development of the Regulations and Rules of the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, p. 56.)

Saipem S.p.A. v. People’s Republic of Bangladesh (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07), Decision on Jurisdiction
and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, 21 March 2007, para. 91. See also for the same approach,
Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert, S.A. (formerly Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and
Lucchetti Pert, S.A.) v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4), Decision on Annulment, 5 Sept.,
2007, paras. 118-19.

See also Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/29), Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 Nov. 2005, where the tribunal articulated the relevant prima facie
standard at the jurisdictional stage of the proceeding: “[t]he Tribunal should be satisfied that, if the facts or
the contentions alleged by [the claimant] are ultimately proven true, they would be capable of constituting a
violation of the BIT.” /d., para. 194.

68.

69.

70.

It is quite clear that the tribunal refers here to facts capable of being analyzed as a breach
of the BIT, and not to facts whose existence is necessary to support jurisdiction.

Tf, on the contrary, the alleged facts are facts on which the jurisdiction of a tribunal rests,
it seems evident that the tribunal has to decide those facts, if contested between the
parties, and cannot accept the facts as alleged by the claimant. The tribunal must take into
account the facts and their interpretation as alleged by the claimant as well as the facts
and their interpretation as alleged by the respondent, and make a decision on their
existence and proper interpretation. This unavoidable analysis has been followed by other
international tribunals, like for example the ICSID tribunal in Jnceysa Vallisoletana S.L.
v. Republic of El Salvador:

“If, in order to rule on its own competence, the Arbitral Tribunal is obligated to
analyze facts and substantive normative provisions that constitute premises for the
definition of the scope of the Tribunal’s competence, then it has no alternative, but to
deal with them.”*®

The situation here concerns the third hypothesis mentioned in paragraph 65. The Tribunal
considers that, if it is manifest that a claim is devoid of any legal merit, even if the facts
are proven, the burden of proof should be the same as the one adopted in the reverse
situation, being the situation where the claim should be granted if the facts are proven. In
other words, at this preliminary stage, it is sufficient, in the Tribunal’s view, to accept
prima facie the plausible facts as presented by the Claimant. Thus, the Tribunal agrees
here with the Claimant, when it states that the Respondent “must show that on the
circumstances as they plausibly arise out of the Request for Arbitration, the claimant

cannot be granted legal relief”

A preliminary objection under Rule 41(5) is an objection based on the manifest absence
of legal merit of a claim, not on the absence of a factual basis. It is therefore not
necessary to prove facts, if these facts, even if proven, are not capable of supporting a
claim that has no legal merit.

Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26), Award, 2 Aug. 2006,
para. 155. This evident approach has also been forcefully supported by Sir Franklin Berman QC, in his
dissenting opinion in the case Industria Nacional de Alimentos, where he stated: “Factual matters can or
should be provisionally accepted at the preliminary phase, because there will be a full opportunity to put
them to the test definitively later on. But if particular facts are a critical element in the establishment of
jurisdiction itself, so that the decision to accept or to deny jurisdiction disposes of them once and for all for
this purpose, how can it be seriously claimed that those facts should be assumed rather than proved?”
industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. v. Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4), Decision on Annulment,
nting Opinion of Franklin Berman QC, 5 Sept. 2007, para. 17.

Clainant 's Response to Respondent’s Rule 41(5) Objections, para. 18.

 

ll

3.6.

71.

3.7.

72.

3.8.

73.

DOES THE EXISTENCE OF A WAIVER OF THE RIGHT TO PURSUE CLAIMS
MANIFESTLY RENDER SUCH CLAIMS WITHOUT LEGAL MERIT, AS OUTSIDE
THE JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL?

The waiver issue raises a number of questions which cannot be decided based on the file
as it presently exists. It has been alleged by the Claimant that not all shares and/or ADRs
have been tendered to the Venezuelan Government. Moreover, the waiver expressly states
that the waiver extends only to “the maximum extent permissible under the applicable
law,” and the Claimant also contends that it has no legal value as it has been obtained by
coercion. In addition, the Claimant asserts that it has never signed any waiver, that the so-
called waiver referred to by the Respondent is merely “a unilateral declaration of intent
by Respondent to which Brandes is alleged to have acceded by conduct.”"" The Tribunal
comes to the conclusion that the answers to these questions necessitate the examination of
complex legal and factual issues which cannot be resolved in these summary proceedings.

DOES THE ALLEGATION THAT THE CLAIMANT ACTS AS AN AGENT OF
INVESTORS MANIFESTLY RENDERS ITS CLAIM WITHOUT LEGAL STANDING.
LE. LEGAL MERIT?

 

 

If the Claimant’s position that it is an investor under the ICSID Convention is accepted,
the claim does not manifestly lack legal merit on this account. In any case, in order to
answer fully such a question, complex issues of fact have to be determined, especially the
exact relationship between Brandes, as an investment advisor, and its clients. The
Claimant furthermore considered that under the applicable Venezuelan legislation to
obtain the investor protection it is not necessary to be the economic or beneficial owner of
the shares in question but that control of such shares, which the Claimant stated it had, is
sufficient for the Claimant to have its claim examined and decided. The Tribunal
therefore again comes to the conclusion that these difficult legal questions cannot be
resolved in these summary proceedings.

CONCLUSIONS

The Tribunal considers that the new Rules introduced in 2006 regarding preliminary
objections in cases where a claim is manifestly without legal merit allows an examination
of the jurisdiction and competence of the Centre and of the Tribunal. Rule 41(5) therefore
allows an early expedited finding if it is manifest that the jurisdiction of the Centre or the
competence of the Tribunal for the claims brought before the Tribunal is lacking.

With respect to the merits of the claim, an award denying such claims can only be made
if the facts, as alleged by the Claimant and which prima facie seem plausible, are not
manifestly of such a nature that the claim would have to be dismissed. The Tribunal does
not consider this to be the case.

Id, para. 28.

After having considered the written submissions by both Parties and having given the
Parties the opportunity to present their oral observations on the Objections at its first
session held in Paris on 29 January 2009, the Tribunal decides as follows:

1. The Respondent’s Objections of 19 December 2008 are rejected;

2. The Tribunal reserves all other issues to a further order, decision or award, including
any question as to costs;

3. The further procedure will be according to the agreement reached at the first session.

Paris, France
2 February 2009

 

[signed] [signed]
Professor Brigitte Stern Professor Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel
Arbitrator Arbitrator
[signed]

Dr. Robert Briner
President of the Tribunal

