BCB v. Belize
PCA Case No. 2010-18 / BCB-BZ

ARBITRATION UNDER THE UNCITRAL RULES

PCA CASE NO. 2010-18 / BCB-BZ
BRITISH CARIBBEAN BANK LTD (CLAIMANT)
Vv.

THE GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE (RESPONDENT)

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S MOTION
PURSUANT TO 1976 UNCITRAL
ARBITRATION RULES, ARTICLES 36 AND 37

21 January 2015

CONSIDERING:

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)
(E)

The Arbitral Tribunal’s issuance of its Award on 19 December 2014;

Paragraph 4 of the Arbitral Tribunal’s Order N° 4, which provided as follows:

For the time being the procedural orders, decisions and awards issued and
rendered by the Tribunal shall be published on the website of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, subject to redactions based on
confidentiality of commercially or politically sensitive or privileged
matters as requested by either Party.

The Respondent’s e-mail communication of 13 January 2015, indicating that the
Respondent intended to make an application pursuant to the provisions of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules relating to the interpretation or correction of the
award or to the issuance of an additional award;

Articles 36 and 37 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, 1976;

The Respondent’s Motion pursuant to 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
Articles 36 and 37 (the “Motion”’), submitted on 16 January 2015, requesting as
follows:

88. That pursuant to Article 36, the Tribunal correct the computation of
Article 2(2) compensation in the Award and grant no compensation
to the Claimant;

PCA CASE NO. 2010-18 / BCB-BZ
Decision on the Respondent’s Motion.

89. In the alternative, and pursuant to Article 37, the Tribunal
adjudicate the Respondent’s claim that, based on ADC Affiliate and
like cases, the general rule in Factory at Chorzéw does not apply,
and grant no compensation to the Claimant under Article 2(2);

90. As such, the Tribunal hold that the Respondent is the prevailing
party and correct the Award to delete any award of interest,
attorney’s fees or costs in favor of the Claimant, and instead award
to the Respondent its attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in these
proceedings;

91. And requests such further relief as may be just and equitable.

(F) The Respondent’s argument, set out in its Motion, that “the use of a wrong
method in the process of computing or calculating compensation clearly
constitutes an ‘error in computation’”, such that the “Award may be corrected”
to modify the Tribunal’s reliance in the Award on the rule in Factory at
Chorzéw in calculating damages pursuant to Article 2(2) of the Treaty
(Respondent’s Motion, paras. 7-13);

(G)_ The Respondent’s argument that “the Tribunal’s finding of a violation of Article
2(2) was based entirely on the finding of an unlawful expropriation of the
Claimant’s property rights”, such that the Article 2(2) violation was dependent
upon the finding of expropriation pursuant to Article 5 of the Treaty
(Respondent’s Motion, paras. 21-23);

(H) The Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal “erroneously found that there is
an ‘absence of an applicable provision within the Treaty itself,’ [with respect to
the compensation to be awarded for violations of Article 2(2) because the
Treaty does mandate the fair market value method for both legal and illegal
expropriations, and the Tribunal’s finding of a violation of Article 2(2) was
based solely on the finding of an illegal expropriation” (Respondent’s Motion,
para. 27);

(I) The Respondent’s argument that the decisions of other tribunals in investment
treaty arbitrations, in particular ADC Affiliate Limited v. Republic of Hungary,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16, Award of 2 October 2006, “are overwhelmingly
clear that compensation should have been computed only under the fair market
value method, and the general rule in Chorzéw Factory simply does not apply”
(Respondent’s Motion, para. 31; see generally, Respondent’s Motion, paras. 31-
62);

(J) The Respondent’s argument that in calculating compensation for the violation
of Article 2(2), “the Tribunal conducted an ex officio examination of certain
financial documentation about Telemedia, without providing the Respondent
with any opportunity to respond”, in respect of which expert testimony was

2

PCA CASE NO. 2010-18 / BCB-BZ
Decision on the Respondent’s Motion.

necessary and which the Tribunal lacked the information or expertise to assess
(Respondent’s Motion, paras. 65-79);

(K)_ The Respondent’s argument that —

the Tribunal did not rule on the issue whether, based on ADC Affiliate and
like precedents, the general compensation rule in Factory at Chorzéw
cannot apply in the circumstances of this case discussed above, including
because the Treaty is a lex specialis, the Treaty mandates compensation
under the fair market value method for both legal and _ illegal
expropriations, and/or the violation of the fair and equitable treatment
standard is based on the finding of an illegal expropriation
and may therefore issue an additional award on this issue pursuant to Article 37

of the UNCITRAL Rules (Respondent’s Motion, para. 84);

(L) The Claimant’s Reply to Respondent’s Motion pursuant to 1976 Arbitration
Rules, Article 36 and 37 (the “Reply”), submitted on 19 January 2015,
requesting that “that the Tribunal dismiss the Government’s Application, with
costs”;

(M) The Claimant’s argument, set out in its Reply, that “Article 36 applies to errors
affecting the expression of the tribunal’s decision, not an alleged error in the
process of reasoning. Accordingly, and contrary to what the Government says,
Article 36 does not extend to revising the methodology used by the arbitral
tribunal to determine compensation” (Claimant’s Reply, para. 7);

(N) The Claimant’s argument that the Respondent’s Motion “is not seeking
correction of any computational, clerical or typographical errors . . . . Rather,
the basis for the Application is the Government’s disagreement with the
Tribunal’s approach to determining the compensation owed to the
Claimant’(Claimant’s Reply, para. 10);

(O) The Claimant’s argument that —

the Tribunal’s conclusion that the Government treated the Claimant’s
investments in an unfair and inequitable manner did not rest solely on its
finding that the Government expropriated those investments for an
illegitimate purpose. Instead, that was only one of the factors (albeit the
primary factor) that led the Tribunal to conclude that the Government had
acted in breach of Article 2(2) of the Treaty.

(Claimant’s Reply, para. 19);

(P) The Claimant’s argument that “the adoption of a particular methodology in
cases involving an expropriation and a non-expropriatory breach of international
law is a matter of the tribunal’s ‘preference’ based on the particular facts of the
case” (Claimant’s Reply, para. 21);

PCA CASE NO. 2010-18 / BCB-BZ
Decision on the Respondent’s Motion.

(Q) The Claimant’s argument that “[t]o make a finding on the financial position of
Telemedia prior to expropriation, the Tribunal does not require expert evidence”
and that “[t]here is no general principle under international law or the
UNCITRAL Rules that require such evidence” (Claimant’s Reply, para. 22);

(R) The Claimant’s argument that “Article 37 is intended to cover ‘obvious cases of
omission’ in which the tribunal fails to render a complete award” and that
“Article 37 thus ‘obviously has no effect in cases of deliberate omission where
an arbitral tribunal has for specific reasons intentionally chosen not to address a
claim or issue in the award’” (Claimant’s Reply, para. 25);

(S) The Claimant’s argument that “both parties had made lengthy submissions on
the ADC v Hungary case, which the Tribunal has clearly considered and ruled
upon in its Award” and that “accordingly, the Government’s request is barred
by the rule that an additional award is not available where the underlying issue
has been ‘specifically addressed’” (Claimant’s Reply, para. 27);

(T) That Article 36 of the UNCITRAL Rules applies only to the correction of
unintentional errors of a technical nature and does not extend to the revision of
the reasoning or substance of a tribunal’s award;

(U) That the Tribunal’s decision to apply the Factory at Chorzéw standard to the
calculation of damages for the Respondent’s violation of Article 2(2) of the
Treaty formed part of the Tribunal’s reasoned decision in its Award and is
therefore not eligible for correction pursuant to Article 36;

(V) That Article 37 of the UNCITRAL Rules is limited to the issuance of an
additional award in respect of matters not decided in a tribunal’s award;

(w

That the applicability of the Factory at Chorzéw standard to the calculation of
damages for the Respondent’s violation of Article 2(2) of the Treaty was
decided in the Tribunal’s Award and is therefore not a matter eligible for an
additional award pursuant to Article 37;

(X) That, notwithstanding that the Tribunal’s findings in (T) through (W) above
suffice to dispense with the Respondent’s Motion, the Respondent’s Motion
conflates the Tribunal’s finding of a violation of Article 5 of the Treaty with the
Tribunal’s finding of a violation of Article 2(2);

(Y) That, while the conduct giving rise to a finding of expropriation may also give
rise to finding of a failure to accord fair and equitable treatment, the nature of
the two violations of the Treaty is distinct;

PCA CASE NO. 2010-18 / BCB-BZ
Decision on the Respondent’s Motion.

(Z) That, where the Tribunal has found both an expropriation and a failure to accord
fair and equitable treatment, it is not limited to awarding compensation pursuant
to the /ex specialis standard applicable to expropriation;

(AA) That the Tribunal would not revise its Award as requested by the Respondent
were it empowered to do so by the UNCITRAL Rules;
THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL HEREBY DECIDES AS FOLLOWS:

1. The Respondent’s request that the Tribunal, pursuant to Article 36 of the
UNCITRAL Rules, “correct the computation of Article 2(2) compensation in
the Award” is denied.

 

2. The Respondent’s request that the Tribunal, pursuant to Article 37 of the
UNCITRAL Rules, “adjudicate the Respondent’s claim that, based on ADC
Affiliate and like cases, the general rule in Factory at Chorzéw does not apply”
is denied.

3. The Respondent’s further requests concerning the prevailing Party, interest, and
attorneys’ fees and costs are correspondingly denied.

 

4. The Claimant’s request for the costs incurred in responding to the Respondent’s
Motion is denied.

 

On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal,

\ Sy

Albert Jan van den Berg,
Presiding Arbitrator

