IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION

UNDER THE RULES OF ARBITRATION OF THE
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

ICSID Case No. ARB/14/22

BSG RESOURCES LIMITED
(Claimant)

THE REPUBLIC OF GUINEA
(Respondent)

 

CLAIMANT'S COMMENTS ON EUROGAS DECISION

 

Karel Daele

James Libson

Mishcon de Reya Solicitors
Summit House

12 Red Lion Square
WCIR 4QD

London

Tel: +44 (0) 20 7440 7060
Fax: +44 (0) 20 7831 3487

i)

On 14 August 2015, the Tribunal granted leave to BSGR to file and
comment on the Decision on the parties’ requests for provisional
measures dated 23 June 2015 in ICSID Case No. ARB/I4/14
EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v, Slovak Republic ("the
EuroGas Decision").' The Eurogas Decision fully supports BSGR’s

position that security for costs should not be ordered.

As the Tribunal will recall, BSGR has submitted that security for
costs can only be ordered in exceptional, if not in extreme,
circumstances.” Inter alia, BSGR has referred to and relied on (i)
Maffezini v. Spain, (ii) Victor Pey v. Chile, (iii) Grynberg v.
Granada, (iv) Burimi v. Albania and (v) Guaracachi y. Bolivia as
supporting BSGR’s contentions. The EuroGas Decision can now be
added to this list, rightly determining that "as regularly held by
ICSID arbitral tribunals, security for costs may only be granted in
exceptional circumstances" >

BSGR has also submitted that of the nine ICSID tribunals that have
considered whether exceptional circumstances existed to justify the
grant of a security, eight have determined that no such circumstances
existed.* The EuroGas Tribunal was the 10th ICSID tribunal to
consider this issue and the ninth to find that no exceptional
circumstances existed to justify a security.” This demonstrates again
that a Tribunal should not lightly make a finding of exceptional

circumstances.

BSGR has further submitted that security for costs cannot be granted
on the ground of an ICSID claimant's financial hardship. ° Once

again, the EuroGas Tribunal agrees: "[...] it is not part of the ICSID

 

Claimant's Response to the Requests of the Republic of Guinea Under Articles
28(1) and 39(1) of the [CSID Arbitration Rules dated 5 June 2015, para. 75
("BSGR's Response").

EuroGas Decision, para. 121.

BSGR's Response, para. 76.

EuroGas Decision, para. 123 ("Yet, no such exceptional circumstances have been
evidenced in the instant case").

BSGR’s Response, paras. 94 to 99.

dispute resolution system that an investor's claim should be heard
only upon the establishment of a sufficient financial standing of the
investor to meet a possible costs award"’ and "financial difficulties
[...] do not necessarily constitute per se exceptional circumstances
justifying that the Respondent be granted an order of security for
costs"®

Finally, BSGR has submitted that Guinea's assertion that Guinea
allegedly has a serious defence on the merits is irrelevant in the
consideration of Guinea's provisional measures requests. ° The
EuroGas Tribunal supports BSGR’s position. Whereas the Slovak
Republic based its request for security inter alia on the ground that it
had a strong defence on the merits'®, the EuroGas Tribunal did not
take any "strong defence" argument into consideration when

rejecting the requested measure.

In summary, the EuroGas decision is entirely consistent with and

reinforces the position which BSGR took in its earlier submissions.

 
 

esources Limited

Karel Daele

James Libson

Mishcon de Reya Solicitors
Summit House

12 Red Lion Square

WCIR 4QD London

Tel: +44 (0) 20 7440 7060

Fax: +44 (0) 20 7831 3487

EuroGas Decision, para. 120.

Ibid., para. 123.

BSGR's Response, para. 48,

EuroGas Decision, para. 112 ("The Respondent contends that it has a plausible
defense and that a future claim for cost reimbursement is not evidently excluded").

