INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
Washington D.C.

Case No. ARB/07/9

BUREAU VERITAS, INSPECTION, VALUATION, ASSESSMENT AND
CONTROL, BIVAC B.V.
(Claimant)
v.
THE REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY
(Respondent)

Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Rolf Knieper, President
L. Yves Fortier, QC, Arbitrator

Professor Philippe Sands QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Gonzalo Flores

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent

Messrs. Nigel Blackaby and Lluis Paradell Dr. José Enrique Garcia Avalos

and Mrs. Patricia Garcia Procurador General de la Repiiblica
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer del Paraguay

and Procuraduria General de la Republica
Messrs. Oscar Mersan and Diego Zavala del Paraguay

Mersan Abogados Asuncion, Paraguay

Asuncion, Paraguay and

Mr. Brian C. Dunning and
Mrs. Irene Dubowy
Thompson & Knight LLP
New York, NY

Date: May 29, 2009

(1 Introductory and Background Matters

1.1 The Parties and Procedural History

1. BIVAC is Bureau Veritas, Inspection, Valuation, Assessment and Control, BIVAC B.V.
(“BIVAC” or the “Claimant”), a company incorporated under the laws of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands (Netherlands) since 1984. Its registered office is at Vissersdijk 223-241 301 1 GW
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. BIVAC is an operating company within the Bureau Veritas Group,
which also maintains affiliated companies in more than one country, the headquarters being situated

in France.

2. BIVAC is represented in this arbitration by Mr. Nigel Blackaby, Mr. Lluis Paradell and Mrs.
Patricia Garcia of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, 2-4 rue Paul Cézanne, 75375 Paris Cédex 08,
France and by Messrs. Oscar Mersan and Diego Zavala of Mersan Abogados, Fulgencio R. Moreno

No. 509 ler. Piso, Asuncién, Paraguay.

3. The Respondent is the Republic of Paraguay (“Paraguay” or the “Respondent”).

4. Paraguay is represented by the Procurador General de la Reptiblica del Paraguay, Dr. José
Enrique Garcia-Avalos. Paraguay was originally also represented in this arbitration by Messrs. David
Lindsey and Ignacio Sudrez-Anzorena of Clifford Chance US LLP, as indicated in Paraguay’s letter
of 17 December 2007 to ICSID. By letter of 29 April 2008, Paraguay’s then Procurador General
informed ICSID that he no longer had the power to represent Paraguay in this arbitration. During the
first session of the Tribunal with the parties Paraguay was represented by Ambassador Luis Enrique
Chase Plate, Advisor to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Paraguay, Dr. Osvaldo Caballero Bejarano,
Procurador General Adjunto of Paraguay, Ms. Claudia Medina, Procuradoria General de la
Republica del Paraguay, Dr. Jorge Brizuela, Embassy of Paraguay in Washington D.C. and Ing.
Gustavo Ruiz Diaz, Representative of Paraguay before the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD). During the session the representatives of Paraguay stated that they would
shortly communicate to ICSID and the Tribunal the names of the persons that would represent
Paraguay during the future conduct of the proceedings. By letter dated 11 November 2008, Dr.
Garcia-Avalos, the newly appointed Procurador General, informed the Tribunal that Paraguay had
mandated Mr. Brian C. Dunning and Mrs. Irene Dubowy, of Thompson and Knight LLP, to assist
him during the hearing on 11 November 2008. By letter dated 6 December 2008 this mandate was

extended to cover the full period of the proceedings during the preliminary objections phase.

1.2 Procedural History and Background

5. On 20 February 2007 the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or
“the Centre”) received from BIVAC a Request for Arbitration dated 16 February 2007.

6. In its request BIVAC asserted that it had made investments in Paraguay which were protected by
the “Agreement between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Paraguay on
encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments”, signed on 29 October 1992, which entered
into force on 1 August 1994 (“The Treaty”, or “the BIT”). BIVAC further asserted that Paraguay had

violated various obligations under the Treaty.

7. BIVAC’s Request for Arbitration asserts that the Ministry of Finance of Paraguay and BIVAC
entered into a contract for the provision of technical services for pre-shipment inspection of imports
into Paraguay, on 6 May 1996 (“the Contract”). An identical contract was apparently concluded
between the Ministry of Finance and SGS Société Général de Surveillance S.A., a Swiss company, at
around the same time. The two contracts were intended to execute a “programme of pre-shipment
inspection” of goods to be imported into Paraguay, as established by the Ministry of Finance
(Preamble to the Contract). The objective of this programme was to optimise the rate of collection of
import duties and taxes. The Paraguayan Government had authorised the Ministry of Finance to enter
into these contracts by Executive Decree No. 12.311, dated 31 January 1996 (“The Decree”
Claimant’s Exhibit, CE-5). The Decree refers to “BIVAC INTERNATIONAL (BUREAU VERITAS
GROUP)” of France, rather than BIVAC B.V., and the Contract identifies “Bureau Veritas,
Inspection, Valuation, Assessment and Control, BIVAC B.V.” as the contracting partner (Claimant’s

Exhibit, CE-6). By the terms of the Contract BIVAC was inter alia required to:

(i) physically identify the goods prior to shipment,

(ii) appraise the reasonableness of the price charged by the seller,
(iii) estimate the customs value,

(iv) issue certificates of inspection,

(v) train Paraguayan personnel, and

(vi) assist in the establishment of a database (Contract, Article 2).

Articles 3.4 and 3.5 of the Contract allowed BIVAC to open and maintain a liaison office in
Paraguay, which was constituted as “BIVAC Paraguay S.A.” The Ministry of Finance was obliged to
pay fees for the technical services, which were to be calculated as a percentage of the “FOB” value of
the goods. Such fees were to be invoiced on a monthly basis to the Ministry of Finance in U.S.

dollars and paid within 20 days of receipt of each invoice (Contract, Article 4).

8. Article 9 of the Contract provided that disputes in relation to the Contract with regard to its
implementation, termination or invalidity were to be submitted to the Tribunals of the City of

Asuncion, with Paraguayan law being applicable.

9. The Contract was to run for a term of three years, and could be extended periodically (Article
8.2). The term of the Contract was due to expire in June 1999. BIVAC asserts that it carried out
some 70,000 inspections over the three year period of the Contract, and that it had issued 35 invoices.
It alleged that 19 of the invoices remained unpaid, amounting to a total amount of some US$ 22
million. The last payment made by the Ministry of Finance was in February 1999. BIVAC estimates
that as at 31 January 2007, the total amount due under the outstanding invoices, together with accrued

interest, is approximately US$ 36.1 million.

10. BIVAC submits that in August 1999 the Ministry of Finance had established the list of the 19
outstanding invoices and, despite this recognition of Paraguay’s indebtedness to BIVAC, a series of
internal reviews, audits and controls of BIVAC’s services were initiated by different government
departments or bodies. BIVAC asserts that these reviews and audits led to the conclusion that the
Contract was valid and that BIVAC had fully complied with it. It asserts that such conclusions are

reflected in:

- the audit by the Contraloria General de la Republica conducted from October 2000
to October 2002, which concluded that the Contract was valid and that the assertions

of breach were unfounded;

- formal recognitions of the debt by the Minister of Finance, as declared in February
2001 and in April 2004;

- the investigation initiated by the Direccién Nacional de Aduanas in February 2005,

which led to the conclusion that BIVAC had fully complied with the Contract.

11. BIVAC asserts that notwithstanding the positive results of these various inquiries, and despite
repeated requests for payment, no payments were made. Instead, BIVAC asserts that between 2001
and 2006 contradictory declarations were made by senior government officials, including the
President of Paraguay and the Minister of Finance. These sometimes recognised the validity of the

Contract and the outstanding debt, and sometimes announced further inquires.

12. By letter dated 3 October 2006, BIVAC notified the President of Paraguay, H.E. Dr. Nicanor

Duarte Frutos, on 13 October 2006 of the existence of an investment dispute under the Treaty.
BIVAC invited Paraguay to enter into negotiations to reach an amicable settlement of the dispute
within a period of three months. The three-month period for negotiations expired on 13 January

2007, apparently without any negotiations having taken place.

13. In its Request for Arbitration dated 16 February 2007, BIVAC sought the establishment of an

Arbitral Tribunal and requested the following relief:

“On the basis of the foregoing, without limitation and reserving BIVAC’s right to

supplement this request for relief in the light of further action which may be taken by

Paraguay, BIVAC respectfully requests that the Tribunal:

(a) DECLARE that:
(i) Paraguay has breached Article 6 of the Treaty by taking measures the
effect of which is to deprive BIVAC of its investment without payment of
just compensation;
(ii) Paraguay has breached Article 3(1) of the Treaty by failing to accord
BIVAC’s investment in Paraguay fair and equitable treatment and impairing

it by unreasonable measures;

(iii) Paraguay has breached Article 3(4) of the Treaty by failing to observe

obligations it has entered into with regard to BIVAC’s investment; and
(b) ORDER Paraguay to compensate BIVAC for its breaches of the Treaty in an
amount of at least US$36,121,052.35 (as of 31 January 2007), plus interest until date
of payment;
(c) AWARD such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate, and

(d) ORDER Paraguay to pay all of the costs and expenses of this arbitration.”

14. BIVAC maintains that the dispute is covered by the Treaty, that Paraguay has breached several of

its Treaty obligations, and that the jurisdictional requirements of the ICSID Convention are met.

15. In its Request for Arbitration BIVAC contends that the dispute is between Paraguay, a party to

the Treaty, and BIVAC, a legal person constituted under the law in force in the Netherlands and with
its legal domicile in the Netherlands. BIVAC asserts that it is a Dutch “national”, within the meaning

of Article I(b) of the Treaty, which includes:

“ii. legal persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party”.

BIVAC further contends that it has made an investment that is protected under Article 1(a) of the

Treaty, which defines “investments” as follows:

“the term ‘investments’ shall comprise every kind of asset and more

particularly, though not exclusively:

i. movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem in

respect of every kind of asset;

ii. rights derived from shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in companies

and joint-ventures;

iii

 

title to money, to other assets or to any performance having an economic

value;

iv. rights in the field of intellectual property, technical processes, goodwill

and know-how;

v. rights granted under public law, including rights to prospect, explore,

extract and win natural resources.”

BIVAC considers that the Contract constitutes a protected investment within the meaning of the
Treaty, specifically that it is an “asset”, a “title to money” and “title to performance having an
economic value”, since it provides for the payment of a service fee by the Ministry of Finance to

BIVAC in exchange for BIVAC’:

 

ervices. BIVAC asserts that the rights under the Contract also
involve “rights granted under public law”, as the Contract confers functions to it that are ordinarily

carried out by the custom services of the State.

16. BIVAC asserts that the non-payment of the amounts claimed in 19 invoices by the Ministry of
Finance is attributable to Paraguay, giving rise to its State responsibility under international law and

the Treaty. It asserts that Paraguay has violated three distinct obligations under the Treaty.

17. It first asserts that Paraguay is responsible for the violation of Article 6 of the Treaty, which states
that Dutch investments in Paraguay would not be expropriated or subjected to measures equivalent to
expropriation, except for a public purpose, on a non-discriminatory basis, and against payment of just

compensation. The provision reads:

“Neither Contracting Party shall take any measures depriving, directly or indirectly,
nationals of the other Contracting Party of their investments unless the following

conditions are complied with:

(a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of law;
(b) the measures are not discriminatory or contrary to any undertaking which
the Contracting Party which takes such measures may have given;

(c) the measures are taken against just compensation. . .”

According to BIVAC, the Ministry of Finance’s continuing failure to pay amounts due to BIVAC
under the Contract and pursuant to the Executive Decree No. 12.311, has substantially deprived
BIVAC of the expected economic benefit of its investment. Since no corresponding prompt,
adequate and effective compensation has been paid, BIVAC asserts that Paraguay’s conduct

constitutes indirect expropriation, within the meaning of Article 6 of the Treaty.
18. Article 3(1) of the Treaty provides:

“Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment of the investments
of nationals of the other Contracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures, the i i use, enj or

disposal thereof by those nationals.”

According to BIVAC, Paraguay’s failure to pay the amounts due to it under the Contract and pursuant
to the Decree are acts made in bad faith, in breach of the Contract and contrary to the investment-
backed legitimate expectations and acquired rights of BIVAC. BIVAC considers that Paraguay’s
conduct amounts to unfair and inequitable treatment of BIVAC’s investment in Paraguay, being
objectively unreasonable, in the sense that it is without any justifiable basis, and that it impairs the

investment by unreasonable and discriminatory measures, which also ignore BIVAC’s rights.

19. Article 3(4) of the Treaty reads:

“Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with

regard to investments of the other Contracting Party.”

BIVAC contends that Paraguay entered into obligations with regard to BIVAC’s investment pursuant
to the Decree and the subsequent Contract, that these obligations have not been observed as a result of
the failure to pay the amounts due, and that consequently Paraguay is in breach of its obligations

under Article 3(4) of the Treaty.

20. BIVAC submits that the jurisdictional requirements as set out in Article 25 have been met. Article

25 reads, in relevant part:

“(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre, shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment, between a Contracting State ... and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent

unilaterally.

(2) ‘National of another Contracting State’ means: [...] (b) any juridical person which
had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute on
the date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or

arbitration.”

21. BIVAC asserts that Article 25 imposes four requirements and that all have been satisfied:

- there is a legal dispute arising from the alleged violation by Paraguay of BIVAC’s

legal rights under the Treaty and international law;

- the dispute arises directly out of BIVAC’s investment in Paraguay which, as
described above, is a protected investment under the Treaty and the ICSID

Convention;

- the dispute is between Paraguay, an ICSID Contracting State, and BIVAC, a

company incorporated in the Netherlands, another ICSID Contracting State; and

- BIVAC and Paraguay have consented to submit the dispute to ICSID arbitration in
writing, the consent being perfected by Paraguay’s offer to submit an investment
dispute under the Treaty to ICSID arbitration and by BIVAC’s acceptance of the offer

as expressed in the Request for Arbitration.

Article 9(2) of the Treaty reads in its relevant part as follows:

“Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit any legal dispute arising
between that Contracting Party and a national of the other Contracting Party
concerning an investment of that national in the territory of the former
Contracting Party to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment

Disputes for settlement by conciliation or arbitration under the Convention on

 

the Settlement of Investment Dispute:

22. On 2 March 2007, the Centre asked BIVAC to elaborate on the manner in which it considered the
Contract to qualify as an investment under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. The Centre also
asked BIVAC to clarify the interplay between Article 9.1 of the Contract, which contains the
contractual dispute settlement clause, and the dispute settlement provisions contained in Article 9 of
the BIT.

23. By letter dated 15 March 2007 BIVAC replied to the first question by explaining that the ICSID
Convention did not define the term “investment” in Article 25, leaving it to other legal instruments
(such as the Treaty) to address the matter. According to BIVAC, the Treaty defines “investment” in a
broad sense, comprising “every kind of asset”, including “title to money” (Art. 1(a)(iii)) and “rights
granted under public law” (Art. 1(a)(v)) as detailed in paragraph 15 above. BIVAC reiterated that the
Contract qualifies as an investment in the sense of the Treaty since it establishes a claim to the
payment for services by the Ministry of Finance to BIVAC, which is a title to money, and since it
conferred functions upon BIVAC which were normally carried out by the custom services, thereby

creating rights under public law.

24. As to the interplay between the dispute settlement provisions in the Contract and the Treaty,
BIVAC contended that a contractual arbitration clause does not preclude Treaty jurisdiction over
claims for breach of the Treaty, regardless of whether the claim may at the same time raise issues of

interpretation or application of the underlying Contract.

25. On the basis of these explanations, and without prejudice to issues of jurisdiction or the merits,

the Centre registered the Request for Arbitration on 11 April 2007, and duly notified the parties.

1.3 The constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal

26. By letter dated 12 June 2007, BIVAC informed the Centre that the parties had not come to an
agreement as to the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and requested the Centre to proceed in
accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. By letter dated 13 June 2007, the Centre
informed the parties that more than 60 days had elapsed since the registration and that in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 2(3) the Tribunal would be constituted as fixed in Article 37(2)(b) of the

Convention.

27. By letter dated 14 June 2007, BIVAC appointed Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., 0.Q., Q.C., LL.D, a
Canadian national, as an arbitrator in this case. Mr. Fortier accepted his appointment on 20 June
2007. By letter dated 9 July 2007, Paraguay appointed Professor Philippe Sands, QC, a British and

French national, as an arbitrator. Professor Sands accepted his appointment on 13 July 2007.

28. By letter dated 18 October 2007, following more than 90 days after the registration of the Request
for Arbitration, BIVAC informed the Centre that the parties had been unable to reach an agreement
on the appointment of the President of the Tribunal and requested, in accordance with Article 38 of
the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 4(1) and (2), ICSID to proceed with the
appointment. Following consultations with the parties, the Centre appointed Professor Dr. Rolf
Knieper, a German national, as the presiding arbitrator. Professor Knieper accepted the appointment

on 10 March 2008.
29. By letter dated 10 March 2008 the Centre informed the parties that the Tribunal had been
constituted on that date and that the proceedings were deemed to have begun on the same day. The
parties were further informed that Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as
Secretary of the Tribunal.

1.4 Paraguay’s Response
30. Paraguay has consistently and from its first correspondence objected to the jurisdiction of the
Centre and the Arbitral Tribunal and has not submitted any arguments as to the merits of the dispute.
Paraguay has insisted that neither the appointment of an arbitrator nor the agreement to the
constitution of the Tribunal were to be interpreted as consent to jurisdiction.
31. In its first written submission on 8 April 2008, Paraguay put forward the following arguments:

(a) Paraguay has never explicitly agreed to arbitration before ICSID, which it claimed

10

was necessary since the mere fact of ratifying the ICSID Convention did not

constitute such agreement. Paraguay referred to the Preamble, which provides:

“that no Contracting State shall by the mere fact of its ratification, acceptance
or approval of this Convention and without its consent be deemed to be under

any obligation to submit any particular dispute to conciliation or arbitration”.

(b) Paraguay asserted that the relationship with BIVAC was based on the Contract,
which is to be characterized as an administrative contract and thereby not covered by
the Treaty. In its view, a purely contractual relationship without any contribution of
capital by the contracting parties does not qualify as an investment as it is understood
in common language as well as in Paraguayan law. According to Paraguay, therefore,

the Treaty does not apply to the dispute.

(c) Paraguay asserts that Article 9.1 of the Contract contains an exclusive dispute
settlement mechanism, establishing jurisdiction of the courts of the city of Asuncién,

with Paraguayan law being applicable.

(d) Paraguay asserts that BIVAC has not made any investment in the territory of
Paraguay, as required by the Treaty. It refers to the Preamble of the Treaty which

reads:

“The Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Government of the Republic of Paraguay...Desiring to strengthen the
traditional ties of friendship between their countries, to extend and
intensify the economic relations between them particularly with respect
of investments by the nationals of the Contracting Party in the territory of

the other Contracting Party...”

(e) According to Paraguay, the Constitution of Paraguay and laws providing for
public order prohibit the State from derogating from the national jurisdiction in

favour of international arbitration where issues relating to State property arise.

(f) Paraguay asserts that the dispute is not of a legal nature in the sense of Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention, and that since the Contract is of a public,
administrative nature, it is governed by cogent law (ius cogens) and considerations of

public policy and not by party autonomy; moreover, given that the State has

ll

1

unilaterally rescinded the Contract for reasons of public policy, the character of the
dispute is of a purely administrative nature and not of a legal nature in the sense of

the ICSID Convention.

 

32. For these reasons Paraguay requests: “To admit this party to the proceeding in accordance with
the enclosed exhibits. To admit this written pleading which asserts that Paraguay has not consented
to ICSID arbitration and that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to decide on the request for arbitration

filed by BIVAC BV.”!

33. In a second, undated brief which was distributed to the Tribunal and BIVAC during the first

session on 20 May 2008, Paraguay reiterated its position:

- that no competent State organ of Paraguay had consented to submit the dispute with

BIVAC B.V. to an ICSID Arbitral Tribunal;
- that therefore the Tribunal has no jurisdiction;

- that any decision of the Tribunal assuming jurisdiction would be manifestly in

excess of its powers and void ex tunc; and

- that this problem should be solved before any further action.
34. Paraguay partly reiterated its initial request” “That the Tribunal declare its lack of jurisdiction to
decide this dispute as a preliminary matter, not jointly with the merits, as if not, Paraguay would be
forced to incur large expenditures from the public treasury to cover its defence costs.”

1.5 The Tribunal’s first session

35. The first session of the Tribunal was held with the parties on 20 May 2008, at the seat of the
Centre in Washington, D.C. At that session BIVAC was represented by Mr. Nigel Blackaby and Ms.
Patricia Garcia from Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, Mr. Andrew Hibbert from BIVAC B.V. and

“Tener por presentando al recurrente en el cardcter invocado en las instrumentales que se acompafian. Tenga

por presentado este escrito que denuncia la falta de consentimiento del Estado paraguayo a someterse al CIADI y su
clara y contundente Incompetencia de Jurisdiccién para conocer en la solicitud de Arbitraje solicitado por BIVAC
BV.”

2

“Que el Tribunal Arbitral del Centro declare la falta de competencia para entender y decidir en esta disputa,

como una cuestién previa, no conjuntamente con el fondo de la cuestién, que obligaré al Estado paraguayo a una
gran erogacién de su Tesoro Publico, para hacer frente a los gastos que demande su defensa.

Mr. Oscar Mersan from Mersan Abogados. Paraguay was represented by Ambassador Luis Enrique
Chase Plate, Advisor to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Paraguay, Dr. Osvaldo Caballero Bejarano,
Procurador General Adjunto, Ms. Claudia Medina, Procuraduria General de la Republica del
Paraguay, Dr. Jorge Brizuela, Embassy of Paraguay in Washington D.C. and Ing. Gustavo Ruiz Diaz,
Representative of Paraguay before the IBRD.

36. During the session, the parties agreed that the Tribunal had been properly constituted in
accordance with the provisions of the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules in force since 10
April 2006, which are applicable to the proceedings. They also agreed on a series of procedural
matters pursuant to the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules. These addressed the
apportionment of costs and advance payments to the Centre, fees and expenses of Tribunal members,
the place of proceedings in Washington D.C., the records of the hearings, the means of
communication to be channelled through the Secretariat, presence, quorum and decisions of the
Tribunal as well as delegation of power to fix time limits, written and oral procedures, the
examination of witnesses and experts and the publication of the award. These decisions were noted in
Minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal and circulated by the latter to the

parties.

37. As to the procedural languages, the Minutes state:

“In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 22, BIVAC selected English and the

Respondent selected Spanish as the procedural language.

On the issue of translations, after listening to both parties, the Tribunal decided as

follows:
a. All memorials and accompanying witness statements and expert reports
will be translated by the submitting party into the other party's selected
language;

b. The translations will be filed simultaneously with the main briefs;

c. The parties do not need to file translations of other accompanying

documentation, but may do so if they wish to.

The accompanying documentation (with the exceptions indicated above), provided

that it is in one of the procedural languages, will be filed in its original language. The

13

Tribunal may require translations from the parties whenever it deems them necessary.
The Tribunal will render its decisions in both languages. The communications from
the Secretariat to the parties will be made in either language. The Secretariat will
arrange simultaneous interpretation services from and into English and Spanish for

future hearings.”

38. As to the pleadings, preliminary objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and suspension of

the proceedings on the merits, the Minutes record that:

“Paraguay submitted a Memorial with Preliminary Objections to the Jurisdiction of
the Centre on April 8, 2008 (a copy of which was transmitted to the Tribunal on April

9, 2008). Paraguay filed a further document on the question of jurisdiction during the

 

first session. Paraguay confirmed that its submissions of April 8 and May 20, 2008

constitute its memorial in chief on the question of jurisdiction.

In view of Paraguay’ objections, after hearing from both parties, the Tribunal decided
as follows (as reflected in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No 1 of June 12, 2008,
amended by letter of the Secretary to the parties of June 25, 2008 (attached to these

Minutes as Annexes 2 and 3, respectively)):

- The Respondent’s Preliminary Objections, as set out in the documents dated April 9,

2008 and May 20, 2008, shall be treated as a preliminary question;

- The proceedings on the merits are suspended until such time as the Tribunal has
adopted a decision on the Preliminary Objections raised by the Respondent, as

provided by Article 41, paragraph 2 of the Convention;

- The Respondent’s documents dated April 9, 2008 and May 20, 2008 shall be treated
as a written pleading (Memorial), setting out in full the Respondent’s Preliminary

Objections within the meaning of Article 41, paragraph 2 of the Convention;

- The time limits for the submission of further pleadings in this phase of the

proceedings are as follows:

+ The Claimant shall submit a Counter-Memorial, in English and in Spanish, no
later than Thursday July 3, 2008;

+ The Respondent shall submit a Reply, in Spanish and in English, no later than
Monday August 18, 2008;

+ The Claimant shall submit a Rejoinder, in English and in Spanish, no later than

Thursday October 2, 2008;

+ A hearing on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections shall be held at the seat
of the Centre in Washington D.C., on Tuesday November 11, 2008, to commence

at 9:30 a.m.

The conduct and timetable for the hearing, and all other matters, is reserved for

further decision.”

39. BIVAC’s Counter-Memorial, Paraguay’s Reply and BIVAC’s Rejoinder were each submitted on
time. By letter dated 4 September 2008 the Tribunal invited the parties to agree to an agenda for the
hearing on Paraguay’s preliminary objections, to be held at the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C.
on 11 November 2008. This was accepted by both parties: BIVAC proposed an agenda by letter
dated 1 October 2008, which was orally confirmed during a telephone conversation on 3 October
2008 between Dr. Osvaldo Caballero Bejarano, at that time Procurador General Adjunto of the

Republic of Paraguay, and Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal.

1.6 The Hearing on Jurisdiction and Post Hearing Briefs

40. The hearing on jurisdiction was held, as scheduled, on 11 November 2008 at the seat of the
Centre in Washington, D.C. At that hearing BIVAC was represented by Mr. Nigel Blackaby, Mr.
Lluis Paradell and Ms. Patricia Garcia from Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, Mr. Diego Zavala from
Mersan Abogados and Mr. Andrew Hibbert from BIVAC BV. Paraguay was represented by Dr. José
Enrique Garcia-Avalos, Procurador General de la Republica, Mr. Luis Emilio Camacho, Chief Legal
Advisor of the President, Mr. Ratil Sapena, Lawyer of the Treasury, Dr. Jorge Brizuela, Embassy of
Paraguay in Washington D.C., Ing. Gustavo Ruiz Diaz, Representative of Paraguay before the IBRD,
Mr. Brian C. Dunning and Ms. Irene Dubowy from Thompson & Knight LLP.

41. Paraguay requested that the hearing be adjourned to a later date. The request was based on the
fact that Paraguay had only recently (in August 2008), experienced a significant change of political
direction and government, after more than 60 years of government by one political party; that counsel
had been retained only days before the hearing; and that more time was needed to master the complex

issues arising in the dispute. At the same time Paraguay took care to “recognize that there is

15

continuity in statehood in Paraguay.”>

42. Paraguay also confirmed that it did not call into question the validity of previous acts of
government officials. It acknowledged that it had been fully involved in the process including the
fixing and evolution of the agenda of the hearing. BIVAC objected to the request for postponement.
It insisted that Paraguay had had all the opportunities necessary to present its case, to hear and to be
heard, that the request was little more than a further effort to delay the resolution of the dispute.
According to BIVAC, it would be unreasonable to frustrate the efforts and expenses that had been

deployed to organize the hearing.

43. The Tribunal considered the arguments and decided that it would be appropriate to proceed with
the hearing. The request for a postponement was rejected. The Tribunal explained that the decision
was motivated by the need to strike a balance between the constraints of the parties and the obligation
to conduct the proceedings in reasonable speed and bring them to an end within an expedient and
efficient period of time. The Tribunal reiterated that the requirements of due process had been
complied with, that both parties had been fully involved in the process, including in the setting of the
timetable and agenda for the hearing on jurisdiction. The Tribunal expressed its understanding as to

the chall facing the new government, but nevertheless d that the interests of the sound

administration of justice would justify a continuation of the hearing.

44. The Tribunal further decided, in order to accommodate the interests of both parties and their
counsel, and with the agreement of both parties, to grant both parties the opportunity to submit post-
hearing memoranda of not more than 40 pages in length, with deadlines for Paraguay of 8 December
2008 and for BIVAC of 22 December 2008. The Tribunal ordered that the submissions elaborate on
arguments already presented in written pleadings albeit in a too succinct form but that the parties

refrain from introducing new arguments or new approaches at this stage of the proceedings.
45. Both parties accepted the Tribunal’s decision.

46. Due to the length of debate leading to these procedural decisions, the initial timetable for the
conduct of the hearing could not be adhered to. With their agreement, both parties were offered equal
time to give an oral presentation of their submissions on the issues of jurisdiction. This was done on
behalf of Paraguay by Mr. Dunning and Dr. Garcia-Avalos, and on behalf of BIVAC by Messrs.
Blackaby, Paradell and Zavala. After having fully presented their arguments and having answered

the Tribunal’s questions, the parties agreed to adjourn the hearing an hour ahead of schedule.

Statement of Mr. Dunning, Hearing on Jurisdiction, 11 November 2008, transcript, p. 36.

47. In the course of the hearing, Paraguay reiterated that BIVAC had not made an investment in the
territory of Paraguay and that therefore the Treaty was inapplicable, and that in any event Paraguay
had not breached any of the Treaty obligations. It further asserted that “there were some diplomatic
negotiations between the French Republic and the Republic of Paraguay” and that the question had
come up “whether the Government of the Netherlands ought to have participated or perhaps ought to

participate going forward in diplomatic negotiations to try to resolve the dispute.”*

48. BIVAC refuted the argumentation. It reiterated that Paraguay had consented to ICSID
jurisdiction, that BIVAC had made a substantive investment in the territory of Paraguay, that it had
complied with all its obligations, and that Paraguay had breached its obligations under the Treaty
causing damage to BIVAC. It insisted that the claim was arbitrable under Paraguayan law and that
the dispute mechanism clause in the Contract did not prevent BIVAC from bringing claims under the

Treaty.

49. The parties filed their post-hearing memoranda in accordance with the agreed timetable.

50. In the meantime, Paraguay sent a letter to the Tribunal dated 5 December 2008, inviting the
Tribunal to dismiss the entire claim on the ground that BIVAC lacked standing. Paraguay asserted
that the real party in interest was BIVAC International S.A., a French company, and not BIVAC BV,
a Dutch company. By letter dated 11 December 2008 BIVAC responded to Paraguay’s claim, and
requested the Tribunal to reject Paraguay’s new submission as inadmissible on the grounds that it
raised new arguments on objections to jurisdiction, thereby contradicting the Tribunal’s decision not

to allow any new arguments to be made at this preliminary stage of the proceedings.

51. The Tribunal invited Paraguay to give its views on the issue of admissibility as raised by BIVAC,
which it did by letter dated 19 December 2008. By letter dated 22 December 2008 BIVAC reiterated

its request that Paraguay’s new arguments as to standing should be declared inadmissible.

52. The Tribunal noted that that the issue of standing only arose for the first time in these proceedings
as a result of Paraguay’s letter of 5 December 2008, some three weeks after the hearing on
jurisdiction. During that hearing Paraguay submitted that diplomatic negotiations had taken place

between France and Paraguay and that the Netherlands should have been ass

 

ciated to them, but it did
not raise any issue as to standing. In a letter to the parties dated 24 December 2008 the Tribunal

communicated its views as follows:

Statement of Mr. Dunning, Hearing on Jurisdiction, 11 November 2008, transcript, p. 44.

“The Tribunal notes that Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the competence of
the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal which shall determine
whether to deal with it as a preliminary question or to join it to the merits of

the dispute.

It is clear from this provision that the Tribunal may decide to deal with any issue of
jurisdiction or admissibility as “a preliminary question” or by joinder to the merits of
the dispute. In its Procedural Order No. 1 (12 June 2008) the Tribunal decided as
follows: The Respondent’s Preliminary Objections, as set out in the documents dated
April 9, 2008 and May 20, 2008, shall be treated as a preliminary question; it is clear
from this Order that the decision to treat certain Preliminary Objections of Paraguay
by way of preliminary question was limited to the arguments raised by Paraguay in
these two documents, and not to any other arguments. The Tribunal recalls that the
suspension of proceedings on the merits was made at the request of Paraguay. The
Tribunal further recalls that, with the consent of BIVAC, it granted Paraguay a
limited further opportunity to elaborate on arguments previously made, whilst also
allowing BIVAC a limited right of reply. Further, the Tribunal made clear to the
parties during the hearing on 11 November, 2008 that it would not be consistent with
principles of due process and procedural economy to introduce new arguments into
the preliminary phase when both parties had already agreed to an orderly procedural
schedule, and where the parties had had ample opportunities to present their
arguments. The Tribunal made clear its direction to the parties that they should not
raise any new arguments in the post-hearing memoranda. There were no objections
to that direction. The Tribunal notes that Paraguay’s letters of 5 December, 2008, and
19 December, 2008 raise an apparently new argument that was not addressed in
Paraguay’s documents dated April 9, 2008 and May 20, 2008. In the circumstances,
the Tribunal will limit its decision during this preliminary phase to the objections
raised by Paraguay in its documents dated April 9, 2008 and May 20, 2008, and as
those arguments (and not any others) are elaborated in the post-hearing memorial
dated 8 December, 2008. To the extent that other arguments raised in the documents
dated December 5, 2008 and December 19, 2008 remain to be addressed, and without
prejudice to any decision the Tribunal may take on the matters raised during this

preliminary objections or the need for any further phase, these arguments will be

18

joined to the merits of the dispute, in accordance with Article 41(2) of the ICSID

Convention.”

53. Against this background, we will not deal with the merits of this new argument, raised at a late
stage by Paraguay. With a view to assisting the parties as they go forward, however, we think it may
be useful to share our perception of the facts as they emerge from the evidence that is currently before
us.
qd) It has not been contested that the BIVAC Group operates in several countries,
where it has established companies, including France and the Netherlands, and that
the French company (BIVAC S.A.) is the headquarters and parent company. The
Dutch affiliate of BIVAC was founded in 1984, as a B.V. On the basis of the
information on the record, it fulfils the requirements of being a juridical person
having the nationality of the Netherlands, within the meaning of Article 25(2)(b) of
the ICSID Convention. No evidence has been put before us to indicate that the Dutch
entity was created to take advantage of a favourable Netherlands-Paraguay BIT,
although this point was alluded to in the Respondent’s letter of 5 December 2008.
The evidence before us indicates when the Contract was concluded, Mr. Gilles
Minard was the Executive Director of BIVAC B.V. (a post which apparently shared
with his position as President of BIVAC International/France). It has not been
contested that the Paraguayan Presidential Decree No. 12.311, which authorized the
Ministry of Finance to enter into contracts with SGS and with BIVAC, refers to
BIVAC International (Group Bureau Veritas) of France. It has also not been
contested that the cover page of the Contract refers to BIVAC BV, that the Contract
states in the opening that the Contract is concluded between the Minister of Finance
and BIVAC B.V. (“a company constituted under the laws of the Netherlands”), and
that the Contract determines that this company is “hereinafter called “BIVAC’”
(although it also refers in the same Article to the Presidential Decree and to “BIVAC

International (Bureau Veritas Group) of France”).

(2) The parties apparently disagree on whether the Contract was signed on behalf
of BIVAC International S.A. (France) or BIVAC B.V. (Netherlands). The documents
are far from clear. The signatures are placed under the words “BIVAC International”
and the postal address refers to BIVAC International, in France. On the other hand,
the commercial register of Rotterdam in The Netherlands identifies one of the
signatories, Mr. Gilles Minard, as executive director of BIVAC B.V. (Netherlands)
and the notarial deed of 29 April 1996, established in Asuncién and attached to the

Contract, certifies a power of attorney for Mr. Henri Pla to act and sign on behalf of

19

BIVAC B.V. (Netherlands). The authenticity of these documents has not been
challenged.

(3) The documentation is — to say the least - far from being entirely consistent.
The documents presently before us do not allow us to determine exactly which of the
two legal entities is to be identified as the party to the Contract with the Ministry of
Finance. This may serve to distinguish the present situation with that which pertained
in ICSID Case No. ARB/03/08 (L.E.S.I. v Algeria)’, on which Paraguay relies, where

the identities of the signatories to the contract differed from that of the Claimant.

(4) It follows that evidence beyond the documents is needed to determine with
greater certainty the party in interest. This evidence appears to be available in the
related circumstances concerning the parties in relation to and under the Contract.
The evidence put before us shows that: (a) the initial security bond was issued on
behalf of BIVAC B.V.; (b) BIVAC B.V. rendered the pre-shipment inspection
technical services and invoiced the Ministry of Finance, which then made payments
to a Bank account in the name of BIVAC B.V.; (c) the termination of the Contract
was notified to BIVAC B.V.; and (d) in the course of these proceedings Paraguay did
not invoke this standing issue until after the hearing on jurisdiction, even though it
was previously aware of the economic links between BIVAC S.A. and BIVAC B.V.
(in a letter dated 4 December 2007, for example, Paraguay rejected ICSID’s proposal
that a French national be President of the Tribunal because the “Claimant is an entity
established under the laws of the Netherlands but with very close ties to France by the
fact that it is completely owned by the Bureau Veritas Group whose centre is in
Paris” (Tribunal’s translation). These factors are evidenced by the documents before
us. Both parties have acted under the Contract in a manner that demonstrates

(implicitly at least) that they considered BIVAC B.V. to be the contracting party.

(5) There appears to be no dispute between the parties that, unless otherwise
agreed, the nationality of a legal entity is not determined by who controls it, but by its
place of incorporation. Article 25(2)(b) ICSID Convention defines “national of
another Contracting State” to mean any juridical person which has the nationality of a
Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute. Case law and commentary

are clear in their support for the proposition that States have a broad discretion to

Consortium Groupement L.E.S.1. - DIPENTA v People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/8).

20

define corporate nationality, for instance for the purposes of a BIT. The BIT in this
case does so by specifying in its Article 1(b)(ii) that “nationals” of either Contracting
Party comprise “legal persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party”,

which indicates that no test of corporate control is required.

On the basis of the limited evidence that has been put before us so far, it appears that Paraguay’s
argument may prove to be difficult to sustain. The documentary material appears to show quite
clearly that both parties acted on the basis that the Claimant was the contracting partner, even if two
entities (the Claimant and BIVAC S.A. (France)) may have been involved in aspects of the Contract.
If Paraguay decides to maintain this argument it will have to provide additional evidence to establish

that BIVAC lacks standing to bring these proceedings.
(ID) The Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility
2.1 Introductory matters

54. Paraguay has objected to the Tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction in its four written pleadings and
during the oral arguments. Whilst the various arguments raised by Paraguay might not easily be
characterised as constant over the course of the proceedings so far, it has consistently and forcefully
objected to the Tribunal’s potential exercise of jurisdiction. Its final written pleading is a Post-
Hearing Brief filed on 10 December 2008, which indicates in the introduction (p. 1) that the
arguments set forth in that pleading are “In addition to the bases set forth in the Republic of
Paraguay’s previous memorials”. BIVAC includes a similar rider in its Post-Hearing Memorial of 22
December 2008, which notes that “while seeking to clarify previous submissions, this brief is in
addition to and does not substitute BIVAC’s previous written and oral pleadings”.° The Tribunal
understands from this that it was the intention of the parties to make their various claims in a
cumulative fashion, and that a failure to address any particular issue in the post-hearing briefs should

not be taken to indicate any intention to abandon any earlier argument.
55. Having regard to the written and oral pleadings of both parties, the arguments of the parties, and
the differences between them, coalesce around five issues. The characterisation of these arguments
has not always been as clear as it might have been, and for this reason the Tribunal deems it useful to
summarise them as follows:

(1) Has Paraguay consented in writing to ICSID jurisdiction?

BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial of 22 December 2008, para. 1 (hereinafter BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial).

21

7

(2) Has BIVAC made an “investment” within the meaning of the ICSID Convention
and the BIT, and if so is it “in the territory of Paraguay”?

(3) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over the claim relating to expropriation
(Article 6), and is the claim admissible?

(4) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over the claim relating to fair and equitable
treatment (Article 3(1)), and is the claim admissible?

(5) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over the claim relating to the umbrella clause

(Article 3(4)), and is the claim admissible?

We deal with each issue in turn. Before doing so, it is useful to address a number of preliminary

matters.

56. It is appropriate to recall that at this stage of the proceedings we are to be guided by Article 41 of
the ICSID Convention, which states:

“(1) The Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence.

(2) Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the competence of the
Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal which shall determine whether to deal

with it as a preliminary question or to join it to the merits of the dispute.”

57. No issue has arisen between the parties as to the meaning and effect of Article 41. It is binding
and applicable, and both parties accept that it is for the Tribunal to determine whether it has
competence over some or all of the claims raised by BIVAC. The parties also recognise that the
Tribunal is free to decide any preliminary objection at this stage of the proceedings, as a preliminary

question, or join it to the merits.

58. The issues that have been presented to us are not novel. They have been raised in other ICSID or
similar proceedings, and both parties have referred to other awards and decisions— or those parts of
other awards and decisions that they deem helpful — in support of their arguments. For
understandable reasons, two cases have attracted particular attention in the course of the pleadings:
the decisions in SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan and in SGS
Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v Philippines.” In accordance with Article 53(1) of the ICSID

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13)

(hereinafter SGS v Pakistan); SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case
No. ARB/02/6) (hereinafter SGS v Philippines).

22

Convention, these decisions are binding only on the parties, so we are not bound by them (or any
other ICSID award) as precedent. Nevertheless, these and other decisions and awards merit careful
consideration. Having regard to the sound administration of justice, and the need to ensure the
coherence and well-being of the system of justice established by the drafters of the ICSID
Convention, we proceed on the basis that it is appropriate for us to explain why we have or have not
followed the approach adopted by other tribunals.* This becomes all the more important where, as in

the cases here referred to, the decisions appear to have certain contradictory elements.

59. In exercising our powers under the ICSID Convention, we are bound to interpret the provisions of
that Convention and the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT. In carrying out that task we will, in accordance
with established practise, be guided by the principles of interpretation that are set forth in Articles 31
to 33 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. These provisions are now broadly
recognised to reflect general international law.’ The principles set forth by these provisions point to a
balanced approach to interpretation, one that, in the case of investment treaties governed by a BIT

such as the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT, recognises the equally legitimate interests of the State and of

 

® See also AES Corporation v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/17), Decision on Jurisdiction, 26
April 2005, (Dupuy (P), Backstiegel, Bello Janeiro), at paras. 30-33:

“30, An identity of the basis of jurisdiction of these tribunals, even when it meets with very similar if not even
identical facts at the origin of the disputes, does not suffice to apply systematically to the present case positions or
solutions already adopted in these cases. Each tribunal remains sovereign and may retain, as it is confirmed by
ICSID practice, a different solution for resolving the same problem; but decisions on jurisdiction dealing with the
same or very similar issues may at least indicate some lines of reasoning of real interest; this Tribunal may consider
them in order to compare its own position with those already adopted by its predecessors and, if it shares the views
already expressed by one or more of these tribunals on a specific point of law, it is free to adopt the same solution.

31. One may even find situations in which, although seized on the basis of another BIT as combined with the
pertinent provisions of the ICSID Convention, a tribunal has set a point of law which, in essence, is or will be met in
other cases whatever the specificities of each dispute may be. Such precedents may also be rightly considered, at
least as a matter of comparison and, if so considered by the Tribunal, of inspiration.

32. The same may be said for the interpretation given by a precedent decision or award to some relevant facts which
are basically at the origin of two or several different disputes, keeping carefully in mind the actual specificities still
featuring each case. If the present Tribunal concurs with the analysis and interpretation of these facts as they
generated certain special consequences for the parties to this case as well as for those of another case, it may
consider this earlier interpretation as relevant.

33. From a more general point of view, one can hardly deny that the institutional dimension of the control
mechanisms provided for under the ICSID Convention might well be a factor, in the longer term, for contributing to
the development of a common legal opinion or jurisprudence constante, to resolve some difficult legal issues
discussed in many cases, inasmuch as these issues share the same substantial features.”

° See Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion,
1.C.J. Reports 2004, p.174, para 94; case concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States
of America), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 2004, p.48, para 83; LaGrand (Germany v. United States of America),
Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 2001, p.501, para 99; and Sovereignty over Pulau Ligitan and Pulau Sipadan
(Indonesia/Malaysia), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 2002, p. 645, para. 37, and the other cases referred to in those
decisions.

 

23

the investor. As one tribunal put it, a balanced interpretation takes into account:

“both the State’s sovereignty and its responsibility to create an adapted and
evolutionary framework for the development of economic activities, and the necessity
to protect foreign investment and its continuing flow.”"°

The same approach is reflected in the Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention'! and in

the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT, the preamble to which provides:

“Desiring to strengthen the traditional ties of friendship between their countries, to
extend and intensify the economic relations between them particularly with respect to
investment by the nationals of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other

Contracting Party,

Recognizing that agreement upon the treatment to be accorded to such investments
will stimulate the flow of capital and technology and the economic development of
the Contracting Parties and that fair and equitable treatment of investment is desirable

ma
2.2 Has Paraguay consented in writing to ICSID jurisdiction?

60. Chapter II of the ICSID Convention is concerned with jurisdiction, and its Article 25 provides
that
“(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or
agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of
another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to
submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may

withdraw its consent unilaterally.”

61. Paraguay raises a number of arguments — over the course of the pleadings taken as a whole — that

go to the question of whether the requirements of Article 25 have been satisfied. It has raised issues

'0 See Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Company v Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case

No. ARB/03/13), Decision on Preliminary Objections, 27 July 2006, (Caflisch (P), Stern, van den Berg) at para. 99.
"International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, (1965), 1 ICSID Reports 25,
at paras. 9-12 and 13 (“While the broad objective of the Convention is to encourage a larger flow of private
international investment, the provisions of the Convention maintain a careful balance between the interests of
investors and those of host States”).

24

that relate to the compatibility of the treaty obligations reflected in the BIT and in the ICSID
Convention with its Constitution and domestic laws, as well as the argument that the essential basis of
BIVAC’s claims raise under the internal law of Paraguay. To cut through the thicket of claims,

Paraguay’s arguments essentially go to two issues: (1) whether it has given its “consent in writing” to

  

submit to the jut

 

diction of the Centre, and (2) whether the dispute arises “directly out of an
investment”. It is convenient to deal with the first issue in this section, and to return to the second

issue when we consider the issue of whether BIVAC made an “investment”.

62. In its initial written pleadings Paraguay argued that it had not consented to ICSID jurisdiction
since neither its President (which was said to be the only office that could represent the State under
the Constitution of Paraguay), nor any other representative with “full powers” to commit the State at
the international level, had expressed consent on the part of Paraguay to ICSID jurisdiction in these
proceedings.” This argument was not explicitly raised again in later written pleadings, or in the oral
arguments (although in its Counter-Memorial Paraguay stated that it “totally ratifies and reaffirms (in
totum) the Objections on Jurisdiction of April 9 and May 20, 2008”, to the effect that “Paraguay has
not consented to ICSID Jurisdiction”.'? We therefore proceed on the basis that the argument has been

maintained and requires a response from the Tribunal.
63. BIVAC responded to this argument in Section II of its Counter-Memorial, arguing that:

“The Treaty clearly and unequivocally contains Paraguay’s consent and it is
universally established that consent to ICSID arbitration is validly formulated in
BITs. The Treaty is binding on Paraguay as a matter of international law and,
although irrelevant to establish consent under the ICSID Convention, Paraguayan

law."

64. In support of that argument, BIVAC invokes Article 9 of the BIT and relies on academic
authority and “unanimous” case law accepting the proposition that for the purposes of Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention “the respondent State’s consent to ICSID jurisdiction is contained in the BIT
invoked” and that the “subsequent consent of a claimant may be manifested through the filing of a

request for arbitration”.'* BIVAC’s written consent has been offered in the Request for Arbitration.

65. Beyond formally maintaining its argument, Paraguay has provided no response to these

Respondent Note of 8 April 2008, p, 3; and Note of 20 May 2008, p 3.

Paraguay’s Reply to BIVAC’s Counter-Memorial, 18 August 2008, p. 2 (“Paraguay Reply”).
BIVAC Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 4 (“BIVAC Counter-Memorial”).

Ibid., para. 11.

25

arguments, a point recognised by BIVAC."* It is difficult to see on what basis it could do so. The
general propositions for which BIVAC argues are by now so well established in practise and case-law
7

that they are “no longer controversial They are unanswerable. In the present case, Paraguay’s

written consent has been expressed in Article 9(2) of the BIT, which states in relevant part:

“Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit any legal dispute arising between
that Contracting Party and a national of the other Contracting Party concerning an
investment of that national in the territory of the former Contracting Party to the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes for settlement by
conciliation or arbitration under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment

Disputes...”

66. There is nothing in the language of Article 9(2) that could be read to indicate any qualification as
to Paraguay’s expression of consent. Paraguay has not argued that the BIT is not legally binding, or

that it was not validly entered into.

67. Instead, Paraguay argues that under its domestic law there is a requirement for an additional
specific expression of consent by its President or a person with full powers under international law,

and that this has not been given.'*

68. BIVAC has responded to this argument in Section II(B) of its Counter-Memorial. It refers to
ICSID case-law and academic authority in support of the proposition that once a State has given its
written consent in the BIT it “may not withdraw its consent unilaterally”.'? Paraguay has not
responded to this argument. Again, we do not easily see on what basis it could effectively do so.
There is nothing in the text of Article 9 of the BIT that could be interpreted to make Paraguay’s
expression of consent conditional or dependent upon some further and more specific expression of
consent by the President, or some other person with full powers under international law.

Accordingly, there is no support for Paraguay’s argument to that effect.

69. Paraguay adds another argument. It claims that the ICSID procedure is “effectively against the
Constitutional and legal order of the Republic of Paraguay”. In support of that proposition it invokes,
amongst other texts, Article 49 of the Judicial Organisation Code (Paraguayan Law No. 879/81)

which, it is said, proclaims that “controversies related to the properties of the state and municipalities

BIVAC Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 22 September 2008, para. 29 (“BIVAC Rejoinder”)

C. McLachlan, L. Shore and M. Weiniger, International Investment Arbitration (2007), para. 3.27, p. 54.
Respondent’s Note of 8 April 2008, p, 3; and Note of 20 May 2008, p 2.

BIVAC Counter-Memorial, para. 17.

26

2

cannot be submitted to arbitral procedures”.””

70. In response, BIVAC argues that there can be no question that a dispute concerning the Contract is
arbitrable under Paraguayan law. Specifically, BIVAC argues that the BIT is binding on Paraguay as
a matter of international law; Paraguay is not entitled to invoke its domestic law as an excuse not to
abide by its Treaty obligations; the BIT is part of Paraguayan law which thereby provides for the
arbitrability of this dispute; and that Paraguay’s Investment Law allows arbitration of contracts
between the State and investors that disputes arising out of those contracts be submitted to arbitration;

and arbitration is expressly admitted in administrative contracts.”!

71. Once again, Paraguay has chosen not to respond to these arguments by BIVAC, at the oral
hearing or in its Post-Hearing Memorial. It is noteworthy, in this regard, that another ICSID Tribunal
in a case involving Paraguay has already ruled that consent expressed in a BIT is sufficient to found
the jurisdiction of an ICSID Tribunal.” That decision contradicts Paraguay’s argument in this case.
That decision in favour of ICSID jurisdiction was handed down in 2000, some nine years ago. We
have been provided with no evidence to indicate that Paraguay objected to the decision or that it took

any steps to change its domestic laws, or amend any of its BITs, in response to the decision.

72. Having expressed its written consent in Article 9 of the BIT without any condition concerning
compliance with other Paraguayan constitutional or domestic legal requirements, and having taken no
other actions that it relies upon to deny consent, we find it difficult to see on what basis Paraguay can

sustain the various claims it has made in the early stages of these proceedings.

73. For these reasons, we reject Paraguay’s arguments and conclude it has expressed its written
consent to jurisdiction in Article 9 of the BIT, and that it has not imposed in that provision or
elsewhere other explicit conditions that are to be satisfied to perfect that expression of consent, or
taken any other actions to support an argument to the effect that written consent under Article 9 is not
effective. In these circumstances it follows that Article 9 constitutes the expression of written consent

required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

Paraguay Reply, p.11.
BIVAC Rejoinder, para. 29.
Eudoro A. Olguin v. Republic of Paraguay, (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/3), Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 August

2000, paras. 26-27 (Spanish original),-English translation available in 154 JCSID Reports 6 at 162.

27

23

2.3 Has BIVAC made an “investment” within the meaning of the ICSID

Convention and the BIT, and if so is it “in the territory of Paraguay”?

74. Paraguay objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the grounds that BIVAC has not made an
“investment” within the meaning of the ICSID Convention or the BIT; that accordingly the dispute
does not “arise out an investment”; and that even if an “investment” was made it was not made “in the

territory of Paraguay” as required by Article 9(2) of the BIT.

75. BIVAC has responded to these arguments by invoking the decisions in the two SGS cases. It
argues that:

“The Contract is a protected investment under the express terms of the Treaty and

also under the ICSID Convention. Further, Paraguayan law is irrelevant as regards

the question of the definition of protected investment under the Treaty. In any case,

the Contract would qualify as an investment under the Investment Law and as an

asset protected under Paraguayan law.”*

76. The parties agree that the ICSID Convention does not define the term “investment”. This is left
to the BIT, as described below. The BIT also provides in Article 9(2) that access to dispute
settlement under the ICSID Convention is limited to circumstances in which three conditions are met:
first, there must be an “investment”; second, it must have been made by a “national”, in this case, of
the Netherlands; and third, it must have been made, in this case, “in the territory” of Paraguay.
Subject to the point that Paraguay raised at a late stage in the proceedings concerning BIVAC’s
standing to bring these claims under the BIT, which will not be decided as a preliminary question (see

above at para. 53), we address the first and third issues.
“Investment”

77. Paraguay argues that BIVAC has not made a protected “investment” under the ICSID Convention

or under the BIT.
78. As regards the ICSID Convention, it is by now well established that in the absence of any attempt
to define the term “investment” in the Convention, the parties to that instrument are left with a margin

of discretion in defining the term. The Tribunal in SGS v Pakistan noted that:

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial on Jurisdiction, 8 December 2008, paras.1-48 (hereinafter Paraguay Post-

Hearing Memorial).

24

BIVAC Counter-Memorial, para. 31 and Section III generally.

28

“The ICSID Convention does not delimit the term “investment,” leaving to the
Contracting Parties a large measure of freedom to define that term as their specific

objectives and circumstances may lead them to do so.””>

Such freedom as may exist is not unlimited. _As the Tribunal recognised in Joy Mining v Egypt:

“The Convention itself, in resorting to the concept of investment in connection with
jurisdiction, establishes a framework to this effect: jurisdiction cannot be based on
something different or entirely unrelated. In other words, it means that there is a limit
to the freedom with which the parties may define an investment if they wish to

engage the jurisdiction of ICSID tribunals.”®

The parties cannot adopt a definition of “investment” that relates to activities that manifestly fall
outside the scope of what the drafters of the ICSID Convention intended. The meaning of
“investment” is subject to objective appreciation, having regard to the objectives of the ICSID
Convention, which seeks to promote international cooperation for economic development and the role

of private international investment (see the preamble to the ICSID Convention).

79. Against this background, we will first address the question of whether BIVAC has made an
“investment” within the meaning of Article 9(2) of the BIT, and then return to definitional issues

under the Convention.
80. Article 1 of the BIT defines investment as follows:

“(a) the term “investments” shall comprise every kind of asset and more

particularly, though not exclusively:

i. movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem in
respect of every kind of asset ;
ii. rights derived from shares, bonds and other kinds of interests in
companies and joint-ventures;
iii. title to money, to other assets or to any performance having an

economic value;

°5_SGS v Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003, (Feliciano (P), Faurés, Thomas), para 133.

© Joy Mining Machinery Limited v Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11), Award on Jurisdiction, 6 August 2004,
(Orrego Vicufia (P), Craig, Weeramantry), para 49.

29

iv. rights in the field of intellectual property, technical processes, goodwill
and know-how;
v. rights granted under public law, including rights to prospect, explore,

extract and win natural resources.”

81. BIVAC asserts that it has, under the Contract, rights to fees arising from the performance of the
Contract which gives it “title to money, to other assets or to any performance having economic
value”, within the meaning of Article 1(a)(iii) of the BIT, as well as “rights granted under public
law”, within the meaning of Article 1(a)(v) of the BIT.” BIVAC has refined its arguments in the
course of the pleadings, clarifying that “the rights arising under, and from the operation of, the
Contract rather than the Contract itself are assets”.”* According to BIVAC, it is necessary to consider

its operations as a whole within which the Contract right at issue arises. It concludes that:

“The investment is BIVAC’s right under the Contract to payment by the Ministry of

929

the fee contractually agreed in return for BIVAC’s services”.
In support of its arguments, BIVAC makes particular reference to the earlier ICSID decisions in SGS v
Pakistan and SGS v Philippines, both of which are said to support its conclusions. As to the question
of assets, BIVAC refers to the non-exhaustive identification of assets referred to in Article 1(a) of the
BIT.

82. In response, Paraguay develops its argument that the requirements of the BIT have not been met.

 

In its Post-Hearing Memorial it argues that the Contract is not an investment within the meaning of
the BIT, because it is not a concession, its rights under the Contract are purely rights to receive
payment for services performed abroad, and not rights granted under public law, and the Contract is

not a title to money because it is not a i a d debt such as a p issory

note or a judgment.”

83. By way of preface, we note that practise under the ICSID Convention, including in the relevant
case law, recognises that a wide range of “assets” may be characterised as an “investment”, and that
they are not limited to equity holdings. In Fedax v Venezuela, for example, the tribunal qualified the
claimant’s holding of promissory notes as an “investment” because they represented the counterpart

of a credit;*! in Salini vy Morocco the tribunal ruled that the claimant had made an investment because

Request for Arbitration, para. 11.
BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial of 22 December 2008, para 5 (hereinafter BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial).
Ibid, para 2(b).

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 30-31.

Fedax N.V. v Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3), Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 11

30

it had made “contributions in money, in kind, and in industry; in Bayindir v Pakistan the tribunal
noted that the claimant had trained engineers, provided equipment and know-how and incurred
extensive bank commission charges and thus had “made a significant contribution, both in terms of
knowhow, equipment and personnel and in financial terms”; in SGS v Philippines the tribunal found
an “investment” where the claimant’s activities were not limited to the provision of inspection

services and that it had established a “substantial office, employing a significant number of people”

with a monthly payroll ranging between US$ 100,000 and US$ 200,000.

84. Against this background, which indicates that a broad range of assets have been treated as
investments, we first address the question of whether BIVAC has rights granted under public law.
BIVAC argues - and Paraguay does not disagree — that the Contract has the character of an
administrative contract, rather than a pure commercial contract. The parties disagree, however, as to
whether the rights that are conferred by the Contract upon BIVAC are of a kind that might normally

be reserved to a public authority.

85. We note that in many respects a public (or administrative) contract may not be structurally
different from a contract under civil law. This is recognised by Paraguayan law, which provides in
Article 8 of Law No. 2.051 on Public Contracts that the Civil Code will be applicable if no special
tules govern. However, a distinguishing feature of a public contract is that the State may unilaterally

terminate the contract if the public interest requires.

86. Did the Contract confer rights to BIVAC under public law? Articles 1 and 2 of the Contract
required BIVAC to render technical services of inspection of merchandise, to verify the prices
invoiced by the importer, to give an opinion with respect to tariff classification, and if appropriate to
issue a “Certificate of Inspection”. These acts allowed the national Custom Office to fix the level of
import duties. Although the Customs Office was not bound by law to follow the Certificate of
Inspection issued by BIVAC, it appears that in practice it invariably did so. Without such a
Certificate, importers would be faced with considerable difficulties if they wished to import goods

into Paraguay. In its Post-Hearing Memorial BIVAC summarised the process as follow:

 

“33. The Contract was part and parcel of Paraguay’s tax policy by ensuring through

 

July 1997, (Orrego Vicufia (P), Heth, Owen), para. 40.

32

Salini Construtorri S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4), Decision on

Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001, (Briner (P), Cremades, Fadlallah), para 53.

33

Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29),

Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, (Kaufmann-Kohler (P), Berman, Béckstiegel), para 131.

SGS v Philippines, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004, (El-Kosheri (P),

Crawford, Crivellaro), paras 101 and 105.

31

35

pre-shipment inspections that imports complied with customs duty and tax
obligations, thereby raising the financial revenue of the State. BIVAC’s services thus
pertained to the sphere of internal affairs of the Paraguayan State and its policies. In
particular, the services related to the regulation of conduct and consequences of
events within the territory of Paraguay such as imports into the territory of Paraguay,
tax payments to the Paraguayan government and control of fraud at the level of local
customs officials in Paraguay. They concerned the extent to which, and the manner
in which, imports could be made and taxes paid in Paraguay according to the law and

policies prescribed by the Government.”

87. It appears from this summary and from the Claimant’s submissions, which have not been
challenged by Paraguay, that BIVAC was entrusted with functions that are commonly reserved to the
public authority of the State acting through its customs authorities, so as to establish the conditions in
which the State is then in a position to levy customs duties. This is clear from Resolution No 1.171, 3
July 1996, which “regulates the operational procedure for the pre-shipment inspection of imports”.
Chapter IV of the Resolution establishes the “procedure” for inspections and the “obligations of the
inspection company”. Article 11 describes pre-shipment inspections, as “includ[ing] the exact
description of the products, their condition (new or used), quantity, quality and/or origin and the price
of the products for a correct tariff classification [...]”. BIVAC’s functions are set out in Articles 12 to
20 of the Resolution, in relation to physical inspections, product description, price verification,
issuance of reports of inspection, content of the certificates of inspection, responsibility, and technical
cooperation with customs. It appears that these regulated functions carried out by BIVAC were the
same as those which had previously been “carried out exclusively by the customs authority”, to quote
from Articles 65 to 69 of the Cédigo de Aduanas (Customs Code), through a procedure known as

“aforo” >>

88. These were the functions for which BIVAC’s services were contracted. In this way, BIVAC was
directly substituted for the previous role of the Paraguayan customs authorities in inspecting imported
goods. At paragraph 10 of its Post-Hearing Memorial, Paraguay in effect confirms that these were

functions of a public character, when it states that:

“Pre-shipment inspection programs are a transitional measure to be used only until

host states’ national customs authorities are able to carry out these tasks on their

Article 65 of the Customs Code, in force at the time, provided: “The aforo of the goods will be carried out

exclusively by the customs authority. This operation consists of examining the goods, verifying their nature,

establis

 

ing their weight, quality, quantity or measurement, classifying them according to the customs tariff,

establishing their price and determining the applicable customs duties.” (informal translation)

32

36

In our view this indicates that BIVAC’s rights were “granted under public law”, within the meaning

of Article 1(a)(v) of the BIT.

89. Relatedly, any Certificate of Inspection issued by BIVAC for Paraguay had legal consequences in
that State, as it established a legal basis for authorising imports. Article 2 of Decree 12.311/96
provides that [t]he Certificate [...] shall be a necessary requisite for processing the customs clearance
of all imported merchandise, without exception”. Article 4 of Resolution No 1.171/96 reiterates the

significance of the Certificate, stating that:

“Tn order to clear the merchandise from customs duties, the importer shall submit to
the Paraguayan Customs the Certificate of Inspection issued by the Inspection
Companies, together with the other import documents required by the General

Customs”.

Resolution No 100 of 30 August 1996 provided for penalties to be applied in the event that imported
goods arrived in the territory of Paraguay without a Certificate of Inspection. It makes clear that
without a Certificate provided by BIVAC, in accordance with the terms of the Contract, no import
could take place. This Resolution also makes clear that in some circumstances BIVAC could be

required to carry out inspections in the territory of Paraguay.

90. Paraguay has not sought to challenge these factual assertions, although it seeks to draw different
inferences from them. It asserts that BIVAC’s rights under the Contract are purely rights to receive

payment for services performed abroad, and not rights granted under public law.**

91. On the basis of the materials set out above, and in the absence of grounds to substantiate the
points made by Paraguay, we disagree with its argument. The better view is plainly that the Contract
bestowed upon BIVAC “rights granted under public law”, as provided by Article 1(a)(v) of the BIT.
The production of Certificates of Inspection and BIVAC’s related activities may have been described
in the Contract as “technical services” rendered by a private enterprise, but the factual and legal
reality is that they were deeply interwoven with the functioning of the State in its public capacity,
including by contributing to the raising of public revenues through import duties. The Contract was

backed by legislation and executive acts.

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, paras 30 and 55.

33

92. Our conclusion is consistent with the approach taken by the Tribunal in SGS v Pakistan, which
found that “SGS was conferred certain powers that ordinarily would have been exercised by the

9 37

Pakistani Customs service (the identification and valuation of goods for duty purposes)”.

93. In light of this conclusion, there is no need for us to determine whether BIVAC had “title to
money” within the meaning of Article 1(a)(iii) of the BIT (we note that there is a difference between

the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT, and the BITs that were in issue in the two SGS case:

 

: in the present

case the BIT refers to “title” to money rather than “claims” to money, as was the case in the Pakistan

 

and the Philippines cases), or whether it held a “concession”.

94. Having concluded that BIVAC made an “investment” within the meaning of the BIT, the
question arises whether a different conclusion arises in relation to the meaning of “investment” in the
ICSID Convention. At a formal level, the question may be put as follows: does the definition in the
BIT exceed what is permissible under the Convention? Framed in that way the answer is self-
evidently negative. The definition in the BIT follows the approach adopted in many other BITs
concluded around the world. Paraguay would have to argue that its own BIT is inconsistent with the

requirements of the ICSID Convention. Sensibly, it has chosen not to go down that path.

95. What Paraguay does do, however, is argue that the acts undertaken by BIVAC under the Contract
do not meet the criteria for the definition of “investment” within the meaning of the Convention.
Specifically, Paraguay argues that the criteria that it identifies as pertinent — contribution to economic
development, contributions, duration and risk - have not been met.’ BIVAC responds to each of

these points to express its strong disagreement.”

96. In our view, Paraguay’s argument is unpersuasive. This issue was addressed in SGS v Philippines
and Pakistan. In both cases the Tribunals had little hesitation in concluding that equivalent
contractual arrangements gave rise to an “investment” within the meaning of the BITs that were
respectively in issue.“” We have not been presented with any argument that would allow us to reach a
different conclusion in the present case, where the nature of the services to be provided under the

contracts and the relevant BIT definitions are broadly the same.
“In the territory of Paraguay”

SGS v Pakistan, para. 135.

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 8-23.

BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 18-28.
SGS v Pakistan, para. 136; SGS v Philippines, para. 112.

34

97. We turn next to the question of whether the legal dispute concerns an investment “in the territory

of [Paraguay]”, as required by Article 9(2) of the BIT.

98. Paraguay asserts that if there was an “investment” it was not made “in the territory of’ Paraguay

because, in accordance with the provisions of the Contract, its performance was to be made abroad.*!

99. For its part, BIVAC responds that “viewed as a whole, the operation performed under the
Contract has a sufficient connection with the territory of Paraguay for BIVAC’s investment be
considered as an investment in Paraguay”.”” BIVAC invites the Tribunal to take into consideration all
the aspects of the operations under the Contract, and in particular: the local presence of BIVAC in
Paraguay through its subsidiary BIVAC Paraguay which was specifically set up to act as the liaison
office to carry out the operations; the functions of this liaison office in receiving and processing the
requests for inspections from importers in Paraguay and in verifying the draft Certificates of
Inspection sent by BIVAC’s Centres at the place of export; the provision of Certificates of Inspection
by BIVAC in Paraguay to importers and customs authorities in Paraguay; the services relating to
know-how transfer (customs’ training, data bank) provided for in the Contract and carried out by
BIVAC in Paraguay; the utilization of the services provided by BIVAC by the Paraguayan State; the
clear replacement by BIVAC of functions otherwise to be carried out by Paraguay’s customs
authorities; the legal effect of BIVAC’s Certificates of Inspections in Paraguay; and the public

regulation of the whole operation by Paraguayan legislation.”

100. Paraguay has not challenged BIVAC’s assertion that it established a local subsidiary which
was staffed by more than 70 employees and maintained three liaison offices in Paraguay, although it
asserts that the Contract did not oblige it to take these actions.’ Paraguay also does not challenge
BIVAC’s assertion it invested more than US$ 6.2 million to establish and to run the subsidiary and
that it had posted a US$ 250,000 security bond to guarantee the fulfilment of its obligations. It
submits, however, that these investments were incremental, incidental and that they did not profit

Paraguay.*°

Paraguay seeks to refute the claim that an “investment” was made in its territory by
referring to the text of the Contract, which refers to the fact that technical services are to be rendered
abroad (Contract, Preamble, Articles 1.1, 2.1, 5.7), including Paraguay’s transfer of fees abroad
(Article 4.4) and which stipulates that the fees would be free of taxes (Article 4.6), which would not

be possible in the case of services rendered nationally.“* It seeks to distinguish this case from the SGS

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 32-43.
BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 30.
Ibid., paras. 32-50.

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 41.
Ibid., paras. 17-19.

Ibid., paras. 32-36.

35

decisions on the grounds that the facts are different: in SGS v Philippines the certificates of inspection
were established in the Philippines and the establishment of the liaison office was a contractual
obligation; in SGS v Pakistan the tribunal found that the contract in issue in that case was a

concession, which Paraguay argues is not the case here."”

101. | These arguments are far from persuasive, and Paraguay seems to take refuge in arguments of
form rather than substance. The facts appear uncontested: a local company was established in
Paraguay, and maintained at a professional level (apparently without criticism); training of local
personnel took place in Paraguay; knowledge was transferred in Paraguay; and a local data base was
established and equipped in Paraguay. BIVAC was entitled to be remunerated in respect of the costs
of these actions, which can hardly be said to be extra-contractual: as Article 2.10 of the Contract put
it, “The cost of such participation and cooperation will be assumed by BIVAC within the amount for
its fees.” In accordance with the Contract, there appears to be no dispute that BIVAC injected money
and industry into the project to render the technical services and in addition to set up a structure in

Paraguay and to create local know-how. These acts built capacity in Paraguay.

102. BIVAC has also argued for the contractual similarities between the Contract and the contracts
on which SGS v Philippines and SGS v Pakistan were based, and submits that the cases are not

distinguishable. In SGS v Pakistan the Tribunal concluded that the contract in question:

“defined the commitments of SGS in such a way as to ensure that SGS, if it was to
comply with them, had to make certain expenditures in the territory of Pakistan.
While the expenditures may be relatively small (Pakistan’s Reply estimates them as
amounting to approximately U.S.$800,000, while SGS presents the estimate of
U.S.$1.5 million), they involved the injection of funds into the territory of Pakistan

for the carrying out of SGS’s engagements under the PSI Agreement.’"*

The decision in SGS v Philippines is even more explicit:

“101 (...)Under the CISS Agreement, SGS was to provide services, within and outside
the Philippines, with a view to improving and integrating the import services and
associated customs revenue gathering of the Philippines. The focal point of SGS’s
services was the provision, in the Philippines, of a reliable inspection certificate (...)
on the basis of which import clearance could be expedited and the appropriate duty

charged. SGS’s inspections abroad were not carried out for their own sake but in

*" Ibid., paras. 40-42.
48 SGS v Pakistan, para, 136.

36

order to enable it to provide, in the Philippines, an inspection certificate on which
BOC could rely to enter goods to the customs territory of the Philippines and to
assess and collect the ensuing revenue. (...) Further, those operations were organized
through the Manila Liaison Office, which under Article 5 of the CISS Agreement
SGS was obliged to “continue and maintain... until the date upon which this
Agreement ceases to be effective or its implementation is interrupted or indefinitely
suspended.” This was a substantial office, employing a significant number of people.
Requisitions for inspections were channelled through the Office which arranged the
inspection, received the results, incorporated them in a CRF which it provided both to
the importer and the BOC prior to customs clearance and dealt with any resulting
queries. In addition, direct periodic reports had to be made to the Government, and
from time to time BOC would make specific requests for reports or other services

with respect to specific consignments.

102. The position might have been different if SGS had provided the certificates and
issued its reports abroad, e.g. to a Philippines trade mission in each country of export.
But it did not perform the service in that way, nor did the CISS Agreement envisage
that it would do so. A substantial and non-severable aspect of the overall service was
provided in the Philippines, and SGS’s entitlement to be paid was contingent on that

aspect.

103. These elements taken together are sufficient to qualify the service as one
provided in the Philippines. Since it was a cost to SGS to provide it, this is enough to

amount to an investment in the Philippines within the meaning of the BIT.

105. The Liaison Office (which had a number of sub-branches) was funded by
subventions from an SGS affiliate in Geneva which employed the staff. According to
evidence presented by SGS, its monthly payroll in the Philippines ranged between
US$100,000 and US$200,000, amounting to something of the order of a quarter of its
total expenses. SGS accepted that this was a fraction of the cost of conducting the
actual inspections abroad. Under Article 7 of the CISS Agreement, invoices were
forwarded to the BOC from Switzerland and were paid by bank transfer to SGS’s

Swiss account.

37

106. The Tribunal does not consider that these circumstances affect the conclusion
that SGS made an investment in the Philippines. A Swiss company within the SGS
Group funded the Liaison Office as a part of the provision of an overall service—

essentially an informational service—which for the reasons given had its focus in the

 

Philippines. The fact that the bulk of the cost of providing the service was incurred

outside the Philippines is not decisive. Nor is it decisive that SGS was paid in

Switzerland.”

103. We find the arguments underlying both decisions to be highly persuasive. They concerned
broadly similar factual and legal circumstances, with the exception of the explicit obligation to set up
liaison offices, which do not arise in the Contract but which is not, in any event, dispositive.
Activities cannot be subdivided in a way as to distinguish between claims for non-payment of
services abroad and claims for services in Paraguay: in practise the services were treated as
inseparable and the overall objective was to increase national State revenue and to transfer knowledge
to Paraguay, so that the State could pursue the import duty assessment and certification at the end of
the Contract with BIVAC. Activities that were internal and external to the territory of Paraguay

formed a whole for which a single ad valorem fee was paid.

104. For these reasons we have little difficulty in concluding, in the light of the obligations under
the Contract and on the basis of the materials that have been put before us, that BIVAC made an

investment “in the territory of’ Paraguay within the meaning of Article 9(2) of the BIT.

Conclusion
105. For these reasons the Tribunal concludes that BIVAC made an “investment” within the
meaning of the ICSID Convention and the BIT, that it did so “in the territory of Paraguay”, and that
the dispute before this tribunal arises out of that “investment”. Having concluded that there was an
“investment”, and that it was made in the territory of Paraguay, for the sake of completeness we also
conclude that the dispute that has been put before the Tribunal “arises out of” that “investment”.
Paraguay has not argued to the contrary. The dispute concerns remuneration for the service that
BIVAC provided under the Contract and, in this way, arises directly out of the investment, within the
meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. Such conclusion is without prejudice to the

merits, or to the issue of jurisdiction and admissibility to which we turn.

SGS v Philippines, paras. 101-106.

38

2.4 Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over the claim relating to expropriation

(Article 6), and is the claim admissible?

106. Paraguay asserts that BIVAC has failed to establish a prima facie breach of the obligation not
to expropriate set forth in Article 6 of the BIT, namely the obligation not to take “any measures
depriving, directly or indirectly, nationals of the other Contracting Party of their investments”.*°
Specifically, Paraguay claims that the facts alleged by BIVAC are not capable of giving rise to a

claim for expropriation, on the basi:

 

s that “a simple breach of contract at the hands of a government is
not expropriation”.*! Paraguay relies in particular on the decision in SGS v. Philippines, in support of
the proposition that a mere refusal to pay a debt cannot amount to an expropriation where remedies
exist in respect of such a refusal, and a refusal to pay is not an expropriation where there is an

unresolved dispute as to the amount payable.*?

107. The parties agree that at this stage of the proceedings what needs to be made out is a prima

facie breach of the obligation. As BIVAC puts it in its Counter-Memorial:

“The Tribunal must be satisfied prima facie that the Claimant’s claims are capable of
constituting the alleged breach of the Treaty, i.e. that ‘the facts as alleged by the
Claimant in this case, if established, are capable of coming within those provisions of

the BIT which have been invoked’.”*?

BIVAC asserts that the prima facie standard is met, and that the present dispute is not about a

mere failure to pay. According to BIVAC, it is

“a persistent failure to pay accompanied by other factors: contradictory conduct by
the authorities in recognising the debt and the obligation to pay, but using
governmental powers to commission endless internal reports and establishing
commissions for the review of BIVAC’s compliance with the Contract, all of which
were favourable to BIVAC; inexcusable failure to adhere by its own internal reports
and thus effectively refusing to pay without any justification; unreasonable and
arbitrary behaviour in light of the results of the internal reviews; and thus the absence

of a real dispute between the parties on either BIVAC’s performance of the Contract,

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 83-91.

Ibid., para. 84,

Ibid., para. 85.

BIVAC Counter-Memorial, para. 120, citing Impregilo S.p.A. v Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.

ARB/03/3), Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005, paras 237 and 254.

39

the obligation to pay, or the amounts due.**

BIVAC further asserts that the measures taken that it says are attributable to Paraguay constitute an
indirect expropriation in the sense that they are “measures ‘taken by a State the effect of which is to
deprive the investor of the use and benefit of his investment’ even if title to the investment is
unaffected, and that Paraguay has deprived BIVAC “of the value of (even if not formally its title to)

its right to payment as of July 1999 when the Contract was terminated”.

108. Issue is joined between the parties on the relevance of the decision in SGS v Philippines,
which is worth considering in some detail. BIVAC does not in its Post-Hearing Memorial assert that

this decision was wrongly decided: rather, it argues that it is distinguishable on the facts.°°

109. — The tribunal in SGS v Philippines approached “the question of its jurisdiction on the footing
that in the Request for Arbitration, SGS made credible allegations of non-payment of very large sums.
due under the CISS Agreement and claimed that the Philippines’ failure to pay these was a breach of
the BIT, but that the exact amount payable has neither been definitively agreed between the parties
nor determined by a competent court or tribunal.” It found as fact that “As presented to the Tribunal
by the Claimant, the unresolved issues between the parties concern the determination of the amount
still payable.”*” It then proceeded to consider the implications of that factual determination for the
question of jurisdiction over a treaty claimed framed in terms of expropriation. At paragraph 161 of

its decision the Tribunal ruled:

“In the Tribunal’s view, on the material presented by the Claimant no case of
expropriation has been raised. Whatever debt the Philippines may owe to SGS still
exists; whatever right to interest for late payment SGS had it still has. There has been
no law or decree enacted by the Philippines attempting to expropriate or annul the
debt, nor any action tantamount to an expropriation. The Tribunal is assured that the
limitation period for proceedings to recover the debt before the Philippine courts
under Article 12 has not expired. A mere refusal to pay a debt is not an expropriation
of property, at least where remedies exist in respect of such a refusal. A fortiori a
refusal to pay is not an expropriation where there is an unresolved dispute as to the

amount payable.”
110. | We have been presented with no arguments asserting that the legal principle applied by the

BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 74.
Ibid., para. 77.

Ibid., para. 75.

SGS v Philippines, para. 158.

40

60

tribunal was wrong as a matter of law, and there is nothing with which we disagree in respect of the
legal principle identified and applied by the tribunal. Where a debt arising under a contract continues
to exist, and where the contractually agreed forum for the resolution of disputes relating to that debt
remains available, it appears self-evident that a contracting party’s rights in relation to that debt
cannot be said to have been expropriated, whether directly or indirectly. In the present case there is
no allegation that the debt under the contract does not continue to exist, or that the contractual forum
provided for by the Contract is not available: BIVAC has freely chosen not to go to the courts of
Asunci6n to recover the sums which it says are due to it under the Contract. Rather, BIVAC seeks to

distinguish the approach of the tribunal in SGS v Philippines in the following way:

“Here there is not a mere refusal to pay a debt; nor an unresolved dispute as to the
amounts or the obligation to pay. This is precisely the point. Paraguay has engaged
in governmental conduct, reviewing BIVAC’s performance and the obligation to pay
not once, but at least five times, and concluded each time that BIVAC was in full
compliance and thus Paraguay had to pay. Yet Paraguay has not paid. That failure to
pay cannot be merely commercial. It is governmental conduct: the failure by the
government to abide by its own internal acts. Admittedly, there is no formal decree
cancelling the debt, but what is discernable from Paraguay’s wrongful omission of
payment, in these highly unusual circumstances, is a policy decision by the
government to do everything within its power to deny BIVAC’s right to payment.

That effectively amounts to a repudiation of the debt.”**

111. The possible distinction between the two cases is that in SGS v Philippines there existed a
dispute between the parties as to the outstanding amount of the debt, whereas in the present case
BIVAC asserts that there is no such dispute. Paraguay disagrees: “it is not true that the Paraguayan
government has confessed this debt. Under Paraguayan law, internal letters or reports do not bind the
Paraguayan executive branch and do not render a disputed debt an unliquidated claim. In fact, only a
Paraguayan court can make a final determination as to the alleged debt.”*” Paraguay further asserts
that BIVAC’s claims under the Contract are unliquidated and therefore not subject to a summary

collection proceeding and that BIVAC’s invoices have not been authenticated.”

112. At this preliminary stage we are not in a position to make definitive findings of fact on the
claims adopted by the parties, or express conclusions on the arguments of Paraguayan law that have

been made. These would be issues for the merits. Our task is limited to an assessment of whether

BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 75.
Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 87.
Ibid.

41

6

BIVAC has pleaded a factual and legal case which, if established, would be capable of giving rise to a
violation of the relevant BIT provision, in this case Article 6. This is sometimes referred to as the
prima facie standard (see above at paras. 106-107). If the pleaded case is so capable then the
Tribunal has jurisdiction and the proceedings move on to the merits; if the pleaded case is not so
capable then the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction. This was the approach taken by the tribunal in
United Parcel Service of America, Inc. v. Government of Canada and, more recently and on the basis
of an extensive review of the case law, by the Tribunal in Salini v Jordan. It is an approach with

which we agree. The Salini tribunal noted that the approach:

“reflects the balance to be struck between two opposing preoccupations: to ensure
that courts and tribunals are not flooded with claims which have no chance of success
and sometimes are even of an abusive nature; but to ensure equally that, in
considering issues of jurisdiction, courts and tribunals do not go into the merits of
cases without sufficient prior debate. In conformity with this jurisprudence, the
Tribunal will accordingly seek to determine whether the facts alleged by the
Claimants in this case, if established, are capable of coming within those provisions

of the BIT which have been invoked.”

113. | Taking this as the approach to be applied, the issue is whether the acts alleged by BIVAC, if
established, are capable of giving rise to a claim of expropriation. The acts alleged by BIVAC
concern “governmental conduct” in the form of a failure to abide “by its own internal acts”, namely
reviewing BIVAC’s performance on five occasions and concluding on each of those occasions that
BIVAC was in full compliance and that Paraguay was legally obliged to pay under the contract. We
can quite see how such conduct might be said to be inappropriate or unconscionable, and we consider
later whether it may give rise to an arguable claim that there has been a breach of the obligation to act

fairly and equitably, but could it ever as such constitute an act of expropriation?

114. We have some difficulty in foreseeing how it could. BIVAC has not shared with the Tribunal
its thinking as to why a refusal to pay on five occasions might be expropriatory in character whereas a
solitary act of refusal would not be. Whether a contracting party refuses to pay once or five times, the
contractual debt continues to exist, and the legal characterization of the obligation to pay cannot be
said to have been altered. Nor can it be said that a refusal to pay on five (or even more) occasions can
alter BIVAC’s legal rights in the debt that is owed to it. The parties did not address the definition of
expropriation in their written pleadings. The issue was raised directly during the oral hearings, when

a member of the Tribunal put the following question to BIVAC:

Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Jordan, (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13), Decision on

Jurisdiction, 9 November 2004, (Guillaume (P), Cremades, Sinclair), para 151.

42

“if the debt continues to exist, as it does, what is the argument in relation to
expropriation? That’s I suppose what I am having a little bit of difficulty about.
What has actually been expropriated? Assuming all the facts you have made are
established, how do you justify an expropriation claim where your rights under the

Contract to be paid continue to exist?”
One Counsel for BIVAC provided the following response:

“Tn relation to conduct where the net effect, and once you look at the effect otherwise
it would seem to us to create a perverse incentive to states to perform in the way that
Paraguay has behaved, by simply refusing — wilful refusal to pay, wilful refusal to
pay, which is one of the issues that was looked at in the Encana versus Ecuador case,
this concept of a wilful refusal to pay, meaning that, no, no, sure, you’re not ever
going to get your money. That is precisely on that basis that we are bringing our
claim obviously under the Umbrella Clause to seek that payment and also damages as
a result of the other aspects. [...] To look at the net effect, it’s a measure — the conduct
of the State having an effect equivalent to expropriation. If I owed you money 10
years ago and you have not seen a cent until today, is that — through my conduct, does
that have an effect equivalent to expropriation? [...] you just engage in an endless
spin or everything through the different administrative organs, a wilful refusal to pay.
Isn’t the effect of that — of that conduct of the State precisely to have the effect of an

expropriation?”
Another counsel for BIVAC followed on: “It begs the question, what’s an expropriation?”

115. | BIVAC’s argument is less than compelling, and we were given no more assistance in the
Post-Hearing Memorial.° The only authority cited in that pleading was - again - the decision of the
Tribunal in Encana v Ecuador, which itself relies on an earlier award in Waste Management v United
Mexican States (No. 2). The award in Encana does not support BIVAC’s argument, or assist the
Tribunal reaching the conclusion that BIVAC’s factual assertions could, if established, give rise to an
act of expropriation, either directly or indirectly. We have carefully reviewed the award, which

merits reproduction in full:

 

Hearing on Juris
Ibid., pp. 185-6.
Ibid., p. 187.

BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 74-77.

‘tion, 11 November 2008, Transcript, p. 184-185.

2B

“192. A NAFTA Tribunal in the Waste Management case analysed in some detail the
test for expropriation of incorporeal rights by executive action. After referring to

earlier decisions and doctrine, the Waste Management tribunal concluded as follows:

“The mere non-performance of a contractual obligation is not to be equated
with a taking of property, nor (unless accompanied by other elements) is it
tantamount to expropriation... [T]he normal response by an investor faced
with a breach of contract by its governmental counter-party (the breach not
taking the form of an exercise of governmental prerogative, such as a
legislative decree) is to sue in the appropriate court to remedy the breach. It is
only where such access is practically or legally foreclosed that the breach
could amount to an outright denial of the right, and the protection of Article

1110 would be called into play.”

Subsequently it expressed the test for executive expropriation in the following term:

 

“an effective repudiation of the right, unredressed by any remedies available
to the Claimant, which has the effect of preventing its exercise entirely or to a

substantial extent, thereby frustrating or negating the enterprise as a whole”.

In other words (and more succinctly) was there a “final refusal to pay (combined with
effective obstruction of legal remedies)?

[J

But there is nonetheless a difference between a questionable position taken by the
executive in relation to a matter governed by the local law and a definitive
determination contrary to law. In terms of the BIT the executive is entitled to take a
position in relation to claims put forward by individuals, even if that position may
turn out to be wrong in law, provided it does so in good faith and stands ready to
defend its position before the courts. Like private parties, governments do not
repudiate obligations merely by contesting their existence. An executive agency does
not expropriate the value represented by a statutory obligation to make a payment or
refund by mere refusal to pay, provided at least that (a) the refusal is not merely
wilful, (b) the courts are open to the aggrieved private party, (c) the courts’ decisions

are not themselves overridden or repudiated by the State.”

% EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador, Award, 3 February 2006 (London Court of international

44

116. The Encana award supports the proposition that a “final refusal to pay (combined with
effective obstruction of legal remedies)” could amount to an expropriation. The facts alleged by
BIVAC do not meet that standard. Even assuming there to have been “a final refusal” to pay, which
Paraguay apparently disputes, BIVAC does not allege any obstruction of the legal remedies provided
for by the Contract. The fact that BIVAC has opted not to have recourse to such remedies, or
believes them for some unstated reason to be unattractive or ineffective, cannot contribute to a claim

of expropriation.

117. Our conclusion may be put simply: in circumstances in which there is no dispute that the
alleged contractual debt continues to exist, or that the forum for the resolution of contractual disputes
remains fully available, the materials put forward by BIVAC do not raise the possibility of an
arguable case of expropriation. To take the standard argued for by the Claimant, the Tribunal is not
satisfied prima facie that the Claimant’s claims are capable of constituting the alleged breach of the
Treaty. We reach this conclusion even assuming that it could be shown that Paraguay acted in
exercise of a puissance publique (see below at para. 125). It follows that this Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction over the claim under Article 6 of the BIT, as presented. In these circumstances, the issue

of admissibility does not arise.

(4) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over the claim relating to fair and equitable

treatment (Article 3(1)), and is the claim admissible?

118. Article 3(1) of the BIT obliges each party to “ensure fair and equitable treatment of the

investments of nationals of the other Contracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or

 

discriminatory measures, the operation, i use, enj or disposal
thereof by those nationals”. BIVAC asserts that the Tribunal has jurisdiction in respect of its claims
under this provision, whereas Paraguay disagrees. Specifically, Paraguay asserts that BIVAC has not
alleged facts that give rise to a prima facie claim: “No breach of the [fair and equitable treatment]
standard can be found where the only violation alleged is a lack of payment under a municipal

contract” ”

 

Arbitration (Crawford (P), Grigera Naon, Thomas). See also Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States
(Number 2), (ICSID Case No.ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, 30 April 2004, (Crawford (P), Civiletti, Magallén), para 175:
“it is one thing to expropriate a right under a contract and another to fail to comply with the contract. Non-
compliance by a government with contractual obligations is not the same thing as, or equivalent or tantamount to, an
expropriation. In the present case the Claimant did not lose its contractual rights, which it was free to pursue before
the contractually chosen forum. The law of breach of contract is not secreted in the interstices of Article 1110 of
NAFTA. Rather it is necessary to show an effective repudiation of the right, unredressed by any remedies available
to BIVAC, which has the effect of preventing its exercise entirely or to a substantial extent.”

® Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 91-97 and 92 and 96.

 

45

119. | BIVAC’s position is that it expected that the Ministry of Finance would respect and abide by
the law in fulfilling the Contract and that in failing to “comply with its part of the bargain” the
standard of fair and equitable treatment was breached. BIVAC asserts that Paraguay’s actions have
been arbitrary, wilful and contrary to due process, in a manner that cannot but “shock or at least
surprise a sense of juridical propriety”; and that the decision not to pay the debt under the Contract
was “not based on reason and judgment, when all the reviews it commissioned pointed in the other
direction”, giving rise to a breach of the duty not to impair by unreasonable measures BIVAC’s
investment.” BIVAC returns to these themes in its Post-Hearing Memorial, invoking the award in
Eureko v Poland” (in which it asserts that “a breach of fair and equitable treatment in the context of
contractual breach was found to have occurred because the Government “consciously and overtly,
breached the basic expectations of Eureko that are at the basis of its investment”) and claiming that

Paraguay has failed to respond all of its arguments, including the claim as to unreasonableness.”"

120. As with the claim to expropriation, at this preliminary stage we are not in a position to make
definitive findings of fact or express conclusions on the arguments of law. Again, our task is limited
to an assessment of whether BIVAC has pleaded a factual and legal case which, if established, would
be capable of giving rise to a violation of Article 3(1) of the BIT. If the pleaded case is so capable

then the Tribunal has jurisdiction and the proceedings move on to the merits.

121. This issue was addressed by the tribunal in SGS v Philippines, which ruled that the claimant
in that case had stated a claim to unfair and inequitable treatment under the BIT but that the existence
of an unresolved dispute as to outstanding amount owing meant that the claim was not yet admissible:
the existence of a forum before which the amounts could be established meant that the claim was
premature and had to “await the determination of the amount payable in accordance with the

contractually-agreed process” The Tribunal said:

“Turning to Article IV (fair and equitable treatment), the position is less clear-cut.
Whatever the scope of the Article IV standard may turn out to be—and that is a
matter for the merits—an unjustified refusal to pay sums admittedly payable under an
award or a contract at least raises arguable issues under Article IV. As noted already

(see paragraphs 36-41), the Philippines did appear to acknowledge that a large

°° BIVAC Counter-Memorial, para. 137.

© Tbid., paras.138 and 141.

7 Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, Partial Award and Dissenting Opinion, 19 August 2005, (Fortier (P),
Schwebel, Rajski) (hereinafter Eureko v Poland).

 BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 79 and 81.

®  $GS v Philippines, para. 163.

46

proportion of the amount claimed was payable. [... ] At the level of jurisdiction, a
claim has in its view been stated by SGS under both provisions. But, there being an
unresolved dispute as to the amount payable, for the Tribunal to decide on the claim
in isolation from a decision by the chosen forum under the CISS Agreement is
inappropriate and premature.” s

122. In the SGS v Philippines case, at the jurisdictional stage the tribunal identified elements of the
underlying contractual claims for which there was no evidence of acknowledgement of indebtedness
on the part of the Philippines, as well as outstanding issues relating to the calculation of interest
payable under the contract at issue in that case. “On any view”, the tribunal concluded, “a court or
Tribunal having jurisdiction to determine obligations under the CISS Agreement will have a

substantial task to perform””*

123. In the present case, at this jurisdictional stage at least, the evidence before us does not point to
any such differences. In its Application, BIVAC described the circumstances in which its claim of
approximately US$22 million arose under 19 unpaid invoices under the Contract, at June 1999.
BIVAC then alleged that in August 1999 the Ministry of Finance recognized the debt under the 19
invoices; in February 2001, the Ministry of Finance recognized the Contract and expressed a
willingness to pay amounts due, following an audit by the Contraloria General de la Republica; in
October 2002 the Contraloria fully accepted the claim, after a two year audit; in April 2004 the
Ministry again acknowledged the debt; in June 2004 it appointed a “Commission for the Review and
Negotiation” of the amounts owing, which eventually determined that this was a task not for it but for
the Direccién General de Aduanas; and in March 2005 the Direccién concluded that BIVAC had fully
complied with the Contract. According to the Request for Arbitration, it appears that at no point did
any authority acting on behalf of Paraguay concluded that the Contract had not been complied with or

challenge the level of the amounts owing under the 19 unpaid invoices.

124. In its pleadings Paraguay does not challenge any of these alleged facts. It asserts that the
Contract did not provide economic or other benefits to Paraguay, for the purpose of challenging its
characterisation as an “investment”. At no point, however, does it challenge the amounts alleged to
be outstanding, or the validity of the nineteen unpaid invoices, or BIVAC’s assertions that it properly
and fully carried out its obligations under the Contract. In these circumstances, and on the basis of
the evidence that is before us, we can provisionally conclude that Paraguay’s failure to challenge the
level of indebtedness may amount to an acknowledgment of such indebtedness. Nor has Paraguay

raised any difficulties concerning the assessment of interest payments, or asserted that the issues that

Ibid., para. 162.
Ibid., para. 41.

47

16

the Courts of the City of Asuncion, which is the chosen forum for the resolution of disputes under the
Contract, would have “a substantial task to perform”, in the sense adverted to by the tribunal in SGS v

Philippines.

125. In these circumstances, it appears at this preliminary stage of the proceedings that there is no
apparent unresolved dispute as to the amount payable. Accordingly, we conclude that it would not be
premature to come to a decision on the merits of the claim under Article 3(1) of the BIT, at least in so
far as the claim relates to acts attributable to Paraguay in relation to the failure to make payments
owing under the Contract. In reaching this conclusion, we wish to make clear that we express no
view whatsoever on the merits of the case. In particular, our finding as to jurisdiction should not be
taken to reflect any view, even provisional in nature, as to whether a persistent failure to make
payment on an outstanding debt, however unreasonable or unwarranted, could of itse/f ever amount to
a violation of the obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment in circumstances in which a
contractually agreed remedy remains available. In this regard, we note that in Impregilo SpA v
Pakistan (a case that did not involve an umbrella clause) the tribunal made the following point in
relation to the interplay between treaty claims and contract claims, of considerable pertinence also for

the present case:

“Tn order that the alleged breach of contract may constitute a violation of the BIT, it
must be the result of behaviour going beyond that which an ordinary contracting party
could adopt. Only the State in the exercise of its sovereign authority (“puissance

publique’), and not as a contracting party, may breach the obligations assumed under

 

the BIT. In other words, the investment protection treaty only provides a remedy to
the investor where the investor proves that the alleged damages were a consequence
of the behaviour of the Host State acting in breach of the obligations it had assumed

under the treaty.””*

Applying this standard, in order to succeed in a claim alleging violation of Article 3(1) of the BIT,
BIVAC would have to meet a threshold for treaty claims that requires it to establish acts by or
attributable to Paraguay that show an act of “puissance publique”, that is to say “activity beyond that

of an ordinary contracting party””®

126. | We express no view as to whether it could meet that standard. At this preliminary stage our
conclusion is simply that BIVAC’s claim in relation to Article 3(1) of the BIT is arguable. We

therefore reject the objection to jurisdiction submitted on this point by Paraguay.

Impregilo SpA v Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005, at para. 260.
Ibid., para. 266.

48

1

 

127. We see no other bar to the admissibility of the claim. Paraguay has argued that the existence
of an agreed forum for the resolution of disputes under Article 9 of the Contract means that it is to
that forum that the dispute should go. We disagree. It is well established that there is a significant
distinction to be drawn between a treaty claim and a contract claim, even if there may be a significant
interplay between the underlying factual issues. As the ad hoc Committee on annulment put it in the
Vivendi case, “whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been a breach of

contract are different questions” The ad hoc Committee explained that

“where ‘the fundamental basis of the claim’ is a treaty laying down an independent
standard by which the conduct of the parties is to be judged, the existence of an
exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract between the claimant and the respondent
state or one of its subdivisions cannot operate as a bar to the application of the treaty
standard. At most, it might be relevant—as municipal law will often be relevant—in

assessing whether there has been a breach of the treaty.”

The fundamental basis of the claim under Article 3(1) of the BIT, over which this Tribunal has
jurisdiction, turns on the interpretation and application of that provision and alleged acts of Paraguay
(as “puissance publique”), not on the interpretation and application of the Contract as such, although
the Contract will necessarily be part of the overall factual and legal matrix. Moreover, the
interpretation of Article 3(1) of the BIT is not a matter over which the courts of Asuncién would be
able to exercise jurisdiction under Article 9 of the Contract. The issue of fair and equitable treatment,
and related matters, was not one which the parties to the Contract agreed to refer to the exclusive
jurisdiction of the courts of Asuncién. The treaty issue is therefore not one for that forum, and there
can be no question of an independent or self-standing treaty claim over which we have jurisdiction
being inadmissible by reason of the choice of forum for the resolution of a disputes under the
Contract. Our conclusion in respect of this aspect of the claim is without prejudice to the issues that
arise in relation to the claim under Article 3(4) of the BIT, the so-called “umbrella clause”, to which

we now turn.

Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No.

ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002 (Fortier (P), Crawford, Fernandez-Rozas), para. 96 (hereinafter
Vivendi v Argentina).

18

Ibid., para. 101.

49

(5) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over the claim relating to the umbrella

clause (Article 3(4)), and is the claim admissible?

128. Article 3(4) of the BIT provides that “Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it
may have entered into with regard to investments of the other Contracting Party.” In its Request for

Arbitration, BIVAC summarises its claim under this provision as follows:

“Paraguay entered into obligations with regard to BIVAC’s investment pursuant to
the Decree and the subsequent Contract which it has not observed by failing to make
the relevant payments to BIVAC. Paraguay is consequently in breach of its

obligations under Article 3(4) of the Treaty.”

129. _ BIVAC treats Article 3(4) as a provision which incorporates the obligations of the Contract
into the BIT, so that a violation of the Contract becomes, as such, a violation of this provision of the
BIT.” BIVAC elaborated on these arguments in its Counter-Memorial, invoking a raft of arbitral
awards in support of the proposition that “The case law has consistently upheld that the effect of

We return to this case law

umbrella clauses is to elevate a breach of contract into a breach of treaty’
in due course. BIVAC asserts that by breaching its obligations to pay under the Contract “governed
by Paraguayan law, and the obligation under Paraguayan law to observe the Contract, Paraguay has
also committed a breach directly cognizable as a Treaty breach pursuant to the umbrella clause”, and
that accordingly the Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction over this treaty claim! In making this
argument, BIVAC appears to recognize that in determining the claim under Article 3(4) the Tribunal
“must take into account the Contract and whether the Ministry breached it, as well as Paraguayan law

as applicable to the Contract’*

In other words, it is not possible to form a view on whether the
Treaty obligation have been met without reaching a conclusion as to whether there has been a breach
of the Contract. BIVAC further argues that this claim is admissible: it seeks to distinguish the facts
from the decision on jurisdiction in SGS v Philippines, where the Tribunal found that it had
jurisdiction over the claims under the umbrella clause but decided to stay the proceedings on the
grounds that this claim and that in relation to the obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment
were premature and that “justice would be best served if the Tribunal were to stay the present
proceedings pending determination of the amount payable ... in accordance with [the contract]? We
return to this point below. BIVAC restates and elaborates upon these arguments in its Rejoinder and

in its Post-Hearing Memorial. Perhaps anticipating issues that might arise, it sought to address the

See also BIVAC Rejoinder, para. 19.

BIVAC Counter-Memorial, para. 143.

Ibid., para. 147.

Ibid., para. 153.

Cited in BIVAC Counter-Memorial, para. 155.

50

possibility that whatever the finding may be as to jurisdiction in relation to Article 3(4), the claim
should also be admissible, on the grounds that if the drafters had intended to exclude treaty
jurisdiction under an umbrella clause they could have inserted a clause to that effect in the BIT, as the

Netherlands and India did in their BIT “ Further, BIVAC asserts:

“Had Paraguay or the Netherlands been concerned about the overlap with contract
dispute resolutions clauses, and the choice thus being given to an investor to resort to
arbitration under the Treaty, they would have not opted for such a wide jurisdiction
clause, or could have used one of the limitations for contract claims that exist in BIT
practice as described above. The Netherlands, for example, included such limitation
in its BITs with India and Oman. In short, any limitations would have been stated

expressly.”**

In its Post-hearing Memorial BIVAC develops its arguments as to jurisdiction under Article 3(4), and
reiterates its reliance on case-law. It also asserts that BIVAC’s claims are fully admissible and that
“Paraguay does not seem to challenge this”*°

130. In response, Paraguay’s argument has evolved over time. In its written submissions of April
and May 2008 it argues that the dispute is governed by the Contract and subject to the exclusive
jurisdiction clause. In its Reply to BIVAC’s Counter-Memorial, Paraguay invoked Clause 9(1) of the
Contract, which provides for the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of Asunci6n for the resolution of

all disputes under the Contract are to be resolved for the exclusive jurisdiction, and asserts:

“The BIVAC BV claim against the Ministry of Finance of Paraguay for payment on
its services provided abroad specified in the Administrative Contract is a matter of
Administrative Law. In fact, it is a matter of PUBLIC LAW and it would be wrong
to settle the issue under the principles and rules of PRIVATE LAW. The dispute is
unrelated to the Bilateral Agreement (The Treaty) and it must be decided within the

Jurisdiction of Paraguayan Tribunals.”*’

Paraguay asserts that Article 9(1) of the Contract establishes “an exclusive jurisdiction to resolve

controversies”, that the parties to the Contract “excluded the jurisdiction of International Arbitral

| BIVAC Rejoinder, para. 14, referring to Article 4(5) of the Netherlands - India BIT (which is quoted as
providing: “Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments
of investors of the other Contracting Party. Provided that dispute resolution under Article 9 of this Agreement shall
only be applicable in the absence of a normal, local, judicial remedy being available.”)

SS“ Ibid., para. 16.

86 BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 99.

*' Paraguay Reply, p. 6.

51

88

Tribunals”, and that “it was the free will of the parties which have decided to rule their rights under
laws within Paraguayan Territory and Paraguayan Tribunals”. In support of that argument Paraguay
relied on the Decision on Jurisdiction of the ICSID tribunal in the Aguas del Tunari v Republic of
Bolivia (we note that the Tribunal in that case ruled that “the Concession does not place all disputes
concerning the Concession within the exclusive jurisdiction of Bolivian courts” and that the decision
does not indicate whether Aguas del Tunari was asserting jurisdiction on the basis of an “umbrella

clause).

131. In its Post Hearing Memorial Paraguay clarifies its position and responds to the various
authorities invoked by BIVAC. It asserts that when the parties signed the Contract they “expressly
agreed to resolve disputes of this type in the sovereign courts of Paraguay under Paraguayan law.
The parties should be held to their agreement, and this case should be dismissed.”*’ It argues that the
types of action that the umbrella clause in the BIT is intended to protect investors from “is not of the
type which can be undertaken by an ordinary private party, but rather is the type which involves the
exercise of a state’s sovereign powers”. It asserts that “because the core claims in question are
exclusively related to a domestic commercial contract, the Tribunal should enforce the Contract’s
exclusive forum selection clause and dismiss BIVAC’s claims”.”' It argues that a “mere failure to
pay does not convert a domestic dispute into an international one”, and relies on the two SGS
decisions to support its proposition that “neither of these tribunals interpreted the umbrella clause to
elevate a pure breach of a commercial contract into a treaty violation”, and relies in particular on the
decision in SGS v. Pakistan as authority that “the Tribunal held that it had no jurisdiction to decide

SGS’s purely contractual claims”.””

132. The issues that divide the parties on Article 3(4) of the BIT relate to two issues: the issue of
jurisdiction, namely whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction over BIVAC’s claims under Article 3(4);
and the issue of admissibility, namely whether in the event that the Tribunal does have jurisdiction,
the claim is admissible. It is true that Paraguay has not framed its argument in terms of admissibility,
a point that is alluded to by BIVAC.” However, the substance of Paraguay’s argument is
substantively to that effect: it’s consistent position has been that contract claims are for the courts of
Asuncién under Article 9 of the Contract, and in its Post-Hearing Memorial it affirms its strong

support for the primacy of the exclusive jurisdiction clause, arguing that “if these are really just

Aguas del Tunari S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3), Decision on Respondent’s

Objections to Jurisdiction, 21 October 2005.
89

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, Introduction, p. 2.
Ibid., para. 61.

Ibid., para. 58.

Ibid., para. 63.

BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 99.

52

100
ot

contract claims, as we submit, then that clause requires BIVAC to sue in Paraguay”.”*
133. Against this background, we deal first with the issue of jurisdiction and then the issue of

admissibility.
Article 3(4): Jurisdiction

134. BIVAC asserts that the Tribunal has jurisdiction under Article 3(4) of the BIT over claims
relating to “any conflict, controversy or claim which arises from or is produced in relation to [the]
Contract”. BIVAC presents this on the basis that it is making a Treaty claim rather than a contractual

claim.”*

135. In making this argument in its Counter-Memorial, BIVAC relies on Vivendi J, to the effect
that if the Tribunal has jurisdiction under the umbrella clause to hear the claim then it cannot be
dismissed because it could or should have been dealt with by a national court.” In its Rejoinder
BIVAC argues that Article 3(4) gave the Tribunal jurisdiction as it placed an obligation of respect on

the parties for the contractual obligations, which Paraguay had breached.””

136. In making its argument, BIVAC provides a summary of the history of the use of umbrella
clauses in seeking to show that Article 3(4) could be applied to all types of contracts in respect of any
sort of breach by the State as a contracting party, in line with the “object and purpose of the treaty to
promote and protect investment”* BIVAC has sought to distinguish the conclusion of the Tribunal in
SGS v Pakistan as “probably linked to the very narrow language used in that treaty.” BIVAC relies
heavily on the holding of the SGS v Philippines tribunal which, it submitted, “is fully applicable

29100.
here.

137. Paraguay has strongly objected to BIVAC’s argument. In its Reply it refers to the
exclusionary nature of the jurisdiction given to the Paraguayan courts by the parties to the Contract of
their own free will, in Article 9 of the Contract.!"' In its Post-Hearing Memorial, Paraguay refines its
argument, submitting that an umbrella clause could not elevate a contractual claim into a treaty

violation on the grounds that “a mere failure to pay does not convert a domestic dispute into an

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 53.
BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, para. 64.
BIVAC Counter-Memorial, para. 150.
BIVAC Rejoinder, para 19.

BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 84-93,
Ibid., para 89.

Ibid., para 96.

Paraguay Reply, p.9.

  

53

international one.”"” Paraguay argues that BIVAC is not raising genuine Treaty claims but making a

contractual claim:

“Despite BIVAC’s clever framing of its “treaty claims,” BIVAC’s factual

allegations are exclusively premised on lack of payment under the Contract.”

Paraguay further contends that neither SGS v Philippines nor SGS v Pakistan interpreted the umbrella

clause in such a way that ultimately gave the Tribunal the basis for jurisdiction.’

138. The parties have addressed extensive arguments to the decisions in SGS v Pakistan and SGS v
Philippines, and in particular the question of whether an umbrella clause can establish a tribunal’s
jurisdiction in relation to commitments made under a contract. It is appropriate that we address those

decisions, which turned on the particular facts — including the relevant contractual and BIT provisions

 

— and arguments in the respective cases. Nevertheless, the two decisi cannot be
reconciled, reflecting different approaches to this issue to the effect of an umbrella clause in the

framework of a BIT.

139. In SGS v Pakistan, the tribunal found that an umbrella clause did not automatically elevate a
breach of contract claim to the level of a claim for a breach of international law and it would only be

under “exceptional circumstances” that it would provide a basis for accepting jurisdiction over a

5

contract claim.'’ The Tribunal gave four reasons for adopting a restrictive interpretation to the
umbrella clause: first, that it was too wide and read like a legal obligation of a general character;
second, that general principles of international law generated a presumption against the broad
interpretation of the clause; third, because of a concern that such a reading of an umbrella clause
would override dispute settlement clauses negotiated in contracts; and fourth, that the umbrella clause

would have appeared earlier in the BIT if it were to impose substantive international obligations.

140. In SGS v Philippines the tribunal rejected the approach taken in the earlier decision. It ruled
that the umbrella clause gave the tribunal jurisdiction on the basis of a broad interpretation of the

mandatory language contained in the text of the provision of the BIT that was at issue in that case.

 

On the

6

of jurisdiction, the tribunal disagreed with the reasoning of the tribunal in SGS v
Pakistan, although it’s finding was without prejudice to what it would rule in relation to the

admissibility of the claim, a point to which we return below.'® In support of its conclusion that the

Paraguay Post-Hearing Memorial, para 63.
Ibid., para. 51

Ibid., para 63.

SGS v Pakistan, para 96(b)

SGS v Philippines, para 138.

54

107
tos
109
10

contract claim could be brought within the scope of the umbrella clause, the tribunal advanced the

following arguments: first, that the text of the provision was phrased in mandatory language, which

 

imposed obligations on the parties;'’ second, that the overriding purpose of the BIT should be given
effect by resolving any uncertainty regarding the scope of the provision in favour of protecting
investment;'°* and third, that the parties were free to stipulate a restriction in the BIT to limit the
umbrella clause to obligations arising under “other international law instruments” and they had not

done so.'”

141. We have carefully considered the meaning and effect of Article 3(4) of the BIT. We
recognise in particular that there is no jurisprudence constante on the effect of umbrella clauses, that
the subject is one on which legal opinion is divided, that the relationship between commercial and
sovereign acts of government is not free from difficulty, and that each particular clause falls to be
interpreted and applied according to its precise wording and the context in which it is included in a
BIT. We have carefully weighed and debated the competing arguments of the parties, following
which the conclusion that has prevailed is that Article 3(4) of the BIT establishes an international
obligation for the parties to the BIT to observe contractual obligation with respect to investors. In
reaching this conclusion the broadly worded text of Article 3(4) of the BIT has been significant. It
provides that Paraguay “shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to
investments of the other Contracting Party.” The words “any obligation” are all encompassing. They
are not limited to international obligations, or non-contractual obligations, so that they appear without
apparent limitation with respect to commitments that impose legal obligations. On a plain meaning
they are undoubtedly capable of being read to include a contractual arrangement entered into by
BIVAC and the Ministry of Finance of Paraguay, whereby the alleged breaches of the Ministry are
attributable to the State. The umbrella clause also appears early on in the BIT, in the same provision
as that imposing an obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment, and it is located before the
obligation on expropriation: this might distinguish this BIT from that in issue in SGS v Pakistan (even
assuming the tribunal’s point on the location within a treaty of any particular text to have force).
Moreover, we consider that the umbrella clause has to be interpreted in such a way as to give it some
meaning and practical effect: Paraguay has not explained the purpose or effect of the umbrella clause

if it was not that for which BIVAC argues.'"°

 
 
 

SGS v Philippines
SGS v Philippines
SGS v Philippines, para. 118.

BIVAC’s argument based on the text of Article 4(5) of the Netherlands - India BIT — see above at footnote 84 —

tends to support our conclusion, but it does not address the situation in the present case where the parties to the
Contract have agreed on an exclusive jurisdiction clause. Rather, Article 4(5) of that BIT appears to provide for
jurisdiction or admissibility in respect of a claim under that umbrella clause to be dependent on the “absence of a
normal, local, judicial remedy being available”.

55

142. For these reasons, we conclude that Article 3(4) of the BIT does have the effect for which
BIVAC argues, namely that it gives the Tribunal jurisdiction over a claim that arises from or is
produced directly in relation to the Contract. This is not, however, the end of the matter. Assuming
that Article 3(4) does import the obligations under the Contract into the BIT, giving this Tribunal
jurisdiction to interpret and apply the Contract as such, then it must have imported into the BIT all of
the obligations owed by Paraguay to BIVAC under the Contract. This would include not only the
obligation to make payment of invoices in accordance with the requirements of the Contract, but also
the obligation (implicit if nothing else) to ensure that the Tribunals of the City of Asuncién were
available to resolve any “conflict, controversy or claim which arises from or is produced in relation
to” the Contract. This raises an issue of admissibility, to which we now turn. The effect of an
umbrella clause is one issue; a different issue is whether such a clause may be invoked in
circumstances where the parties have clearly agreed on an exclusive jurisdiction for the resolution of

contractual disputes that may fall within the terms of the umbrella clause.

Article 3(4): Admissibility

143. _ In the present case the issue of admissibility in relation to the possible exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 3(4) of the BIT may be put simply: assuming that Article 3(4) allows the Tribunal to
exercise jurisdiction over a contractual dispute — in which the essential cause of action is the Contract
- does the existence of Article 9 of the Contract and the agreement of the parties to have recourse to
the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of Asuncién act as a bar to the Tribunal’s exercise of
jurisdiction under Article 3(4) of the BIT? The answer to that question turns on the meaning and
effect of Article 9 of the Contract; the subject matter jurisdiction that the Tribunal might have to
exercise under Article 3(4) of the BIT; and the legal principles that govern the relationship between

these two provisions in the event of a conflict between them. We deal with each point in turn.

144, — Article 9(1) of the Contract provides as follows:

“Any conflict, controversy or claim which arises from or is produced in
relation to this Contract, non compliance, resolution or invalidity shall be
submitted to the Tribunals of the City of Asuncién pursuant to Paraguayan

Law.

145. There appears to be no disagreement between the parties as to the meaning and effect of this
provision in relation to a dispute under the Contract, and their mutual desire to respect the autonomy
and exercise of will by the parties to the Contract: Article 9(1) is an exclusive jurisdiction clause

which post-dated the BIT and has been voluntarily accepted by the parties to the Contract and which

56

has the effect of precluding any body other than the Tribunals of the City of Asuncién from resolving
any dispute “which arises from or is produced in relation to” the Contract, which Tribunals are bound
to apply the law of Paraguay. On its face, the text is very broad: the words “any conflict, controversy
or claim which arises from or is produced in relation to” the Contract are capable of being interpreted
to include not only disputes relating directly to alleged breaches of the Contract but also disputes
concerning acts that may be connected with the Contract which may give rise to claims under other
instruments, including the BIT. The parties did not direct their attentions to this point. Be that as it
may, the tribunals of the City of Asuncién have not been given competence to interpret and apply the
BIT. BIVAC appears to recognise that the effect of this provision is to preclude this Tribunal from
exercising jurisdiction over the contractual dispute between the parties, as such. Instead, BIVAC
says, acting under Article 3(4) of the BIT the Tribunal would exercise jurisdiction over a distinct and
free standing treaty obligation into which the contractual obligations would, in effect, have been
incorporated. In exercise of our jurisdiction we would be interpreting and applying the Treaty, not
the Contract, BIVAC argues, and it “is not requiring this Tribunal to exercise contractual

jurisdiction”."""

146. In considering the effect of Article 9 it is appropriate to consider its relationship in time to the
BIT. The BIT came first. It was concluded in The Hague on 29 October 1992, and came into effect
shortly afterwards, on 1 August 1994, The Contract between BIVAC and the Ministry of Finance
was executed on 6 May 1996, that is nearly two years after the BIT came into force. No evidence has
been tendered by the parties as to the relevance of the BIT to BIVAC’s decision to enter into the
Contract. Paraguay, and its Ministry of Finance, must be taken to have knowledge of the treaties that
it has entered into, and it would be surprising if those responsible for advising BIVAC on the legal
aspects of the Contract were not aware of the BIT and the protections it provided, including the
potential availability of ICSID arbitration for certain treaty disputes. Knowledge of the BIT was not,
however, a subject to which arguments or evidence have been addressed by the parties. Nevertheless,
the parties agreed to include in the Contract a provision which provides for the exclusive jurisdiction
of the Tribunals of the City of Asuncién to settle “Any conflict, controversy or claim which arises
from or is produced in relation to this Contract, non compliance, resolution or invalidity”. The parties
could have included a provision in Article 9(1) to the effect that the obligations it imposed were
without prejudice to any rights under the BIT, including the possible exercise of jurisdiction by an
ICSID Tribunal to any matters arising under the Contract which could fall to be determined under
Article 3(4) of the BIT. The fact that they did not do so is not without relevance: it indicates, at the
very least, that the parties to the Contract, including BIVAC, intended the exclusive contractual

jurisdiction of the Tribunals of the City of Asuncién to be absolute and without exception, and for it

"1! BIVAC Counter-Memorial, para. 151.

57

to mean what it says.

147. As set out above, Article 3(4) of the BIT is broadly worded and has the effect of importing
the obligations under the Contract into the BIT. Such obligations include the contractual arrangement
entered into by BIVAC and the Ministry of Finance of Paraguay, comprising amongst other
obligations the obligation to make payment of invoices in accordance with the requirements of the
Contract, and the implicit obligation to ensure that the tribunals of the City of Asuncién were
available to resolve any “conflict, controversy or claim which arises from or is produced in relation
to” the Contract. On such a reading, and assuming that BIVAC’s approach to these issues is correct,
if Paraguay had taken steps to prevent the Tribunals of the City of Asuncién from exercising
jurisdiction over a dispute in relation to the Contract, then BIVAC would be entitled to challenge such

an act under Article 3(4).

148. The broader point, however, having regard to the fundamental principle that the autonomy
and will of the parties is to be respected, is that the parties to a contract are not free to pick and choose
those parts of the Contract that they may wish to incorporate into an “umbrella clause” provision such
as Article 3(4) and to ignore others. The obligation that Paraguay entered into with BIVAC was to
pay its invoices in a timely way and if it failed to do so to allow any contractual dispute to go to the
Tribunals of the City of Asuncién. To allow BIVAC to choose those obligations it wished to
incorporate into the BIT and to ignore others would seriously and negatively undermine contractual
autonomy. If the parties to a contract have freely entered into commitments, they must respect those
commitments, and they are entitled to expect that others, including international courts and tribunals,
also respect them, unless there are powerful reasons for not doing so.''* BIVAC has not identified

any reasons at all.

149. Instead, it seeks to address this issue by arguing, in effect, that if this Tribunal were to
exercise jurisdiction under Article 3(4) in the way that it wished then it would only be interpreting
and applying the Treaty not the Contract. This strikes us as being entirely artificial. There is no free-
standing international treaty obligation, under the BIT or anywhere else, which would allow this

Tribunal to determine whether the acts of Paraguay gave rise to a violation of Article 3(4) of the BIT.

"2 See in this sense the recent Concurring Opinion of Professor Abi Saab in TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v

Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/5), 19 December 2008, at para. 5:

“Thus, where what is contended in the treaty claim is mainly that the contract has been violated and that this
violation constitutes in turn and by another name (figuring in the treaty) a treaty violation, such a nominal trick does
not suffice to transform the contract claim into a treaty claim or to create a parallel treaty claim. To use the
terminology of Vivendi II , “where ‘the fundamental basis of the claim” is the contract, however, many more layers
of claims one tops it with, it remains a contract claim, which has to be settled according to the terms of the contract
and in the forum chosen in that contract.”

58

The reality is that the Tribunal would have to interpret and apply the Contract, to determine whether
Paraguay was or was not in breach of its obligations thereunder to make certain payments on the
nineteen invoices. If the Tribunal was to find that there was a breach of the Contract, on BIVAC’s
argument it would have to find also a breach of the BIT. But if the Tribunal were to find no breach of
the Contract, there would be no breach of the BIT. Everything turns on the meaning and effect of the
Contract. BIVAC has provided no explanation as to where in the BIT, or anywhere else in the rules
of international law, the Tribunal might find the “independent standard” that might allow it to
determine whether or not Article 3(4) has been breached. The ad hoc Committee in Vivendi adverted
to these considerations in invoking the decision in the Woodruff case, to conclude that

“where “the fundamental basis of the claim” is a treaty laying down an independent
standard by which the conduct of the parties is to be judged, the existence of an
exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract between the claimant and the respondent
state or one of its subdivisions cannot operate as a bar to the application of the treaty

standard”.'!*

In the present case, in relation to Article 3(4) we do not see how it could be concluded that “the
fundamental basis of the claim” was the BIT rather than the Contract. Any other approach strikes us

as being so artificial as to be unreasonable.

150. | We are not the first tribunal to face this issue. Both parties have invoked a number of arbitral
decisions and awards in favour of the positions for which they argue. Although we are not bound by
these earlier decisions and awards, it is both useful and appropriate to have regard to them to explain
our approach. It is clear that with the passage of time the issues have crystallised as there has been
greater time for reflection. We recognise that tribunals which first had to deal with these issues were
often doing so without the benefit of commentary and reaction, on the basis of the facts of their
particular cases and the arguments that were presented by the parties. We express our appreciation

for the efforts made by the arbitrators in these early cases, which have facilitated our task.

151. Two of the earliest decisions which are pertinent to these issues were handed down the two
SGS tribunals, where the facts were somewhat similar to those before us. In SGS v Pakistan the
tribunal did not address the admissibility of a claim under an umbrella clause in the face of an
exclusive jurisdiction clause for the resolution of contractual disputes by reference to arbitration
under the law of Pakistan, having concluded that the tribunal did not have jurisdiction to resolve

contractual disputes under the umbrella clause of the BIT (we note that in that case the BIT entered

"3° Supra., note 77.

59

into force after the relevant contract was adopted).'"* That tribunal also concluded that the umbrella
clause in the BIT that they were required to interpret did not transform purely contractual claims into

BIT claims.''*

152. The issue of admissibility was addressed by the tribunal in SGS v Philippines, in a manner
which we have found helpful and with which we largely, but not completely, agree. There too the
tribunal was faced with a claim that an umbrella clause allowed it to exercise jurisdiction over claims
arising directly under a contract. On the basis of the language of the umbrella clause in the
Switzerland/Philippines BIT the Tribunal concluded that “in principle (and apart from the exclusive
jurisdiction clause in the [underlying contract] it was open to SGS to refer the present dispute, as a
contractual dispute, to ICSID arbitration under Article VIII(2) of the BIT”.'° The tribunal then
turned to the impact of that contract’s exclusive jurisdiction clause, which provided that “All actions.
concerning disputes in connection with the obligations of either party to this Agreement shall be filed
at the Regional Trial Courts of Makati or Manila” (a formulation which appears on its face to be
narrower in scope and effect than Article 9(1) of the Contract at issue in the present case). By a
majority, the tribunal proceeded to hold that Article VIII(2) of the BIT was not intended to override
an exclusive jurisdiction clause in an investment contract, so far as contractual claims were
concerned, and that the balance of opinion in the jurisprudence supported the conclusion that such a

7

clause affected the Tribunal’s jurisdiction or the admissibility of the claim.''’ In summary, the

tribunal ruled that it

“cannot accept that standard BIT jurisdiction clauses automatically override the
binding selection of a forum by the parties to determine their contractual claims. As

the ad hoc Committee said in the Vivendi case:

‘where the essential basis of a claim brought before an international tribunal
is a breach of contract, the tribunal will give effect to any valid choice of
forum clause in the contract.’”"'*

153. Invoking the distinction between jurisdiction and admissibility, the Tribunal concluded that as
a matter of admissibility a party should not be allowed “to rely on a contract as the basis of its claim

when the contract itself refers that claim exclusively to another forum”, unless there were good

SGS v Pakistan, paras. 156-162.
Ibid., paras. 163-174.

SGS v Philippines, para. 135.
Ibid., paras. 140 and 150.

Ibid., para. 153.

60

reasons, such as force majeure, which prevented a claimant from complying with the contract.'"” Up

to this point we fully share the approach adopted by the tribunal in SGS v Philippines.

154. | Having concluded that the tribunal should not exercise its jurisdiction over a contractual
claim when the parties had agreed on an exclusive alternative forum, we would have expected the
tribunal to dismiss the claim. Indeed, it concluded that “[nJormally a claim which is within
jurisdiction but inadmissible (e.g., on grounds of failure to exhaust local remedies) will be dismissed,
although this will usually be without prejudice to the right of the claimant to start new proceedings if
the obstacle to admissibility has been removed (e.g., through exhaustion of local remedies).”""". The
tribunal did not, however, dismiss the claim. Instead, it decided to stay the proceedings “pending
determination of the amount payable, either by agreement between the parties or by the Philippine

”."! The tribunal’s true rationale for that decision is not

courts in accordance with [the contract]
entirely clear from the text. It refers somewhat cryptically to “substantial efforts” on the part of the
claimant to settle the claim through negotiations and the existence of “the factual predicate of a
determination” by the Philippine court of the total amount owed by the respondent, circumstances
which led it to conclude that the fixing of the amount payable under the contract - whether by
definitive agreement between the parties or by proceedings before the courts of the Philippines —
“should not require the bringing of a new ICSID claim by sGs”.'” The logic of this approach is not
immediately apparent to us: if the parties to the contract have agreed on an exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve a dispute under the contract, whether it relates to the amount that is to be paid or the
justifications raised by one party for non payment, then it is exclusively for that forum to resolve all
aspects of the dispute under the exclusive jurisdiction clause. If any agreement between the parties on
the amounts outstanding under the contract does not resolve the contractual dispute, then exclusive
jurisdiction continues to vest in the agreed forum and the ICSID tribunal is barred from exercising
jurisdiction. Whatever facts may have pertained in the case of SGS v Philippines, or whatever other
considerations may have given rise to the Tribunal’s decision to stay the proceedings rather than
dismiss the claim, it is not immediately apparent to us the nature or extent of argument that was

addressed to this point by the parties, or what truly motivated the decision.

155. Against this background BIVAC has referred to a large number of decisions and awards in

support of its argument that the tribunal has jurisdiction under the umbrella clause and there is no bar

"° Tbid., para. 154. We would add that another exceptional circumstance which might justify a claimant having
resort to an umbrella clause (assuming it to provide jurisdiction) to litigate a dispute under a contract which would
otherwise go to the forum selected by the exclusive jurisdiction clause, would be if the state party had taken steps to
prevent recourse to the agreed forum. That has not happened in the present case: BIVAC has not alleged any
impossibility of recourse to the tribunals of the City of Asuncién to resolve the outstanding contractual dispute.

120" Tbid., para. 171.

BI Tbid., para. 175.

"2 Tbid., paras. 173-4.

to the admissibility of the claim. In its Post-Hearing Memorial it focused on three cases in its

123

treatment of jurisdiction, as well as the decision in SGS v Philippines in its arguments on

 

admissibility. We consider the three cases on jurisdiction for the purposes of completenes

156. The first award referred to is Eureko v Poland, where the tribunal rejected Poland’s argument
on the inadmissibility of a claim under the umbrella clause in circumstances in which there was an

ince the Claimant “advances claims for breach

 

exclusive jurisdiction clause for contractual disputes:
of Treaty ... every one of those claims must be heard and judged by this Tribunal”.'* As to the
violations of the contract at issue in that case, the tribunal concluded that Poland’s actions and
inactions that were in breach of its obligations under the BIT - those held to be unfair and inequitable
and expropriatory in effect — were also in breach of the umbrella clause and the underlying
contractual obligations. The award provided no assessment or analysis of the contractual provisions
that were in issue in that case, so that it appears that its conclusions are to be understood against the

background of the particular facts that were there in issue.

157. The second award invoked by BIVAC is Noble Ventures v Romania.'”* Although that award
dealt with the meaning and effect of an umbrella clause, there is no indication that the underlying
contract included an exclusive jurisdiction clause or that there was any argument as to admissibility.

sue.

 

Accordingly that award can provide no assistance to BIVAC on this is:

158. The third case invoked by BIVAC is Siemens v Argentina. In its decision on jurisdiction the

 

tribunal did not address the issue of admissibility with regards to the umbrella clause. In a single line

it ruled that “The dispute as formulated by the Claimant is a dispute under the Treaty”, and on that
basis found that it had jurisdiction.'”° At the merits phase the tribunal found that the Claimant was
not a party to the contract, and accordingly rejected the claim as regards breach of the contract.'”

The decision therefore provides no support for BIVAC’s position as to admissibility.

3 BIVAC Post-Hearing Memorial, paras. 91-93.

"4 Eureko v Poland, Partial Award and Dissenting Opinion, at para. 113. The tribunal indicated that it had
reviewed and considered the other cases cited by the Respondent in support of its jurisdictional objection, but that
these decisions did not lead the Tribunal to any other conclusion: ibid., at note 7.

"5 Noble Ventures, Inc. v Romania, (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/11), Award, 12 October 2005, (Backstiegel (P),
Lever, Dupuy).

"26 Siemens AG v Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004, (Rigo
Sureda (P), Brower, Bello Janeiro), para. 180.

"7 Siemens AG v. Argentine Republic, Award, 6 February 2007, (Rigo Sureda (P), Brower, Bello Janeiro), paras.
204-206.

62

Conclusions on admissibility of the Article 3(4) claim

159. For the reasons set out above, assuming that Article 3(4) of the BIT provides a basis for the

 

exercise of jurisdiction by the tribunal over claims relating to the Contract, we conclude that the claim

in relation to Article 3(4) is inadmissible, because:

(1) In Article 9(1) of the Contract the parties agreed to a legally binding exclusive
jurisdiction clause which provided for the resolution of “any conflict, controversy
or claim which arises from or is produced in relation to [the] Contract” only by

the Tribunals of the City of Asuncion;

(2) Article 3(4) of the BIT does not override the exclusive jurisdiction clause of

Article 9(1) of the Contract;

(3) “the fundamental basis of the claim” presented by BIVAC in respect of Article
3(4) of the BIT concerns a “conflict, controversy or claim” arising from or

produced in relation to the Contract;

(4) having regard to the need to respect the autonomy of the parties, BIVAC cannot
rely on the Contract as the basis of a claim under Article 3(4) of the BIT when the
Contract itself refers that claim exclusively to another forum, in the absence of

exceptional reasons which might make the contractual forum unavailable;

(

2

the proper forum for the resolution of the contractual claim that has been raised
under Article 3(4) of the BIT is the Tribunals of the City of Asuncién, applying

the law of Paraguay.

160. | Having concluded that the claim under the umbrella clause is inadmissible, the normal course
would be to dismiss the claim. As noted above, however, the Tribunal in SGS v Philippines the
tribunal did not follow this course, and chose instead to stay the proceedings. We were not presented
with arguments by the parties as to what course we should follow in the event that we upheld
jurisdiction under Article 3(4) of the BIT but decided that the claim was inadmissible. We note that
no proceedings have been initiated by BIVAC before the tribunals of the City of Asuncion, despite
the passage of many years and, perhaps surprisingly if the evidence before us is to be believed, in the
face of Paraguay’s persistent and unexplained failure to comply with its contractual obligation to pay.
We note also that BIVAC has not sought to explain why it has not had recourse to the forum agreed

by the Contract for the resolution of disputes, and that it has not put any evidence before the Tribunal

63

to suggest that justice would not be done before the tribunals of the City of Asuncién.

161. In such circumstances it might be concluded that a stay of these proceedings in relation to the
claim under Article 3(4) of the BIT would be unwarranted, and the proper course would be to dismiss
the claim. Against that, we have heard no argument from the Respondent seeking to dissuade us from
adopting the approach taken by the Tribunal in SGS v Philippines, which decided to stay proceedings.
In the absence of argument by either party, and having found that the claim under Article 3(4) is
inadmissible, we consider that the most prudent approach is to join to the merits the limited issue of
whether the Tribunal should either dismiss the claim under Article 3(4) of the BIT or stay the
exercise of jurisdiction indefinitely or for some other period of time or until some other circumstances

pertain.

64

162.

DECISION
For these reasons the Tribunal decides that:
(a) it has no jurisdiction in relation to the claim made under Article 6 of the BIT;

(b) it has jurisdiction in relation to the claim made under Article 3(1) of the BIT,

and that claim is admissible;

(c) it has jurisdiction in relation to the claim made under Article 3(4) of the BIT
but that the claim is inadmissible, and it joins to the merits the issue of whether
the consequence of the decision on inadmissibility is that the claim should be

dismissed or the exercise of jurisdiction stayed;

(d) the claim raised by Paraguay in its letter of 5 December 2008 as to the

standing of BIVAC to bring the claims is joined to the merits; and

(e) all other questions, including those concerning the costs and expenses of the
Tribunal and the costs of the parties determination are reserved for future

determination.

bf bei

ProfesSor Rolf Knieper

President
Wr } 9 Sialo Site ii
Professoi Philippe Sands, ec Mr. L\ Yves Fortier, QC

Arbitrator Arbitrator

