INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between
BURIMI SRL AND EAGLE GAMES SH.A

(Claimants)

REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA

(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. Daniel M. Price, President
Prof. Bernardo M. Cremades
Prof. Ibrahim Fadlallah

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor

Representing Claimants: Representing Respondent:
Ms. Patrizia Di Nunno Mr. Hamid Gharavi
Attorney-at-law, Brescia, Italy Ms. Sophie von Dewall
Derains & Gharavi, Paris, France
and

Ms. Ledina Mandia
Ministry of Justice, Tirana, Albania

Date of dispatch to the Parties: May 29, 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

I. Factual Background 1
A. The Parties 1

1. Claimants 1

2. d 1

B. The Dispute 1
I. Procedural History 7

 

 

I. Summary of the Parties’ Contentions and Relief Sought

 

 

A. The Claims 14
B. The Objections to Jurisdiction 1s
IV. Analysis 16

 

 

A. Law Applicable to the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal...
B. The Objections to Jurisdiction 19

 

1. Whether there is ji

 

isdiction ratione personae with respect to the claims of Eagle Game:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i) Claimants’ Position 20
(ii) dent’s Position 20
(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis 2
2. Whether there is jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae with respect to the claims of
Burimi SRL 25
2.1. Jurisdiction ratione personae 25
i) Claimants’ Position 95
(ii) dent’s Position 25
(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis 6
2.2. Jurisdiction ratione materiae 27
i) Claimants’ Position 7
(ii) dent’s Position 27
(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis 29
3. Whether Claimants have complied with the best efforts negotiation provisions of the BIT and FIL........ 31
i) Claimants’ Position 31
(ii) dent’s Position 31
(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis 32
Vv. Costs 32
A. The Parties’ 32
B. The Costs of the Proceeding, 32
C. The Tribunal’s Decision on Costs 33
VL Award 35

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Arbitration Rules

BIT

CM

ICSID Convention

ICSID or the Centre

Exhibit C-#
Exhibit R-#

FIL

Financing Agreement
Gambling Law

2007 Gambling Law
LA [C-L] [R-L]

Mem

Pledge Agreement
Reply

Rejoinder

Request

Requesting Parties

Tr. [page: line]

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Agreement for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments concluded between the Republic
of Italy and the Republic of Albania

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial [on the merits
and jurisdiction] of September 17, 2012

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States of March 18, 1965

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

Exhibit Claimant
Exhibit Respondent

Albania’s Foreign Investment Law No. 7764 of
November 2, 1993

Loan agreement of August 24, 2004
Albanian Law No. 8701 of December 1, 2000
Albanian Law No. 9744 of May 28, 2007
Legal Authority [Claimant] [Respondent]

Claimants’ Memorial [on the merits and
jurisdiction] of June 4, 2012

Pledge Agreement of August 24, 2004

Claimants’ Reply of October 17, 2012
Respondent’s Rejoinder of November 28, 2012
Request for Arbitration of June 15, 2011

Mr. Ilir Burimi, Burimi SRL, and Eagle Games
SH.A

Transcript of the hearing held on
January 21, 2013

L FACTUAL BACKGROUND

A. The Parties

1. Claimants
Claimants are Burimi SRL and Eagle Games SH.A, and are hereinafter referred to as “Burimi

SRL,” “Eagle Games,” or “Claimants.”

Burimi SRL is a company incorporated under the laws of Italy. Its business objective is

“intermediation and commercial representation.”'

Eagle Games SH.A is a company incorporated under the laws of Albania. Its objective is to

organize games of chance.*

Claimants are represented in this arbitration by Ms. Patrizia Di Nunno, Attorney-at-law,

Brescia, Italy.

2. Respondent

Respondent is the Republic of Albania and is hereinafter referred to as “Albania” or

“Respondent.”

Respondent is represented by Mr. Hamid Gharavi and Ms. Sophie von Dewall, of

Derains & Gharavi, Paris, France.

Claimants and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

B. The Dispute

On December 1, 2000, the Albanian Government enacted Law No. 8701 on Gambling,

Casinos, and Hippodromes (the “Gambling Law”).’ This law introduced a new regulatory

' Exhibit C-7.
> Exhibit C-1.
* Exhibit R-6,

framework for the gambling industry and was aimed at reducing illicit gambling and

associated practices.*

On March 29, 2004, Eagle Games was founded by two Albanian nationals, Ms. Alma Leka
and Mr. Artan Serjani.* Each owned 50 percent of the shares in the company.® Eagle
Games’ objective was to organize games of chance, mainly through the sale of “scratch and
win’ instant lottery tickets.’ Mr. Fatjon Luniku, also an Albanian national, was appointed

General Director of the company.

Pursuant to the Gambling Law, Eagle Games had to obtain a gambling permit from Albania’s
Finance Ministry before commencing its activities... To obtain a permit, Eagle Games had to
comply with the following criteria:’ (i) be a private company registered in the commercial
register, (ii) have gambling activity as its statutory object, (iii) have its headquarters in
Albanian territory, (iv) identify its founders, directors, and key personnel, (v) provide itself
the total investment for its gambling business, and (vi) guarantee the prize money by freezing

a certain amount in its bank account.

10

On April 6, 2004, Eagle Games was registered in Albania.

Soon thereafter, Eagle Games applied for a gambling permit. At that time, Eagle Games was

an Albanian company, with two Albanian shareholders and an Albanian director.

On June 18, 2004, the Finance Ministry granted Eagle Games a 10-year permit to organize
instant lottery games.'! The permit fee was 10,000,000 Albanian Lek (“ALL”) (80,334.19
euros [“EUR”])."?

+ Exhibit R-20.

* Exhibits C-1 and C-2.

° Exhibits C-1.

7 Id. (“The activity object of the company ‘EAGLE GAMES’ S.A. is the organization of the Lucky Games winning
immediately.”).

* Exhibit R-6, Gambling Law, Article 6(1).

° Exhibit R-5.

'° Exhibit C-2.

"' Exhibit C-12.

Request 13.

Albania submits that the permit provided nothing more than the legal framework within
which Eagle Games was authorized to develop its gambling activities.’ For each instant
lottery game that the company sought to introduce in the market, it had to meet certain
conditions, namely: (i) the Gambling Commission needed to approve the standard and format
of the tickets, and (ii) the Finance Ministry had to approve and supervise the printing of the

tickets and control their distribution in the market."

According to Claimants, Eagle Games commenced its business activities at the end of

September 2004.'° Respondent disputes this fact.'®

On August 24, 2004, Ms. Alma Leka, a shareholder of Eagle Games, entered into a loan
agreement (“the financing agreement”) with Burimi SRL.'’ The financing agreement was for
an indefinite period of time. Under this agreement, Burimi SRL would finance all of the
investments made by Ms. Alma Leka in Eagle Games. The agreement also distributed any
prospective profits deriving from Eagle Games’ operations as follows: 90 percent to Burimi
SRL and 10 percent to Ms. Alma Leka.'* Burimi SRL would absorb all of the losses incurred

by Eagle Games.

On the same day, Ms. Alma Leka also entered into a “pledge agreement.”'? Under this
agreement, Ms. Alma Leka pledged her shares in Eagle Games as a guarantee for Burimi
SRL’s financing of those shares.*” The term of this agreement was also for an indefinite

period.

Claimants submit that pursuant to the financing and pledge agreements, Burimi SRL invested

EUR 204,431.00 towards the development of Eagle Games.”!

SCM {50.

' Exhibit R-6, Gambling Law, Article 6(5) and 6(6); CM {{ 50.

'S Request {| 14. According to Claimants, Eagle Games placed its first lot of instant lottery tickets in the market in
late September.

CM 452.

"7 Exhibit C-4.

'8 Td.

° Exhibit C-5.

14

*! Exhibit C-6; Request [ 7 and p. 6.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

On September 9, 2004, Ms. Alma Leka and Mr. Artan Serjani each transferred 15 percent of
their shares to Mr. Edmond Shoto, an Albanian national, notwithstanding Ms. Alma Leka’s
earlier pledge agreement and without any apparent consent of Burimi SRL. Thereafter,
Eagle Games had the following structure: Ms. Alma Leka 35 percent, Mr. Artan Serjani

35 percent, and Mr. Edmond Shoto 30 percent.

On November 26, 2004, Eagle Games held a shareholders meeting. The company’s board
appointed Mr. Ilir Burimi, a national of Albania and Italy, as General Director, to replace
Mr. Luniko. The board also authorized Ms. Alma Leka to represent the company in dealings

with banks.**

Mr. Ilir Burimi and Ms. Alma Leka are brother and sister, a fact which Respondent has

accused Claimants of having kept intentionally hidden.”

On June 1, 2005, Eagle Games’ board appointed Mr. Adrian Kosturi, an Albanian national,
as its new General Director in replacement of Mr. Ilir Burimi. In addition, the company’s
board revoked Ms. Alma Leka’s power of attorney and conferred these powers upon

Mr. Adrian Kosturi.*

On July 4 and August 2, 2005, Eagle Games filed requests with the Gambling Commission”

and the Finance Ministry” for the approval of the production of lottery tickets.

In September 2005, the new Albanian Government took office.” Around the same time, the
Trade Ministry* was tasked with the supervision of games of chance, replacing the Finance

Ministry.

* Exhibit R-28.

> Rejoinder | 14.

*4 Exhibit R-29.

°S Claimants refer to the Commission as the “Directorate of Fortune Games.”

°° Exhibits R-30 and R-31.

27 Request, J 16.

°8 Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry. Also called the Ministry of Economics, Department of Trade and
Industry.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

On September 11, 2005, Eagle Games withdrew its July and August requests.” It also asked
the Finance Ministry to unfreeze ALL 5,000,000—approximately USD 49,500—that served

as security for amounts due to prospective lottery winners.*

The Parties disagree on the reasons behind the withdrawal. Claimants contend that “since the
beginning of the year 2005, the Albanian Ministry of Finance, do not conform to the law
relating to the centralized printing of lottery tickets for all game of chance operators,
preventing the issuance of new tickets by Eagle Games SH.A and preventing de facto the

exercise of each activity. Respondent argues that Eagle Games withdrew the requests
because of “internal reasons,” in particular, lack of funding. In doing so, it prevented the
Gambling Commission and the Finance Ministry from responding to Eagle Games’

petition.”

On December 16, 2005, Eagle Games changed ownership and management once again. By
resolution of its General Assembly, Mr. Artan Serjani and Mr. Edmond Shoto transferred
their shares to Mr. Ilir Burimi.** Thereby, Mr. Ilir Burimi became the majority shareholder of
Eagle Games with 65 percent of the shares. Mr. Ilir Burimi was also reappointed General
Director. Ms. Alma Leka was granted another special power of attorney to represent the

company in dealings with banks.

On November 30, 2006, Eagle Games submitted a new request for approval of the printing of

a lottery ticket named “HAPPY NEW YEAR 2007.”

In December 2006, the Trade Ministry initiated the supervision of the games of chance.*°
Claimants contend that Eagle Games’ activity was blocked for more than one year because
the Trade Ministry had not created the Gambling Commission in charge of authorizing the

issuance of new tickets for games of chance.

» Exhibit R-32.

* Td, CM 58.

+! Request, 15.

*° OM ff 57-58.

5} Exhibit R-33. Claimants submit that the purchase of 65 percent of company shares was made by Mr. Ilir Burimi
upon explicit request of Burimi SRL. (See Mem {ff 9-10.)

* Exhibit R-34; CM { 62.

5 Mem {{ 17.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

On January 17, 2007, Eagle Games withdrew its November 2006 request, replacing it with a
request for approval of an instant lottery ticket named “FORTUNE WITH YOU.”**

On March 20, 2007, the Gambling Commission approved the ticket “FORTUNE WITH
YOU” by Decision No. 5.*’ According to Claimants, upon receipt of the Commission’s

9938

approval, they “began preparing the new tickets by investing large amounts of money [...]

On or around that time, discussions took place in the Council of Ministers and Parliament

about amending the Gambling Law.

On April 2, 2007, the Trade Ministry published on its website the main proposed
amendments to the Gambling Law.* These included the creation of a centralized National

Lottery that would replace the multiple lottery companies.

On April 11, 2007, Eagle Games wrote to the Trade Ministry regarding its pending request
for approval of the instant lottery ticket “FORTUNE WITH YOU.”

On May 4, 2007, the Trade Ministry informed Eagle Games that for the time being, its
request would not be considered further because of the amendments proposed in the draft
bill. The Finance Ministry also released Eagle Games’ funds held as prize money of its

“FORTUNE WITH YOU” game.*!

On May 28, 2007, Albania adopted Law No. 9744 (the “2007 Gambling Law”).*” The new
law introduced a single license for the exploitation of the National Lottery. It also revoked
all existing permits and licenses for instant lotteries, including Eagle Games’ permit.** The

revocation of Eagle Games’ permit is the subject of the present dispute.

* Exhibits R-34 and R-35.

*” Exhibit R-36.

8 Mem, { 21.

* Exhibit C-16.

ld.

+! Exhibit C-24; Request {{ 20; Mem, {{ 22.
* Exhibit C-20.

Td.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

Article 20 of the 2007 Gambling Law provided that:

“1. [...] the state has the obligation to return to the entities the sums
derived by such revocation.

2. The Council of Ministers defines the criteria, method and form of
compensation for these companies.”“*

On June 23, 2010, the Finance Minister issued Order No. 21, setting out the criteria and

method by which the affected companies had to apply for compensation.**

On August 25, 2010, Eagle Games wrote to Albania, disagreeing with the compensation that
it would be entitled to pursuant to Order No. 21.*° According to Claimants, the compensation
amounted to ALL 9,970,000, which was in their view “essentially only the reimbursement of
the cost of obtaining the license of ALL 10,000,000.”*’ Claimants further note that Albania

“has always rejected any request made [for compensation].”**

Respondent submits that Eagle Games did not apply for compensation and instead “went

straight to ICSID arbitration.”””

Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On June 16, 2011, Mr. Ilir Burimi, Burimi SRL, and Eagle Games SH.A (the “Requesting

Parties”) submitted a Request for Arbitration (the “Request”) to ICSID.*

The Request invoked the consent to ICSID arbitration contained in: (i) the Agreement for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments concluded between the Republic of Italy and the

Republic of Albania (the “BIT”)*', which entered into force on September 12, 1991; and (ii)

“Td.

5 Exhibit C-9.

4° Exhibit C-14; CM { 94.

47 Request { 27.

48 Request { 28.

CM {fl 68-69.

*° Request was accompanied by Exhibits C-1 to C-25.
*! Exhibit C-21.

Albania’s Foreign Investment Law No. 7764/93 (the “FIL”)”, which entered into force on
November 2, 1993.

43. On the same day, ICSID transmitted a copy of the Request to Albania in accordance with

ICSID Institution Rule 5(2).
44, On June 22, 2011, ICSID wrote to the Requesting Parties as follows:

“We note that the Request was submitted by (i) Mr. Ilir Burimi,
(ii) Burimi SRL, and (iii) Eagle Games SH.A.

(i) We understand from page 6 and exhibit 18 that Mr. Burimi is a dual
national of Albania and Italy with his residence in Italy. In this respect,
please note that, pursuant to the mandatory provisions of Article 25(1)
and (2) of the ICSID Convention, jurisdiction under the Convention does
not extend to “any person who on either date [of consent or registration
of a request for arbitration] also had the nationality of the Contracting
State party to the dispute.” It would therefore appear that Mr. Burimi is
manifestly ineligible to appear as a party in this case.”

45. On June 28, 2011, ICSID sought the following clarification from the Requesting Parties:

“You have not confirmed that Mr. Ilir Burimi is not a national of
Albania. If Mr. Burimi had the Albanian nationality on the date of
consent or date of the request for arbitration (i.e. on 15 June 2011
according to your letter of 27 June), Mr. Burimi would be ineligible as a
party under the ICSID Convention. This is irrespective of the provisions
of any other treaty or law because Article 25 of the Convention is
mandatory. Therefore, the Request for Arbitration would be manifestly
outside ICSID's jurisdiction regarding Mr. Burimi.”

46. On July 1, 2011, ICSID wrote to the Requesting Parties indicating that “[u]nless you confirm
that Mr. Ilir Burimi is not a national of Albania, the Request for Arbitration would be

manifestly outside ICSID’s jurisdiction regarding Mr. Burimi.”
47. On July 6, 2011, Mr. Ilir Burimi withdrew his Request, stating that:

“Tn relation to these proceedings, took note of your position in relation to
Mr. [Ilir] Burimi [...], who, besides being an Italian citizen is also a
citizen of Albania, today’s defense waives the instance of Mr. [Ilir]

* Exhibits C-19 and R-4.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

Burimi, requesting that the arbitration procedure must be recorded in
favor of the companies Eagle Games Sh.a and Burimi SRL.”

On the same day, ICSID took note of Mr. Ilir Burimi’s withdrawal as a Requesting Party.

On July 12, 2011, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request (of Burimi SRL and
Eagle Games SH.A) in accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention. In the Notice
of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an Arbitral

Tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Articles 37 to 40 of the ICSID Convention.

In the absence of an agreement between the Parties, Claimants elected to submit the
arbitration to a Tribunal constituted of three arbitrators, as provided in Article 37(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention.

On September 23, 2011, Prof. Bernardo M. Cremades, a national of Spain, accepted his
appointment by Claimants. On October 4, 2011, Prof. Ibrahim Fadlallah, a national of
Lebanon and France, accepted his appointment by Respondent. On November 22, 2011,
Mr. Daniel M. Price, a national of the United States, accepted his appointment as Tribunal
President by the Chairman of the Administrative Council in accordance with Article 38 of the

ICSID Convention.

On November 22, 2011, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”) notified the Parties
that the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted on that date. Mr. Marco Tulio
Montafiés-Rumayor, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the

Tribunal.

Immediately thereafter, the Tribunal circulated the first session’s provisional agenda, inviting

the Parties to agree on the items contained therein.

On December 23, 2011, Respondent requested a 60-day extension to comment on the

provisional agenda.

On December 30, 2011, the Tribunal granted the extension but only until February 3, 2012.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

On February 22, 2012, the Parties agreed to hold the first session outside of the 60-day period
prescribed in Arbitration Rule 13(1), extending the 60-day period by 60 additional days.

On February 23, 2012, Respondent informed ICSID that it had instructed Mr. Hamid Gharavi

of Derains & Gharavi to represent it in this proceeding.

On March 30, 2012, Respondent filed objections to jurisdiction pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(1) and a request for bifurcation. It also submitted a request for
provisional measures concerning security for costs pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID

Convention.

On the same date, the Tribunal invited Claimants to file their observations on both of

Respondent’s requests by April 9, 2012.

On April 3, 2012, Claimants requested an extension to file their observations by April 13,

2012. The Tribunal granted the extension on the same day.

On April 13, 2012, Claimants filed their response to the request for bifurcation. They also
submitted observations on Respondent’s provisional measures request, as well as a counter-

application for provisional measures concerning security for costs.

On April 17, 2012, the Tribunal held a first session by telephone conference with the Parties.
During that session, the Tribunal noted that the Parties, through their various prior comments,
had reached agreement on most of the Draft Agenda items, leaving open for the Tribunal’s
decision only a few issues concerning time limits for pleadings and the question of

bifurcation.

On April 18, 2012, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 which recorded the Parties’
agreements and resolved the outstanding first session matters. It also ruled on the
Respondent’s request for bifurcation, holding that:

“.,.the Tribunal believes that substantial questions on jurisdiction were

raised, but that they are inextricably tied to issues of the merits (liability)
and are best appreciated in that context.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

Therefore, after deliberation among its Members, the Tribunal has
decided to join the issue of jurisdiction to that of the merits (liability).
However, given the significance of the jurisdictional questions, the
Tribunal will defer consideration of damages until after it has reached a
decision (or award) on jurisdiction and merits.”**

On April 20, 2012, Respondent filed its observations on Claimants’ counter-application for

provisional measures concerning security for costs.

On May 3, 2012, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, denying the Parties’ requests

for provisional measures concerning security for costs.

On June 4, 2012, Claimants filed a memorial on jurisdiction and _ merits

(liability). [“Memorial” or “Mem”].**

On September 17, 2012, Respondent filed a counter-memorial on jurisdiction and merits

(liability) [‘Counter-Memorial” or “CM”].**

On October 17, 2012,°° Claimants filed their reply on jurisdiction and merits (liability)
[‘Reply”].”

On November 28, 2012, Respondent filed its Rejoinder on jurisdiction and merits (liability)
[“Rejoinder”].*

The Tribunal notes that written pleadings were submitted by Claimants in Italian, not an
official language of ICSID. The English translations bordered on incomprehensible, despite
repeated requests from the Secretariat for the submission of professional translations. It
struck the Tribunal at times that the pleadings had been translated from Italian to English
using a web-based translation service. The poor quality of Claimants’ English language
pleadings posed great difficulties for the Tribunal in understanding the arguments advanced

and for Respondent in formulating its rebuttal arguments.

* Procedural Order No. 1, item 13.2.
-

 

*5 Accompanied by Exhibits R-15 to R-43 and Legal Authorities R-L1 to R-L10.

56 Although the Memorial was dated October 17, 2013 it was not transmitted to ICSID until October 22, 2013.

57 Accompanied by Exhibit C-34.

*8 Accompanied by Exhibits R-44 to R-51 and the Legal Expert Opinions of Mr. Neritan Kallfa and Mr. Besnik
Cobaj.

71.

72.

723.

74.

75.

76.

77.

On December 12, 2012, the Tribunal ruled on an exchange between the parties concerning
Claimants’ intention to call for direct examination witnesses who had not submitted witness
statements. The Tribunal held that no such witness testimony could be heard because
Claimants’ request ran contrary to the clear terms of the parties’ agreements as reflected in
Procedural Order No. 1 (see in particular item No. 14). The Tribunal decided that to hear
such witnesses would be not only contrary to the Procedural Order, but also prejudicial to

Respondent, which would not be in a position to prepare cross-examination.

On December 18, 2012, Claimants requested that the Tribunal (i) reconsider its Decision of
December 12, 2012 not to allow oral testimony at the hearing of witnesses who had not
submitted written statements, and (ii) exclude Respondent’s expert reports submitted with its

Rejoinder.
On December 20, 2012, Respondent objected to both of the above requests.

On January 8, 2013, the President of the Tribunal, on behalf of the Tribunal, convened a
telephone conference with the Parties to discuss (i) outstanding procedural matters, (ii) issues

relating to the hearing, and (iii) financial matters.

During the conference call, Claimants renewed their request (first stated in their Reply of
October 17, 2012) for an in-person pre-hearing conference under Arbitration Rule 21(2) to
seek an amicable settlement of the dispute. Respondent objected to this request both in its

Rejoinder of November 28, 2012 and during the conference call.

On January 9, 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, which addressed
outstanding procedural matters. First, regarding the request for reconsideration, the Tribunal
confirmed its Decision of December 12, 2012 and held that “it will not permit the Claimants
to present and examine witnesses at the hearing who have not previously submitted written

statements as required by Procedural Order No. 1.”*°

Second, regarding the request for exclusion of Respondent’s expert reports, the Tribunal

denied the request. The Tribunal concluded that the expert reports submitted by Respondent

* Procedural Order No. 3, item 1(a).

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

with its Rejoinder were “admissible because they are responsive to arguments made by the

Claimants in their Reply of October 17, 2012.”

Finally, regarding the request for a pre-hearing conference, the Tribunal noted that
Respondent did not join in Claimants’ request. Therefore, the Tribunal denied the request

because there was no “request of the parties” as called for by Arbitration Rule 21(2)."

On January 21, 2013, a hearing on jurisdiction and merits (liability) was held in Paris,
France. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the Tribunal, present

at the hearing were:

For Claimants:

Ms. Patrizia Di Nunno Attorney-at-law
Mr. Italo Moreschi Attorney-at-law
Mr. Denny Iacobazzi Attorney-at-law

For Respondent:

Dr. Hamid Gharavi Derains & Gharavi

Ms. Sophia von Dewall Derains & Gharavi

Mrs. Carmela Viccaro Derains & Gharavi

Mrs. Ledina Mandia State Attorney General, Albania
Mr. Armer Juka State Attorney, Albania

Mr. Moreschi presented oral arguments on behalf of Claimants. Mr. Gharavi and Ms. von

Dewall presented oral arguments on behalf of Respondent.

The hearing was sound recorded and transcribed verbatim, and copies of the sound

recordings and the transcripts were subsequently delivered to the Parties.

On January 28, 2013, Respondent filed minor corrections to the hearing transcript.

Claimants did not file any corrections.

On January 31, 2013, Respondent filed its statement on costs.

60.

Id., item 1(b).
°' Td., item 1(c).

84.

85.

86.

87.

On February 5, 2013, Claimants filed their statement on costs.

The Tribunal has deliberated and carefully considered the arguments presented by the
Parties. The Tribunal shall now proceed to summarize the Parties’ positions (Part III), to
analyze the arguments behind those positions (Part IV), and finally, on the basis of its

analysis, to render its Award (Part V).

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS AND RELIEF SOUGHT

A. The Claims

Claimants submit that Respondent has effectively prevented Eagle Games from carrying out
its business.” In particular, Claimants contend that Albania, through its different
instrumentalities—the Finance Ministry, the Trade Ministry, and the Gambling Commission,
among others— (i) blocked and delayed Eagle Games from issuing new tickets, (ii) failed to
promptly create the government entity in charge of authorizing the issuance of tickets, (iii)
changed the regulatory framework governing the games of chance sector, and finally, (iv)

revoked Eagle Games’ permit in 2007."
As a result of the above measures, Claimants request that the Tribunal:

1. Declare that Albania expropriated the investments of Eagle Games and Burimi

SRL, in violation of BIT Article 5, FIL Article 4, and customary international law;

2. Declare that Albania breached the minimum standard of treatment pursuant to FIL

Article 2(3); and thus

3. Award compensation to Claimants in the sum of ALL 1,034,794,456
(approximately USD 10,244,465, corresponding to the company’s actual value on
December 31, 2004 (ALL 803,111,584 or approximately USD 8 million), plus

© Request J 21.
© Id. 4 16-23; Mem, unpaginated.

interest from January 1, 2005 to December 31, 2009 (ALL 231,682,872 or

),8¢

approximately USD 2.4 million

88. Albania contends that the revocation of Eagle Games’ gambling permit was fully justified as
a matter of public policy. It also denies the rest of the claims on the merits. Finally, it

challenges ICSID jurisdiction.

B. The Objections to Jurisdiction
89. Albania advances the following objections to jurisdiction:

1. Eagle Games is an Albanian company owned by Albanian nationals and does not
qualify as a national “of a Contracting State other than the State party to the

dispute”;

2. Burimi SRL is owned by Mr. Ilir Burimi, who is a national of both Albania and

Italy; therefore, Burimi SRL is an Albanian company;
3. Burimi SRL has not made an “investment” in Albania and is not an “investor”;

4. Claimants failed to comply with the best efforts negotiation provisions of the BIT

and FIL.
90. Therefore, Albania asks the Tribunal:

“To declare that Eagle Games and Burimi S.r.l., individually and/or
collectively, lack standing before this Tribunal, and to reject all of their
claims for lack of jurisdiction ratione personae and/or ratione materiae,
as the case may be, accordingly.”°*

91. The Tribunal will refer to the Parties’ positions in more detail in the course of its analysis.

4 Td. pp. 13-15
°° CM ff 66-70.
°° 1d. 4449.

Iv. ANALYSIS

A. Law Applicable to the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal

92. Jurisdiction is governed by the relevant provisions of the (i) ICSID Convention and Rules,

(ii) BIT, and (iii) FIL.
93. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention provides that:

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the
Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which
the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.
When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its
consent unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration as well as
on the date on which the request was registered pursuant to paragraph (3)
of Article 28 or paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does not include any
person who on either date also had the nationality of the Contracting
State party to the dispute; and

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any
juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party
to the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign control, the
parties have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting
State for the purposes of this Convention.

94. Articles | and 8 of the BIT read as follows: ©”

Article 1: Definitions
[...]

1. The term “investment” means, whatever the legal form chosen by the
legal and reference, every asset invested by investors of one Contracting

© Exhibit C-21.

Party in the territory of the other, in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the latter.

In this context of a general nature, the term investment shows in
particular but not exclusively:

(a) movable and immovable property and any real right, including, as it
can be invested, mortgages, liens and privileges;

(b) shares, bonds, shares and any other instruments of credit;

(c) claims to money or any right arising from commitments or services
having an economic value and an investment, as well as income
reinvested;

(d) intellectual property rights and hence the industry, including
copyrights, trademarks, patents, industrial designs and know-how, trade
secrets, business, trade names, goodwill and other similar rights;

(e) any economic rights conferred by law, contract, license or
administrative action including prospecting, cultivation, extraction and
exploitation of natural resources.

2. The term “investor” means a natural person or legal entity of a
Contracting Party which has made, granted or assumed to have obtained
any necessary authorization, irrevocable obligation to make investments
in the territory of the other Contracting Party shall, in accordance with
the laws and regulations of the latter.

3. The term “income” means fees that are derived from an investment,
especially profits, interest, capital gains, dividends, royalties and other
income from investments.

Article 8: Regulation of disputes between investors and one of the
Contracting Parties

1. Any dispute concerning investments arising between an investor and
the other Contracting Party, including disputes concerning compensation
for expropriation, nationalization, requisition and similar measures
should be, wherever possible, resolved amicably.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably within six months from the
date of a request made in writing, the investor may, as its option, submit:

@)[-]
(b) L.-J

 

95.

(c) The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
relating to Disputes (ICSID) for the application of arbitration and
conciliation procedures under the Washington Convention 18 March
1965 on “Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States” as soon as the contracting parties had validly
accepted both, or of regulations concerning the "mechanisms" for the
additional settlement of the arbitration of the International Center said.

For the purposes of Article 25 of the Washington Convention March 18,
1965 and as of the date on which this will be applicable for both
Contracting Parties, a company having legal nationality of a Contracting
Party to the dispute, but with a majority of capital owned by investors of
the other Contracting Party or other third party, will be considered as
having the nationality of the latter.

Articles 1 and 8 of the FIL provide in the relevant part:

° Exhibit C-19.

Article 1: General Provisions

For the purpose of this law [...]:

- “Foreign investor” means:
(a) Any natural entity who is a citizen of a foreign country, or

(b) Any natural entity who is a citizen of the Republic of Albania, but
who resides outside the country, or

(c) Any legal entity established in accordance with the law of a foreign
country, who directly or indirectly seeks to carry out or is carrying out an
investment in the territory of the Republic of Albania in conformity with
its laws, or has carried out an investment in conformity with its laws
during the period from 31.07.1990 in continuation.

- “Foreign investment” means any kind of investment in the territory of
the Republic of Albania, performed directly or indirectly by a foreign
investor that consists of:

(a) Movable or immovable, tangible or intangible assets, or any other
kind of ownership;

(b) A company, rights that derive from any kind of participation in a
company, by stock shares etc.;

(c) Loans, monetary obligations or obligations in an activity of an
economic value and related to an investment;

96.

(¢) Intellectual property, including literary and artistic, scientific and
technological products, audio recording, inventions, industrial designs,
schemes of integrated circles, know how, trademarks, designs of
trademarks and trade names;

(d) Any right recognized by law or contract, and any license or
permission issued in accordance with the laws.

- “Dispute over foreign investment” means every disagreement or
presumption caused by a foreign investment or that relates to it.

- “Revenue” means an amount of money that derives from or is
associated with an investment, including profit, dividend, interest,
reinvestment of the capital, costs of direction and administration, costs of
technical assistance or other costs or contributions in kind.

Article 8: Dispute Resolution

2. If a dispute about a foreign investment arises between a foreign
investor and the Albanian public administration, which has not been
settled through an agreement, the foreign investor may submit the
dispute for resolution to a competent court or arbitrator of the Republic
of Albania, according to its laws. If the dispute relates to expropriation,
compensation for expropriation or discrimination, as well as to transfers
as provided in article 7 of this law, the foreign investor may submit the
dispute for resolution to the International Center [sic] for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes (“Center” [sic]), established by the Convention
for the settlement of investment disputes between the states and citizens
of other states, approved in Washington, on 18 March 1965.

3. [uk

B. The Objections to Jurisdiction

To summarize, Respondent argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction: (i) ratione personae
with respect to the claims of Eagle Games; and (ii) ratione personae and ratione materiae
with respect to the claims of Burimi SRL. Respondent further argues that the claim is
inadmissible because Claimants failed to comply with the best efforts negotiation provisions

of the BIT and FIL.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

© Request {f 9.
CM ¥ 101 (“It

1. Whether there is jurisdiction ratione personae with respect to the claims of
Eagle Games

(i) Claimants’ Position

Claimants argue that Eagle Games has standing before this Tribunal because it is an

“investor” as defined in Article 1 of the BIT and the FIL.

Moreover, Claimants contend that Eagle Games has standing pursuant to ICSID Convention
Article 25(2)(b). According to Claimants, although Eagle Games is an Albanian company, it
should be treated as under the control of the Italian company Burimi SRL because Mr. Ilir
Burimi, the General Director and sole shareholder of Burimi SRL, holds 65 percent of the

shares in Eagle Games.”

Therefore, Claimants conclude that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione personae with

respect to the claims of Eagle Games.
(ii) Respondent’s Position

Respondent argues that this Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to the claims of Eagle
Games under the first or second clauses of ICSID Convention Article 25(2)(b), and that

Burimi SRL does not own the 65 percent shareholding in Eagle Games.

First, there is no jurisdiction under the first clause of Article 25(2)(b) because Eagle Games is

70

an Albanian company.” As such, it does not qualify as a national “of a Contracting State

other than the State party to the dispute” (i.e., Albania).

Respondent further contends that Article 8(2)(c) of the BIT does not alter Eagle Games’
Albanian nationality for purposes of the ICSID Convention.’! The majority of Eagle Games’
capital is owned by Mr. Ilir Burimi, an Albanian national and the company’s ultimate

beneficial owner.” Therefore, Eagle Games is an Albanian national under the first clause of

 

and pp. 5-8.
s a matter of fact and record that Eagle Games, the company holding the gambling permit, is a

  

company incorporated under Albanian Law”).

7 Td. Wf 102-104.
” Ta.

20

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, notwithstanding that Mr. Ilir Burimi is also an

Italian national.

Second, there is no jurisdiction under Article 25(2)(b) second clause given that the parties did
not agree to treat Eagle Games as a non-Albanian national “because of foreign control.”
According to Respondent “[n]o such consent is included in the provisions of the BIT (or the
FIL for the matter), whereby it is noted that the “nationality” stipulation in Article 8(2)(c) of
the BIT [...] for the purposes of the first clause of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID, must not be
confused with a specific agreement concerning host State nationals for purposes of the

second clause of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID” Convention.”

Moreover, Albania argues that even if the “foreign control” exception applied, Eagle Games
still would not qualify as a non-Albanian national because its shares are held by two
Albanian nationals as follows: 65 percent by Mr. Ilir Burimi and 35 percent by Ms. Alma
Leka.”*

Furthermore, “the fact that Mr. Burimi is also an Italian national is...irrelevant.””° “[DJual
nationals that also hold the nationality of the State party to the dispute are categorically

9977

ineligible to qualify as ‘national of another Contracting State’, or simply as a ‘foreigner’.

Therefore, according to Respondent, as Eagle Games is an Albanian company under
Albanian control, this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae pursuant to the second

clause of Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention.

Finally, Respondent claims that there is no evidence on the record showing that Mr. Ilir
Burimi’s 65 percent shareholding in Eagle Games is in fact owned by Burimi SRL. To the
contrary, Claimants produced a company extract for Eagle Games from the Albanian Trade

Registry,” in which Mr. Ilir Burimi — and not Burimi SRL — is listed as the company’s 65

* Td. 4 105-107.

7 Td. J 106 (emphasis omitted).
8 Td. 112.

1 Id. (113.

Td.

* Exhibit C-3.

21

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

percent shareholder.” In addition, the sale contract by which Mr. Ilir Burimi purchased the
shares from Mr. Edmond Shoto and Mr. Artan Serjani again identifies Mr. Ilir Burimi as the
buyer and owner of the shares and does not indicate that he acted “on behalf of”

Burimi SRL.”

Therefore, Respondent concludes that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae with

respect to the claims of Eagle Games.
(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis

To have standing under ICSID Convention Article 25(2)(b), Eagle Games must show that it
is a national “of a Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute” or that it should,
by way of exception, “‘be treated” as such for the purposes of the ICSID Convention “because

of foreign control.”*'

Eagle Games is a legal entity incorporated in Albania. As such, it does not qualify as a
national “of a Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute” under the first

clause of Article 25(2)(b).

Under the second clause of Article 25(2)(b), Eagle Games could, by way of exception, “be
treated as a national of another Contracting State” if, “because of foreign control, the parties

have agreed” that it would be treated as such.

The requirement of “foreign control” is not expressly defined in the ICSID Convention. The
wording of the second clause of 25(2)(b) allows the parties “to decide under what
circumstances a company could be treated as a ‘national of another Contracting State.”®
Accordingly, the Tribunal must consider whether the parties to this dispute have agreed that
Eagle Games is under foreign—in this case, Italian—control and thereby qualifies as a

national of Italy.

PCM 118.

897d, 4 118-119.

*! Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

® Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States,
Receuil des Cours 1972 I, Vol 136, pp. 337-410, at pp. 358-359.

22

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

As Eagle Games has not concluded an agreement, such as an investment contract, directly
with Respondent in which there is a direct or implied (by virtue of an ICSID arbitration
clause) agreement to treat Eagle Games as a foreign national, the Tribunal must look to the
relevant investment treaty and foreign investment law to determine whether there is an
agreement on the meaning of “foreign control” for the purposes of fulfilling the requirement

established by the second clause of Article 25(2)(b).*

Article 8(2)(c) of the Italy-Albania BIT states “[...] For the purposes of Article 25 of the
Washington Convention March 18, 1965 and as of the date on which this will be applicable
for both Contracting Parties, a company having legal nationality of a Contracting Party to
the dispute, but with a majority of capital owned by investors [of] the other Contracting

Party or other third party, will be considered as having the nationality of the latter.”

Claimants are thus correct in their assertion that, if the majority of Eagle Games’ shares were
owned by an Italian national, Eagle Games would qualify as having Italian nationality under

the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

Claimants argue that 100 percent of Eagle Games’ shares are owned by Burimi SRL, an
Italian entity incorporated in Italy because Ms. Alma Leka’s 35 percent shareholding is
attributable to Burimi SRL via the financing agreement™ and the pledge agreement,* and
Mr. Ilir Burimi’s 65 percent shareholding is attributable to Burimi SRL as Mr. Ilir Burimi

was acting as an agent of Burimi SRL when he purchased the shares.

The Tribunal finds that the financing and pledge agreement do not represent ownership by
Burimi SRL of the 35 percent shareholding in Eagle Games, nor have Claimants provided
sufficient evidence that Mr. Ilir Burimi was acting on behalf of Burimi SRL as the purchaser
and owner of the 65 percent of shares. The Share Sale Contract* and the attestation by the

Albanian judge of the sale of shares,*’ in addition to trade data extracts and balance sheets,**

*5 Claimants brought this case under the BIT and the FIL. The Tribunal notes that unlike the BIT, the FIL does not
contain an agreement on the meaning of “foreign control” for purposes of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b).

* Exhibit C-4.

*S Exhibit C-5.

* Exhibit R-33.

*” Exhibit C-8.

*S Exhibits C-3, R-3, R-13.

23

118.

119.

120.

121.

show that the shares were purchased in the name of Mr. Ilir Burimi and contain no reference

to his acting as an agent of Burimi SRL.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that Mr. Ilir Burimi, a dual national of Italy and Albania, is
the majority shareholder of Eagle Games and therefore the relevant party for determining
whether Eagle Games can be treated as a national of a Contracting State other than the State

party to the dispute because it is under “foreign control.”

While Claimants did not make this argument in its written submissions, the conclusion that
Mr. Ilir Burimi—a dual national of Italy and Albania—is the majority shareholder of Eagle
Games raises an important question about whether a dual national may rely on his “foreign”
nationality—that is, the nationality other than the nationality of the Contracting State party to
the dispute—for the purposes of establishing “foreign control” over a company bringing a

claim before ICSID.

The ICSID Convention makes it very clear that a dual national may not invoke one of his two
nationalities to establish jurisdiction over a claim brought in his own name under
Article 25(2)(a). Indeed, it is for this very reason that Mr. Ilir Burimi was required to

withdraw as a Requesting Party from the Request for Arbitration dated June 16, 2011.

While neither the ICSID Convention nor relevant precedents address the potential for a dual
national invoking one of his two nationalities to establish jurisdiction over a claim brought in
the name of a juridical person under the second clause of Article 25(2)(b), it strikes the
Tribunal as anomalous that the principle against use of dual nationality in 25(2)(a) would not
transfer to the potential use of dual nationality in 25(2)(b). Otherwise, any dual national who
is a national of the Contracting State to a dispute could circumvent the bar on claims in
Article 25(2)(a) by establishing a company in that state and asserting foreign control of that
company by virtue of his second (foreign) nationality. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that

for the purposes of considering whether Eagle Games could be treated as a national of

*° Pursuant to Article 25(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention, jurisdiction under the Convention does not extend to “any
person who on either date [of consent or registration of a request for arbitration] also had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute.”

24

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

another Contracting State (i.e., Italy) because of “foreign control,” Mr. Ilir Burimi cannot

invoke his Italian nationality to establish “foreign control” of Eagle Games.

The Tribunal thus concludes that it lacks jurisdiction ratione personae with respect to the

claims of Eagle Games.

2. Whether there is jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae with
respect to the claims of Burimi SRL

2.1. Jurisdiction ratione personae
(i) Claimants’ Position

Claimants allege that Burimi SRL has standing before this Tribunal because it is a company
incorporated in Italy. As such, it is a “national of another Contracting State” pursuant to

Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.”

Moreover, according to Claimants, Mr. Ilir Burimi acted on behalf of Burimi SRL when he
purchased shares of Eagle Games, as clearly indicated in the records of the transaction.” As

a result, Claimants assert that Burimi SRL has exercised control over Eagle Games.
(ii) Respondent’s Position

Respondent argues that Burimi SRL lacks standing because it is owned by Mr. Ilir Burimi,
who is a national of both Albania and Italy. As a consequence, Burimi SRL is an Albanian
company—as opposed to an Italian company—for purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID

Convention.

Furthermore, Respondent submits that the Republics of Italy and Albania included a specific
stipulation as to the investor’s nationality in Article 8(2)(c) of the BIT. Under this provision,
the nationality of a legal entity is determined by who controls it, and not by the company’s
place of incorporation. To apply correctly this provision, Albania contends that one has to
pierce the corporate veil of the company to identify the nationality of the person or legal

entity holding the majority of the capital for purposes of the first clause of Article 25(2)(b) of

°° Mem, unpaginated.
° Exhibit C-26.

25

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

the ICSID Convention.” In this case, 90 percent of the shares in Burimi SRL are held and

owned by Mr. Ilir Burimi, who is an Albanian national.

Therefore, Respondent concludes that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae with

respect to the claims of Burimi SRL.
(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis

Article 8(2)(c) of the Italy-Albania BIT states that “For the purposes of Article 25 of the
Washington Convention March 18, 1965 and as of the date on which this will be applicable
for both Contracting Parties, a company having legal nationality of a Contracting Party to
the dispute, but with a majority of capital owned by investors [of] the other Contracting
Party or other third party, will be considered as having the nationality of the latter.”
Respondent argues that this provision requires the Tribunal to pierce the corporate veil and
determine the nationality of Burimi SRL based on the nationality of the majority shareholder.
As Mr. Ilir Burimi is a citizen of Albania, Respondent claims that for the purposes of

Article 25(2)(b), Burimi SRL is an Albanian company.

Respondent’s argument is based on a fundamental misunderstanding of Article 25(2)(b) of

the ICSID Convention.

The first clause of Article 25(2)(b) defines a “national of another Contracting State” as “any
juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State party to
the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation
or arbitration.” Burimi SRL is a juridical person with nationality of a Contracting State

(Italy) other than the State party to the dispute (Albania).

The second clause of Article 25(2)(b) defines a “national of another Contracting State” as
“any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute
on that date and which, because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated

as a national of another Contracting State”. Burimi SRL does not have the nationality of the

° OM ¥ 129.

26

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

Contracting State party to the dispute (Albania). It is an Italian legal entity. Therefore,

whether it is under “foreign control” is irrelevant to the determination of its nationality.

Respondent mistakenly argues that piercing the corporate veil—as is required by Article
8(2)(c) of the Italy-Albania BIT—is necessary to determine the nationality of a company that
already has the nationality of a State other than the State party to the dispute. The purpose of
Article 8(2)(c), however, is to determine whether companies with the nationality of the State
party to the dispute (Albania), can be considered under foreign control and therefore should
be treated as a “national of another Contracting State” for the purposes of the ICSID

Convention.

The Tribunal thus concludes that it does have jurisdiction ratione personae with respect to

the claims of Burimi SRL.
2.2. Jurisdiction ratione materiae
(i) Claimants’ Position

Claimants submit that Burimi SRL (an Italian company) invested in Eagle Games by virtue
of the financing agreement entered into with Ms. Alma Leka to fund her purchase of shares

in Eagle Games.”**

Claimants therefore argue that Burimi SRL holds an indirect investment under the terms of

the ICSID Convention, the BIT, and the FIL.
(ii) Respondent’s Position

Respondent objects to jurisdiction ratione materiae on six grounds.” First, Albania argues
that the dispute does not arise directly out of an investment but rather out of a commercial
financing agreement. In Albania’s view, the financing agreement is a private inter-partes
agreement concluded between one of the shareholders of Eagle Games (Ms. Alma Leka) and

a third party (Burimi SRL).** Respondent further argues that “the objective of the financing

°3 Mem, unpaginated.
°* OM ¥ 137-355.
°° Td. 4 145.

27

agreement was not to invest in Eagle Games, the gambling permit holder, but to finance
investments belonging to Ms. Leka.”** Albania thus concludes that Burimi SRL’s claims do

not arise directly out of the gambling permit or the transactions associated therewith.”

137. Second, Respondent argues that Burimi SRL has not made an investment within the meaning

of ICSID Convention Article 25, FIL Articles 1(3) and 1(5), and BIT Articles 1(1) and 1(3).
Albania further argues that this Tribunal should “irrespective of the requirements stipulated
in the BIT or FIL—not accept jurisdiction ratione materiae if the ‘investment’ requirements
of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention are not met.”** According to Respondent, those
requirements include (i) a (substantial) contribution; (ii) a certain duration; (iii) risk; and

(iv) a contribution to the host State’s development.”

138. Third, Respondent contends that Burimi SRL has failed to prove “that it is the holder of the

139.

right it claims, ie., the ‘investment’ in Eagle Games.”'™ To satisfy this burden, Albania
submits that Burimi SRL must show two separate facts: first, full proof of its investment,”
and second, that the documents in question provide a minimally sufficient degree of

102

confidence in their authenticity. Albania contends that Claimants have failed to meet

“even at this advanced stage of the jurisdictional and merit proceedings, either of these two

obligations.”’'*
Fourth, Respondent argues that there is no bona fide investment because Mr. Ilir Burimi
“single-handedly designed and construed the financing arrangements between Burimi SRL
and Ms. Leka with no other objective than to create — on paper — the illusion of a foreign
investment, where there was, in reality, none.” Respondent thus contends that the
financing arrangements were designed not only as an attempt to create ICSID jurisdiction
°° Id. 4 146.
° Id. 4 147.

°8 Td. Wf 211-235.
°° Id. Y 227 citing Salini Costruttori S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4) Decision on
Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001, 4 52.

1 Td. 161.
1! Td. 162.
1 Td. 163.
3 Td. 4 181.
Td. 4 284.

28

140.

141.

142.

143.

where there was none, but that these actions further constitute a violation of the principle of

good faith. '°°

Fifth, Respondent alleges that Burimi SRL’s investment is illegal because it was made in
violation of several domestic laws and regulations in Albania.'°° In light of these breaches,
Albania argues that the alleged investment cannot benefit from protection under the FIL, the

BIT and the ICSID Convention.'”

Sixth, Respondent contends that Burimi SRL has not established a prima facie expropriation
of its alleged investment because it failed to indicate (i) how its property—the financing and

pledge agreements—was “taken”; and (ii) how this taking is attributable to Albania. '*

(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention states that “the jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend
to any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State [...]
and a national of another Contracting State.” Claimants argue that the legal dispute at hand
arises directly out of Burimi SRL’s investment in Albania, which consists of (i) Burimi
SRL’s 65 percent shareholding in Eagle Games, an Albanian company, and (ii) Burimi
SRL’s financing agreement with Ms. Alma Leka as regards her 35 percent shareholding in

Eagle Games.

With respect to Burimi SRL’s alleged ownership of the 65 percent shareholding of Eagles
Games, the Tribunal has already concluded that Claimants have not provided sufficient proof

that Mr. Ilir Burimi was acting on behalf of Burimi SRL as the purchaser and owner of the

109

65 percent of shares. The Share Sale Contract'” and the attestation by the Albanian judge of

10

the sale of shares,'’ in addition to trade data extracts and balance sheets,''! show that the

shares were purchased in the name of Mr. Ilir Burimi and contain no reference to his acting

15 Td. (9 284-285.

196 Td. {J 297-330.

17 14.331.

18 Td. {J 333-355.

'®° Exhibit R-33.

NO Exhibit C-8.

'! Exhibits C-3, R-3, R-13.

29

144.

145.

146.

112
113
14

as an agent of Burimi SRL. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that Burimi SRL does not
own the 65 percent of shares held by Mr. Ilir Burimi and those shares therefore do not

represent an investment in Albania by Burimi SRL.

With respect to Burimi SRL’s alleged ownership of the 35 percent shareholding of Eagle
Games, Claimants argue that the financing agreement'’? and the share pledge agreement!"
between Ms. Alma Leka and Burimi SRL together constitute an investment by Burimi SRL
in Eagle Games. However, the financing agreement—by which Burimi SRL financed
Ms. Alma Leka’s share purchase in exchange for 90 percent of the profits she would
receive—does not represent ownership by Burimi SRL of Eagle Games. Rather, it represents
a private, contractual loan agreement between Burimi SRL and Ms. Alma Leka, a private
citizen, to finance investments belonging to her. The financing agreement states: “The object
of this contract is to ratify an agreement between the company Burimi Srl, which engages to

finance all the belonging investments of the shareholder Ms. Alma Leka [...]”.'"*

Moreover, the dispute at hand does not arise out of any government measure affecting
Burimi SRL’s agreement with Ms. Alma Leka. The financing and pledge agreements are
free-standing contracts between Ms. Alma Leka and Burimi SRL, and exist independently of
Eagle Games’ gambling business. Burimi SRL’s claims in this dispute arise out of its
agreement with Ms. Alma Leka and do not arise out of the investment in question, namely,

the enterprise of Eagle Games.

On these grounds alone, the Tribunal concludes that it lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae
with respect to the claims of Burimi SRL. Therefore the Tribunal does not address

Respondent’s many other arguments on this jurisdictional question.

Exhibit C-4.
Exhibit C-5.
Exhibit C-4 (emphasis added).

30

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

3. Whether Claimants have complied with the best efforts negotiation
provisions of the BIT and FIL

(i) Claimants’ Position

Claimants contend that they have complied with FIL Article 8(2) and BIT Article 8(2). In
their view, Claimants attempted to settle this dispute prior to initiating ICSID arbitration but
their notice letters were rejected by Respondent.''* Claimants further contend that they also
informed the Italian Embassy of the dispute, the latter suggesting that legal action should be

taken.'"°
(ii) Respondent’s Position

Respondent argues that Claimants did not make an effort to engage in proper amicable

settlement negotiations with Albania.'!”

Burimi SRL did not send any notification at all of a dispute to Albania prior to submitting the

request for arbitration. '"*

With respect to Eagle Games, only one letter was sent on August 25, 2010. In Respondent’s
view, the letter was “nothing but a formal notification of Eagle Games’ claims and its
intention to resort to legal proceedings” if Albania failed to pay the amount in dispute in this

arbitration.”

Moreover, the letter did not invite Albania to enter into amicable settlement negotiations and
made no reference to ICSID, the BIT, or the FIL—instead it only mentioned the European

Court of Human Rights. '”°

Therefore, Respondent concludes that Claimants have not complied with the best efforts

obligation of FIL Article 8(2) and BIT Article 8(2).

"5 Exhibits C-14 and C-16.

‘6 Exhibit C-33; Mem, unpaginated.
"OM 474 and {{[ 85-98.

"SoM 492.

' om 494.

°° CM ql 94-95.

31

(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis

153. Given the Tribunal’s disposition of the other jurisdictional objections, it need not decide this

question.

Vv. COSTS

A. The Parties’ Statements

154. After the hearing, the Tribunal asked the Parties to submit their statements of costs.

155. On January 31, 2013, Respondent claimed costs as follows:

 

[ICSID fees | USD 150,000

 

| Legal representation costs | EUR 348,856

 

156. On February 5, 2013, Claimants submitted the following statement:

 

[ICSID fees [| USD_ 175,000

 

| Legal representation costs | EUR 407,000

 

B. The Costs of the Proceeding

157. The costs of the proceeding include the Tribunal’s fees and expenses as well as ICSID’s

administrative fees and expenses. They are paid out of the advances made by the Parties. '*'

1 The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to
ICSID.

32

158. The costs of the proceeding are summarized as follows: '”

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Description USD
Tribunal’s fees and expenses $122,408.17
ICSID’s fees and expenses (estimated) $64,142.42
Total $186,550.59

 

 

Cc. The Tribunal’s Decision on Costs

159. Costs are governed by Article 61 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 47(j).

1

a

0. Article 61 of the ICSID Convention reads as follows:

(2) In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom
those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal
and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid.
Such decision shall form part of the award.

161. Arbitration Rule 47 provides that:

(1) The award shall be in writing and shall contain:

[...]

Gj) any decision of the Tribunal regarding the costs of the
proceeding.

162. It is clear from the above-mentioned provisions that the Tribunal has broad powers to rule on

the costs incurred by the Parties and ICSID in connection with this proceeding.

163. Respondent prevailed on its jurisdictional arguments. Indeed, some of the grounds for
jurisdiction asserted by Claimants did not withstand even moderate scrutiny. Moreover,
Respondent’s task (as well as the Tribunal’s) was rendered difficult by the often incoherent

presentation by Claimants.

122

 

The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed financial statement of the case account as soon as

all invoices are received and the account is final.

 

33

164.

165.

In the circumstances, the Tribunal exercises its discretion pursuant to Article 61 of the
Convention and awards all costs in favor of Respondent. Therefore, Claimants shall pay to

Respondent:
1. USD 93,225.30 for Respondent’s costs of these proceedings; and
2. EUR 348,856 for Respondent’s legal costs and expenses in this arbitration.

Interest on the amount awarded to Respondent shall run from the date of this Award and be
set at the Euro Interbank Offered Rate (Euribor) three-month rate in effect on the date of this

Award, plus two percent (2%) compounded semi-annually from the date of this Award.

'°3 The Tribunal awards Respondent 100 percent of its arbitration costs. After ICSID refunds Albania with its share

of the remaining balance in the case account, Albania will have incurred USD 93,275.30 in arbitration costs. This
amount is calculated by subtracting USD 56,997.93 (the amount to be refunded to Albania) from USD 150,000 (the
total amount paid into the case account by Albania.) For a detailed breakdown of the arbitration costs, please refer
to the financial statement to be provided with the refund letters.

34

VI. AWARD

For the reasons and on the grounds set out above, the Tribunal unanimously decides that:

1. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae with respect to the claims of Eagle
Games SH.A;

2. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae with respect to the claims of

Burimi SRL;

3. Claimants shall pay to Respondent USD 93,225.30 for Respondent’s costs of these

proceedings;

4. Claimants shall pay to Respondent EUR 348,856 for Respondent’s legal costs and

expenses in this arbitration;

5. Interest on the amounts awarded to Respondent shall run from the date of this
Award and be set at the Euro Interbank Offered Rate (Euribor) three-month rate in
effect on the date of this Award, plus two percent (2%) compounded semi-annually

from the date of this Award;

6. All other claims and requests by the Parties are dismissed.

A-E[-LY

Professor Ibrahim Fadlallah Professor Bernardo M. Cremades
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date:2o] 5/2212, Date: 24/05/13

—Noenble Pace

Mr. Daniel M. Price
President

Date: B/oo /'>

35

