INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.
In the arbitration proceeding between

BURLINGTON RESOURCES, INC.

Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL FOR DISQUALIFICATION OF
PROFESSOR FRANCISCO ORREGO VICUNA

 

Chairman of the Administrative Council
Dr. Jim Yong Kim

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor

Representing the Claimant:

Mr. Alexander Yanos and

Ms. Noiana Marigo

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
New York, NY 10022

and

Mr. Nigel Blackaby

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
Washington, DC 20004-2692

and

Mr. Christopher Pugh

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
London, United Kingdom EC4Y1HS

Date: December 13, 2013

Representing the Respondent:

Dr. Diego Garcia Carri6n
Procurador General del Estado
Dra. Christel Gaibor and

Dra. Blanca Gomez de la Torre
Procuraduria General del Estado
Av. Amazonas N39-123 y Arizaga
Quito, Ecuador

and

Messrs. Pierre Mayer, Eduardo Silva Romero
and José-Manuel Garcia Represa
Dechert LLP

32 rue de Monceau

Paris, France 75008

TABLE OF CONTENTS
A. The Parties

B. Procedural History

 

C. Position of the Parties

 

I. Ecuador’s Position

 

II. Burlington’s Position

 

D. Professor Orrego Vicuiia’s E: ion:
E. Decision by the Chairman

I. Applicable Legal Standard

 

IL. Analysis

 

F. Decision

 

10

14

14

15

17

Page |l

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

A.

1.

THE PARTIES

The Claimant is Burlington Resources Inc. (“Burlington’’), a company incorporated
under the laws of the state of Delaware. The Respondent is the Republic of Ecuador
(“Ecuador”).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On August 4, 2008, Burlington, represented by the law firm Freshfields Bruckhaus
Deringer (“Freshfields”), appointed Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia to serve as
arbitrator in this case. The Arbitral Tribunal was constituted on November 18, 2008,
and the proceedings began on that date.

On January 20, 2009, the Tribunal and the Parties held a first session in Paris, France.
On April 17, 2009, the Tribunal held a hearing on provisional measures in Washington
D.C. On January 22, 2010, the Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction in Paris, issuing
its Decision on Jurisdiction on June 2, 2010. A dissenting opinion by Professor Orrego
Vicufia was attached to the Decision on Jurisdiction. The Tribunal then held a hearing
on liability in Paris from March 8 through 11, 2011, issuing a Decision on Liability on
December 14, 2012. A dissenting opinion by Professor Orrego Vicuiia was attached to
the Decision on Liability.

On July 8, 2013, Dechert (Paris) LLP (“Dechert”), counsel representing Ecuador, sent
an unsigned letter (the “July 8 letter”) to Professor Orrego Vicufia regarding news
reports stating that he had been appointed as arbitrator multiple times (“repeat
appointments”) by Freshfields. In this context, Ecuador asked Professor Orrego Vicufia
to disclose all of his appointments in cases in which Freshfields acted or acts as counsel,
and in particular any cases accepted after signing his Declaration pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 6 on August 11, 2008 (the “2008 Declaration”). Ecuador also asked
for disclosure of the compensation paid in these proceedings.

On July 11, 2013, the Tribunal and the Parties held a telephone conference to discuss
organizational matters (“the July 11 conference”). At the end of the conference,
Professor Orrego Vicufia enquired as to the origin of the July 8 letter, mentioning that it
was not signed. Counsel for Ecuador apologized for having sent the letter unsigned,
indicating that this had been an administrative mistake.

On July 12, 2013, Professor Orrego Vicufia answered the July 8 letter (the “July 12
response”), providing the list of cases requested by Ecuador.

On July 24, 2013, Ecuador proposed the disqualification of Professor Orrego Vicuiia
(the “Proposal’”).

On July 25, 2013, the ICSID Secretariat notified the Parties that the proceedings were
suspended until the Proposal was decided, pursuant to Rule 9(6) of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”). Professors Gabrielle
Kaufmann-Kohler and Brigitte Stern (“the unchallenged arbitrators”) were seized of

Page |2

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

the challenge pursuant to Article 58 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“the ICSID Convention”).

On July 27, 2013, Burlington filed a Response to the Proposal (the “Response”), in
which it proposed a briefing schedule for the disqualification procedure that would
ensure the hearing scheduled to be held in August 2013 could take place. Burlington
also invited the unchallenged arbitrators to issue a summary decision on the
disqualification proposal, which could be supplemented at a later date.

On July 28, 2013, the unchallenged arbitrators invited Ecuador to comment on
Burlington’s proposed schedule.

On July 29, 2013, Ecuador submitted its comments on Burlington’s proposed schedule.
Besides raising arguments related to the merits of the Proposal, Ecuador acknowledged
its duty to pursue its counterclaims as rapidly as possible, but stated that this duty had to
“be balanced by the need to conduct this arbitration in a fair and cost and time effective
manner”. Accordingly, Ecuador proposed an alternative schedule.

Also on July 29, 2013, the unchallenged arbitrators fixed a calendar for the next steps in
the disqualification procedure: Professor Orrego Vicufia would furnish explanations
pursuant to Arbitration Rule 9(3) at his earliest convenience; Ecuador would submit a
reply within 5 calendar days of receipt of Professor Orrego Vicufia’s explanations; the
Claimant would submit a rejoinder within 5 calendar days of receipt of the reply; and
the unchallenged arbitrators would advise the Parties on further steps, including an
estimated date of issuance of their decision, within 5 calendar days of receipt of the
rejoinder.

On July 31, 2013, Professor Orrego Vicufia furnished his explanations. On the same
day, the unchallenged arbitrators and the Parties held a telephone conference to address
the calendar for the Parties’ outstanding submissions on the Proposal, and the possibility
of maintaining the August hearing.

During the telephone conference, the Parties agreed, and the unchallenged arbitrators
confirmed in a subsequent letter, that Ecuador would submit its reply by August 5,
2013, and that Burlington would file its rejoinder by August 7, 2013. At the end of the
conference, the President of the Tribunal asked the Parties to address two questions in
their submissions:

(1) What are the applicable standards for disclosure in an ICSID arbitration and what
are the consequences of a breach of the duty to disclose?

(2) Do parties to an ICSID arbitration have a duty to inquire about facts that may give
rise to doubts as to an arbitrator’s independence and impartiality? If such a duty
exists, what is its source and scope?

On August 5, 2013, Ecuador filed a Reply to the Proposal (the “Reply”) and on August
7, 2013, Burlington filed a Rejoinder on the Proposal (the “Rejoinder’).

Page |3
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

16. On October 15, 2013, Professors Kaufmann-Kohler and Stern advised the Secretary-
General of ICSID that they had failed to reach a decision on the proposal to disqualify
Professor Orrego Vicuiia. On the same date, the Secretary-General informed the Parties
that the decision on the Respondent’s Proposal would now be taken by the Chairman of
the Administrative Council (“Chairman”), in accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID
Convention.

17. On October 21, 2013, Ecuador sent a letter to ICSID noting an LCIA Decision on
Challenge of Arbitrator (LCIA Reference No. 1303). On October 24, 2013, Burlington
objected to Ecuador’s letter of October 21 and stated that the LCIA decision did not
establish any governing principles of law as it was grounded on the specific facts of that
case.

C. POSITION OF THE PARTIES
I. Ecuador’s Position

18. On July 8, 2013, Ecuador asked Professor Orrego Vicuiia to disclose “all cases that [he]
accepted [as arbitrator] in which Freshfields acts as counsel”, including the amount of
fees received on account of those cases.' It stated that it had become aware of repeat
appointments of Professor Orrego Vicujia by Freshfields through an article published in
an arbitration newsletter on June 20, 2013.7 This article addressed a decision on a
proposal to disqualify Professor Orrego Vicufia in Rusoro v. Venezuela.’ Ecuador
stressed that Professor Orrego Vicuiia had not disclosed in this proceeding any
appointment in cases in which Freshfields acted or acts as counsel since his appointment
and declaration in 2008.

19. Ecuador noted that its concern was even greater since it learned at the same time that in
the Rusoro case Professor Orrego Vicufia had disclosed his appointment in Repsol v.
Argentina.* Ecuador stated that it was unaware of this second appointment and argued
that such disclosure should have been made in the present case.”

20. Ecuador’s Proposal was based on three grounds:

(i) Professor Orrego Vicuiia had been appointed by Freshfields in an “unacceptably
high number of cases”;°

(ii) Professor Orrego Vicufia breached his continuing obligation to disclose any
circumstance that might cause his reliability for independent judgment to be
questioned;” and

'Ecuador’s Proposal For Disqualification of Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia of July 24, 2013 (the
“Proposal”, 13.

°Global Arbitration Review, Arbitrator survives challenge over Freshfields appointments, published on
June 20, 2013 (Exh. E-381).

Rusoro Mining Limited v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.ARB(AF)/12/5), Decision
of June 20, 2013.

‘Repsol S.A. and Repsol Butano S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.ARB/12/38).

*Proposal, {| 6, footnote 2.

°Id., W.5, 41, 42-57.

"Id., 99.5, 41, 58-70.

Page |4

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

21.

22.

23.

24.

(iii) Professor Orrego Vicufia had displayed “a blatant lack of impartiality to the
detriment of Ecuador” during the course of this arbitration.*

Regarding the first ground, Ecuador noted that Professor Orrego Vicuiia has been
appointed in eight ICSID cases by the same law firm between 2007 and 2013. It
considers this an “excessively high number of appointments by the same law firm

during such a limited period of time”.

The eight cases referred to in Ecuador’s Proposal '® are:

i. Eni Dacion B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/04);

ii. Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05);

iii. [tera International Energy LLC and Itera Group NV v. Georgia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/07);

iv. EVNAG v. Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/10);

v. Pan American Energy LLC vy. Plurinational State of Bolivia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/8);

vi. | Ampal-American Israel Corporation and others v. Arab Republic of Egypt ICSID
Case No. ARB/12/11);

vii.  Rusoro Mining Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/12/5);

viii. | Repsol S.A. and Repsol Butano S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/38).

Ecuador distinguished the Rusoro disqualification decision from the present case.
According to published reports, the Rusoro tribunal rejected the challenge of Professor
Orrego Vicufia because Venezuela had been aware of eight appointments since 2008,
and a potential ninth, in cases where Freshfields acted or acts as counsel, and that the
additional appointment in the Repsol case was not sufficient to disqualify Professor
Orrego Vicufia. Ecuador noted the Rusoro tribunal’s recognition that “excessive
dependence on one law firm can be seen as undermining an arbitrator’s independence,
can require full disclosure, and may even lead to a successful challenge.”!! Ecuador
also asserted that “the number of acceptable appointments needs to be determined in
each case based on the circumstances.”!

According to Ecuador, Professor Orrego Vicufia’s excessive dependence on Freshfields
is shown by his eight appointments in ICSID cases since 2007, which undermines his
independence in this case.'?

S1d., W 5, 41, 71-76.
°Id., 4 44.

Page |5
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

25. With respect to the second ground for disqualification, Ecuador contended that
Professor Orrego Vicufia failed to fulfill his duty of disclosure “both prior to and after
his appointment.” * Ecuador argued that at the time Professor Orrego Vicufia was
appointed in the present case, he did not disclose his prior or contemporaneous
appointments by Freshfields in the ENI Dacidn BV v. Venezuela and Itera v. Georgia
ICSID cases. Ecuador noted that subsequently, Professor Orrego Vicuiia failed to
disclose his appointments by Freshfields in five additional ICSID cases, contrary to the
obligation he had assumed in his 2008 Declaration. Is

26. Ecuador argued that Professor Orrego Vicufia had adopted an inconsistent view of his
duty of disclosure.” To substantiate its allegation, Ecuador submitted Professor Orrego
Vicufia’s declaration of June 6, 2011 in Pan American Energy v. Bolivia, a case in
which Dechert acted as counsel for Bolivia and in which Professor Orrego Vicufia
disclosed that he had been appointed as an arbitrator by Freshfields in tera, EVN, and
Burlington."

27. Responding to Professor Orrego Vicufia’s explanation that all his appointments were
readily accessible on the ICSID website, Ecuador noted three points:

(i) The ICSID website only started identifying counsel at the end of 2010, over two
years after the 2008 Declaration; 18

(ii) The burden of disclosure lies on Professor Orrego Vicufia, who assumed a continuing
obligation in his 2008 Declaration. Ecuador had no obligation to investigate an
arbitrator’s appointments; 8

(iii)Professor Orrego Vicufia’s conduct had been inconsistent since he disclosed his
Freshfields appointments in the Rusoro case only upon request by one party, but
made such disclosure sua sponte in the Pan American case in June 2011.

28. Ecuador cited decisions”! on the scope of the duty of disclosure to demonstrate that
Professor Orrego Vicufia was obliged to inform Ecuador of all his appointments by
Freshfields.” It relied on the following factors identified in Suez: (1) whether the
failure to disclose was inadvertent or intentional, (2) whether it was the result of an
honest exercise of discretion, (3) whether the non-disclosed facts raise obvious
questions about impartiality and independence, and (4) whether the non-disclosure is an

“Id., 1 60.

Id. [ 60-61.

'"Id., J 62.

"Signed Declaration of Professor Orrego Vicufia in the Pan American case, June 6, 2011 (Exh.E-384).
'SProposal, q 64.

id. 65.

*Id., 4 66.

*'Tidewater Investment SRL and Tidewater Caribe, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID
Case No.ARB/10/5) (“Tidewater”); Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua
Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. y. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17) and Suez,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/19), (together “Suez’’).

Proposal, q 67.

Page |6

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

aberration on the part of a conscientious arbitrator or part of a pattern of circumstances
raising doubts as to impartiality.”*

Ecuador noted that Professor Orrego Vicufia’s ICSID appointments by Freshfields were
not publicly known until after he signed his declaration on August 11, 2008, and that the
failure to disclose these form part of a pattern of circumstances raising “obvious
questions” as to Professor Orrego Vicufia’s impartiality and independence, thus
fulfilling the Suez test.”4

With respect to the third ground for disqualification, Ecuador argued that Professor
Orrego Vicufia demonstrated a manifest lack of independence and impartiality to the
detriment of Ecuador in the conduct of the proceedings, including at the July 11, 2013
telephone conference.”> Ecuador alleged that “the vast majority of questions” asked by
Professor Orrego Vicufia during the hearings were favorable to the Claimant or
attempted to undermine Ecuador’s position and the credibility of some of its
witnesses.”°

Ecuador submitted that Professor Orrego Vicufia demonstrated “a pattern of consistently
dissenting from the Arbitral Tribunal’s majority on those points that were decided in
Ecuador's favor.”?’

In Ecuador’s Reply, it argued that Professor Orrego Vicuiia’s July 31 explanations show
partiality and loss of neutrality, both in tone and content.”* Ecuador stated that
Professor Orrego Vicujfia’s in personam attacks directed at Dechert, which represents
Ecuador in this case, demonstrate a strong bias against it? In particular, the
Respondent argued that these explanations are “shocking and unacceptable”,
demonstrating an “intolerable lack of impartiality”, thus removing any possible doubts
as to the need to remove Professor Orrego Vicufia from the Tribunal.*

Ecuador observed that Professor Orrego Vicuiia “confuses the requirement to disclose a
potential conflict of interest with the decision as to whether the number of appointments
creates a conflict of interest”.*! By stating that “in the circumstances of this case no
such conflict of interest arises in my understanding”, Professor Orrego Vicuiia failed to
account for the viewpoint of the Parties.

Ecuador rebutted Professor Orrego Vicufia’s statement that all information about his
professional activities is public. For example, it noted that appointments in ICC or
UNCITRAL cases are not always public, thus necessitating disclosure by the

*Id., 4 68.

*Id., 70.

*Id.,.71.

Id... 72.

“Id., 4.73.

*SEcuador’s Reply on the Proposal for Disqualification of Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia of August
5, 2013 (“Reply”), {ff 7-13.

*Id., 19 9-10.

*Td., WY 2-3.

“Id. 15.

Page |7

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

arbitrator.» In this context, Ecuador argued that the burden of providing information is
on the arbitrator, and the Parties have no obligation to obtain such information.

35. Ecuador argued that it had no duty to continuously investigate arbitrators in the
framework of an ICSID arbitration.” It recognized that it is standard practice to
investigate arbitrators at the initial moment of their appointment, but that this practice
does not create a positive duty to investigate an arbitrator throughout the proceeding.**
Furthermore, it argued that practical reasons militate against the existence of such a
duty.

36. Ecuador also argued that Professor Orrego Vicufia’s July 31 explanations were an attack
on its counsel that demonstrated he had “stepped outside of his role as arbitrator” and
could no longer be seen as a neutral decision maker.*°

37. Ecuador stated that Burlington failed to show that the proposal was not timely filed.”
According to Ecuador, the word “promptly” in Arbitration Rule 9(1) refers to “the date
of actual knowledge” of the event.*® Ecuador argued that it only became aware of the
full extent of Professor Orrego Vicufia’s appointments by Freshfields through his July
12 response. The proposal was filed on July 24, 2013, 13 days later, and hence was
promptly filed.”

38. Finally, Ecuador submitted that “Professor Orrego Vicufia’s bias has [...] become
evident based on the Comments that he submitted in response to Ecuador’s Proposal for
Disqualification. Such bias therefore also requires his disqualification.”

Il. Burlington’s Position

39. Burlington responded that Ecuador’s Proposal was untimely and unfounded.*! It
claimed that the proposal to disqualify represented “a transparent attempt to sabotage
these proceedings”, most notably with regard to the August hearing.”

40. Burlington argued that the Proposal was belated with respect to both repeat
appointments and the alleged bias during the proceedings. A proposal for
disqualification must be made “promptly” and a failure to do so amounts to a waiver.*°

Al. Burlington submitted that all the information on which Ecuador relied had been public
before or by February 19, 2013,“ hence the trigger for Ecuador’s challenge was not

Id., 4 18.

*Id., WI 78-94

“Id., 4 87.

*Id., {| 87-94.

*°Id., 4 27 and 29.

“Id.,.31.

*Id., W{ 33-34.

*Id., WY] 35-36.

“Id., (60.

“'Burlington’s Response to Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia
(“Response”), {[ 1.

Page |8
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

June 20, 2013. It noted that Professor Orrego Vicufia was appointed to the Rusoro case
on October 15, 2012, and this fact had been public since then. The appointment in
Repsol, on which Ecuador relies, was disclosed in the media on February 19, 2013, and
was published on the ICSID website on or around March 6, 2013, “about 140 days, or
almost three times the delay considered sufficient to warrant dismissal of a challenge in
the Suez case”.“ Relying on case law, and on Ecuador’s own pleadings in another
case*”, Burlington argued that Ecuador waived its right to challenge Professor Orrego
Vicufia on the basis of these repeat appointments because it waited more than four
months after the relevant facts became public to make this challenge.“

42. Burlington argued that the challenge based on Professor Orrego Vicufia’s conduct
during the arbitration was not promptly filed. The hearing on liability took place over
two years earlier and the dissent in the Decision on Liability was issued more than six
months earlier, thus the Proposal “falls manifestly outside the scope of a “prompt”
application for disqualification”. ”

43. Burlington submitted that Ecuador “misunderstands or chooses to misunderstand the
party-driven nature of arbitral appointments”.*° In the present case, different parties
being advised by the same law firm appointed Professor Orrego Vicufia to the eight
cases under scrutiny. As a result, it argued that Ecuador’s Proposal “implicitly threatens
the due process right of all parties in investment arbitration to their choice of arbitrators
under the ICSID Convention — and, indeed, to their choice of counsel”.

44. Burlington submitted that the Proposal did not sfeach the high standard for
disqualification in Article 57 of the ICSID Convention.»

45. It argued that non-disclosure of the appointment in Repsol does not in itself support a
challenge based on repeat appointments, but merely justifies enquiring into potential
economic dependence between the appointed arbitrator and the law firm.>> Professor
Orrego Vicufia has been appointed in more than eighty cases over his career, and has
held other important functions, thus he was not economically dependent on Freshfields
nor did he derive a significant portion of his income from these appointments. In the
present case, Ecuador had made no attempt to prove such economic dependence.

46. Relying on prior decisions, in particular on Tidewater, Burlington argued that multiple
appointments by the same party, without more, are not a valid ground for a challenge.”

 

“Murphy Expl ion and Production Company I ional v. Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL
Arbitration pursuant to the Ecuador-United States BIT.

“Response, qg 17-18.

“Id... 20.

Id. 4.25.

*'1d., 4.25.

*Id., 4 26.

1d... 34.

1d. 39.

Tidewater supra note 21, Decision on Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Professor Brigitte Stern
(December 23, 2010) (Exh. CL 299).

Page |9
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

47. Burlington argued that Ecuador’s allegations of bias in the conduct of the arbitration
were without merit and “a vexatious attempt to improperly review ordinary arbitral
discretion”.*”

48. In its Rejoinder, Burlington reiterated that Ecuador had not provided any facts that

would lead an objective observer to discern a manifest lack of independence of
Professor Orrego Vicuiia.**

49. Burlington stated that all the facts on which Ecuador relied were public for many
months before Ecuador filed its Proposal. Furthermore, Burlington argued that counsel
for Ecuador acknowledged that it was aware of five of the eight appointments of
Professor Orrego Vicuiia since June 2011. The sixth appointment in the Ampal case
was published in the media on October 22, 2012; the seventh appointment in the Rusoro
case was reported in the media on January 9, 2013; and the eighth appointment in the
Repsol case was made public in media reports on February 19, 2013, and could be
accessed on the ICSID website as of March 2013.” Additionally, Burlington argued
that each of these appointments forming the basis of the challenge — including Rusoro,
Repsol and Ampal - were disclosed on the ICSID website.

50. Burlington argued that knowledge of notorious facts should be imputed to Ecuador and
its specialist counsel, and that Burlington could not be asked to prove that Ecuador had
knowledge of public facts." Burlington noted that Ecuador acknowledged that certain
domestic legal systems recognize a “should have known” standard, and submitted that
this standard should apply in the present context.” According to Burlington, Ecuador’s
“willful blindness” is in breach of good faith.”

51. Burlington argued that the standard to disqualify an ICSID arbitrator is very high, that
the manifest lack of independence must be established by objective evidence, and that
supposition or speculation cannot substitute for proof of facts. 4

52. Burlington further argued that Ecuador’s claims of bias on the basis of Professor Orrego
Vicufia’s July 31 explanations were without merit, as he simply exercised his right to
respond under the ICSID system.°>

 

**Response, q 37.

“Id., 4 42.

**Burlington’s Rejoinder to Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia
(“Rejoinder”), { 5.

*Id., 16.

Id., 55.

Id. (7.

“Id., 417, 49 and 50.

“Ibid, (56.

“Rejoinder, {{ 16-17; Opic Karimun Corporation v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case
No.ARB/10/14) (“OPIC”), Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Professor Philippe Sands, Arbitrator
(May 5, 2011) 45 (Exh. CL-302); Participaciones Inversiones Portuarias SARL v. Gabonese Republic
(ICSID Case No.ARB/08/17), Decision on Proposal for Disqualification of an Arbitrator (November 12,
2009), {| 22 (Exh. CL-310); S.G.S. Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan
(ICSID Case No.ARB/01/13), Decision on Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator (December 19,
2002) {| 26 (Exh. CL-311).

Page |10
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

53. Burlington asserted that no challenge on the ground of repeat appointments had been
successful. It stated that repeat appointments give rise to concern only if they create a
financial dependence. In the three relevant cases, repeat appointments by the same
party, without more, did not constitute a valid ground for a challenge.°” A fortiori, this
should apply to cases where different parties appoint the same arbitrator, even if they
are represented by the same law firm.

54. Additionally, Burlington argued that good faith requires parties to exercise at least
minimal due diligence with respect to the relationship of arbitrators and opposing
counsel. If there are facts that should have prompted a party to make further inquiry
during an arbitral proceeding, the party may not later claim bias on the basis of those
facts.” According to Burlington, this reasoning is especially relevant in this case
because Professor Orrego Vicufia’s appointments were public.” It also argued that
Ecuador could easily have discovered the relevant appointments, for example by a
“Google Alert”, and thus Ecuador’s challenge had not been brought in good faith.”

55. Finally, Burlington argued that upholding Ecuador’s challenge on the basis of repeat
appointment would have negative systemic effects for investment arbitration ” and that

repeat appointments are “‘a necessary part of the practice for the foreseeable future”.”?

D. PROFESSOR ORREGO VICUNA’S EXPLANATIONS

56. On July 12, 2013, Professor Orrego Vicufia disclosed all of his Freshfields
appointments, as requested by Ecuador.” Professor Orrego Vicufia also furnished
explanations pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3) on July 31, 2013.5

57. In his July 12 letter, Professor Orrego Vicufia acknowledged the duty to continuously
disclose any circumstance that might raise doubts as to his independent judgment and
stated that “none of the appointments made in any way interferes with the arbitrator’s
independence to judge impartially” in this case.

58. Professor Orrego Vicufia noted that all the information requested was posted on the
ICSID website. Regarding Repsol, Professor Orrego Vicujia explained that he disclosed
that appointment because a party in Rusoro requested a list of all his appointments, just
as Dechert was doing now.

 

Id... 21.

“Id. 433.

"Tidewater, supra note 55; OPIC supra note 64; and Universal Compression International Holdings,
S.L.U. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.ARB/10/09), Decision on the Proposal to
Disqualify Prof. Brigitte Stern and Prof. Guido Santiago Tawil (May 20, 2011) (Exh.CL-301).
“8Rejoinder, {[ 36.

Id. (49.

"Id., 4.50.

"Id., Y9{ 53 and 56.

See supra J 6.
See supra 13.

Page |i

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

59.

60.

61.

Pursuant to Ecuador’s request, Professor Orrego Vicufia disclosed having been
appointed in seven other cases since 2007 where Freshfields acted or acts as counsel:
ENI Dacién BV v. Venezuela in 2007, Itera International Energy LLC and Itera Group
v. Georgia in 2008, EVN AG v. Macedonia in 2009, Pan American Energy v. Bolivia in
2011, Ampal-American Israel Corporation v. Egypt in 2012, Rusoro Mining Ltd v.
Venezuela in 2012, and Repsol, S.A. and Repsol Butano, S.A. v. Argentina in 2013. He
noted that EN/ Daci6n was settled in 2008 before the tribunal was constituted, and that
Itera and EVN were discontinued in the early stages of the proceedings in 2010 and
2011 respectively. He also indicated that the remaining four cases were still in the early
stages of the proceedings. Professor Orrego Vicufia noted that the appointments in EN/,
Itera, EVN and Burlington were made more than three years ago.

With respect to fees earned in these arbitrations, Professor Orrego Vicufia did not
disclose his remuneration in these cases and referred to any institutional policy which
ICSID may have in respect of disclosure of fees.

In his July 31 explanations, Professor Orrego Vicufia stated as follows:

“T appreciate your invitation to comment on the proposal for disqualification that
Dechert LL. P. has brought on behalf of the Government of Ecuador in respect of
this arbitrator in Burlington v. Ecuador. I should state at the outset that I have had
and continue to have the most harmonious and respectful relations with the
government of Ecuador in many dispute settlement proceedings and other work
in the field of international law and related subjects, and that at no point I have
experienced the mistrust that Dechert now invokes as an over-dramatization of
this challenge. The same hold true for counsel from Dechert.

These comments shall not deal with the applicable law as this aspect has already
been discussed in detail by counsel for the parties. I shall restrict these comments
to factual questions in respect of which I believe that counsel for Dechert is
wrong.

The first such question is the alleged non-compliance with the continuing
obligation to disclose potential conflicts of interest. I fully agree with this
principle but, as held in many disqualification cases, the number of appointments
does not per se create a conflict of interest and the circumstances of each case
must be considered individually. In the circumstances of this case no such
conflict of interest arises in my understanding as I have kept with my tradition of
being fully independent from the parties, including financial aspects. It is thus an
overstatement to argue, like Dechert does, that several appointments make highly
probable that an arbitrator cannot be relied upon to exercise independent and
impartial judgment.

All my professional activities are in any event in the public knowledge, not least
fully reported in the ICSID webpage and on many occasions, like in Repsol, in
the press. The editors for the Global Arbitration Review will no doubt be
delighted to learn that it has become a source of information capable of triggering
a challenge, but the fact of the matter is that the Repsol appointment has been
reported in the press for many months, including the Financial Times, the Wall
Street Journal and the press throughout Latin America.

Dechert further asserts that I would have continuously supported Freshfields
position in the cases to which I have been appointed by the latter. One may

Page |12

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

wonder on which information Dechert bases its conclusion in this respect, as not
even I know that. In fact, the Eni case was settled before the tribunal was
constituted and EVN was settled before proceedings started. The Itera case was
settled during its early phase, and Pan American, Ampal, Rusoro and Repsol are
also at the start-up period. That conclusion is rather based on speculation. The
only case that has had a record of relevant time is Burlington.

Dechert also finds inconsistency in the fact that while no prior cases were
reported at the time of the Burlington statement of independence made by this
arbitrator in 2008, in other later cases complete listing of appointments were
indicated. The reason appears to be simple. Before 2008 there were no cases, as
the Eni case did not see a tribunal established in 2007 or at any time thereafter. In
the following years the policy in respect of disclosing gradually changed, in part
as a result of ICSID practice and in part because of the IBA Guidelines on
conflicts of interest had become of common application. This is the very reason
why all such information was later published in the ICSID webpage.

A second issue that needs to be commented on is why only ICSID cases have
been disclosed by this arbitrator in recent correspondence. The reason is still
more evident. There are no other appointments by Freshfields in any other forum
at any other time. Dechert, like Holey Foag did in Rusoro, has come up with a
new standard in respect of appointments of judges ad-hoc to the International
Court of Justice, asserting that counsel for the appointing government in a given
case before that Court have to be counted among the cases in respect of which
disclosure is required under arbitration proceedings.

With respect, this new purported standard is utterly wrong. Judges ad-hoc are
nominated by governments but confirmed by the Court and both under the Statute
and Rules of the Court they have the same obligations of impartiality and
independence as any other judge. Judges ad-hoc are indeed members of the Court
like any other Judge. They do not represent the nominating government and have
no links of dependency with that government, least of all with any counsel that
governments decide to appoint. Moreover, the Court requests comments from the
other party so as to ascertain whether there could be any objection to that
appointment. This has been the procedure followed in the Peru-Chile maritime
delimitation dispute before that Court, which Dechert brings up as a non-ICSID
case that was not reported.

A third issue concerns Dechert’s allegations in respect of the behavior of this
arbitrator in the Burlington case, arguing that there is a blatant lack of impartiality
to the detriment of Ecuador. Dechert indicates as examples of this behavior the
fact that I partly dissented on the decision on jurisdiction and also partly
dissented in the decision on liability. Those dissents are partial dissents and
Dechert fails to note that in many other matters I concurred with the Tribunal.
Neither is Dechert privy to the deliberations of the Tribunal where many other
points of agreement are regularly reached.

More importantly, those dissents concern subjects on which I have long held
publicly known views, in particular the interpretation of treaties, privity in
international arbitration and questions concerning the umbrella clause. All of it
has been addressed in scholarly publications that are well known and could
hardly be regarded as views held in detriment of Ecuador. The very counsel for

Page

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

62.

Dechert have cited to some of these publications in the submissions before the
Tribunal when convenient to their position.

Arbitrators are appointed by the parties not because they favor such party but
because their previously held views are considered the right ones. It is then for
the tribunal to decide on which party is right or wrong, taking into account both
the law and the facts of the case. I have known of no party appointing an
arbitrator that holds views contrary to that party’s understanding of its rights. I
can assume that this is also what Dechert does when requested by a client to
propose the names of likely arbitrators for appointment.

Dechert also complains about this arbitrator’s behavior in the hearing on liability
and in a recent telephone conference on pre-hearing arrangements to the hearing
that had been scheduled for August. For an arbitrator to ask questions at a hearing
is a fundamental right that it is not to be suppressed as otherwise only questions
of the like of one party could be asked either to the parties or to their witnesses.
Both parties had the opportunity to answer such questions and no complaints
were made in this respect. None of it could be attributed to an intention to cast
Ecuador’s position in an unfavorable light as argued by counsel for Dechert.

The telephone conference is not different. This arbitrator had the right to ask
about the meaning of an unsigned ex parte letter he had received from Dechert. It
was then explained that it was meant to be signed by counsel Eduardo Silva
Romero and that the fact that it had not been signed was purely an administrative
mistake, for which he apologized. Now it is argued that to ask such question is a
reason for disqualification. Neither to ask about the implications of that letter for
the programmed hearing is in any way a form of misbehavior, particularly when
the implications asked about turned to be very real.

Lastly there are some ethical assertions that cannot be left unanswered. Dechert
admonishes this arbitrator to resign on ethical grounds as if Dechert’s views were
proven correct. This is certainly not the case. Moreover, the real ethical question
seems to lie with Dechert’s submissions and the handling of confidential
information. To the best of this arbitrator’s knowledge the correspondence
concerning disclosure and other matters in Pan American v. Bolivia is part of the
confidential record of that case. Dechert is in the knowledge of such
correspondence as counsel for Bolivia, but it does not seem appropriate or
ethically justified that this information be now used to the advantage of a
different client of Dechert, a use that in any event should be consented to by the
other party to that case.

Thank you again for the invitation to comment.”

 

13

In summary, Professor Orrego Vicufia rejected Ecuador’s allegations of partiality in the
course of the arbitration.

Page |14
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

E. DECISION BY THE CHAIRMAN

I. Applicable Legal Standard

63. Article 57 of the ICSID Convention allows a party to propose the disqualification of any
member of a tribunal. It reads as follows:

“A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the disqualification of
any of its members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the
qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14. A party to arbitration
proceedings may, in addition, propose the disqualification of an arbitrator
on the ground that he was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under
Section 2 of Chapter IV.”

64. Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high moral
character and recognized competence in the fields of law, commerce,
industry or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise independent
judgment. Competence in the field of law shall be of particular importance
in the case of persons on the Panel of Arbitrators”.

65. While the English version of Article 14 of the ICSID Convention refers to “independent
judgment,” the Spanish version requires “imparcialidad de juicio” (impartiality of
judgment). Given that both versions are equally authentic, it is accepted that
arbitrators must be both impartial and independent.”

 

66. Impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a_ party.
Independence is characterized by the absence of external control.”* Independence and
impartiality both “protect parties against arbitrators being influenced by factors other
than those related to the merits of the case”.” Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID

"The French version refers to “indépendance dans I’exercice de leurs fonctions.”

"Suez, supra note 21, Decision on the Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral
Tribunal (October 22, 2007), {| 28 (Exh. EL-202, CL-294); OPIC, supra note 64, {| 44; Getma
International and others v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/29), Decision on the Proposal
for Disqualification of Arbitrator Bernardo M. Cremades (June 28, 2012), {| 59 (“Getma”) (Exh. EL-
220); ConocoPhillips Company et al. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.ARB/07/30),
Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify L. Yves Fortier, Q.C., Arbitrator (February 27, 2012), J 54
(“ConocoPhillips”) (Exh. EL-212); Alpha Projektholding GmbH y. Ukraine (ICSID Case
No.ARB/07/16), Decision on Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator Dr. Yoram Turbowicz,
(March 19, 2010) { 36 (“Alpha”) (Exh. CL-296, EL-205); Tidewater supra note 55, {| 37; Saint-Gobain
Performance Plastics Europe v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.ARB/12/13),
Decision on Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Mr. Gabriel Bottini from the Tribunal under Article 57 of
the ICSID Convention (February 27, 2013),| 55 (“Saint-Gobain”) (Exh. EL-201).

8 Suez, supra note 21, | 29; Getma, supra note 77, 59; ConocoPhillips, supra note 77, J 54

” ConocoPhillips, supra note 77, { 55; Universal supra note 67 { 70; Urbaser S.A. and Consorcio de
Aguas Bilbao Bizkaia, Bilbao Biskaia Ur Partzuergoa v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/26), Decision on Claimants’ Proposal to Disqualify Professor Campbell McLachlan, Arbitrator
(August 12, 2010), [ 43 (“Urbaser’).

  

Page |15

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

67.

68.

69.

I.

70.

71.

iii.

Convention do not require proof of actual dependence or bias; rather it is sufficient to
establish the appearance of dependence or bias.*

The applicable legal standard is an “objective standard based on a reasonable evaluation
of the evidence by a third party”.*! As a consequence, the subjective belief of the party
requesting the disqualification is not enough to satisfy the requirements of the

Convention.

Regarding the meaning of the word “manifest” in Article 57 of the Convention, a
number of decisions have concluded that it means “evident” or “obvious,” and that it
relates to the ease with which the alleged lack of the required qualities can be
perceived.

The Chairman notes that the Parties in this case have relied in varying degrees on the
2004 IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration (“IBA
Guidelines”). The IBA Guidelines, which are not binding in an ICSID challenge,
have been recognized as useful guidance in prior cases.*° While it is true that these
tules or guidelines may serve as useful references, the Chairman is bound by the
standard set forth in the ICSID Convention. Accordingly, this decision is made in
accordance with Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention.

Analysis

Three grounds are invoked to disqualify Professor Orrego Vicujfia:
His repeat appointments as arbitrator by Freshfields;
His non-disclosure of these appointments in this case; and

His conduct in these proceedings, including his dissent from the Tribunal’s 2010
Decision on Jurisdiction and 2012 Decision on Liability; and his conduct during the
pre-hearing telephone conference of July 11, 2013, in his July 12 response and July
31 explanations.

Arbitration Rule 9(1) reads as follows:

Urbaser, supra note 79, 43
Sl Snez, supra note 77, {J 39-40
“Idem.
SS enez, supra note 77, J 34; Alpha, supra note 77, { 37; Universal, supra note 67, 71.

“\C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, Second Edition (2009), p. 1202, 9] 134-154; Saint-Gobain, supra
note 77, 59.

“Ecuador stated that “the IBA Guidelines do not apply in this case" (Proposal, note 17) and Burlington
stated that “(t)he IBA Rules on Conflicts were primarily designed for commercial arbitrations where the
pool of available experienced arbitrators and the pool of competent law firms is extremely broad. The
same is not true for investment arbitrations, where the pool of arbitrators and law firms with real
experience is very small” (Response, {{ 29).

**Alpha, supra note 77, J 56; Urbaser supra note 79, { 37.

Page |16
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

“A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article
57 of the Convention shall promptly, and in any event before the proceeding
is declared closed, file its proposal with the Secretary-General, stating its
reasons therefor.”

72. As stated in Suez, “an orderly and fair arbitration proceeding while permitting
challenges to arbitrators on specified grounds also normally requires that such
challenges be made in a timely fashion.”*”

73. As the ICSID Convention and Rules do not specify a number of days within which a
proposal for disqualification must be filed, the timeliness of a proposal must be
determined on a case by case basis. In Urbaser, the tribunal decided that filing a
challenge within 10 days of learning of the underlying facts fulfilled the promptness
requirement.** In Suez, the tribunal held that 53 days was too long.” In Azurix, the
tribunal found that 8 months was too long.” In CDC, a filing after 147 days was
deemed untimely”! and in Cemex, 6 months was considered too long.”

74. In this case the Respondent acknowledges that it knew of four of the eight appointments
of Professor Orrego Vicuiia since June 2011 [EVN, Itera, Burlington and Pan
American]. In addition, the appointment of Professor Orrego Vicufia by Freshfields
became public in October 2012 in the Ampal case, in January 2013 in the Rusoro case,
and in February 2013 in the Repsol case. There is no doubt that all relevant information
concerning the Repsol, Ampal and Rusoro cases was publicly available on the ICSID
website before, or by, March 7, 2013.

75. Taking all of these facts into consideration, the Chairman finds that the Respondent had
sufficient information to file its Proposal for Disqualification of Professor Orrego
Vicufia on the basis of repeat appointments and non-disclosure of such appointments
well before it did so on July 24, 2013. Similarly, the Respondent knew about Professor
Orrego Vicufia’s conduct at the 2011 hearing on liability and his dissents attached to the
2010 Decision on Jurisdiction and 2012 Decision on Liability, and these were not raised
promptly. As a result, the Proposal is dismissed to the extent that it relies on these
grounds of challenge.

76. The challenge based on Professor Orrego Vicuiia’s conduct following the July 8 letter
was raised in a timely manner. The Chairman addresses below the merits of these
grounds for challenge.

Suez, supra note 77, J 18.

SUrbaser supra note 79 19.

Suez, supra note 77, J 26.

“Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Decision on the Challenge to the
President of the Tribunal (February 25, 2005) (unpublished) (reported in the Decision on Annulment, 1
September 2009, {f[ 35 and 269).

°'CDC Group PLC v. Republic of Seychelles (CSID Case No.ARB/02/14), Decision on Annulment (June
29, 2005) I 53.

°CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/15), Decision on proposal for Disqualification of an Arbitrator
(November 6, 2009) {[ 41 (Exh. CL-295).

Page |17

ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5

77.

78.

79.

80.

As to Professor Orrego Vicujia’s conduct during the July 11, 2013 teleconference, the
Chairman notes the right of arbitrators to ask questions and satisfy themselves of the
legal merits of the arguments put forward by the parties. The record in this case does
not provide objective evidence of bias in this regard.

Professor Orrego Vicufia’s written comments in his July 31 explanations are fully set
out in paragraph 61 of this decision. To the extent that these comments address
circumstances related to the proposal for disqualification they are relevant and
appropriate, and do not provide a basis for challenge.

However, in this instance, the challenged arbitrator concluded his explanations with
allegations about the ethics of counsel for the Republic of Ecuador. He stated:

“[lJastly there are some ethical assertions that cannot be left unanswered.
Dechert admonishes this arbitrator to resign on ethical grounds as if Dechert’s
views were proven correct. This is certainly not the case. Moreover, the real
ethical question seems to lie with Dechert’s submissions and the handling of
confidential information. To the best of this arbitrator's knowledge the
correspondence concerning disclosure and other matters in Pan American v.
Bolivia is part of the confidential record of that case. Dechert is in the
knowledge of such correspondence as counsel for Bolivia, but it does not seem
appropriate or ethically justified that this information be now used to the
advantage of a different client of Dechert, a use that in any event should be
consented to by the other party to that case.”

Such comments do not serve any purpose in addressing the proposal for disqualification
or explaining circumstances relevant to the allegations that the arbitrator manifestly
lacks independence or impartiality.

In the Chairman’s view, a third party undertaking a reasonable evaluation of the July 31,
2013 explanations would conclude that the paragraph quoted above manifestly
evidences an appearance of lack of impartiality with respect to the Republic of Ecuador
and its counsel. Therefore, on the facts of this case, the Chairman upholds the
challenge.

F. DECISION

81.

[signed]

Having considered all of the facts alleged and the arguments submitted by the Parties,
and for the above reasons, the Chairman decides that the Republic of Ecuador’s
proposal to disqualify Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia is upheld.

Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council
Dr. Jim Yong Kim

