Date of dispatch to the parties:
January 13, 1997

ICSID Case No. ARB/95/2

IN THE INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

BETWEEN
Cable Television of Nevis Ltd. and Cable Television of
Nevis Holdings, Ltd.,
(Claimants)
AND
The Federation of St. Christopher (St. Kitts) and Nevis
(Respondent)
AWARD
OF
December 16th, 1996

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter 1. Request for Arbitration, Composition of Tribunal, Represen-
tation, Hearing and Issues.

Chapter 2. First Issue: The alleged dispute is not within the competence
of the Arbitral Tribunal.

Chapter 3. Second Issue: The Arbitral Tribunal is not competent to
countenance the substitution of a Contracting State, namely
the Federation, in lieu of NIA as a party to the proceedings.

330 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

“holding company” means Cable Television of Nevis Holdings, Ltd.

“ICSID” means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes.

“NIA” means the Nevis Island Administration.
“operating company” means Cable Television of Nevis Limited.

“the Request” means the Request by the Claimants in writing dared October
23, 1995, to ICSID requesting arbitration.

“Respondent” means the Federation, the other party to the dispute as al-
leged by the Requesting Parties.

“Rules” or “Institution Rules” means the Rules of Procedure for the Insti-
tution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution
Rules) of ICSID.

CASES 329

Chapter 4. Third Issue: The Institution of the High Court Proceedings
for an Injunction does not amount to consent to ground
jurisdiction for the purposes of the Convention.

Chapter 5. Fourth Issue: The Request for Arbitration does not comply
with the requirements of the Institution Rules in several
material particulars and the said noncompliance is fatal in
that it cannot be overcome.

Chapter 6. Fifth Issue: Cable Television of Nevis Limited was not in
existence at the time it purported to enter into the Agree-
ment on which it relies for its Request for Arbitration and,
consequently, the Agreement is irrelevant in so far as that
company is concerned.

Chapter 7. Sixth Issue: Cable Television of Nevis Holdings, Ltd. is an
Offshore Company, and as such, is prohibited from carrying
on business within Nevis and any dispute that arises as a
result cannot be described as a legal dispute for the purposes
of the Convention.

Chapter 8. Summary of decisions reached and Order.

ABBREVIATIONS

“the Agreement” means the Investment Agreement dated September 18,
1986, between the Government of Nevis and Cable.

“Cable” or “claimants” or "the Requesting Parties" means Cable Televi-
sion of Nevis Limited and Cable Television of Nevis Holdings, Ltd.

“the Constitution” means the Constitution of Saint Christopher and Nevis.

“the Ce ion” means the Ce ion on the Sect! I
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, referred to in

Clause 16 of the Agreement.

“Federation” means the Federation of St. Christopher (St. Kitts) and Nevis.

1.03

CHAPTER 1

Request for Arbitration, Composition of Tribunal, Representation,
Hearings and Issues.

The Arbitral Tribunal begins by recalling that Cable Television of
Nevis Limited and Cable Television of Nevis Holdings, Led., (here-
inafter sometimes called “Cable” or “the claimants”) by Lee A.
Bertman, President, addressed a request in writing dated October
23, 1995 to the Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (hereinafter called “ICSID”) °
requesting arbitration under the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States
(hereinafter called “the Convention”).

The Request states that: (1) both corporations were formed under
the Companies Act of the Federation of St. Christopher (St. Kitts)
and Nevis (hereinafter called “the Federation”), (2) the two corpo-
rations are 99.9% owned (and therefore controlled) by nationals of
the United States of America, a Contracting State, and (3) this
control, combined with the Agreement described in paragraph
1.03 below (hereinafter called “the Agreement”), constitute the
agreement of the parties to treat Cable as a “National of another
Contracting State” under Article 25 (2) (b) of the Convention.
The Request further states that the other party to the arbitration is
the Federation of St. Christopher and Nevis (hereinafter called “the
Federation”), a Contracting State and that both the United States of
America and the Federation are signatories of the Convention. In
addition, the Agreement between the parties dated September 18,
1986 provides, in Clause 16, that “any disputes relating to this agree-
ment, its performance or nonperformance shall be referred to arbitra-
tion under the rules of procedure for arbitration proceediny
(hereinafter the “Rules”) in effect as of February 1, 1981 adopted

a

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

under the 1965 Convention on the Settlement of Investment Dis-
putes between States and Nationals of other States.”

Cable claims it has invested over one million U.S. Dollars in the
construction of a cable television system on the island of Nevis
pursuant to the Agreement. In addition, recent hurricane damage
to Cable's system on Nevis approximates U.S.$50,000.00. Cable
provides basic tier, and premium CATV services on the island of
Nevis under the Agreement. Clause 7 of the Agreement permits
Cable to increase both its basic and premium charges. Premium
charges are not controlled after the first year. Cable believes that
tier services (a group of additional channels in addition to the basic
services channels) should be treated as premium services for this
purpose. As increases in basic charges may only be proportionate to
increases in Cable's “cost of goods and services,” Cable has repeat-
edly submitted to the Federation, according to the Request, infor-
mation and studies based upon that information which justify
increases in basic charges.

Despite the language of the Agreement, according to the Request,
(1) the Federation has consistently refused to permit Cable co
increase either its basic or premium charges, (2) the Federation,
through its Attorney-General, obtained from the High Court of
Justice, Federation of St. Christopher and Nevis, Nevis Circuit, an
exparte order restraining and enjoining Cable from raising rates
prior to completion of the arbitration requested above, and (3) as a
result of the actions of the Federation, Cable is unable to recoup its
investment and continues in a substantial (in excess of
U.S.$700,000) cumulative loss position. Cable seeks the relief in
the award of the arbitrators.

ICSID transmitted a copy of the Request to the Federation under
cover of a letter dated November 13, 1995, pursuant to Rule 5 (2)
of the Institution Rules of ICSID (hereinafter called “the Rules”),
The Request was registered and the parties were notified pursuant
to Article 36 (3) of the Convention.

On November 30, 1995, the Nevis Island Administration (herein-
after called “NIA") through its Legal Department advised ICSID
that the dispute between the parties had been overtaken on Octo-
ber 17, 1995 by the Public Utilities Commission Ordinance.

On December 19, 1995, Cable noted that the Federation, under
Chapter II, Article 25, of the Convention, having consented to
ICSID arbitration contractually and confirmed that consent before

S

S

333

the Federation’s High Court of Justice in August of 1995, could
not withdraw its consent unilaterally.
In accordance with Article 37 of the Convention, G. Arthur A.
Maynard of Barbados and Rex Mckay, S.C. of Guyana were
appointed Arbitrators by the claimants and respondent, respec-
tively, and Woodbine A. Davis, Q.C. of Barbados, was appoinced
President of the Tribunal, with the agreement of both parties. Ms.
Margrete Stevens, Counsel of ICSID, performed the duties of Sec-
retary of the Tribunal.
The Claimants were represented by A. Bruce Bowden, Counsel, of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S.A. and the Respondent, appearing
through NIA, was represented by Terrence V. Byron, Barrister-at-
Law and Solicitor, and Mark A.G. Brantley, Attorney-at law, both
of Nevis.
The Tribunal held 2 sessions both in Barbados, the first on March
12, 1996, at which the Respondent produced written documenta-
tion containing several objections to ICSID jurisdiction in the
matter, and the other on July 1 and 2, 1996, at which lengthy oral
submissions were addressed to the Tribunal by counsel on both
sides on the documentation furnished to the Tribunal by both par-
ties up to and including July 1, 1996, including further objections
by the Respondent to ICSID jurisdiction.
Basically the Respondent has submitted that, notwithstanding the
Agreement and the High Coure proceedings, ICSID is without the
jurisdiction in the dispute on the following grounds:
(a) the alleged dispute is not within the competence of the Arbi-
tral Tribunal;
(b) the Arbitral Tribunal is not competent to countenance the
substitution of a Contracting State, namely, the Federation, in
lieu of NIA, as a party to these proceedings;
the institution of the High Court Proceedings for an Injunc-
tion does not amount to consent to ground jurisdiction for the
purposes of the Convention;
(d) the Request for Arbitration does not comply with the require-
ments of the Institution Rules in several material particulars,
and the said noncompliance is fatal in that it cannot be over-
come;
Cable Television of Nevis Limited was not in existence at the
time it purported to enter into the Agreement on which it
relies for its Request for Arbitration and, consequently, the

x

2£

«

2

334

1.13

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Agreement is irrelevant in so far as that Company is con-
cerned; and
() Cable Television of Nevis Holding Ltd. is an Offshore Company
and, as such, is prohibited from carrying on business within
Nevis and any dispute that arises as a result cannot be described
asa legal dispuce for the purposes of the Convention;
No oral evidence was taken and all members of the Tribunal, the
Secretary, Counsel for the Claimants and both Counsel for the
Respondent attended throughout the sessions. The issues outlined
in paragraph 1.12 above are discussed in Chapters 2 to 7 and the
decisions reached are summarised in Chapter 8.

CHAPTER 2

First Issue: The Alleged Dispute is not Within the Competence
of the Arbitral Tribunal.

This submission by the respondent is based on the contention that
NIA (not the Federation) is the Contracting Party in the Agree-
ment, is a constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State;
ite., the Federation, and has not been designated as such to ICSID
by the Federation. Hence, the Arbitral Tribunal has no jurisdiction
to hear the matter.

The Federation is established by Section 1 of Chapter 1 of the
Constitution of Saint Christopher and Nevis (hereinafter called
“the Constitution”) which sets out as follows:

(1) “The island of Saint Christopher (which is otherwise known as
Saint Kitts) and the island of Nevis shall be a sovercign demo-
cratic Federal State which may be styled Saint Christopher and
Nevis or Saine Kitts and Nevis or the Federation of Saint Chris-
topher and Nevis or the Federation of Saint Kiets and Nevis.”

(2) “The territory of Saint Christopher and Nevis shall comprise
all areas that were comprised in the associated state of Saint
Christopher and Nevis immediately before September 19,

CASES

2.0

a

335

1983, together with such other areas as may be declared by

Parliament to form part of the territory of Saint Christopher

and Nevis.”
The Constitution further stipulates at Section 2 of Chapter 1 that
“this Constitution is the supreme law of Saint Christopher and
Nevis and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution if any
other law is inconsistent with this Constitution, this Constitution
shall prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsis-
tency be void.”
The Constitution makes specific reference to the Island of Nevis, as
distinct from the Federation, in many areas, namely, sections 8 (8),
9 (2) (c), 19 (4), (6) (b), (7), (8) and (10) and (20) of Chapter II,
section 23 (2) and (6) (b) of Chapter III, sections 28 (3) and (5)
(a), 29 (3), 37 (2) to (7) inclusive, 38 (4) (c) and (5) and (49) (1)
of Chapter IV, sections 51 (4), 553 (4) (d) and 56 (1) (I) and of
Chapter V, section 77 (1) and (2) of Chapter VII, section 98 (c) of
Chapter IX, the whole of Chapter X, i.e., sections 100 to 114, sec-
tions 115, 118 (2), 119 in part, and 120 of Chapter X, and Sched-
ules 3, 5 arid 6. Some of these provisions have been referred to by
the Requesting Parties’ counsel in his Response of Requesting Par-
ties to Objections to Jurisdiction.
Perhaps the more relevant provisions of the Constitution for the
purpose of this exercise are set out in Section 37 (2) to (7) of Chap-
ter IV and the whole of Chapter X, in particular sections 100, 102,
103, 105, 106 and 108. These sections establish a separate legisla-
ture for Nevis, the Nevis Island Legislature, which consists of Her
Majesty and an assembly styled the Nevis Island Assembly (Section
100), and has exclusive power to make laws, styled Ordinances, for
the peace, order and good Government of the Island of Nevis with
regard to the specified matters (Sections 103 and 119 (1) and
Schedule 5). Any such Ordinance may contain incidental and sup-
plementary provisions that relate to a matter other than a specified
matter provided there is no inconsistency between such provisions
and those of any law enacted by Parliament, in which case the lat-
ter provisions would prevail (Section 103 (2) and Part 2 of Sched-
ule 5). Section 37 expressly restricts Parliament, which is
established for the Federation (Section 25) to make laws for the
peace, order and good Government of the Federation (Section 37
(1)), from making laws having effect in Nevis in respect of any of
the specified matters without the request and/or consent of NIA,

u

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

except for provisions in the interests of external affairs and defence
as specified in a proclamation by the Governor-General (Section
17 (2) and (4)). Section 102 establishes NIA, stipulates how it is
constituted and sets out its functions. Section 106 provides NIA
with exclusive responsibility for administration within the Island of
Nevis, in accordance with relevant laws, of airports and seaports,
education, extraction and processing of minerals, fisheries, health
and welfare, labour, crown lands and buildings appropriated to the
use of the Federation, and licensing of imports into and exports
out of the State. Section 106 (4) provides that “nothing in subsec-
tion (1) shall be construed as precluding the legislature from con-
ferring other responsibilities on the Administration.” In other
words the Nevis Island Legislature may on its own expand the list
of responsibilities of NIA. A list of the specified matters for which
the Nevis Island Legislature has exclusive power to make laws
under the Constitution is set out in Schedule 5. Section 108 estab-
lishes the Nevis Island Consolidated Fund as distinct from the
Consolidated Fund of the Federation.

Counsel for the Requesting Parties in his Response of Requesting
Parties to Objections to Jurisdiction refers to the powers and duties
of the Governor-General of the Federation including the power to
make rules limiting NIA’s liability to service its public debt and
providing for consultation between the Federation and the Admin-
istration concerning any proposal for borrowing and the obtaining
of grants (Section 111). The Response also refers to the power of
the Governor-General to appoint all members of NIA including
the Premier, which power in respect of the latter is exercised in his
own deliberate judgment and in respect of the other members of
NIA in accordance with the advice of the Premier (Section 102).
Counsel also refers to Section 116 under which the performance of
any function by the Governor-General in his own deliberate judg-
ment or in accordance with the advice or recommendation of, or
after consultation with, any person or authority shall not be
enquired into in any court of law.

‘As empowered by the Constitution, NIA may contract (Section 28
(6) as modified by Section 104 (1) and reflected at Section 28 (6)
of Schedule (6), borrow (section III (1) (b) and (c) and paragraph
(5) of Part I of Schedule (5) if the Nevis Island Legislature passes
an Ordinance to this effect, hold land and buildings other than
Crown property (Section 8 (8), paragraph (15) of Part 1 and para-

2.01

eS

337

graph 1 (c) of Pare 2 of Schedule 5) with the authorisation of the
Nevis Island Legislature, sue and be sued in the Courts of Law in

the State (Section 112 and paragraphs 1 (b) and (by implication)

(d) to (k) inclusive, and 3 of Part 2 of Schedule 5), and charge rates

and taxes on buildings and fees, charges and other taxes, if so

authorised by the Nevis Island Legislature (Part 2 of Schedule 5).

As already indicated in paragraph 2.06 above, the Governor-Gen-

eral may make rules limiting NIA’s existing or contingent liability

for servicing its public debt, but the power of the Governor-Gen-

eral in this respect is exercisable on the advise of the Prime Minis-

ter which advice shall not be given without the concurrence of the

Premier.

Having regard to the foregoing, it would appear that NIA possesses

juridical personality and it is evidene that the Constitution recogn-

ises Nevis in two ways: one, as an integral in-separate part of the

Federation (Chapter I, Section 1) with both St. Kitts and Nevis

being unified as one sovereign democratic federal state, and two, as

a separate, distinct and somewhat autonomous entity within the

Federation (Chapter X enhanced by Section 37). There are several

instances within the Constitution whereby NIA or Nevis or the

Nevis Island Legislature is treated as distinct from the Federation
bur what greater evidence of this separate identity for NIA within

the Constitution is there than in Section 112 which provides that

“[:Jhe High Court shall, to the exclusion of any other Court of
Law, have original jurisdiction in any dispute between [NIA] and

the Government [the Federation] if and in so far as the dispute

involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which the exist-

ence or extent of a legal right depends.” Another example recog:

ing the creation by the Constitution of a separate personality for
NIA is in Section III which call for consultation between the Fed-
eration and NIA concerning any proposal by NIA to obtain grants
or loans of money. As put by Claimants’ Counsel in the Response
of Requesting Parties to Objections to Jurisdiction, “the island of
Nevis, and the NIA are in fact part of the Federation of St. Kitts
and Nevis and... the NIA, the Premier, and the Nevis Island Legis-
lature and Assembly are creatures of the Federation Constitution,
having been created by that Constitution” (page 3, last paragraph
of the Response). Section 102 (5) clearly sets out that “[tJhe func-
tions of [NIA] shall be to advise the Governor-General in the gov-
ernment of the Island of Nevis and [NIA] shall be collectively

 

2.09

N
So

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

responsible to the [Nevis Island] Assembly for any advice given to
the Governor-General by or under the general authority of [NIA]
and for all things done by or under the authority of any member of
{NIA} in the execution of his office.” It would therefore appear
that NIA, as a juridical body, has the power to enter into the Agree-
ment on its own and independently of the Federation. The Agree-
ment was signed by the then Premier of Nevis who is, under the
Constitution, a member of NIA ex officio.

Turning to the Agreement, the parties, as named therein and con-
ceded by Cable in paragraph 2 of the Request, are the Government
of Nevis (therein called the Government) of one part and Cable
Television of Nevis, Ltd. and Cable Television of Nevis Holdings
Ltd., (therein and herein together called Cable) of the other part.
By clauses 1 and 2 of the Agreement, the Government of Nevis
granted to Cable the right and permission to perform the functions
of a cable television company on the Island of Nevis including cer-
tain exclusive rights, privileges and franchises in relation to a
CATV system on Nevis and to provide video and entertainment
services by cable or fiber and the right to receive, retransmit and
redistribute over the cable television system all audio and video
programming receivable on Nevis. The Requesting Parties (herein
also called Cable) have consistently claimed that the Agreement
was entered into by the Government of Nevis as representing the
Federation, in other words that the Federation should take the
place of the Government of Nevis as a party to the Agreement. It
seems however that, on the face of it, the Agreement recognises the
Government and the Federation separately, since both appear at
separate places in the Agreement. Paragraph H of Clause 2 is obvi-
ously a case in which the Government of Nevis is intended as the
body granting the right since that paragraph expressly uses the
words “Government of Nevis,” as well as Clause 1 having regard to
the definition of the parties in the Agreement.

Could these concessions have been granted by the Federation? This
is really a moot point for we are here concerned not with who can
do what but who contracted with whom and in what capacity. The
Nevis Island Legislature has exclusive power to make laws, styled
Ordinances, for the peace, order and good Government of Nevis
with respect to the specified matters. Further, by Section 106 of the
Constitution, NIA has exclusive responsibility for the administra-
tion within the Island of Nevis of certain specified areas. The basic

339

tier of programming and premium service referred to in paragraphs
b and c of Clause 7 of the Agreement appears to be educational and
informative and Cable's letters of September 8, 1992 and February
14, 1994 to the Premier of Nevis do mention “the use of the Nevis
Cable Television system for educational uses...” These therefore
seem to be matters which appear to fall exclusively within NIA’s
domain.

Cable in its Response to Objections to Jurisdiction states that “the
Island of Nevis does not have any power to levy its own taxes
except in expressly listed cases, which do not include taxes or
charges upon income of public utilities in general or CATV service
in particular (Schedule 5, Part 2; page 94).” In this regard, while
not addressing the matter of public utilities as this is not an issue
before the Tribunal, it should be pointed out that Clauses 3 and 4
of the Agreement recognise the inability of NIA to collect certain
revenue from a CATV operation in Nevis, and, in so doing, creates
a distinction between the Federation and NIA. In Clause 3, “the
parties [to the Agreement] recognise that the Government of St.
Kicts-Nevis (hereinafter, Federation) currently imposes a levy of
Three Dollars ($3.00) EC per month per cable television company
subscriber.” Furthermore, in Clause 4, “recognising that an active
CATV System creates additional revenues for the Government
[NIA] and in order to stimulate rapid development and encourage
financial growth, Government [NIA] and Cable shall with thirty
(30) days of the date of execution hereof [date of Agreement Sep-
tember 18, 1986] obtain from the Governments {sic] of St. Kitts
and Nevis (Federation) an appropriate ruling under which Cable
shall receive a one hundred percent (100%) tax holiday on corpo-
rate income tax and the repatriation thereof for a ten year term.”
NIA and Cable seem to have recognised prior to the signing of the
Agreement the points now being made by Cable’s counsel on this
score and addressed them in the Agreement.

It would seem that one of the points raised by Cable in its
Response to Objections to Jurisdiction (see the third paragraph on
Page 3 of such Response) is that the granting of exclusive responsi-
bility to NIA and the Nevis Island Legislature over specific arcas
does not necessarily mean that the Federation is totally impotent
with regard to such matters or that it has irrevocably abdicated
responsibility for such matters, especially bearing in mind section
106 (2) of the Constitution, which reserves the exercise of any

N

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

power vested by law in the Governor-General or a Minister and
does not empower NIA to take any action inconsistent with the
general policy of the Federation as signified by the Prime Miniscer.
In other words, the exclusive responsibility to NIA and the Nevis
Island Legistacure could be interpreted as being exclusive as regards
any other institution or person in the island of Nevis but does not
affect any inherent power in the Federation as regards such matters.
In the second complete paragraph of Cable’s Response to Objec-
tions to Jurisdiction, the statement is made that the list set out in
Schedule 5 to the Constitution does not include “reference to cither
public utilities or cable television service.” In the next paragraph,
mention is made of NIA‘s “exclusive responsibility for the adminis-
tration within the island of Nevis of several listed matters none of
which relate to public utilities or cable television service.” Are they
now saying that the Government of Nevis could not enter the
‘Agreement in the first place or, if it did, it could only be on behalf
of the Federation? Is the execution of the Agreement by Nevis ultra
vires? It should be noted that the Constitution makes no reference
at all to public utilities or cable television services, i.e., in respect of
the Federation or Nevis. Does the absence of such provision mean
that the Federation cannot provide for public utilities or cable tele-
vision in the island of St. Kitts? Surely, cable television service falls

within the parameters of “peace, order and good government of the .

island of Nevis” for the matters listed in Part 1 of Schedule 5 to the
Constitution and the incidental and supplementary matters set out
in Part 2 of the said Schedule, note being taken that the lists are not
all embracing, and that, by section 106 (4) of the Constitution, the
Nevis Island Legislature can confer on NIA responsibilities addi-
tional to those already listed in paragraph 5 above.

Two other points are of some significance. One is that at para-
graphs (8) and (16) of Part 1 of Schedule 5 to the Constitution,
matters which the Nevis Island Legislature has exclusive powers to
make laws (ordinances) in respect of Nevis include (a) conservation
and supply of water, and (b) manufacture and supply of electricity.
It is not uncommon that, in some countries, including Caribbean
countries, the fixing of rates for one or both of these and other
public utilities is determined by public utilities tribunals estab-
lished by the laws of the respective countries, and it should be
noted that the Nevis Island Legislature has included both of these
utilities within the Public Utilities Commission Ordinance of

CASES

a

341

Nevis. The other point is thar the Public Utilities Commission
Ordinance includes within the definition of public utility “the dis-
tribution of television programmes by coaxial or fiber optic cable
directly or indirectly to or for the public.” It is evident that the
Nevis authorities consider themselves to have the power constitu-
tionally to deal wich public utilities and the provision of cable tele-
vision services for Nevis and it is not for this Tribunal to enquire
into whether they are right or wrong. It would seem that any dis-
pute on this score, being a dispute as to the extent of the powers of
the Nevis authorities within the Constitution, must be between the
Federation and NIA for hearing by the High Court in accordance
with Section 112 of the Constitution, if the parties are unable to
settle their differences, the same High Court, albeit sitting in the
Nevis Circuit and not in the St. Kitts Circuit, the seat of the Feder-
ation, which ruled that the fiat of the Attorney-General of the Fed-
eration was not necessary to enable NIA to commence or defend
litiguous matters.

OF special note is the fact that the words “peace, order and good
government” also appear in the Constitution in respect of laws by
Parliament in relation to the Federation. In other words, these
words, which appear in the constitutions of other nations, do give
Parliament and the Nevis Island Legislature respectively far reach-
ing powers within which to make laws and ordinances, provided
they fall within the parameters prescribed by the Constitution, The
argument in this regard by Cable in its response to Objections to
Jurisdiction would therefore seem to fail when attention is paid to
Section 37 (2) of the Constitution which expressly restricts Parlia-
ment from making laws having effect in Nevis which extend to any
of the specified matters, and above all, to the fact chat nothing has

been brought to the attention of the Tribunal to establish that an

agreement by NIA, on behalf of Nevis independent of the Federa-

tion, for the creation of a CATV in the Island of Nevis, exclusively

for that island, is in conflict with any law passed by Parliament or

is inconsistent with the general policy of the Federation or is in

direct contravention of the exercise of any power vested by law in

the Governor-General or a Minister. It would therefore, accord-

ingly, appear that these concessions could be geanted by NIA and

that the Federation had no standing in the matter.

In the Agreement, the words “the Government” meaning the Gov-

ernment of Nevis appear twenty four times and a further seven

342

21

N

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

times in the addendum thereto by telex. Both the Agreement and
telex were signed by Mr. S. Daniel, then Premier of Nevis who
signed as such on behalf of the Government of Nevis. It states at
paragraph f. of Clause 2 that the Government will endeavour to
ensure that the local currency is convertible to U.S. funds. Para-
graph b. of clause 4 talks of Non-Nevisian employces of Cable;
Clause 5 talks of Cable exerting its best efforts to hire and train cit-
izens of Nevis and that the company (it doesn’t say which one) will
employ Nevisians only, if qualified persons are available, otherwise
it will hire foreign nationals; in Clause 6, the Government agrees to
make available necessary work permits for foreign nationals
required by Cable, business licences, building permits and con-
struction permits, and to grant customs duty exemption with
respect to material and equipment imported by Cable in connec-
tion with the CATV system and modified concessions to importa-
tion of household and personal effects of Cable non-Nevisian staff,
Clause 13 makes provision in the event of nationalisation of Cable
by Nevis [sic], and Clause 14 stipulates that,in the event that
Nevis [sic] shall become an independent nation, the Agreement
shall continue in full force and effect. The last mentioned provi-
sion obviously relates to a situation over which the Federation has
no control, having regard to section 113 of the Constitution.
In contrast zo the foregoing, the Federation, as distinct from the
Government of Nevis, is specifically referred to only three times in
the Agreement, (1) — at Clause 3 — the parties, i.e., the Govern-
ment of Nevis and Cable, recognise that the Government of St.
Kitts-Nevis (hereinafter, Federation) currently imposes a levy of
Three Dollars ($3.00) EC per month per cable television company
subscriber; (2) — at Clause 4 — “Government and Cable shall
within thirty (30) days of the date of execution hereof obtain from
the Governments (sic) of St. Kitts and Nevis (Federation) an
appropriate ruling under which Cable shall receive a one hundred
percent (100%) tax holiday”; and (3) — at paragraph d. of Clause
— “If currency exchange rates, other than the free market are
established by the Government or the Federation, Cable may, at
Cable's option, use the best official exchange rate available.”
Ic is manifestly evident from all the circumstances that Cable
intended at all times to deal only with the Government of Nevis.
This is supported by the telex of September 11, 1986 from the
Washington based lawyers direct to the then Premier of Nevis to

CASES

343

further clarify the Agreement between the Government of Nevis
[sic] and Cable, and to be treated as an addendum to the Agree-
ment, Further reinforcement for this is evidenced by the events
taking place since the Agreement was signed. Cable has at all times
been in contact with NIA and no correspondence has surfaced to
indicate that it at any time had any discussion with the Federation.
Even if it can be held that several of the undertakings by the Gov-
ernment under the Agreement could not be performed directly by
the Government, due note being taken that this was never pro-
posed or argued by either party, this does not mean that automati-
cally the Federation should be substituted for the Government as
the party to the Agreement or that the Government of Nevis is a
party to the Agreement purely as agent of the Federation. The only
explanation in such case is that the Nevis Government's undertak-
ing(s) to perform tasks outside its direct control can only amount
to best efforts promise(s), a not unusual occurrence in agreements.
It is therefore inconceivable that, at this stage, the Federation
should be substituted for the Government of Nevis as the party
contracting on the ground that, when the Agreement was entered
into, the Government of Nevis signed on behalf of the Federation
and not on its own behalf.

One cannot overlook the fact that Clause 16 of the Agreement,
which is the only foundation for the institution of these Arbitral
Proceedings, does not appear to have been given due consideration
by the parties at the time the Agreement was negotiated and
signed. During the hearing by the Tribunal, it was observed that
the agreement in draft had been prepared by or on behalf of Cable
and introduced by Cable to the Nevis authorities, due note being
taken that had anything to do with it at the time of its preparation,
negotiation and execution. Clause 16, to put it mildly, was an
anachronism since it had no legal effect at the time of the Agree-
ment, as conceded by Cable's counsel at the preliminary meeting,
and appeared to be rescued only on September 3, 1995 the date
when the Federation acceded to the Convention establishing
ICSID. It is noted that there have been other ICSID cases in which
relevant states became members of ICSID after the related invest-
ment agreements containing ICSID arbitration clauses had been
signed, so the present case is not an isolated case in which the host
state joins ICSID after the date of the investment agreement. One
other such case is the Holiday Inns case in which the Base Agree-

344

XN
oS

2.21

Ss

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ment was signed on December 5, 1966, whereas Morocco became a
member of ICSID on June 10, 1967 and Switzerland, the national-
ity of the foreign investors, on June 14, 1968.

The procedure for commencing ICSID Arbitral Proceedings is laid
down in the Convention and Rules and Regulations made thereun-
der. Article 25 (1), Chapter II of the Convention, provides that the
“jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly ou of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State desig-
nated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Con-
tracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing
to submit co the Centre.” The Contracting State for the purpose of
these proceedings must therefore be the Federation, since the dis-
pute is in respect of an agreement which is being performed within
that State and the investors are claiming to be American citizens,
i.e. nationals of another state, to wit, U.S.A., another Contracting
State. The issue of the nationality of the other parties co the dis-
pute is being dealt with later in this decision.

Cable attempted to introduce increased rates in the island of Nevis
to take effect from September 1, 1995 and NIA through the Attor-
ney-General of Saint Christopher/Nevis, as the applicant, moved
the High Court of Justice, Federation of Saint Christopher and
Nevis, Nevis Circuit, during Court Vacation, to obtain an exparte
injunction against Cable, The exparte hearing took place on
August 31, 1995, the day before the increased rates were to take
effect, and the learned trial judge “ORDERED and DIRECTED
that the Respondents [Cable] by their servants or agents or officers
or otherwise be restrained and an injunction is hereby granted
restraining them from acting in breach of contract entered into
between the Government of Nevis and the Respondents dated Sep-
tember 18, 1986 AND in particular from raising the rates charged
for the provision of cable services prior to the resolution of issues
in dispute between the parties by arbitration as provided for by the
aforementioned contract.” The Court Order was served later the
same day on Cable. Other documentation submitted to the Tribu-
nal included an application by Cable to the same High Court with
the same patties and same suit for an Order that the Injunction
granted herein and dated August 31, 1995, be vacated and/or dis-
charged. An affidavit by Mr. Lee Bertman, president of Cable, was
filed in support. The application and affidavit were both dated and

CASES

N
v

345

filed December 1, 1995 with date for hearing set for December 4,
1995. It appears from the Observations Refuting Requesting
Party’s Responses to Objections to Jurisdiction that the documents
were merely filed in the Court Registry and were not served on
NIA. In these circumstances, the application was never heard. How-
ever, during October 25, 1996, members of the Tribunal received
further documentation from the Respondent and the Claimants
through ICSID indicating that steps are in train to have the injunc-
tion lifted, and on November 1, 1996 received from ICSID by fax a
copy of the Court Order entered October 25, 1996, ordering that
the injunction dated August 31, 1995, be vacated and/or discharged.
Cable had, however, by letter dated October 23, 1995, made
request to ICSID for the institution of arbitration proceedings and
named the parties to the arbitration as being “Cable Television of
Nevis, Ltd. and Cable Television of Nevis Holdings, Ltd., both
corporations formed under The Companies Act of the Federation
of St. Christopher (St. Kitts) and Nevis, and their sharcholders
(including the undersigned) referred to below as “Cable.” The two
corporations are 99.9% owned (and therefore controlled) by
nationals of the United States of America, a Contracting
State....... The other party to the arbitration is the Federation of
St. Christopher and Nevis (the “Federation”) a Contracting State.
Communications to the Federation may be addressed to The Hon-
orable Vance Amory, Premier, Nevis Island Administration,
Administration Building, Charlestown, Nevis, West Indies.” It is,
at this stage, for the first time that the Federation is being named as
a party to the Agreement.

The consent to ICSID arbitration contained in Clause 16 of the
‘Agreement can only take effect in the present case on the matter of
jurisdiction of ICSID if the Contracting State, i.e, the Federation,
is a party to the dispute, or, if it is not a party and the relevant
party to the dispute is a constituent subdivision or agency of the
Contracting State, then that relevant party must have been desig-
nated as such to ICSID by the Federation. In addition, the consent
by a constituent subdivision or agency of a contracting state
requires the approval of that state unless that state notifies ICSID
that no such approval is required. No documentation has been fur-
nished to the Tribunal evidencing that NIA or the Government of
Nevis has been so designated to ICSID by the Federation, and, in
the circumstances, the request by Cable for arbitration in accor-

  

 

346

2.2;

&

2.24

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

dance with Clause 16 of the Agreement can only pass this stage
under Article 25(1) of the Convention if the Contracting State,
iue., the Federation, can by interpretation or otherwise be substi-
tuted in the Agreement in place of the Government of Nevis as the
contracting party with Cable, or by some other means qualify as a
party to the ICSID arbitration.

On reviewing Cable's Response to Objections to Jurisdiction on
this point, it would appear that Cable is, or was at one time, under
the impression, inter alia, chat the Respondent's objections to juris-
diction are based in part on the assumption that Nevis Govern-
ment is a state separate from the Federation. Respondent's
objections do not so state, and it is noteworthy that Cable’s counsel
at the hearing agreed that the word “state” has different meanings
to different people. On the international scene, a state is an inter-
national legal person i.e. an independent government, which has
total control over its affairs both at the national and international
levels including its foreign affairs and national security. Such a state
can join international organisations like the United Nations or the
World Bank or ICSID as, to our knowledge, the Federation has
done in each of these three institutions. In other parlance, the word
“seate” has been attributed to one of states of the United States of
America, e.g. Pennsylvania or Iowa or whatever, or of Australia, e.g.
the State of New South Wales, which is not an international body
capable of sitting in international organisations alongside indepen-
dent nations of the world, but, nevertheless, each an integral part
along with other states of similar status of the United States of
America and Australia respectively, which themselves are interna-
tional legal persons. This appellation also applied to several coun-
tries of the English speaking Eastern Caribbean Countries,
including St. Kitts and Nevis (formerly St. Kitts, Nevis and
Anguilla) prior to their achieving independence from the United
Kingdom.

However, Cable, in the first sentence on page 4 of their Response to
Objections to Jurisdiction, mentions that the “Federation has argued
that, because the High Court sitting in Nevis has found that the NIA
can sue and be sued even when the Attorney-General of the Federa-
tion refuses to give his fiat, this establishes that Nevis is an entity sep-
arate from the Federation...........” In the penultimate sentence of
that paragraph, Cable states that this decision is certainly not author-
ity for the proposition “that Nevis is a state separate from the Federa-

 

2.25

347

 

..." The Respondent never sought to establish chat Nevis is
a state. In fact at point (88) of the Respondent's Submissions in its
Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent sets out that the “Federa-
tion is a federal sovereign democratic State, whereas the NIA is a
semi-autonomous Department within chat State,” and, later in the
said Objections, submits that the relationship between NIA and the
Federation is analogous to the relationship between the Government
of Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom, with one not per se an
agent of the other. Cable’s counsel, however, by letter dated April 30,
1996, sets out the following:

“Respondent argues that ICSID lacks jurisdiction not
because the Nevis Island Administration (“NIA”) is a sepa-
rate sovereign party but rather because NIA is a subdivision
ot agency of the Federation of St. Kitts and Nevis (the “Fed-
eration”) which has not been designated to ICSID by the
Federation. Cable went to some trouble to review and anal-
yse in their Response the Federation Constitution because
that document makes it clear that NIA‘and the Federation
are one and the same, both being creatures of that Constitu-
tion. Nowhere in that document are the words “subdivision”
or “agency” or any equivalent expression used to describe
NIA. This is one of a number of assertions by the Respon-
dent in its “Observations” for which no legal authority,
either in the Federation Constitution or elsewhere, is cited.”

Respondent objected, and quite rightly so, to the issue of this let-
ter, as such issue is in contravention of the procedures agreed to at
the first hearing. However, in order to give both parties the fullest
hearing, the Tribunal has included this letter in its deliberations. In.
so doing, the conclusion already reached in paragraph 2.08 above
that the Constitution treats Nevis in two ways, (1) as integral and
in separate part of the Federation and, (2) as a separate and distinct
entity within the state, remains unchanged. In other words, the
position posited by Cable that the Constitution makes it clear that
NIA and the Federation are one and the same is not accepted.

The Constitution does not have to set out the words that Nevis is a
constituent subdivision or agency of the Federation in order for it
to be designated or deemed as such. This is a matter to be deter-
mined by the Tribunal having regard to all the documentation

N
v
8

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

available to it, and, indeed, such designation is a matter for the
Federation in matters under the ICSID Convention. Furthermore,
whether or not the Attorney-General’s fiat is necessary for com-
mencement of legal proceedings by NIA does not appear to be a
deciding factor in determining that the Government of Nevis
through NIA has a separate legal personality. This legal personality
has already been addressed above.

Additionally, on this issue, having regard to the other provisions in
the Constitution applicable to the island of Nevis, the Nevis Island
Legislature and NIA, one cannot overlook the fact that the Gov-
ernment of Nevis by way of the Nevis Island Legislature has the
power enshrined in the Constitution to secede from the Federa-
tion, without consulting the Federation, by following the proce-
dure laid down in Section 113 of the Constitution, thereby
becoming, if it so wishes, another independent nation with the
inherent eligibility co join international organisations and sit and
vote alongside other independent countries, including St. Kites
(the sovereign democratic state after the secession of Nevis (Section
I of Schedule 3 to the Constitution) and the superpowers. Upon so
doing, Cable should be able to invoke Clause 14 of the Agreement,
whereby the Agreement with its exclusive licence to Cable contin-
ues in force, notwithstanding the secession. Bearing all the forego-
ing in mind, it seems clear that the Government of Nevis, as stated
in the Agreement, is the proper party to the Agreement and, in the
absence of any assignment, that the Federation has no locus standi
or privity of contract with Cable and should not be substituted
therefor as claimed by Cable.

The last point to be considered on this issue is the meaning of the
words “(or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting
State designated to the Centre by that State)” as appears in Article
25 (1) of the Convention. It is evident from Article 25 (1) that
ICSID has no jurisdiction in matters brought by or against an
entity other than a contracting state unless the entity has been des-
ignated to ICSID by the contracting state as a constituent subdivi-
sion ot agency of the contracting state. Furthermore, it would
appear that the provision applies to an entity over which the con-
tracting state has some measure of control, including but not lim-
ited to a colony or partially autonomous government forming part
of or belonging to the state, a government statutory corporation or

 

CASES

349

a company incorporated under national/local legislation in which
the Government has some interest or shareholding, the apparent
intention being that overseas investors dealing with governments
and/ ot Government owned or controlled enterprises have available
to them independent arbitrators and rules to settle any disputes
under their investment agreements rather than have to “resort to
litigation in the courts of che host state, a forum where national
bias and the political pressures which attend foreign investment
may result in favouritism towards the sovercign” (John T. Schmidt
Arbitration under the Auspices of ICSID: Implications of the
Decision on Jurisdiction in Alcoa Minerals of Jamaica, Inc. v. Gov-
ernment of Jamaica). In other words, a body corporate established
in the Contracting State wholly or substantially owned by private
citizens would not appear to qualify for designation.

A teview of the list of Designations by Contracting States Regard-
ing Constituent Subdivisions or Agencies ICSID/8C (copies of
which were delivered by ICSID to the parties and the Tribunal),
reveals that, for instance, Australia has designated the State of New
South Wales and four other states in addition-to the Northern Ter-
ritory and the Australian Capital Territory. At the time of the con-
stitution of the Commonwealth of Australia, six states joined to
form that Commonwealth, but, unlike in the case of St. Kitts and
Nevis, their names for obvious reasons do not form part of the
name of that independent country and four of these have been des-
ignated by Australia to ICSID as constituent subdivisions/agencies
of Australia. It is also noted that Ecuador, Guinea, Madagascar,
Nigeria, Portugal, and the Sudan have respectively designated what
appears to be corporations, but there is no indication as to the
degree of Government control therein, if any. The United King-
dom, with which we are more familiar, has designated as many as
16 of its colonies and dependencies, all of which to our knowledge
are Government run. It is likely that these were designated in order
to instill investor confidence in these Governments who, in any
case, could not join ICSID having regard to their constitutional
scatus. Of some interest is the inclusion among these designations
of Anguilla which at one time was a part of the three islands group-
ing of St. Kicts-Nevis Anguilla, then an associated state with the
United Kingdom. Note is taken that the list is not complete and
that ad hoc designations and notifications can and have been made

350

2.3

3

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

to ICSID by contracting states pursuant co Articles 25 (1) and 25
(3) of the Convention.

In reviewing the list of ICSID cases up to July 1995, it would
appear that there is only one reported case, at least up to 1986,
involving the issue of ICSID’s jurisdiction over a state agency, i.e.,
Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH, Kléckner Belge S.A. and Klack-
ner Handelmaatschappij B.V. v. United Republic of Cameroon and
Societe Camerounaise des Engrais (SOCAME). SOCAME, a state
controlled company incorporated in Cameroon pursuant to the par-
ties’ joint venture agreement, was named as a respondent even
though Cameroon had not designated SOCAME as a constituent
subdivision or agency. The issue was resolved without the need of a
tribunal decision when Cameroon decided to designate SOCAME
as a constituent subdivision within the meaning of Article 25 (1) of
the Convention.

In order to better understand the meaning and significance of the
words “constituent subdivision or agency” appearing in Article 25
(1) of the Convention, opportunity was taken to examine the
ICSID published Documents Concerning the Origin and the For-
mulation of the Convention. The words used in the first draft for
consideration by the Legal Committee were “political subdivision
or agency” in Article 26, later changed to 25. Subsequently, there
was a draft submitted by several countries represented on the
Working Committee which omitted reference to any subdivision of
agency, the intention being that the host state must in all cases be a
party to the dispute. Subsequent proposals included the following:
“(or a constituent subdivision, such as a State, Republic or Prov-
ince, of a Contracting State, or any agency of a Contracting State
that had been designated to the Center by that Contracting State)”
and “(ot any body or bodies designated in that behalf by that Con-
tracting State).” A later draft of Article 26 (1) contained the words
in parenthesis which were finally adopted in Article 25 (1). How-
ever, prior to agreement on the final text, during the deliberations
of the Legal Committee, mention was made in referring to the
kinds of bodies that should be covered by the Convention, of the
“terminological difficulties in how to describe uniformly what were
referred to as constituent subdivisions, territorial subdivisions,
political subdivisions and agencies.” Ie is of interest to mention
that, according to an unapproved record of the Meeting of the

 

2.32

351

Committee of the Whole, February 23, 1965, the then Chairman
of the Legal Committee meetings on the draft convention, in
answer to a query as to whether an investor in a federal State could
bring a claim against the federal government or the government of
a constituent state or both, replied that, “under Article 25 of the
Convention, dealing with the jurisdiction of the Centre, a constit-
uent subdivision of a federal state, for instance, a state of the
United States, could enter into an Arbitral agreement with a for-
cign investor with the approval of the federal government. If it did
so and lost the case the award could be enforced in any country,
including the federal State, as if it were the decision of a court in
that State.”

NIA is not as in the case of SOCAME a state controlled company
nor is it a government statutory corporation, i.e., a corporation
specially created by legislation as a government agency. The Con-
stitution seems to be rather unique in that it creates two constitu-
ent bodies, namely Nevis on the onc hand and, on the other, the
independent Federal State of St. Kitts and Nevis. Attempts by
counsel on both sides to find a comparable constitution have been
without success. It is our view that NIA or the Government of
Nevis, howsoever named, is a creature of the Constitution and is a
separate juridical body, clothed with several powers and functions,
over and above powers and functions normally vested in a corpora-
tion or a company. It has exclusive responsibility for the adminis-
tration within the island of Nevis of certain matters. The
Federation has a final say in matters other than the specified mat-
ters, especially in foreign affairs and national security, i.e., defence.
The Constitution recognises the coming together of the two
islands, i.e., Se. Kitts by itself and Nevis by itself, to make a single
sovereign democratic federal state and, almost throughout the
Constitution, there is reference to Saint Christopher and Nevis,
with provision for a Parliament, Governor-General, Attorney-Gen-
eral and Consolidated Fund, inter alia, for Saint Christopher and
Nevis. The special treatment for Nevis in the Constitution as
already dealt with in the foregoing paragraphs establishes it as con-
stituent part, ic., a constituent subdivision, of the Federation.

2.33 Jurisdiction in respect of such a constituent subdivision can only be

available from ICSID if Nevis was designated as such by the Federa-
tion. Furthermore, consent by NIA to ICSID jurisdiction requires

352 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

the approval of the Federation under Article 25(3) of the Conven-
tion unless the Federation notifies ICSID that no such approval is
necessary. None of these has been done and, in the circumstances,
the Arbitral Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear this marcer. Clause
16 of the Agreement has not yet in fact been activated.

CHAPTER 3

Second Issue: The Arbitral Tribunal is not competent to countenance
the substitution of a Contracting State, namely, the Federation
of St. Kitts and Nevis, in lieu of the NIA as a party
to these proceedings.

3.01 This has also been addressed and dealt with in Chapter 2 above, in
particular at paragraphs 2.15 to 2.17 inclusive, 2.22, 2.25 and
2.27.

3.02. For the reasons advanced therein, the Tribunal does not consider
substitution of the Federation for the Government of Nevis as a
party to the proceedings as appropriate and finds it unacceptable.
It therefore must follow that the Federation is NOT eligible co be
named as a party to the proceedings, notwithstanding Cable nam-
ing it as such in its Request for Arbicration.

CHAPTER 4

Third Issue: The Institution of the High Court Proceedings
Sor an Injunction does not amount to consent to ground
Jurisdiction for the purposes of the Convention.

4.01 The relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention relating to con-
sent are set out in Articles 25, 26 and 36 as follows:

Article 25: Jurisdiction of the Centre

“The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dis-
pute arising directly out of an investment, between a Con-
tracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and
a national of another Contracting State, which che parties to
the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.”

Article 25 (3):

“Consent by a constituent subdivision or agency of a con-
tracting state shall require the approval of that State unless
that State notifies the Centre that no such approval is
required.”

Article 26:

“Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention
shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbi-
tration to the exclusion of any other remedy. A Contracting
State may require the exhaustion of local administrative or
judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration
under this Convention.

Article 36 (2):

“The request shall contain information concerning the issues
in dispute, che identity of the parties and their consent to
arbitration in accordance with the rules of procedure for the
institution of arbitration proceedings.”

4.02. Cable, in the Request, on the issue of Consent states at paragraph 2
that “[b]oth the United States of America and the Federation are
signatories of the Convention. In addition, the Agreement between
the parties dated September 18, 1986 (copy attached at Tab 1) pro-
vides, in section 16, that “Any disputes relating to this agreement,
its performance or nonperformance shall be referred to arbitration
under the rules of procedure for arbitration proceedings (hereinaf-

 

354

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ter the “Rules”) in effect as of February 1, 1981 adopted under the
...Convention....” (The named party in the Agreement is the “Gov-
ernment of Nevis” [now called Nevis Island Administration],
which was created by the 1983 Federation Constitution). This
Agreement and the Court Order described in section 4 below con-
stitute the consent of the parties described in Article 25(1) of the
Convention. “The Centre therefore has jurisdiction over the dis-
pute of which Cable secks arbitration.” Paragraph 2.20 sets out the
Court Order in greater deta
It seems from the above-mentioned paragraph 2 of the Request
that Cable is seeking to use Clause 16 of the Agreement which,
they admit, as being between the Government of Nevis and Cable
to ground the consent and approach to Arbitration and to drag the
Federation into the dispute as the Contracting State via the appear-
ance of the Attorney-General as the party instituting the proceed-
ings resulting in the Court injunction, on the basis that such
appearance amounts to a consent by the Federation to the institu-
tion of ICSID Arbitral proceedings.

The summons instituting the injunction proceedings was taken out
by Mark Anderson of the Legal Department, Charlestown, Nevis,
Solicitor for the Applicant, and the summons, except for the Attor-
ney-General of St. Christopher/Nevis being the applicant, deals
throughout with matters confined to the Agreement, the parties
thereof and the issues in dispute all related to NIA, Nevis and
ce to the Federation. The matter is filed
!), an arrangement within a judicial sys-
tem which services the states and territories within the Organisa-
tion of Eastern Caribbean States. The affidavit in support of the
summons was sworn to by Pearlievan Wilkin of Nevis, then Perma-
nent Secretary in the Ministry of Communications, Works, Public
Utilities and Posts in the Nevis administration. Both the summons
and the affidavit in support refer inter alia to the provision in the
Agreement for settlement of any dispute thereunder under the
ICSID Convention and Rules.

The relevant Court documents also reveal that, by letter dated
August 15, 1995, the then acting Premier of Nevis advised Cable
that NIA was committed to having the issue of a rate increase sub-
mitted to arbitration under Clause 16 of the agreement. That letter
ended with the exhortation to “Take note that the proposed rate
increase should not be effected until a decision has been rendered

  

 
 

 

CASES

4.07

355

by the arbitration panel.” “Cable promptly replied, by letter dated
August 17, 1995, to the said acting Premier. In that letter, Cable
told NIA, inter alia, chat it has instructed its lawyer to proceed
with the registration of Cable's request for such action and that, in
the interim, the Government of Nevis may not interfere with the
rate increase. IT IS THE SOLE RIGHT AND RESPONSIBILITY
OF THE ARBITRATION PANEL TO RULE AS TO WHETHER
CABLE TV WAS JUSTIFIED IN TAKING THE INCREASE.
NIA, in the circumstances, had no alternative but to go to the High
Court with the hope of obtaining an injunction and all the Court
Order states is that you can not have the rate increase until you
have exhausted whatever remedies are available to the parties under
the Agreement for the settlement of disputes. The Court Order is
NOT a consent Order but is made independently by her Ladyship
Justice Velma L. Hylton Q.C., notwithstanding that it was an
exparte hearing and Cable was not heard on the matter.

It is therefore difficult to comprehend that the institution of the
High Court proceedings which were forced on NIA, having regard
to Cable's letter of August 17, 1995, can amount to a consent by
the Federation to ICSID proceedings. It does not put the Agree-
ment in any better or worse light and the appearance of the Attor-
ney-General, only as a figurehead, as the applicant cannot by itself
be an act sufficient to cloak the Federation with responsibility for
the obligations of NIA under -the Agreement or to enable the
Agreement to fall within the strict eligibility requirements of
ICSID on matters related to ICSID jurisdiction.

The Constitution establishes the office of Attorney-General, who is
the principal legal adviser to the Federation and may be either a
public officer or a Minister of the Federation. Unlike in the cases of
the Governor-General, Prime Minister, Premier of Nevis, Director
of Public Prosecutions, Secretary to the Cabinet, Director of Audit
and others, there are no specific duties set out in the Constitution
for the Attorney-General other than under (1) Section 36 which
enables the Attorney-General to apply to the High Court, or inter-
vene in High Court proceedings, in connection with the determi-
nation of any question whether any person has been validly elected
to the National Assembly, or appointed as a Senator, ot elected as
Speaker or whether any such person has validly vacated his seat or
office, and (2) Section 67 where he is an ex-officio member of the
Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy.

356

4.08

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Ic was argued on behalf of the Respondent that the Attorney-Gen-
eral’s appearance in NIA’s application for the High Court injunction
is based on a practice over the years and has its origin in the Crown
Proceedings legislation of the U.K from which the Federation
gained its independence in 1983. Reference was made to the Rules
of the West Indies Associated States Supreme Court (Revision)
1970 regarding proceedings by and against the Crown. Prior to the
High Coust injunction, the Public Service Commission of St.
Christopher and Nevis, in respect of a Nevis related matter,
decided to go to the High Court on an exparte application for an
order for judicial review of a decision of the Public Service Board
of Appeal. The High Court, on November 1994, granted leave for
the applicant to apply for judicial review and, on November 15,
1994, a Notice of Motion in this connection was filed. An adjourn-
ment was granted to enable NIA legal counsel to seek and obtain
the Attorney-General’s fiat. This fiat was refused and, for the first
time, application was made to the High Court for a determination
as whether the Attorney-General’s fiat was necessary for NIA or the
Public Service Commission, Nevis Chapter, to maintain a suit in
the High Court. On November 22, 1995, the learned Judge ruled
that NIA and/or Public Service Commission can sue and be sued
without obtaining the Fiat of the Attorney-General.

Even if the Atrorney-General’s fiat was necessary, does this
empower him by being named as the applicant in a High Court
matter to bind the Federation in a matter in which the Federation
has not been involved? As pointed out in che judgment in respect
of the Attorney-General’s Fiat, the Attorney-General is a creature
of the Constitution and as such can properly exercise only those
functions imparted thereunder or under any Act of Parliament. In
the First “World Bank” Arbitration — (Holiday Inns v. Morocco)
— Some legal Problems — by Pierre Lalive, Decision No. 20, wi
which this Tribunal concurs, “(T]he Tribunal [was] of the opini
that the Convention allows parties to subordinate the entry into
force of an arbitration clause to the subsequent fulfillment of cer-
tain conditions, such as he adherence of the States concerned to the
Convention, or the incorporation of the company envisaged by the
agreement. On this assumption, it is the date when the conditions
are definitely satisfied, as regards one of the Parties involved, which
constitutes in the sense of the Convention the date of Consent by
thar Party.” Although this decision concerned the foreign investor

 

CASES

41

Ss

357

under Article 25 (2) (b) of the Convention rather than the host
state, it establishes the principle chat the critical date for determin-
ing the status of a contracting state is the date of submission of the
dispute to ICSID, rather the date of the agreement containing the
ICSID Arbitral Clause. If, as Cable claims, the High Court order
for the injunction or the documents filed in the High Court, Nevis
Circuit, could by any stretch of the imagination amount to a con-
sent by the Federation to the arbitration, Clause 16 of the Agree-
ment and such documentation could together fall within the
requirements of the Convention. However, we cannot take the view
that the High Court documentation can be interpreted in this
manner.

In fact the Attorney-General does not appear to have done any-
thing at all, other than issue his Fiat. His office was only used to
initiate the proceedings and all the documentation and argument
was prepared and placed before the Court in Nevis by NIA offi-
cials. Furthermore, throughout the documentation submitted in
this Arbitration and the appearances before the Tribunal, there has
been a most pregnant silence on the Federation's involvement in
the Cable TV operation in Nevis, the negotiations and discussions
between Cable and NIA and, above all, in this Arbitration, except
for both Counsel for NIA placing on record that they are repre-
senting the Respondent, i.c., the Federation. Nowhere is there any
indication that Cable or NIA has had discussion with the Federa-
tion authorities and, except for the Federation being named by
Cable as the other party to the Arbitration, the only references to
the Federation are at the three places in the Agreement mentioned
in paragraph 2.16 above. Added to this is the fact that NIA’s con-
tention that litiguous matters involving the Federation are brought
in the seat of the Federation, to wit in St, Kitts, has not been con-
tradicted.

First of all, as indicated earlier, the Attorney-General has not con-
sented to ICSID jurisdiction. The only consent apparently given
by the Attorney-General is his Fiat dated August 25, 1995, a copy
of which is set out at paragraph (95) of the Respondent's Observa-
tions Refuting Requesting Parties’ Responses to Objections to
Jurisdiction. The Fiat reads as follows:

“This is to certify that the Attorney-General gives his con-
sent for the institution of legal proceedings by the Nevis

358

4.12

4,

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Island Administration for an Injunction to restrain Cable
‘Television of Nevis Limited from increasing the rate charged
for Cable service without first going to Arbitration.”

The salient points in che Fiat are (1) the legal proceedings are to be
instituted by NIA, not the Federation, and (2) Cable is to be
restrained from increasing the rate prior to going to arbitration,
which, when read with the High Court summons and other docu-
ments filed in the proceedings, means arbitration under Clause 16
of the Agreement.

It does not even appear that the Attorney-General was present
when the application for an injunction was heard, and, again as
indicated above, the learned trial judge made the order. She could
have thrown out, dismissed or adjourned the application, and it is
worthy of note that the Court makes no pronouncement on the
effectiveness or otherwise of Clause 16. As a matter of fact it seems
that NIA and Cable were assuming at that time that Clause 16 was
effective in August 1995, Secondly, if the Attorney-General had
given consent on behalf of the Federation, he would have had to be
cloaked with the authority to do so. Such authority would have had
to come from probably the Cabinet or the Prime-Minister or the
Minister of Finance of the Federation because of the far- reaching
implications for liability of the Federation and the Consolidated
Fund, if a decision of the Tribunal went against the Federation.
Furthermore, if it is being that the State is, as alleged by Cable, a
party to the arbitration, the consent must be in writing, a require-
ment of Article 25 (1) of the Convention, and this forms the cor-
nerstone of the jurisdiction of ICSID.

It is difficult to understand Cable's argument in this regard. Cable
seems to be urging that the Agreement is between the Federation
and Cable and, if this is so, why is the alleged consent of the Attor-
ney-General via his appearance as applicant in the High Court pro-
ceeding so important. One would have thought that Clause 16 of
the Agreement would have sufficed, its effectiveness being crystal-
lised when the Federation acceded to the Convention, assuming
that the Federation was a party to the Agreement, on September 3,
1995, the date the Convention entered into force in respect of the
Federation. Article 25 (3) does not merit consideration in this Sec-
tion, since Cable has never recognised NIA as being a constituent
subdivision or agency of the Federation. As already indicated in

CASES

4.14

4.15

359

paragraph 2 above, Cable, in its Request for Arbitration, stated
quite clearly that Clause 16 of the Agreement and the Court Order
constitute the consent of the parties described in Arcicle 25 (1) of
the Convention.

On the issue of consent, there are three grounds on which Cable
based its submission. The first is Clause 16 of the Agreement
which sets out the intention of the parties to invoke ICSID juris-
diction. This Agreement is on the face of it between the Govern-
ment of Nevis and Cable.

The next ground is the institution of proceedings in the High
Court, Nevis Circuit, against Cable by the Attorney-General. In
support of this ground, Cable is relying on the reference in the sum-
mons to the provision in the Agreement for Arbitration, i.e., Clause
16, and the urgency for the issue of the injunction to restrain Cable
from raising the rates prior to the resolution of the dispute by arbi-
tration as provided for in the Agreement. The Response does not
refer to the inclusion in the summons that the Attorney-General’s
application was “one of urgency due to the immediate concern of
the Nevis Island Administration that the Respondents in breach of
contract have decided to raise the rates charged for the provision of
Cable services in Nevis.” Note the reference to NIA and not the
Federation, The next paragraph of the summons refers to the Agree
ment of September 1986 between the Government of Nevis and the
Respondent. Throughout the rest of the summons the references are
to NIA and Nevis, nothing about the Federation. Cable in the
Response next turns to the Affidavit of Pearlievan Wilkin and again
refers to the Agreement and Clause 16. Cable, in its comments on
the Affidavit, went on to refer to the already mentioned letter of
August 15, 1995 from the then Acting Premier of Nevis to the Pres-
ident of Cable informing Cable that NIA was committed to having
the dispute submitted to Arbitration in accordance with Clause 16
of the Agreement. This aspect of the submission then refers to the
Court Order of August 31, 1995, and that, on the basis of the High
Court documentation, “the Attorney-General of the Federation and
one of its Ministers clearly consented to the jurisdiction of ICSID
in these proceedings in the Summer of 1995.”

The final ground is based on the letter dated March 18, 1996 from
the Honourable Vance Amory, Premier of Nevis, to ICSID on NIA
lettethead. The letter deals mainly with the coming into effect of
the Public Utilities Commission Ordinance which was passed by

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the Nevis Island Assembly and, on December 13, 1995 assented to
by the Deputy Governor-General. The Tribunal, on March 12,
1996 — its first session, had requested information about the
Ordinance and this letter was issued in response thereto. The letter
gave details as to the date when certain matters required under the
Ordinance were dealt with and continued as follows:

.. “However, the [NIA] having regard to all the circum-
stances, thought it only prudent co proceed with the utmost
circumspection.

 

Section 11 of the Ordinance, requires cach public utility
to file tariffs showing all rates within sixty days of the coming
into operation of the Ordinance. Having the greatest defer-
ence and respect to the Arbitration Tribunal, the Administca-
tion did not wish to give even the appearance that it was
exercising parallel jurisdiction over the matter before the Tri-
bunal, or even worse, that it was proceeding in a high
handed manner or preempting the Tribunal. Therefore our
exercise of restraint.

We are pleased to welcome the request of the Tribunal and
wish you to note for record purposes that the Commission
will be functional by the 30th April, 1996.”

Cable is basing its third ground on the above reference by the Premier
to parallel jurisdiction as an acknowledgment that ICSID has juris-
diction over the matter. Firstly, this is a statement by Nevis and not
the Federation, so the Federation cannot be bound by it, whatever
weight it may carry, and, secondly, the words “parallel jurisdiction”
are capable of several interpretations and do not necessarily constitute
an acknowledgment of ICSID jurisdiction especially in the light of
the fact that the letter was issued at the request of the Tribunal which
had already had its first session on March 12, 1996 at which NIA or
the Federation, call it what you will, had lodged objections to ICSID
jurisdiction. One interpretation, and this is probably the correct one,
is the NIA did not wish to give even the appearance of dealing with
Cable under the Public Utilities Commission Ordinance until the
ICSID Arbitral proceedings were completed.

CASES

4.17

361

Ic is the view of the Tribunal that the references in the High Court
documentation to Clause 16 of the Agreement, both in the sum-
mons and the affidavit, are merely statements of fact and do not
amount to consent by any person or persons to ICSID jurisdic-
tion. In other words, Clause 16 of che Agreement has not been
strengthened in favour of Cable, and che consent of the Federation
to Arbitration as a party or to enable NIA to do so on its own
behalf has not been established by the documentation in the High
Court case.

CHAPTER 5

Fourth Issue: The Request for Arbitration does not comply
with the requirements of the Institution Rules in several
material particulars, and the said noncompliance
is fatal in that it cannot be overcome.

The Respondent, in support at paragraph (115) of Objections to

Jurisdiction, suggests that, “in order to invoke the authority of the

Arbitral Tribunal to consider the merits of an investment dispute,

there must be, in the first place, a request for arbitration meeting

the following requirements:

(a) the request must contain information concerning the issues in
dispute;

(b) the request must contain information concerning the identity
of the parties to the dispute; and

()_ the request must contain information concerning the patties’
consent to arbitration in accordance with the rules of proce-
dure for the institution of arbitration proceedings.”

The foregoing are all required under Rule 2 of the Rules, which

deals with the Contents of the Request. The Request appears to

establish a prima facie for ICSID arbitration in that it contains

inter alia the following as required under the Rules:

(a) the issue in dispute — the failure of NIA to agree to the
increased rates and the High Court injunction;

362

5.0

zB

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

(b) the indentity of the parties — the Requesting Parties on the
one side and the Federation on the other, the Requesting Par-
ties having been set out as nationals of U.S.A., a Contracting
State, with the Federation at that time being the other Con-
tracting State; and

(©) information concerning the parties’ consent to the arbitra-
tion — Clause 16 of the Agreement and the High Court doc-
umentation, there being no intention by the Requesting
Parties to treat NIA as a party and hence no need to deal with
the constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
aspect.

Accordingly, having regard to the submissions by Counsel on
behalf of the Respondent on this issue, the Tribunal is in full agree-
ment with the decision by the ICSID Secretary-General to register
the Request on November 14, 1995 pursuant to Article 36 (3) of
the Convention, as communicated to the parties by his Notice of
Registration dated November 14, 1995.
The Respondent has not raised as an issue whether there is a legal
dispute arising directly out of an investment between a Contract-
ing State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contract-
ing State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of
another Contracting State, one of the essential elements to ground
the jurisdiction of ICSID as required in Article 25 of the Conven-
tion. Accordingly, it appears to have-conceded that there is a legal
issue. However, since the matter of ICSID’s jurisdiction is called
into question, it seems that the Tribunal must consider all the
issues affecting jurisdiction.

In this regard, without prejudice to decisions on other aspects of

the Request for Arbitration, Clause 16 of the Agreement between

the Government of Nevis and Cable, the base on which the

Request for Arbitration has been made, provides explicitly that any

disputes relating to the agreement, its performance or nonperfor-

mance shall be referred to arbitration under ICSID rules of proce-
dure. Clause 7 d. of the Agreement provides that, after the second
year of service, Cable may increase its basic charges proportionate
to Cable’s increased cost of goods and services, and that, after the
first year of service, premium charges will not be controlled. Cable
has, time and again commencing in November 1991, endeavoured
to obtain a rate increase but NIA has consistently opposed such
increase. So you have Cable, on one hand, stating that it is entitled

 

CASES

5.0

a

a

363

toa rate increase under Clause 7 of the Agreement and the Govern-
ment of Nevis, the other party to the Agreement, saying Cable is
not so entitled. So, there is obviously a dispute over the operation
of Clause 7 of the Agreement, which, in our view and provided all
other requirements have been met, could be brought within Article
25 of the Convention.

Further support for concluding that this is a dispute under the
‘Agreement can be taken from (a) the fifth paragraph of Cable's let-
ter of July 26, 1995 to the Honourable Vance Amory, Premier,
Government of Nevis, which states inter alia that “in the event that
Government opposes said increase, Cable Television of Nevis will
have no alternative but to forthwith offer the matter to Interna-
tional Arbitration as prescribed for in Section 16 of the Franchise
Agreement”; (b) the third paragraph of letter dated August 15,
1995 from Mr. Malcolm Guishard, Acting Premier of Nevis which
states inter alia “Please be advised that in accordance with item 16
of the agreement and paragraph five of your letter [of July 26,
1995], the Nevis Island Administration is committed to having this
matter submited to arbitration. Take note that the proposed rate
increase should not be effected until a decision has been rendered
by the arbitration panel”; and (c) paragraph 6 of the exparte sum-
mons in Suit No 156/95 in the High Court of Justice Federation of
Saint Christopher and Nevis, Nevis Circuit, between the Attorney-
General of St. Christopher/Nevis and Cable Television of Nevis
Limited and Cable Television of Nevis Holdings Limited which
alleges that Lee Bertman, President of Cable, is in breach of the
Agreement and paragraph 9 of the Affidavit of Pearlievan Wilkin
filed in the same suit in which it is stated that the proposed action
by the Respondents in the suit will be in breach of Clause 16 of the
Agreement.

The Respondent has posited as one of its objections on this issue is
that “in breach of the Institution Rules {Rule 2 (1) (a)], the request
does not designate, precisely or at all, each party the dispute, for
the reason that [NIA] is a party to the dispute, and is not desig-
nated therein, either as “the Government of Nevis” of in any other
fashion.” The latter section of paragraph 1 of the Request for Arbi-
tration states that “[t}he other party to the arbitration is the Feder-
ation of St. Christopher and Nevis (the “Federation”), a
Contracting State. Communications to the Federation may be
addressed to the Honorable Vance Amory, Premier, Nevis Island

5.0:

5.0

g

&

5.09

5.1

3

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Administration, Administration Building, Charlestown, Nevis,
West Indies.” The Tribunal has already given thorough consider-
ation to this aspect as reflected at paragraphs 2.15 to 2.18 inclu-
sive, 2.23 and 2.27 and has concluded in the last sentence of
paragraph 2.27 and in paragraph 3.02 that the Federation is not a
proper party to these proceedings and that, if all the necessary
other elements had been met, the proper parties to these procced-
ings should be Cable and NIA. Accordingly, the Tribunal agrees
with this submission by the Respondent.

In further support of its objections on this issue, the Respondent
has stated that “in breach of the Institution Rules [Rule 2 (1) (b)],
the request does not state that, [NIA] being a constituent subdivi-
sion or agency of a Contracting Scate, it has been designated to the
Centre by that State pursuant to the provisions of the Conven-
tion.” The Tribunal has also already given a thorough consider-
ation to this aspect in chapter 2 especially at paragraphs 2.15 to
2.17 inclusive, 2.22, 2.27, 2.32 and 2.33. The Tribunal, accord-
ingly, agrees with this submission by the Respondent.

The Respondent further states thar “[iJn breach of the Rules (Rule
2.(1) ()}, the request docs not indicate the date of the consent nec-
essary to ground jurisdiction in the Arbitral Tribunal, for the rea-
son that, in claiming that the Agreement and the Court Order
constitute the necessary consent, Cable conspicuously avoids refer-
ring to any “date” at all.” Rule 2 (1) (c) requires that the request for
arbitration shall “indicate the date of consent and the instruments
in which it is recorded, including, if one party is a constituent sub-
division or agency of a Contracting State, similar data on the
approval of such consent by that State unless it had notified the
Centre that no such approval is required.”

The Respondent has also submitted that “in breach of the Institu-
tion Rules, the instruments in which the consent of the NIA as a
party to the dispute is recorded are not indicated, for the reason
that the NIA is not a party to the request for arbitration.”

In the Request for Arbitration and in all its submissions, both writ-
ten and oral, to the Tribunal, Cable has maintained the position that
the parties to the Arbitration are Cable on the one hand and the Fed-
eration on the other. The Tribunal has already rejected the purported
substitution of the Federation as a party to the arbitration proceed-
ings, in lieu of the Government of Nevis. The Tribunal has been
informed that the Federation acceded to the Convention on Septem-

 

CASES

5.1

&

365

ber 3, 1995 and no documentation has been furnished to the Tribu-
nal evidencing the exclusions or designations regarding constituent
subdivisions or agencies being made to ICSID by the Federation if it
so wished in accordance with the Convention.

The Tribunal has already addressed the matter of alleged consent
by the Federation through the presence of the Attorney-General as
a party to the Court proceedings culminating in the Court injunc-
tion in Chapter 4. All chings being considered, Clause 16 of che
Agreement could have been regarded as one ingredient leading to a
consent for purposes of ICSID Arbitration. This however had no
legal effect at the time the Agreement was signed on September 18,
1986. The Federation's accession to the Convention on September
3, 1995 created a second ingredient leading to a consent for the
purposes of ICSID Arbitration, However, these wo ingredients do
not by themselves satisfy ICSID requirements. No further docu-
mentation has been forthcoming to meet the other essential
requirements. The further documentation needed in the light of
earlier decisions by the Tribunal in this arbitration would seem to
be (a) NIA be a party to the Arbitral proceedings in place of the
Federation, (b) a formal designation to ICSID by the Federation
that NIA is a constituent subdivision or agency of the Federation,
and (c) an approval to ICSID duly authorised by the Federation to
Arbitral proceedings between Cable and NIA or, in lieu of such
approval, notification by the Federation to ICSID that no such
approval is necessary.

In the Holiday Inns case, the tribunal agreed, and this Tribunal
concurs, that “the Convention allows parties to subordinate the
entry into force of an arbitration clause to the subsequent fulfill-
ment of certain conditions.” This decision, which has been fol-
lowed by later [CSID arbitral tribunals, implies chat the date of
consent required by Rule 2 (1) (c) of the Institution Rules need not
be expressly set out in the Request for Arbitration, so long as the
date is determinable or indicated from the documentation submit-
ted. Only two ingredients would have been met if NIA was a party
to the proceedings, and, if the others had been met, all the condi-
tions for consent would have been deemed met when the last of the
conditions had been satisfied. The Tribunal has rejected Cable's
naming the Federation party to the proceedings, and, in the cir-
cumstances, the Tribunal does not consider that Rule 2(1) (c) has
been complied with.

 

366

5.16

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

The Respondent has also submitted that, “in breach of the Institu-
tion Rules, the request for arbitration does not indicate the nation-
ality of the party that is a national of a Contracting State on the
date of consent.” It appears to be a simple thing to refer to para-
graph 1 of the Request in which Cable states that the “parties
requesting arbitration are Cable Television of Nevis, Ltd. and Cable
Television of Nevis Holdings, Ltd., both corporations formed
under the Companies Act of the Federation of St. Christopher (St.
Kirts) and Nevis and cheir shareholders (including the undersigned)
referred to below as “Cable.” The two corporations are 99.9%
owned (and therefore controlled) by nationals of the United States
of America, a Contracting State. This control, combined with the
Agreement described in Section 2 below, constitute the agreement
of the parties to treat Cable as a “National of another Contracting
State” under Article 25 (2) (b) of the Convention.”

However, the issue is more complicated since Cable has made the
Federation the opposing party to the Arbitral proceedings in licu of
NIA. As already decided by the Tribunal, the Federation is not a
proper party to these proceedings, was not a party to the Agreement
and there is no privity of contract between the Federation and
Cable. Accordingly, there is no agreement between the Federation
and Cable for Arbitral Proceedings under ICSID rules and, conse-
quentially, no consent by the Federation to the Arbitration proceed-
ings and no date of consent for the purpose of this hearing,

The statement in paragraph 1 of the Request as to the 99.9% own-
ership by nationals of the United States of America, a Contracting
State, could have been relevant otherwise but the Request would
have been deficient by the failure to comply with Rule 2 (2) of the
Institution Rules in that the information required by Rule 2 (1) (d)
(111) must be supported by documentation. The lack of appropriate
documentation at the time of filing of the Request, in our view,
was not fatal as such documentation could be provided during the
hearings, and an attempt was made to do so by Cable in its
Response to Objections to Jurisdiction and in documentation sub-
mitted after the hearing on July 1 and 2, 1996.

The Respondent, in its Observations Refuting Requesting Party's
Responses to Objections to Jurisdiction, made an issue as to the
proof of foreign nationality of the investors behind the Cable com-
panies, i.c., the holding company and the operating company,
based on the documentation submirted by the Requesting Parties
in the Response to Objections to Jurisdiction. Among other things,

CASES

u

367

Respondent does not dispute the fact that the only two directors of
the operating company have at all times been nationals of the
U.S.A. but disputes their continued existence as directors based on
the requirements of the Bylaws of the holding company for the
annual rotation of directors, The mere fact that the identity of the
initial directors is known at May 6, 1986, the date of incorpora-
tion, does not necessarily establish anything in respect of the iden-
tity or nationality of the directors beyond May 6, 1987, by which
time the initial directorships lapsed. Another contention is that the
documentation reveals only one subscriber of shares in the holding
company, such subscriber being a national of the Federation. Addi-
tionally, the documentation reveals only one shareholder for the
operating company, whereas by law at least two shareholders are
required. Based on these and other factors, the Respondent states
that “[eJhe result is that the Requesting Party, since it is a dual
party, cannot be said to be under foreign control, since while the
Directors of one are nationals of the U.S.A., the single shareholder
of that onc is a company whose single shareholder is a national of
the Federation of St. Kitts and Nevis, and the identity of whose
Directors is not known.”

The foregoing reveals flaws in the preparation and filing of docu-
mentation required by law in the Federation and in Nevis and are
matters which, while of some concern to the Tribunal because of
some obvious inconsistencies and their largely unhelpful nature,
could be ventilated in another forum. One glaring eyesore in the
annual returns documentation related to Cable Television of Nevis
Limited, both in the obviously incorrect documentation first sub-
mitted having regard to the time of incorporation and the memo-
randum and articles of association of that company and the later
documentation which corresponded with the memorandum and
articles of association of the company, is that they all reflected that
(1) no shares had been issued notwithstanding that at least one
share each had been issued to two separate individuals at the time
of the company's registration, (2) there was no change in share
ownership, and (3) all the shares were held by one person, the
holding company, despite the fact that the law requires at least 2
shareholders. The issues, however, before the Tribunal are whether
the Requesting Parties have met the requirements of Article 25
(2)(b) of the Convention as to the nationality of another Contract-
ing State and, if so, whether the parties to the arbitration have
agreed that, because of such foreign control, the Requesting Party

5.19

5.20

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

should be treated as a national of such Contracting State for the
purposes of the Convention.

First, on the matter of recognition, there are provisions in the
‘Agreement which infer that Cable, though incorporated in the
State of St. Christopher and Nevis, is controlled by nationals of
another state, e.g., inter alia convertibility of local currency to U.S.
funds, the concession to Cable of 2 100% ten year tax holiday, sub-
ject to renewal, rectuitment of foreign nationals to work for Cable,
and customs and duty exemption to Cable and expatriate staff. The
presence of Clause 16 in the Agreement does give rise to the pre-
sumption that the partics thereto were treating Cable as being
owned or controlled by nationals of a contracting state of the
ICSID Convention outside of the Federation, notwithstanding
that, at the date of the Agreement and for several years thereafter,
the Federation had not acceded to the Convention. The Agreement
was signed by Lee. A. Bertman, as the representative of both com-
panics and the Request is signed by the same Lee. A. Bertman as
President of both companies.

All returns submitted on behalf of the Requesting Parties have been
certified by Lee A. Bertman, as director, and Suzanne B. Etzold, as
secretary. These two persons are reported as having the nationality
of U.S.A., with residences at one time or another in Virginia,
U.S.A., the Dominican Republic and Anguilla, and with one being
President and the other Vice-President of Cable TV company.
Throughout the documentation, there is statement, albeit question-
able, that there has been no change of ownership of the shares in the
operating company. The memorandum and articles of association of
the operating company were signed by the same Lee A. Bertman,
President Cable TV company, as taking up one share, and Myrna C.
Liburd, Assistant Secretary CSCL, as taking up another share. It is
assumed that (1) M.C. Liburd is the national of the Federation
referred to by the Respondent as the only shareholder in the holding
company, and (2) CSCL is the acronym for Corporate Services
Company Limited which is the Registered Agent in Nevis for the
holding company. Furthermore, all the correspondence submitted
to the Tribunal as from Cable to NIA has emanated from the same
Lee A. Bertman, as President of one or both Cable companies with
an offshore address, and nothing has surfaced to indicate that the
directors have ceased being nationals of the U.S.A.

In respect of the holding company, it is noted that Myrna C.
Liburd is the only person signing as incorporator and subscriber of

CASES

5.2

5.2:

5.2.

2

&

369

one share with a par value of ten US cents in an authorised share
capital of five hundred thousand registered shares with such par
value, i.e., an authorised share capital of U.S.$50,000. However,
the Articles of Incorporation of the holding company reveal that
five persons have been named as the initial directors, all wich
addresses in U.S.A. The same Lee A. Bertman heads the list and
two of the remaining four are the two Washington based lawyers
who were involved in the Agreement. Under the Articles of Incor-
poration, the Board of Directors or shareholders shall have the
authority to adopt, amend or repeal the bylaws of the holding
company.

Note is also taken of the Auditors’ Report and Financial Statements
for the Year ended December 31, 1993 of Cable Television of Nevis
Limited by a firm of chartered accountants of Anguilla, set out in
Tab 4 of the Request for Arbitration. At Note 7 of that Report,
there is mention of long term debt of principal and interest due to
Lee Bertman, “Director and majority shareholder” and to Philips
Credit Corporation (PCC). The PCC loan is dated July 31, 1987
with negotiation taking effect in August 1994. Mr. Bertman is
guarantor and at December 31st 1993 amounts owing under the
PCC loan stood at U.S.$ 593,033. Additionally at thar date the
company owed Mr. Bertman U.S.$534,229 making a total expo-
sure of U.S.$1,127,262 by Mr. Bertman. In that Report, it is stated
that at that date only 2 ordinary shares of E.C. $20 each were
issued and there was a share premium of U.S.$149,985 which was
croded by accumulated loss.

When all the foregoing is taken into account together with the
statement in the Request for Arbitration, signed by the same Lee A.
Bertman, as President of both companies as indicated earlier,
which statement sets out that “[tJhe two corporations are 99.9%
owned (and therefore controlled) by nationals of the United States
of America, a Contracting State,” and the statement made by
Counsel for the Claimants at the hearing that the principals are
Mr. and Mrs. Bertman, it would not seem unreasonable for the Tri-
bunal to, and it does, conclude that both the holding and operat-
ing companies are established respectively under the laws of Nevis
and of the Federation and that ownership of these companies by
nationals of U.S.A. has been established for the purposes of Article
25 (2)(b) of the Convention.

The matter of the agreement with the Federation that the Request-
ing Parties “being juridical persons which [have] the nationality of

 

 

370

5.24

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the Contracting State party to the dispute, because of foreign con-
trol, should be treated as a national of another Contracting State
for the purposes of [the] Convention” needs to be studied. Article
25 (2)(b) of the Convention seems to presuppose that the host
State must be a party to the dispute. This Tribunal has already
ruled that the Federation is not a party to the dispute. The chrono-
logical events reflect that in September 1986 NIA entered into the
Agreement with at least one Cable company which agreement pro-
vided for ICSID arbitration. The Federation became a member of
ICSID on September 3, 1995.

In Decision 20 of the Holiday Inns case, already outlined and
commented on at paragraph 4.09, parties may condition the
effectiveness of their arbitration clauses on the occurrence of
specified “events, one of which may be the adherence of relevant
states to the Convention, In this case, the Federation's adherence
to the Convention on September 3, 1995 represents a fulfilled
condition along the way towards effecting ICSID jurisdiction on
matters within that state. However, there has been no consent by
the Federation to either the institution of these proceedings
against it and/or any other party or to the treatment of the
Requesting Parties as being under the foreign control of United
States nationals for the purposes of Article 25 (2)(b) of the Con-
vention. As put in paragraph 33 of the Holiday Inns decision:
“The question arises, however, whether such an agreement must
be expressed or whether it may be implied. The solution which
such an agreement is intended to achieve constitutes an exception
to the general rule established by the Convention, and one would
expect that parties should express themselves clearly and explicitly
with respect to such a derogation. Such an agreement should
therefore normally be explicit. An implied agreement would only
be acceptable in the event that the specific circumstances would
exclude any other interpretation of the intention of the parties,
which is not the case here.” There has been no expressed or
implied agreement or consent in this regard by the Federation,
and, in the circumstances, the requirements of Rule 2(d)(iii) of
the Institution Rules have not been met. On reflection, the
Requesting Parties may have been attempting to do so by alleging
the consent of the Federation via the documentation of the High
Court case, but, as already indicated in Chapter 4, the Tribunal
has rejected this submission.

 

CASES 371

CHAPTER 6

Fifth Issue: Cable Television of Nevis Limited was not in existence
at the time it purported to enter into the Agreement on which
it relies for its Request for Arbitration. Consequently, the
Agreement is irrelevant insofar as the company is concerned,
and no further consideration need be given to any
contention on behalf of the company in relation
to that Agreement.

6.01 Article 42 (1) of the Convention provides as follows:

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such
rules of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of
such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Con-
tracting State party to the dispute (including its rules on the
conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as may
be applicable.”

6.02 The Agreement is silent on the matter of applicable law and, in the
circumstances, in accordance with Article 42 (1) of the Convention
the law of the Federation and applicable international law will apply.

6.03 The Companies Act Cap 335 of the laws of St. Christopher and
Nevis is an old Act and, we are told, is based on the U.K Compa-
nies Act of 1929. It is trite law in the U.K and, owing to its links
with the U.K for many years, in the Federation, in regard to rele-
vant matters falling under the U.K Companies Law prior to and
after the 1929 Companies Act that a company cannot enter into
agreements before the date of its incorporation, and any such
agreement is completely null and void and of no effect is against
that company. They may, prima facie, bind only the actual makers
of the contract and not the company, and may be completely null
and void if the persons purporting to sign on behalf of the com-
pany cannot show that they were the real principals.

6.04 In this regard it is noted that, in the preamble to the Agreement
dated September 18, 1986, Cable Television of Nevis, Ltd. is
described as “formed under The Companies Act (335) of St. Kitts
and Nevis” and, in respect of this company, the Agreement is signed
“CABLE TELEVISION OF NEVIS, LTD. By Lee A. Bertram.”

372

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

6.05 In support of this issue, the Respondent has submitted several U.K

6.0:

6.0

16

Sg

cases for study, namely, in chronological sequence, Kelner v. Baxter
and Others (1866) L:R. 2 C.P. 174, Re Northumberland Avenue
Hotel Co. (1886) 33 Ch. D 16, Melhado and Another v The Porto
Alegre, New Hamburgh, and Brazilian Railway Company (1874)
LR. 9 C.P 503, Bagot Pneumatic Tyre Co. v. Clipper Pneumatic
Tyre Co (1902) 1 Ch. 146, Natal Land and Colonization Com-
pany, Limited v Pauline Colliery and Development Syndicate,
Limited (1904) A.C. 120, and Newborne v Sensolid (Great Brit-
ain), Led. (1954) 1 QB, 45. Cable, to counter these submissions,
has submitted Holiday Inns v Morocco, and ICSID’s Emerging
Jurisprudence, which have both been referred to earlier, and the
other ICSID cases referred to in paragraph 4.10 above.

The U.K cases which appear to have direct relevance seem to be re
Northumberland Avenue Hotel Company and Newborne v. Sensolid.
The other cases deal with the validity of contracts signed by per-
sons as agents or promoters for companies to be formed at a future
date, which is not relevant in the present case, since there is no
alleged agency by Cable.

Stated very briefly, in the Northumberland case, a written agree-
ment was entered into on July 24, 1882 between W of the one part
and D as trustee for an intended company to be called the N.
Company, of the other part. N Company was incorporated the
next day, i.e. July 25, 1882 and did not, after such incorporation,
enter into any further agreement in writing with W, but acted upon
the agreement of July 24, 1882, rook possession in October 1882
of certain lands as intended under the agreement of July 24, 1882
and expended upon it a large sum of money, amounting to about
40,000 pounds sterling. In October 1884, N company passed a res-
olution for voluntary winding-up and, on December 29, 1884, an
order was made for carrying on the winding up under the supervi-
sion of the court. W became bankrupt and S, his trustee, inter
alias, on the interest of W under the agreement of July 24, 1882,
took out a summons asking that they might be admitted as credi-
cors for damages sustained by them in respect of the breach by N
company of that agreement on the footing that the agreement was
one by which the N company was bound. Mr. Justice Chitty held
that, if D contracted for the company, then, as the company was
not in existence at the time, the agreement could not be ratified by
the company, and that, if he contracted as trustee, then, whatever

CASES

373

claims he might have against the company if they took the benefit
of the agreement, there was no contract between the company and
W. An appeal followed. Set out below are excerpts from the deci-
sions of the three appeal court judges. While, admittedly, this case
is somewhat similar to the other cases which are not considered rel-
evant since they dealt with pre-incorporation contracts entered
into by agents or promoters, the rationale of the decisions are per-
tinent to the present issue:

Cotton, L.J:- (p.20)

“Buc it is said that we ought to hold that there was a contract
entered between the company and Wallis on the same terms
(except so far as they were subsequently modified) as those
contained in the contract of July 24, 1882. In my opinion
that will not hold. It is very true that there were transactions
between Wallis and the company in which the company
acted on the terms of that contract entered into with Wallis
by the person who said he was trustee for them. But why did
the company do so? The company seems to have considered,
or rather its directors seem to have considered, that the con-
tract was a contract binding on the company. But the errone-
ous opinion that a contract entered into before the company
came into existence was binding on the company, and the
acting on that erroneous opinion, does not make a good con-
tract between the company and Mr. Wallis, and all the acts
which occurred subsequently to the existence of the com-
pany were acts proceeding on the erroneous assumption that
the contract of July 24, was binding on the company...... We
are not therefore authorised to infer a contract as it was
inferred in those cases where there was no other explanation
of the conduct of the parties. In my opinion the decision of
Mr. Justice Chitty was right, and the appeal must therefore
fail.”

 

Lindley, L. J.:- (p.21)

“The more closely the facts are looked into the more plain is
that everything which the company did, from the taking of

possession down to the very last moment, was referable to

374

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the agreement of July 24, 1882, which the directors errone-
ously supposed to be binding on the company. I therefore
cannot come to any other conclusion than the conclusion at
which Mr. Justice Chitty arrived.”

Lopes, L. J. :- (p.21)

“The question is whether there was a contract between Wal-
lis and the company. There no doubt was an agreement
between a man called Nunneley, who was agent for Wallis,
and a man named Doyle, who described himself as trustee
for the company. But at that time the company was not
incorporated, and therefore it is perfectly clear that the agree-
ment was inoperative as against the company. It is also
equally clear that the company, after it came into existence,
could not ratify chat contract, because the company was not
in existence at the time the contract was made. No doubt the
company, after it came into existence, might have entered
into’a new contract upon the same terms’as the agreement of
July 24, 1882, and we are asked to infer such a contract from
the conduct and transactions of the company after they came
into existence, It seems to me impossible to infer such a con-
tract, for it is clear to my mind that the company never
intended to make any new contract because they firmly
believed that the contract of the July 24 was in existence, and
was a binding, valid contract. Everything that was done by
them after their incorporation appears to me to be based
upon the assumption that the contract of July 24, 1882, was
an existing and binding contract. I think, therefore, that the
appeal ought to be dismissed.”

  

6.08 The Newborne v Sensolid (Great Britain) is more direct on the

point and is much more recent (C.A. 1953). Briefly stated, a con-
tract, which purported to be entered into for the sale of certain
goods by Leopold Newborne (London) Ld., was signed “Leopold
Newborne (London) Ld., and underneath was the name Leopold
Newborne. On the back of the document were set out the names of
Leopold Newborne and M. Newborne as directors of the company.
The goods were tendered but the purported buyers refused to take
delivery. A writ was issued in the name of Leopold Newborne

CASES

6.0

3

375

(London) Ld against the buyers claiming damages for breach of
contract, namely failure to accept the goods. Whilst the case was in
progress, it was discovered that, at the time when the contract was
signed, the company, Leopold Newborne (London) Ld., was not
registered and steps were taken to substitute for the name of the
company, as plaintiff, that of Leopold Newborne. It was held, by
Mr. Justice Parker, that Leopold Newborne never purported to
contract to sell nor sold the goods cither as principal or agent. The
contract purported to be made by the company, on whose behalf it
was signed by a future director, and, inasmuch as the company was
nonexistent at the material time, the contract was a nullity. New-
borne appealed and, in the decision of the Court of Appeal dis-
missing the appeal, Lord Goddard, C.J., held as follows: “The
company makes the contract. No doubt, the company must do its
physical acts, and so forth, through the directors, but it is not the
ordinary case of principal and agent. It is a case in which the com-
pany is contracting and the company’s contract is authenticated by
the signature of one of the directors. This contract purports to be a
contract by the’ company; it does not purport to be a contract by
Mr. Newborne. He does not purport to be selling his goods but to
be selling the company’s goods. The only person who had any con-
tract here was the company, and Mr. Newborne’s signature merely
confirmed the company’s signature. The document is signed “Yours
faithfully, Leopold Newborne (London) Ld.,” and then the signa-
ture underneath is the signature of the person authorised to sign on
behalf of the company. In my opinion, unfortunate though it may
be, as the company was not in existence when the contract was
signed there never was a contract, and Mr. Newborne cannot come
forward and say “Well, it was my contract.” The fact is, he made a
contract for a company which did not exist. It seems to me, there-
fore, that the defendants can avail of the defence which they
pleaded and the appeal must be dismissed.

Paragraphs 6.07 and 6.08 above have been inserted in order to set
out clearly the U.K, and consequently the Federation, legal posi-
tion with regard to contracts signed by or on behalf of companies
prior to incorporation, a situation which seems to be applicable in
this case to Cable Television of Nevis, Ltd., a purported party to
the Agreement of September 18, 1986 along with Cable Television
of Nevis Holdings, Ltd., on one side, and the Government of Nevis
on the other. Paragraph 6.08 shows clearly that, according to the

376

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

law of the Federation, such a purported agreement by an unincor-
porated, later incorporated, company is a nullity in respect of such
a company, and paragraph 6.07 indicates that subsequent acts by
such a company in the erroncous belief that such agreement is valid
does not validate the agreement.

Cable on the other hand referred to the following ICSID cases:
Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation (LETCO) v. the Govern-
ment of Liberia 26 I.L.M. 647, 651-52 (1987), AMCO Asia Cor-
poration and others v, the Republic of Indonesia 23 I.L.M. 351,
361-62 (1984), Alcoa Minerals of Jamaica v. the Government of
Jamaica as discussed in John T. Schmide, Arbitration under the
‘Auspices of ICSID: Implications of the Decision on Jurisdiction in
Alcoa Minerals of Jamaica Incorporated, Inc. v. Government of
Jamaica 17 Harv. Int'l LJ., 90, 102-3 (1976) and the aforemen-
tioned Holiday Inns v. Morocco case. Cable had also in paragraph
6 of its counsel's reply dated April 30, 1996, to the Respondent's
“Observations Refuting Requesting Party's Responses to Objec-
tions to Jurisdiction” set forth the following position:

“Respondent argues that Requesting Party the Operating
Company was incorporated subsequent to the date of the
Agreement, and is thus a “non-party” in these proceedings.
The Agreement upoa which the Request for Arbitration is
based is dated September 1986. The Holding Company
Requesting Party was incorporated on May 6, 1986 (see Tab
1 to our Response). The Operating Company Requesting
Party was incorporated April 2, 1987. Thus, there was a
Requesting Party in existence on the date of the Agreement,
and the Agreement makes it apparent on its face that the
organization of the Operating Company was contemplated
by both parties. Cable respectfully submits that it is not
unusual to encounter legal requirements of various countries
of the world concerning the legal structure under which one
must invest in those countries. It is also common for compli-
ance with those requirements to take some time to complete.
Ie is respectfully submitted that the organization of the
Operating Company after the Agreement was signed is not
legally relevant. While Mr. Byron makes numerous assertions
of violations of local law of the Federation, he cites no legal
authority for any of these assertions, and, since they are irrel-

 

CASES

6.1

6.1

u

377

evant in any case, Cable requests that the Tribunal disregard
these assertions. Since it took the Federation several years to
approve and ratify the Convention under which these pro-
ceedings are being conducted, and which Convention the
Respondent had designated in the Agreement, perhaps Cable
can be forgiven this short delay in causing the second of its
entities to be organised.”

To put the record straight on one point made by Cable’s Counsel in
this paragraph, the U.K cases referred to in paragraph 5 above were
submitted by Mr. Byron through ICSID by letter dated June 24,
1996, for the Tribunal’s consideration and formed part of his argu-
ment at the hearing on July 1 and 2, 1996.

Careful attention has been paid to the several ICSID arbitral cases
for guidance on this and other issues raised in these Arbitral pro-
ceedings. On a comparison of these cases, it would appear that the
Holiday Inns case has the most direct relevance to the present case.
In the LETCO v. Liberia case, on the matter of consent giving rise
to establishing of ICSID jurisdiction, LETCO, the claimant relied
on an arbitration clause contained in the concession agreement
signed by LETCO and Liberia. Liberia never appeared at any of the
hearings before the Tribunal and submitted no documentation
contesting the issues. The Tribunal found that the content of the
relevant article in the concession agreement was clear evidence of
the parties’ consent in writing to submit to ICSID and required no
further discussion. LETCO however wished to add as a joint claim-
ant a subsidiary company of LETCO, namely LETCO Lumber
Industry Corporation (LLIC), which was not a party to the conces-
sion agreement. The Tribunal decided on this issue that no evi-
dence was submitted which would permit the Tribunal to extend
ICSID jurisdiction to LLIC, since it was a separate juridical person
from LETCO and had not entered into an ICSID arbitration
agreement with Liberia. However this did not exclude LETCO
from seeking damages based on its investments in LLIC which
were made pursuant to the ends contemplated in the concession
agreement. An attempt was also made to join the Liberian Bank for
Development and Investment (LBDI) as a party to the proceedings
but this was rejected by the Tribunal, as neither LBDI or Liberia
had consented to such participation. So there is very little help, if
any, from this case on this issue.

378

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

6.13 The AMCO Asia Corporation (AAC) and others v. the Republic of

Indonesia involved three claimant companies, namely (1) AAC, the
parent company, (2) PT. Amco Indonesia (PTA),the subsidiary of
AAC and which had applied to carry out a hotel investment in
Indonesia and had included in its application a provision for
ICSID arbitration which Indonesia accepted when it agreed to the
application, and (3) Pan American (PA), to which a portion of the
shares held by AAC had been transferred. On the matter of consent
to arbitration, Indonesia raised objections to jurisdiction in respect
of AAC and PA in that Indonesia had never consented to ICSID’s
jurisdiction in respect of any dispute between Indonesia and AAC
or between Indonesia and PA. A third objection was for the Tribu-
nal to determine whether it had jurisdiction over PTA since Indo-
nesia had not effectively agreed to treat PTA as a national of U.S.A.
for purposes of the Convention. The first two objections only are
relevant to the issue at hand. In respect of AAC, the Tribunal took
the view chat the foreign investor was AAC and PTA was merely an
instrumentality through which AAC was to realize the investment.
The tribunal had already considered that PTA had the benefit of
the arbitration clause and asked the question: would it not be fully
illogical to grant this protection to the controlled entity, but not to
the controlling one. It had by this time looked at the preamble to
the Convention and come to the conclusion that “while a consent
in writing to ICSID arbitration is indispensable, since it is required
by article 25 (1) of the Convention, such consent in writing is not
to be expressed in a solemn, ritual and unique formulation. The
investment agreement being in writing, it suffices to establish that
its interpretation in good faith shows that the parties agreed to
ICSID arbitration for the ICSID tribunal to have jurisdiction over
them.” The tribunal also referred to Indonesian legislation and lit-
erature which, seemingly unlike in the case of the Federation, pro-
vided for the protection of investors through international
arbitration in the interest of Indonesia. In conclusion on this
point, the tribunal held that there was a written consent to the
arbitration in the investment agreement between Indonesia and
PTA and accordingly the formal requirement of article 25 (1) of
the Convention had been fulfilled. The Tribunal further inter-
preted that written consent as being capable of being invoked by
AAC, and therefore it had jurisdiction over AAC. It also held that
whether and to what extent AAC took part itself in the building of

6.15

379

the hotel is not relevant. With regard to PA, the tribunal decided
that it had jurisdiction over disputes involving PA, having regard to
the fact that PA had acquired shares in AAC, and, since the tribu-
nal had decided that it had jurisdiction in relation to AAC, by vir-
tue of the transfer of such shares to PA with the approval of the
Government of Indonesia without any exclusion of the right to
ICSID arbitration, PA also acquired the right to ICSID arbitra-
tion.

The Alcoa Minerals of Jamaica, Inc. (AMJ) v. Government of
Jamaica is another uncontested arbitral matter and the main issue,
as regards consent, was whether Jamaica, after entering an agree-
ment with AMJ which included an ICSID arbitration clause could
unilaterally withdraw from the agreement. Both Jamaica and USA
were already contracting states to the Convention without reserva-
tion when the agreement was signed in 1968. In 1974, Jamaica
enacted legislation which effected an increase in taxes on mining by
the investors, who considered this as a violation of the agreement.
In addition, shortly after the legislation, Jamaica informed ICSID
that investment disputes “at any time arising” involving natural
resources would not be submitted to ICSID arbitration. The tribu-
nal decided on this aspect that these actions by Jamaica could not
oust jurisdiction. Having earlier agreed to ICSID arbitration,
Jamaica could not unilaterally withdraw its consent and that its
directive to ICSID withdrawing disputes of that nature from
ICSID arbitration could apply only to future arbitration agree-
ments.

On this matter of consent, it may be helpful co quote extensively
from the Holiday Inns v. Morocco case as discussed by Pierre Lalive
(p. 144-145) as follows:

“A similar insuperable difficulty confronted the second part
of the Moroccan objection to jurisdiction raised against Hol-
iday Inns S.A., Switzerland. The Government had signed an
agreement which expressly identified one of the parties as the
company ‘Holiday Inns S. A., Spielhof 3, Glarus Switzer-
land.” Now the same Government was contending that,
although it had intended to confer jurisdiction upon ICSID
in respect of that company, Holiday Inns, Glarus failed to
meet the requirements of Article 25 of the Convention
because it was not legally in existence at the date of the Basic

380

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

‘Agreement (and in particular had then “no nationality at

The relevant facts have been outlined above and were not in
dispute: at the time of signing the contract, the ewo Ameri-
can partners (H.I. and O.PRC.) had already decided that, in
keeping with a frequent business practice, they would per-
form the Project through two wholly owned subsidiaries to
be created for the purpose. The Moroccan Government was
fully aware of this fact, as shown in particular by the very
designations in the Agreement of the “Parties of the Second
Part” and also by the signing, following the Government's
request, of a “letter of guarantee” of the same date by the two
American mother companies). The Government appears also
to have known full well chat on the date of signing, the prep-
arations made by the H.I. group in order to create a Swiss
subsidiary had not been completed. The Charter and By-
Laws of the company were signed a few weeks later, on 30
December 1966, and the formalities came to an end on 1
February 1967 with the formal registration of the new com-
pany in the Commercial Register, a registration which, under
the Swiss Code of Obligations (Article 643), is necessary to
confer legal personality upon a stock corporation.

Several distinct arguments were put forward by the claimants
to meet the Moroccan objection. First, under the personal
law of the company, which was undoubtedly Swiss law, a
stock corporation in a process of constitution is not entirely
devoid of existence and the legal acts made on its behalf do
have some effects. Secondly, whatever the position may have
been in Swiss private law, the Government, when it signed
the Basic Agreement with Holiday Inns, Glarus, Switzerland,
had thereby recognised its legal personality and existence, in
so far as Moroccan law and the international legal order were
concerned; the requirements laid down by the Convention
were thus fulfilled (independently of the formalities and the
type of company or legal person contemplated by Swiss
internal law). Thirdly, in any event, it was stressed that the
Government had knowingly contracted with a corporation
in a process of creation and that it could not in good faith

6.16

rely on the absence of Swiss registration on the date of the
contract. All the less so since it had no legitimate interest
whatever in objecting to a fact (ulterior registration) which
had not caused the slightest damage to the Government and
had been totally accepted by it. The claimants believed, in
other words, that the Government was precluded from rais-
ing that objection under the principle of good faith in an
international sense.

To sum up, the claimants counter-attacked by emphasizing
the “artificial” character of the Moroccan objections, which
interpreted the Washington Convention in an extraordinar-
ily formalistic and narrow manner. The Moroccan theory on
the date of consent amounted, in their submission, to an
exclusion of all expression of intent subject to suspensive
conditions and to a requirement that all conditions be met
simultaneously at the precise minute when the contract was
signed. The Convention (as well as the Basic Agreement) was
therefore deprived of a large part of its effectiveness, contrary
to the evident intention of its signatories and contrary, in the
concrete case, to the recognised intention of the Moroccan
State itself to accept the jurisdiction of ICSID for “any dis-
pute” relating to the contract and the “Moroccan Project”.
Furthermore, the Government's position, however ably pre-
sented by its counsel before the Tribunal, happened to be in
flat contradiction to its own attitude both at the time of
signing the Basic Agreement and afterwards. The Govern-
ment had started to perform the contract long after the
respective dates of registration of Holiday Inns, Glarus, and
of the coming into force of the Washington Convention
between all the States concerned, and it had at all times
(prior to the arbitration proceedings) treated Holiday Inns,
Glarus as a Contracting Party.

The tribunal in the Holiday Inns case formed the opinion, as
already mentioned at paragraphs 4.09 and 5.11, that “the Conven-
tion allows parties to subordinate the entry into force of an arbitra-
tion clause to the subsequent fulfillment of certain conditions,
such as the adherence of the States concerned to the Convention or
the incorporation of the company envisaged by the agreement. On

6.1

a

o

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

this assumption, it is the date when the conditions are definitely
satisfied, as regards one of the Parties involved, which constitutes
in the sense of the Convention the date of consent by that Party.”
Having noted that the Government of Morocco did not deny that
it entered into the Basic Contract and intended that the Centre
should have jurisdiction in respect of “Holiday Inns S. A. and the
subsidiary of Occidental Petroleum”, that Tribunal stated that “the
only reasonable interpretation of the Basic Agreement is to hold
that the Parties when signing the Agreement envisaged that all nec-
essary conditions for jurisdiction of the Centre would be fulfilled
and their consent at that time would be effective.” That Tribunal
went on to say that “Morocco became a Contracting State on June
10, 1967 and Switzerland on June 14, 1968, the Company became
a juridical person in 1967. Consequently, it is on the last of those
dates, i.c., June 14, 1968, that the Parties “have consented to sub-
mit the dispute to arbitration” within the meaning of Article 25 (2)
(b) of the Convention. From that date neither Party could unilater-
ally withdraw its consent as provided in Article 25 (1).”

Turning first to Cable’s Counsel's reply of April 30, 1996, copied in
paragraph 6.10 above, Cable concedes that only the Holding Com-
pany Requesting Party, ic. Cable Television of Nevis Holdings,
Led. was in existence at the time the Agreement was signed. The
letter goes on to state that “the Agreement makes it apparent on its
face that the Organisation of the Operating Company was contem-
plated by both parties.” A perusal of the Agreement could lead one
not to agree with this statement. The preamble to the Agreement
refers to the Operating Company as “formed under The Compa-
nies Act (335) of St. Kitts and Nevis.” This would suggest that the
company was already incorporated on or before September 18,
1986 the date of the Agreement. Furthermore, the recitals in the
Agreement read as follows: “WHEREAS, Government desires to
promote the development of cable television service, and,
WHEREAS, Cable is a television company.” Cable here refers to
the Holding and the Operating Companies which scemingly are
together called Cable under the Agreement. The Agreement goes
on to state that the Government hereby grants to Cable the right
and permission etc. The term of the Agreement commenced on the
date of its execution ive. September 18, 1986, (Clause 11) and the
Agreement ends at Clause 19 “Effective Date. Acceptance by Cable
is contingent upon completion of engineering and strand mapping

CASES

6.2

6.2

oS

‘0

383

of the system, which acceptance must be given within sixty (60)
days of the above date. The effective date of this Agreement shall
be the date of its execution by all parties.” The Agreement is exe-
cuted by CABLE TELEVISION OF NEVIS, LTD. By Lee A. Bert-
man. Nowhere in the agreement is there mention or inference of
the organization of the Operating Company at a future date being
contemplated by the parties to the Agreement and Clause 19 does
not appear to help since the contingencies for acceptance by Cable
make no reference to the future incorporation of the Operating
Company and stipulates quite clearly that the effective date of the
Agreement shall be the date of its execution, i.e., signature, by all
patties, the effective date being September 18, 1986.

In comparing the Holiday Inns case with this one, there are at least
three common veins, namely, (1) the host state was not a member
of ICSID when the project agreement was signed, (2) foreign
investors signed to carry out the project, and (3) a purported exe-
cuting party to the agreement was not in existence at the time of
the signing of the agreement.

Against this, there are several dissimilarities. First and foremost,
the applicable municipal law is different. In the present case, as
indicated above, the law of the Federation (which is based for the
most part on U.K. law) together with applicable international law
must be applied. In the Holiday Inns case, there was recourse to
Morocco and Swiss law, plus relevant international law. As Cable’s
Counsel submitted in his letter of June 30, 1996, “it is not unusual
to encounter legal requirements of various countries of the world
concerning the legal structure under which one must invest in
those countries. Ir is also common for compliance with those
requirements to take some time to complete.”

Another apparent dissimilarity is that, in thé Holiday Inns Case,
the Government of Morocco was fully aware that the American
investors would be performing the Project through two wholly
owned subsidiaries to be created for the purpose and that at the
date of signing the preparations to create a Swiss subsidiary had not
been completed. In the present case, NIA was obviously aware that
foreign, apparently American, investors were to carry out the Cable
TV Project in Nevis. This scems to be the only inference one can
draw from the Agreement, since inter alia (1) the Holding Com-
pany is an offshore company formed under the Nevis Business Cor-
poration Ordinance of 1984, (2) there is a condition for

384

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

convertibility of local funds into U.S. funds, (3) there is provision
for tax holiday for Cable, (4) there is exemption from tax on remit-
tances to offshore investors, (5) Non-Nevisian employees of Cable
are to be exempt from the 20% tax on earnings, (6) Cable is enti-
ted to the best exchange rate and establish and operate a U.S, cur-
rency account, and (definitely not least) there is provision for
ICSID Arbitration. Added to these is the appearance of the names
of ewo Washington based lawyers on the cover sheet of the Agree-
ment and the fact that the telex containing last minute modifica-
tions to the Agreement issued directly from these two lawyers to
the then Premier of Nevis, giving rise to the assumption that these
lawyers had a hand in the Agreement.

NIA however, unlike in the Holiday Inns case, seems, or rather so
it seems to be now claiming, to have first become aware that the
Operating Company was not in existence at the time of the signing
of the Agreement when Cable submitted its documentation in the
Response of Requesting Parties to Objections to Jurisdiction, such
documentation having included a true copy of the Certificate of
Incorporation of the Operating Company. Furthermore, no evi-
dence has been adduced to the Tribunal that NIA was aware that
the investors were intending to form an operating company after
the Agreement was signed. As a matter of fact, none of the persons
who appeared before the Tribunal was involved with the prepara-
tion or signing of the Agreement. The Tribunal however cannot
overlook the fact, as communicated by counsel for the Respondent
during the hearing, that che arrangements with Cable were formal-
ized by an NIA of a different political persuasion. In paragraph (9)
of section B. of The Facts, as set out in che Respondent's Objec-
tions to Jurisdiction, Respondent states that “Cable dealt with suc-
cessive political parties in office in [NIA]. The first one headed by
the Honourable Simeon Daniel as Premier was the Nevis Reforma-
tion Party (NRP). The agreement was signed with the NRP
Administration.” Respondent further states at paragraph (18) of
The Facts that “{aJs a result of local elections in Nevis in mid-
1992, the NRP was replaced by the Concerned Citizen’s Movement
(CCM), headed by the Honourable Vance Amory, as Premier.” In
other words, NIA, as presently constituted, is comprised of persons
of a different political party to the one in 1986 when the Agree-
ment was negotiated and signed.

CASES

385

6.23. Another apparent dissimilarity is the argument raised in the Holi-

a

day Inns case that a stock corporation in a process of constitution
under Swiss law is not entirely devoid of existence and the legal
acts made on its behalf do have some effects. The Tribunal is not
familiar wich Swiss law and, consequently, is uninfluenced by this
indecisive statement, as it cannot confirm its veracity. This legal
position, however, is not so under St. Kitts and Nevis law.

Finally, the State of Morocco was a signatory to the Basic Agree-
ment with (1) Holiday Inns S.A., Glarus, Switzerland, w! at
that time was only in the process of creation, and (2) a subsidiary
of O.P.C. which at the time was clearly not in existence. In the
present case, the State, i.e., the Federation, is not a party to the
Agreement, notwithstanding Cable’s claim otherwise, the party
thereof being the Government of Nevis. So the matter of the Feder-
ation agreeing and intending, or not denying that it entered into
an agreement and intended, that ICSID should have jurisdiction in
respect of the Operating or any other company does not arise.

To turn again to the applicable law which, in the absence of agree-
ment of the parties as to the rules of law to apply to this hearing, is
the law of the Federation and such rules of international law as
may be applicable, it is desirable that consideration be given to the
Convention and the reasons therefor. Quoting from ICSID’s
Emerging Jurisprudence: The Scope of ICSID’s Jurisdiction by
William Rand, Robert N. Homick and -Paul Friedland,
“{ICSID] was established by. the Con-
vention... in 1965 under the auspices of the World Bank in
order to provide a forum for the arbitration of investment disputes
between governments and foreign investors. ICSID is a unique
forum serving a variety of interests. To both foreign investors and
host governments, it is a neutral forum, independent of the inves-
tors’ and host governments’ courts, in which investment disputes
between the foreign investors and host governments can be
resolved. Foreign investors can expect that tribunal awards will be
enforced since Article 54 of the Convention establishes that an
ICSID award shall be treated by each Contracting State as if it were a
final judgment of a court of that state. Host governments are guaran-
teed that they will not be subjected to international claims or diplo-
matic intervention by the foreign investor's home country and that
the law governing the arbitration will be, in the absence of a different

 

    

 

386

6.2

XN

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

agreement among the parties, that of the host government. Most sig-
nificantly, co the benefit of both foreign investors and host govern-
ments, ICSID promotes foreign investment by providing a reliable
forum for the resolution of investment disputes.”

The Respondent's submission in respect of the nonexistence of the
Requesting Operating Company at the date of the signing of the
Agreement, i. ¢., September 18, 1986, appears to be relevant in
respect of Article 25 of the Convention for the purpose of estab-
lishing thac the Requesting Operating Company could not, and
did not, consent to ICSID Arbitration, as required under that Arti-
cle, The Tribunal does not accept submission that “no further con-
sideration need be given to any contention on behalf of this
company in relation to that Agreement.” All thar the eribunal is
concerned with at this stage is whether it has jurisdiction in dis-
putes between the operating company and the respondent. The
incontrovertible facts are that (1) at the time of the signing of the
Agreement, i. e. September 18, 1986, the Requesting Operating
Company was nonexistent, (2) thar company was incorporated on
April 2, 1987, some 6 1/2 months after the Agreement was signed,
(3) all the parties had treated the Requesting Operating Company
as if it had been in existence from September 18, 1986, and (4) all
the work required under the Agreement in respect of the CATV
System on Nevis had been carried out by the Requesting Operating
Company, if Respondent's submission that the Holding Company
cannot carry out such activities in Nevis is correct.

In the ICSID arbitration matter, AAC v. Indonesia, referred to in
paragraph 6.13 above and in che aforementioned ICSID’s Emerg-
ing Jurisprudence, that tribunal ruled that “under well seteled prin-
ciples of international law an agreement to arbitrate is not to be
construed restrictively but rather in a way that leads [the court] to
find out and to respect the common will of the parties. According
to the Tribunal, the guiding principle of construction is reason-
ableness, or good faith, as determined by consideration of the con-
sequences the parties may be considered as having reasonably and
legitimately envisaged to arise from theit commitments.” That tri-
bunal’s award reaffirms that the reasonable understanding and con-
templation of parties to international contracts containing ICSID
arbitration clauses will not be frustrated by technical arguments
interposed in order to defeat ICSID jurisdiction.

CASES

6.28

387

In the Holiday Inns arbitration, the tribunal, in rejecting
Morocco's position, “referred explicitly to three general principles
of international commercial law: (1) the general unity of an invest-
ment operation; (2) respect for the sovereignty of States, and (3)
the primacy, in principle, of international proceedings over purely
internal proceedings. Applying the first and dispositive principle,
the tribunal reasoned that the agreements underlying a single
investment could be categorized as basic contracts that create the
parties’ obligations and related agreements, contemplated by the
initial contracts, concerning the execution of the matters originally
agreed upon. The loan contracts fell into the latter category;
although separate agreements, they were an integral part of the
investment picture. Accordingly, the rights and duties emerging
from them could not be ignored when ruling upon disputes regard-
ing the underlying investment agreement.”

The Holiday Inns and AAC cases involved parties that either had not
signed the arbitration agreement or were not clearly designated in
the relevant arbitration clause. Additionally,-the Holiday Inns case
also deale with signatories which were not in existence at the time of
signing. The tribunal refused to be swayed by formalistic arguments
when it was clear that the parties had, both at the time of signing
and thereafter, reasonably contemplated ICSID jurisdiction over all
the principal parties to the dispute. This portion of the Holiday Inns
jurisdictional ruling is significant as a precedent for the extension of
jurisdiction over unnamed parties not signatories to the agreement
containing the arbitration clause. Another statement by the tribunal
in the Holiday Inns case is worthy of mention. That tribunal took
the view that while “an agreement should . normally be
explicit an implied agreement would.
acceptable in the event that the special circumstances would wae
any other interpretation of the intention of the parties. The above
quotations are all taken from the above-mentioned ICSID’s Emerg-
ing Jurisprudence: The Scope of ICSID’s Jurisdiction.

In the present case, it is highly probable that, if the matter was liti-
gated before the local courts, they would be bound to follow the
decisions already referred to in paragraphs 6.07 and 6.08 above.
However, having regard to the international nature of the Conven-
tion and arbitration matters taking place thereunder, there are cer-
tain other aspects to be considered.

 

   

388

6.31

6.32

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

No evidence or other information has been brought to indicate
what transpired between the overseas investors and NIA prior to
and up to the time of the signing of the Agreement in September
1986. There were obviously some sort of negotiations, since it is
unlikely that NIA would have accepted a first draft agreement
related to the project without question. This is reflected in the fact
that there are some marked up delineations creating four changes
in the text of the Agreement and the addendum contained in the
telex of September 11, 1986, from the Washington based lawyers
dealt with these changes. Obviously, the overseas investors
intended to execute the project through two locally incorporated
companies, one, an off-shore company which will be the holding
company, and the other, a subsidiary of the holding company,
which will carry out the on-the-ground work in Nevis. NIA was
obviously aware of this intention prior to the signing of the Agree-
ment as it is manifest in the Agreement that this is the intention of
the overseas investors, otherwise why the naming of two companies
as parties co the Agreement representing Cable. NIA obviously agreed
to the proposal by Cable to have a holding company and an operat-
ing company carry out the project, otherwise NIA would not have
signed the Agreement with the two Cable designated companies.

There is only one Project, i.c., the establishment and commercial-
ism of an island wide Cable TV system for the island of Nevis, with
benefits accruing to both NIA and Cable. Based on the under-
standings reached as reflected in the Agreement, the overseas inves-
tors seemingly moved large sums of money held outside to invest in
Nevis in the establishment of the project. The parties all along
seem to have treated the operating company as having the author-
ity co represent Cable in all matters in Nevis under the Agreement,
This is reflected in the correspondence referred to at paragraphs (9)
to (31) of The Facts in the Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction
and the copies of correspondence circulated to the Tribunal. Lee A.
Bertman, with an American address, signed the Memorandum of
Association of the Operating Company, as President, Cable TV
Company, at least by March 13, 1987, thereby taking up one share
in the company. He had purported to sign the Agreement six and
one half months earlier as president of the operating company. One
should therefore assume that, at time of signing of the Agreement,
he knew or should have been aware, unless he received incorrect
advice, that the company had not yet been registered. The annual

CASES

6.3:

6.3

o

a

389

returns of the company reveal that the operating company is
wholly owned and controlled by the holding company, and that che
directors are both of USA nationality. The holding company can
therefore direct and dictate to the operating company what it
should do, provided it is within the powers and functions set out in
the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the company.

As pointed out at the hearing by Cable’s counsel, the Agreement, ac
clause 18, provides for assignment as follows; “the agreement shall
not be assignable in whole or part except with the mutual consent
of the parties, provided, however, Cable may assign this Agreement
to a subsidiary parent, or related entity.” Even if the strictly legal
position as it applies to the Federation were followed and a deter-
mination was made that the non-existence of the operating com-
pany at the time of the signing of the Agreement meant that the
operating company was not a party to the Agreement, it seems one
may infer an assignment by the holding company to the operating
company, which is a subsidiary of the holding company, from the
conduct of the parties, bearing in mind the ruling by the tribunal
in the Holiday Inns case, already referred to in paragraph 6.28
above, that while an agreement should be normally explicit, an
implied agreement would be acceptable in the event the specific
circumstances would exclude any other interpretation of the inten-
tion of the parties, Furthermore, unlike in the matter of a new con-
tract as might have been required under a strict interpretation
according to the law of the Federation, the agreement of NIA to
such an assignment is not required.

In the circumstances, it appears to the Tribunal that, if the other
requirements for ICSID arbitration were or are being met, the late
registration of the operating company docs not operate to bar the
operating company from participation in the institution of Arbitral
proceedings under the Convention. In this regard, the very flexible
interpretation given in the Holiday Inns case, already referred to in
paragraphs 6.10 and 6.16 above, in that “the Convention allows
parties to subordinate the entry into force of an arbitration clause
to the subsequent fulfillment of certain conditions, such as the
adherence of the States concerned to the Convention, or the incor-
poration of the company envisaged by the agreement. On this
assumption, it is the date when the conditions are definitely satis-
fied, as regards one of the parties involved, which constitutes in the
sense of the Convention the date of consent by that Party.” In

 

390

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

respect of the operating company, the requirements to be met by
the Federation under the Convention have not been satisfied and,
in the circumstances, the operating company’s consent to the

ICSID Arbitral proceedings has not been established.

CHAPTER 7

Sixth Issue: Cable Television of Nevis Holdings Limited is by
the terms of its incorporation under the Nevis Business
Corporation Ordinance, 1984, an offshore company.

An offshore company is prohibited from carrying on
business within Nevis and, accordingly, if an offshore
company does so carry on business, any dispute that
arises as a result cannot be described as a legal dispute
‘for the purposes of the Convention.

Cable cannot be heard to say that Cable Television
of Nevis Holdings Limited is a party to a dispute
for the purposes of the Convention.

‘The Tribunal rejects this submission. These are overseas investors
who have agreed with NIA to carry out the project through the
medium of two locally incorporated companies, one, an offshore
company, which is the holding company, and the other, the operat-
ing company which is a subsidiary of the holding company. The
holding company is permitted by the Nevis Business Corporation
Ordinance, 1984, inter alia to “invest in stocks or entities of Nevis
corporations or be a partner in Nevis partnership or a beneficiary
of a Nevis trust or estate” and, for the purpose of this investment
has done just that. All the on-the ground operations have been car-
ried out, or so it appears, by the operating company which has
been registered under the Companies Act Cap 335 of the Federa-
tion, The investors have signed the Agreement as an interested
party and, in so doing, have agreed to Clause 16, the Arbitration

CASES

7.02

391

Clause. Accordingly, whether or not it is an offshore company is
not relevant, The salient points are (1) it has signed the Agreement
and has therefore agreed with NIA on the manner in which the
Arbitration should be conducted, if there is any dispute arising
under the agreement, (2) it is the parent or holding company of the
operating company which may be eligible to qualify for the same
arrangements for arbitration, (3) the presence of the holding com-
pany as an offshore company, albeit incorporated in Nevis, gives
rise to the presumption of foreign ownership thereby enabling it to
seek to qualify for treatment under Article 25 (2)(b) of the Con-
vention, and (4) above all, it is the money of the overseas investors
behind the holding company which is at risk.

However, as already indicated in paragraph 6.34 above, since
there are other unfulfilled requirements of ICSID essential in
order to ground ICSID arbitration in this matter, the Tribunal
rules that Cable Television of Nevis Holdings, Ltd. has not yet
established consent to the institution of ICSID proceedings.

CHAPTER 8

Summary of decisions reached and Order

In summary, the Tribunal concludes in respect of the Respondent's
Objections to Jurisdiction as follows:

(1) The Tribunal decides that the proper party to the Agreement is
NIA and not the Federation, and that NIA is a constituent sub-
division or agency of the Federation which has not been desig-
nated as such to ICSID as required by Article 25 (1) of the
Convention. Accordingly, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
(paragraphs 2.08, 2.15 to 2.17, 2.25, 2.27, and 2.32 to 2.33);

(2) The Tribunal decides that substitution of the Federation for
the Government of Nevis as a party is not appropriate and that
the Federation is not eligible to be named as a party to the pro-
ceedings (paragraphs 2.17, 2.27 and 3.02);

392

8.02

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(3) The Tribunal decides that the references in the High Court
documentation to Clause 16 of the Agreement are merely
statements of fact and do not amount to consent by any person
ot persons to ICSID jurisdiction and that the consent of the
Federation to arbitration as a party or to enable NIA to do so
on its own behalf has not been established by the documenta-
tion in the High Court case (paragraph 4.17);

The Tribunal decides in respect of the Rules:

(a) Rule 2 (1) (a) has not been complied with, since the Fed-

eration is incorrectly named as a party to the proceedings

(paragraph 5.06);

Rule 2 (1) (b) has not been complied with, since the correct

party should be NIA which is a constituent subdivision or

agency of the Federation and has not been designated to

ICSID as such by che Federation (paragraph 5.07);

Rule 2 (1) (c) has not been complied with in that no rele-

vant documentation has been furnished in respect of NIA

as a constituent subdivision or agency of the Federation

(paragraph 5.12); and

Rule 2 (1) (d) has not been complied with in its entirety in

that, while the Requesting Partics mect the nationality

requirements, the agreement of the parties that they should
be treated as nationals of another Contracting State has not

been established (paragraphs 5.22 and 5.24);

(5) The ‘Tribunal decides that the operating company, Cable Televi-
sion of Nevis Limited, has not established its consent to ICSID
jurisdiction since all the conditions required to ground such
jurisdiction have not been met (paragraph 6.34); and

¢

&

Es

S

s

(©) The Tribunal holds that Cable Television of Nevis Holdings
Led., an offshore Company, could be a proper patty to ICSID
Atbitral proceedings if the jurisdiction hurdle in relation to
such proceedings were overcome (paragraph 7.02).

The Tribunal therefore, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 41

(5), proposes to render an award that the dispute before the Tribu-
nal is not within the jurisdiction of ICSID and not within the
competence of the Tribunal.

On the matter of costs, several attempts were made by the Request-
ing Parties over the years to obtain an increase in the rates for Cable
TV service in Nevis and, in each case, NIA did not support the pro-
posed increase. Following exchanges between the parties, NIA

 

CASES

&

8.0

8.0!

a

8.06

393

sought and obtained exparte a High Court Order dated August 31,
1995, to the effect that Cable could not increase the rates until
Cable had exhausted whatever remedies were available to the parties
under the Agreement for the settlement of disputes. Cable, by letter
dated October 23, 1995, to ICSID, requested ICSID arbitration. In
so doing, Cable used the only means available to it, that of naming
the Federation as a party to the Agreement and to the proceedings.
The Respondent quite rightly raised objections on the matter of
jurisdiction and the Tribunal, as reflected in this award, has agreed to
some extent with the Respondent's submissions.

Article 61(2) of the Convention provides that “iJn the case of arbi-
tration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties other-
wise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by
whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the
Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of {ICSID]
shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award”. ICSID
Arbitration Rule 47 (1) (j) requires thar the award shall contain
“any decision of the Tribunal regarding the cost of the proceeding”.
The Tribunal notes that, on behalf of each party, it was submitted
that the costs of the successful party should be borne by the unsuc-
cessful party. Accordingly, the words “the parties otherwise agree”
within the meaning of Article 61 (2) of the Convention are not
applicable hereto. The Tribunal decides that cach party shall bear
the expenses incurred by it in connection with the proceedings and
that the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of ICSID shall be paid by them
in equal shares. Inasmuch as the parties have advanced to ICSID
equal deposits in respect of such fees, expenses and charges ade-
quate to pay them, no monetary award is required.

With foregoing in mind, and having regard to the complexity and
unusual nature of the issues raised, the tribunal considers that cach
party should bear its own costs,

ORDER
For the reasons set forth above

THE TRIBUNAL AWARDS AS FOLLOWS:

&

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

. The Request for Arbitration herein registered on November 14,

1995 is dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

Each party shall bear the costs incurred by it in connection with
the proceedings.

