PCA CASE NO. 2016-7
In The Matter Of An Arbitration Before A Tribunal Constituted In Accordance With
The Agreement Between The Government Of The United Kingdom Of Great Britain
And Northern Ireland And The Government Of The Republic Of India
For The Promotion And Protection Of Investments
-and-
The Arbitration Rules Of The United Nations Commission On International Trade Law,
1976 (the “UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules”)

-between-

CAIRN ENERGY PLC
CAIRN UK HOLDINGS LIMITED

Claimants
-and-
The Republic of India

Respondent

 

Procedural Order No. 4

Decision on the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation

 

The Arbitral Tribunal
Dr. Laurent Lévy (Presiding Arbitrator)
Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC

Registry
Permanent Court of Arbitration

19 April 2017

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4

 

 

 

19 April 2017

Table of Contents
I. Procedural History 3
IL. The Parties’ Position: 7
A. The Respondent’s position 7
1. The UNCITRAL Rules contain a presumption in favor of bifurcation ................ 8

2. The Respondent’s objections are fit for bifurcation under the criteria adopted by
international tribunals

 

 

B. The Clai ” position 15
1. The Respondent’s decision to withhold its Application for Bifurcation warrants
its rejection 15

 

2. The Respondent fails to demonstrate that bifurcation at this stage of the
proceedings would be efficient

 

 

Til. Analysis

A. Do the UNCITRAL Rules create a presumption in favor of bifurcation? ...........0.0... 25
B. What criteria should the Tribunal consider when exercising its discretion? ............. 26
C.__Is bifurcation warranted in the present Case? 0... eee eeeeee ees eee eeeeeeeeneeneneeeee 28
IV. Decision 33

 

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 18 April 2016, the Parties and the Tribunal held the first procedural hearing to
discuss, inter alia, the procedural calendar. During that hearing, the Respondent
indicated that it intended to wait until the Claimants filed their Statement of Claim
before formulating its objections to jurisdiction and admissibility, and proposed that
whether those objections should be heard in a preliminary bifurcated phase should be
determined thereafter.' That said, the Respondent made the following commitments:

a. First, “[i]f following the Claimants’ memorial being filed, we realize that in fact,
on the claim as formulated, there are no objections we wish to take to either
jurisdiction or admissibility, we would commit to letting the Tribunal know that
straightaway, irrespective of the timeline which would have been otherwise put
in place to file the objections.”~

b. “Secondly, if when we file the objections to jurisdiction and admissibility, we
realize that there would be no good grounds for bifurcation or in fact feel that
actually everything is better dealt with in one phase, we would also say that
straightaway.”?

On 21 April 2016, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties to follow up on various matters
discussed during the first procedural hearing. With respect to the question of
bifurcation, the Tribunal recorded the agreement reached at the hearing as follows: “Tf,
once the Respondent has received the Claimants’ Statement of Claim, the Respondent
wishes to raise objections to jurisdiction and/or admissibility, it may file a request for
bifurcation and should do so as soon as reasonably possible, failing which the
Respondent will submit its Statement of Defense in full. If the Respondent does
request a bifurcation, the Tribunal would then allow the Claimants to comment and
will ultimately make a decision.”*

On 6 June 2016, the Respondent filed an Application for a Stay of the Proceedings
(the “Stay Application”).°

On 28 June 2016, the Claimants filed their Statement of Claim.

On 1 July 2016, in the context of the timing for a decision on the Respondent’s Stay
Application and for the filing of the Respondent’s Statement of Defence, the Tribunal
noted that the Claimants had already filed their Statement of Claim, and reiterated the

Tr. 18.04.2016, 27:3-28-7 (Mr. Moolan).
Tr. 18.04.2016, 28:8-15 (Mr. Moolan).
Tr. 18.04.2016, 28:17-23 (Mr. Moolan).
Tribunal’s email of 21 April 2016 (AT-7).

The procedural history relating to the Stay Application is summarized in Procedural Order No. 3.

3

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

directions regarding the timing of an application for bifurcation by the Respondent
quoted at paragraph 2 above.®

On 8 July 2016, the Respondent indicated that it would await the Tribunal’s decision
on its Stay Application before filing any application for bifurcation.’ The Claimants
objected to this, and requested the Tribunal to “reject the Respondent’s proposal to
delay notification of any preliminary objections and any bifurcation request until after
the Tribunal issues a decision on its stay application, and [...] encourage the
Respondent to comply with its commitment made at the organisational hearing to raise
those issues straightaway.”*

By letter of 25 July 2016, the Respondent responded that it had only promised to
inform the Tribunal and the Claimants “straightaway” if it did not wish to raise
objections to jurisdiction and admissibility, or whether bifurcation appeared
inappropriate. The Respondent also argued that in view of the formulation of Article
21(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules (1976), it had no obligation to file any jurisdictional
objections or file an application for bifurcation prior to the submission of its Statement
of Defence. Further, as in the Respondent’s view the proceedings should be stayed, it
argued that it is “perfectly legitimate” for it to await the Tribunal’s decision on its Stay
Application before filing its foreshadowed application for bifurcation.”

By letter of 4 August 2016, the Tribunal determined that the Parties’ submissions did
not call for a revision of its previous directions on this matter. It therefore reiterated
that “if the Respondent wishes to raise objections to jurisdiction and/or admissibility to
the Claimants’ claim, it may file a request for bifurcation and should do so as soon as
reasonably possible, failing which the Respondent shall submit its Statement of
Defence in full.” The Tribunal added that “when ruling on a request for bifurcation, it
will take into consideration whether it was timely made.”!°

Separately, in its letter of 8 July 2016, the Respondent requested a hearing on its Stay
Application. The Claimants objected to this hearing; this objection notwithstanding,
they proposed that if the Tribunal decided that a hearing should be held, the Parties
should use “any such hearing to address questions of bifurcation, even if India insists
on briefing its objections later.” The Claimants clarified that “[t]he Respondent would
only need to be willing to identify those objections it believes warrant bifurcated
treatment.” The Claimants added that this “would allow the Tribunal and the Parties to
address in a single hearing two threshold procedural questions, the resolution of which
will dispose of the stay application and set a path towards resolving the Respondent’s
jurisdictional objections.”"!

Tribunal’s letter of 1 July 2016 (AT-20).

Respondent's email of 8 July 2016 (RCom-27).
Claimants’ letter of 18 July 2016, p. 5 (CCom-35).
Respondent's letter of 25 July 2016, #91 4-5 (RCom-32).
Tribunal’s letter of 4 August 2016, p. 3 (AT-25).
Claimants’ letter of 29 July 2016, p. 2 (CCom-36).

4

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

In its letter of 4 August 2016, the Tribunal granted the Respondent’s request for a
hearing on its Stay Application. Ultimately, this hearing was scheduled for 7 October
2016."

By letter of 8 August 2016, the Respondent rejected the Claimants’ proposal that they
should identify their preliminary objections prior to the hearing on the Stay
Application or include a discussion on bifurcation during that hearing, arguing that
either “(i) the Respondent would have filed its Application for Bifurcation before the
date of the hearing, in which case, procedural directions can be issued by the Tribunal
in writing in the usual way; or (ii) the Respondent would not have filed its Application
for Bifurcation before that date, in which case it would not be appropriate for the
Tribunal to require the Respondent to identify objections to jurisdiction in advance of
its Statement of Defence given the terms of Article 21 of the UNCITRAL Rules[.]”?

By email of 2 September 2016, the Tribunal included in the agenda for the hearing on
the Stay Application the discussion of the procedural calendar, including blocking
dates for an evidentiary hearing.'* The Respondent objected to this and other items
listed in the agenda. 'S The Claimants expressed no objection to the Tribunal’s agenda
for the hearing, but argued that “had the Respondent been more forthcoming about its
plans in respect of bifurcation, as it was invited to do, a parallel briefing and combined
hearing could have been organised to address both applications” and, as a result, “any
request by the Respondent for a separate hearing on bifurcation should receive little
sympathy, and in no circumstance should it provide an excuse for the late filing of the
Statement of Defence.”'*

By letter of 28 September 2016, after hearing the Parties, the Tribunal eliminated from
the agenda for the hearing a broad discussion of the procedural calendar, but
confirmed that the agenda would include a discussion of the dates for an evidentiary
hearing, noting that this item could not be delayed any longer. The Tribunal also
reiterated its directions of 21 April, 1 July and 4 August 2016. "

On 6 October 2016, on the eve of the hearing scheduled for the Respondent’s Stay
Application, the Respondent filed its Application for Bifurcation (the “Respondent’s
Application”). At the same time, the Respondent proposed a briefing schedule for that
application consisting of two rounds, and requested a hearing on that application.

On 7 October 2016, the Parties and the Tribunal held a hearing to address the
Respondent’s Stay Application, as well as certain procedural matters, including the
determination of dates for the evidentiary hearing.

Tribunal’s letter of 4 August 2016, p. 3 (AT-25).

Respondent’s letter of 8 August 2016, 4 3 (RCom-36).

Tribunal’s email of 2 September 2016 (AT-30).

Respondent’ letters of 16 and 26 September 2016 (RCom-38 and RCom-40).
Claimants’ letter of 21 September 2016, p. 4 (CCom-44).

Tribunal’s letter of 28 September 2016 (AT-34).

5

20.

21.

22.

23.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

By letter of 17 October 2016, the Claimants objected to a hearing on the Respondent’s
Application for Bifurcation, arguing that “the Respondent has been tactically
withholding its Bifurcation Application, notwithstanding repeated urgings by the
Tribunal and the Claimants”, and that “[h]ad the Respondent done so, the issue could
have been briefed and decided long ago, or it could have been addressed in a
combined hearing on 7 October 2016, as the Claimants proposed.” '*

In its Letter 1 of 3 November 2016, after considering the circumstances described
above and in the exercise of its discretion under Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL
Rules, the Tribunal denied the Respondent’s request for a hearing on its Application
for Bifurcation.'? However, it agreed that the application would be briefed in two
rounds, with the first round to take place before the filing of the Respondent’s
Statement of Defence, and the second round to take place thereafter. The Tribunal
also invited the Parties to consult and agree on two timetable proposals, one for a
bifurcated proceeding, and one for a non-bifurcated proceeding.

In a second letter dated 3 November 2016, the Tribunal informed the Parties that
before it issued its decision on the Stay Application, it wished to explore avenues of
coordination with the Vedanta tribunal that would be directed at reducing the risk of
inconsistent decisions while allowing both arbitrations to proceed, and invited the
Parties to consult with each other and with Vedanta to determine whether other
options — short of a full consolidation or a full stay of the proceedings — would be
feasible. 7° As explained in Procedural Order No. 3, the Parties cooperated with this
invitation, but these efforts ultimately failed, and on 17 December 2016 the
Respondent renewed its Stay Application. These exchanges were followed by new
submissions by the Parties on the Stay Application which continued until March 2017,
and a request by the Respondent for a second hearing for this application”!

On 9 November 2016, the Claimants filed their Response to the Respondent’s
Application for Bifurcation (the “Claimants’ Response’).

On 4 February 2017, after several requests for extensions, the Respondent filed its full
Statement of Defence.

On 19 February 2017, the Respondent filed its Reply to the Claimants’ Response to its
Application for Bifurcation (the “Respondent’s Reply”).

On 6 March 2017, the Claimants filed their Rejoinder on the Respondent’s
Application for Bifurcation (the “Claimants’ Rejoinder”).

By letter of 27 March 2017, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the Stay
Application was denied, that a decision containing the Tribunal’s reasoning would

Claimants’ letter of 17 October 2016, pp. 1-2 (CCom-49).
Tribunal’s Letter 1 of 3 November 2016, pp. 6-7 (AT-37).
Tribunal’s Letter 2 of 3 November 2016, pp. 1-2 (AT-36).
See Procedural Order No. 3, {9 5-11.

24.

25.

IL.

26.

27.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

follow shortly, and that the Tribunal would thereafter address the Respondent’s
Application for Bifurcation.

On 31 March 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 with its Decision on
the Respondent’s Stay Application.

The present Decision addresses the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation.

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

As it is the Respondent who requests a stay of the proceedings, the Tribunal will start
with the Respondent’s position, and will then address the Claimants’.

A. The Respondent’s position

The Respondent contends that the present dispute falls outside of the scope of
protection of the India-United Kingdom bilateral investment treaty (the “BIT”), and as
a result is outside of the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction”, or the claim is
inadmissible.”* More specifically, the Respondent raises the following three
preliminary objections:”4

a. First, the Respondent argues that the Claimants’ claim is premature, because it
concerns a first instance assessment order which is still in the process of being
reviewed within the appellate procedure provided for in the Indian Income Tax
Act 1961 (the “Income Tax Act” or the “Act”) (the “First Preliminary
Objection”).”* The Tribunal understands the Respondent’s position in this regard
to be that this renders the claim inadmissible.”°

b. Second, the Respondent contends that the BIT does not apply to disputes
concerning taxation measures (the “Second Preliminary Objection”).”” The
Tribunal understands that, as a result, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal
has no jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claim.”*

c. Third, the Respondent submits that the dispute does not concern the Claimants’
“investments”, but rather it relates to a taxation measure that has been imposed
on the Claimants’ “returns”, which either (i) do not fall within the scope of the

Respondent’s Application, J 2.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, Section V.

In its Statement of Defence, the Respondent raises a fourth preliminary objection to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction, namely that the Claimants have not made an investment in accordance with Indian Law
(Respondent’s Statement of Defence, Section V.D). However, the Respondent “recognises that this
preliminary objection is inappropriate for bifurcation inasmuch as it is intertwined with the merits of the
dispute.” (Respondent's Statement of Defence, {| 245).

  

  

 

Respondent’s Application, J 5.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, { 195.
Respondent’s Application, J 5.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, {| 225.

28.

29.

30.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

investor-State dispute settlement provisions in Article 9 of the BIT and therefore
fall outside of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, or (ii) are not protected by the
substantive protections invoked by the Claimants, which cover “investments”
and not “returns” (with the exception of Article 7 of the BIT, which is
inapplicable) (the “Third Preliminary Objection”). » As explained at paragraph
40 below, the Tribunal understands the Respondent’s position is that “the
Claimants’ claim is outside the scope of protection of the BIT” (and thus outside
of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, or “alternatively that the bulk of the substantive

protections invoked by the Claimants are not available to them”.*°

The Respondent submits that it would be in the interests of procedural efficiency to
bifurcate these proceedings so that these three objections can be heard and determined
in a separate preliminary phase.*! The Respondent makes two main arguments in this
regard: first, that the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules” or
the “Rules”) contain a presumption in favor of bifurcation in the event that the
Respondent raises any preliminary objections (Section 1); and second, that the
objections raised are fit for bifurcation under the criteria determined by other
international tribunals (Section 2).

1. The UNCITRAL Rules contain a presumption in favor of bifurcation

The Respondent submits that the UNCITRAL Rules 1976 contain a presumption in
favor of bifurcation in the event that the Respondent raises any preliminary
objections.” This presumption derives from the text of Article 24(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rules, which provides that “[i]n general, the arbitral tribunal should rule
on a plea concerning its jurisdiction as a preliminary question.” Citing the rules and
practice of other international courts and tribunals, the Respondent argues that “[i]t is
usual practice in international dispute settlement to separate jurisdictional objections
from the merits of the dispute.” The Respondent acknowledges however that
tribunals retain the discretion to join any preliminary objections to the merits, as
confirmed by the tribunal in Glamis Gold.»

The Respondent emphasizes that Article 23(3) of the 2010 version of the UNCITRAL
Rules (the “2010 Rules”) does not include this presumption, as the relevant text states

Respondent’s Application, {{ 5, 66.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, {| 226.
Respondent’s Application, J 5.
Respondent’s Application, J 7.

Respondent’s Application, 9{{ 22-23, citing Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules. See also
Respondent's Reply, { 6(a).

Respondent's Application, | 22.

Respondent's Application, {| 23, citing Glamis Gold Ltd v. United States of America (“Glamis Gold”),
Procedural Order No 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RLA-33), (9.

8

31.

32.

33.

34,

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

that “[t]he arbitral tribunal may rule on a plea referred to in paragraph 2 either as a
preliminary question or in an award on the merits.”*

The Respondent denies that Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules creates a “soft”
presumption, as asserted by the Claimants. To the contrary, it submits that “[t]he
combination of the direction that ‘in general’ an arbitral tribunal ‘should’ rule on a
plea concerning its jurisdiction as a preliminary question is quite the reverse of a ‘soft’
presumption.” Further, the Glamis Gold tribunal’s statement merely reiterates that it
is a presumption, but does not seek to diminish the strength of the presumption.**

Likewise, the Respondent denies that the presumption is in some way premised on a
respondent’s having raised its objections in a timely manner. While the Respondent
does not dispute that “the primary motive for the presumption was to ensure efficiency
in proceedings”, “it does not follow that the goal of procedural efficiency imposes any
obligation as to the timing of preliminary objections.”*” Tf this had been UNCITRAL’s

intention, Article 21(3) would have been worded differently.*°

The Respondent recognizes that the Tribunal encouraged it to raise any objections to
jurisdiction and file any request for bifurcation “as soon as reasonably possible”, but
argues that the Tribunal was not purporting to impose an exclusionary time limit;
rather, it simply noted that when ruling on a request for bifurcation, it would take into
account whether it was timely made.*! The Claimants’ reliance on Desert Line is
misplaced as that decision was based on the very different wording of Rule 41(1) of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules.“

In any event, the Respondent denies that “in the unusual and complex circumstances
of this case and the Vedanta claim” its Application for Bifurcation could have been
filed at any time over the past year, as the Claimants assert. According to the
Respondent, “[i]t was perfectly reasonable for the Respondent to await the full
elaboration of the Claimants’ case in its Statement of Claim” and, “contrary to the
Claimants’ assertion, the Application does rely on facts and matters which were
developed in the Statement of Claim” (the Respondent notes in this regard that “the
Claimants’ arguments on the interpretation of Indian law are developed in much
greater detail in the Statement of Claim”). The Respondent also notes that it
indicated as early as July 2016 that it would await the Tribunal’s decision on its Stay

Respondent’s Application, {| 24-25, citing inter alia Article 23(3) of the 2010 Rules, Guaracachi
America Inc. and Rurelec PLC v Bolivia (“Rurelec”), Procedural Order No 10 of 17 December 2012
(Exh, RLA-36), 9, and Philip Morris Asia Ltd v. Australia (“Philip Morris”), Procedural Order No 8
of 14 April 2014 (Exh. RLA-37), { 101.

Respondent's Reply, 19.

Id, citing Glamis Gold, Procedural Order No 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RLA-33), 19.
Respondent's Application, {| 10.

Id.

Respondent's Application, {| 1, citing the Tribunal’s letter of 4 August 2016.
Respondent's Application, | 11.

Respondent's Application, | 12.

35.

36.

37.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

Application before filing an Application for Bifurcation, which was a “perfectly
reasonable approach to take” and “one which was consistent with the interests of
procedural efficiency”, as at that time it was expected that the Tribunal would issue its
decision the Stay Application by the end of August 2016.4

The Respondent further contends that, contrary to the position taken in Desert Line,
the Application was not issued on the very last day possible under Article 21(3); “[iJt
had been presaged since April 2016 and was ultimately filed on 6 October 2016."
The Respondent explains that its Application for Bifurcation was made in advance of
the 7 October 2016 hearing “precisely in order that it could be taken into account in
the discussions of timetabling issues.”“° The Respondent emphasizes that “[t]his is not
a case in which the Respondent has sought to ambush the Claimants or the Tribunal
and/or to derail the timetable”, noting that separate timetables for bifurcated and non-
bifurcated proceedings’ were discussed and proposed by the Parties.*”

As a result, the Respondent submits that “in the exercise of its discretion, the Tribunal
should start from a presumption in favour of bifurcation, before taking into account
other relevant considerations.’”“*

2. The Respondent’s objections are fit for bifurcation under the criteria
adopted by international tribunals

Citing Glamis Gold in particular, the Respondent notes that tribunals constituted under
the UNCITRAL and the ICSID Rules have identified the following criteria to
determine whether preliminary objections should be heard separately from the merits:

a. Whether the objection is substantial (in the sense of not being frivolous);

b. | Whether, if granted, the objection to jurisdiction would result in a material
reduction of the proceedings at the next phase; and

c. Whether bifurcation is impractical, in the sense that the preliminary issue raised
is so intertwined with the merits that it is very unlikely that there will be any
savings in time or cost.”

Respondent's Application, | 12.

Respondent's Application, {| 13.

Id.

Id.

Respondent's Application, | 27.

Respondent’s Application, {{[ 28-30, citing Glamis Gold, | 12(c); Philip Morris, | 109; Emmis
International Holding BV v. Hungary (ICSID Case No ARB/12/2) (“Emmis”), Decision on Bifurcation
of 13 June 2013) (Exh. RLA-38), { 37(2); Accession Mezzanine Capital LP v. Republic of Hungary
(ICSID Case No ARB/12/13) (“Accession Mezzanine”), Decision on Respondent’s Notice of
Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation of 8 August 2013 (Exh. RLA-39), 4 38; Tulip
Real Estate and Development Netherlands BV v. Turkey (ICSID Case No ARB/11/28) (“Tulip”),
Decision on Bifurcation of 2 November 2012 (Exh. RLA-40), {[ 30. See also Respondent's Reply,
6(b).

10

38.

39.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

The Respondent submits that the jurisdictional objections it has raised are fit for
bifurcation under the criteria identified above. Specifically, it argues that all three
objections “(a) are serious and substantial; (b) would, if accepted, either end the case
or substantially reduce the scope of the merits phase; and (c) are capable of ready
identification and are discrete from the merits.”

First, the Respondent submits that all of its preliminary objections are serious and
substantial. Specifically:

a. The First Preliminary Objection (i.e., that the Claimants’ claim is premature
because it concerns a first instance assessment order which is still in the process
of being reviewed by the appellate procedure provided for in the Income Tax
Act) is serious and substantial for the following reasons:

i The Respondent is not suggesting that the Claimants must exhaust local
remedies; rather, it submits that “the Claimants must make proper use of
the dispute settlement procedures available to it under the Income Tax Act
of 1961 before its claim for alleged breach of the BIT can be pursued any
further.”*' More specifically, it argues that “what is required of the
Claimants is that they take such reasonable steps to challenge the FAO and
Tax Demand through the statutory and constitutional procedures that are
available to it.” According to the Respondent, the chronology of the
Claimants’ actions demonstrates the prematurity of these arbitral
proceedings, as the Claimants served their Notice of Dispute under the BIT
the day following the Draft Assessment Order was served on CUHL, and
filed their Notice of Arbitration without awaiting the results of the
domestic challenge that CUHL had initiated before the Dispute Resolution
Panel.*> Nor have the Claimants pursued their challenge to the tax
assessment “diligently”, as they have chosen not to pursue all available
appeal mechanisms and have sought to delay the proceedings before the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (“ITAT”) as much as possible.**

ii. | The Respondent summarizes the basis for its First Preliminary Objection
as follows: “(a) [t]here are a number of independent domestic avenues
open to CUHL to challenge the Final Assessment Order; (b) CUHL has
invoked the first of these mechanisms — albeit that it has then sought to
delay that domestic process; (c) [t]he heart of the Claimants’ claim is
based on detailed issues of Indian law, which have as yet not been tested

Respondent's Application, | 36.

Respondent's Application, {| 37, 45. See also Respondent’s Reply, 17.

Respondent's Application, | 45. See also Respondent’s Reply, | 17.

Respondent's Reply, 18, citing the First Witness Statement of Mr. Sanjay Puri (“Puri WS1”), 191 85-
89.

Respondent’s Reply, { 19, citing Puri WS1, J 95. The Respondent also asserts that while CUHL could
not have filed a Writ Petition challenging the constitutionality of the 2012 Amendment under Article 19
of the Constitution, it could have brought an equivalent action under Article 14 of the Constitution.
Respondent’s Reply, § 21.

11

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

by the Indian courts; (d) [i]t is perfectly possible that the domestic
mechanisms available to the Claimants will provide complete or partial
redress and/or refine the issues of Indian law which are in dispute.”

iii. Citing Generation Ukraine, the Respondent contends that “[t]he Claimants
cannot simply treat as irrelevant their statutory rights of appeals and
available constitutional review processes, and bring before this Tribunal a
decision made by the lowest revenue officer in the assessment chain and
purport to treat it as a finally adjudicated demand.”*° According to the
Respondent, “[t]his is not simply a case where the Claimants have not
availed themselves of the domestic avenues”; here, “the Claimants seek to
keep a toe in the door of the domestic proceedings, whilst simultaneously
rail-roading the Respondent into this arbitration.”*”

The Second Preliminary Objection (i.e., that the BIT does not apply to disputes
that concern taxation measures) is also serious and substantial. Although the
Respondent acknowledges that the BIT does not formally exclude taxation
measures, it submits that “tax disputes are not capable of being resolved by
arbitration under the BIT in light of an implied exception to the scope of
application of the BIT, and of the fact that the Respondent and the United
Kingdom have in fact specifically agreed that tax disputes should be settled in
accordance with the procedure prescribed in the contemporaneous Double

Taxation Agreement (‘the DTA’).”*> More specifically, the Respondent
contends that:
i There is “an implied exception in relation to disputes (such as this one)

which involve a challenge to a State’s legislative powers to tax.” Citing
Dutch law and Indian law, the Respondent submits that a dispute
concerning the ability of a sovereign state to introduce general legislation
in respect of taxation is not arbitrable.

ii. The India-UK DTA, which was being negotiated at the same time as the
BIT, determines the respective powers of India and the UK to impose
taxes on persons who are residents of one or both of those States, and its
scope extends to capital gains tax. At Article 27, the DTA provides that
disputes between a resident and one or both of the Contracting States are
not to be resolved by a third party mechanism such as arbitration, but by
mutual agreement between the “competent authorities” of both Contracting

Respondent's Reply, {{ 22.

Respondent’s Application, | 44, citing Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No ARB/00/9)
(“Generation Ukraine”), Award of 16 September 2003 (Exh. RLA-43), [ 20.30. The Respondent also
relies on Feldman v. Mexico (ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/99/1) (“Feldman”), Award of 16 December
2002 (Exh. RLA-44)), 114.

Respondent's Application, {| 20.
Respondent's Application, 4 54-55.
Respondent's Reply, { 24.
Respondent's Reply, ‘If 24-26.

40.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

States. According to the Respondent, “it would [...] be surprising if India
and the UK had simultaneously intended that disputes arising out of their
sovereign powers of taxation were nonetheless to be subject to arbitration
under the BIT.”*!

iii. The Claimants’ contention that the DTA and the limits on arbitrability
under domestic law are irrelevant to the status of claims brought under the
BIT misses the point: “[t]he issue is whether the Claimants’ claims are
properly within the scope of the BIT”. According to the Respondent, “it
cannot be assumed, from the fact that the BIT does not expressly exclude
tax matters, that disputes which go to the heart of a State’s sovereign
powers to tax fall within the scope of the BIT”; “[o]n the contrary, the
[DTA] and the approach of Indian and Dutch law are all consistent with an
intention that such public law disputes are outside the scope of the
Tribunal’ s jurisdiction.”

c. The Respondent further contends that the Third Preliminary Objection (i.e., that
the dispute does not concern the Claimants’ “investments”, but rather it relates to
the Claimants’ “returns”) is serious and substantial. Specifically, the Respondent

contends that: ©

i The measure challenged by the Claimants concerns a taxation measure that
has been imposed on capital gains made by the Claimants from the 2006
intragroup share transactions. The Claimants’ assertion that the 2006
transactions did not give rise to any capital gain or profit assumes the very
point which the Claimants must prove in this arbitration.

ii. These capital gains qualify as “returns” and not “investments” under the
BIT. Indeed, Articles 1(b) and 1(e) of the BIT clearly distinguish between
“investments” and “returns”.

iii. The scope of application of the BIT (Article 2) and the substantive
provisions contained at Articles 3(2), 3(3), 4(1), 5(1), 6(1) and 9(1) of the
BIT apply to investments and not returns, while Articles 4(2) and 7(1)
apply only to returns. In particular, the dispute resolution mechanism
provided at Article 9 of the BIT only covers disputes relating to the
Claimants’ purported investments in India, not their returns. The
Claimants do not explain the basis upon which they say their claims relate
to investments and not returns.

As a result, with respect to its Third Preliminary objection the Respondent contends
that:

Respondent's Reply, { 28.
Respondent's Reply, { 29.
Respondent's Reply, { 29.
Respondent's Application, {{[ 5, 66-83; Respondent’s Reply, 4 30-31.

13

41.

42.

43.

44.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

a. “The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the Claimants’ claims do not concern
‘investments’ but are rather brought concerning their ‘returns’, and Article 9 of
the BIT only provides that international arbitration is available for disputes in
relation to ‘investments’.”

b. “In the alternative, if the Tribunal does not accept that the Claimants’ claims are
in relation to ‘returns’ rather than in relation to ‘investments’, the Tribunal
nonetheless lacks jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims for breach of Article 7,
for their claim under Article 7 only concerns the Claimants’ capital gains.”

c. “In the further alternative, even if the Tribunal has jurisdiction under Article 9,
Articles 3 and 5 are not available to the Claimants, and Article 7 is
inapplicable[.]”*

Second, the Respondent submits that all of its preliminary objections would, if
accepted, either end the case or substantially reduce the scope of the merits phase.

Third, the Respondent contends that all of its preliminary objections are capable of
ready identification and are discrete from the merits.” According to the Respondent,
to the extent that the objections raise any factual issues, these facts are different from,
and not intertwined with, those that relate to the merits of the dispute.”

The Respondent further submits that, according to commentators and tribunals, “an
‘overarching question’ in deciding whether or not to bifurcate is whether procedural
efficiency would be preserved or improved as a result of bifurcation.”®* Here, the
Respondent contends that it would be in the interests of procedural efficiency to hear
and determine these objections in a preliminary bifurcated phase. The Respondent
adds that, “[i]f the Tribunal were to conclude that some, but not all, of the objections
satisfy the criteria for bifurcation so that there should in any event be a bifurcated
phase, it would be procedurally efficient to determine all the objections in that
bifurcated phase (and, conversely, procedurally inefficient not to do so).

Finally, the Respondent argues that “‘as a matter of fairness, the Respondent should not
have to participate in a full hearing of the Claimants’ claim before the Tribunal has
determined whether its claim is outside the scope of protection of the BIT.”” The
Respondent refers in this regard to the first Caratube case, in which the tribunal noted

Respondent's Application, | 83.
Respondent's Application, | 36.
Respondent's Application, | 36.

Respondent's Application, {{f{ 31-33, citing David Caron and Lee Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules: A Commentary (OUP, 2nded, 2013) (Exh. RLA-41), pp. 457-458; Emmis, Decision on
Bifurcation of 13 June 2013 (Exh. RLA-38), | 37(2); Accession Mezzanine, Decision on Respondent's
Notice of Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation of 8 August 2013 (Exh. RLA-39), 38;
Glamis Gold, Procedural Order No 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RLA-33), { 12(c). See also Respondent's
Reply, 1 6(c).

Respondent's Application, | 36.
Respondent's Application, | 34.

45.

46.

47.

48.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

that, “[w]ith the wisdom of hindsight, the majority of the costs and expenses of each
party and of the dispute, both in duration and expense, would have been avoided had
Respondent opted for bifurcation and the preliminary determination of its equivalent
of Rule 41(1) objections under the Rules.””! In the Respondent’s view, “there is a very
real prospect of savings of time, expense and clarity of presentation and analysis if

bifurcation is the course adopted now.”
kok

For the reasons set out above, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to decide that:

a. “The Respondent’s First, Second and Third Preliminary Objections should be
bifurcated and determined in a preliminary phase;

b. | The Respondent be awarded the costs of its Application for Bifurcation;

c. Such other relief as the Tribunal determines to be appropriate.””*
Finally, the Respondent notes that the tribunal in the Vedanta arbitration has directed
that two objections equivalent to the Respondent’s First and Second Preliminary
Objections here (namely, that the claim is premature and that tax disputes are not
arbitrable) should be bifurcated.

B. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants object to the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation. Their
arguments are essentially two-fold. First, they argue that the Respondent’s decision to
withhold its Application for Bifurcation in disregard of the Tribunal’s repeated
requests warrants its rejection (Section 1 below). Second, the Claimants contend that
even if the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation had been filed at the earliest
reasonable time, the Respondent fails to demonstrate that bifurcation at this stage of
the proceedings would be efficient (Section 2 below).

1. The Respondent’s decision to withhold its Application for Bifurcation
warrants its rejection

The Claimants allege that the Respondent deliberately withheld raising its objections
to jurisdiction [or admissibility] until October 2016, ignoring four instructions from
the Tribunal to raise any such objections “as soon as reasonably possible”.”° The
Claimants refer specifically to the Tribunal’s communications to the Parties dated 21

Caratube International Oil Company LLP v Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No ARB/08/2) (“Caratube I’),
Award of 5 June 2012 (Exh. RLA-42), {| 487.

Respondent’s Application, 35.
Respondent's Application, {| 85, reiterated at Respondent's Reply, {| 32.

Respondent's Reply, { 15. The Respondent clarifies that the Third Preliminary Objection raised in this
arbitration does not arise in the Vedanta arbitration.

Claimants’ Response, {{ 2.

15

49.

50.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

April 2016, 1 July 2016, 4 August 2016 and 28 September 2016."° The Claimants
note in particular that, in its letter of 4 August 2016, the Tribunal emphasized that it
had wide discretion under Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules to conduct the
proceedings as it considered appropriate, and that, when ruling on a request for
bifurcation, it would take into consideration whether it was timely made.” According
to the Claimants, the Respondent “wilfully disregarded these explicit directions and
warnings.””®

According to the Claimants, it is obvious that the objections raised by the Respondent
“relate purely to issues of treaty interpretation and could have been raised at any time
after the Notice of Arbitration was filed on 22 September 2015 — and certainly at any
time after the Tribunal first directed the Respondent to raise them in April of this
year.” Contrary to the Respondent’s suggestions, these objections “‘are all based on
the Respondent’s interpretation of the UK-India BIT and do not rely in any respect on
information disclosed in the Claimants’ Statement of Claim.”*° Indeed, the Claimants
note that the Respondent raised the first two objections as early as 11 May 2015 ina
letter to the Claimants.*! The Claimants reject the Respondent’s explanation that it
waited to receive the Statement of Claim because the Claimants’ arguments on the
interpretation of Indian law were developed in more detail in that submission, arguing
that the Respondent’s objections are based on its interpretation of the BIT and have
not been shaped in any material way by any discussion of Indian law in the Statement
of Claim.

The Claimants also assert that the Respondent insisted that under Article 21(3) of the
UNCITRAL Rules it was not required to raise its objections to jurisdiction or file its
request for bifurcation until it filed its Statement of Defence, and that “it would be
somehow inappropriate to disclose its jurisdictional objections before the Tribunal
decided its Stay Application.”** The Claimants further allege that, when the
Respondent finally decided to file its Application for Bifurcation on 6 October 2016,
on the eve of the 7 October 2016 hearing, it was “only because it could no longer
avoid a discussion of the Procedural Calendar, and wanted to have its objections on
the table (together with its request to postpone filing its Statement of Defence) for the
purposes of that discussion.”** Thus, the Claimants understand that the Respondent’s
position is not that it was unable to raise its objections earlier, but that it was entitled

See supra Wf 2, 5, 8, and 13.

Respondent's Application, { 6, citing to the Tribunal’s letter of 4 August 2016.

Respondent’s Application, J 6.

Claimants’ Response, J 2.

Claimants’ Response, {{][ 7-8.

Claimant’s Response, {{ 7, citing Exh. C-64.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, J 8.

Claimants’ Response, { 8, citing the Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal dated 25 July 2016, 4.
Claimants’ Response, { 9, citing the Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal dated 6 October 2016, { 1.

16

Sl.

52.

53.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

to withhold them as long as it wished, provided it raised them no later than the
Statement of Defence.**

According to the Claimants, the Respondent confirmed in its Reply that “the timing of
its filing was a tactical decision designed to ensure that the question of its
jurisdictional objections was reflected in the procedural calendar’, while offering no
justification other than its own decision to await the Tribunal’s decision on its Stay
Application.*° The Claimants further argue that the Respondent revealed in its Reply
that months before it had already raised two equivalent objections in the Vedanta
arbitration, yet still chose to withhold them in this arbitration.®”

The Claimants accept that the Respondent cannot be compelled to raise its
jurisdictional objections prior to the deadline for the filing of its Statement of
Defence.** They also agree that Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules contains a
general presumption in favor of preliminary treatment of jurisdictional objections, but
submit, citing Glamis Gold and the second part of Article 21(4), that the choice not to
do so is left to the Tribunal’s discretion.*” Finally, the Claimants note that it is
common ground between the Parties that Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules
confers to the Tribunal broad discretion in the conduct of the proceedings, including
whether or not to bifurcate.” However, the Parties disagree as to how the Tribunal
should exercise that discretion.”!

In light of the Respondent’s deliberate choice to delay raising its objections, despite
the Tribunal’s requests for it to do so, the Claimants submit that the Tribunal should
exercise that discretion by denying the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation.
According to the Claimants, “[t]he question of whether to bifurcate arbitral
proceedings ultimately turns on considerations of procedural efficiency.” The
Claimants submit that “the soft presumption in favour of preliminary treatment in the
1976 UNCITRAL Rules is premised on a respondent having raised its objections in a
timely manner consistent with the efficiency rationale for treating objections in a

Claimants’ Response, {{ 10.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, {ff 6-7.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{ 5.
Claimants’ Response, { 11.

Claimants’ Response, { 11, citing Glamis Gold, Procedural Order No. 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RLA-
33), 19.

Claimants’ Response, { 11.
Claimants’ Response, {{ 12.

Claimants’ Response, | 3. See also Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 9, citing Glamis Gold, Procedural Order
No. 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RLA-33), f 11; Emmis, Decision on Bifurcation of 13 June 2013 (Exh.
RLA-38),  37(2); Accessii Decision on *s Notice of Jurisdictional Objections
and Request for Bifurcation of 8 August 2013 (Exh. RLA-39), { 38; Apotex Holdings Inc. and Apotex
Inc. v. United States of America (ICSID ARB(AF)/12/1) (“Apotex”), Procedural Order deciding
Bifurcation dated 25 January 2013 (Exh. CLA-98), | 10; Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong)
Limited v. Tanzania Electric Supply Company (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20), Procedural Order No. 5
dated 29 May 2012 (Exh. CLA-99), 22.

17

54.

55.

56.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

preliminary phase.” The Claimants note that the Glamis Gold tribunal made clear

that Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules reflects a presumption in favor of
efficiency, and emphasize that the Tribunal’s discretion under Article 15(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rule and Article 1036 of the Dutch Arbitration Act is guided by the
principle of efficiency and the need to avoid unnecessary delay.** The Claimants add
that the Respondent is under a duty to cooperate in the efficient conduct of these
proceedings, and argue that it is a general principle of arbitral procedure that
jurisdictional objections should be raised as early as possible, as recognized by India’s
representative to the UNCITRAL, Committee.”

The Claimants contend that “the Respondent’s actions in deliberately withholding its
Bifurcation Application — for no other apparent reason than to cause delay —
undermines this essential rationale for bifurcation and flouts the Respondent’s duty to
cooperate in the efficient conduct of these proceedings.”*° Accordingly, the Claimants
submit that, in the exercise of its broad discretion under Article 15(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rules, “the Tribunal can readily dismiss the Respondent’s Bifurcation
Application simply on the basis that it was untimely submitted in disregard of the
Tribunal’s explicit directions and multiple warnings.”°”

The Claimants cite in this respect Desert Line v. Yemen, which they submit “stands for
the proposition that a bifurcation request by a party that has deliberately withheld
objections it could have raised earlier cannot be justified in the name of efficiency.”
While the Claimants acknowledge that the relevant Article 41 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules also provides that jurisdictional objections shall be made as early as possible,
they argue that any textual distinction with Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules “is
rendered moot in these circumstances by the fact that the Tribunal repeatedly gave the
Respondent the same instructions, namely that it should raise its preliminary
objections ‘as soon as reasonably possible’”, and is undercut by the Parties’ obligation
to cooperate in the efficient organization and conduct of these proceedings.”

By contrast, the Claimants argue that in Philip Morris v. Australia the tribunal agreed
to hear Australia’s objections to jurisdiction preliminarily in part because Australia

Claimants’ Response, {{ 12.

Claimants’ Response, { 12, citing Glamis Gold, Procedural Order No. 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RLA-
33), { 11, and David Caron and Lee Caplan, THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES: A
COMMENTARY (Oxford University Press 2013) (Exh. CLA-72), p. 34.

Claimants’ Response, {| 13, citing Article 1036(3) of the Dutch Arbitration Act, Pieter Sanders,
“Commentary on UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules” in YEARBOOK COMMERCIAL ARBITRATION
Vol. 2 (1977), Exhibit CLA-96, p. 196; Summary Record of the 8th Meeting of the Committee of the
Whole] (II), UNCITRAL, Ninth Session, UN Doc A/CN.9/9/C.2/SR.8, Exhibit CLA-89, p. 5 & {| 30
(1976) (Comment by Mr Dey, India); ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (2006) (the
“ICSID Arbitration Rules”) (Exh. CLA-93), Rule 41.

 

Claimants’ Response, { 3.
Claimants’ Response, { 3.

Claimant’s Response, { 14, citing Desert Line Projects LLC v. The Republic of Yemen (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/17) (“Desert Line”), Award dated February 2008 (Exh. CLA-86), {11 60, 89-90, 97.

Claimants’ Response, {[ 15, citing the Tribunal’s letter to the Parties dated 4 August 2016.

18

57.

58.

59.

100

tol

102

103

104

los

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

demonstrated that it had filed its objections at the earliest possible time, as required
under the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules.'® In that case there was no question of the
respondent having tactically withheld its objections, as was the case in Desert Line and
in the present case.

2. The Respondent fails to demonstrate that bifurcation at this stage of
the proceedings would be efficient

Even if the Respondent had raised its objections at the earliest reasonable time, the
Claimants contend that the Respondent fails to demonstrate that bifurcating the
arbitration at this stage of the proceedings would yield significant efficiency benefits
for the Parties. '°!

 

First, the Claimants argue that, by the time that the Respondent’s Application for
Bifurcation is decided in early 2017, both Parties will have submitted their primary
memorials on the merits, and the merits issues will have been fully joined. The
Claimants submit that “[b]ifurcation is often warranted where a preliminary objection
has a likelihood of resulting in the dismissal or significant narrowing of the dispute
before the parties have gone through the time and expense of filing detailed merits
submissions. Here, however, the Respondent indicated to the Tribunal that its
objections would be informed by the Statement of Claim and should therefore follow
that filing.”! According to the Claimants, not only did the Statement of Claim prove
irrelevant to the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections, but the Respondent’s delay in
filing its Application for Bifurcation would not yield any cost savings; rather, it would
likely increase costs. More specifically, the Claimants note that, to date, both Parties
have submitted their main memorials with their arguments on the merits, and all that
remains is a document production phase, a narrower set of rebuttal submissions, a
dispositive hearing and a final award. By contrast, a bifurcated proceeding would add
four additional memorials, an additional round of document production, an additional
hearing and a separate reasoned award. 108

 

Second, the Claimants contend that the timeline proposed by the Respondent to hear
its jurisdictional objections in a bifurcated proceeding would add nine months to the
procedural calendar, should the Application for Bifurcation be decided in the first
quarter of 2017,'" with the hearing on objections to jurisdiction and admissibility to
be heard in January 2018, and the merits to be considered at some unspecified time
thereafter.'°° The Claimants argue that “[i]n a dispute of this magnitude, involving a

 

Claimants’ Response, { 26, citing Philip Morris, Procedural Order No. 4 Regarding the Procedure until
a Decision on Bifurcation, dated 26 October 2016 (Exh. CLA-88), | 24.

Claimants’ Response, {ff 4, 18.

Claimants’ Response, {[ 19, citing the Claimants’ letter to the Tribunal dated 17 October 2016, pp. 3-5.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, § 10.

Claimants’ Response, {{ 20.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{ 13.

60.

61.

62.

106

107

108

109

10

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

massive deprivation of assets, there would need to be an overwhelmingly compelling
reason to incur such a lengthy delay, which does not remotely exist here.”!°°

Third, the Claimants argue that the Respondent’s objections are frivolous, and
“according them a dedicated preliminary phase would result in a fruitless delay of up
year or more in these proceedings, ending in dismissal of the objections.”!°” Citing
Glamis Gold, the Respondent argues that frivolous objections are unlikely to reduce
the costs or time required for the proceedings. '

According to the Claimants, all three of the Respondent’s preliminary objections are
“totally lacking in legal merit”, as “each objection improperly asks the Tribunal to
fundamentally re-write the terms of the UK-India BIT, as well as, in one case, the
terms of the UK-India [DTA].”!

More specifically, the Claimants argue that the First Preliminary Objection lacks legal
merit and factual support, for the following reasons:

a. According to the Claimants, the Respondent seeks to obfuscate the real dispute
between the Parties: the present claims arise from a violation of the UK-India
BIT, not a violation of Indian law. In light of the dispute settlement provisions
contained at Article 9 of the BIT, the proper forum cannot be the Indian courts.
The Claimants are arguing that that India’s retrospective imposition of the tax
measure violates its treaty rights, and the remedy for that is treaty arbitration. Ho

b. The UK-India BIT does not contain any exhaustion of local remedies
requirement. Indeed, one of the core purposes of the dispute settlement
mechanism contained in Article 9 of the BIT is to relieve an injured investor
from this requirement. The Respondent’s attempt to read a local remedies
requirement back into the BIT must be rejected.'!! The tribunal in Generation
Ukraine, on which the Respondent relies, recognized that any requirement to
pursue local remedies as a pre-condition to bringing a treaty claim must be
expressly stated in the treaty.!!?

Id.

Claimants’ Response, 4.

Claimants’ Response, { 21, citing Glamis Gold, Procedural Order No. 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RLA-
33), f 12(c).

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 14.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 16.

Claimants’ Response, {| 25, citing Helnan International Hotels v. Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/0S/19)
(“Heinan’’), Decision of the ad hoc Committee of 14 June 2010 (Exh. CLA-87), J 47; the writings of
Judge Stephen Schwebel (Exh. CLA-94 and 95), and The Institute of International Law, Arbitration
between States, State Enterprises, or State Entities, and Foreign Enterprises, Resolution of the
Eighteenth Commission dated 12 September 1989 (Exh. CLA-90). See also Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 17.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 17, citing Generation Ukraine, Award of 16 September 2003 (Exh. RLA-43), {]
13.5.

20

63.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

Contrary to the Respondent’s contention, the decision in Generation Ukraine
does not stand for the proposition that a claimant must first challenge the
offending measure in the courts of the host State; that tribunal merely referred to
the principle that the exhaustion of available judicial remedies is necessary to
establish a substantive claim for denial of justice.'

In any event, the facts on this case are very different to those in Generation
Ukraine: while in that case the claimant made no “reasonable efforts” to
challenge the actions of an inferior government official,!'* here the Claimants
have “diligently challenged the application and enforcement of India’s tax
measure against Cairn before domestic authorities for almost two years, but to
no avail.”

The Respondent’s suggestion that the Claimants must challenge the 2012
Amendment before the Indian courts is ironic, as the 2012 Amendment was
passed to overturn the Supreme Court decision in the Vodaphone case. In any
event, the Claimants assert that such a constitutional challenge is only
guaranteed to Indian citizens and is not available to the Claimants under Article
19 of the Constitution. ''° As to the Respondent’s argument that a similar remedy
would be available under Article 14 of the Constitution, the Claimants “fail to
see how an alleged pre-condition to pursue remedies up to the highest court of
the land differs in substance from an exhaustion of local remedies

requirement”. i

With respect to the Second Preliminary objection, the Claimants raise the following
arguments:

a.

The Respondent’s argument that matters of taxation are not arbitrable is wrong
as a matter of treaty interpretation.''* The BIT does not contain any express
exclusion for all tax-related claims; it merely contains “‘a very precise and
limited exclusion in Article 4(3)”, which excludes tax treaties and domestic tax
legislation from the scope of national treatment and most-favoured nation
(“MEN”) treatment, which is irrelevant here because the Claimants do not
invoke these obligations. |!” According to the Claimants, “India is well aware of

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 20, citing Generation Ukraine, Award of 16 September 2003 (Exh. RLA-43), {]

20.33.

Claimants’ Response, {{ 26, citing Generation Ukraine, Award of 16 September 2003 (Exh. RLA-43), {]

20.30.

Claimants’ Response, | 27, citing several instances in which they have challenged the Income Tax

Authority’s ass

sment (Exh. C-30, C-63, C-66, C-68, C-69, C-70, C-77. See also Claimants’

 

Rejoinder, ¥ 19.

Claimants’ Response, {[ 28, citing Article 19(1)(g) of the Indian Constitution.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{ 18.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {[ 4.

Claimants’ Response, {{{ 31-32, citing Article 4(3) of the BIT. See also Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 23.

21

120

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

how to exclude all tax-related claims from the scope of an investment treaty
because it has done so in a handful of its other investment treaties.”'

b. | The Respondent’s contention that tax matters are not arbitrable under Indian law
“is wholly irrelevant to the status of claims brought under a treaty governed by
international law, and is in any event inconsistent with the limited and defined
carve-out for tax matters that India agreed to in the UK-India BIT.”'?! The
Claimants also submit that this is not an “international commercial arbitration”,
but a treaty arbitration. 122

c. The Claimants further deny that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction should be ousted by
the UK-India DTA. The Claimants argue that the UK-India BIT and the UK-
India DTA “serve different purposes and provide different remedies to achieve
them.”! More specifically, the Claimants submit the subject matter of these
treaties is distinct and separate: “The UK-India DTA (like all double taxation
agreements) represents a division of tax bases between the two contracting states
in relation to incomes that are taxable in both states and stipulates which State
has the taxing rights over the relevant income.”'* As to remedies, “[t]he Mutual
Agreement Procedure contained in the DTA _ provides for inter-State
consultations in the event a person of one Contracting Party may have been
taxed in contravention of the DTA” (a remedy that the Claimants do not seek),
while “the UK-India BIT allows a private investor like Cairn to bring a direct
action against the State for measures — including tax measures — that violate
specific protections contained in the BIT.” Noting that the BIT was concluded
one year after the DTA, the Claimants contend that if the Contracting Parties had
intended to preclude any claims relating to taxation or tax legislation under the
BIT, it would have been easy to clarify that intent in the BIT.'” In any event, the
Claimants note that capital gains tax is expressly excluded from the scope of the
DTA, as a result of which the Respondent itself has declared it to be inapplicable
to this dispute. a7

d. Finally, the Claimants argue that this objection raises merits issues that are
inappropriate for preliminary treatment. The Claimants note in particular that in

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 24, citing Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and
the Government of the Republic of India for the Promotion and Mutual Protection of Investments
signed on 23 December 1994 (Exh. CLA-91), Article 2(2), and India’s Model Bilateral Investment
Treaty Text, Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Investment
Division) dated 28 December 2015 (Exh. CLA-92), Annex. See also Claimants’ Response, { 33, citing

Claimants’ Response, 35.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 25.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 26.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 26.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 26.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 27.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, 28, citing the Final Assessment Order (Exh. C-70), p. 99; the India-UK DTA
(Exh. RLA-45), Article 14).

22

64.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

its Statement of Defence, the Respondent argues for the first time that,
irrespective of the 2012 Amendment, “the 2006 share transfers made in
preparation for the initial public offering in India triggered a liability to tax
because they were part of an unwholesome tax avoidance scheme.” 78 According
to the Claimants, deciding this argument would require a full hearing on the
merits. Likewise, the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants’ claims are
inadmissible because they challenge India’s tax “policy”, rather than the
application of tax laws, raises merits issues. 129

 

As to the Third Preliminary Objection, the Claimants argue as follows:

a.

There can be no serious debate that the Claimants have “investments” under the
meaning of Article 1 of the BIT, and that the government measures challenged
in this arbitration relate to those investments. The Claimants assert that their
shareholding in CIL falls within the definition of investment, and that their claim
relates in part to the Respondent’s seizure of those shares. The Claimants add
that the corporate reorganization of Cairn’s assets in 2006 and initial public
offering in January 2009 (the “IPO”’) could arguably have resulted in a change in
the form of Cairn’s investments, but note that Article 1 expressly includes in its
definition of investment “every kind of asset established or acquired, including

changes in the form of such investment”. 150

As to the Respondent’s contention that the challenged measure relates to capital
gains which should be qualified as “returns”, the Claimants submit that “[t]his
argument confuses its characterisation of the government measures at issue with
the investments to which those measures were applied.” 3! The Claimants allege
that while the IPO resulted in extraordinary gains that were fully reported and
were not taxable under Indian law, the intragroup share transfers between non-
Indian companies made in preparation for that IPO that India is retroactively
seeking to tax did not give rise to any capital gain or profit whatsoever, because
equal economic values were exchanged. '? Accordingly, the Claimants argue
that “this dispute does not relate to any actual capital gains earned by CUHL, but
rather to the abusive application of India’s tax laws — under the rubric of “capital
gains tax” — to Cairn’s investments in India, including Cairn’s shareholdings in
CIL, which are clearly protected “investments” under Article 1(b) of the
Treaty.”

Further, the Claimants argue that the Respondent has not provided any reasoning
for its request that the Claimants’ claim under Article 7 be dismissed, nor has it

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {[ 4.

Id.

Claimants’ Response, ¥] 36-37, citing Article 1. See also Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 29.

Claimants’ Response, 38.

Claimants’ Response, { 38, citing their Statement of Claim, Section II.B. See also Claimants’
Rejoinder, 30.

Claimants’ Response, 38.

23

65.

66.

67.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

responded to the Claimants’ arguments that Article 7 does protect investors by
allowing the free transfer or repatriation of both investments and returns. 14

d. Finally, the Claimants submit that “even if one were to accept arguendo India’s
characterisation, it would not provide any support whatsoever for a dismissal on
jurisdictional grounds”: Article 9 of the BIT allows a claimant to bring “any
dispute... in relation to an investment”, and in the Claimants’ submission, “[a]
dispute over investment returns clearly constitutes a claim ‘in relation to an

investment’.

As a result, the Claimants contend that “[b]ifurcating the proceedings would do
nothing more than substantially postpone the resolution of this dispute with nothing
gained, while the amounts at stake climb by hundreds of millions of dollars (including
because the tax demands by the Respondent are subject to a very high interest rate
prescribed under Indian law), and Cairn continues to be deprived of its assets seized in
January 2014.”'° The Claimants further argue that “the pendency of India’s massive
tax claim also continues to render substantial reputational damage to Cairn.”3

According to the Claimants, the Respondent’s reliance on the bifurcation of two
objections in the Vedanta arbitration is unpersuasive. The Respondent does not explain
what preliminary objections it raised in that arbitration but not here, nor does it
provide evidence of the circumstances that could have led to that procedural outcome.
The Claimants further stress that there are significant legal and factual differences
between the Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations, including the Respondent’s argument
raised in its Statement of Defence that the Claimants’ allegedly improper tax planning
practices made the 2006 corporate reorganization taxable regardless of section 9(1)(i)
of the Income Tax Act. In any event, the Claimants argue that, because the hearing on
jurisdictional objections in Vedanta is scheduled for May 2017, the bifurcation in that
case does not cause the same delay that it would here. 188

ek Ok

For the reasons set out above, the Claimants request the Tribunal to:
a. “DISMISS the Respondent’s Bifurcation Application with prejudice;

b. | DECIDE that the Respondent’s preliminary objections should be considered and
determined with the merits in a unitary proceeding; and

c. ORDER the Respondent to pay the Claimants’ costs associated with the
Respondent’s Bifurcation Application.” 189

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 30.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 31.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 10.

Id.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{{ 11-13.

Claimants’ Response, {[ 41, reiterated in their Rejoinder, { 34.

24

Til.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

140

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

ANALYSIS

The Tribunal will structure its analysis as follows. First, it will address whether the
UNCITRAL Rules create a presumption in favor of bifurcation, and if yes, what is the
Tribunal’s discretion in this regard (Section A). It will then address what are the
criteria to be considered when exercising that discretion (Section B). Finally, it will
consider whether bifurcation is warranted in the present case (Section C).

A. Do the UNCITRAL Rules create a presumption in favor of bifurcation?
Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides:

“In general, the arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its
jurisdiction as a preliminary question. However, the arbitral tribunal may
proceed with the arbitration and rule on such a plea in their final award.”

Both Parties agree that this provision creates a presumption in favor of bifurcation;
however, the Claimants call this a “soft” presumption and emphasize that the decision
whether to bifurcate or not rests within the Tribunal’s discretion. The Respondent
objects to the presumption’s characterization as “soft”, but agrees that the Tribunal
retains the discretion to join any preliminary objections to the merits. Both Parties
also agree that Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules confers upon the Tribunal broad
discretion over the conduct of the proceedings. ‘49 Both Parties cite Glamis Gold in this
respect, specifically the tribunal’s comment that:

“Article 21(4) establishes a presumption in favor of the tribunal
preliminarily considering objections to jurisdiction. Simultaneously,
however, Article 21(4) does not require that pleas as to jurisdiction must be
ruled on as preliminary questions. The choice not to do so is left to the
tribunal’s discretion.” '“!

There is therefore no dispute that the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules establish a presumption
in favor of bifurcation. Likewise, there is no dispute that, in the exercise of its
discretion, the Tribunal may decide not to bifurcate. Where the Parties disagree is how
the Tribunal should exercise this discretion in the present case.

The Respondent nonetheless suggests that, given the textual differences between the
1976 UNCITRAL Rules and the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules, tribunals should in principle
tule in favor of bifurcation. The Tribunal observes in this respect that, in the second
edition of their treatise, Caron and Caplan note that the current version of this
provision (Article 23(3) of the 2010 Rules) “replaces the express encouragement in
original Article 21(4) that the arbitral tribunal ‘should’ rule on a plea that it lacks
jurisdiction as a ‘preliminary matter’ with a more neutral rule: the arbitral tribunal may

Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides: “Subject to these Rules, the arbitral tribunal may
conduct the arbitration in such manner as it considers appropriate, provided that the parties are treated
with equality and that at any stage of the proceedings each party is given a full opportunity of
presenting his case.”

Glamis Gold, Procedural Order No 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RLA-33), 19.
25

73.

74.

75.

76.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

rule on such a plea ‘as a preliminary question or in an award on the merits.’”!?

However, the authors submit that “the same policy of ensuring a fair and efficient
arbitration that underpins both the 1976 and 2010 UNCITRAL Rules would minimize
any textual differences in practice.” '*?

Indeed, the authors had already noted in the first edition of their treatise that the
discussion during the negotiations of the 1976 Rules “points to efficiency as the prime
factor in determining whether a tribunal should rule on pleas concerning jurisdiction as
a preliminary matter.”'“4 As the Respondent has also rightly pointed out, “any
decision, therefore, must consider the substantiality of the objection, the cost in time
and money to the parties of such a preliminary ruling (e.g. whether such a ruling
would entail written filings or an oral hearing), and the practicality of bifurcating the
proceedings to address jurisdiction preliminarily, especially where jurisdictional issues
are intertwined with the merits.”!

The tribunal in Glamis Gold made a similar observation, noting that “[i]n examining
the drafting history of Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal finds that
the primary motive for the creation of a presumption in favor of the preliminary
consideration of a jurisdictional objection was to ensure efficiency in the proceedings.
Importantly, the Tribunal reads the presumption in favor of preliminarily considering
an objection to jurisdiction as an instruction to the Tribunal and clearly not as an
absolute right of the requesting party.” 4°

The Tribunal concludes that, under the 1976 Rules which apply to this case, it is
required to give serious consideration to a request that an objection to its jurisdiction
should be heard as a preliminary question. However, it retains full discretion to
determine whether, in the circumstances of the case, that objection should be heard
preliminarily or be joined to the merits.

B. What criteria should the Tribunal consider when exercising its discretion?

The Respondent submits that the factors to be considered are those identified in
Glamis Gold, and adopted by the tribunals in Philip Morris and Emmis, namely:

a. Whether the objection is substantial (in the sense of not being frivolous);

b. | Whether, if granted, the objection to jurisdiction would result in a material
reduction of the proceedings at the next phase; and

David Caron and Lee Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A Commentary (2nd ed., 2010), p.
459.

Id.

David Caron, Lee Caplan and Matti Pellonpaii, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A Commentary
(2006), pp. 450-451. See also supra 30 and infra | 76.

Id.
Glamis Gold, Procedural Order No 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh. RLA-33), {| 11.

26

77.

78.

79.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

c. Whether bifurcation is impractical, in the sense that the preliminary issue raised
is so intertwined with the merits that it is very unlikely that there will be any
savings in time or cost.!

The Tribunal agrees that these factors should be taken into consideration when
determining whether jurisdictional objections should be bifurcated. However, it does
not consider that these factors constitute a stand-alone test. In particular, it does not
agree that, if factors (a) and (b) are answered in the affirmative and factor (c) in the
negative, a tribunal should necessarily bifurcate a jurisdictional objection.

As the tribunal in Accession Mezzanine stated and the Parties have expressly
recognized, “an overarching question [is] whether fairness and procedural efficiency
would be preserved or improved.” '* These considerations — fairness and procedural
efficiency — are the determining factors that should guide the Tribunal’s discretion. As
noted above, these were the principles that guided the negotiations for the 1976 Rules.
It is also worth noting that the Glamis Gold tribunal only enumerated the factors listed
in paragraph 76 above as non-exhaustive elements to be considered in the quest for
procedural efficiency. That tribunal stated:

“[I]f an objection is raised to the jurisdiction of the tribunal and a request is
made by either party that the objection be considered as a preliminary
matter, the tribunal should do so. The tribunal may decline to do so when
doing so is unlikely to bring about increased efficiency in the proceedings.
Considerations relevant to this analysis include, inter alia, (1) whether the
objection is sut ial i h as the prelimi consideration of a
frivolous objection to jurisdiction is very unlikely to reduce the costs of, or
time required for, the proceeding; (2) whether the objection to jurisdiction if
granted results in a material reduction of the proceedings at the next phase
(in other words, the tribunal should consider whether the costs and time
required of a preliminary proceedings, even if the objecting party is
successful, will be justified in terms of the reduction in costs at the
subsequent phase of proceedings); and (3) whether bifurcation is impractical
in that the jurisdictional issue identified is so intertwined with the merits that
it is very unlikely that there will be any savings in time or cost[.]'”

Other tribunals have also emphasized the need to achieve procedural fairness and
efficiency in light of the circumstances of the particular case. For instance, the
tribunal in Apotex stated as follows:

“The Tribunal must take in this case a difficult but not a complicated
decision, weighing for both sides the benefits of procedural fairness and
efficiency against the risks of delay, wasted expense and prejudice. There is
no bright dividing-line as to where that decision now lies, rightly or wrongly.

Respondent's Application, {ff 28-30, citing Glamis Gold, Procedural Order No 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh.
RLA-33),  12(c); Philip Morris, Procedural Order No 8 of 14 April 2014 (Exh. RLA-37), { 109;
Emmis, Decision on Bifurcation of 13 June 2013) (Exh, RLA-38), 1 37(2), among others.

Accession Mezzanine, Decision on Respondent's Notice of Jurisdictional Objections and Request for
Bifurcation of 8 August 2013 (Exh, RLA-39), { 38.

Glamis Gold, Procedural Order No 2 of 31 May 2005 (Exh, RLA-33), { 12(c).
27

80.

81.

82.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

Moreover, the Tribunal must decide the Respondent’s application in the
particular circumstances of this case. It serves no purpose for this Tribunal to
follow blindly what other tribunals have or have not done in other
. A “th hinde: ght 77150

circumstances, particularly with hindsight.

This quest for procedural efficiency is consistent with the mandate contained in Article
1036(3) of the Dutch Arbitration Act, which provides:

“The arbitral tribunal shall ensure that there will be no unreasonable delay of
the proceedings and, if necessary, take measures at the request of a party or
on its own initiative. The parties have an obligation towards each other to
prevent unreasonable delay of the proceedings.”

The Tribunal thus concludes that the question it must ask itself when considering
whether to hear a jurisdictional objection as a preliminary question or to join it to the
merits is the following: in the circumstances of the particular case, would bifurcation
promote fairness and procedural efficiency? In answering that question, the Tribunal
may consider the factors identified by the Glamis Gold tribunal, among others.

C. Is bifurcation warranted in the present case?

The Tribunal has carefully considered the Respondent’s arguments in favor of
bifurcation. It agrees with the Respondent that, prima facie, the objections it has
raised meet some of the criteria cited at paragraph 76 above. In particular:

a. It is not the Tribunal’s task at this stage to judge whether the Respondent’s
objections are justified in substance. However, for purposes of this decision, the
Tribunal is satisfied that the Respondent has put forward serious arguments in
support of its Application on Bifurcation, as have the Claimants. The Tribunal
thus cannot exclude that the Respondent’s objections might be successful and
does not consider at this juncture that they are frivolous.'*!

b. The Claimants do not deny that any of these objections, if upheld, might either
put an end to the dispute or significantly reduce its scope. The Tribunal notes
however that a bifurcated phase would not dispose of all preliminary
considerations: as noted above, in its Statement of Defence the Respondent has
raised a fourth preliminary objection, namely that the Claimants have not made
an investment in accordance with Indian Law.'? The Respondent “recognises
that this preliminary objection is inappropriate for bifurcation inasmuch as it is
intertwined with the merits of the dispute,”'*? and thus does not request
bifurcation in this regard. In addition, as discussed in paragraph 87.b below, the
Tribunal is not persuaded that if the Third Preliminary Objection was decided in
favor of the Respondent it would put an end to the dispute. As a result, the

Apotex, Procedural Order deciding Bifurcation dated 25 January 2013 (Exh, CLA-98), J 10.

See, e.g., Philip Morris, Procedural Order No. 4 Regarding the Procedure until a Decision on
Bifurcation, dated 26 October 2016 (Exh. CLA-88), 125.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, Section V.D.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, {| 245.

28

83.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

Tribunal finds that this consideration would be satisfied only for the First and
Second Preliminary Objections.

That being said, after carefully considering the circumstances of this case, the Tribunal
is not persuaded that a bifurcation would promote fairness or procedural efficiency.
The Tribunal has considered in particular the following factors:

a.

A year has passed since the first procedural hearing took place in April 2016. At
that time, the Respondent insisted that it wished to await the Claimants’
Statement of Claim to file its objections to jurisdiction and file its request for
bifurcation. The Tribunal does not raise any objection to that position; however,
as recorded by the Tribunal in its email of 21 April 2016 (which the Respondent
did not object to), it committed to filing that request “as soon as reasonably
possible’, failing which it agreed that it would submit its Statement of Defence
in full.

The Claimants filed their Statement of Claim in June 2016. On three occasions,
the Tribunal reiterated its invitation that the Respondent should file its request
for bifurcation as soon as reasonably possible, failing which it would have to
submit its Statement of Defence in full, but the application was not
forthcoming. 'SS The Tribunal also explicitly stated that when ruling on a request
for bifurcation, it would take into consideration whether it was timely made. 156

The Claimants suggested that the Respondent could identify its objections and
brief them later, so that the hearing scheduled for 7 October could be used to
discuss both the Stay and Bifurcation Applications.'*” The Respondent rejected
the Claimants’ proposal. 158 Ultimately, it filed its Application for Bifurcation on
the eve of that very hearing, and has acknowledged that this was done so that
this Application could be considered in the discussion of the procedural calendar
during that hearing. 159

The Respondent has rightly noted that under Article 21(3) of the UNCITRAL
Rules, it had the right to withhold the filing of its objections to jurisdiction (and
its Application for Bifurcation) until the filing of its Statement of Defence. The
Tribunal also recognizes that it was for the Respondent to make whatever
strategic decisions it chose in terms of the timing of its Application for
Bifurcation. The Tribunal offers no judgment in this respect, but the
Respondent’s decisions have had an impact on the procedural calendar and on
the efficiency of this arbitration: deciding on bifurcation before any significant
procedural steps have been undertaken is not the same as deciding on it later on

See paragraph 2 above.

See paragraphs 5, 8 and 13 above.

See paragraph 8 above.

See paragraph 9 above.

See paragraph 11 above.

See paragraphs 14 and 35 above.

29

160

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

in a proceeding and the circumstances are different as will now be considered
more in depth. First, precisely, the first round of (full) written submissions are
now in the record and this has certainly resulted in significant costs that are
already expended.

Likewise, and second, it cannot be ignored that the Tribunal has now decided on
the Respondent’s Stay Application and that this application and its disposal
caused significant delay to the determination of any Application for Bifurcation.
As above, the Tribunal offers no judgment in this respect; to the contrary, given
the serious nature of the matters raised in the Respondent’s Stay Application, in
particular the risk of conflicting decisions in the Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations,
the Tribunal considers that the delay caused by that application was justified.
That said, as a matter of fact, the Stay Application delayed the consideration of
any Application for Bifurcation by several months, in particular because (i) the
Respondent requested a hearing on its Stay Application, which the Tribunal
granted over the Claimants’ objection, and that hearing did not take place until 7
October 2016; (ii) in order to reduce the risk of conflicting decisions, the
Tribunal invited the Parties to consult with Vedanta to see if enhanced forms of
cooperation between the two arbitrations were feasible; and (iii) after these
consultations failed, the Parties made further submissions on the Stay
Application. As a result, the Tribunal ruled on the Stay Application in March
2017, and can only now address the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation.

It is true that the Parties have already consulted and agreed on a procedural
timetable for bifurcated and non-bifurcated proceedings. However, due to the
inability to find hearing dates earlier, the hearing for either scenario has been set
for January 2018, which effectively means that the briefing and oral submissions
for the Respondent’s preliminary objections alone would take the same amount
of time as if these objections were joined to the merits (approximately one year).
Indeed, as noted above, both Parties have already submitted their full memorials
in chief, addressing issues of jurisdiction, admissibility and the merits.

The Tribunal is aware that the Respondent has objected to having been required
to file its Statement of Defence in full before its Stay Application and
Application for Bifurcation were decided. The Tribunal has taken note of this
objection, but observes that the Respondent itself agreed to this course of action
if it did not file its Application for Bifurcation as soon as reasonably possible
after receiving the Claimants’ Statement of Claim. Given the procedural history
that predates this Application and is cited in Section I above, the Tribunal cannot
but conclude that the Respondent did not file this Application as soon as it
would have been possible. In the circumstances, the Tribunal ordered the
Respondent to submit its full Statement of Defence in an attempt to exercise its
discretion under Article 15(1) reasonably and with a view to preserving fairness
between the Parties. The Tribunal further notes that it granted the Respondent
several extensions to file its Statement of Defence: although the pleading was

See Procedural Order No. 3.

30

84.

85.

86.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

originally due on 11 November 2016, the Respondent ultimately filed it on 4
February 2017.

h. The Tribunal is likewise not persuaded that, because the Vedanta tribunal has
decided to bifurcate two identical objections to the Respondent’s two first
preliminary objections, the Tribunal should do so here as well. Although the
Tribunal does not have the details of the factual and procedural circumstances
surrounding that arbitration, it understands that the Respondent filed its request
for bifurcation some time before it did so in this arbitration, and that the hearing
for that application is scheduled for May 2017. It also understands that the
Respondent did not file a stay application in the Vedanta arbitration. The
procedural circumstances (and the procedural timetables) are thus very different.
In any case, as recalled above, each Tribunal has to decide on the merits of
bifurcation on the basis of the circumstances of the case before it and not solely
in reliance on a precedent, however similar the circumstances of that other case
might appear to be.

In sum, regardless of the reasons that led to the present situation, the fact of the matter
is that the consideration of the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation has been
delayed significantly, the Parties have already submitted their main memorials and
evidence, considerable time has already elapsed since the commencement of this
arbitration and the procedural timetables agreed by the Parties mean that it would take
the same time to brief and hear the Respondent’s preliminary objections as it would to
brief and hear the entire case. The Tribunal thus concludes that bifurcating these
proceedings would not increase procedural efficiency and would not result in very
significant savings even if a bifurcated case would result in a dismissal, which in any
event would not occur significantly earlier than the release of Award on the full case;
to the contrary, it might significantly increase time and costs.

 

The Tribunal has also taken into consideration that, given the nature of this dispute,
the passage of time could aggravate the dispute and increase the amounts claimed as
damages. Indeed, the Respondent has seized and continues to hold the Claimants’
shares in Cairn India Limited, and is now threatening to sell them. In addition,
significant interest and penalties might accrue to the amounts assessed by India, thus
potentially increasing the amount in dispute. In the Tribunal’s view, this is yet another
consideration that warrants a resolution of this dispute as swiftly as reasonably
possible. tel

That said, the Tribunal acknowledges that, if the Respondent is successful in any of its
preliminary objections, it will have incurred costs in addressing the merits that it could
have saved in a bifurcated proceeding. The Tribunal might well consider among other
factors the outcome of the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction and admissibility
when determining the costs of this proceeding. Considering that any prejudice to the
Respondent caused by non-bifurcated proceedings can be compensated by an award of
costs, the Tribunal believes, like the Apotex tribunal did in the case before it, that “in

While it is certainly possible that the Respondent could be successful in its preliminary objections, it is
also possible that these objections might be rejected, so that bifurcation would postpone the resolution
of this dispute.

 

31

87.

88.

89.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

the circumstances of this case, [...] the balance of procedural fairness bears less
heavily on the Respondent without bifurcation than on the Claimants with
bifurcation.”

Finally, although it considers its reasoning in terms of procedural fairness and
economy sufficient, the Tribunal notes that, with respect to the Second and Third
Preliminary Objections, it is not satisfied that they can easily and entirely be addressed
separately from the merits of the dispute:

a. With respect to the Second Preliminary Objection, the Claimants have pointed
out that in its Statement of Defence the Respondent argues that the 2006 share
transfers triggered the Claimants’ tax liability irrespective of the 2012
Amendment because they were part of an “unwholesome tax avoidance
scheme”, an argument that according to the Claimants is intertwined with the
merits.'° The Claimants also argue that the Respondent’s argument that the
Claimants’ claims are inadmissible because they challenge India’s tax policy
rather than the application of its tax laws may also raise merits issues. loa

b. As to the Third Preliminary Objection, the Tribunal is not persuaded that it
raises only issues of treaty interpretation. In particular, even if the Respondent’s
interpretation of the BIT is correct, the Tribunal might still need to determine
whether the Claimants made “investments” in the meaning of the BIT (which the
Respondent recognizes is an issue intertwined with the merits), or whether they
made the capital gains that the Respondent refers to as “returns” and that do not
qualify as “investments”. The Claimants deny that they made any profit from the
2006 transactions, but the Respondent rightly observes that this assumes “the
very point” which the Claimants must prove in this arbitration. In the Tribunal’s
view, this point would also be intimately linked with the merits.

For the reasons set out above and without a need to go into further reasons, the
Tribunal denies the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation.

As a result, it confirms that the Procedural Calendar for Non-Bifurcated Proceedings
attached to the Tribunal’s letter AT- 42 of 20 January 2017 (and reattached as Annex
A hereto) will apply to the remainder of this arbitration.

Apotex, Procedural Order deciding Bifurcation dated 25 January 2013 (Exh, CLA-98), J 13.
See paragraph 63.d above.
Id.

32

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 4
19 April 2017

Iv. DECISION
90. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal:
a. DENIES the Respondent’s Application for Bifurcation;

b. | ORDERS that the Procedural Calendar for Non-Bifurcated Proceedings attached
as Annex A shall apply to the remainder of these proceedings; and

c. DEFERS its decision on costs to a later stage.

Seat of arbitration: The Hague, Netherlands

Date: 19 April 2017

For the Arbitral Tribunal:

 

Dr-L aurent Lévy

Presiding Arbitrator

33

