PCA CASE NO. 2016-7
In The Matter Of An Arbitration Before A Tribunal Constituted In Accordance With
The Agreement Between The Government Of The United Kingdom Of Great Britain
And Northern Ireland And The Government Of The Republic Of India
For The Promotion And Protection Of Investments
-and-
The Arbitration Rules Of The United Nations Commission On International Trade Law,
1976 (the “UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules”)

-between-

CAIRN ENERGY PLC
CAIRN UK HOLDINGS LIMITED

Claimants
-and-
The Republic of India

Respondent

 

Procedural Order No. 3

Decision on the Respondent’s Application for a Stay of the Proceedings

 

The Arbitral Tribunal
Dr. Laurent Lévy (Presiding Arbitrator)
Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC

Registry
Permanent Court of Arbitration

31 March 2017

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table of Contents

I. Procedural History 3
IL. Parties’ Positions 5
A. The Respondent’s position 5
1. The Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations are inextricably linked..........0.00ccceee 5

2. A stay of the proceedings is needed to prevent irreparable harm to India

3. The Tribunal has the power to stay the proceedings............0ceeeee

4. The test to stay the proceedings is met in this CaS@.......... cece eens 15
B. The Clai ” position 17
1. The Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations are not parallel proceedings ..............00 18
2. There are other less extreme alternatives to coordinate ............cccccceseeeeeeeeeeees 20
3. A party seeking to stay an arbitration faces a high burden of persuasion, which is
not met here 23
4. The balance of convenience militates against a stay..........ccccc eee eee 27

Til. Analysis

32

 

A. Does the Tribunal have the power to order a stay, and if yes, what is the standard? 32

B. Applying this standard, is a stay warranted in the circumstances of this case?......... 37

IV. Decision

46

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 12 April 2016, a few days before the first procedural hearing, the Respondent
announced its intention to make an application for a stay of the present proceedings
(the “Stay Application”). By letter of 15 April 2016, the Claimants objected to any
such application.

During the first procedural hearing, the Parties and the Tribunal addressed the
Respondent’s intention to file the Stay Application and set a briefing schedule for that
purpose.

On 6 June 2016, the Respondent filed its Stay Application. The Claimants submitted
their Response on 12 July 2016, and the Respondent filed its Reply on 28 July 2016.
The Claimants did not file a Rejoinder.

At the Respondent’s request, over the Claimants’ objections, on 7 October 2016 the
Parties and the Tribunal held a hearing on the Respondent’s Stay Application (the
“Hearing”). The Hearing took place in Geneva, with the Parties and the President
participating in person, and the co-arbitrators participating via telephone conference.

On 3 November 2016, the Tribunal informed the Parties that “before it issue[d] its
decision on the Stay Application and without prejudging any of the issues before it,
the Tribunal would like to explore avenues of coordination with the Vedanta tribunal
that would be directed at reducing the risk of inconsistent decisions while allowing
both arbitrations to proceed.”! It therefore invited the Parties to “to consult between
themselves and with Vedanta to determine whether other options — short of a full
consolidation or a full stay of the proceedings — would be feasible, and to revert to it
(preferably jointly) by 18 November 2016.”" In that letter, the Tribunal also addressed
the issue of document sharing between both arbitrations, which is a matter that will be
addressed in a separate procedural order.

In the weeks that followed, the Parties exchanged correspondence with a view to
complying with the Tribunal’s invitation.* By email of 25 November 2016, the
Tribunal encouraged the Parties to cooperate with each other and with Vedanta, with a
view to agreeing on an enhanced form of coordination in both proceedings that would
be acceptable to all parties and the two tribunals.

On 8 December 2016, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that its attempts to reach
an agreement with Vedanta on enhanced forms of coordination and/or document
sharing between the Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations had failed.

Tribunal’s Letter 2 of 3 November 2016, p. 1.
Id., pp. 1-2.

See, e.g., Claimants’ letters of 11, 19 and 23 November 2016, and Respondent’s communications of 15
and 30 November 2016 and 8 December 2016.

3

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

On 17 December 2016, the Respondent renewed is Stay Application, and made further
submissions in that regard. At the Tribunal’s invitation, the Claimants submitted a
response on 9 January 2017. On 15 February 2017, the Respondent submitted a reply,
to which the Claimants filed a rejoinder on 22 February 2017.

In its letter of 15 February 2017, and as reiterated by communications of 2, 13 and 17
March 2017, the Respondent requested a second hearing on its Stay Application. The
Claimants objected to this second hearing by letter of 7 March 2017.

By letter of 14 March 2017, the Claimants informed the Tribunal of certain new
developments in India that could have an impact on their case, including the fact that
on that same day they had received a letter from the Office of the Assistant
Commissioner of Income Tax indicating that it would proceed to the forced sale of the
CUHL’s shares in CIL (as defined further below) if the tax demand was not paid by 15
June 2017. The Respondent commented on these new developments by letters of 17
March 2017, where it also made additional submissions in respect of its Stay
Application (as well as its Application for Bifurcation, which will be addressed in a
separate procedural order) and reiterated its request for a hearing on the Stay
Application.

At the Tribunal’s invitation, the Claimants submitted their response to these further
submissions on the Stay and Bifurcation Applications on 23 March 2017. On that
same day, the Respondent confirmed that the letter of the Office of the Assistant
Commissioner of Income Tax mentioned in the preceding paragraph should be treated
as a notice for purposes of its letter of 11 May 2016, in which the Respondent
represented that it would “take no steps to purport to transfer, sell, encumber or in any
other way dispose of the [CIL] shares during the pendency of these arbitral
proceedings, without giving Cairn UK Holdings Ltd three months’ written notice” of
its intention to do so.”*

By letter of 27 March 2017, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the Respondent’s
request for a second hearing on its Stay Application was denied, that the Stay
Application was also denied, and that a decision with the Tribunal’s reasoning would
follow shortly.

The present Decision addresses the Respondent’s application for a stay of the
proceedings.

Respondent’s letter of 11 May 2017, p. 1.

IL.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

PARTIES’ POSITIONS

As it is the Respondent who requests a stay of the proceedings, the Tribunal will start
with the Respondent’s position, and will then address the Claimants’.

A. The Respondent’s position

In the Respondent’s submission, these proceedings should be stayed pending the
determination of another arbitration initiated by Vedanta Resources Ple against the
Respondent (the “Vedanta arbitration”), and pending the determination of any cross-
litigation between Cairn’ and Vedanta and/or its subsidiary Cairn India Limited
(“CIL”).° According to the Respondent, this arbitration and the Vedanta arbitration
constitute “parallel arbitration proceedings” that “are based on identical issues of fact
and law”” that are “inextricably linkea”’® (Section 1). The links between these two
cases create a risk of irreparable harm to India which requires adequate coordination,
preferably in the form of a stay of these proceedings in favour of the Vedanta
arbitration (Section 2). In the Respondent’s view, the Tribunal has the power to order
such a stay and the test to be applied is that of the balance of prejudice (Section 3). In
this case, the balance of prejudice falls to India, and as a result this arbitration should
be stayed (Section 4).

1. The Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations are inextricably linked

The Respondent contends that the Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations are inextricably
linked because (i) they refer to the same underlying transaction, (ii) Cairn and Vedanta
are linked by contractual indemnity provisions, and (iii) Cairn and Vedanta are
cooperating and sharing information, as well as the same counsel.

The Respondent explains that these two arbitrations relate to two tax demands that
concern the same underlying economic transaction, and which are “two sides of the
same coin”.’ The Respondent explains that:

a. This arbitration “concerns the tax demand issued by the Respondent’s Income
Tax Department against CUHL [Cairn Energy UK Holdings Ltd] for its failure
to pay capital gains tax as the seller of shares of Cairn India Holdings Ltd
(“CIHL”), a company incorporated in Jersey, to Cairn India Ltd (“CIL”), a
company incorporated in India, in 2006.” 10

By “Cairn”, the Parties refer specifically to the Claimants in this arbitration, i.e. Cairn Energy Plc and
Cairn UK Holdings Limited.

For the sake of clarity, the Tribunal has italicized the case names and removed italics from party names,
even when the Parties have not done so.

Respondent's Application for a Stay of the Proceedings, {[ 2.

Id., 4 44; Transcript of the hearing of 7 October 2016 (“Tr.”), 64:18-65:1 (Mr. Moolan).
Tr., 64:18-23 (Mr. Moolan).

Respondent's Application for a Stay of the Proceedings, [ 4.

5

20.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

b. In turn, “[t]he Vedanta Arbitration concerns a mirror-image tax demand which
was issued against CIL for its failure to withhold capital gains as the buyer of
those shares before making payment to CUHL, a non-resident company, for the
shares.” '! CIL is now controlled by Vedanta.

While the Respondent concedes that the issues before the Cairn and Vedanta tribunals
are not identical, '? it argues that the core issue — the lawfulness of the Respondent’s
tax demand — is the same in both arbitrations. It further contends that the Tribunal
itself made this “correct” albeit “provisional” determination in its Letter 2 of 3
November 2016."

The Respondent asserts that, in addition to these parallel proceedings, there is also a
threat of cross-litigation between the Claimants and Vedanta as a result of indemnity
provisions in the 2006 share purchase agreements. According to the Respondent, this
indemnity would essentially allow Vedanta, through CIL, to demand CUHL to
reimburse any amounts paid by Vedanta to the Indian government as a result of the tax
assessment against CIL described under paragraph 17.b above. The Respondent cites
the contractual provisions that give rise to this indemnity obligation, '* as well as
correspondence in which CIL has notified CUHL that it demands indemnification for
any tax and interest assessed against CIL by the Indian tax authorities as a result of the
transaction.'> The Respondent also asserts that this indemnity “brings into play a duty
to mitigate by Vedanta’s indirect subsidiary, CIL, for the benefit of Cairn, which duty
Vedanta is fulfilling by pursuing the Vedanta proceedings against India”. '© The
Claimants’ attempts to show that there are various scenarios that could unfold merely
prove the complexities involved. 0

The Respondent also alleges that there is a “unity of interests” between the Claimants
and Vedanta, that they have “coordinated their efforts in pursuing these related
proceedings”. '* The Respondent argues that this coordination has had the effect
deferring the dispute between the Claimants and CIL with respect to the indemnities
provided by CUHL to CIL under the purchase agreements.

Id., 44.
Respondent's Letter 1 of 15 February 2017, 4 6(a).

Respondent’s Letter 1 of 15 February 2017, {i 4 and 6(a). The Respondent refers to the Tribunal’s
Letter 2 of 3 November 2016, where it stated that “one alternative that warrants serious consideration
would be to seek to coordinate the present proceedings with the Vedanta proceedings so that, putting to
one side what might be called the less central issues, the question of the lawfulness of the Respondent's
tax measure under the treaty could be briefed, argued and heard before both tribunals at the same time,
and perhaps, if all parties consented, eventually decided by both tribunals jointly.” Tribunal’s Letter 2
of 3 November 2016, p. 3.

Exh. C-6 and C-7.

 

Exh. R-1.

Respondent's letter of 17 December 2017, {| 5(c), citing Exh. R-3, R-4, R-5, R-2 and R-7.
Tr., 165:22-166:1 (Mr. Moolan).

Respondent's Application for a Stay of the Proceedings, J 5.

6

21.

22.

23.

24.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

According to the Respondent, this cooperation “includes sharing of information
through their choice of counsel’, as one of the Claimants’ counsel (Mr. Harish Salve
SA) is also counsel to Vedanta.'? The Respondent cites correspondence that it asserts
demonstrates such coordination.” According to the Respondent, the Claimants have
barely attempted to rebut the evidence that they and CIL (i.e., Vedanta) have
coordinated their efforts in pursuing their BIT proceedings.”! The Respondent also
contends that, while the Claimants have stated that their knowledge of the Vedanta
arbitration is based on publicly available information, their comments suggest
knowledge of facts that are not in the public domain. The Respondent deduces that this
information was provided by its common counsel, adding that “it is ludicrous to
suggest that two Parties linked by an indemnity provision which may lead to litigation
— including obvious questions as to steps taken by Vedanta to mitigate any loss
through the pursuit of litigation — are not sharing information; as they clearly are.”

The Respondent objects to the Claimants’ allegations that Mr. Salve does not share
information on the Vedanta case with them: it contends that the “formal position” is
the Mr. Salve is instructed in both cases, with the result that “Counsel for Vedanta is
counsel for Cairn”; “he has sight of both pleadings”, and “[h]is knowledge is
imputable to the Claimants.”??

That being said, the Respondent clarifies that it has “never suggested that there is
anything untoward about Cairn and Vedanta collaborating and cooperating. Our case
is the exact opposite; it is exactly what you would expect. You have one party that is
on the receiving end of an indemnity, of course they agree to liaise, and you have seen
from the correspondence Vedanta itself saying, ‘We need to mitigate our damages’.””*
Indeed, the Respondent notes that normally when an indemnity is in place there is a
right of control of the proceedings, and thus both investors have “good reasons to
cooperate”.”> The Tribunal understands this to mean that the Respondent does not
object to the coordination of the claims, but argues that this shows how linked the
claims are.”°

Somewhat inconsistently, the Respondent also argues that Cairn and Vedanta have
pursued “independent uncoordinated — deliberately uncoordinated — litigation from

Id., 7.

Exh, R-1, R-2, R-5, R-7.
Respondent's Reply, If 6-12
Respondent's Reply, { 10.

Tr., 163:21-164:9 (Mr. Moolan).
Tr., 172:14-21 (Mr. Moolan).
Tr., 172:24-173:13 (Mr. Moolan).

When restated by the Tribunal, Counsel for the Respondent confirmed that it did not object to this
coordination. See Tr., 175:2-8 (The President/Mr Moolan: “THE PRESIDENT: [...] I also had
understood that you did not find any fault with the fact that the two Claimants in two arbitrations might
be coordinating because there is an indemnity. I had also not read your submissions that way. MR
MOOLLAN: Thank you, Mr Chairman.”)

25.

26.

27.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

one another”.”” The Respondent’s point appears to be that “Cairn and Vedanta have
chosen (i) to commence two separate investment arbitrations, having had prior
discussions about the same in the context of the indemnity which links them and (ii) to
do all in their power to avoid any coordination or sharing of information between the
two sets of proceedings, thus creating [] incontrovertible difficulties”.** In particular,
the Respondent complains that while the Claimants and Vedanta are coordinating and
sharing information, “everything is being done by them to keep the two tribunals in
the dark about the other set of proceedings, and to seek to avoid the possibility of the
two tribunals putting in place proper coordination between the two sets of
proceedings.””” For the Respondent, this is confirmed by the fact that the Claimants
have rejected the designation of Singapore (which is the seat in the Vedanta
proceedings) as the seat of this arbitration, and the application of the UNCITRAL
Transparency Rules®).

The Respondent submits that Claimants’ attempt to isolate these proceedings should
not be condoned by the Tribunal: the claimants in both cases (“through their overt
choice of Counsel and covert cooperation”) and the Respondent (through its defence
in both proceedings), are aware of what is going on in both arbitrations; “the only
party being kept in the dark is this Tribunal.””!

2.  Astay of the proceedings is needed to prevent irreparable harm to
India

The Respondent contends that the links between these two arbitrations create a risk of
“manifest prejudice” or “irreparable harm” to the Respondent, and that a stay is
necessary to “ensure the proper administration of international justice.” In the
Respondent’s submission, “the correct approach is to coordinate the two related
proceedings in a fair and efficient manner”, which “would be best done by staying
these proceedings pending the outcome of the Vedanta Arbitration and any litigation
instituted by CIL and/or Vedanta against the Claimants which seeks to enforce the
contractual indemnities provided in the 2006 Agreements.”*?

First, the Respondent argues that “[t]he inextricable link between the Vedanta
Arbitration and the present proceedings gives rise to a real and substantial risk that the
two proceedings will result in conflicting and irreconcilable awards.” According to
the Respondent, “[s]uch an outcome would plainly be illogical and absurd”, “would
run counter to the Respondent’s basic framework of tax assessment and collection, and

Tr., 80:1-3 (Mr. Moolan).

Respondent's Reply, | 17. See also Tr., 80:6-16 (Mr. Moolan).
Respondent's Reply, { 10.

Id.,4 13.

Id., 4 12.

Respondent's Reply, J 2; Tr. 23:13-15; 47:20-22 (Mr. Moolan).
Respondent's Application, | 11.

Respondent's Application, | 45.

28.

29.

30.

40

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

it would also threaten the coherence and legitimacy of the investment arbitration
9935
system.

With respect to the risk of inconsistent decisions, the Respondent accepts that “[w]hile
it is correct that the two sets of proceedings do not and will not raise the exact same
points”, it stresses that “the core question in each case — the legitimacy of India’s
taxation of the extraordinary capital gain made by Cairn in 2006 (an extraordinary
gain which has not been taxed anywhere in the world) — is exactly the same.”*°

Second, the Respondent has also stated that “[t]he two arbitrations represent a
coordinated attempt by the buyers and sellers of the taxable asset to have two bites at
the same cherry: a finding by an international tribunal that the tax measure was
somehow in breach of the BIT.”*” In its Reply, the Respondent clarified that the
expression “two bites at the same cherry” did not imply that Cairn and Vedanta were
seeking double recovery, but rather that the risk is one of “double jeopardy”.**
Somewhat contradictorily, at the hearing the Respondent restated that Cairn and
Vedanta were seeking “two bites at the cherry”.? The Tribunal understands that the
Respondent is referring to the following risk: if there is a situation where one investor
wins against India and the other loses, the losing investor will attempt to avail itself of
the other investor’s positive result.“°

As to the fact that India is pursuing tax demands against both the seller (CUHL) and
the buyer (CIL), the Respondent argues that this “is merely the product of the fact that
the tax remains unpaid and that the Respondent’s Income Tax Department is under a
statutory obligation to implement and enforce the provisions of the Income Tax

Id., 44.
Respondent's Reply, { 11.
Respondent's Application, 9.

Respondent’s Reply, {[ 21. At the hearing, Counsel for the Respondent clarified: “Double jeopardy in
the sense that you are damned if you do, you are damned if you do not. By having two sets of
proceedings, as I gave you that scenario, you may well end up in a situation where India wins one of the

cases, loses the other case and is then damned come what may. [...] [T]hat is because of the interplay of
two things: (i) the fact that these two tax demands are mirror images of one another; and (ii) the
existence of the indemnity. Let me go to the example again. [...] Vedanta loses, Cairn wins. Because it

is the same tax measure, Vedanta will then undoubtedly try to say, ‘Well, how can I be liable? The
capital gains tax is gone. You cannot be withholding tax without capital gains tax’ and vice versa. That
does not need the indemnity, that is just because they are two sides of the same coin. That is made even
more complex by the existence of the indemnity. Same scenario: Vedanta loses, Cairn wins. What does
Vedanta do? Of course it sues Cairn, it has got an indemnity. It sues Cairn, it wins, USD 4 billion
payable to India, Cairn pays USD 4 billion to Vedanta. So the USD 4 billion have effectively gone from
Cairn to Vedanta to India. What does Cairn do? ‘But I won. You did not have that right against me. Can
I please now have the USD 4 billion I have just had to pay to CIL?’”. Tr., 84:18-85:25 (Mr. Moolan).

 

Tr., 176:20-177:5 (Mr. Moolan) (“[W]e do say they are having two bites of the cherry because
whichever party — imagine there is a win-lose situation — [...] Whoever loses will say, ‘Well, the other
one has won, there is therefore no tax liability there, therefore there cannot be any tax liability on me’.”)

Id.

31.

32.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

Act.”"! The Respondent emphasizes that Indian law does not allow it the discretion
not to pursue a demand against a defaulting party (whether seller or buyer).

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ suggestion that the risk of inconsistent
outcomes could be blamed on the Respondent’s decision to pursue both Cairn and
Vedanta: it argues that “[t]he Claimants, not India, have chosen to work with Vedanta
to bring two separate sets of arbitral proceedings seeking to impugn the exact same tax
measure; and to do everything in their power to avoid those two sets of proceedings
being properly coordinated.”**

The Respondent further asserts that this arbitration should be stayed in favour of the
Vedanta arbitration and not the other way around, for the following reasons:

a. The Respondent’s first point (which it concedes may be a “a bit flippant’), is
that if it had proposed to stay the Vedanta arbitration, then Vedanta would have

complained as Cairn is doing now, “so one has to stay somewhere”.*#

b. Second, the Respondent submits that the Vedanta case is more advanced. While
the Cairn arbitration was filed first in time, Vedanta submitted its Statement of
Claim first, filed an application for interim measures first, and the Vedanta
tribunal scheduled a hearing on the Respondent’s Application of Bifurcation,
which was to be filed the week after the Respondent’s Reply.*°

c. Third, “the existence of the indemnity from CUHL to Vedanta makes it clear
that there can be only one logical sequence of litigation”.“° According to the
Respondent, “the existence of that indemnity creates the risk — in addition to all
the other risks of inconsistency and prejudice noted by the Respondents — that (i)
Vedanta may lose its proceedings against the Respondent; (ii) Vedanta (through
CIL) will then pursue Cairn under the indemnity; (iii) with the result that Cairn
will seek to recoup amounts paid out to Vedanta (via CIL) under the indemnity
against the Respondent in this or further proceedings." As a result, the
Respondent contends that “the logical sequence of events is for the Vedanta
arbitration to conclude (with all relevant proceedings, evidence and awards to be
made available to the present Tribunal), for any indemnity proceedings to play
out, and for the present arbitration to then resume with the benefit of the
outcome of both sets of proceedings and of the reasoning of the Vedanta

Id.,4 16.

Id., | 14, referring to Exh, R-13, Common Cause A Registered Society v Union of India and Others,
[1996] 222 ITR 260 (SC), para. 18); Exh. R-14, Income Tax Act 1961, s. 143(1), and Exh. R-15,
Income Tax Act 1961, s. 119 proviso (a).

 

Respondent's Application, | 50.

Tr., 71:24-72:3 (Mr. Moolan).

Respondent's Reply, [ 18; Tr., 72:4-19 (Mr. Moolan).
Tr., 73:3-8.

Respondent's Reply, { 18.

33.

34,

35.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

Tribunal.”** Indeed, according to the Respondent, “Vedanta’s claim and the fate
of Vedanta’s claim will determine whether or not the indemnity will be
triggered. Whether or not the indemnity will be triggered will, in turn, directly
impact Cairn’s claims.”””

If Cairn disagrees that the risk described in paragraph 32.c above exists, the
Respondent has invited it to “confirm that it commits and binds itself not to seek to
claim against the Respondent in any circumstance any amount which Vedanta may
recover against it under any indemnity between Cairn and Vedanta arising from the
transactions at issue in this case.”*° For the Respondent, “[a] failure to do so will
speak for itself.”>! During the hearing, the Respondent argued that the Claimants had
provided no such confirmation, and submits that this means that the risk identified by
the Respondent is “likely” and that it is accordingly necessary for the various
proceedings to follow the sequence outlined by the Respondent.

As discussed further below, the Respondent submits that the links between the two
arbitrations warrant a stay of this arbitration, “pending determination of the Vedanta
Arbitration by the Vedanta Tribunal and, if applicable, the resolution of any cross-
litigation between CIL and/or Vedanta and the Claimants concerning the CUHL and
CIL Tax Demands”.** The Respondent clarifies however that it “remains open to other
avenues of coordination which would bring about a fair, efficient and predictable
outcome”, a including consolidation.*°

In this context, the Respondent welcomed the Tribunal’s invitation to the Parties to
attempt to agree with Vedanta a form of enhanced coordination between the two
arbitrations in which “the question of the lawfulness of the Respondent’s tax measure
under the treaty could be briefed, argued and heard before both tribunals at the same
time, and perhaps, if all parties consented, eventually decided by both tribunals
jointly.”°° The Respondent suggests that the Parties’ failure to agree to the Tribunal’s
proposal can be attributed to both the Cairn and Vedanta claimants’ unwillingness to
engage in such enhanced coordination.” The Respondent argues in this respect that:

Id. See also Tr., 73:3-13 (Mr. Moolan) (“[T]he existence of the indemnity from CUHL to Vedanta
makes it clear that there can be only one logical sequence of litigation. First, the Vedanta arbitration
must conclude. Depending on the outcome of that arbitration, indemnity proceedings by Vedanta
against Cairn may be triggered. It is in light of the result of that process that the Cairn arbitration can
take place.”) See also Respondent's Letter | of 15 February 2017, { 8.

Tr., 160:18-22 (Mr. Moolan).

Respondent's Reply, { 18.

Id.

Tr., 75:15-76:3; 160:23-163:13 (Mr. Moolan).
Respondent's Reply, 33.

Respondent's Application, | 11.
Respondent's Reply, { 32.

Tribunal’s Letter 2 of 3 November 2016, p. 3.

In its letter of 17 December 2016, the Respondent also requests the Claimants to produce documents
related to their correspondence with Vedanta, and requests the establishment of a document sharing

11

36.

37.

38.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

a. “Tt is obvious that coordination has continued between the two sets of
99, 58

Claimants”;

b. Despite the Claimants’ contentions to the contrary, “[t]he interests of Vedanta
and Cairn against India are perfectly aligned. As recognised in correspondence
between the two sets of Claimants, the Vedanta arbitration is a manifestation of
Vedanta’s duty to mitigate its claim against the Cairn Claimants under the
indemnity, and the indemnity will only come into play if Vedanta is
unsuccessful against India.”

c. “The Claimants’ concerted strategy is clear: to try and push the Cairn arbitration
as aggressively as possible, while slowing down the Vedanta arbitration [...] and
to pretend that the lack of cooperation is due to Vedanta so that the Cairn
Claimants should not face the obvious consequences of the Claimants’ concerted

actions i.e. a stay of the Cairn arbitration”.

The Respondent further contends that “Cairn’s right to prosecute its claims must be
balanced against the Respondent’s right to a fair trial and hearings, including trials and
hearings which minimise the risk of inconsistent outcomes in the two arbitrations.”°!
The Respondent also requests the Tribunal to take into account that “the Claimants’
actions to defeat attempts at coordination and this Tribunal’s own proposals of 3
November 2016, are prejudicing the Respondent’s rights to a fair hearing in both
arbitrations (and relevantly for these applications in this, Cairn arbitration) in that they
inter alia prejudice the possibility of ensuring consistent outcomes in the two
arbitrations.”

3. The Tribunal has the power to stay the proceedings

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal has the power to stay proceedings. For the
Respondent, this power arises under Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, as well as
from its inherent powers.

In the Respondent’s view, the jurisprudence of UNCITRAL tribunals (such as
Methanex v. United States and UPS v. Canada) demonstrates that “(i) Article 15(1)
provides the Tribunal with a broad power over procedural issues; and (ii) that power is
understood to confer ‘the broadest procedural flexibility’ subject to compliance with
fundamental safeguards.” While none of these cases refers specifically to a stay of

 

regime between the Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations. The Tribunal addresses these requests in a different
order.

Respondent's letter of 17 December 2016, { 5(a).

Id.,7. See also Respondent's Letter 1 of 15 February 2017, { 6(b).
Id., 4 5(d).

Respondent's Letter | of 15 February 2017, 18.

Respondent's letter of 17 December 2016, | 10. See also Respondent's Letter | of 15 February 2017,
G13.

Respondent's Application, {]{ 54-68; Tr., 23:4-8; 24:1-31:8 (Mr. Moolan).
Respondent's Application, | 57.
12

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

the proceedings, the Respondent contends that the cases are relevant to “demonstrate
the breadth of application of Article 15(1)”.% The Respondent also cites the Hvratska
case for the proposition that “the Tribunal has an inherent power to take measures to
preserve the integrity of its proceedings”, and that, “[m]Jore broadly, there is an
‘inherent power of an international court to deal with any issues necessary for the
conduct of matters falling within its jurisdiction’”, which “‘exists independently of

any statutory reference’ .

In the Respondent’s submission, “[t]he Tribunal’s broad powers under Article 15 of
the UNCITRAL Rules, as well as in the exercise of its inherent powers, include the
power to stay or suspend the proceedings in the interests of ensuring fairness in the
treatment of the Parties and the proper administration of international justice.” In the
Respondent’s view, “[t]his arbitration is well suited for the exercise of such a power
because of the clear existence of concurrent proceedings, the possibility of conflicting
decisions, as well as the possibility of cross-litigation between the Claimants in the
two proceedings.”

The Respondent contends that the power of international courts and tribunals to stay
proceedings has been confirmed in international arbitral and judicial practice. Citing
S.D. Myers and Bilcon, it notes that tribunals constituted under the UNCITRAL Rules
have confirmed their power to stay proceedings, but acknowledges that those tribunals
did not, on the facts of those cases, accede to the request for a stay.”

The Respondent notes however that international tribunals constituted under other
tules (specifically, in SPP v. Egypt, the Mox Plant case and SGS v. Philippines) have
stayed the proceedings pending the outcome of related litigation.” According to the
Respondent, these cases “demonstrate that this Tribunal undoubtedly has the power to
stay its proceedings in appropriate circumstances; for instance where the resolution of
a relevant issue is pending before another body.”7! While the Claimants “seek to
distinguish those cases on their specific fact patterns, [...] this cannot bring into doubt
the existence of the discretion to stay as a matter of law, but only serves to highlight
that any exercise of that discretion must, by its very nature, be driven by the facts.” It

Respondent's Reply, {| 23.

Respondent’s Application, | 58, citing, Hrvatska Elektroprivreda v Slovenia (ICSID Case No
ARB/05/24), Order Concerning the Participation of Counsel of 6 May 2008, 33 (Exh. RLA-21).

Respondent's Application, | 59.
Id.

Respondent's Reply, ff 24-26, citing S.D. Myers, Inc. v Government of Canada (Procedural Order No
18 of 26 February 2001), 9, 7, 9-11,15 (Exh. RLA-28), and William Ralph Clayton, William Richard
Clayton, Douglas Clayton, Daniel Clayton and Bilcon of Delaware Inc. v Government of Canada, PCA
Case No. 2009-04 (Procedural Order No 19 of 10 August 2015), | 4 (Exh. RLA-29).

Respondent's Application, {{{ 60-65.
Id.,1 65.
Id.,4 27.

42.

43.

44.

45.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

is the Respondent’s submission that the facts of this case “warrant the exercise of that
discretion.”

In the Respondent’s view, a tribunal’s power to stay proceedings should be used in the
case of concurrent investment treaty proceedings such as this one. The Respondent
notes in this respect that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(“UNCITRAL”), the International Law Commission (“ILA”) and leading writers and
practitioners have highlighted the risks of multiple proceedings in investment treaty
arbitration, which include the risk of inconsistent outcomes, duplication of efforts,
additional costs, and procedural unfairness.”* The temporary stay of an arbitration
pending the outcome of other proceedings has been proposed as one of the possible
solutions to these risks.’°

Contrary to the Claimants’ characterization, the Cairn and Vedanta proceedings are
clearly “multiple proceedings in investment arbitration” as defined in the UNCITRAL
Secretariat’s Note on concurrent proceedings, which includes “situations “[w]here
unrelated claimants initiate separate proceedings against the same respondent with
regard to the same measure (under an investment treaty and/or a contract).””°

The Respondent argues that, contrary to the Claimants’ contention, the UNCITRAL
Secretariat’s Note does not state that the power to stay an arbitration (or otherwise
take into account of parallel proceedings) is limited to cases when there is a specific
treaty provision providing for such measures. To the contrary, the Note recommends
the Commission to prepare a guidance text to assist tribunals in the management of
concurrent proceedings, including on whether there is an inherent power to stay
proceedings, decline jurisdiction, or proceed with consolidation. The Note thus clearly
envisages cases where there is no treaty provision.”

The Respondent emphasizes that “this Tribunal undoubtedly has the power to stay its
proceedings in appropriate circumstances; for instance where the resolution of a
relevant issue is pending before another body. The only question is whether it should
use that power in the present case.””* The Respondent submits that “the issue lies not
with the absence of tools which tribunals may use to manage situations such as the
present one, but with a lack of appreciation by tribunals as to when or how to use
those tools.””” Citing Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler, the Respondent argues that, beyond

Id.,4 27.
Respondent's Application, | 46-48, 52-53, citing Exh, RLA-13, RLA-14, RLA-15, and RLA-16.
Id.

Respondent's Reply, 30, citing UNCITRAL Secretariat Note, Concurrent Proceedings in Investment
Arbitration, UN Doc, A/CN.9/881 (8 April 2016), | 8 (Exh. CLA-73).

Respondent’s Reply, {{{{ 28-31, citing UNCITRAL Secretariat Note, Concurrent Proceedings in
Investment Arbitration, UN Doc. A/CN.9/848 (17 April 2015) (Exh. RLA-13), 19.

Respondent's Application, | 65.
Id.

46.

47.

48.

49.

80

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

occasional remedies, “‘a serious effort is needed to elaborate more general solutions”
that require “creative thinking”.*°

Citing S.D. Myers, the Respondent submits that the test to determine if a case must be
stayed is “essentially one of a balance of prejudice”: the Tribunal “should weigh, on
one side, the prejudice which is likely to arise if [it does] not grant a stay, and that
includes the serious and irreparable risk of inconsistent decisions [...] against the
prejudice which the Claimants say they will suffer if a stay is granted, which [...] is
essentially monetary.”*!

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal can find guidance in the recent work of the
International Law Commission (ILA) on concurrent proceedings (the “ILA Paper”).*
The Respondent acknowledges that the ILA Paper’s starting position is that, once it
has established that it has jurisdiction, a tribunal must proceed with the arbitration, but
argues that, in order to avoid conflicting decisions, costly duplication of proceedings
or oppressive tactics, the ILA Paper notes that a tribunal may decide to stay an
arbitration (even when the triple identity test is not satisfied) if the tribunal (i) is not
precluded from doing so under the applicable law; (ii) it is satisfied that the outcome
of the pending proceedings is material to the outcome of the current arbitration, and
(iii) it is satisfied that there will be no material prejudice to the party opposing the
stay.””

4. The test to stay the proceedings is met in this case

In the Respondent’s view, “the ‘balance of convenience’ to the parties — taking into
account the costs which the Parties will incur, and the possible prejudice faced by the
Respondent given the risks arising from the existence of the indemnity, the
‘duplication of efforts’ in being required to defend the two claims concurrently, and
the possibility of ‘potentially contradictory outcomes’ overwhelmingly favours the
granting of a stay. “4 Th this respect, the Respondent contends that “the harm which
India stands to suffer if the proceedings are not stayed — and inconsistent outcomes
reached — is irreparable and cannot be compensated in damages.”

It also argues that “it is fundamentally unfair for the Respondent to have to defend two
claims arising out of the same measure in circumstances where the Respondent could
find itself exposed to different awards”, and “the maintenance of concurrent

Respondent’s Application, {| 52, citing Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, “Multiple Proceedings — New
Challenges for the Settlement of Investment Disputes”, in Arthur Rovine (ed), Contemporary Issues in
International Arbitration and Mediation: The Fordham Papers (2013), pp. 11-12 (Exh. RLA-16).

Tr. 23:10-22 (Mr. Moolan); see also Respondent's Reply, (11 25, 31.

De Ly and Sheppard, “ILA Final Report on Lis Pendens and Arbitration”, 25(1) Arbitration
International 83, 84 (2009) (Exh. RLA-14).

Tr. 31:11-35:10 (Mr. Moolan, citing Exh, RLA-14).
Respondent's Reply, 31.
Respondent's Letter 1 of 15 February 2015, { 8(c).

15

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

proceedings in the present case is inconsistent with the proper and fair administration
of international justice”.*°

By contrast, any prejudice which the Claimants may suffer (none being admitted)
could ultimately be compensated through monetary compensation, bearing in mind
that the Claimants have long reaped the benefits of their extraordinary capital gains,
without ever paying tax thereon in any jurisdiction.”*”

The Respondent also contends that the Claimants exaggerate the prejudice that would
be suffered by them, and argues that “it is all hyperbole which is designed to scare [the
Tribunal] from doing the right thing.”** In particular, the Respondent argues that,
contrary to what the Claimants suggest, it is not proposing a lengthy and indefinite
stay; it is asking for “a temporary stay, limited in time by the duration of another set of
proceedings and, in this instance, [...] of two further sets of proceedings” — in other
words, it is requesting a “clearly defined stay”. The Respondent asserts that the
Vedanta proceedings are well advanced, with a hearing on bifurcation in December
2016 and, if bifurcation is ordered, a hearing on jurisdiction in May 2017. As for the
indemnity proceedings, the Respondent notes that they would take place in English
Commercial Courts and that it understands that counsel has already been retained.
The Respondent also explains that, if a stay was granted, this Tribunal would remain
fully constituted, it would be fully appraised of the advancement of the Vedanta
proceedings (once a proper information-sharing system is put in place), and there
would be regular updates from the Parties. The Tribunal would thus remain in full
charge of the proceedings and would remain “free at all times to vary or discharge the
stay if it felt that the reason why it had granted the stay in the first place had gone
away or that something had happened which warranted for this course of action to take
place.”

As to the Claimants’ allegations that the prejudice to Cairn is greater than the
prejudice to Vedanta if the Vedanta arbitration was stayed, the Respondent argues that
“this case in terms of alleged prejudice is exactly the same as Vedanta, the same
interest is accruing against Vedanta”, and that “[t]he only difference [...] is that
Vedanta has assets in India and, therefore, India will be able to enforce its tax demand
against Vedanta”, “[w]hereas these Claimants have already taken all their funds out of
India, with the only remaining funds being what has been attached.”*!

Finally, the Respondent objects to the Claimants’ argument that granting a stay would
be inconsistent with the Respondent’s obligation to provide a prompt and effective
remedy. The Respondent denies that it has breached the BIT and rejects the suggestion
that the Tribunal should assume that it has, and also rejects the proposition that the

Respondent's Application, | 49.
Respondent's Reply, 31.

Tr., 169:8-9 (Mr. Moolan).

Tr., 76:7-16 (Mr. Moolan).

Tr., 76:17-78:5 (Mr. Moolan).
Tr., 167:17-168:3 (Mr. Moolan).

54.

55.

56.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

BIT’s object and purpose should require a prompt and effective remedy that would be
inconsistent with the proper management of concurrent proceedings.”

OR OR

For the reasons set out above, the Respondent request the Tribunal to:

a. “stay these proceedings pending determination of the Vedanta Arbitration by the
Vedanta Tribunal and, if applicable, the resolution of any cross-litigation
between CIL and/or Vedanta and the Claimants concerning the CUHL and CIL
Tax Demands; and

b. award the Respondent the costs of this Application.””

B. The Claimants’ position

The Claimants contend that the Respondent’s stay application is “wholly unjustified
and should be summarily dismissed.” In the Claimant’s view, “the lengthy and
indefinite stay of this arbitration that is requested by the Respondent would constitute
an egregious and unprecedented denial of justice, and India cannot be allowed to
repudiate its treaty obligation to grant the Claimants the right to seek a prompt and
effective remedy for their serious and continuing harms.””°

The Claimants contend that “the requested stay cannot be considered while India
continues to hold Cairn’s investment and aggressively pursues its multi-billion-dollar
tax claim against Cairn.”°° The Claimants argue that the Respondent is requesting a
stay for an indefinite period, contingent on the outcome of multiple disputes (e.g., the
Vedanta arbitration and any disputes between the Claimants and Vedanta), each of
which could last several years. However, the circumstances of this case require an
immediate remedy: the Claimants argue that the Respondent “has wrongfully deprived
Cairn of US$ 1 billion in assets”?” and “continues to detain those assets, causing
massive on-going harm and preventing Cairn from being able to pursue substantial
business opportunities;”"* “Indian tax authorities continue to aggressively pursue
Cairn and have threatened further penalty proceedings;””” and “even before any
penalties are assessed, the purported tax bill is mounting at a staggering rate of US$ 44
million per month, or over a half billion US dollars per year.” '

Respondent's Reply, { 20.

Respondent's Reply, 33.

Claimants’ Response, {{ 2.

Claimants’ letter of 22 February 2017, p. 2.
Claimants’ Response, 5.

Id.,4 18.

Id.,4 18.

Id.,4 18.

Id.,4 18.

57.

58.

59.

tol

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

The Claimants’ arguments can be grouped as follows. The Claimants first contend
that the points of commonality between the Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations are not
parallel proceedings (Section 1). The Claimants also contend that there are better
ways of ensuring the coordination of the two proceedings than ordering a lengthy stay
(Section 2). In any event, the Claimants submit that a party seeking to stay an
arbitration faces a high burden of persuasion, which is not met here (Section 3). They
further contend that the balance of convenience militates against a stay (Section 4).

1. The Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations are not parallel proceedings

Contrary to the Respondent’s contention, this arbitration and the Vedanta arbitration
are not parallel or concurrent proceedings that could potentially threaten the coherence
or legitimacy of the investment arbitration system and thus justify a stay.

The Claimants acknowledge that the transaction that gives rise to the tax demands
against Cairn and Vedanta is the same, but argues that there are many fundamental
differences between the two cases. To begin with, the Claimants argue that there is no
triple identity: tol

a. The parties are different: the claimants in the Cairn arbitration are CUHL and
Cairn Energy Plc (the seller/taxpayer and its 100% shareholder, respectively),
while the Claimant in the Vedanta arbitration is Vedanta (a partial shareholder of
the buyer/taxpayer). Cairn and Vedanta are not the same or closely related
parties; nor are they companies in the same corporate chain or group: they are
entirely separate publicly held companies owned by different shareholders.

b. The causes of action are different: although both Cairn and Vedanta rely on the
same treaty (the UK-India BIT), the Claimants understand that they have each
brought different treaty-based claims. On one hand, Cairn advances claims of
expropriation of shares under Article 5 of the BIT, claims of breach of FET
under Article 3 of the BIT, and claims for a denial of its right to repatriate funds.
The Claimants note that they cannot be certain of Vedanta’s claims, but note that
it is possible to assume that Vedanta will bring a claim for breach of FET.
However, the basis for Vedanta’s legitimate expectations would be different to
Cairn’s: while in 2006 Cairn could not have known that India would radically
reinterpret the ITA, Vedanta made its investment in 2011, after India had
introduced its new interpretation of the ITA. The Claimants are also unaware of
a similar seizure of shares such as the one inflicted upon Cairn that could give
rise to an expropriation claim.

The Claimants also note that the measures that give rise to these causes of action
are different: the measures that serve as basis for Cairn’s claim are the 22
January 2014 order pursuant to § 281B ITA attaching Cairn’s shares in CIL, and
the 25 January 2016 Final Assessment Order pursuant to §§ 148, 143(3) and
144(C)13 ITA and Notice of Demand under to § 156 ITA, ordering Cairn to pay
approximately USD 4.3 billion. In turn, the measure that gives rise to Vedanta’s
claim is the 11 March 2015 Tax Assessment under § 201 ITA declaring CIL to

Tr., 145:6-148:21 (Mr. McNeill); Claimants’ Hearing Slides, Slide 19.
18

60.

61.

62.

63.

102

103

104

los

106

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

be an “assessee in default” and ordering the payment of approximately USD 3.1
billion. The Claimants have no knowledge of another measure, but note that it
could possibly exist.

c. Finally, the Claimants note that the requests for relief are likely to be different
in both arbitrations. The Claimants have no knowledge of the specific request
made by Vedanta, but note that Cairn’s principal relief relates to the losses
arising from the seizure of Cairn’s shares (noting that they are not aware of a
similar seizure of Vedanta’s shares) and only alternatively relief from India’s tax
assessment, in the amount of USD 4.4 billion.

In addition, the Claimants contend that there is no conceivable possibility of double
recovery by either Cairn or Vedanta. In particular, each investor seeks compensation
for its own losses: Cairn in particular seeks compensation for the consequences of the
seizure of its shares in in CIL, and while it also seeks protection against any tax levies
made by India, this would not result in any net recovery by Cairn. By contrast, India
is able to collect the same tax from both Cairn and Vedanta: although India has stated
that it can legally collect tax only from the buyer or the seller but not both, it has made
clear that even if it recovers the tax from CUHL it can still recover interest and
penalties from CIL.!

The Claimants add that the Respondent’s allegations of coordination and unity of
interest between Cairn and Vedanta are “speculative, false and legally irrelevant”, and
even if they “contained any measure of truth, they would fall far short of justifying
treating Cairn and Vedanta as a single party or ‘closely related’ parties and staying this
arbitration on that basis.”!°

Contrary to India’s contentions, it would not be unfair to allow this arbitration to
continue: it was India’s decision to initiate separate tax proceedings against CUHL
and CIL in connection with the same 2006 share transfers. “India should not be
surprised that as a result each assessee would wish to exercise independent rights to
challenge such wrongful tax claims domestically or that distinct foreign investors
would bring treaty claims seeking redress for violations of international law.” The
Claimants add that “[i]t is no excuse for India to say that it is statutorily required to
pursue independent tax assessments against both companies; the remedy is for India to
amend its statute to give itself a choice, rather than to irrationally compel the two
claimants to elect a single remedy between them.”!

As to the indemnity that exists between Cairn and cit,!° the Claimants made the
point in one of its presentation slides that this is irrelevant: it is irrelevant to India

Claimants’ Response, 25.

Id., 135.

Id.,4 21.

Claimants’ letter of 9 January 2017, p. 22.

The Claimants clarify that the indemnity that arises from the 2006 transactions and that is at stake here
runs between CUHL and CIL, and not CUHL and Vedanta (Vedanta is the 55% shareholder of CIL, but
the indemnity is not directly with Vedanta). Tr., 119:6-21 (Mr. McNeill).

19

64.

65.

66.

67.

107

108

109

10

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

(who is not a party to the 2006 agreements); it is irrelevant to the requested stay,
because it is a contractual allocation of risk between two private entities, and it is
irrelevant to the risk of conflicting outcomes, because the requested stay pending any
cross-litigation is intended to foreclose future remedies.'°’ More importantly, it is
irrelevant because, as explained further below, the Claimants are already requesting to
be made whole from any demands from India. 108 Tn any event, the Claimants note that
the indemnities would come to play even if Vedanta were to win in this arbitration,
because as it is only a 51% shareholder in CIL, CIL still might seek to recover from
Cairn the full indemnity. As a result, there is no benefit in waiting for the outcome of
the Vedanta arbitration or any indemnity litigations. 109

The Claimants further argue that the existence of the indemnity is also irrelevant
because, even without a contractual indemnity, if CIL was forced to pay taxes on
Cairn’s behalf, it could still bring a common law claim against Cairn.'!°

2. There are other less extreme alternatives to coordinate

Prior to addressing the stay application itself, the Claimants argue that there are other
less extreme methods to ensure a proper coordination of cases (other than a stay or a
full consolidation) that could have been considered by the Respondent, for instance, (i)
appointing arbitrators common to the two arbitrations, (ii) sharing the pleadings and
evidence between the two arbitrations, and (iii) staying the Vedanta arbitration instead
of this arbitration.

With respect to (i), the Claimants note that appointing arbitrators common to two
arbitrations is a method that has been used to mitigate the risk of inconsistent
decisions from arbitrations involving the same government measures. However, the
Respondent made no attempt to do so. In this respect, the Claimants note that the
Respondent waited seven months to file its application for a stay, which according to
the Claimants, “is not just a matter of delay; it is also a matter of what opportunities
you have missed potentially to find some means of coordinating cases that you believe
give rise to a risk of conflicting decisions.”!!! Among the opportunities that the
Respondent missed was the opportunity to appoint common arbitrators. |!

With respect to (ii), the Claimants submit that sharing the pleadings and evidence
between the two arbitrations would facilitate the flow of information between both
cases and mitigate the risk of inconsistence decisions. The Claimants acknowledge
that the Respondent has agreed that documents from one case should be disclosed in
the other, but suggest that the Respondent’s position has been inconsistent: one the
one hand, to date the Respondent has refused to share documents from the Vedanta

Claimants’ Hearing Slides, Slide 25.
Tr., 180:16-181:18 (Mr. Nelson).
Tr., 181:19-183:23 (Mr. Nelson).
Tr., 184:19-185:16 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 100:11:22 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 99:18-101:25 (Mr. McNeill).

20

68.

69.

70.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

case with this Tribunal, arguing that the confidentiality and transparency regime in the
Vedanta case has not been put in place, but on the other hand has threatened to
introduce selected pleadings in the Vedanta case to counter the Claimants’ arguments.
Considering that the Respondent is the only party with full access to the documents of
both proceedings, the Claimants consider this to be “fundamentally unfair’. 13

In the Claimants’ submission, “enhancing information flow between the two tribunals
would help ensure common information is available for issues common to the two
arbitrations” and “is the most sensible way of thinking about coordinating the two
cases.”!'4 The Claimants clarify that if the Tribunal intends to set up a regime for the
sharing of information between both arbitrations, “Cairn would be fully in support of
these efforts and would be willing to engage in discussions about what sort of
documents could be produced to the Vedanta case if mutual disclosure were a
requirement.”'!°

With reference to PO2, the Claimants add that, “if the Tribunal concluded that the
transparency regime was an excessive and inappropriate means to share documents
between the two cases and coordinate the cases and avoid conflicting decisions, then a
stay that may last five or eight years, a fortiori, by necessity is far, far, far in excess
for the alleged problem, the alleged issue at hand, which is avoiding the risk of any
conflicting decisions between the two cases.”!

As to (iii), although the Claimants contend that a stay would be an “incredibly
excessive means of coordinating the two cases”, as “it would be denying one Claimant
its right to proceed with his claim”,!!” if any case were to be stayed, “it would

logically and fairly be the Vedanta arbitration”, ''* for the following reasons:

a. India has seized USD 1 billion in Cairn assets and continues to hold them.
According to the Claimants, “[t]his wrongful action has impacted Cairn
Energy’s market capitalisation and has caused serious and ongoing harm to
Cairn and its business operations.” !!° As noted above, the Claimants are not
aware of any similar seizure of Vedanta’s assets.'° At the hearing, the
Claimants argued that this amount “was growing every day” through the
application of interest, and was also under the threat of penalties. '2! In later
submissions, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that the Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal (“ITAT”) had determined that the principal amount was not subject to

Tr., 102:1-106:1 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 109:1-5 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 108:3-15 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 109:5-14 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 109:19-21 (Mr. McNeill).
Claimants’ Response, | 49.
Id., 150.
Tr., 112:10-12 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 95:10-96:14; 112:8-9 (Mr. McNeill).
21

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

interest, but noted that this decision was subject to appeal. '22 The Claimants later
clarified that this only referred to interest under Sections 234A and 234B if the
Income Tax Act, but that interest under Section 220(2) of the that Act continues
to increase with every passing day. 123

b. | The Respondent has referred to Vedanta’s tax liability as being “contingent”,
“derivative” and “secondary”.'*4 Without accepting this characterization, the
Claimants argue that “it would be illogical to stay Cairn’s claim in favour of the
claim by a shareholder of a third-party, CIL, which the Respondent characterises
as being in an inferior position vis-a-vis the impugned tax claim.”!?> The
Claimants add that “[i]Jt makes no sense to prioritise the case that supposedly
raises the contingent liability and prioritise that over the case that raises the non-
contingent liability of the putative seller.”'?° As a result, the Claimants argue
that Cairn has “a far superior right than Vedanta does to prosecute this claim”
because “Cairn is the party that is accused in this matter of aggressive tax
actions” and is “the one that is primarily in the firing line”.'77. The Claimants
add that “if Vendanta [sic] were found liable on the principal for withholding
tax, [the Respondent] would come after Cairn presumably regardless of whether

: o> 128
there was an indemnity or not”.

c. Moreover, “if the Respondent seeks to rely on the belief that CIL has a valid
indemnity against CUHL (which Cairn strongly denies), then the Respondent
could have sought a stay of the Vedanta arbitration [...] on the ground that
Vedanta would stand to benefit, in its capacity as a majority shareholder in CIL,
from CIL’s indemnity rights, and should wait for CIL to exhaust that remedy
first before Vedanta chooses to pursue India, in order to avoid duplicative and
potentially conflicting arbitral proceedings.” '””

d. Cairn’s arbitration is first in time, as the Claimants commenced arbitration
before Vedanta. This order is dispositive under a lis pendens analysis, if that
doctrine were to apply here. '30 The Claimants note that the Respondent seems to
agree that the order of filings and procedural status of the two cases is relevant
for its stay application, as it has previously argued that the Vedanta arbitration is
more advanced.'*! Referring to the Chairman’s article on this point, the

Claimants’ letter of 14 March 2017, p. 2.

Claimants’ letter of 23 March 2017, p. 2.

Claimants’ Response, [ 52; Tr., 112:18-24 (Mr. McNeill).
Claimants’ Response, 52.

Tr., 112:24:113:3 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 113:4-13 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 113:14-17 (Mr. McNeill).

Claimants’ letter of 9 January 2017, p. 22.

Claimants’ Response, 51.

Claimants’ Response, {| 51, referring to Respondent's counsel’s statements at the First Procedural
Hearing, Tr., 107:24-108:1.

22

71.

72.

73.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

Claimants submit that “[i]f you have two tribunals of equal standing, with equal
rights to adjudicate a particular dispute, then the simple rule is a chronological
one: which case was filed first?”!*” But in the Claimants’ view, in this case we
do not have two tribunals adjudicating on claimants with equal interests, because
“Cairn has a far stronger right and a far stronger interest in having its claim
adjudicated as the primary claim and not being stayed, instead of waiting for a
result from the Vedanta Tribunal”, which would in any event have uncertain
results for this Tribunal. '*

The Claimants contend that the Respondent’s real motivation to stay this arbitration
and not the Vedanta arbitration is strategic, and not altruistic. While the Respondent
“purport[s] to have altruistic intentions, to save the ISDS system’, ] their real
motivation is that “this is an easier claim to defend” because, based on the date in
which Vedanta made its investments, its legitimate expectations might be different to
Cairn’s.'** The Claimants explain that Vedanta bought its shares in 2011, when the
Vodafone proceedings were already ongoing and the Indian income tax authorities had
already taken a new interpretation of Section 9.1(i) ITA, so Vedanta’s expectations
with respect to that tax should be assessed as of that date.'* In the Claimants’ view,
“this is all a calculation by India of its interests in terms of which claim it prefers to

defend first because it thinks it has a stronger case”. 186

 

3. A party seeking to stay an arbitration faces a high burden of
persuasion, which is not met here

Turning to the Respondent’s Stay Application, the Claimants submit that a party
seeking to stay an arbitration faces a high burden of persuasion, which the Respondent
has not met.

The Claimants note in this respect that the UNCITRAL Rules do not expressly
authorize the Tribunal to stay this arbitration.'*’ The Claimants add that, according to
the UNCITRAL Note on Concurrent Proceedings in International Arbitration, “unless
an investment treaty contains express provisions for regulating parallel proceedings, a
tribunal’s regulatory powers will be significantly circumscribed by the need for party
consent in this area.”!

Tr., 114:8-11 (Mr. McNeill). See also Claimants’ Response, { 40, referring to E. Geisinger and L.
Lévy, Lis Alibi Pendens in International Commercial Arbitration in International Chamber of
Commerce, Special Supplement 2003: Complex Arbitrations: Perspectives on their Procedural
Implications (Exhibit CLA-69), p. 62.

Tr., 114:13-21 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 115:11-116:11 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 115:11-116:11 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 116:21-23 (Mr. McNeill).
Claimants’ Response, 39.

Claimants’ Response, {{ 36, referring to UNCITRAL Secretariat Note on “Concurrent proceedings in
international arbitration” dated 8 April 2016 (UN Doc. A/CN.9/881), { 40 (Exh. CLA-73).

23

74.

75.

76.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

That being said, the Claimants agree that the Tribunal has broad authority under
Article (1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, including to order a stay.'? However, they
submit that the Tribunal’s “discretion under Article 15(1) is limited by an overriding
requirement to treat parties with equality and to ensure that each party ‘is given a full
opportunity of presenting [its] case’ at every stage of the proceeding.” '“° The
Claimants also argue that the UNCITRAL Rules require that the arbitration be
resolved without unnecessary delay. This requirement is express in the 2010 Rules,
and in the Claimants’ submission, implied in the 1976 Rules. According to the
Claimants, the reason why it was not made express in the 1976 Rules is because it
could have been used against tribunals. '*!

The Claimants assert that the same principles exist in Dutch law: Article 1036(1) of
the Netherlands Arbitration Act provides that the agreement of the parties shall control
but that the tribunal has very broad discretion, while subparagraphs (2) and (3) set out
the principles of equality, the right to be heard and no unreasonable delay (which is a
principle that applies not only to the tribunal but is also an obligation imposed on the
parties). '*? According to the Claimants, “[t]he Tribunal not only has the duty to avoid
unnecessary delays in the delivery of justice, but to actively ensure that the arbitration
proceeds efficiently and expeditiously, particularly in a case involving claims of this
magnitude and urgency.” M8

In the Claimants’ submission, “the Stay Application that is proposed by India in this
case is fundamentally inconsistent with these core principles.” '* Specifically:

a. With respect to the equality of the Parties, the Claimants argue that “the stay
would fall completely unequally in terms of the prejudice that would be suffered
by Cairn.” 45 Contrary to what the Respondent suggests, the harm that Cairn
would suffer “is not just monetary; it is the lifeblood of this company.” 6 The
Respondent has seized USD 1 billion in Cairn shares, and if a stay is granted this
means that that money will be frozen for another five to eight years, preventing
the Claimants from making further investments and manage its business, making
any future damages very difficult to quantify.”'*7 By contrast, staying this
arbitration would have “wonderful benefits for India’s tactical interests in this
case, its strategic interests, but not compensated by any benefit to this Tribunal

Tr., 131:6-8 (Mr. McNeill) (“There is no dispute in this case that the Tribunal has the discretion under
Article 15(1) to stay an arbitration.”).

Claimants’ Response, {[ 39; Tr., 96:15-25; 131:9-21 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 131:22-132:15 (Mr. McNeill, citing D. Caron and L. Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A
Commentary (OUP 2013) (Exh. CLA-72), p. 34). See also Claimants’ Hearing Slides, Slide 15.

Tr., 132:16-133:19 (Mr. McNeill).

Claimants’ letter of 1 January 2017, p. 20.

Tr., 133:20-23 (Mr. McNeill). See also Claimants’ Response, { 39.
Tr., 133:24:134:1 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 135:3-4 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 134:3-20 (Mr. McNeill).

24

77.

78.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

or to investor-State arbitration.” !** Therefore, in the Claimants’ view “the

prejudice is very severe and the prejudice is very, very one-sided” and “[s]o, a

lengthy stay would be fundamentally inconsistent with equality to the
«col

parties.

b. | The Claimants also argue that the stay proposed by India is inconsistent with
their right to plead their case. The Claimants assert that “Cairn is suffering from
very severe accusations of tax evasion and it is suffering from asset deprivation,
and putting Cairn’s claim on ice, after having filed the Statement of Claim, for a
very lengthy period is a fundamental denial of justice in this case and a
fundamental denial of Cairn's right to prosecute and proceed with its claims.”!?

c. The Claimants also submit that the stay proposed by India contravenes the
principle of that there be no unreasonable delay. Contrary to what the
Respondent suggests, the stay it is requesting is not a limited stay, but a very
lengthy one, and “there are no countervailing benefits that would possibly come
close to justifying a delay of this magnitude.” '°

The Claimants add that the Respondent has been unable to cite a single case in which
a stay was actually granted under Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules. The
Claimants point out that in the S.D. Myers and Bilcon cases, two NAFTA tribunals
denied applications for a stay, essentially stating that “parties are entitled to have a
dispute resolved expeditiously, there are strong policy reasons against suspensions,
and that a party requesting a stay, therefore, faces a very high burden of showing
compelling reasons.”'* In the Claimants’ submission, the burden is particularly high
in a case like this: “where you have a dispute of this magnitude, USD 1 billion in
seized assets, a very large and growing tax demand that is several times the size of the
entire company itself, and that Cairn has continued to be pursued by the tax authorities
and is wrongly accused of tax evasion, [...] when you have these very large, very
significant, very severe and aggravating harms, then the compelling reasons must be
extraordinary; there must be some egregious abuse by Cairn that would warrant that
kind of measure. There simply is not anything of that nature here.” !

The Claimants also note that tribunals that used their authority under Article 15(1) in
the context of other procedural decisions have made sure to ensure the protection of
the core principles cited above. For instance, in the Methanex case, where the tribunal
determined that it had the power to accept amicus curiae submissions under Article
15(1), it did so after carefully ensuring that the equality of the parties and their right to
plead their case were preserved, and that the proceeding was not overburdened. Is

Tr., 135:3-6 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 135:6-10 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 135:23-135:4 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 136:5-21 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 139:19-23 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 140:3-15 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 136:22-139-4 (Mr. McNeill).

25

79.

80.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

The Claimants further argue that “[t]he Respondent has failed to cite to a single
authority or case that would support even a limited, short-term stay of this arbitration,
let alone the lengthy and indefinite stay requested.” !5 The cases cited by the
Respondent (SPP v. Egypt, Mox Plant and SGS v. Philippines) “are irrelevant because
they deal with the entirely distinct situation where a tribunal has temporarily stayed an
arbitration pending the resolution by another body of the threshold question of
whether the tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims submitted to it.” 156 According to
the Claimants, “[t]hese cases collectively stand for the proposition that a stay of
arbitral proceedings is appropriate only in exceedingly limited circumstances, such as
those involving parties’ consensual submission of the dispute to another forum, that
look nothing like the circumstances in this arbitration.”!” In addition, in these cases
the claimants were at least allowed to pursue their claims, albeit in a different
forum, '* and the stays were granted for a limited period of time: one and a half years
in SPP v. Egypt, three years in SGS v. Philippines, and less than six months in the Mox
Plant case.'”? For the Claimants, the Mox Plant case is “a manifestation of the
principle that a tribunal, when it does order a stay — even a very limited and time-
defined stay such as this case — looks at the equality of the parties, looks at the
prejudice that is going to occur, that is going to emerge from its stay, because of this
very powerful, very strong presumption that [...] that claims must proceed.” !©°

The Claimants further contend that no other theories assist the Respondent’s stay
application:

a. The doctrines of res judicata and lis alibi pendens do not assist the Respondent,
because they require a strict application of the triple identity, which as noted
above is not met here. In any event, the lis alibi pendens doctrine serves to bar a
second litigation, but here Cairn’s claim was filed first. Even if these doctrines
did apply, the Respondent fails to meet the ILA’s recommendations with respect
to the applications of these doctrines. In particular, it “fails to overcome the
prohibition on a stay in situations, as here, in which there would be material
prejudice to the party opposing the stay.” 16!

b. There is no abuse of process that could justify a stay. For this doctrine to apply,
the Tribunal would need to find “truly compelling reasons” that the Claimants
have abused the arbitral process in bad faith. The Respondent has not presented
any evidence that the Claimants are abusing the arbitral process, and the
Claimants allege that it could not, because the Claimants have initiated this
arbitration to seek relief from the application of a retroactive tax amendment that
is contrary to the rule of law. The Respondent’s “vague allegations” of

Claimants’ Response, 45.

Id.,4 45.

Id.,4 48.

Tr., 142:1-15 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 150:8-153:12 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 153:5-12 (Mr. McNeill).

Claimants’ Response, 41.

26

81.

82.

83.

84.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

coordination between Cairn and Vedanta are “empty rhetoric that does not
remotely justify the extreme measures it seeks in its Application.” Nor is there
any possibility of double-recovery by Cairn and Vedanta, so the Respondent’s
allegation that they are trying to get “two bites at the cherry” is wrong. 163

The Claimant also argue that a stay a for an indefinite period as proposed by the
Respondent would be inconsistent with the object and purpose of the BIT, which is to
encourage investment in return for guarantees for the reciprocal protection of such
investment. These protections are only meaningful if aggrieved investors are granted
to prompt and effective remedy for any breaches. The Claimants add that India has
benefitted from the Claimants’ investments, and “must not be permitted to avoid the
substantive and procedural obligations it accepted under the Treaty as the quid pro quo
for obtaining the very substantial benefits of Cairn’s investments.”!

Finally, the Claimants contend that there are general reasons against staying an
arbitration for a lengthy period of time. In particular, the Claimants argue that
evidence ages or disappears; witnesses or experts may become unavailable; memories
fade. A long stay would also be inefficient for the Parties and their counsel and for the
Tribunal.

4. The balance of convenience militates against a stay

As noted above, the Claimants argue that the decision to stay an arbitration may only
be taken after having assessed the stay application against the core principles that limit
the Arbitral Tribunal’s discretion under Article 15(1), namely, the equality of the
parties, the right of the parties to plead their case, and no unreasonable delay.

The Claimants also appear to agree that at least part of the relevant test to determine if
a stay should be granted is the “balance of equities”, “balance of prejudice” or
“balance of convenience”.'* The Claimants note however that in the NAFTA cases
cited by the Respondent in which this balancing test was used (S.D. Myers and
Bilcon), there already was triple identity, because the parties and issues were the same.
Despite this triple identity, the tribunals decided to apply this balancing test. The
Claimants emphasize that both tribunals unanimously stated that there is a very strong
fundamental presumption that cases must proceed and that there must be compelling
reasons to issue a stay. And even though in both cases the outcome of the set-aside
proceedings before Canadian courts would have disposed of the NAFTA arbitrations,
both tribunals found that the State had not proved compelling reasons for a stay to be
ordered.

Id. 44.

Tr., 143:16-144:15 (Mr. McNeill).

Claimants’ Response, { 20.

Tr., 140:16-141:24 (Mr. McNeill).

Claimants’ Response, [ 28; Tr., Tr., 153:13-157:4 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 153:13-155:1 (Mr. McNeill).

27

85.

86.

87.

88.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

In this case, the Claimants argue that the balance of prejudice militates against a stay.
This is because a stay of this dispute (in particular a lengthy stay such as that proposed
by the Respondent) would cause material prejudice to Cairn, without securing any
equivalent benefit to the Respondent. By contrast, in the Claimant’s view, continuing
this arbitration would not harm the Respondent, and indeed might benefit it.

In this context, the Claimants note that it is not in dispute that Cairn has had USD 1
billion in shares seized. Whether this seizure was lawful or unlawful, this is a vast sum
of money for a company such as Cairn, who has a market capitalization of
approximately 1.5 billion. There is also a principal tax demand of USD 4.4 billion,
which accumulates interest at a rate of USD 44 million per month, and USD 1.5
million every single day, plus the threat of penalties, which could rise to
approximately USD 10 billion. The Claimants thus contend that “this is a dispute
which is enormous in scope, particularly in relation to this Claimant, and it is a dispute
that is aggravating.” !® As noted above, staying this arbitration would cause enormous
harm to Cairn because in the meantime its assets would be frozen, and it would be
prevented from running its business and making further investments.

By contrast, the Claimants argue that a stay of this arbitration would not provide any
real benefit to anyone except to India and its strategic interests. In particular, it would
not eliminate the risk of inconsistent decisions, because “any decision by the Vedanta
tribunal would not be binding on this Tribunal, and its persuasive authority would be
circumscribed by the fact that it raises different issues and relates to different
harms.”'® As noted above, the two arbitrations relate to different breaches of the
Treaty, and the claimants’ legitimate expectations will be different in both cases
because they made their investments with a different knowledge of possible changes
in tax legislation.'”° Although “[t]he Respondent makes every effort to genericise the
issues in the two cases by saying that both cases raise the idea that the retroactive
amendment in 2012 was legitimate or illegitimate”, the Claimants argue that “there is

no treaty obligation called legitimate or illegitimate”. Mm

For the Claimants, “the fundamental question for this Tribunal”, based on the
imperfect knowledge that it has of the Vedanta arbitration, “is if, hypothetically, the
Vedanta tribunal issued its final award, how much benefit would [the Tribunal] get
from it?”!”? In the Claimants’ submission, this benefit is “pretty modest given that it
would only have potentially some persuasive influence on this Tribunal’s thinking.”!>
In the Claimants’ view, it would not be worth staying Cairn’s claims for five or eight
years (or however long India is proposing) for that “alleged miniscule benefit”.!"*

Tr., 95:10-96:14 (Mr. McNeill).
Claimants’ Response, 23.

Id. 24.

Tr., 148:21-149:2 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 149:8-12 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 149:24:150:1 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr. 115:1-13 (Mr. McNeill).

28

89.

90.

92.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

In the same vein, the Claimants also deny that a stay of this case would serve the
interests of international treaty arbitration. They argue that “the treaty rights secured
by an investor, in particular to seek a direct remedy against a breaching host State,
would be rendered virtually meaningless if the investor were told that it had to wait
years to seek a remedy because the host State was entitled to choose which claim it
preferred to defend first [...]”.'7 In their view, “the notion of ‘claim shopping’ by a
State that has enacted a measure causing losses to multiple investors but seeks to
pursue [...] the weaker investor case first in the hope of establishing a precedent
would be anathema to the very purpose of investment treaties and treaty
arbitration.” !7°

By contrast, the Claimants contend that continuing this arbitration would not cause
harm to India. First, the Claimants argue that inconsistent awards could not possibly
prejudice India: if India prevails in one case but not the other, it would be able to
recover the tax from either Cairn or Vedanta (which is what India has stated it intends
to do in any event). What India seeks to avoid are consistent awards (i.e., two awards
confirming that India’s treatment of the claimants’ investment in both cases breaches
the BIT), not inconsistent awards. !7”

Second, with respect to India’s assertion that allowing the Cairn arbitration to
continue creates the risk that Cairn may request that India pay for any indemnity it is
forced to pay to Vedanta/CIL, the Claimants note that “[t]he harm alleged by India
assumes a long series of hypothetical events, ending in a hypothetical request by Cairn
before this Tribunal to amend its request for relief”.!75 As a preliminary matter, the
Claimants argue that “the time for India to raise objections to making Cairn whole for
any amounts paid to indemnify CIL would be if and when this speculative (and highly
improbable) chain of events comes to pass”, and “[t]he mere prospect that this issue
may arise in the future is hardly reason to address it now — let alone by imposing the
draconian remedy that is sought by India of denying Cairn its day in court.”!

Going to the substance of the Respondent’s argument, the Claimants contend that
there are many possible ways in which events could unfold, and “most of the more
likely outcomes [...] result in the same great prejudice to Cairn without providing any
of the alleged benefits in terms of mitigating the risk of inconsistent awards.””!*
Specifically, other possibilities that must be considered are the following:

a. One possibility is that Vedanta prevails in its arbitration, or settles its claims. In
this scenario, Cairn will have stayed its case for no reason whatsoever. If
Vedanta wins on the merits, the award could perhaps provide insights that would
benefit the Claimants, but the Claimants would rather proceed with their case

Claimants’ letter of 9 January 2017, p. 22.

Id.

Claimants’ Response, 22. See also Claimants’ letter of 9 January 2017, p. 21.
Claimants’ Hearing Slides, Slide 10.

Claimants’ letter of 22 February 2017, p. 3.

Tr., 122:16-20 (Mr. McNeill).

29

93.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

now. If Vedanta settles, there will be no award to benefit from. And if India
prevails against Vedanta on jurisdictional grounds, India would not have to
defend two claims at the same time, there would be no double jeopardy, and
there would be no risk of inconsistent decisions. In the Claimants’ view, none of
these potential outcomes gives rise to any justification to stay Cairn’s claim.'*!

Another possibility is that the Vedanta arbitration ends with a dismissal of
Vedanta’s claims, and CIL and Vedanta lose all further remedies before the
courts of India and Singapore, but CIL decides not to bring cross claims against
Cairn, or loses any claims it may have brought against Cairn (which, in the
Claimants’ view, is the more likely scenario as Cairn disputes CIL’s indemnity
claim). Again, here the Claimants argue that the risk for the Respondent does
not arise. !

Even assuming India’s hypothetical scenario, in which Vedanta loses its
arbitration, CIL and Vedanta lose all further remedies in India and Singapore,
and CIL does indeed bring contractual claims against Cairn and prevails, “the
‘harm’ alleged by India is the mere possibility that Cairn could request to amend
its claim in this arbitration to include damages arising from amounts paid to
CIL”.'*’ For the Claimants, “the mere prospect of this request that is remote in
time, that is highly speculative, that we would say is even highly improbable to
emerge, the mere risk of that emerging being the harm that we need to mitigate
by staying Cairn's claim just does not stand to reason at all.”'** The Claimants
also argue that “the ultimate irony” is that the only way in which Cairn would be
able to amend its request for relief as India suggests is if the Cairn arbitration is
stayed as India requests; if there is no stay, both arbitrations would proceed in
parallel, and by the time the indemnity-related litigation is concluded in the UK
courts, the Cairn arbitration would long be over and there would be no
possibility of amending the request for relief. 1s

As to the Respondent’s argument that if the Claimants believe that there is no risk that
they will amend their request for relief in the future, the Claimants contend that “the
Claimants are already asking to be made whole entirely for any consequences that
flow from this unlawful measure as it was applied to Cairn and the transaction Cairn
engaged in, regardless of whether that harm flows directly or indirectly.”'*° The
Claimants point to their request for relief at paragraphs 448 and 449 of their Statement
of Claim, where they request that India be ordered to compensate them “in an amount
equal to the total harm suffered by the Claimants as a result of its breaches of the
Treaty [...)?.87 In any event, the Claimants state that Cairn is “not in a position today

Tr., 122:21-125:1 (Mr. McNeill).
Tr., 125:2-126:3 (Mr. McNeill).

Claimants’ Hearing Slides, Slide 13 (emphasis in original).
Tr., 127:9-15 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 126:4-128.21 (Mr. McNeill).

Tr., 130:12-17 (Mr. McNeill).

Claimants’ Hearing Slides, Slide 14 (emphasis eliminated).

30

94.

95.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

to amend its request for relief to make some point in the context of this Stay
Application.” !*

The Claimants also clarify that the contractual indemnity provision (which the
Claimants dispute applies in this case) “applies only in respect of certain obligations
for which the indemnifying party would be primarily liable” (i.e., only the principal
but not any interest or penalties). '*° “Accordingly, even if India’s hypothetical
scenario somehow came to pass, and Cairn successfully sought and obtained recovery
for the $1.6 billion paid to indemnify CIL for the principal tax liability, India would
still retain twice that sum in penalties and interest collected from CIL.”!? The
Claimants add that “[iJn any event, India would in no way be worse off than it would
have been had it simply lost the present arbitration to Cairn, and, in all likelihood,
would be in a far more favourable net position by virtue of both proceedings having
been conducted.”!”!

In conclusion, the Claimants argue that the balance of convenience weighs heavily
against a lengthy stay. On one hand, “[t]he real harms that would result from a lengthy
and indefinite stay would be severe and aggravating”; in particular:

a. “Cairn would be fundamentally deprived of its right to present its case”;

b. “Cairn would continue to be deprived of US$ 1 billion in assets — 40% of its
market capitalization”;

c. “The tax demand against Cairn would continue to increase by US$ 1.5 million
per day (over US$ 500m per year)”;

d. “The Indian tax authorities would continue to aggressively pursue Cairn,
possibly including by further pursuing penalty proceedings (which would add
billions of dollars to the tax claim)”;

e. “Cairn would continue to suffer reputational harm from false allegations of tax
evasion”;

f. “A lengthy stay would risk the loss or degradation of evidence and access to
witnesses or experts”;

g. “A lengthy stay would also be grossly inefficient for the Tribunal and its

secretary, the parties and their counsel, the witnesses, the experts, and the
administering institution”. 192

Tr., 131:1-3 (Mr. McNeill).

Claimants’ letter of 22 February 2017, p. 3.

Id.

Id.

Claimants’ Hearing Slides, Slide 24; Tr., 155:5-22 (Mr. McNeill).
31

96.

97.

Til.

98.

99.

100.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

On the other hand, “[t]he alleged benefits are one-sided, hypothetical, unsupported,
and vastly outweighed by the harms”. 198 Specifically, the Claimants argue that:

a. With respect to the reduction of the cost to India of defending against two
claims, this is nominal and relative to the amounts and issues at stake;

b. | With respect to the alleged reduction of the risk of “inconsistent outcomes”,
other less harmful, more effective means are available;

c. With respect to the alleged reduction of the risk that Cairn might ask this
Tribunal any amounts that might be paid to CIL in the event a successful
indemnity claim, “a stay would have no such effect, since Cairn has already

asked to be made whole from India’s wrongful actions”.!°*

OR OR

For the reasons set out above, the Claimants request that the Tribunal:

a. “DISMISS the Respondent’s Application for a Stay of the Proceedings dated 6
June 2016, with prejudice; and

b. “ORDER the Respondent to pay the Claimants’ costs associated with the
Respondent’s Stay Application.”!”

ANALYSIS

The Tribunal’s analysis will be structured as follows. First, the Tribunal will address
whether it has the power to order a stay. In the affirmative, the Tribunal will then
address the standard for a stay to be granted. It will then assess whether, applying that
standard, a stay is warranted in the circumstances of this case.

A. Does the Tribunal have the power to order a stay, and if yes, what is the
standard?

Neither the UNCITRAL Rules, nor the BIT, nor the Netherlands Arbitration Act
expressly grants the Tribunal the power to order a stay of this arbitration. The
question is thus whether such a power can be inferred from the Tribunal’s powers
under those instruments and/or from its inherent powers.

Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides:

Subject to these Rules, the arbitral tribunal may conduct the arbitration in
such manner as it considers appropriate, provided that the parties are treated
with equality and that at any stage of the proceedings each party is given a
full opportunity of presenting his case.

Id.

Id.

Claimants’ Response, 155. See also Claimants’ letter of 22 February 2017, p. 6, paragraph (f).
32

101.

102.

103.

200

201

202

203,

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

The Parties agree that this provision gives arbitral tribunals constituted under the
UNCITRAL Rules broad procedural powers, including the power to grant a stay,
subject to certain requirements.

The Tribunal agrees. As noted in PO2 in the context of the Respondent’s application
for a transparency regime, '*° Article 15(1) has been referred to as the “heart” of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.'°” As noted by the Methanex tribunal, this provision
“grants the Tribunal a broad discretion as to the conduct of this arbitration”, and “is
intended to provide the broadest procedural flexibility within fundamental safeguards,
to be applied by the arbitration tribunal to fit the particular needs of the particular
arbitration.”'°* Other UNCITRAL tribunals have also considered that their broad
procedural discretion under Article 15(1) empowers them to grant a stay. 199

However, as noted in the context of PO2, the Tribunal’s procedural powers are not
without limitation. First, one must look for any limitations in the UNCITRAL Rules
themselves (“[s]ubject to these Rules”), in those cases in which the Rules themselves
regulate the matter in dispute. This proviso also has the effect of subjecting the
Tribunal’s powers to Article 1 of the Rules.”” Pursuant to Article 1(1), the Rules may
be subject to any modifications that the parties may agree in writing,””! while pursuant
to Article 1(2), the Rules (in their original version or as modified by the Parties)
cannot derogate from the mandatory rules of the law applicable to the arbitration”
(i.e., the lex arbitri, which in this case is Dutch law).703 As noted above, neither the

PO2, | 43.

David Caron, Lee Caplan and Matti Pellonpai, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A Commentary
(2006), p. 26, citing H. Bagner, “Enforcement of International Commercial Contracts by Arbitration:
Recent Developments”, 14 Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law (1982), p. 577.

Methanex Corporation v. United States of America (UNCITRAL), Decision on Amicus Curiae of 15
January 2001, {{{] 26-27 (Exh. RLA-18). See also UNCITRAL Notes on Organizing Arbitral
Proceedings (1996), available at http://www.uncitral.org/pdf/english/texts/arbitration/arb-notes/arb-
notes-e.pdf, 31 (explaining that rules such as Article 15(1) “allow the arbitral tribunal broad discretion
and flexibility in the conduct of arbitral proceedings”, which “is useful in that it enables the arbitral
tribunal to take decisions on the organization of proceedings that take into account the circumstances of
the case, the expectations of the parties and of the members of the arbitral tribunal, and the need for a
just and cost-efficient resolution of the dispute.”)

See, e.g., S.D. Myers Inc. v. Canada (“S.D. Myers”), Procedural Order No. 17 of 26 February 2011
(Exh. RLA-28), | 7; William Ralph Clayton, William Richard Clayton, Douglas Clayton, Daniel
Clayton and Bilcon of Delaware Inc v Government of Canada, PCA Case No. 2009-04 (“Bilcon v.
Canada), Procedural Order No 19 of 10 August 2015 (RLA-29), | 16.

David Caron and Lee Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A Commentary (2 ed., 2010), pp.
34-35 (referring to analogous rules of the UNCITRAL Rules 2010).

 

Article 1(1) of the Rules provides: “Where the parties to a contract have agreed in writing* that
disputes in relation to that contract shall be referred to arbitration under the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, then such disputes shall be settled in accordance with these Rules subject to such modification as
the parties may agree in writing.”

Article 1(2) of the Rules provides: “These Rules shall govern the arbitration except that where any of
these Rules is in conflict with a provision of the law applicable to the arbitration from which the parties
cannot derogate, that provision shall prevail.”

David Caron and Lee Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A Commentary (2 ed., 2010), pp.
34-35 (referring to analogous rules of the UNCITRAL Rules 2010).

33

104.

105.

106.

208

205

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

BIT (containing the contracting parties’ agreement) nor the Netherlands Arbitration
Act contain an express rule authorizing the Tribunal to order a stay of the proceedings.

The Tribunal must thus turn to the remaining limitations set out in Article 15(1). As
noted by the Claimants, the Tribunal is under a duty to exercise its procedural powers
in such a way that respects the principles of equality (“provided that the parties are
treated with equality”) and the right to be heard (“provided that [...] at any stage of the
proceedings each party is given a full opportunity of presenting his case”). The
Claimants also submit that the Tribunal’s powers are subject to a third limitation,
which is the avoidance of unnecessary delay. This limitation is expressly contained in
the 2010 version of the UNCITRAL Rules, and in the Claimants’ view is implied in
the 1976 version that applies in this arbitration. The Claimants add that, under the
Dutch Arbitration Law, the Tribunal’s procedural powers are expressly subject to
these three core principles.

Article 1036 of the Dutch Arbitration Law provides as follows:

1. Without prejudice to the provisions of mandatory law of this title, the
arbitral proceedings shall be conducted in such manner as agreed
between the parties. To the extent that the parties have not agreed upon
the conduct of the arbitral proceedings, the arbitral proceedings shall,
without prejudice to the provisions of this title, be conducted in such a
manner as determined by the arbitral tribunal.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall treat the parties with equality. The arbitral
tribunal shall give each party an opportunity of presenting and
explaining its case and to respond to the other party's arguments and to
comment on all records and other pieces of information that have been
submitted to the arbitral tribunal during the arbitral proceedings. In its
decision, the arbitral tribunal shall not to the detriment of one of the
parties base its decision on records and other pieces of information on
which the other party has not sufficiently been able to comment.

3. The arbitral tribunal shall ensure that there will be no unreasonable
delay of the proceedings and, if necessary, take measures at the request
of a party or on its own initiative. The parties have an obligation
towards each other to prevent unreasonable delay of the proceedings.”**

While structured differently, this provision provides essentially the same limitations to
the Tribunal’s procedural powers as Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules (with the
exception of the last paragraph). It provides that, subject to the mandatory rules of the
Netherlands Arbitration Act, the arbitral proceedings shall be conducted in accordance
with the parties’ agreement or, absent such agreement, as determined by the arbitral
tribunal. It then directs the tribunal to treat the parties with equality and to give each
party an opportunity to plead its case. Finally (and this is the main difference with

Article 17(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules (2010) provides: “The arbitral tribunal, in exercising its
discretion, shall conduct the proceedings so as to avoid unnecessary delay and expense and to provide a
fair and efficient process for resolving the parties’ dispute.”

Article 1036 of the Netherlands Arbitration Act (unofficial translation).

34

107.

108.

109.

110.

206

207

208,

209

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

Article 15(1)), it expressly provides that “[t]he arbitral tribunal shall ensure that there
will be no unreasonable delay of the proceedings and, if necessary, take measures at
the request of a party or on its own initiative.” It also provides that “[t]he parties have
an obligation towards each other to prevent unreasonable delay of the proceedings.”

Given the use of the word “shall”, the Tribunal considers that the requirement of
avoiding any unreasonable delay of the proceedings may very well be mandatory and
such kind of provision would otherwise not make much sense. In any circumstances, if
it should be hortatory, it would nevertheless recommend expeditiousness in express
terms and should not be lightly disregarded. As a result, through the combined effect
of Article 15(1) and 1(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal understands that, in
addition to the principles of equality and the right to be heard, the Tribunal’s
procedural powers are limited by its duty to ensure that there will be no unreasonable
delay in the conduct of the proceedings.

Even without this express provision, the Tribunal considers that the principle of no
unreasonable delay is implicit in international arbitration. As noted in the S.D. Myers
case, the “point of departure is the presumption that a party to an arbitration (whether
claimant or respondent) is entitled to have the arbitration proceedings continued at a
normal pace”.7°° Indeed, “[a]n arbitral tribunal has no permanent, independent or
institutional life of its own” and as a result “[t]here are strong policy reasons for not
placing the performance of its functions ‘on hold’ (unless of course the parties so
agree) [7 A suspension of the proceedings is thus an exceptional remedy, and
for it to be granted the applicant must provide “compelling reasons” that a stay is
warranted.?°*

The Tribunal concludes that it has the authority to order a stay of the proceedings,
provided that the stay is not inconsistent with these three core principles.

This, however, is not the end of the inquiry. The Respondent submits that the Cairn
and Vedanta arbitrations can be characterized as multiple, parallel or concurrent
proceedings in international investment arbitration, and as such the Tribunal’s decision
as to whether a stay should be granted should be guided by the ILA Paper on
concurrent proceedings.” As the Respondent recognizes, the ILA’s starting point is
also that an arbitral tribunal in an ongoing arbitration (what the ILA Paper calls the
“Current Arbitration”) that considers itself prima facie competent in accordance with
the relevant arbitration agreement must proceed with the arbitration, regardless of any
another proceedings pending before a national court or an arbitral tribunal “in which
the parties and one or more of the issues are the same or substantially the same as the

S.D. Myers Inc. v. Canada (“S.D. Myers”), Procedural Order No. 17 of 26 February 2011 (Exh. RLA-
28), 1.8.

Id.,4 16.
Id.

De Ly and Sheppard, “ILA Final Report on Lis Pendens and Arbitration”, 25(1) Arbitration
International (2009) (Exh. RLA-14).

35

111.

112.

113.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

ones before the arbitral tribunal in the Current Arbitration” (what the ILA Paper calls
“Parallel Proceedings”).7!”

That said, the ILA Paper recognizes that, when there are Parallel Proceedings, arbitral
tribunals may face requests from a party to decline jurisdiction or stay the arbitration.
The ILA Paper then recommends that, “in the interest of avoiding conflicting
decisions, preventing costly duplication of proceedings or protecting parties from
oppressive tactics”, tribunals facing such requests proceed in accordance with certain
principles”"'. The ILA Paper goes on to set out these principles, but none of the
situations covered fully corresponds to the situation in this case. The first two
situations deal with Parallel Proceedings before courts of the place of arbitration or in
a different jurisdiction.” The third situation refers to proceedings pending before
another arbitral tribunal, but assumes that the proceedings are “Parallel” in the ILA
Paper’s definition (i.e., that they refer to the same parties and substantially the same
issues), and that the Parallel Proceeding was commenced before the Current
Proceeding.”"3 None of these requirements is met in this case: Cairn and Vedanta are
not affiliated parties, and Cairn initiated its arbitration first.

That being said, the ILA Paper does provide guidance (on which the Respondent
expressly relies) for cases that do not qualify as Parallel Proceedings. Specifically, the
ILA Paper recommends:

“[A]s a matter of sound case management, or to avoid conflicting decisions,
to prevent costly duplication of proceedings or to protect a party from
oppressive tactics, an arbitral tribunal requested by a party to stay
temporarily the Current Arbitration, on such conditions as it sees fit, until the
outcome, or partial or interim outcome, of any other pending proceedings
(whether court, arbitration or supra-national proceedings), or any active
dispute settlement process, may grant the request, whether or not the other
proceedings or settlement process are between the same parties, relate to the
same subject matter, or raise one or more of the same issues as the Current
Arbitration, provided that the arbitral tribunal in the Current Arbitration is:

¢ not precluded from doing so under the applicable law;

e satisfied that the outcome of the other pending proceedings or
settlement process is material to the outcome of the Current
Arbitration; and

¢ — satisfied that there will be no material prejudice to the party opposing
the stay.””!

This recommendation adds an additional element, beyond those set out in Articles
15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules and 1036 of the Netherlands Arbitration Act, to the
assessment of whether a stay should be granted: whether the outcome of the other

Id, 1.
Id., 42.
Id, {9 3-4.
1,45.
Id., 6 (emphasis in original).
36

114.

115.

116.

117.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

pending proceedings is material to the outcome of the Current Arbitration. The
Tribunal notes however that for cases that do not technically involve Parallel
Proceedings (as defined by the ILA Paper), the ILA Paper uses permissive (as opposed
to mandatory) language (‘an arbitral tribunal [...] may grant the request”).

 

The Tribunal concludes that it has the authority to order a stay of the proceedings,
provided that a stay is not precluded by the mandatory law applicable to the arbitration
(the lex arbitri) or by agreement of the parties. In exercising such power, the Tribunal
will consider the following factors, bearing in mind that a stay is an exceptional
remedy and that for it to be granted the applicant must provide compelling reasons to
show that it is warranted:

a. Whether the stay creates an imbalance between the parties, or causes material
prejudice to one of the parties, thus violating their right to equal treatment;

b. | Whether the stay amounts to depriving a party from the right to present its case;
c. Whether the stay delays the proceedings unreasonably; and

d. | Where (as here) the stay is premised on the finalization of other pending
proceedings, whether the outcome of the other pending proceedings is material
to the outcome of the arbitration.

The Parties have also referred to the “balance of equities”, “balance of prejudice” or
“balance of convenience” as being the relevant test to determine if a stay must be
granted. This term should not be interpreted to refer exclusively to the requirement of
equality between the Parties; if that were the case, it would then be insufficient. In the
Tribunal’s view, all of the factors listed above must be considered to determine if a
stay may be ordered.

B. Applying this standard, is a stay warranted in the circumstances of this
case?

The next question is whether, applying the standard set out above, a stay is warranted
in the circumstances of this case. The Tribunal has considered the question carefully,
and concludes that it is not, for the reasons set out below. Before proceeding to set out
those reasons, the Tribunal emphasizes that it has taken no view whatsoever on the
merits of the claim. Its focus in this Decision is rather on the relationship between the
Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations and the impact of the attachment and other measures
taken by the Respondent to protect its position in what it considers to be a failure to
pay a lawful taxation measure. The latter remains to be evaluated in accordance with
the terms of the Treaty and no further comment is required. However, the measures
have had, and if maintained will continue to have, a significant impact on the
Claimants and these effects cannot be ignored in resolving the Stay Application.

First, a stay would cause material prejudice to the Claimants. Irrespective of whether
the Respondent breached the BIT, it has seized and is currently holding CUHL’s
shares in CIL for a value of approximately USD 1 billion. While the seizure of those
shares remains in place, CUHL cannot freely exercise its ownership rights over those

37

118.

119.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

shares, and in particular it cannot sell them. The Claimants have represented that
Cairn’s market capitalization is approximately USD 1.5 billion, an estimate that the
Respondent has not challenged. A seizure having a value of USD 1 billion creates a
substantial impairment to the way in which Cairn can manage its business, including
on the management of its investments. In the Tribunal’s view, this causes material
harm to the Claimants, a harm that would remain in place for several years if the
proposed stay is granted, and could have repercussions on the relief requested in this
case. Irrespective of the eventual outcome of the case, it is in the interest of all parties
that the legality of the tax claim and the measures taken in relation thereto be
determined in a final award.

Further, the Respondent’s seizure of CUHL’s shares in CIL carries with it the
additional risk that the Respondent may decide to proceed with the forced sale of those
shares. This risk prompted the Claimants to submit a Request for Interim Measures
before the First Procedural Hearing.”!° After discussions at that hearing, the
Respondent represented that it would “take no steps to purport to transfer, sell,
encumber or in any other way dispose of the shares during the pendency of these
arbitral proceedings, without giving [CUHL] three months’ written notice of its
intention to do so.”?!° However, on 14 March 2017 the Claimants informed the
Tribunal that, by letter of that same date, the Income Tax Authority had informed
CUHL that it had until 15 June 2017 (i.e., three months) to comply with the recent
order by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, or the Government would commence
recovery proceedings against CUHL.”"” On 23 March 2017, the Respondent
confirmed that, in its opinion, this letter constituted a “notice” for purposes of its
representation of 11 May 2016.7/8 The Tribunal understands from the Claimants’
submissions that they intend to revive their Request for Interim Measures. Even if they
do not do so immediately, the fact remains that the risk of harm to the Claimants due
to a potential forced sale of CUHL’s shares in CIL is current and real, and confirms
the need for this arbitration to proceed at a normal pace for a swift resolution of this
dispute. In addition, the volumes of the correspondence the Parties have exchanged
with the Tribunal so far may show that a constant intervention, or at least availability,
of the Tribunal seems necessary.

Then there is the harm caused by the tax assessment itself, which would remain
outstanding during any stay. The principal amounts to approximately USD 4.4 billion,
with the possibility of interest accruing at the rate of USD 44 million per month, as
well as the possibility of penalties.”! As a result, the size of the amount claimed to be
owed by the Claimants is growing at a significant pace, and would continue to do so

Claimants’ Request for Interim Measures of 13 April 2016.
Respondent's letter of 11 May 2016.

Claimants’ letter of 14 March 2016, referring to the letter from the Assistant Commissioner of Income
Tax of the same date.

Respondent's letter of 23 March 2017.

While the Claimants have informed the Tribunal that the ITAT has determined that interest is not
applicable under sections 234A and 234B of the Income Tax Act, it appears that it continue to accrue
under Section 220(2) of that Act (see paragraph 70(a) above). Both Parties also confirm that penalties
may also apply (see both the Parties’ respective letters of 23 March 2017).

38

120.

121.

122.

123.

220

21

22

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

over the course of a stay which the Tribunal, agreeing with the Claimants, considers
would likely be lengthy.

By contrast, continuing this arbitration would not unduly prejudice the Respondent.
The Respondent has identified four potential harms that would be caused by
continuing this arbitration at the same time as the Vedanta arbitration: (i) the risk of
contradictory outcomes; (ii) the risk of double jeopardy (i.e., that, in the event of
contradictory outcomes, the claimant who loses shall endeavor to avail itself of the
other claimant’s victory); (iii) the risk that, as a result of the indemnity between CUHL
and CIL, Cairn may request to amend its request for relief to include any amounts
claimed by CIL in the event that Vedanta loses its arbitration, and (iv) duplication of
costs and effort. After careful analysis, the Tribunal concludes that (with the exception
of item (iv)) a stay of this arbitration will not place the Respondent in a worse position
with respect to these alleged risks than were the present arbitration to continue.

With respect to the first alleged harm, the Tribunal is not persuaded that staying this
arbitration would eliminate the risk of inconsistent outcomes, or even decrease them
significantly.

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that, to the extent possible, contradictory
outcomes in investment arbitration should be avoided, to which the Tribunal would
add that this is true “in any dispute resolution”. This is especially true for Parallel
Proceedings according to the ILA Paper’s definition (i.e., those involving the same
parties and substantially the same issues), or for the first category of concurrent
proceedings identified by the UNCITRAL Secretariat’s Note of 8 April 2016 (ie.,
those in which “different entities within the same corporate structure have a right of
action against a State or state-owned entity in relation to the same investment, with
regard to the same State measure and for the benefit of substantially the same interests,
as long as all entities qualify as investors under an applicable investment treaty, or
have a right of action under a contract or under domestic investment law”).°”° In these
cases, the effect is that there are “various parties, claiming in various forums and
under different sources of law, yet seeking substantially the same relief for the same
measure.”””! It is particularly important to devise reasonable ways to coordinate this
type of concurrent proceedings, as there is a real possibility of double recovery. But
that is not the concern here: Cairn and Vedanta are not affiliated companies (that they
are both shareholders in CIL does not change this fact), and are each claiming for their
own relief to compensate for their own harm.

The UNCITRAL Secretariat’s Note identifies yet a second category of concurrent
proceedings that arises “where a measure by a State has an impact on a number of
investors which are not related.”””? The Note explains that “[wJhen a State takes a
measure which potentially affects a number of investors, it may be faced with multiple

UNCITRAL Secretariat Note, Concurrent Proceedings in Investment Arbitration, UN Doc. A/CN.9/881
(8 April 2016) (Exh. CLA-73), 7.

Id.
Id., 18.

39

124.

125.

126.

23

204

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

claims from those unrelated investors in relation to that measure”.”* Here the risk is
not one of double recovery, but of different investment tribunals reaching different
conclusions as to whether the measure engages the State’s responsibility, thus
jeopardizing the coherence of the investment arbitration system.

The Tribunal agrees that, ideally, investment tribunals should seek to preserve
coherence in the investment arbitration system, especially in cases arising out of the
same key facts, but as the UNCITRAL Note itself recognizes, “it is foreseeable that
decisions rendered by separate tribunals may yield different outcomes”.”™4 This is not
only because the tribunals deciding these cases will be different, but because the issues
at stake, as well as the facts surrounding each investment, might also be different, thus
yielding different results. As the Claimants have pointed out, in investment treaty
arbitration there is not one single standard that can be used to measure the “legality” or
“lawfulness” of a measure. Through the measure in question, the State can breach one
or more of its obligations under the treaty, such as the obligation not to expropriate
except under certain conditions, the obligation to treat the investor’s investments fairly
and equitably, and the obligation not to impair those investments with discriminatory,
and/or arbitrary and/or unreasonable measures. Some of these obligations set out
absolute standards of conduct, while others are relative. Further, in some cases, such
as when an investor alleges a breach of its legitimate expectations, the determination
of whether there has been a breach hinges heavily on the particular facts of the case
and of the specific investment. Short of both tribunals completely accepting or
completely dismissing the claims, and adopting the same reasoning to do so, it is
therefore difficult to completely avoid outcomes which might appear to be
contradictory.

In the case of the Cairn and Vedanta arbitrations, two unaffiliated parties are bringing
two separate claims against India under the same treaty, but they both allege different
breaches of the treaty and request their own relief. While it is true that there is a core
of common issues of fact, each arbitration refers to a separate and distinct dispute, in
which each unrelated claimant seeks relief for its own harm. As a result, for justice to
be served, each claimant has a right to a resolution of its own dispute, and the risk of
different (if not contradictory) outcomes is virtually unavoidable, absent some form of
coordination between both cases.

A stay of one arbitration in favor of the other, however, does not eliminate this risk.
The risk will certainly remain for those issues that are specific to each case, such as an
assessment of whether a particular measure constitutes an expropriation of an
investor’s investment, or whether the measure violates the legitimate expectations of a
particular investor. There may be issues, however, where the tribunals in both
proceedings may be called upon to carry out similar or the same assessments, such as
when investors allege that a particular measure is contrary to the same BIT obligation.
It is in these cases where avoiding contradictory decisions is most desirable.

Id.
40

127.

128.

129.

130.

25

226

27

28

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

It was to address this situation that the Tribunal invited the Parties to consult in order
to “seek to coordinate the present proceedings with the Vedanta proceedings so that,
putting to one side what might be called the less central issues, the question of the
lawfulness of the Respondent’s tax measure under the treaty could be briefed, argued
and heard before both tribunals at the same time, and perhaps, if all parties consented,
eventually decided by both tribunals jointly.” Indeed, the Claimants in this case
have already argued that the Respondent’s amendment or clarification of Section 9 of
the Indian Income Tax Law, 1961 (for purposes of this Order, the Tribunal will refer
to it as the “2012 Amendment”?”’) breaches the Respondent’s obligation to accord fair
and equitable treatment to investors of investments because, inter alia, it constitutes
retroactive taxation that is contrary to the rule of law,7”” and it is almost certain that
Vedanta will raise a similar argument in its own arbitration. The Tribunal’s intention
was thus to diminish the risk of contradictory decisions on this point, which (arguably)
is less dependent on the circumstances of each investor’s investment, by allowing this
issue to be briefed and argued jointly by both sets of parties and, eventually,
deliberated and decided jointly by both tribunals.

If all parties had agreed, this ““quasi-consolidation” could potentially have decreased
the risk of inconsistent decisions on this point. Conversely, a stay of this arbitration
would not have the same effect. What the Respondent is suggesting is that this
Tribunal should await the decision of the Vedanta tribunal and adopt the same
reasoning. While a decision from the Vedanta tribunal would certainly constitute
persuasive authority for this Tribunal, it could not dispense this Tribunal from its
obligation to discharge its own duties, namely to use its own reasoning to decide the
case on the basis of the record before it.

The Tribunal thus concludes that staying this arbitration would not eliminate the risk
of inconsistent outcomes, nor would it decrease this risk in a manner proportional to
the harm suffered by the Claimants.

The second harm alleged by the Respondent is the risk of “double jeopardy”. The
Tribunal understands this to mean that, if one investor were to prevail in its arbitration
and the other were to lose, the losing investor would attempt to avail itself of the other
investor’s victory to deny its liability vis-a-vis the Respondent. In particular, if
Vedanta were to lose against India but Cairn were to win, Vedanta would argue that its
secondary or contingent liability could not be established because the primary liability
has not been established.””* It is not possible for the Tribunal to anticipate how this

Tribunal’s Letter 2 of 3 November 2017, p. 3.

The Tribunal attaches no value judgment and is not prejudging the nature of this measure. It notes that
in their Statement of Claim the Claimants refer to it as the “Retroactive Amendment”, while in its
Statement of Defence the Respondent refers to it as the “2012 Clarification”.

 

The Claimants also argue that they arise from different measures, because they respond to separate tax
assessments brought separately by India against each investor. The Tribunal takes due note of this
point, and, if necessary, will assess this statement in the appropriate phase of these proceedings. That
said, it und that both tax are the direct of the 2012 di

 

At the hearing, Counsel for the Respondent explained: “Vedanta loses, Cairn wins. Because it is the
same tax measure, Vedanta will then undoubtedly try to say, ‘Well, how can I be liable? The capital
gains tax is gone. You cannot be withholding tax without capital gains tax’ and vice versa. That does

4l

131.

132.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

hypothetical allegation, if it actually arose in fact, would play out in practice, or how it
would concretely harm the Respondent: if Vedanta loses its arbitration, it means that it
will have to suffer the effects of any taxation measures implemented by the
Respondent without being able to obtain compensation from the Respondent under its
treaty claim. Whether or not Cairn wins its own arbitration will not change this state of
affairs. More importantly, granting a stay would in any event not eliminate this alleged
risk; it would simply postpone it.

As a third alleged harm, the Respondent contends that “the existence of [the]
indemnity creates the risk — in addition to all the other risks of inconsistency and
prejudice noted by the Respondent — that (i) Vedanta may lose its proceedings against
the Respondent; (ii) Vedanta (through CIL) will then pursue Cairn under the
indemnity; (iii) with the result that Cairn will seek to recoup amounts paid out to
Vedanta (via CIL) under the indemnity against the Respondent in this or further
proceedings.””” As a consequence, the Respondent contends that “the logical
sequence of events is for the Vedanta arbitration to conclude (with all relevant
proceedings, evidence and awards to be made available to the present Tribunal), for
any indemnity proceedings to play out, and for the present arbitration to then resume
with the benefit of the outcome of both sets of proceedings and of the reasoning of the
Vedanta Tribunal.””*° As a result, the Respondent contends that “Vedanta’s claim and
the fate of Vedanta’s claim will determine whether or not the indemnity will be
triggered. Whether or not the indemnity will be triggered will, in turn, directly impact
Cairn’s claims.”?*!

The Tribunal has trouble following the Respondent’s argument. The Respondent has
acknowledged that the primary tax liability lies with Cairn.?™ It is Cairn (as the seller)
who would be primarily liable for paying capital gains tax on the sale of its shares;
CIL’s derivative or contingent obligation to withhold that tax would only arise if the
primary tax applies any capital gain made by Cairn. Likewise, any right that CIL may
have to be indemnified from Cairn can only arise if CIL is forced to pay on Cairn’s
behalf — a situation that can only arise if Cairn is liable in the first place. Accordingly,

 

29

230

not need the indemnity, that is just because they are two sides of the same coin.”) Tr., 85:9-15 (Mr.
Moolan).

Respondent's Reply, { 18.

Id. See also Tr., 73:3-13 (Mr. Moolan) (“[TJhe existence of the indemnity from CUHL to Vedanta
makes it clear that there can be only one logical sequence of litigation. First, the Vedanta arbitration
must conclude. Depending on the outcome of that arbitration, indemnity proceedings by Vedanta
against Cairn may be triggered. It is in light of the result of that process that the Cairn arbitration can
take place.”) See also Respondent’s Letter | of 15 February 2017, 4 8.

Tr., 160:18-22 (Mr. Moolan).

See note 228 above. See also Respondent's Application, { 22; Tr., 177:6-11 (THE PRESIDENT: May I
understand that if the Indian Supreme Court, if it is the supreme body in those matters, eventually finds
that Cairn has no tax liability then automatically Vedanta cannot have a liability? Do I understand
properly? MR MOOLLAN: Yes, absolutely.”) See also Respondent’s Application, | 22, where the
Respondent refers to the “secondary liability of the resident buyer”. The characterization of the
CUHL/’s liability as “primary” and CIL’s liability as “secondary” is also confirmed in the indemnity
provisions contained in the Share Purchase Deed dated 12 October 2006 by and between Cairn Energy
PLC, Cairn UK Holdings Limited, Cairn India Limited and Cairn India Holdings Limited (Exh. C-7),
Clause 9.1.

42

133.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

should one of the arbitrations be kept in abeyance pending the resolution of the other,
in the Tribunal’s view the logical sequence of litigation would be for the Cairn
arbitration to move forward so that the legality of the 2012 Amendment vis-a-vis
Cairn’s primary liability could be determined first (from the prism of international law
— the Tribunal is aware that the existence of Cairn’s tax liability under Indian law is
being determined by Indian courts). From this perspective, it seems to the Tribunal
that if any arbitration had to be stayed (without conceding that any of them must be
stayed), logically it would be the Vedanta arbitration. Indeed, considering that CIL’s
liability is contingent on CUHL’s, a decision of this Tribunal could be useful to the
Vedanta tribunal’s eventual determination.

The Tribunal has also envisaged the possible scenarios that could unfold if the Cairn
arbitration were to continue, none of which would leave the Respondent in a worse
position than it is today:

a. Tf Cairn loses this arbitration, the Respondent will be able to pursue Cairn for its
tax liability without having to compensate it for any breach of the treaty. CIL
would thus be released from any tax liability and would not need to trigger the
indemnity (to the extent that it applies). Indeed, if the Respondent obtains
payment of the tax from Cairn, Vedanta’s entire arbitration could become moot
(at least with respect to the principal — the Respondent has acknowledged that it
could still demand interest and penalties from CIL).

b. _ If Cairn prevails in this arbitration, then it is likely that the Respondent will seek
recovery from CIL. But if in turn Vedanta also wins its own arbitration
(resulting in consistent outcomes, albeit prejudicial for the Respondent), it will
not need to trigger the indemnity because arguably it should be able to obtain
compensation from the Respondent.

c. The only situation in which the risk identified by the Respondent could arise is if
Cairn prevails in this arbitration, but Vedanta loses its own. In that case, Vedanta
would not be able to obtain redress from the Respondent for any amounts paid
by CIL, and CIL would likely request Cairn to indemnify it. The risk identified
by the Respondent is that Cairn will then seek to amend its request for relief so
that it includes any amounts it needs to pay to CIL as a result of the indemnity.
The Claimants deny that this is a risk, because they say that their request for
relief already includes any such amounts. The Tribunal only notes at this stage
that, if the Cairn arbitration is allowed to continue instead of being stayed as the
Respondent requests, the risk identified by the Respondent would be greatly
diminished: if the Cairn arbitration has ended before any indemnity litigation is
finalized, Cairn will not be able to amend its request for relief or (if no
amendment is required) update its quantification of damages to include any
indemnities paid to CIL. The Respondent has argued that Cairn may decide to
commence new litigation or arbitration against India to obtain redress for this
indemnity, but has not articulated what cause of action the Claimants would
have for such a case.

43

134,

135.

136.

137.

138.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

The Tribunal thus concludes that the third harm identified by the Respondent is not
sufficiently established and, to the extent that it exists, would not be reduced by
ordering a stay, and that it does not outweigh the harms to Cairn identified above.

Finally, the Respondent argues that proceeding with the Cairn and Vedanta
arbitrations causes it to duplicate costs and effort. This may be so, but this harm is
minor compared to the harm that a stay would cause the Claimants, and can be
repaired by an award of costs. In addition, it bears noting that the reason why two
separate investors have initiated two separate claims against the Respondent is simply
because the Respondent has initiated two separate tax assessments against each of
them in order to pursue the same tax that arises from the same transaction. The
Tribunal is aware that the Respondent has alleged that Indian law requires that both
seller (as the principal assessee) and buyer (as the withholding party) should be
pursued, and the Tribunal emphasizes that it offers no value judgement in this regard.
It merely notes that, even if this is permitted or indeed required of the tax authorities
from an Indian tax law perspective, the possibility of separate claims by the two
different affected parties, each claiming treaty rights, was a logical possible
consequence.

 

In view of the above, the Tribunal concludes that a stay would cause significant
prejudice to the Claimants, while it would not alleviate in any significant manner the
harms identified by the Respondent. As a result, the requested stay would not be
advisable under factor (a) of the standard set out in paragraph 114 above.

For the reasons set out above, regarding the risk of inconsistent decisions, the Tribunal
is likewise not persuaded that the outcome of the Vedanta arbitration would be
material to the outcome of this case. (It might or it might not; at this point it would be
pure speculation to say otherwise.) The Respondent is not requesting the Tribunal to
stay the proceedings pending the resolution of other proceedings which could define
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction (as was the case in SPP v. Egypt? or the Mox Plant case,
which is in point although was not submitted to arbitration’**) or resolve the content or
quantum of an underlying obligation in accordance with its proper law and forum (as
happened in SGS v. Philippines”*>). The outcome of the Vedanta arbitration could
certainly provide persuasive authority to this Tribunal, but it would not be
determinative to the outcome of this case, especially with respect to any alleged treaty
breaches that are not common to both cases. Accordingly, the Respondent’s Stay
Application does appear warranted in view of factor (d) of the standard set out in
paragraph 114 above.

The Tribunal further finds that the stay requested by the Respondent would subject the
procedural calendar to “unreasonable” delay. For the reasons set out above, the stay

Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd v. Egypt (ICSID Case No ARB/84/3, Award of 20 May
1992) (Exh. RLA-21), if. 15-17.

MOX Plant Case (Ireland v United Kingdom), Procedural Order No 3 of 24 June 2003 (Exh. RLA-22),
4 20-28.

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No ARB/02/6
(“SGS v. Philippines”), Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 January 2004 (Exh. RLA-23), {] 170.

44

139.

140.

141.

142.

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

would cause a harm that would not be proportionate to the benefit it would bring. This
would suffice to consider it unreasonable, but the sheer length of the requested stay
also renders it unreasonable. The Respondent is requesting a stay pending the
termination of multiple proceedings (the Vedanta arbitration and any cross-litigation
between Vedanta/CIL and Cairn arising out of the indemnity). In practice, this would
possibly take several years, especially if the indemnity litigation is not triggered until
after the Vedanta arbitration is finalized, and if any set aside proceedings are
commenced against an award rendered in that arbitration. Although perhaps the stay
would not be indefinite, as the Claimants allege, it would most probably be lengthy.
Respondent has furnished no precedent of a stay for a similarly lengthy period of time.
The Tribunal thus concludes that the Respondent’s Stay Application also appears
unwarranted in light of factor (c) of the standard set out in paragraph 114 above.

Finally, a stay as lengthy as one proposed by the Respondent would amount to
diminishing the Claimants’ right to plead their case within a reasonable period of time,
without a reasonable justification. The Respondent’s Stay Application thus fails in
light of factor (b) of the standard set out in paragraph 114 above.

The Tribunal cannot end its analysis without a brief comment on the Respondent’s
allegations that Cairn and Vedanta are communicating and coordinating their cases, in
order to bring separate and deliberately uncoordinated arbitrations. The Respondent
has clarified that it sees nothing untoward in both investors communicating; to the
contrary, it has confirmed that this was to be expected of two parties linked by an
indemnity.>*° The Tribunal notes this clarification and therefore has nothing more to
add on this point.

As to both investors bringing deliberately separate and uncoordinated claims, the
Tribunal can only note that, to the extent that each investor considers that it has been
harmed by a measure implemented by the Respondent, it is their right under the BIT
for each of them to assert their own claim. Rights cannot be exercised in an abusive
fashion, but on the basis of the information available to it as present the Tribunal has
not seen any evidence of abuse. So far as is evident, Cairn has been cooperative with
respect to a potential coordination of the two arbitrations. While it appears that it
would not have accepted the Tribunal’s invitation for a “quasi-consolidation” of the
cases, it has shown itself amenable to a sharing of documents between both
arbitrations.

The Tribunal thus denies the Respondent’s Stay Application.

See paragraph 23 above.
45

PCA Case No. 2016-7
Procedural Order No. 3
31 March 2017

Iv. DECISION
143. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal:
a. DENIES the Respondent’s Stay Application; and

b. | DEFERS its decision on costs to a later stage.

Seat of arbitration: The Hague, Netherlands

Date: 31 March 2017

For the Arbitral Tribunal:

    

Dr. Laurent Lévy
Presiding Arbitrator

46

