INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/18

Between

Cambodia Power Company
— Claimant —

And

Kingdom of Cambodia

— Respondent —

DECISION ON THE CLAIMANT’S
APPLICATION TO EXCLUDE
MR. LOBIT’S WITNESS
STATEMENT AND DERIVATIVE
EVIDENCE

29 January 2012
Members of the Tribunal

Neil Kaplan CBE QC SBS - Presiding Arbitrator -
John Beechey - Co-Arbitrator -
Toby Landau QC - Co-Arbitrator -

The Tribunal thanks the Parties for their written submissions and their very
helpful oral presentations in Hong Kong on 25 and 26" January 2012 relating
to the evidence of Mr. Lobit.

The Tribunal has decided to give the Parties its Decision as a matter of urgency
and in so doing has been guided by two factors. First, there is a merits hearing
fixed for September 2012 in Paris and the Tribunal and, doubtless the Parties
too, do not want to countenance any further delay. This case was due to be heard
in April 2012 but was adjourned due to the Claimant’s application. Secondly, the
Tribunal is anxious not to risk trespassing on matters that might need to be dealt
with in the Award following the merits hearing. Accordingly, the Tribunal has
concluded that both caution and expedition favour the course of giving just the
result of the applications now, but leaving the reasons for further adumbration
in the Award, following the September hearing.

Accordingly, having taken into account all the submissions and materials
presented, the Tribunal rules as follows:

1. The Tribunal finds that International Law governs the question of the
admissibility of Mr. Lobit’s evidence in this Arbitration. In applying
International Law, the Tribunal finds that questions of impediment,
privilege, agency, confidentiality and fiduciary duties, that have been
relied upon by CPC, are governed by Californian law. In reaching its
determinations on the Claimant’s application, the Tribunal considers that
it may be guided, as agreed by the Parties, by the IBA Rules on the Taking
of Evidence in International Commercial Arbitration.

2. The Tribunal declines to exclude Mr. Lobit’s testimony from these
proceedings, and to prevent him from participating in these proceedings,
on the sole basis of his or PDC’s status or relationship with CPC and its
legal representatives, including objections based on _ agency,
confidentiality, and fiduciary duties.

3. The Claimant remains at liberty, however, to object to any specific
communications about which Mr. Lobit has testified, or to which the
Respondent has referred, on the basis that the communication itself is
subject to attorney-client privilege as a matter of Californian law.

4. For these purposes:
(a) | Within 14 days of the date of this Decision, the Respondent shall
serve on the Claimant and the Tribunal a schedule of all the documents

relied upon in its Counter-Memorial which have emanated from Mr. Lobit;

(b) Within 14 days thereafter, the Claimant shall:

10.

11.

i. particularise any objection it may have to the use of each of
the documents identified by the Respondent, as a matter of attorney-
client privilege, applying Californian law (excluding any objection based
solely upon Mr. Lobit’s or PDC’s status or relationship with CPC and its
legal representatives, or agency, confidentiality and fiduciary duties);

ii. identify by means of a Redfern Schedule, with reasons, any
specific passages in Mr. Lobit’s 1st witness statement that are said to refer
to communications that are covered by attorney-client privilege under
Californian law (excluding any objection based solely upon Mr Lobit’s or
PDC’s status or relationship with CPC and its legal representatives, or
agency, confidentiality and fiduciary duties).

(c) Within 14 days thereafter, the Respondent may respond to any
objections; and

(d) | Within 7 days thereafter, the Claimant may reply.

Further, within 21 days of the date of this Decision, the Respondent shall
serve on the Claimant and the Tribunal a schedule (the “Full Schedule”),
with sufficient particularity, of all the documents received from Mr. Lobit,
save those scheduled under paragraph 4(a) above and, within 14 days
thereafter, the Claimant shall be permitted to inspect such documents as
it wishes.

. Any application for production in respect of the documents referred to in

paragraph 5 above, must be made within 21 days of receipt of the Full
Schedule. If the Respondent maintains any objection to the production of
any of the documents referred to in paragraph 5 above, it must state its
reasons in the Full Schedule with sufficient particularity. The Claimant
may respond to any such objection(s) within 7 days of the filing of the Full
Schedule. The Respondent may reply within 7 days thereafter.

. The Tribunal will rule on any objections to production or claims to

privilege as soon as reasonably practical.

Having regard to Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention, the Claimant
is hereby restrained from taking any action in any court against Mr. Lobit
personally in relation to his involvement and continuing involvement in
these proceedings.

. Save insofar as the Parties’ applications have been dealt with herein, the

same are dismissed.
The costs of this Application are reserved.

The Tribunal will now look at the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial and
Mr. Lobit’s 1st Witness Statement de bene esse.

[Signed]
Neil Kaplan QC CBE SBS
For and on behalf of the Tribunal

