INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

ICSID CASE No. ARB/09/18

Between

Cambodia Power Company

— Claimant —
And
Kingdom of Cambodia
Electricité du Cambodge
— Respondents —

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Neil Kaplan CBE QC SBS - Presiding Arbitrator -

John Beechey — Co-Arbitrator -
Toby Landau QC — Co-Arbitrator -

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 22 March 2011

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18

Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

 

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 
 
 

 

   
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

iF THE PARTIES 4
A. THE CLAIMANT 4
B. THE RESPONDENT! 5
Il. ARBITRATION CLAUSES. 5
Ill. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 16
IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND TO THE DISPUTE 22
V. THE DISPUTE IN BRIEF 24
VI. REQUESTS FOR RELIEF 25
VII. ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION 27
Vill. ARGUMENTS AND DECISION 28
A. — TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION OVER CLAIMS ARISING OUT OF THE PPA, [A AND DOG BROUGHT IN A SINGLE PROCEEDING .. 28
1. Claimant’s Position. 29
a. The negotiations of the contracts and the wording of the PPA, IA and DOG demonstrate the Parties’ intention
to consider the agreements as part of a unitary project, and to have a single proceeding in case of dispute .........
The similar wording of the arbitration clauses of the IA and of the PPA, as amended on 9 October 1998,
demonstrates the Parties’ intention to hear claims under a single proceeding
c. _ ICSID practice and Common Law jurisdictions support the consolidation of the proceedings ‘under the
present 32
2. ” Position 34
a. The absence of express consolidation provisions in the PPA, the IA and the DOG demonstrates the Parties’
intention to have separate proceedings in case of dispute ... 34
b. Significant differences in the arbitration clauses of the PPA, the TA and the DOG demonstrate the Parties
intention not to have a arbitration 3!
c. _ ICSID practice does not support consolidation of arbitration proceedings when there is no consent to
consolidate and when the arbitration clauses are materially different
d. The three agreements are not so interrelated that they cannot be heard separatel:
3. Tribunal’s Decision
a. _ Relevant principles governing consolidation of claims in ICSID proceeding
b. The Parties’ implied consent in this case
B. DOES THE TRIBUNAL HAVE JURISDICTION RATIONAE PERSONAE OVER EDC
1. Was EDC properly designated to the Centre as an agency of KOC within the meaning of Article 25(1)
of the Convention? 49
a. Claimant’s Position: 49
b. Position 4
c Tribunal’s Decision
2. Does EDC qualify as an agency of KOC within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the Convention
C. DOES THE TRIBUNAL HAVE JURISDICTION TO DECIDE CLAIMS ARISING OUT OF THE DOG?...

 

1. Claimant’s Position.

 

  

 

 

a. Imprecision in the Request is a procedural matter which does not prevent the Tribunal hearing claims arising
out of the DOG 70
The claims under the DOG were properly identified in the Request 2

c. Alternatively, the Claimant is entitled to bring claims under the DOG under Article 46 of the Convention ..72
2. ” Position 73
a. Claimant's claims are limited to those properly articulated in the Request... B

 

 

Page 2 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18

Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

 

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

b. Claimant's claims under the DOG were not properly articulated in the Request and thus fall outside the
Tribunal’ juri 74
c. Inthe alternative, Claimant's claims under the DOG are not admissible under Article 46 of the Convention 74
3. Tribunal’s decision
D. DOES THE TRIBUNAL HAVE JURISDICTION TO DECIDE CLAIMS BASED ON CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW ?.
1. Claimant's Position: claims under customary international law are admissible and within the

 

 

.77

 

 

 

 

Tribunal’s jurisdiction 77
2. Respondents’ Position: claims under customary international law are inadmissible and outside the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction 79
3. Tribunal’s Decision 81
IX. OPERATIVE ORDER 83

 

 

Page 3 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

I. THE PARTIES

A. THE CLAIMANT

1. The Claimant is Cambodia Power Company, a Cambodian limited liability company
incorporated and existing under the laws of the Kingdom of Cambodia (“Claimant” or
“CPC’”). For the purpose of this matter the Claimant’s registered office is at 520 Savoy
Street, Bridgeport, Connecticut 06606, U.S.A.

2. CPC is a company wholly owned by Beacon Hill Associates, Inc. (“BHA”), a Delaware
corporation, which entered into the original contracts, the subject matter of this arbitration.

3. The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by:

MACMILLAN KECK

Richard Keck

469 7th Avenue

Suite 419

New York, New York 10018, USA
Tel: +1.212.359.9599

Fax : +1.646.349.4989

Email: richard @macmillankeck.pro

Rory Macmillan

72 Boulevard St. Georges

2éme étage

1205 Geneva, Switzerland

Tel: +41.22.322.2231

Fax: +41.22.322.2239

Email: rory@macmillankeck.pro

STARR & PARTNERS LLP
Toby Starr

21 Garlick Hill

London EC4V 2AU, England
Tel: +44.20.7199.1451

Fax: +44.870.460.1139
Email: tstarr@starrlegal.com

 

Page 4 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

B. THE RESPONDENTS

4. The first Respondent is the Kingdom of Cambodia, a sovereign state (“KOC”),
represented by the Ministry of Industry, Mines and Energy (“MIME”). For the purpose
of this matter, the first Respondent’s address is at 45 Norodom Boulevard, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.

5. The second Respondent is Electricité du Cambodge, a Cambodian limited liability
company owned by KOC (“EDC”). For the purpose of this matter, the second
Respondent’s registered office is at Yukuntor Street, Wat Phnom, Daun Penh District,
Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

6. The first Respondent and the second Respondent are each referred to as “Respondent”, or
jointly as “Respondents”.

7. The Respondents are represented in this arbitration by

FRESHFIELDS BRUCKHAUS DERINGER

Peter J. Turner, Marie Stoyanov, Sami Tannous & Kate Parlett

2 rue Paul Cezanne

75008 Paris, France

T +33 1 44 56 44 56

F +33 1 44 56 44 00

Emails: Peter. Turner @ freshfields.com, Marie.Stoyanov @ freshfields.com,
Sami.Tannous @freshfields.com & Kate.Parlett@freshfields.com

8. The Claimant and the Respondents are each referred to as a “Party”, or jointly as “the
Parties”.

Il. ARBITRATION CLAUSES

9. This Arbitration arises under three different agreements.

10. The Power Purchase Agreement entered into between KOC, CPC and EDC dated 20
March 1996 (“PPA”) contained in Section 16 the following agreement to arbitrate:

“16.1 Mutual Discussions

If any dispute or difference of any kind whatsoever shall arise between
Edc and the Company in connection with or arising out of this
Agreement, including in relation to any termination of this
Agreement or rights arising thereafter or if the Parties are unable

 

Page 5 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

to agree upon any matter as required under the terms of this
Agreement (a “Dispute”) the provisions of this Section 16 shall
apply.

16.3 Arbitration
(a)...

(b) Any Dispute falling within Section 16.3(a) shall be referred to
arbitration which shall be conducted in accordance with the Rules
of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) (as modified
herein) or as otherwise agreed upon in writing by the Parties.

(c) The arbitral tribunal may consist of a single arbitrator if the
Parties can agree thereon otherwise it shall consist of three (3)
arbitrators. Each Party shall appoint one arbitrator with, in case
of a Dispute of a technical nature, knowledge and experience in
such technical matters. The two arbitrators so appointed shall
appoint the third arbitrator who shall serve as the chairman of the
arbitral tribunal.

(d) If a Party fails to appoint its arbitrator within a period of ten (10)
days after receiving notice of the arbitration, or if the two
arbitrators cannot agree on the third arbitrator within a period of
ten (10) days after appointment of the second arbitrator then such
arbitrator shall be appointed pursuant to the procedures of the ICC,
or as otherwise agreed to by the Parties.

(e) All arbitrators appointed pursuant to Section 16.3(c) shall comply
with the criteria set out in Section 4.6(a)(iii)-(v). In the event that
the ICC is required or requested to appoint an arbitrator, it shall
be requested to appoint only a person who (i) complies with these
criteria; (ii) has experience in international commercial
agreements and in particular the implementation and
interpretation of contracts relating to the design, engineering,
construction, operation and maintenance of electric power
generation facilities; and (iii) if the Dispute concerns a technical
issue, a person who has knowledge and experience in technical
matters.

(f) The arbitration shall be conducted in Singapore (or in such other
nearby location as may be agreed by the arbitrators which is a
Contracting State under the New York Convention on the

 

Page 6 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards) using
the English language. All documents or evidence presented at such
arbitration in a language other than English shall be accompanied
by a certified English translation. The arbitrators shall decide the
Dispute by majority and shall state in writing the reasons for their
decision. The arbitrators shall be bound by the decision of any
Expert under Section 16.2(g) and shall not have the power to
review or appeal such decision other than in the circumstances set
out in Section 16.3(a)(iii).

(g) The Parties hereby waive any rights to appeal or to review of any
arbitral award by any court or tribunal. The Parties further
undertake to carry out without delay the provisions of any arbitral
award or decision and each agrees that any such arbitral award or
decision may be enforced by any court or tribunal having
jurisdiction. Either Party may, subject to Section 21.4, publicise or
otherwise disclose to others the contents of any award or decision
of the arbitral tribunal.

(h) The arbitral award shall be in Dollars. The cost of such arbitration
shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal in its award.

(i) Each Party hereby irrevocably agrees not to bring legal
proceedings in any court except:

(A) obtaining interim and conservatory measures to protect or enforce
its rights under this Agreement as provided in Article 8(5) of the
ICC Rules;

(B) bringing any action to enforce an arbitral award or a decision of
the Expert which is final, conclusive and binding under Section
16.2(g); and/or

(C) carrying actions to give effect to this Section 16.

(j) For the purposes set out in sub-Section 16.3(i), each of the Parties
irrevocably submits to the jurisdiction of the courts of Cambodia
and of any other competent jurisdiction.

(k) The Parties irrevocably and unconditionally waive all the
provisions of Cambodian Law which may be inconsistent with this
Section 16 and which may otherwise override the provisions
hereof.”

 

Page 7 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

11. The PPA dated 20 March 1996 was novated on 30 September 1996, and amended on 9
October 1998. As amended, Section 16 reads as follows:

“16.1 Mutual Discussions

If any dispute or difference of any kind whatsoever shall arise between
Ede and the Company in connection with or arising out of this
Agreement, including in relation to any termination of this
Agreement or rights arising thereafter or if the Parties are unable
to agree upon any matter as required under the terms of this
Agreement (a “Dispute”) the provisions of this Section 16 shall
apply.

16.3 Arbitration
(a)...

(b)(i) If and when the Kingdom of Cambodia has implemented the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States (the “Convention”) any
Dispute shall, subject to Section 16.3(b)(iv) where applicable, be
referred to arbitration and finally settled in accordance with the
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings of the
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (the
“Centre” ) established by the Convention (the “ICSID Rules”) and
the parties hereby consent to arbitration thereunder;

(ii) The parties agree the Company shall be deemed to be a foreign
controlled company for the purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention so long as not less than thirty (30) percent of the
shares and other securities convertible into shares issued by the
Company are held by Foreign Investors;

(iii) MIME agrees to procure that the Kingdom of Cambodia:

(A) notifies the centre that it has designated each of MIME and EDC
as a sub-division or agency of the Kingdom of Cambodia which is
subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre for the purpose of Article
25(1) of the Convention;

(B) approves the consent by MIME to arbitration under the ICSID
Rules for the purpose of Article 25(3) of the Convention; and

 

Page 8 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(C) arbitration proceedings conducted pursuant to this Section 16.3
shall be held in Washington, D.C., The Hague, Cairo or Kuala
Lumpur; and

(iv) Unless and until the Kingdom of Cambodia has implemented the
Convention or if for any other reason the Dispute cannot be finally
settled pursuant to the terms of the Convention, any Dispute shall
be referred to and finally settled by arbitration under the Rules of
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (the “ICC
Rules”) as modified herein or as otherwise agreed upon in writing
by the Parties. The seat of the arbitration, unless otherwise agreed
by the Parties, shall be Singapore or such other nearby location as
the Parties may agree provided it is in a Contracting State to the
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards 1958. The language of the arbitration shall be
English.

(

oS
2

The arbitral tribunal may consist of a single arbitrator if the
Parties can agree thereon otherwise it shall consist of three (3)
arbitrators. Each Party shall appoint one arbitrator with, in case
of a Dispute of a technical nature, knowledge and experience in
such technical matters. The two arbitrators so appointed shall
appoint the third arbitrator who shall serve as the chairman of the
arbitral tribunal.

(d) If a Party fails to appoint its arbitrator within a period of ten (10)
days after receiving notice of the arbitration, or if the two
arbitrators cannot agree on the third arbitrator within a period of
ten (10) days after appointment of the second arbitrator then such
arbitrator shall be appointed pursuant to the ICSID Rules or the
ICC Rules, or as otherwise agreed to by the Parties.

(e) All arbitrators appointed pursuant to Section 16.3(c) shall comply
with the criteria set out in Section 4.6(a)(iii)-(v). In the event that
the ICC or the Centre, as the case may be, is required or requested
to appoint an arbitrator, it shall be requested to appoint only a
person who (i) complies with these criteria; (ii) has experience in
international commercial agreements and in particular the
implementation and interpretation of contracts relating to the
design, engineering, construction, operation and maintenance of
electric power generation facilities; and (iii) if the Dispute
concerns a technical issue, a person who has knowledge and
experience in technical matters.

 

Page 9 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(f) All documents or evidence presented at such arbitration in a

language other than English shall be accompanied by a certified
English translation. The arbitrators shall decide the Dispute by
majority and shall state in writing the reasons for their decision.
The arbitrators shall be bound by the decision of any Expert under
Section 16.2(g) and shall not have the power to review or appeal
any decision other than in the circumstances set out in Section
16.3(a)(iii).

 

(g) The Parties hereby waive any rights to appeal or to review of any

arbitral award by any court or tribunal. The Parties further
undertake to carry out without delay the provisions of any arbitral
award or decision and each agrees that any such arbitral award or
decision may be enforced by any court or tribunal having
jurisdiction. Either Party may, subject to Section 21.4, publicise or
otherwise disclose to others the contents of any award or decision
of the arbitral tribunal.

(h) The arbitral award shall be in Dollars. The cost of such arbitration

(i

shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal in its award.

') Each Party hereby irrevocably agrees not to bring legal
proceedings in any court except any action to enforce an arbitral
award or unless a dispute cannot legally be arbitrated. Each Party
hereby irrevocably consents to the jurisdiction of the courts of
Cambodia and any other court of competent jurisdiction in another
country for any action or proceeding filed by any other Party (i) to
enforce a judgement entered by a Cambodian court of competent
jurisdiction recognizing any award or decision of any arbitrator(s)
or Experts who were duly appointed under this Agreement to
resolve any dispute between the Parties (ii) to enforce any award
or decision of any arbitrator(s) or experts who were duly appointed
under this Implementation Agreement to resolve any dispute
between the Parties and (iii) regarding any matter or issue that
cannot be arbitrated because any arbitrator declines or is not
competent to resolve such matter issue. With respect to any such
action or proceeding, including without limitation, any
proceedings for the enforcement of any award against the assets of
MIME or EDC:

(a) Each Party shall maintain in London, England a duly appointed

agent for the receipt of service of process and shall notify the other
Party of the name and address of such agent and any change in
such agent/or the address of such agent;

 

Page 10 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(b) Each Party agrees that the failure by any such agent for the receipt
of service of process to give it notice of any process that has been
served on such agent shall not impair the validity of such service or
of any judgment based thereon; and

(c) Each Party waives any objection that it may have or hereafter have
to the venue of an action or proceeding brought as consented to in
this Section 16.3 and specifically waives any objection that any
action or proceeding was brought in an inconvenient forum and
agrees not to plead or claim the same. Each Party agrees that
service of process in any such action or proceeding may be effected
in the manner set forth in this Section 16.3 or in any other manner
permitted by applicable law.

(ji) The Parties irrevocably and unconditionally waive all the
provisions of Cambodian Law which may be inconsistent with this
Section 16 and which may otherwise override the provisions hereof.

12. The Implementation Agreement entered between KOC and CPC dated 20 March 1996
(“IA”) contained in Section 12 the following agreement to arbitrate:

“12.1 Disputes

If any dispute or difference arises out of or in connection with this
Agreement (including in relation to the termination thereof) (each
a “Dispute” ), the provisions of this Section 12 shall apply.

12.2 International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes

(a) If and when the Kingdom of Cambodia has implemented the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States (the “Convention”) it shall,
subject to Section 12.3 where applicable, be referred to arbitration
and finally settled in accordance with the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings of the International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes (the “Centre”) established by the
Convention (the “ICSID Rules”) and the parties hereby consent to
arbitration thereunder.

(b) The parties agree the Company shall be deemed to be a foreign
controlled company for the purposes of Article 23(2)(b) of the
Convention so long as not less than thirty (30) per cent of the
shares and other securities convertible into shares issued by the
Company are held by Foreign Investors.

 

Page 11 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(c) MIME agrees to procure that the Kingdom of Cambodia:

(a) notifies the Centre that it has designated MIME as a sub-division
or agency of the Kingdom of Cambodia which is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Centre for the purpose of Article 25(1) of the
Convention; and

(b) approves the consent by MIME to arbitration under the ICSID
Rules for the purpose of Article 25(3) of the Convention,

(c) arbitration proceedings conducted pursuant to this Section 12.2
shall be held in Singapore.

12.3 Unless and until the Kingdom of Cambodia has implemented the
Convention or if for any other reason the Dispute cannot be finally
settled pursuant to the terms of the Convention, any Dispute shall
be referred to and finally settled by arbitration under the Rules of
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (the “ICC
Rules”) by one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance with
the ICC Rules. The arbitration proceedings shall be held in
Singapore or in such other nearby location as the arbitrators may
agree provided it is a Contracting State under the Convention on
the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards. The
language of the arbitration shall be English.

12.4 Legal Proceedings
Where Section 12.2 or Section 12.3 applies:

(a) Each party hereby irrevocably agrees not to bring legal
proceedings in any court except:

(i) seeking interim and conservatory measures to protect or enforce its
rights under this Agreement as provided in Article 8(5) of the ICC
Rules or carrying out actions to give effect to Section 12.3; or

(ii) bringing any action to enforce an arbitral award;

(b) each of the parties irrevocably submits, subject to sub-section
12.4(c), to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of Cambodia;
and

(c) for the sole purpose of the enforcement of any arbitral award, each
of the parties irrevocably submits to the jurisdiction of any court of
competent jurisdiction.”

 

Page 12 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

13. The IA was novated on 30 September 1996, and amended on 20 July 1998. As amended,
Section 12.2 reads as follows:

“12.1 Disputes

If any dispute or difference arises out of or in connection with this
Agreement (including in relation to the termination thereof) (each
a “Dispute” ), the provisions of this Section 12 shall apply.

12.2 International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes

(a) If and when the Kingdom of Cambodia has implemented the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States (the “Convention”) any
Dispute shall, subject to Section 12.3 where applicable, be referred
to arbitration and finally settled in accordance with the Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings of the International Centre
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (the “Centre”)
established by the Convention (the “ICSID Rules”) and the parties
hereby consent to arbitration thereunder.

(b) The parties agree the Company shall be deemed to be a foreign
controlled company for the purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention so long as not less than thirty (30) percent of the
shares and other securities convertible into shares issued by the
Company are held by Foreign Investors.

(c) MIME agrees to procure that the Kingdom of Cambodia:

(i) notifies the centre that it has designated MIME as a sub-division or
agency of the Kingdom of Cambodia which is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Centre for the purpose of Article 25(1) of the
Convention;

(ii) approves the consent by MIME to arbitration under the ICSID
Rules for the purpose of Article 25(3) of the Convention; and

(iii) arbitration proceedings conducted pursuant to this Section 12.2
shall be held in Washington, D.C., The Hague, Cairo or Kuala
Lumpur.

12.3 Unless and until the Kingdom of Cambodia has implemented the
Convention or if for any other reason the Dispute cannot be finally
settled pursuant to the terms of the Convention, any Dispute shall
be referred to and finally settled by arbitration under the Rules of

 

Page 13 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (the “ICC
Rules”) as modified herein or as otherwise agreed upon in writing
by the parties. The seat of the arbitration, unless otherwise agreed
by the parties, shall be Singapore or such other nearby location as
the parties may agree provided it is in a Contracting State to the
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards 1958. The language of the arbitration shall be
English.

12.4 Legal Proceedings: consent to jurisdiction

Each party hereby irrevocably agrees not to bring legal proceedings in
any court except any action to enforce an arbitral award or unless
a dispute cannot legally be arbitrated. Each party hereby
irrevocably consents to the jurisdiction of the courts of Cambodia
and any other court of competent jurisdiction in another country
for any action or proceeding filed by any other party (i) to enforce
a judgement entered by a Cambodian court of competent
jurisdiction recognizing any award or decision of any arbitrator(s)
or experts who were duly appointed under this Implementation
Agreement to resolve any dispute between the parties, (ii) to
enforce any award or decision of any arbitrator(s) or experts who
were duly appointed under this Implementation Agreement to
resolve any dispute between the parties and (iii) regarding any
matter or issue that cannot be arbitrated because any arbitrator
declines or is not competent to resolve such matter or issue. With
respect to any such action or proceeding, including without
limitation, any proceedings for the enforcement of any award
against the assets of MIME:

(a) Each party shall maintain in London, England a duly appointed
agent for the receipt of service of process and shall notify the other
party of the name and address of such agent and any change in
such agent/or the address of such agent;

(b) Each party agrees that the failure by any such agent for the receipt
of service of process to give it notice of any process that has been
served on such agent shall not impair the validity of such service or
of any judgement based thereon; and

(c) Each party waives any objection that it may have or hereafter have
to the venue of an action or proceeding brought as consented to in
this Section 12.4 and specifically waives any objection that any
action or proceeding was brought in an inconvenient forum and

 

Page 14 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

agrees not to plead or claim the same. Each party agrees that
service of process in any such action or proceeding may be
affected [sic] in the manner set forth in this Section 12.3 or in any
other manner permitted by applicable law.”

14. The Deed of Guarantee entered between KOC and CPC dated 24 March 1998 (“DOG”)
contains in Section 7.2 the following agreement to arbitrate:

“7.2.1 Disputes

If any dispute or difference arises out of or in connection with this
Agreement (including in relation to the termination thereof) (each
a “Dispute” ), the provisions of Sections 7.2-7.5 shall apply.

7.2.2 International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes

(a) If and when the Kingdom of Cambodia has implemented the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States (the “Convention”) any
Dispute shall, subject to Section 7.4 where applicable, be referred
to arbitration and finally settled in accordance with the Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings of the International Centre
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (the “Centre”)
established by the Convention (the “ICSID Rules”) and the parties
hereby consent to arbitration thereunder.

(b) The parties agree the Company shall be deemed to be a foreign
controlled company for the purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention so long as not less than thirty (30) percent of the
shares and other securities convertible into shares issued by the
Company are held by Foreign Investors.

(c) The Guarantor agrees to procure that the Kingdom of Cambodia:

(i) notifies the Centre that it has designated the Ministry of Economy
and Finance as a sub-division or agency of the Kingdom of
Cambodia which is subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre for the
purpose of Article 25(1) of the Convention;

(ii) approves the consent by the Ministry of Economy and Finance to
arbitration under the ICSID Rules for the purpose of Article 25(3)
of the Convention; and

(iii) arbitration proceedings conducted pursuant to this Section 7.3
shall be held in The Hague, Cairo or Kuala Lumpur.

 

Page 15 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Il.

7.3 Unless and until the Kingdom of Cambodia has implemented the
Convention or if for any other reason the Dispute cannot be finally
settled pursuant to the terms of the Convention, any Dispute shall
be referred to and finally settled by arbitration under the Rules of
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (the “ICC
Rules”) by one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance with
the ICC Rules. The seat of the arbitration, unless otherwise agreed
by the parties, shall be Singapore or such other nearby location as
the parties may agree provided it is in a Contracting State to the
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards 1958. The language of the arbitration shall be
English.”

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

Following the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration (“Request”) and Supplement No. 1 to
the Request for Arbitration (“Supplement to Request”) dated 30 July and 21 August
2009 respectively, the Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“Secretary-General” and “Centre” respectively) registered the
present dispute on 16 September 2009.

On 15 December 2009, the Parties agreed that the Tribunal would be constituted of three
arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each party and the third, the President of the
Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the Parties. Subsequently, the Claimant and the
Respondents appointed Messrs. John Beechey and Toby Landau respectively. Both
arbitrators accepted their appointments. The Parties then agreed to appoint Mr. Neil
Kaplan as presiding arbitrator. Mr. Kaplan accepted his appointment and, on 8 January
2010, the Secretary-General sent a letter to the Parties announcing the constitution of the
Arbitral Tribunal (“the Tribunal”).

On 9 April 2009, the Parties and the Tribunal met for the First Session at the Permanent
Court of Arbitration in The Hague, the Netherlands. Shortly thereafter, the Minutes of the
First Session were served on the Parties (“Minutes”). In accordance with the relevant
articles of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention” or “the Convention”) and the Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”), these Minutes addressed,
in relevant part, the following points:

(a) apportionment of costs and advance payments to the Centre;

(b) fees and expenses of the Tribunal members;

 

Page 16 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(c) applicable Arbitration Rules: the 2006 ICSID Arbitration Rules;

(d

place of the proceedings: The Hague, Netherlands;
(e) procedural language: English;

(f) transcription service at the hearing;

(g) means of communications and submissions;

(h) quorum of arbitrators at the hearing;

(i) convening of a pre-hearing conference;

(Gj) procedure to adopt with regards to the production of evidence through witness
statements and expert reports;

(k) decisions of the Tribunal and appropriate means of communication;
(1) delegation of power to fix and extend time limits;

(m

written and oral procedures; and

(n) sequence of pleadings according to the following timetable which distinguished
whether the issue on jurisdiction would be bifurcated or not.

In accordance with the Minutes, on 2 July 2010, the Claimant served its Memorial on the
Merits Part 1 — Jurisdiction and Liability.

On 12 July 2010, the Respondents wrote to the Tribunal stating that the Claimant had
omitted to request any relief in its Memorial of 2 July 2010. Accordingly, Respondents
stated that they would rely upon the requests for relief contained in the Claimant’s
Request unless Claimant clearly identified the relief that it sought within 24 hours.

On the same day, Claimant responded that since the Merits were split in two parts, the first

addressing liability, and the second addressing quantum, it was clear that the appropriate
measure of damages would not be sought by Claimant until Part 2 of the submissions. In
any event, Claimant contended that the opening and concluding paragraphs of its last
submission included the relief sought. Claimant reiterated its reliefs as follows:

(a) to hold EDC liable in damages for its repudiation of, defaults under and/or
other breaches of the PPA;

 

Page 17 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(b) to hold KOC liable in damages for its repudiation of, defaults under and/or
other breaches of the IA;

(c) to hold KOC liable pursuant to its obligation in the DOG to pay all amounts
owed by EDC to CPC under the PPA; and

(d) to hold KOC liable in respect of EDC’s repudiation of, defaults under and/or
other breaches of the PPA that are attributable to KOC under the state
responsibility doctrine.

On the next day, the Respondents denied that the relief sought by the Claimant should be
included in Part 2 of the submissions which were intended only to deal with the pure
quantification of damages. The Respondents asserted that the factual and legal bases of
the damages sought had to be set out in Part 1 of the submissions and therefore could not
be modified in Part 2.

On 20 July 2010, the Respondents served their Preliminary Objections and requested that
the proceedings be bifurcated.

On 30 July 2010, the Claimant served its Response to Respondents’ Preliminary
Objections, and objected to the request for bifurcation.

By letter on the same day, the Respondents took issue with Claimant’s allegations of
corruption against officials of the Cambodian government contained in Claimant’s
submissions. The Respondents maintained that these allegations were unfounded and
unsupported by any documents, and asked the Tribunal to strike out paragraphs 78, 93,
218 and 273 of the witness statement of Mr. William Garret (“Mr. Garret”). In addition,
Respondents objected to the “unsupported allegations made in reliance on documents not
submitted by the Claimant.” The Respondents maintained that the Claimant should have
submitted all documents upon which it intended to rely in these proceedings with its
Memorial on the Merits. A list of these unsupported allegations was annexed to the letter.

On 3 August 2010, the Respondents wrote a letter to the Tribunal stating that the
Claimant’s Response to the Respondents’ Preliminary Objections was in contravention of
the agreed timetable as this submission was not limited to a brief description of arguments
concerning bifurcation, but instead it articulated most of Claimant’s case on the merits.
The Respondents also stated that the Claimant had misinterpreted the Respondents’
position.

 

Page 18 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

On the next day, the Claimant objected to the Respondents’ letter which presented other
arguments and new legal authorities not permitted by the timetable contained in the
Minutes. The Claimant added that it was unfair not to have afforded it an opportunity to
respond. Finally, the Claimant denied the Respondents’ allegations that the Claimant had
set out its case on the merits rather than addressing the bifurcation issue in its Response to
the Respondents’ Preliminary Objections.

On 23 August 2010, the Tribunal decided to bifurcate the proceedings and to hold a
hearing on jurisdiction on 6-7 December 2010 in Hong Kong (“the Hearing”). The
Tribunal also provided the following directions with regard to the issues to be addressed
at the Hearing (by reference to the list of issues proposed by the Respondents):

(a) Issue 1: Does the Tribunal have a jurisdiction over EDC? In
other words whether or not EDC is an "agency" for the
purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

(b) Issue 2: The admissibility of two separate claims under a
single proceeding.

(c) Issue 3: Claims under the Deed of Guarantee. The only claim
here that will be heard in December is the issue relating to the
allegation that no claim under the Deed was advanced in the
Request for Arbitration. All other issues relating to the Deed of
Guarantee will be heard in a merits hearing.

(d) Issue 4: Whether under Cambodian company law the
claimants' corporate decisions relating to the commencement
of this arbitration are valid or invalid.

(e) Issue 5: Time bar. This will be heard in a merits hearing.

(f) Issue 6: Objections to claims of State Responsibility. The only
issue here that can be heard in December is the effect of the
allegation that such claims were not pleaded in the request for
arbitration. The argument that the claimants' case on
customary international law is wrong in principle will only be
heard in a merits hearing.

(g) Issue 7: Force Majeure. This will only be heard in a merits
hearing.

 

Page 19 of 84

30.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

On 16 September 2010, the Respondents withdrew their objection to the Claimant’s
authority to bring the present proceedings as articulated in Section IV of the Respondents’
Preliminary Objections dated 20 July 2010.

On 27 September 2010, after discussion between the Parties, the Tribunal ordered that
Skeleton Arguments were to be exchanged on or before Monday 29 November 2010 at 5
pmE.S.T.

On the same day, the Claimant submitted to the Tribunal an application for permission to
amend its 2 July 2010 submissions and to submit additional documentary evidence.

On 28 September 2010, the Respondents objected to the Claimant’s application and
assured the Tribunal that they would respond to this application after they had filed their
Memorial on Preliminary Issues due on 6 October 2010.

On 6 October 2010, the Respondents served their Submissions on Preliminary Objections.

On 14 October 2010, the Respondents applied for the Tribunal’s permission to introduce
into evidence a recent decision rendered by an ICSID tribunal, namely Gustav F W
Hamester GmbH & Co KG v The Republic of Ghana, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24, Award
(18 June 2010) (“Hamester’’).

On 15 October 2010, the Respondents wrote a letter to the Tribunal stating that three
matters remained outstanding between the Parties. Respondents requested that:

(a) the Claimant’s corruption allegations articulated in the Claimant’s Memorial on
the Merits be struck out;

(b) the Claimant’s claims under customary international law be struck out; and

(c) the Claimant’s application for permission to amend its Memorial on the Merits
and witness statements and to submit additional documentary evidence be denied.

In addition, the Respondents asked the Tribunal to issue a ruling on the costs incurred by
the Respondents in reviewing and addressing the Claimant’s application.

On the next day, the Claimant accepted the Respondents’ late submission of the referenced

authority, i.e. Hamester, but requested that Respondents submit a supplement to their
submissions by 22 October 2010 so that the Claimant had a reasonable opportunity to
address the Respondents’ arguments in its Counter-Memorial.

 

Page 20 of 84

40.

41.

42.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

On 20 October 2010, the Respondents submitted a letter setting out the relevance of the
recent Hamester case.

On 21 October 2010, the Claimant responded to the Respondents’ requests of 15 October
2010. The Claimant said that:

(a) the Respondents’ request to strike out portions of Mr. Garrett’s testimony were
without merit and not ripe for a ruling by the Tribunal;

(b) the Respondents’ request to strike out Claimant’s claims under customary
international law should be denied as those claims were properly articulated in
the Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits dated 2 July 2010; and

(c) the Claimant’s application to amend its submissions and to submit additional
evidence should be granted as they did not constitute new claims.

On 3 November 2010, the Tribunal ruled on the three outstanding issues together with the

question of costs raised by the Respondents. First, with regard to the Respondents’ claim
of unsupported and defamatory allegations of corruption made by the Claimant, the
Tribunal decided that this was not a matter with which it could deal, and thus the Tribunal
declined to strike out these allegations. Had the Claimant’s allegations been defamatory,
it was neither the Tribunal’s mission nor within the Tribunal’s power to investigate and
condemn such behaviour. Second, with regard to the Respondents’ objections concerning
Claimant’s claim under customary international law, the Tribunal decided that at this time
it was premature to rule on this point. Accordingly it refused the Respondents’ application
to strike out the Claimant’s claim based on customary international law. Thirdly, with
regard to the Claimant’s application for permission to amend its Memorial on the Merits
and witness statements and to submit additional documentary evidence, the Tribunal
noted that paragraph 14(d) of the Minutes gave it an element of discretion in this regard
and therefore decided to grant the request. Fourthly, with regard to the Respondents’
request for an award on costs, the Tribunal declined to make such an order at this stage.

On 12 November 2010, Claimant served its 167-page single-space Counter-Memorial on
Respondents’ Preliminary Objections (“Claimant’s Counter Memorial’).

On 29 November 2010, the Parties submitted their Skeleton Arguments.

On 30 November 2010, the Parties and the Presiding Arbitrator, on behalf of the Tribunal,
had a case management conference by telephone.

 

Page 21 of 84

43.

44,

45.

IV.

46.

47.

48.

49.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The main Hearing took place from 6-7 December 2010 at the Hong Kong International
Arbitration Centre (“HKIAC”). At the Hearing, the Claimant was represented by Mr.
Richard Keck, who was assisted by Mr. Blechman both from Macmillan Keck. On the
Claimant’s side were also present Mr. Garrett, witness and employee of CPC and Ms. Se
Muy Tan, employee of CPC. The Respondents were represented by Mr. Peter Turner and
Ms. Marie Stoyanov, who were assisted by Mr. Sami Tannous and Dr. Kate Parlett, all
from Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer. On the Respondents’ side were also present H.E.
Ith Praing from MIME and HE. Keo Rottanak from EDC. Other attendees of the hearing
were Ms. Martina Polasek, Secretary of the Tribunal and Mr. Olivier Darcq, Legal
Assistant to the President of the Tribunal.

On 13 December 2010, the Secretary of the Tribunal, acting upon instruction of the
Tribunal, informed the Parties that ICSID had recently posted the award of 28 December
2009 in Government of the Province of East Kalimantan v. P.T. Kaltim Prima Coal, et al
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/3) (“East Kalimantan”) on its website, and invited them to
submit any observations on this decision by 20 December 2010.

By emails dated 20 December 2010, the Claimant and the Respondents submitted their
observations.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND TO THE DISPUTE

In 1994, KOC announced a tender process to select an independent power producer to
invest in, construct, own and operate a 60MW electric power plant in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia, known as the C-4 power plant project, and to sell that plant’s capacity and
electricity to Respondent EDC for a 20 to 25-year term.

In July 1995, BHA, a Delaware corporation, was invited by the Prime Minister of
Cambodia to participate in a competitive bidding process and submitted an application in
response to EDC’s request for proposals.

At this time, EDC was a department within MIME. EDC was therefore part of the
Government of KOC.

In late 1995, BHA was selected as winner of the tender. BHA, KOC and EDC then
negotiated the legal documentation for the investment by BHA into the Cambodian state
power industry, which later resulted in two main agreements, the PPA and the IA, as well
as numerous annexed forms of other agreements to be entered into at various stages of the
project.

 

Page 22 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

50.

On 9 March 1996, a Royal Decree declared the establishment of a new EDC. KOC
transformed EDC into a state-owned limited liability enterprise duly organized and
validly existing under the laws of KOC. Following this change, the rights and obligations
which were those of the old EDC were diluted between the new EDC and a newly created
state agency: the Electricity Authority of Cambodia (“EAC”). The new EDC remained
fully owned by KOC which was also empowered to appoint its board of directors.

The PPA and IA were signed on 20 March 1996. The PPA was signed by BHA, KOC and
EDC. However, EDC was not a party to the IA which was entered into only by BHA and
KOC. The PPA contained an arbitration clause providing for an arbitration administered
by the International Chamber of Commerce (“ICC”) in case of a dispute. By contrast, the
IA contained an arbitration clause providing for ICSID arbitration, or, as a default forum,
for ICC arbitration if ICSID arbitration was not available.

As understood by the parties to those contracts, BHA subsequently formed the Claimant
(CPC) as a limited liability project company under Cambodian law, and on 5 June and 30
September 1996, KOC, EDC, BHA and CPC entered into two Novation Agreements
(“Novation Agreements”) substituting CPC for BHA in the IA and PPA respectively.

On 9 October 1998, KOC, EDC and CPC amended the PPA (“PPA Amendment No. 1”).
This included an amendment to the dispute resolution clause of the PPA, to provide for
ICSID arbitration or, similarly to the provision contained in the IA, for ICC arbitration, if
ICSID arbitration was not available. This ICSID arbitration clause was drafted in similar
terms, albeit with some differences (the importance of those differences is contested), to
the ICSID arbitration clause contained in the IA. Under this amendment, the new EDC
joined the PPA as a party replacing the old EDC.

MIME, as a ministry of KOC, executed PPA Amendment No.1 for and on behalf of KOC.
According to PPA§16.3(b)(iii)(A) as amended by PPA Amendment No.1:

“MIME agrees to procure that the Kingdom of Cambodia ... notifies
the Centre that it has designated each of MIME and EDC as a sub-
division or agency of the Kingdom of Cambodia which is subject to
the jurisdiction of the Centre for the purpose of Article 25(1) of the
Convention.”

In fact, KOC never notified the Centre of the designation -if any- of EDC as its agency for
the purposes of Article 25(1) of the Convention.

 

Page 23 of 84

60.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

On 27 March 1998, the DOG was signed between KOC (Ministry of Economy and
Finance, “MoEF’”) and CPC. The DOG contains an arbitration clause similar to the one
contained in the IA.

The Claimant contends that from 1998 to 2004, KOC and EDC repeatedly and deliberately

breached their contractual obligations. As a result, CPC was not able to build the power
plant, and finally decided to accept KOC’s and EDC’s repudiation of the project contracts.
Such alleged repudiation is said to have caused CPC to lose its entire investment and the
benefit of its bargain.

On 20 December 2004, KOC ratified the ICSID Convention, which entered into force in
Cambodia on 19 January 2005.

On 30 July 2009, the Claimant commenced this arbitration by submitting its Request to the
ICSID Centre.

THE DISPUTE IN BRIEF

According to the Claimant, following the signature of the PPA and IA, CPC had taken all

preliminary steps to design, obtain all permits for and was prepared to build and operate
the C-4 power plant. It had also arranged the requisite debt and equity financing,
including having obtained the approval of the board of directors of the World Bank to
proceed with financing the project as anchor lender.

However, according to the Claimant, from 1998 to 2004, the Respondents persistently
breached their obligations to support the project and habitually took actions that were
inconsistent with those obligations. As a consequence of the Respondents’ acts and
omissions, the power plant anticipated under the investment contracts was never built.
The Claimant concludes that KOC and EDC reneged on their commitments in the
investment agreements, failed and refused to permit the Claimant to develop and profit
from the C-4 power plant project, and denied the Claimant the fruits of its investment.

The Claimant commenced an ICSID arbitration against KOC and EDC. However, the
Respondents objected to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the ground that the Claimant’s
claims made under the PPA, the IA and the DOG cannot be heard in a single arbitration
proceeding. In addition, the Respondents contend that EDC is not an agency of KOC and
has never been designated to the ICSID Centre as required by the Convention. Finally,
Respondents argue that the Claimant’s claims under the DOG and international

 

Page 24 of 84

VI.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

customary law are inadmissible and outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and, in any event,
unsuitable to be pursued as additional claims under Article 46 of the Convention.

REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

In its most recent request for relief, the Claimant requests the Tribunal to dismiss all the
preliminary objections of the Respondents heard in this bifurcated proceeding, and to
award the following additional and/or other relief:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)
(6)
(g)

(h)

Declare that the claims under the PPA, IA and DOG are properly brought in this
proceeding;

As an alternative, declare that claims under each of the PPA, IA and DOG are
claims over which the Tribunal has jurisdiction in multiple parallel proceedings
and order those proceedings to proceed to the merits phase on the already-agreed
timetable;

As a further alternative, if the Tribunal decides that multiple claims are not
permissible in the same proceeding, then afford the Claimant the choice of which
claims to continue in this proceeding and which to voluntarily dismiss without
prejudice to bringing such claims in another proceeding, and order the remaining
claims to proceed on the already-agreed timetable;

Declare that EDC is an agency of the Kingdom of Cambodia within the meaning
of Article 25(1) of the Convention;

Declare that EDC has been designated to the ICSID Centre by KOC;
And therefore declare that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over EDC;

Declare that Claimant’s claims against KOC under the DOG are properly brought
and within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and fully admissible;

As an alternative, admit the claims against KOC under the DOG as additional
claims under Article 46 of the Convention;

Declare that Claimant’s claims against KOC based on state responsibility under
principles of customary international law are properly brought and within the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal and fully admissible;

 

Page 25 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

@

(k)

@

As an alternative, admit the claims against KOC under the state responsibility
doctrine as additional claims under Article 46 of the Convention;

Order Respondents to pay all of the fees, costs and expenses incurred by the
Claimant in responding to their preliminary objections; and/or

Decide such further issues, make such further or alternative declarations, orders
and awards, and grant such other and further relief as may be just or proper.

64. In its most recent request for relief, the Respondents request the Tribunal:

(a)

(b)

(c)

As regards the objection to the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction rationae personae
over EDC:

a. to declare that EDC has not been designated to the ICSID Centre by
KOC;

b. further or alternatively, to declare that EDC is not an agency of KOC
within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the Convention;

c. to find that it has no jurisdiction over EDC; and
d. to dismiss all claims made against EDC.

As regards the objection to the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction over claims under
more than one agreement:

a. To declare that claims under the PPA, the IA and the DOG ought to
have been brought in separate proceedings; and

b. To dismiss all of CPC’s claims in these proceedings.

As regards the objection to the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction over claims under
the DOG, and to the admissibility of such claims:

a. to declare that CPC’s claim under the DOG is a new claim that does not
fall within its jurisdiction;

b. alternatively, to declare that CPC’s claim under the DOG is
inadmissible for failure to comply with the requirements of Article 46
of the Convention; and

 

Page 26 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(d)

(e)

c. to dismiss CPC’s claim under the DOG.

As regards the objection to the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction over claims under
principles of customary international law, and to the admissibility of the same:

a. to declare that CPC’s claims under principles of customary international
law are new claims that do not fall within its jurisdiction;

b. alternatively, to declare that CPC’s claims under principles of
customary international law are inadmissible for failure to comply with
the requirements of Article 46 of the Convention; and

c. to dismiss CPC’s claims under principles of customary international law;

To order the Claimant to pay all of the costs and expenses incurred by the
Respondents in defending against the Claimant’s claims, including, but not
limited to, the Arbitral Tribunal’s fees and expenses, the fees and expenses of the
Respondents’ counsel, and interest, on a full indemnity basis.

VII. ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION

65. The Parties requested the Tribunal to consider the following issues:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to decide claims arising out of the three
separate agreements, namely the PPA, the IA and the DOG, in a single
proceeding?

Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction rationae personae over EDC?

‘Was EDC properly designated to the Centre as an agency of KOC within the
meaning of Article 25(1) of the Convention?

Does the designation requirement of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
require some form of communication to the Centre?

If yes, what type of communication is acceptable within the meaning of the
Convention?

If yes, must such communication be made exclusively by the Contracting State
itself?

 

Page 27 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Vil.

(g) | Is EDC an agency of Cambodia for the purpose of Article 25 of the Convention?

(h) Are the Respondents estopped from arguing that EDC is not an agency of KOC
and/or that EDC has not been designated to the Centre as required by Article
25(1) of the Convention?

(i) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to decide claims arising out of the DOG?

(0) Did the Claimant need to identify the relevant consent instrument, i.e. the DOG,
and indicate that a claim was made in respect of the DOG in the Request for
Arbitration?

(k) If yes, did the Claimant identify the DOG as a consent instrument in the Request
for Arbitration?

a) Tf yes, did the Claimant properly articulate a claim under the DOG in the Request
for Arbitration?

(m) If no, can a claim under the DOG be admitted at a later stage under Article 46 of
the Convention?

(n) Did the Claimant properly and sufficiently articulate a claim under customary
international law in the Request for Arbitration?

(o) If no, can customary international law claims be admitted under Article 46 of the
Convention as additional claims after the Request for Arbitration is filed?

ARGUMENTS AND DECISION

The Tribunal will consider the above issues on a step-by-step basis.

A. TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION OVER CLAIMS ARISING OUT OF THE PPA,
IA AND DOG BROUGHT IN A SINGLE PROCEEDING

The fundamental disagreement between the Parties, simply put, is whether or not there
was any intention for claims arising out of separate contracts to be consolidated, or the
subject of concurrent arbitral proceedings, or whether claims under each agreement could
only be heard and determined by separate tribunals in separate arbitral proceedings.

 

Page 28 of 84

70.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

1. CLAIMANT’S POSITION

a. The negotiations of the contracts and the wording of the PPA, IA and DOG
demonstrate the Parties’ intention to consider the agreements as part of a
unitary project, and to have a single proceeding in case of dispute

The Claimant contends that when BHA negotiated the transaction with the Cambodian
state, the Parties both agreed to model the transaction documents on those previously used
in an IPP in Pakistan. This was the reason why the Parties negotiated two different
agreements, i.e. the PPA and the IA, but both formed part of a single transaction for the
implementation of a single project.

The Claimant supports its assertion through the witness statement of Mr. Garrett, who
testified that:

“[iJn the end, both sides agreed that we would be better off with the
two-document framework purely as a matter of convenience and
efficiency.”

According to the Claimant, the negotiations and drafting history support an inference that
the Parties saw all the agreements (including the DOG) as part of one, unified transaction.

The Claimant submits that as a result of this understanding that there was a single project

articulated through separate contracts, the project agreements were drafted and executed
as an interrelated set of obligations among CPC, KOC and EDC, and were meant to be
read, interpreted, and enforced together in a single proceeding against both KOC and
EDC.

The Claimant also argues that KOC and EDC expressly agreed and consented in the PPA

that that contract and the IA, together with the DOG, constituted a single “understanding”
among all three Parties, and should be interpreted and enforced together. For instance,
Section 21.2 of the PPA provides that both it and the IA:

“together represent the entire understanding between the Parties in
relation to the subject matter therein.”

A similar clause is included at Section 14.2 of the IA:

“[t]his Agreement and the [PPA] represents the entire understanding
between the parties in relation to the subject matter therein”.

 

Page 29 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The Claimant contends that the fact that each of the PPA and IA contains this provision
mirroring the other confirms that it was clearly the Parties’ intention to have a unity of
agreements.

The Claimant maintains that the three agreements were drafted as a suite of related
agreements in such a way that it would be impossible to interpret or enforce any of them
without reference to the others. In fact, so the Claimant argues, the documents must
inherently be considered as one understanding, in order for there to have been valid
consideration for their performance. Many obligations of KOC and EDC under each
agreement can only be determined by reference to the performance or non-performance of
obligations under the other agreements.

In support of this argument, the Claimant relies upon, among others, certain cross-default
provisions in each of the agreements, as follows:

(a) — Section 15.2(a) of the PPA, which refers to “default by the Royal Government of
Cambodia in the making of any payment in accordance with the terms of the
Government Guarantee of Payments [i.e. the DOG].”

(b) Schedule 1 of the PPA, which defines the Government Guarantee of Payments as
having “the meaning ascribed thereto in the [IA].”

(c) Section 15.2(d) of the PPA, which refers to “any Change-in-Law which makes
invalid, unenforceable or void any material undertaking of EDC or [KOC] under
this agreement or the [IA].”

(d) Section 15.2(g) of the PPA, which refers to an event of default by KOC having
“occurred under the [IA] giving rise to the Company’s right to terminate the
[IA].”

(e) Section 10.2(a) of the IA, which refers to circumstances in which “EDC commits
any material breach of the [PPA].”

(f) Section 10.2(b) of the IA, which refers to “default by the Royal Government of
[KOC] in making any payment due and payable in accordance with the
Government Guarantee of Payments [i.e. the DOG].”

(g) Section 1.1 of the DOG, which states that KOC “irrevocably and unconditionally
guarantees and promises to pay [CPC] any and every sum of money which is due

 

Page 30 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

and owing by EDC to [CPC] under or pursuant to the [PPA] that EDC has failed
to pay in accordance with the terms of the [PPA].”

77. The Claimant also cites other provisions of the PPA and the IA which contain intertwined
rights and obligations of EDC, MIME (KOC) and CPC under the PPA, the IA and the

DOG:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Section 3.6 of the PPA, which states that the Required Commercial Operations
Date was to be extended in the case of certain delays, including those resulting
from “any breach of contract or default by [EDC] under this Agreement [the
PPA] or by MIME under the [IA]”.

Section 14.2 of the PPA, which sets out representations and warranties given
jointly and severally in the PPA by both KOC and EDC.

Section 1.1(a) of the IA, which states all expressions used in the IA that were
defined in the PPA shall have their PPA meanings.

Section 2.2 of the IA, which ties the IA to the PPA, providing for automatic
termination of the IA, if the PPA should terminate on account of the Effective
Date not having occurred.

Section 5 of the IA, which links Claimant’s PPA obligations with the IA and
KOC’s IA obligations, providing that “subject to [Claimant] complying with [its
PPA obligations to apply for government consents]”, KOC agrees to perform its
main IA obligations.

78. The Claimant also argues that Common Law jurisdictions have looked to interrelated

“entire agreement” clauses as evidence that two agreements comprise a single, unitary

transaction. In support of this argument, the Claimant cites Inveresk plc v Tullis Russell
Papermakers Ltd [2009] UKSC 19 (“Inveresk”), where the UK Supreme Court found
that, under Scottish law, obligations arising out of two separate agreements depended

“upon one another and as each forming part of the same transaction.”

79. The Court added that:

“[t]he true significance of these agreements [wa]s to be found in
the respects in which they were each linked expressly with each
other.”

 

Page 31 of 84

80.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The Claimant also cites 684733 Alberta Ltd. v. Money's Mushrooms Ltd. [2003] B.C.J. No.

2475 (“Alberta”), where the Supreme Court of British Columbia decided that a share
purchase agreement and a convertible promissory note were to be read together as one
agreement since they were “executed contemporanecously with each other.”

With regard to the DOG, the Claimant refers to the second witness statement of Mr.
Garrett, which articulates a practical reason as to why the guarantee was not provided in
March 1996, i.e. at the same time that the PPA and the IA were signed. According to the
Claimant, the budget approval of the Cambodian National Assembly was required, but
had not yet been obtained. It was not therefore possible to sign the DOG on 20 March
1996. However, once signed, the DOG thus became integrated with the PPA and IA as an
element of the single understanding of the Parties.

b. The similar wording of the arbitration clauses of the IA and of the PPA, as
amended on 9 October 1998, demonstrates the Parties’ intention to hear claims
under a single proceeding

The Claimant contends that the similarity of Section 6 of the IA and Section 16(3) of the
PPA, as amended by PPA Amendment No. 1, is evidence that the Parties positively saw
the two agreements as providing a single dispute resolution mechanism.

Indeed, at the time of signature of the IA and the PPA, the latter contained no ICSID
clause. The introduction of an ICSID arbitration clause in PPA Amendment No. 1
supports an inference that the Parties thereby brought the IA and PPA into line in order to
harmonize their provisions, thereby allowing disputes to be heard in a single proceeding
(i.e. an ICSID arbitration).

The Claimant submits that the variations between the dispute resolution clause of the PPA,

as amended by PPA Amendment No. 1, and the dispute resolution clauses of the IA and
the DOG, concern no more than minor details, and do not contradict the Parties’ intention
to have potential claims heard in a single proceeding. It is the Claimant’s assertion that
these differences reflect poor drafting, as opposed to an intention to avoid consolidation,
or a single proceeding for a dispute involving claims under the PPA, the IA and/or the
DOG.

c. ICSID practice and Common Law jurisdictions support the consolidation of the
proceedings under the present circumstances

According to the Claimant, previous ICSID tribunals have interpreted parties’ consent to
jurisdiction in one agreement such as to cover related agreements, when such agreements

 

Page 32 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

collectively encompass one unified investment, and such analyses have found support
with commentators.

In Noble Energy Inc. and Machalapower Cia. Ltda. v The Republic of Ecuador and
Consejo Nacional de Electricidad, ICSID Case No. ARB/5/12, Decision on Jurisdiction (5
March 2008) (“Noble Energy”), the tribunal found that it had jurisdiction over disputes
arising out of multiple agreements where there was “an implied consent to have the
pending disputes arising from the same overall economic transaction resolved in one and
the same arbitration.” The tribunal relied upon the fact that (1) the disputes were closely
related and arose out of the same investment project, and the same overall economic
transaction, and (2) that the two main agreements were themselves closely linked. The
Claimant contends that these two elements are also present in the instant dispute.
Therefore, following the Noble Energy reasoning, the Tribunal should find it has
jurisdiction over claims under the PPA, the IA and the DOG, and that those claims can be
heard in a single proceeding.

In Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH, Klockner Belge SA  and_ Kléckner
Handelsmaatschappij BV v United Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des
Engrais, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Award (21 Oct. 1983) (“Kléckner’), the tribunal
decided that it had jurisdiction to hear disputes arising under two agreements in a single
proceeding (but not under a third). Although there was no cross-referred dispute
settlement clause, the separate agreements referred disputes arising under each to ICSID
arbitration, as is the case in the present dispute.

In Société Ouest Africaine des Bétons Industriels v Senegal, ICSID Case No. ARB/82/1,
Award (25 February 1988) (“SOABI’), the tribunal found that a construction contract
formed part of another contract, on the basis of an analysis of the relevant agreements as a
whole. In SOABI, so the Claimant observes, the construction contract lacked an ICSID
arbitration clause. In contrast, in the instant case, all the agreements in question provide
for ICSID jurisdiction. Therefore, according to the Claimant, in the instant case there is
better cause to conclude that the Parties intended to have claims arising out of separate
agreements heard in a single proceeding. In addition, in SOABI, the main agreement did
not make explicit reference to rights and obligations under the construction contract. The
Claimant asserts that in the present case, the PPA, the IA and the DOG are explicitly,
repeatedly and extensively interconnected. That makes the instant case a more compelling
one for a finding that the Parties’ intended to have claims arising out of these contracts
heard in the same arbitration.

 

Page 33 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

90.

In Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. v The Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4,
Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (24 May 1999) (“CSOB’), the
tribunal saw its task as finding the “common will of the parties.” This common will was
reflected in one of the agreements which specifically referred to “a court of competent
jurisdiction.” In the present case, all agreements contain ICSID clauses. On the basis of
the approach in CSOB (albeit differently to the facts of that case), the Claimant argued
that this leaves room for an inference that the Parties intended an ICSID arbitration to
deal with their claims under these agreements, by a single tribunal, in one proceeding.

The Claimant further contends that under English law there is a presumption that the
Parties intended their disputes to be heard in a single forum. The Claimant supports this
assertion by citing two English cases.

In Premium Nafta Products Ltd and others v Fili Shipping Co Ltd and others [2007]
UKHL 40 (“Premium Nafta’), the House of Lords held that there was a presumption that
an arbitration clause in a main contract also governed claims regarding the validity or
enforceability of an underlying contract “unless the language makes it clear that certain
questions were intended to be excluded from the arbitrator's jurisdiction.”

In UBS AG v HAS Nordbank AG, [2009] EWCA Civ 585 (“UBS AG”), the Court of
Appeal held that sensible business people would not have intended that a dispute of this
kind would have been within the scope of two inconsistent jurisdiction agreements. The
Court found that the agreements were all connected and part of one package.

In light of all these cases, as there is no express language that could contradict the
principle of consolidation, or concurrent proceedings, the Claimant contends that claims
under the PPA, the IA and the DOG should be heard in a single proceeding.

2. RESPONDENTS’ POSITION

a. The absence of express consolidation provisions in the PPA, the IA
and the DOG demonstrates the Parties’ intention to have separate
proceedings in case of dispute

Respondents submit that claims arising out of the PPA, the IA and the DOG cannot be
brought in one single proceeding since the Parties have not consented to a single tribunal
having jurisdiction over all of them. The Tribunal can only take jurisdiction over claims
arising out of more than one agreement if this is the Parties’ intention. In the present case,

 

Page 34 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

it was never the intention of the Parties to have claims arising under different instruments
heard in the same proceeding.

According to the Respondents, the arbitration clauses are plain on their face: each vests an

arbitral tribunal with jurisdiction over disputes arising solely under that agreement, and
does not cover disputes arising under either of the other agreements. The Respondents
contend that the dispute resolution clause in each agreement is limited, by clear and
unequivocal terms, to disputes arising out of each specific agreement, and the clauses do
not contemplate the resolution of disputes under separate agreements in a single
proceeding:

(a) Article 12 of the IA defines an arbitrable dispute as one:
“aris[ing] out of or in connection with this Agreement”.
(b) Article 7.2 of the DOG defines a dispute as:

“any dispute or difference aris[ing] out of or in connection with this
Agreement.”

(c) Article 16.1 of the PPA also defines a dispute as a:

“dispute or difference ... between EDC and [CPC] in connection with
or arising out of this Agreement.”

The Respondents accept the Claimant’s argument that the three agreements were
“carefully drafted’, but the Respondents emphasise that the Parties nevertheless took
great care not to include any provision for consolidation in any of them. This fact shows
conclusively that the Parties did not intend disputes under more than one of the
agreements to be heard together.

b. Significant differences in the arbitration clauses of the PPA, the IA and the DOG
demonstrate the Parties’ intention not to have a consolidated arbitration

The Respondents contend that the Parties’ intention not to have claims arising under the
PPA, the IA and the DOG heard together can be ascertained from the words of the
arbitration clauses of the various agreements, which are materially different. The
Respondents submit that such differences are obvious not only in the original arbitration
clause of the PPA signed on 20 March 1996, but also in the arbitration clause of the PPA
signed on 9 October 1998, when both are compared to the arbitration clauses of the IA
and the DOG.

 

Page 35 of 84

100.

101.

102.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(i) The negotiations of the agreements and the final wording of the arbitration
clauses demonstrate the Parties’ intention to exclude any consolidation in
case of dispute

The Respondents contend that the initial versions of the arbitration clauses of the PPA, IA,

and DOG were potentially incompatible, as the PPA only provided for ICC arbitration
whereas the IA and the DOG provided for ICSID arbitration on Cambodia’s ratification
of the Convention. Therefore, it is clear that from the outset, the Parties contemplated
different fora in case of disputes brought under the several agreements.

Indeed, Article 16.3 of the PPA, as executed on 20 March 1996, provided only for dispute

resolution in accordance with the ICC Rules, with no alternative forum. By contrast, the
TA, as executed on the same day as the PPA, provided for ICSID arbitration or, if ICSID
arbitration was not available, ICC arbitration. The same is true for the DOG, which was
signed on 27 March 1998, at which time the PPA still only referred to ICC arbitration.

The Respondents contend that the consent to ICSID arbitration was therefore never part of

the bargain, as there was no ICSID arbitration clause in the PPA in 1996; and although
there was a provision in the IA and the DOG for ICSID arbitration, it was subject to
Cambodia’s ratification of the Convention. Therefore it was never the Parties’ intention
that proceedings brought under the PPA, the IA and the DOG would be brought in a
single proceeding since the arbitration clauses were incompatible.

(ii) The wording of the PPA’s arbitration clause signed on 9 October 1998
demonstrates the Parties’ intention to exclude any consolidation in case of
dispute

The Respondents maintain that the Parties’ intention not to have claims under the PPA, the
TA and the DOG heard in a single proceeding can be deduced from the Parties’ intentional
omission of any consolidation provision, or the insertion of an identical dispute resolution
clause, when the PPA was amended on 9 October 1998.

PPA Amendment No. 1 amended the dispute-resolution clause to provide for ICSID
arbitration, with the default forum remaining ICC arbitration. Thus, although the Parties
had the opportunity to insert consolidation clauses in their agreement or, at the very least,
to include identical arbitration clauses at that stage, they did not do so. According to the
Respondents, this is further proof that, not only in March 1996, but also in October 1998,
the Parties neither intended that disputes under the three agreements be heard in a single
proceeding, nor consented in advance to consolidated proceedings.

 

Page 36 of 84

103.

104.

105.

106.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The Respondents submit that the dispute-resolution clause in the PPA (as amended) is
materially different from the dispute-resolution clauses contained in the IA and the DOG,
and that they are incompatible.

According to the Respondents, the significant variations in the various clauses relate to:

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)

The procedure for appointment of a single arbitrator;

The procedure for appointment of the presiding arbitrator;

The qualifications of the arbitrators;

The need to have certified translations of documents not in English;
That the arbitrators shall be bound by the decision of the “Expert”;
That the parties may publicise or disclose the contents of any award;
That the award shall be in dollars; and

An express waiver of all provisions of Cambodian law which may be inconsistent
with Article 16 of the PPA

c. ICSID practice does not support consolidation of arbitration proceedings when
there is no consent to consolidate and when the arbitration clauses are
materially different

The Respondents contend that neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Arbitration
Rules provide for proceedings under separate agreements, governed by separate
arbitration clauses, to be brought in a single proceeding. ICSID practice is to appoint
identical tribunals for separate but related claims, but only with the Parties’ consent. In
support of their assertion, the Respondents cite Schreuer:

“these cases remain exceptional since — in the absence of an
express provision in the relevant treaty — consolidation requires
the consent of the parties and this cannot always be easily
achieved.” (C Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary
(2nd ed., 2009) (ICSID Commentary) §26-131)

The Respondents maintain that the only potential basis upon which this Tribunal might
assume jurisdiction over the three distinct contracts under which CPC’s claims arise is
therefore the Parties’ intention itself, which to some extent can be derived from the

 

Page 37 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

107.

108.

109.

110.

12.

circumstances. However, the Respondents deny the Claimant’s interpretation of several
ICSID cases upon which they rely.

In Noble Energy (supra), while the tribunal concluded that it had jurisdiction over disputes
arising out of three different instruments, this decision was premised on the finding that
there was “an implied consent to have the pending disputes arising from the same overall
economic transaction resolved in one and the same arbitration.” Importantly, this
implied consent was based on several decisive factors, a number of which are not present
in the instant case.

In Kléckner (supra), the tribunal only assumed jurisdiction over a contract (Establishment
Agreement) and a second agreement (Protocol of Agreement), which both contained an
ICSID arbitration clause. However, the tribunal in that case did not assume jurisdiction
over another contract (Management Contract) which contained an ICC clause.

In SOABI (supra), four successive agreements were entered into by the parties. Only one
of these agreements (Establishment Agreement) contained a dispute-resolution clause,
referring to ICSID arbitration. The Claimant brought proceedings under two separate
agreements. The tribunal assumed jurisdiction under the two agreements as they were:

“of necessity incorporated into the [Establishment Agreement]”, and
“therefore ... the disputes relating to their execution or to the
rights and obligations arising thereunder fall within the scope of
[the arbitration clause] of the Establishment Agreement.”

However, the Respondents submit that the circumstances in that case materially differ
from those of the instant case. Unlike the present case, in SOABI:

(a) _ the respondent was a party to all the agreements, as was the claimant;
(b) _ the incorporated agreements did not contain any dispute-resolution clause; and

(c) the incorporating agreement (the Establishment Agreement) was deemed to
incorporate the other two agreements.

The Respondents contend that in the present case, not only are the PPA and the IA not
between the same parties, they also each impose precise and distinct obligations on EDC
(the PPA), MIME (the IA) and the MoEF (the DOG).

In CSOB (supra), the tribunal did not assume jurisdiction over other agreements pertaining
to the wider investment operation. In its second decision on jurisdiction, and referring to

 

Page 38 of 84

113.

114.

115.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

its earlier finding, the tribunal forcefully stated that even though the first decision held
that CSOB’s claims related to another loan facility could qualify as part of the investment,
this did:

“not mean, however, that the Tribunal thereby automatically acquires
jurisdiction with regard to each agreement concluded to implement
the wider investment operation. Other requirements have to be met
for such jurisdiction to be established.”

In Duke Energy (supra), a “legal stability agreement” between the claimant and Peru
contained an ICSID arbitration clause. The parties had entered into a series of other legal
stability agreements with Peru which did not contain ICSID arbitration clauses. The
tribunal made a finding regarding the qualification of the investment; however, it stated
that it would not entertain any claims arising out of those other contracts and transactions.
The tribunal added that:

“in the peculiar circumstances of this case (successive agreements for
the protection of the investment), the unity of the investment does
not necessarily imply the unity of the protection of the investment.”

The Respondents contend that this decision makes clear that, while the broader
arrangements made in relation to an investment may be taken into consideration in
finding a qualifying “investment”, or in determining a breach of a treaty, the jurisdiction
of an arbitral tribunal is limited to the particular agreement which contains the relevant
arbitration agreement.

In Holiday Inns v Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1, Decision on Jurisdiction (12 May

1974) (“Holiday Inns’), the tribunal agreed that questions arising out of loan contracts,
that had been concluded in the context of a main agreement containing an ICSID
arbitration clause and which themselves contained choice-of-court clauses, were within
the jurisdiction of the local courts - even if these questions “affect{ed] the indirect or
secondary aspects of the investment.” The tribunal thus did not “hear a dispute” under the
loan contracts; quite the opposite. It gave due deference to the jurisdiction of the local
courts over disputes arising out of the loan contracts, while at the same time fully
assuming its own jurisdiction over disputes based on a contract containing an arbitration
clause.

 

Page 39 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

d.The three agreements are not so interrelated that they cannot be heard
separately

The Respondents contend that while there are indeed cross-references to the PPA in the IA
and vice-versa, a tribunal having jurisdiction over the PPA need not have jurisdiction over
the IA to take the latter into account as a fact, to the extent necessary, and vice-versa. The
PPA and the IA are therefore capable of being enforced on their own. This is all the more
so with respect to the DOG, which can only be called upon once an award against EDC
has been made.

3. TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

On 16 September 2009, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered this arbitration as a
single proceeding as presented, notwithstanding that the Request for Arbitration
(according to the Claimant) embodied claims under each of the PPA, the IA and the DOG.

The Respondents’ principal objection is not to the determination of claims arising out of
the PPA, the IA and the DOG by this Tribunal, in ICSID arbitration. There is, for
example, no issue that each contract contains a valid ICSID arbitration clause; that three
separate Requests for Arbitration could have been filed by the Claimant (one for each
agreement); and that this Tribunal could have been constituted in each of the three
separate arbitral proceedings. Rather, the Respondents’ complaint is to the determination
of claims under each of these agreements at the same time, in a single proceeding.
According to the Respondents, the joining together of all claims in a single Request for
Arbitration is impermissible, and itself has the effect of depriving this Tribunal of
jurisdiction for all such claims.

It is clear that the decision of the Secretary-General to register a single arbitral proceeding
does not bind this Tribunal, which has to consider the jurisdictional arguments raised de
novo.

For the reasons set out below, in the circumstances of this case the Tribunal disagrees with
the Respondents’ analysis.

 

Page 40 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

a. Relevant principles governing consolidation of claims in ICSID
proceedings

@ Consent

The uncontroversial starting point is that the consolidation of claims in ICSID arbitration

(as with most other systems) depends upon the consent of the parties. Such consent may
be established before or after the dispute has arisen. Absent consent, the fundamental
principle of party autonomy dictates that claims under multiple contracts may not be
consolidated, however inconvenient and inefficient that result may be.

Whilst such consent usually takes the form of an express provision, whether in a contract
or Treaty; by way of incorporated arbitration rules; or in a submission agreement; it can
also be implied from the circumstances.

The various ICSID decisions that have been deployed by the Parties (as noted earlier) are
significant in this regard, since they emphasise the need to interpret the parties’ intentions
in light of all the circumstances of each case. In the absence of an express provision on
consolidation, the intentions of the parties remains the critical test in determining whether
or not claims arising out of different agreements are to be heard together.

For example, in SOABI (supra) the tribunal held that:

“the interpretation must take into account the consequences which
the parties must reasonably and legitimately be considered to have
envisaged as flowing from the undertakings. It is this principle of
interpretation, rather than one of priori strict, or, for that matter,
broad and liberal construction, that the Tribunal has chosen to
apply.”

In CSOB (supra), the tribunal found that its task was to determinate the “common will of
the parties” and held that, in doing so, “each case must be assessed by reference to its
specific facts”.

Similarly, in Noble Energy (supra) the tribunal’s conclusion that it had jurisdiction over
disputes arising out of multiple agreements was premised upon “an implied consent to
have the pending disputes arising from the same overall economic transaction resolved in
one and the same arbitration”, such implied consent having been deduced from a number
of factors related to the purpose and configuration of the agreements in question.

 

Page 41 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

127.

128.

129.

130.

(ii) The Precise Type of “Consolidation”

Establishing requisite consent entails, however, a further level of analysis, namely
identifying the precise mechanism by which it has been agreed that claims be coordinated.
Whilst it is clear that ICSID tribunals have accepted jurisdiction in a number of previous
cases, where a single proceeding has been commenced and registered, arising out of more
than one, albeit connected, agreement, such cases in fact span a number of different
situations, and it is important to distinguish between them.

In particular, parties may agree that disputes arising out of multiple contracts are all to be
brought within the scope of one particular arbitration agreement in one of the contracts.
Alternatively, separate arbitration clauses in separate agreements might be interpreted as,
in truth, one single arbitration agreement. Further still, claims under multiple contracts
might be merged into one arbitration proceeding, and determined by way of one award.
Alternatively, separate arbitration proceedings arising out of separate arbitration
agreements might be heard and determined concurrently (i.e. synchronised), whilst
maintaining a separate juridical nature. Whilst all of these variations might be described
as “consolidation”, each is obviously different in nature.

b. The Parties’ implied consent in this case

During the Hearing, the Tribunal pressed the Claimant to clarify the precise mechanism by
which the Parties had agreed that all claims could be heard in a single proceeding.

In this regard, the Tribunal suggested (by way of example — and without limitation) the
three following scenarii (T/day1/p156/4-22; p160/1-16):

(a) | Consent for the Claimant to activate one arbitration agreement under one of the
contracts, and to bring within its scope claims that arise under the two other
contracts;

(b) Each of the arbitration clauses in the PPA, the IA and the DOG, in truth,
constituting (as a matter of fact and law) a single arbitration agreement between
the Parties;

(c) Consent for proceedings that arise out of three distinct arbitration agreements to
be brought together before the same tribunal, through either consolidation or
concurrent proceedings.

 

Page 42 of 84

131.

132.

133.

134,

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

On day 2 of the Hearing, the Claimant clarified its position, arguing that scenario (b)
above was “in perfect harmony with [its] pleadings” (T/day2/p75/116-17), albeit if this
could not be established, the Claimant then also relied upon the other possible analyses.

Having carefully considered all the circumstances of this case, the Tribunal finds no basis

for scenario (b). This scenario seems far from the present situation, since the PPA, IA
and DOG arbitration clauses were concluded separately, at different times, between
different (albeit connected) parties, and each as a self-contained agreement, enforceable
in its own right. The three clauses are not identical and do not refer to each other. In the
Tribunal’s view, scenario (b) presents an a priori consolidation by unification of the
proceedings which can only happen in two cases. First, where each arbitration clause
expressly refers to the others as forming a single arbitration clause and providing for a
single arbitration. Second, where there is no such express reference, but an implied
consent can be inferred, for example because all arbitration clauses are identical, were
concluded in parallel, are dependent upon one another or otherwise interconnected, and
included in contracts which are themselves interrelated and arising out of a single project.
In the Tribunal’s view, the agreements in this case cannot comfortably be analysed in
either of these ways.

It follows that each of the three arbitration clauses constitutes a separate agreement, which

could be activated separately. Thus, there would be nothing in principle to prevent the
Claimant from commencing an arbitration, and pursuing claims, under only one of the
PPA, the IA or the DOG. Were the Claimant to seek instead to commence one “umbrella”
arbitration raising claims under all three agreements, it could not do so in the absence of
consent of the other Parties to the agreements. That consent would necessarily have to
extend to an acknowledgement that, notwithstanding any asserted incompatibilities in the
three discrete arbitration agreements, no objection predicated on such a basis was raised.
Such consent might be express, but there is none in this case. Alternatively, it might be
implied by reference to the Parties' conduct and/or by reference to their intentions as
reflected in the terms of the PPA, the IA and the DOG. (See paragraphs 135-138 below).

Equally, the Tribunal finds no basis for scenario (a) above. Each of the PPA, IA and DOG
contains its own valid arbitration clause, with a defined scope. There is nothing in the
arbitration clauses themselves, or in the wider circumstances of the Parties’ arrangement,
to suggest any consent that one arbitration clause take precedence over the other two. To
this end, as the Respondents have argued, the presence of separate arbitration clauses in
each contract in this case means that previous ICSID decisions in which one arbitration
clause has been extended to cover multiple contracts are of no assistance here. It may be

 

Page 43 of 84

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

noted, in any event, that the Claimant in its Request for Arbitration purported to activate
all the arbitration clauses in the relevant contracts, rather than relying upon just one.

But the fact that each arbitration clause constitutes a separate agreement does not answer
the question whether, if a party elects to activate more than one of the arbitration
agreements at or about the same time, that party is entitled to seek to co-ordinate or
combine the several proceedings before a single tribunal.

That brings the Tribunal to scenario (c). With regard to this scenario, where multiple
arbitration clauses have been separately activated, there are two options in coordinating
the various proceedings, each option bearing different consequences. First, the separate
proceedings flowing from each of the separate arbitration clauses might be merged into
one proceeding, and heard and determined by a single tribunal in a single award.
Secondly, the separate proceedings might be kept notionally separate, but with hearings
and determinations synchronised, whether before a single or multiple tribunals, and
usually by way of multiple awards (often termed: “concurrent proceedings” or “de facto
consolidation’).

In the Tribunal’s view, the first of the two options accurately reflects the intentions of the
Parties in this case.

The Tribunal has already set out the competing arguments at some length when
summarising the Parties’ respective positions. Having considered all of them very
carefully, and for the particular reasons elaborated below, the Tribunal concludes that the
Parties in this case undoubtedly intended that there be an option to coordinate multiple
proceedings. Specifically, where claims are brought by a party pursuant to more than one
arbitration clause at or about the same time, the Parties clearly intended that the party in
question should be entitled to combine the claims, in order that they be heard and
determined before a single tribunal. Equally, the Tribunal is confident that in structuring
their project contracts, the Parties never intended multiple, parallel proceedings arising
out of the same dispute, with all the burdens and risks that this would entail, where this
might practically be avoided.

It follows that the Claimant was entitled to commence proceedings under the PPA, IA and
DOG at the same time by way of a single Request for Arbitration, and to compel the
Respondents to appoint a single tribunal to hear and determine all such claims. The
Tribunal notes, in this regard, that even if (contrary to the analysis above) the
Respondents had been entitled to object to the constitution of the same tribunal for all

 

Page 44 of 84

140.

141.

142.

143.

144,

145.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

claims, no such objection was actually raised in a timely fashion in this case in any event
(see paras [ 162-4 ] below).

The Tribunal’s conclusion is based on the following factors:

() The three agreements all arise from a single investment for a single power
project

The agreements in this case all regulate aspects of a single project, and there exists a clear

connectivity and interdependence between them. Any dispute arising out of the project
would almost inevitably touch upon, and give rise to claims under, each agreement, and
the Tribunal finds that the Parties’ intention must have been to have such claims heard
together, wherever possible.

In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal has taken into account (inter alia) the drafting
history of the agreements. The Tribunal accepts Mr. Garrett’s testimony that the
negotiations of the project led the Parties to model the transaction documents on those
used in a successful IPP in Pakistan. It appears that the Parties structured the project
through three separate agreements in order to attract potential lenders and as a matter of
general efficiency. According to Mr. Garrett, consideration was given to combining the
PPA and the JA in one single document. This option was later abandoned, because it
would have resulted in an unreadable document which would have kept away any
potential investor. Contrary to the Respondents’ case, the fact that the project was
structured by way of three contracts rather than one, therefore, had nothing to do with any
motivated desire to have three separate arbitrations in the event of a dispute.

As noted earlier, the Respondents emphasised that the arbitration clause in each of the
PPA, the IA and the DOG was drafted with a limited scope, and that this indicates an
intention that claims under each contract be resolved separately.

The Tribunal disagrees with the Respondents’ interpretation of the scope of each clause. In

fact, each has a formulation which allows for a broad scope (e.g. “aris[ing] out of or in
connection with” (Art 12 of the IA and Art 7.2 of the DOG); “in connection with or
arising out of’ (Art 16.1 of the PPA). Be that as it may, the Respondents’ objection would
only be relevant in any event if scenario (a) above had been in question (i.e. the activation
of one arbitration agreement in one of the contracts, to cover claims under all of the
contracts).

Once the precise form of coordination is identified, this objection falls away. Unlike
scenario (a), the consolidation of claims (scenario (c)) entails the activation of each of the

 

Page 45 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

arbitration clauses (of whatever breadth), and the merger of the resultant arbitration
proceedings. Even if each separate arbitration clause had been narrowly framed, the
Tribunal does not consider that this negates the Parties’ intention to consolidate the
various proceedings themselves.

In addition, as the Claimant submits, both Section 21.2 and 14.2 of the PPA and IA
respectively provide that they, “together/,] represent the entire understanding between
the Parties in relation to the subject matter therein.” (emphasis added)

There is no doubt that by these provisions, the Parties’ intention was to emphasise the
unity of the investment under the separate agreements. The same intention dictates that, in
case of dispute, those agreements would also be considered together as part of an
indivisible project.

(ii) The three agreements contain cross-default provisions

The agreements’ cross-default provisions clearly demonstrate the Parties’ intention that
the claims arising out of the three agreements be heard together, wherever possible.

The Claimant emphasised at length the numerous cross-default provisions contained in the

PPA, IA and DOG. These cross-default provisions show an interdependence of the
Parties’ rights and obligations. The Tribunal concludes that it would be impracticable to
consider the rights and obligations of the Parties arising out of one agreement without
considering at least one of the two other agreements, and that this impracticality must
have been evident to the Parties at the time of contracting.

It is quite clear that the whole transaction could not have been implemented by way of one
of the three agreements alone, and thus it is not surprising that the Respondents presented
no evidence that the Parties ever had the intention to disconnect each agreement from the
others.

The Tribunal finds that the interdependence of the three agreements reflects the intention
of the Parties that there be an option for related claims arising out of the agreements to be
considered together.

(iii) The Parties’ effort to reach similar arbitration clauses through amendments

The Respondents’ case is that the differences in the arbitrations clauses of the PPA, IA and
DOG demonstrate that the Parties did not intend to have their claims heard together.

 

Page 46 of 84

153.

154.

155.

156.

157.

158.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The Tribunal notes that the initial PPA arbitration clause was clearly different from the IA
and DOG clauses. However, in a conscious effort to unify and conform them, the Parties
subsequently amended the PPA arbitration clause, with the obvious intention to have the
same or very similar dispute resolution provisions in each of the three agreements.

Whilst it is true that the three arbitration clauses prior to amendment were very different,
this deliberate attempt to conform them is, in the Tribunal’s view, very significant, and
sets this case apart from many others involving multiple contracts.

Following the amendment, the several arbitration clauses were substantially the same, with

the remaining differences being — in the Tribunal’s judgment — insignificant (and
certainly not such as to be incompatible in practice). Each of the three clauses provided
for ICSID arbitration after ratification of the ICISD Convention by KOC, and ICC
arbitration prior to ratification, or if ICSID arbitration was otherwise not possible. The
Tribunal accepts the Claimant’s contention that the minor variations that remained
between the clauses were likely the result of poor drafting, rather than an unconditional
desire of the Parties to have their claims heard by different tribunals in separate
proceedings in case of a dispute.

In conclusion, the Tribunal is satisfied that it could not have been the intention of the
Parties, as prudent and reasonable organisations, and on the facts of this case, that any
disputes arising out of this project should only be determined by different tribunals, with
all the difficulties and risks that this would inevitably entail. On the contrary, the Parties
took special steps to avoid this.

(iv) The use of a single Request to activate several arbitration clauses

The Respondents’ objections also raise a distinct procedural question, namely whether the

Claimant was entitled to activate the three arbitration clauses, and commence three
concurrent arbitrations with the same Tribunal, by filing a single Request. In the
Tribunal’s view, this is not a matter of jurisdiction subject to Article 25 of the Convention,
but rather a matter relating to the conduct of the procedure covered by Article 44 of
ICSID Convention.

The Tribunal notes and concurs with the following statement in the Noble Energy decision
(supra):

“Article 44 of the ICSID Convention provides that arbitration
proceedings are governed by the Convention, and, unless the
parties agree otherwise, by the ICSID Arbitration Rules. Whenever

 

Page 47 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

the ICSID Convention and Rules are silent on an issue ‘the
Tribunal shall decide the question’ in the exercise of its general
powers.”

The starting point of the Tribunal’s consideration of this issue must be the Convention
itself and the Arbitration Rules. There is nothing in either which expressly prohibits an
investor using a single Request to commence ICSID arbitration proceedings pursuant to
more than one arbitration agreement relating to the same project and involving a single
investment. Therefore, the Tribunal must exercise its power in light of its own judgment.

The filing of a single Request in such cases may well facilitate the consolidation of

proceedings before a single tribunal, and thereby achieve a fair, expeditious and cost-
efficient resolution of the dispute. Investments often are in the form of complex financial
structures which require the implementation of several agreements. It would be contrary
to the spirit of the Convention to require claimants in each case to file as many requests
for arbitration as they have claims arising under different agreements, particularly where
such claims are clearly connected as in the present case. Not only would this be onerous,
but it would also represent a considerable waste of time and costs, and could lead to
potential delaying tactics, and inconsistent determinations. More importantly such an
approach is not mandated by the Convention or by the Rules.

Clearly, if one Request is used to activate more than one arbitration agreement, this may or

may not actually achieve consolidation in any particular case, depending upon whether
the respondent agrees, or (as here) is found to have consented previously to a single
proceeding before a single tribunal.

In this case, as set out above, the Claimant is entitled to consolidation before a single
tribunal. The Tribunal notes in this regard that, as recorded in the Minutes of the hearing
held on 9 April 2010 in The Hague, “the Parties confirmed their agreement that the
Tribunal had been properly constituted and that they had no objection to any of its
members.” Whereas it is clear that the Respondents at The Hague meeting foreshadowed
the possibility of jurisdictional issues, they did not then state that the Tribunal was
wrongly constituted, and nor would there have been a basis to assert this.

Some six months after the Tribunal’s constitution, the Respondents suggested for the first
time that they objected to the Tribunal’s constitution to arbitrate all claims together.
Whilst this objection was not raised timeously, in light of the Tribunal’s findings as to the
Parties’ implied consent, it must fail in any event.

 

Page 48 of 84

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant acted properly when it filed its Request
which articulated claims under three separate agreements, i.e. the PPA, IA and DOG.

B. DOES THE TRIBUNAL HAVE JURISDICTION RATIONAE PERSONAE
OVER EDC?

1. Was EDC properly designated to the Centre as an agency of KOC within the

meaning of Article 25(1) of the Convention?

a. Claimant’s Position:
The Claimant’s position has varied on this issue.

First, in its Request, the Claimant maintained that EDC was apparently an agency of KOC,
but that, to its knowledge, KOC had never designated EDC to the Centre (Request §40).
As a response to a request for clarification made by ICSID, the Claimant stated that the
designation requirement was satisfied because the KOC and EDC had consented to
arbitration in the same clause and the communication of that consent had been made to
ICSID through the submission of the Request (Supplement to Request).

Secondly, in its Memorial on the Merits, the Claimant submitted that KOC had expressly
designated EDC as an “agency” for purposes of the Centre’s jurisdiction, and that such
designation was properly communicated to the Centre by CPC through the Request
(Memorial on the Merits §134).

Finally, in the Claimant’s last submission, it argues that EDC was properly designated as
an agency of KOC within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the Convention. The Claimant
contends that the designation requirement of Article 25(1) of the Convention does not
require formal communication of the designation to the Centre. As an alternative, the
Claimant says that if such communication is required by the Convention, it was properly
effectuated by the Claimant when it submitted its Request to the Centre. In addition, the
Claimant submits that the Respondents are estopped from arguing that EDC was not
properly designated within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the Convention.

(i) Article 25(1) of the Convention does not require notification of the designation

According to the Claimant, once an entity has been designated as an agency, such
designation does not require notification to the Centre. The Claimant argues that the term
“notify” and its related forms clearly mean something different from the term “designate”
and its related forms. In the case of “notify,” the action of communicating is the essence

 

Page 49 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

of the term. In the case of “designate,” the essence is in the selection, appointment or
setting apart itself; any communication of that act is secondary, and may be made to one
or more different persons depending on the context. In support of its argument, the
Claimant cites the definition of the terms “designate” and “notify” of the American

Heritage Dictionary and the Black’s Law Dictionary.

The Claimant contends that since the Convention uses both the terms “designate” and
“notify” in a number of instances with each concept having a distinct meaning from the
other, Article 25(1) was specifically drafted not to include an element of notification. In
support of its argument, the Claimant indentifies the Convention’s use of “notify”
referring to a formal communication made by a specified person to a specified person or
persons, which can be compared to the Convention’s use of “designate.” E.g.:

(a) “Notify”: Articles 28(3), 49, 66(1), 70, 71, 72 and 75;
(b) “Designate”: Articles 12, 13, 25(1), 52(3).

According to the Claimant, the use of the preposition “to” in the phrase “designated to the
Centre” does not require an act of communication to the Centre. The term “fo” in this
instance points to the purpose for which the designation is made, i.e. pointing to the
institution to which a person is designated. In this regard, the Claimant cites Mr. Aaron
Broches, ICSID’s first Secretary-General who chaired the Legal Committee on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes, and concludes that nothing in Mr. Broches’ summary
of the purposes of the designation requirement suggests any communication to the Centre.

The Claimant submits that the interpretation of Article 25(1) by ICSID tribunals supports
the view that formal communication of the designation to the Centre is not required.

According to the Claimant there is a consistent interpretation of Article 25(1) by the
Secretary-General such that the lack of direct notification to the Centre by a Contracting
State of its designation of an agency does not put a claim outside the jurisdiction of the
Centre.

The Claimant cites several cases where the Secretary-General registered a request for
arbitration, and relies upon two of them in particular, in which tribunals accepted
jurisdiction over a respondent agency where no prior notice of designation had been given
to the Centre by the Contracting State.

In Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company v Arab Republic of Egypt and the General
Authority for Investment and Free Zones, ICSID Case No. ARB/89/1, Decision on the

 

Page 50 of 84

176.

177.

178.

179.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Jurisdiction and the Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and on Recommendation of
Provisional Measures (6 June 1991) (“Manufacturers Hanover”) (unpublished but
submitted in this case as a legal authority), there was no indication that the Arab Republic
of Egypt, the Contracting State, had ever notified the Centre that it had designated GAIFZ
as its agency. The tribunal held that:

“no particular form [wa]s required for such designation and
approval. Whereas it may be assumed that a writing is needed,
such writing can be contained in an Investment Law as Law No.
43”.

In Kléckner (supra), whereas the Contracting State had not designated the relevant agency

or notified the Centre of that designation when the request was registered, the tribunal
made no mention of the requirement that the designation be made directly to the Centre,
but instead referred to “an ad hoc designation of [the agency] as a party to the
proceedings.”

In Scimitar Exploration Limited v. Bangladesh and Bangladesh Oil, Gas and Mineral
Corporation, ICSID Case No. ARB/92/2, Award (5 Apr. 1994) (“Scimitar Exploration”),
the Secretary-General registered a request for arbitration by an investor against both a
Contracting State and its agency as respondents, even though the Centre had apparently
never received any notice of designation of the agency by the Contracting State. Although
the tribunal dismissed the case based on the claimant’s lack of corporate authority to
bring the proceedings, it did not address the issue of designation. According to the
claimant, the case nevertheless stands as another example of the Secretary-General having
determined that not receiving direct notification of designation by a Contracting State did
not put the claim against the Contracting State’s agency “manifestly outside the
jurisdiction of the Centre.”

In Cable Television of Nevis Ltd. v The Federation of St. Christopher and Nevis, ICSID
Case No. ARB/95/2, Award, (16 December 1996) (“Cable Television of Nevis”), the
Secretary-General registered a request for arbitration lodged by investor claimants against
a constituent subdivision of a Contracting State where there was no indication that the
Contracting State had ever designated its constituent subdivision for the purposes of
jurisdiction under Article 25(1).

Finally, the Claimant contends that in the East Kalimantan case (supra), the tribunal
emphasised that the designation requirement concerned the intention of the Contracting
State to designate the relevant agency or constituent subdivision for the purposes of

 

Page 51 of 84

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Article 25, and not the formalities of communicating that intention to ICSID’s
administrative body:

“the form and channel of communication [of designation to the
Centre] do not matter, provided that the intention to designate is
clearly established.”

According to the Claimant, the tribunal in that case focused on evidence of the acts of the
Government of Indonesia, and whether those acts showed its intention to designate East
Kalimantan as being subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre. The instruments the East
Kalimantan tribunal examined included: (a) minutes of meetings, (b) an investment
agreement, and (c) a decision of a municipal court in Indonesia.

The Claimant then applies the East Kalimantan tribunal’s reasoning to the present case,
and draws the conclusion that no clearer evidence of KOC’s intention to designate EDC
for purposes of Article 25 can be imagined than KOC’s negotiation and signature of PPA
Amendment No. 1, in which it consented to ICSID arbitration alongside EDC, subject
only to entry into force of the Convention, and explicitly stated that it had designated
EDC to the Centre for the purposes of Article 25. The Claimant submits that the East
Kalimantan tribunal also suggested that where a Contracting State joins with its
constituent subdivision or agency in consenting to ICSID arbitration in the same
investment agreement, that fact alone is sufficient to find an “implied designation” by the
Contracting State.

(ii) KOC designated EDC as its agency

The Claimant submits that KOC designated EDC as an agency for purposes of Article
25(1) in PPA Amendment No. 1. In this agreement, KOC confirmed in writing that it had
designated EDC as its agency subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre.

The Claimant emphasises that MIME expressly undertook:

“to procure that the Kingdom of Cambodia . . . notifies the Centre
that it has designated ... EDC as... [an] agency of [KOC] which
is subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre for purposes of Article
25(1) of the Convention”. (PPA §16.3(b)(iii)(A) as amended by
Amendment No. I §82) (emphasis added)

According to the Claimant, it is clear from this undertaking that the designation had
already been made. The only promised future performance was to notify the Centre. The
only condition was that KOC implement the Convention, which it did in 2005.

 

Page 52 of 84

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.

190.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The Claimant’s argument is based on the use of the present perfect tense of the verb
“designate” in “has designated’, which, according to the Claimant, indicates that KOC
had already perfected the action expressed by the verb. Regardless of whether or not the
designation as an agency was later communicated to the Centre by KOC, its designation
of EDC as an agency in PPA Amendment No. | was self-effectuating and became an
irrevocable element of EDC’s consent. Such designation had significance in that CPC
could rely on it.

Further, the Claimant contends that because a state will generally only approve agencies’
consents under Article 25(3) if it considers them to be eligible, the designation
(confirmation of eligibility) might be inferred from the provision of consent. Therefore,
the approval of consent that is notified to the Centre may be interpreted as an ad hoc
designation of the constituent subdivision or agency.

(iii) As an alternative, CPC was entitled to communicate to the Centre the
designation of EDC as an agency of KOC

The Claimant submits that because neither Article 25(1) nor any provision of the
Convention indicates the specific wording, manner, form or timing in which designation
of an agency of a Contracting State must be made, the Claimant, even though the investor,
was entitled to communicate the designation to the Centre by filing its Request for
Arbitration.

In support of its alternative argument, the Claimant emphasises that the East Kalimantan
tribunal explicitly adopted this view:

“the designation requirement may in particular be deemed fulfilled
when a document that emanates from the State is filed with the
request for arbitration and shows the State’s intent to name a
specific entity as a constituent subdivision or agency for the
purposes of Article 25(1).”

Applying the analysis in the East Kalimantan decision to the facts of the present case, the
Claimant contends that the delivery of PPA Amendment No. | to the Centre with the
Request for Arbitration, assuming Amendment No. | manifests KOC’s intention to

designate EDC, fully satisfied any requirement that the designation be communicated to
the Centre.

According to the Claimant, the decision of the tribunal in East Kalimantan demonstrates
each of the propositions it advances, namely that the act of designation is separate and

 

Page 53 of 84

191.

192.

193.

194,

195.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

distinct from notifying the Centre of that act; that the Contracting State must manifest its
intention to designate in writing; but that the communication of that designation to the
Centre can be made by an adverse party in its Request for Arbitration.

(iv) KOC is estopped from arguing that EDC was not properly designated within
Article 25(1) of the Convention

The Claimant submits that the circumstances surrounding KOC’s and EDC’s unequivocal

consent to ICSID jurisdiction should estop the Respondents from now contending that the
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction based on the argument that EDC has not been
properly designated to the Centre.

The Claimant contends that, through the PPA’s arbitration clause, the Respondents
unequivocally promised that EDC’s designation would be notified to the Centre. On this
basis, the Claimant relied on the promises of the Respondents that any potential dispute
would be resolved through ICSID arbitration. Therefore, the doctrine of estoppel under
international law must prevent the Respondents from asserting now that the Tribunal
lacks jurisdiction over EDC.

According to the Claimant, on the basis of the promises of Respondents regarding dispute

resolution, CPC invested considerable money and time in the C-4 power plant project
with the expectation that any disputes with the Respondents would have the benefit of
ICSID arbitration. The Respondents made these promises deliberately and solemnly, and
intended that the Claimant rely on them. The Respondents should therefore be estopped
from objecting to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over EDC due to KOC’s failure to fulfil its
promise to notify the Centre of its designation.

The Claimant also argues that the present case differs from East Kalimantan in one
important respect: in that case, the tribunal found that the claimant had not proved the
necessary elements of estoppel and that, even if it had, estoppel could not overcome a
failure to meet the mandatory jurisdictional requirements under the Convention. The
Claimant contends that, in contrast to East Kalimantan, it has shown that the
Respondents’ promise to notify the Centre of EDC’s designation, and the reliance placed
upon this promise by the Claimant, satisfy the elements of estoppel.

b. Respondents’ Position

The Respondents contend that no designation of EDC has been made properly, within the
meaning of Article 25(1) of the Convention. In addition, the Respondents object to the
application of the doctrine of estoppel on two grounds. First, the elements required to

 

Page 54 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

apply this doctrine are not met in this case. Secondly, even if they were met, estoppels
cannot grant jurisdiction to an ICSID tribunal, where the requirements for such
jurisdiction have not objectively been satisfied, and where jurisdiction would not
otherwise exist. As long as KOC has not in fact designated EDC to the Centre, the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction over EDC.

(i) EDC was not designated to the Centre by KOC as required by Article 25(1) of
the Convention

196. The Respondents contend that the designation requirement in Article 25(1) of the
Convention requires some form of communication of the designation to the Centre by the
Contracting State, which was not accomplished in the present case.

(a) Article 25(1) of the Convention requires communication of the designation to the Centre

197. The Respondents submit that Article 25(1) of the Convention is plain on its face: it
requires that the entity be “designated to the Centre by that State” (Emphasis added). It
makes no distinction between the act of designating and the notification of that act to the
Centre. In other words, the act of “designation” has implicit in it a notification to the
Centre by the state, such that absent such notification, no “designation” would have taken
place.

198. The Respondents maintain that while some commentators accept that “designation by a
Contracting State can take any form that gives it general notoriety and comes to the
Centre’s attention”, such as the promulgation of legislation containing an express
designation, the key requirement remains that: “/t/here must be some communication by
the host State to the Centre.”

199. In this respect, the Respondents cite Professor Schreuer:

“an agreement of the Contracting State with the investor or a promise
to make the designation to the Centre will not suffice. There must
be some communication by the host State to the Centre.”
(Emphasis added.” (Schreuer supra at §25-252)

200. The Respondents also cite Ms. Lamm (who cites Mr. Amerasinghe):

“Arguably, a clear intention on the part of the Contracting State to
file a designation may be sufficient to satisfy the designation
requirement so long as that intention is somehow brought to the
Centre’s attention.” (emphasis added) ( C Lamm, “Jurisdiction of

 

Page 55 of 84

202.

203.

204.

205.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes”
(1991) 6 ICSID Rev-FILJ 462, p 469)

In support of their argument, the Respondents further refer to the interpretation of the
designation requirement by previous ICSID tribunals.

First, the Respondents contend that the Claimant’s reliance upon certain cases that it cites
is inapposite. No one challenged the categorisation of the respondent entities as
“constituent subdivisions or agencies’, or their designation to the Centre by the state, in
Scimitar Exploration or Kléckner. However, the fact that no such challenge was brought
in most cases obviously does not mean that no such challenge could have been brought.
Furthermore, according to the Respondents, these cases are noteworthy because, in all of
them, the entity in question had been designated to the Centre by the state, i.e. it was
either on the ICSID list of designated constituent subdivisions and agencies before a
request for arbitration naming it as respondent was registered, or, in the case of Socame in
Kléckner, it was designated by the respondent state to the Centre after proceedings had
already begun.

Secondly, the Respondents submit that the Tribunal should not rely on the unpublished
Manufacturers Hanover decision to decide that it may depart from the clear wording of
the Convention, which requires designation to the Centre to be made by the state. The
Respondents maintain that the only other case dealing with designation, which is publicly
available and can therefore be examined, explained, debated and relied upon by the
Parties and the Tribunal is Cable Television of Nevis. However, the Respondents argue,
this case defeats the Claimant’s proposition.

In Cable Television of Nevis (supra), the tribunal held that in the absence of the NIA’s
designation to the Centre, the tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear a claim against it. The
tribunal added that it could not simply ignore the Federation’s failure to designate the
NIA, even though its decision effectively invalidated the arbitration clause in the
underlying agreement. The Respondents emphasise that in this case, there was no doubt
that the NIA was a constituent subdivision of the Federation as this was expressly
provided for in the constitution of St Kitts and Nevis, nevertheless the tribunal found the
lack of designation fatal.

Finally, the Respondents presented some observations on the East Kalimantan case. In this
case, no formal designation had been made and it was undisputed that the Province of
East Kalimantan was a constituent subdivision of Indonesia. The Respondents contend
that in considering whether or not a designation had been made, the East Kalimantan

 

Page 56 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

tribunal misinterpreted Professor Schreuer’s words. According to the Respondents, it is
clear that Professor Schreuer is not of the view that a clear intention to designate coupled
with some form of communication is enough to satisfy the requirements of Article 25(1)
of the Convention. In any event, the East Kalimantan tribunal did not decide this point, as
it found that there was no intention to designate.

(b) KOC never designated EDC to the Centre and the Claimant could not do so by filing its
Request

206. Article 25(1) of the Convention clearly provides that there must be a designation (1) “to
the Centre” and (2) “by that State”. The Respondents contend that even assuming that
designation under Article 25(1) of the Convention could be effected in two steps and by
two different parties (which it denies), KOC has never designated EDC, whether in the
PPA or otherwise, so that the Claimant had no instrument of designation to bring to the
Centre’s attention.

207. The Respondents submit that the wording of the PPA does not contain KOC’s designation
of EDC as an agency. In any event, the alleged designation was never brought to the
attention of the Centre by KOC. The Respondents emphasise that even the Claimant itself
admits in its Request that “designation could not be given at the time the parties gave
their consent”, because the ICSID arbitration clause would only enter into effect upon
ratification of the Convention by KOC (which had not at that stage yet occurred).

208. The Respondents maintain that it is obvious from the plain language used in the relevant
provision in PPA Amendment No | that the Parties intended such designation could only
be made at a later date. Such designation could indeed only be made if and when KOC
had implemented the Convention, which implementation did not occur until 19 January
2005, by which time the PPA had, on the Claimant’s own case, already been terminated.

209. According to the Respondents, in the absence of a clear intention on behalf of KOC to
designate EDC for the purposes of the Convention in the PPA, the communication of the
PPA to the Centre by the Claimant through its Request is not, even on the interpretation
most favourable to the investor, sufficient to fulfill the designation requirement in Article
25(1) of the Convention.

(ii) Claimant’s estoppel argument is not applicable to the case

210. The Respondents contend that the Claimant’s estoppel argument does not fulfil the three
fundamental conditions necessary for this doctrine to apply. First, there must be a clear
and unequivocal statement. Secondly, there must be a reliance on that statement by one

 

Page 57 of 84

212.

213.

214.

215.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

party. And thirdly, there must be a detriment to the party invoking the estoppel or an
advantage to the party who made the statement. The Respondents submit that none of
these conditions is met in the instant case.

According to the Respondents, there is no suggestion of any clear and unequivocal
statement in the PPA of consent to ICSID jurisdiction. First, the Respondents emphasise
that there was no ICSID jurisdiction clause in the PPA as signed in March 1996, and that
it was only in 1998, with PPA Amendment No. 1, that an ICSID jurisdiction clause was
introduced in the PPA. Secondly, the ICSID jurisdiction clause was subject to a number
of pre-conditions, one of which was ratification of the Convention by KOC, which only
happened some seven years later, in January 2005. Therefore, when entering into PPA
Amendment No. 1, it was clear that ICSID jurisdiction could not be invoked at the time
and that the existing ICC jurisdiction clause would govern any disputes between the
Parties.

The Respondents contend that because the possibility of having an ICSID arbitration
clause was purely hypothetical and was at this time ineffective, the Claimant could not
have relied on any statement by KOC or EDC as to ICSID jurisdiction. Indeed, the
Claimant was perfectly content to continue investing in the project as from 1998 with no
certainty that KOC would ever ratify the Convention, and thus no certainty as to whether
ICSID jurisdiction would ever be available.

Finally, the Respondents emphasise that the Claimant was not able, and has not even
attempted, to show any relevant detriment to the Claimant, or relevant advantage to KOC
or EDC.

In any event, the Respondents rely on the East Kalimantan case to argue that even if there

was an estoppel, such an estoppel could not operate to grant an ICSID tribunal
jurisdiction where the requirements for such jurisdiction were not objectively met (i.e.
where jurisdiction would not otherwise exist). The Respondents also note that the East
Kalimantan tribunal found that the existence of an alternative dispute resolution
mechanism in the underlying contract, which is the situation in the present case, was fatal
to any argument that the claimant had suffered detriment in reliance on the respondents’
alleged conduct.

c. Tribunal’s Decision

This is a crucial issue because unless the designation provision contained in Article 25 of
the Convention has been complied with, the claim against EDC must fail.

 

Page 58 of 84

216.

217.

218.

219.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The Tribunal must deal with two separate issues. The Tribunal will first decide whether
EDC was properly designated as an agency of KOC within the meaning of Article 25(1)
of the Convention. If the answer is negative, the Tribunal will then consider if an estoppel
argument prevents the Respondents from arguing that such designation was not properly
made.

(i) EDC was not properly designated as an agency of KOC so as to comply with
Article 25(1) of the Convention

The first issue that the Tribunal needs to consider is whether designation in conformity
with Article 25(1) of the Convention requires actual communication of the designation to
the Centre. The second issue is, if designation requires communication, what are the
forms and channels that such communication could take? Finally, a correlative question is
who can communicate the designation to the Centre for the purposes of Article 25(1) of
the Convention?

(a) The need for communication

On the issue of whether a designation pursuant to Article 25(1) requires some sort of
communication, the Claimant relies upon observations by Aaron Broches, who chaired
the Legal Committee on the Settlement of Investment Disputes which ultimately
produced the phrase “designated to the Centre by that state”. Broches stated:

“The limited purpose of the requirement of designation is to avoid
doubt whether an entity is a constituent subdivision or agency and
thus qualified to be a party to a dispute before the Centre. Failure
of a formal designation should therefore not itself defeat
jurisdiction if the entity concerned is proved or conceded to be a
constituent, subdivision or agency of a contracting state.” (A.
Broches, “Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States of 1965, Explanatory
Notes and Survey of its Application” 18 YCA 627, 642 (1993))

However, more recently, Professor Schreuer has considered the issue of designation and
has stated that:

“[t]here must be some communication by the host state to the
Centre.” (C Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2nd
ed., 2009) (ICSID Commentary) §25-252)

 

Page 59 of 84

220.

221.

222.

223.

224.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The issue whether Broches was correct in his view that the lack of formal designation does
not defeat jurisdiction was recently considered by a strong tribunal in the East
Kalimantan case, which stated as follows:

“[t]he Tribunal considers that the lack of a valid designation is a
bar to its jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention. While holding
so, the Tribunal is mindful of Aaron Broches’ view that failure of a
formal designation should ... not by itself defeat jurisdiction if the
entity concerned is proved or conceded to be a constituent
subdivision or agency of a contracting state’. With Christoph
Schreuer, the Tribunal considers, however, that Broches’ view
‘goes too far’ and that designation cannot be dispensed with
altogether. Accepting jurisdiction in the absence of designation by
the state would not be in line with the ICSID Convention, which
expressly constrained the possibility for constituent subdivisions to
submit to ICSID arbitration within specified limits.”(Schreuer
supra at §186-187)

 

The present Tribunal agrees with the East Kalimantan decision and Professor Schreuer’s
position that Mr. Broches’ view “goes too far’ and that “there must be some form of
communication”.

In order properly to interpret Article 25(1) of the Convention, the Tribunal must of course
be guided by the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969 (“Vienna
Convention’), as a reflection of customary international law. Article 31(1) of the Vienna
Convention provides that:

“[a] treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with
the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

This is a very familiar provision, that needs little elaboration here. The starting point is
obviously the text of the treaty itself, and, in the words of Sir Ian Sinclair:

“[t]he true meaning of a text has to be arrived at by taking into
account all the consequences which normally and reasonably flow
from the text.” (Ian Sinclair, The Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties 121 (2 ed. 1984))

The text of Article 25(1) of the Convention is clear. It imposes the following requirements
as jurisdictional thresholds for constituent subdivisions or agencies of a Contracting State:
(1) “designation”, (2) “to the Centre”:

 

Page 60 of 84

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

“Chapter II: Jurisdiction of the Centre
Article 25

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment between a Contracting State
(or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, ...”

If “designation” alone, without any communication, were sufficient for these purposes, the
words “to the Centre” would be otiose. Indeed, as the Respondents submitted,
communication is inherent in the very notion of “designation” as used in this provision.

Beyond the text itself, the Tribunal finds further support for this proposition in the
Convention’s object and purpose. As elaborated in the Parties’ submissions, the
Convention is intended to promote foreign investment within a secure framework. Article
25 plays a critical role in delimiting the scope of the Convention regime. In this context,
the designation requirement in Article 25(1) itself serves at least two specific purposes.

First, the designation requirement provides both clarity and a guarantee of protection to
investors (or at least some certainty in this regard) as to which entities within (and in
addition to) a given Contracting State may be subject to the Convention regime. This
information may, for example, be critical in an investor’s choice of contractual
counterparty. For such clarity and certainty to be achieved, a structured and standardised
system of notification is obviously necessary, which in Article 25(1) consists of
communication to the Centre.

Secondly, the designation requirement also serves a “gate-keeping” function for
Contracting States. As Schreuer states, it embodies the:

“desire on the part of the State to preserve control over semi-
autonomous entities in their dealings with foreign investors”
(C.Schreuer, “Commentary on the ICSID Convention” (1996) 11
ICSID Rev-FILJ 318, §152).

To this end, the designation requirement is not for the sole benefit of investors. Broches
himself recognised in this specific context that:

“while in some instances the Contracting State’s approval may not
be required, it retains the right of designation in all cases.” (A
Broches, “Awards Rendered Pursuant to the ICSID Convention:

 

Page 61 of 84

230.

232.

233.

234,

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Binding Force, Finality, Recognition, Enforcement, Execution”
(1987) 2 ICSID Rev-FILJ 287, p.298).

Contracting States have an obvious interest in such “gate-keeping”, given (for example)
that any award rendered against a constituent subdivision or agency could, arguably, be
binding on the State itself (e.g. per Article 54(1) of the Convention). The State might also
— at least arguably - have to “abide by and comply with the terms of the award” in
accordance with Article 53(1) of the Convention, even if it were not a party to the arbitral
proceedings. According to Broches:

“Tf a constituent subdivision or an agency of a Contracting State
meets the requirements of the Convention as regards designation
and approval and has consented to submit or has submitted a
dispute with a national of another Contracting State to arbitration
under the Convention, the former Contracting State is responsible
for compliance with a resulting award, whether or not the
subdivision or agency is acting for or on behalf of that Contracting
State” (A Broches, “Awards Rendered Pursuant to the ICSID
Convention: Binding Force, Finality, Recognition, Enforcement,
Execution” (1987) 2 ICSID Rev-FILJ 287, p.298)

According to Schreuer, this responsibility would:

“arise from [the Contracting State’s] role as designating and
approving authority under Art. 25(1) and (3), from the obligation
of Art.54 to recognize and enforce awards, and generally from the
principle of good faith.” (Schreuer supra at §53-15).

Just as with the first object and purpose identified above, for this second purpose to be
achieved, a structured and standardised system of notification is also necessary. Again, in
Article 25(1) this consists of communication to the Centre. If uncommunicated approvals
were sufficient, Contracting States would be vulnerable to arguments from investors that
designations had occurred when this may be denied.

The clarity of the text of Article 25(1), in the Tribunal’s view, is such that no recourse to
supplementary means of interpretation (e.g. per Article 32 of the Vienna Convention) is
necessary. But even if it was, the materials that have been put before the Tribunal in this
case support the same conclusion.

In particular, reference may be made (for the sake of completeness only) to the
Convention’s drafting history. “Political subdivisions and instrumentalities” (as they
were initially called) were added to the Preliminary Draft of the Convention during the

 

Page 62 of 84

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

original Regional Consultative Meetings as a recognition that states may well act through
other entities (e.g. Draft provision on extension of the jurisdiction of the Center to
disputes involving political subdivisions or instrumentalities of states (COM/AF/7),
circulated during the Addis Adaba consultations (JCSID, History of the ICSID Convention:
Documents Concerning the Origin and Formulation of the Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (1968), Vol II,
p.288). This first draft of the Convention included a requirement that any such
subdivision or instrumentality be approved by the Contracting State in question. When
the Working Group discussed this extension of the Centre’s jurisdiction, it was
considered that this approval requirement was not itself sufficient, and it was therefore
proposed that:

“each State party to the Convention could deposit a list indicating
the bodies regarded by it as ‘political subdivisions’ for the
purposes of this Convention.” (Proposal of the representative for
the UK at the Legal Committee Proceedings, 25 Nov 1964 — which
was later clarified as applying to both constituent subdivisions and
agencies).

This proposal was finally approved by the Legal Committee, which agreed that, for the
Centre’s jurisdiction to extend beyond the Contracting State itself, to a given constituent
subdivision or agency, the entity in question had to have been designated by the
Contracting State to the Centre (Legal Committee Proceedings, 9 Dec 1964).

It is therefore clear that the requirement of “designation” was intended to be distinct from,
and additional to, mere uncommunicated “approval” by a Contracting State.

(b) The mode of communication

Now turning to the question whether a communication of the designation can be made
through a channel other than the Centre, the Tribunal is again guided by the text of
Article 25(1) of the Convention, in its context and in light of the Convention’s object and
purposes.

The clear language of Article 25(1) requires that the designation be “to the Centre”. As a
matter of simple language, this naturally excludes designation without communication to
the Centre. If this were not so, different language would obviously have been used.

As noted above, the requirement of a communicated designation serves the needs of both
investors and Contracting States. In each case, the system is regulated and standardised

 

Page 63 of 84

240.

242.

243.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

by the Centre acting as (in effect) the depository of information in this regard. The Centre
is the commonly accepted channel of communication between Contracting States and
investors. As a matter of convenience, and with the objective of communicating the
designation to all potential investors, as well as clarifying each Contracting State’s
potential exposure, it is logical that Article 25(1) requires designation of an agency or
subdivision to be brought to the Centre’s attention.

This is not to say, however, that a formal notification to the Centre is the only means by
which a designation might be brought to the Centre’s attention. So long as the designation
of an entity as an agency or subdivision of a Contracting State is given public notoriety by
the Contracting State such as to come to the Centre’s attention, the use of other channels
of communication can attain the objective of Article 25(1) of the Convention and thus
comply with its designation requirement.

The Tribunal’s interpretation is shared by Professor Schreuer who wrote:

“Tt has been argued that where there is a clear intention to
designate, it does not matter how and through whom the
communication reaches the Centre. Broches has said that failure of
a formal designation should not defeat jurisdiction if the entity
concerned is proved or conceded to be a constituent subdivision or
agency of a Contracting State. It seems that this goes too far.
Designation cannot be dispensed with all together. But it is
submitted that designation by a Contracting State can take any
form that gives it general notoriety and comes to the Centre’s
attention. Legislation by the Contracting State that clearly includes
a designation in the sense of Article 25 should suffice. This would
also apply to a designation in a Bilateral Investment Treaty.
Despite all this, it is advisable that the Contracting State sends a
clear and separate notification of the designation to the Centre in
order to avoid any misunderstandings and jurisdictional
difficulties.” (Schreuer supra at §25-252)

The key requirement, therefore, is that the designation is so communicated by the
Contracting State that it comes to the Centre’s attention.

In the East Kalimantan case, the tribunal appears to misquote Professor Schreuer’s view.
This led the tribunal to conclude mistakenly that:

“the form and channel of communication do not matter provided
that the intention to designation is clearly established.”

 

Page 64 of 84

244,

245.

246.

247.

248.

249.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

It is clear that in the passage cited above Professor Schreuer simply records the view of
some commentators that “it does not matter how and through whom the communication
reaches the Centre.” However, it is not Professor Schreuer’s position that anybody
through any type of channel or form can communicate the designation of an agency of a
Contracting State. Quite the contrary, as the Tribunal concludes in the present case,
Professor Schreuer favours a serious threshold in that the form of designation must give
“general notoriety” to the designation, such as to come to the Centre’s attention.

Schreuer’s position was endorsed in the Manufacturers Hanover case where it was held by

an ICSID tribunal that “no particular form is required for such designation” besides the
exchange of a writing. However, in that case, the tribunal limited the channels of
communication to those by which designation would achieve public notoriety. The
tribunal held that since communication took place by the publication of the designation in
an investment law (Law No. 43), it achieved public notoriety and complied with Article
25(1) of the Convention in this regard. Whether or not that case was correctly decided,
the fact remains that the circumstances of the present case are far removed from it.
Publication by a Contracting State in national legislation is quite a different act to the
insertion of a reference to a designation in a private contract. The former reflects an
intention to notify the world. The latter is a private act, without any public notoriety. In
circumstances where the Contracting State has taken no step to bring the private contract
to the attention of the Centre, the Tribunal considers that the requirements of Article 25(1)
have not been met.

Therefore, the Tribunal finds that in order for there to be a “designation” of an agency or
subdivision of a Contracting State under the Convention, there has to be a written
designation which is communicated to the Centre. It may be possible for this to be done
other than in a direct communication from the Contracting State to the Centre, such as in
a Treaty or Legislation that would inevitably have public notoriety. But in most cases, it
would be by direct communication and thus cannot be complied with by the investor itself
providing a document to the Centre which contains, or is said to contain, a designation.

(c) Communication by whom?

There is then the question as to who is competent to communicate a designation of an
agency or subdivision to the Centre.

Once again the language of Article 25(1) is clear. It provides that the designation to the
Centre must be “by that State”. This is unambiguous, and susceptible of little further
elaboration.

 

Page 65 of 84

250.

252.

253.

254.

255.

256.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

If needed, the analysis above as to the functions of this provision explains why it is only
the Contracting State that may communicate the designation. In particular, for Article
25(1) to serve a “gate-keeping” function, whereby each Contracting State has some form
of control with regard to the scope of the Convention, it is obviously essential that
communication be the sole preserve of the State itself — and not a function which
investors can discharge.

Therefore, in the Tribunal’s view, communication of a designation to the Centre by
anyone else than the Contracting State does not comply with Article 25(1) of the
Convention.

In the present case, the Claimant contends that communication of the designation of EDC
as an agency or subdivision of KOC was properly completed when it filed its Request.

However, the Tribunal agrees with Professor Schreuer’s view that:

“designation in an agreement with the investor is not enough. It is
clear that the entity concerned cannot designate itself. But even an
agreement of the contracting state with the investor or a promise to
make the designation to the Centre will not suffice.” (supra)

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the alleged designation of EDC as an agency or
subdivision of KOC by the Claimant through its Request does not comply with the
requirements of Article 25(1) of the Convention.”

Even if the Tribunal had concluded that the communication of the designation of EDC as
an agency of KOC could be effected by the Claimant through its Request, the Claimant
still faces the additional problem that the wording associated with designation in the
amended agreements remains, at best, ambiguous. The relevant part of the clause states:

“If and when the Kingdom of Cambodia has implemented the
Convention ...

(3) MIME agrees to procure that the Kingdom of Cambodia:

(A) notifies the centre that it has designated each of MIME and EDC
as a sub-division or agency of the Kingdom of Cambodia which is
subject to the jurisdiction of the Centre for the purpose of Article
25(1) of the Convention”

The Tribunal finds that until KOC implemented the Convention, there could be no
question of any designation having been made. MIME’s agreement upon implementation

 

Page 66 of 84

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

was to procure that KOC would thereafter designate EDC as its agency or subdivision.
The language looks to the future and the designation of EDC was an action that KOC
could only have implemented once the Convention was ratified. However KOC
admittedly did nothing after ratification of the Convention.

Accordingly, the Claimant’s argument that the designation was complete at the time when

MIME agreed to procure designation upon implementation is not accepted. The Tribunal
fails to see how it can be said that designation was completed at the time of the
amendment of the agreements, namely on 9 October 1998. The linguistic arguments of
the Claimant (“has designated”) do not appear availing to the Tribunal in the light of all
of the surrounding facts. (As the Respondents stated, the formulation “has designated”
need not refer to a completed event, just as: “tell me when you have arrived’). KOC could
not have designated EDC prior to January 2005. It did nothing thereafter.

Therefore, even if the Claimant had persuaded the Tribunal that designation was properly

communicated to the Centre, the Tribunal is not convinced that the wording of the
arbitration provisions that were so communicated demonstrated KOC’s unequivocal
designation of EDC as its agency.

In conclusion on this point, it is clear to the Tribunal that not only does designation require
a public communication by the State, but that such designation must also represent an
unequivocal intention of the State to consider the entity as its agency or subdivision.

(ii) The Respondents are not estopped from arguing that EDC was not properly
designated within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the Convention

The Claimant has a further argument in the event that the Tribunal rules that designation
as required by Article 25(1) has not taken place. The Claimant contends that the
Respondents are estopped from denying that KOC has designated EDC.

Both Parties accepted that an estoppel could apply if the necessary elements were met.
Both Parties agreed on Sir Derek Bowett’s statement of the principles involved (D.W.
Bowett, Estoppel before International Tribunals and Its Relation to Acquiescence, 33 Brit.
Y.B. Int’L L. 176, 183-184); namely that there has to be :

(a) aclear and unequivocal statement or conduct;

(b) _ reliance on that statement or conduct by one party; and

 

Page 67 of 84

262.

263.

264.

265.

266.

267.

268.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(c) detriment to the party invoking the estoppel or an advantage to the party who
made the statement.

With regard to the first requirement, the Claimant relies upon the PPA arbitration clause
(as amended in PPA Amendment No.1). It contends that this clause contains an
unequivocal promise that: (1) EDC was an agency of KOC, and that (2) EDC’s
designation would be notified to the Centre.

This alleged promise can only stem from the amendments introduced in 1998 since at the

time the Parties entered into the initial transaction, i.e. 20 March 1996, the Parties were
all content to rely on the original ICC arbitration clause. It is plain that when the original
documents were signed, there was no promise relating to either (1) or (2) above. Further,
the alleged promise contained in the 1998 version of the PPA was conditional upon
ratification of the Convention by KOC which did not occur until January 2005.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds it hard to see how in this case an unequivocal statement or

conduct can be found. A statement producing an effect only upon the occurrence of a
potential future event unquestionably prevents this statement from being qualified as
“unequivocal”. Therefore, the Tribunal considers that the Claimant fails in establishing
the first leg of its estoppel argument.

With regard to the reliance requirement, it appears that Claimant faces an even more
difficult burden. In order to satisfy this requirement, the Claimant must have assumed that
KOC would definitely ratify the Convention or that any claims it had might materialise
after ratification. However, the Parties were content to rely on the ICC clause either pro
tempore or forever if no ratification took place and thus it is difficult to see how the
Claimant relied upon this alleged statement.

With regard to the detriment requirement, the Tribunal finds that Claimant produced no
evidence of detriment. Whatever was the situation, the Claimant always had recourse to
arbitration under ICC Rules in the absence of ratification of the Convention by KOC, and
therefore it is hard to see what detriment could have been suffered.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that in relation to designation by estoppel the
Claimant fails to make out a case.

Had the Tribunal been satisfied that designation had taken place or that the Respondents
were estopped from denying such, the Tribunal would have had to consider whether an
estoppel ran in relation to the statement in the arbitration clause that EDC was a
subdivision or agency of KOC. The Tribunal can see more merit in this point, because it

 

Page 68 of 84

269.

270.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

was only when the defence was filed that KOC denied that EDC was an agency or
subdivision of KOC. This led to a report from Professor Reisman as to what is required in
international law for an organisation to be an agency or subdivision of a State. All this
was very interesting indeed and the Tribunal does not think that the estoppel would
necessarily have failed merely because the estoppel relating to designation itself failed.
There could have been two estoppel arguments on the facts of the case. However, again
as interesting as it would have been to determine, it is of no help to the Claimant, because
it fails at the designation hurdle and the issue of whether EDC was or was not an agency
or subdivision thus becomes unnecessary to determine.

In conclusion, the Tribunal comes back inevitably to the language used in Article 25(1) of
the Convention. The Tribunal acknowledges all the interesting points made by the
Claimant, but cannot conclude that there has, in this case, been a sufficient designation of
EDC communicated to the Centre so as to comply with Article 25(1) of the Convention.
By way of summary, the Tribunal decides that:

(a) designation of an entity as an agency or subdivision of a Contracting State must
be communicated to the Centre by that State;

(b) communication of a designation within Article 25(1) of the Convention must be
in a written form and can be made through channels other than direct and formal
communication to the Centre, so long as the communication by the Contracting
State achieves public notoriety such as to come to the Centre’s attention;

(c) public notoriety of a designation cannot be achieved through the Claimant’s
communication to the Centre of a private investment contract annexed to the
Request for Arbitration;

(d) in any event, the text of the arbitration agreements in this case was not
sufficiently clear as to constitute an unequivocal designation of EDC by KOC as
its agency; and

(e) | KOC is not estopped from arguing that EDC was not properly designated.

This means that claims against EDC cannot proceed in this ICSID arbitration. The
Tribunal notes, however, that recourse against EDC may well still be available by way of
ICC arbitration, and that the Parties specifically maintained this route in case ICSID
arbitration was not possible.

 

Page 69 of 84

272.

273.

274.

275.

276.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

2. Does EDC qualify as an agency of KOC within the meaning of Article 25(1) of

the Convention?

The Respondents have raised the issue as to whether or not EDC is, in fact, an agency or
subdivision of KOC. As the Tribunal has found that no designation pursuant to Article
25(1) of the Convention has taken place, there is now no need to decide this issue.

C. DOES THE TRIBUNAL HAVE JURISDICTION TO DECIDE CLAIMS
ARISING OUT OF THE DOG?

1. Claimant’s Position

The Claimant contends that its claims against KOC under the DOG are within the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction and competence and fully admissible. The Claimant asserts that
those claims are central to the dispute as described in the Request and are within the
scope of the Parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration.

The Claimant submits three arguments. First, the Claimant contends that the proper
articulation of the claims in the Request for Arbitration is not a jurisdictional matter, but
rather a procedural issue. The Claimant adds that incomplete or imprecise claims comply
with the Convention and the Institution Rules. Secondly, and in any event, the Claimant
argues that it properly identified the DOG in its Request. Thirdly, and in the alternative,
the Claimant maintains that it is entitled to bring claims arising out of the DOG under
Article 46 of the Convention.

a. Imprecision in the Request is a procedural matter which does not
prevent the Tribunal hearing claims arising out of the DOG

The Claimant submits that it commenced this proceeding by lodging the Request with the

Centre on 31 July 2009 in compliance with Article 36((2) & (3)) of the Convention and
Rule 2(1) of the Institution Rules. Before the Secretary-General registered the Request,
Claimant supplemented the Request with the submission of Supplement No. 1 on 21
August 2009.

The Claimant maintains that, upon registration, it was entitled to plead in detail all claims
and make all arguments relating to the dispute.

The Claimant argues that it provided ample notice in its Request of its intention to assert a
claim against KOC under the DOG. According to the Claimant, such a matter is a

 

Page 70 of 84

277.

278.

279.

280.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

procedural issue and its Request was sufficiently articulated to meet the requirement in
Institution Rule 2(1)(e) which provides:

“[t]he request shall: ...

(e) contain information concerning the issues in dispute indicating
that there is, between the parties, a legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment ...”

According to the Claimant, the request for arbitration in ICSID proceedings is not meant
to be a comprehensive listing of all facts, legal arguments or causes of action in a dispute.
These are to be pleaded in a claimant’s memorial on the merits pursuant to Arbitration
Rule 31(3). Rather, as the text of Institution Rule 2(1) confirms, the claimant must merely
make a showing that a legal dispute exists for the purposes of jurisdiction.

In support of its argument, the Claimant cites the case ADF Group Inc. v United States of
America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1, Award (9 Jan. 2003) (‘ADF Group’), where
the tribunal, in its analysis of the requirement under the Arbitration (Additional Facility)
Rules, construed the requirement of Institution Rule 2(1)(e) such that imprecision or
incompleteness in the setting out of issues in dispute in a request for arbitration would not
adversely impact upon its jurisdiction, and observed that Article 36(2) of the Convention
should be similarly construed.

Therefore, the Claimant contends that any review by the Tribunal of its jurisdiction is now

conducted de novo. Claimant’s previous compliance or non-compliance with the
Institution Rules does not bear on whether or not the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the
dispute and the claims registered. In support of this argument, Claimant cites Professor
Schreuer:

“[R]eliance on Institution Rule 2 to determine jurisdiction is
inappropriate. Institution Rule 2 does not set out jurisdictional
requirements in addition to Art. 25. It is merely a rule of procedure.
It lists the information and documentation that must be contained
in the request. Its purpose is to enable the Secretary-General to
decide whether a request should be registered in accordance with
Art. 36(3)... Omissions, errors and other deficiencies in the request
for arbitration are not an independent basis for the Tribunal to
decline jurisdiction.” (Emphasis added) (Schreuer supra at §367)

The Claimant also refers to the ICSID case Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and
Vivendi Universal v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. 97/3, Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Page 71 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

282.

283.

284.

285.

(14 November 2005) (“Vivendi”), where the respondent objected to jurisdiction on the
grounds that the claimants had failed to comply with Institution Rule 2(f) in their request
for arbitration. The tribunal rejected the respondent’s objection and explicitly endorsed
Professor Schreuer’s approach.

b. The claims under the DOG were properly identified in the Request

The Claimant contends that it identified in its Request that the DOG as a legal obligation
of KOC would be one of the subjects of the arbitration. Paragraph 2 of the Request
referred to the:

“Power Purchase Agreement and Implementation Agreement, as

well as numerous annexed forms [to the PPA and IA] of other
agreements to be entered into at various stages of the project.”
(emphasis added)

It is undisputed that the DOG is one of the “other agreements” referred to in paragraph 2
of the Request.

The Claimant also submits that it provided a copy of the DOG in the Supplement to the
Request which contained a lengthy discussion as to why EDC’s consent to ICSID
arbitration in the PPA extended to the ancillary agreements referenced in the PPA and IA.
The Supplement to the Request introduced the DOG as follows:

“[t]he referenced Government Guarantee of Payments was
embodied in a Deed of Guarantee entered into on 24 March 1998
(a copy of which is being electronically submitted with this letter
and which is being identified as Annex 18 to the Request). In
Section 1.1 of the Deed of Guarantee, KOC guarantees payment to
Claimant of “any monetary damages that may be assessed or
awarded against EDC and that arise out of failure by [EDC] to
perform its obligations under the Power Purchase Agreement.”

Therefore, the Claimant maintains that the DOG was properly articulated in the Request
and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims arising out of this agreement.

c. Alternatively, the Claimant is entitled to bring claims under the DOG
under Article 46 of the Convention

Alternatively, the Claimant argues that if the Tribunal were to find that the claims under
the DOG were not properly articulated in the Request, the Tribunal may nevertheless
admit these claims as additional claims under Article 46 of the Convention.

 

Page 72 of 84

286.

287.

288.

289.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

According to the Claimant, under Article 46 of the Convention, there is no requirement
that consent to ICSID arbitration be contained in the same instrument or instruments
identified in the request for arbitration. It is sufficient that additional claims “aris[e]
directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute”. The Claimant contends that, in the
instant case, claims under the DOG are inextricably related (1) to the claims against EDC
under the PPA, as the latter form the basis for KOC’s liability under the DOG, and (2) to
the claims against KOC under the IA, as the DOG was executed and delivered pursuant to
the IA.

Furthermore, the Claimant contends that Article 46 provides no procedural requirements
for an additional claim, and simply directs that the Tribunal “shall, if requested by a party,
determine” such a claim that otherwise satisfies the requirements. There is no formal
requirement that Claimant identify its claims under the DOG as additional claims under
Article 46. In any event, were the Tribunal to determine that they are indeed additional
claims that meet the requirements of Article 46, it has full authority and power to admit
them now.

2. Respondents’ Position

The Respondents contend that the Claimant’s claims made under the DOG are outside the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal and are inadmissible since they were not properly articulated
in the Request.

a. Claimant’s claims are limited to those properly articulated in the
Request

According to the Respondents, the jurisdiction rationae materiae of an arbitral tribunal is
defined at the outset of the proceedings. The Respondents submit that while ancillary
claims can be admitted at a later stage under certain conditions to expand the Tribunal’s
mission, they cannot expand the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Therefore, claims arising out of
or under agreements not used to define the Parties’ consent are outside the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction and must be dismissed. In support of their argument, the Respondents cite the
decision of the Annulment Committee in Helnan International Hotels A/S v Arab
Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/19) Decision of the ad hoc Committee, 14
June 2010 (“Helnan’’) where it was found that:

“[t]he question whether an ICSID arbitral Tribunal has exceeded
its powers is determined by reference to the agreement of the
parties... In the case of an investment treaty claim, this agreement

 

Page 73 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

290.

292.

293.

294,

is constituted by the BIT and by the ICSID Convention ... as well
as by the filing of the investor’s claim.” (emphasis added)

b. Claimant’s claims under the DOG were not properly articulated in
the Request and thus fall outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction

The Respondents contend that since the DOG was not listed in the Claimant’s Request as
an instrument in which the Parties consented to ICSID arbitration, the claims under the
DOG are outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

According to the Respondents, Claimant’s claims under the DOG appeared for the first
time in the Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits filed on 2 July 2010. There was no
mention of the DOG in the Request, which was filed on 30 July 2009, nor was the DOG
initially annexed to the Request for Arbitration. The only mention of the DOG before 2
July 2010 was in a list of attachments included in the Supplement to the Request dated 21
August 2009 as “Annex 18 — Deed of Guarantee...”

Therefore, KOC argues, that when the Request and its Supplement were registered on 16

September 2009, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction was limited to claims arising under the PPA
and the IA. Since disputes under the DOG are not within the scope of the arbitration
clauses of either the IA or the PPA, it follows that CPC’s claim under the DOG is outside
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and should accordingly be dismissed.

c. In the alternative, Claimant’s claims under the DOG are not
admissible under Article 46 of the Convention

The Respondents contend that, in any event, were the Tribunal minded to assume
jurisdiction over claims under the DOG, no request for admittance of a new claim under
Article 46 of the Convention has been brought by the Claimant, so that its claim is
inadmissible.

The Respondents maintain that the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction as defined by the
consent instruments listed in the Request and the scope of the relevant arbitration clauses
is immutable and cannot be later varied. However, a party may introduce an ancillary
claim, which will expand the mission of the Tribunal but not its jurisdiction, if it
conforms with Article 46 of the Convention. In support of their argument, the
Respondents cite Professor Schreuer:

“[t]he inclusion of ancillary claims under Art. 46 does not extend
the Centre’s jurisdiction. Rather, the existence of jurisdiction over

 

Page 74 of 84

295.

296.

297.

298.

299.

300.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

an ancillary claim is a precondition for the operation of this
provision.” (Emphasis added) (Schreuer supra at §46-86)

The Respondents submit that, in the instant case, the claims under the DOG are new, as
they were not advanced in the Request. As such, they can only be admitted in accordance
with Article 46 of the Convention. However, the Claimant has expressly indicated that:

“the claims set forth in this Memorial ... do not include any
incidental or additional claims required to be within the scope of
consent of KOC and EDC under Article 46 of the Convention.”
(Memorial on the Merits at §87).

Therefore, having not sought to introduce additional claims under Article 46 of the
Convention when it had the opportunity to do so, and having instead maintained that the
claims under the DOG did not qualify as additional claims, the Claimant should be
estopped from doing so now.

3. Tribunal’s decision

Two questions arise from the Respondents’ objections on this issue. The first question is
whether a claimant is required to articulate its precise case, including facts, legal
arguments or causes of action, in its request for arbitration filed with the Centre. The
second issue is whether the Claimant complied with the ICSID Rules when it filed its
Request and Supplement to Request.

With regard to the first question, the Tribunal notes that ICSID Rule 2(1)(e) only requires
the request for arbitration to:

“contain information concerning the issues in dispute indicating
that there is, between the parties, a legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment.”

At no point do the Rules require the request for arbitration to articulate all legal arguments
or specific causes of action that the claimant relies upon.

In any event, such a matter is not a jurisdictional issue. The Claimant’s compliance or non-

compliance with the Rules is a procedural issue that the Tribunal has power to decide. As
Professor Schreuer puts it:

 

Page 75 of 84

302.

303.

304.

305.

306.

307.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

“[o]missions, errors and other deficiencies in the request for
arbitration are not an independent basis for the Tribunal to decline
jurisdiction.” (Schreuer supra at §36-36)

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the Respondents are wrong in arguing that the
Claimant’s imprecise Request bars the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the DOG.

With regard to the second question whether the Claimant properly complied with the
Rules when filing its Request, the Tribunal notes that even though there is little doubt that
the claims under the DOG were clumsily made, two points remain in the Claimant’s
favour.

First, §2 of the Request as cited above refers to “numerous annexed forms of other
agreements to be entered to at various stages of the project”. The Claimant submits that it
is undisputed that the DOG is one such agreement. The Tribunal is ready to accept this.

Secondly, the Claimant actually did provide a copy of the DOG in its Supplement to the
Request and included the DOG in the language cited above.

It seems clear to the Tribunal, and must have been so to the Respondents, that the
Claimant was making a claim under the DOG. After all, this was the agreement by which
the State underpinned the liability of EDC and it is doubtful in the extreme whether the
project would have advanced at all had that state guarantee not been provided. KOC
could not have been under any misapprehension when it agreed to guarantee EDC
liabilities to the Claimant, nor would these proceedings have been instituted had the
Claimant not been relying on the guarantee.

Further, the Tribunal is entitled to have regard to both the unity of the investment and the
transaction to determine whether the three agreements were sufficiently interconnected as
pointed out by the Claimant in its submission.

The Tribunal is satisfied that the Request and Supplement sufficiently referred to the DOG
to enable the Tribunal to conclude that it does have jurisdiction over such claims.

 

Page 76 of 84

308.

309.

310.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

D. DOES THE TRIBUNAL HAVE JURISDICTION TO DECIDE CLAIMS
BASED ON CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW?

1. Claimant’s Position: claims under customary international law are admissible

and within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction

The Claimant presents three arguments in response to the Respondents’ contentions that
its claims under customary international law are inadmissible and outside the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. First, the Claimant submits that it properly identified its claims in its Request
and Supplement to the Request. Secondly, the Claimant asserts that its claims under
customary international law are within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction since even in the
absence of an express reference to international law in a choice of law clause,
international law is always available. Thirdly, the Claimant maintains that the scope of
the Parties’ consent to arbitrate as set out in the arbitration clauses of the IA and PPA is

sufficiently broad to cover claims of state responsibility for EDC’s repudiation of the
PPA.

The Claimant contends that it sufficiently identified potential claims of state responsibility
in its Request, which stated at paragraph 64(e):

““Respondents’ acts and omissions .... otherwise amount to
breaches of duty actionable by Claimant and contravene
established principles of international investment law ..., for
which Claimant is entitled to and claims such remedies and relief
as may be just and proper.” (Emphasis added)

Therefore, the Claimant’s claims under customary international law were properly
indentified in the Request and are thus admissible.

The Claimant also denies the Respondents’ argument that because the PPA, IA and DOG

are governed by English law, the adjudication of claims under customary international
law is beyond the scope of the Parties’ consent to arbitration. The Claimant contends that
in the context of ICSID arbitration, commentators have held that even when parties agree
that a dispute shall be decided in accordance with a particular national law pursuant to
Article 42(1) of the Convention, claims under customary international law may still be
pleaded. In support of its argument, the Claimant cites Professor Schreuer:

“[t]he mandatory rules of international law, which provide a
minimum standard of protection for aliens, exist independently of
any choice of law made for a specific transaction. They constitute a

 

Page 77 of 84

312.

313.

314,

315.

316.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

framework of public order within which such transactions operate.
Their obligatory nature is not open to the disposition of the parties.
This assertion is quite different from questions of applicable law
under the conflict of laws. International law does not thereby
become the law applicable to the contract. The transaction remains
governed by the domestic legal system chosen by the parties.
However, this choice is checked by the application of a number of
mandatory international rules such as the prohibition of denial of
justice, the discriminatory taking of property or the arbitrary
repudiation of contractual undertakings.” (Schreuer supra at §42-
70)

Claimant also supports its argument by citing Broches, who noted that any agreement
among the parties to exclude the applicability of international law must be express. (A.
Broches, “Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States of 1965, Explanatory Notes and Survey of its Application” 18
YCA 669, §121 (1993))

Therefore, as the Parties have never indicated in the IA, PPA, DOG or otherwise an
express desire to exclude claims under customary international law, Claimant contends
that its state responsibility claims are properly within the Parties’ scope of consent to
arbitration, and thus within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

With regard to the Respondents’ argument that a claim for expropriation under customary
international law is “a significant incursion on state sovereignty”, the Claimant submits
that whether or not such assertion has merit is clearly outside the scope of the issues that
the Tribunal decided it would hear at this stage of the proceedings.

The Claimant also submits that the PPA and JA arbitration clauses provide that “any
Dispute” falls within the Parties’ consent to arbitrate. Therefore, any event that might lead
to a dispute arising out of or in connection with those agreements extends the scope of
consent to “any remedies as may be available to it in law and equity.”

Finally, and in the alternative, the Claimant argues that were the Tribunal to determine that
Claimant’s state responsibility claims are not within the scope of the dispute as registered,
the Tribunal may nevertheless admit these claims as additional claims under Article 46 of
the Convention.

 

Page 78 of 84

317.

318.

319.

320.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

2. Respondents’ Position: claims under customary international law are

inadmissible and outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction

The Respondents’ contentions on the Claimant’s claims made under customary
international law are threefold. First, the Respondents contend that such claims are
inadmissible as they were not properly articulated in the Request. Secondly, the
Respondents submit that under English law those claims fall outside the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. Thirdly, the Respondents maintain that a plain reading of the arbitration
clauses demonstrates the Parties’ consent to exclude claims made under customary
international law.

The Respondents contend that the Claimant did not properly articulate any claim under
customary international law in the Request, in which it merely stated that the acts and
omissions of the Respondents:

“contravene established principles of international investment law
and Cambodian law, for which Claimant is entitled to and claims
such remedies and relief as may be just and proper.”

The Respondents submit that even if the vague reference in the Request to “principles of
international investment law” could be construed as a reference to customary
international law, it fell far short of an articulation of a claim for breach of a specific
principle of customary international law.

According to the Respondents, it was only when the Claimant filed its Memorial on the
Merits or, rather, the Prayer for Relief, that a claim against Cambodia under principles of
customary international law was made. However, such claim had still not been
sufficiently articulated either to establish the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction over it or to
allow the Respondents to respond to such a claim on the merits.

The Respondents argue that even in its Prayer for Relief, the Claimant did not identify a

primary rule of international law on which it based its claim. The Claimant merely asked
the Tribunal to:

“hold [Cambodia] liable in respect of EDC’s repudiation of,
defaults under and/or other breaches of the [PPA] that are
attributable to [Cambodia] under the state responsibility
doctrine.”

 

Page 79 of 84

322.

323.

324,

325.

326.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The Respondents also submit that since the Claimant does not seek leave to bring the
claims under customary international law pursuant to Article 46 of the Convention, the
Claimant is precluded from amending its claim now. In any event, an application under
Article 46 of the Convention must fail as to bring the claims under customary
international law would have the effect of extending the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, which
Article 46 cannot do.

The Respondents also contend that even if a claim for expropriation under customary
international law could be said to have been sufficiently articulated by the Claimant in its
Request, such a claim would not fall within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction since the
adjudication of claims alleging violations of customary international law is a significant
incursion on state sovereignty; that is a fundamental principle of international law. To do
so in the present case would go beyond the Parties’ consent to arbitration.

Indeed, according to the Respondents, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is confined to the
Parties’ arbitration agreement. Each of the PPA, the IA and the DOG is a contract
governed by English law, and an arbitration clause in a contract with a sovereign state
cannot be said to confer jurisdiction to determine a claim that the state has violated
principles of customary international law.

The Respondents maintain that it is one thing for an arbitral tribunal constituted under an
arbitration agreement governed by English law to find that claims in tort are admissible in
relation to a contractual dispute; however, it is quite another for that tribunal to consider
itself competent to decide whether a state has complied with its international law
obligations relating to expropriation. In support of their argument, Respondents cite the
case Premium Nafta Products Limited (20th Defendant) and others v Fili Shipping
Company Limited (14th Claimant) and others [2007] UKHL 40 (‘Fiona Trust”),

Finally, the Respondents emphasise that a plain reading of the relevant dispute resolution
clauses leads to the inevitable conclusion that a claim for expropriation under customary
international law is outside the scope of the Parties’ consent. Indeed, the PPA imposes no
obligations on Cambodia, but only on EDC, whereas the Claimant nevertheless purports
to bring its claims under customary international law, which, by definition, must be
against Cambodia. A dispute between the Claimant and KOC as to KOC’s international
law obligations is not a dispute between EDC and CPC in connection with, or arising out
of, the PPA, and hence such a dispute cannot be within the scope of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.

 

Page 80 of 84

327.

328.

329.

330.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

3. Tribunal’s Decision

The Tribunal finds no basis for the Respondents’ first objection to the Claimant’s claim
based on customary international law. In its Request, the Claimant sufficiently articulated
that:

“Respondents’ acts and omissions ... contravene established
principles of international investment law ... for which Claimant is
entitled to and claims such remedies and relief as may be just and
proper”.

It is true that the Claimant’s phrasing did not identify specific breaches on which it
planned to base its claims. However, the Claimant made clear that it was seeking to raise
claims under customary international law. At the stage of the Request for Arbitration, the
Claimant is not required to set out its precise case by identifying the specific rules of
customary international law upon which it sought to rely. This can be for a later stage
when Parties exchange pleadings or memorials on the merits.

Further, the Respondents cannot contend that they were taken by surprise or that they did
not understand what the Claimant meant by “principles of international investment law’.
The body of “international investment law” includes the principles of state responsibility.
For that matter, the Respondents themselves acknowledged that it was “probable that the
Claimant [wa]s making a claim for expropriation”. The Claimant’s reference was
unequivocal. The wording used, combined with the commencement of an ICSID
arbitration which is the typical forum where customary international law claims are raised,
should have made it clear to the Respondents that the Claimant intended to pursue claims
under customary international law.

Therefore, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant sufficiently articulated in its Request that it
was seeking to frame claims under customary international law.

With regard to the second objection raised by the Respondents, the Tribunal is not
convinced by the argument. The Respondents submit that the Parties intentionally left
customary international law outside of their consent to arbitration when they decided that
the agreements were governed by English law. The Respondents also try to interpret a
contrario the plain wording of the arbitration clauses. In doing so, they state that:

“State responsibility claims’ do not relate to the parties’ inability
to agree upon a matter as required under the terms of the PPA”,

 

Page 81 of 84

332.

333.

334,

335.

336.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

and that:

“the parties are more likely to have intended the term ‘remedies’ to
refer to remedies available under English law ... than under
customary international law.”

The Respondents are wrong in their approach to this issue. First, as it is clearly explained
by Professor Schreuer, customary international law exists and may be applied
independently of any choice of law (Schreuer supra). The Tribunal also shares Mr.
Broches’ view that:

“[iJt is unreasonable to assume that the specification of an
applicable national law is intended to or should have [as its]
effect” to “exclude any recourse at all to international law”.
(Broches supra)

Secondly, and additionally, the express choice of English law itself has the effect of
including (rather than displacing) at least a body of customary international law, since
customary international law (i.e. general practices of states followed by them from a
sense of legal obligation) constitutes part of the Common law by a well established
doctrine of incorporation. When customary international law changes, the Common law
also incorporates these changes, save to the extent that such changes conflict with
domestic law.

Customary international law is inevitably relevant in the context of foreign investment
(and ICSID arbitration), given that it comprises a body of norms that establish minimum
standards of protection in this field. It is simply unrealistic to assume that the parties to a
foreign investment contract such as those in question here would have intended to
exclude such inherent protection by simply choosing an applicable national law.

Equally, parties can always consent to exclude customary international law from the scope

of their dispute resolution clause. However, one would expect this to be done expressly
and unequivocally. In the present case, the PPA, IA, DOG do not indicate that the Parties
expressly excluded customary international law from the scope of their consent.

The Tribunal is also satisfied that the wording of each arbitration clause is itself wide
enough to cover claims based on customary international law. The IA arbitration clause,
for example, provides:

“Ti]f any dispute or difference arises out of or in connection with
this Agreement ... the provisions of this Section 12 shall apply.”

 

Page 82 of 84

337.

338.

Ix.

339.

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

This broad form of arbitration clause (which appears, albeit with slightly different wording,
in each of the agreements) would allow the Parties to articulate claims on the basis of any
remedies available in law or equity, including customary international law (as long as
these are claims that could be said to arise out of or be in connection with each
agreement). The Tribunal is satisfied that the Claimant is entitled to bring these claims in
this case under each arbitration clause.

Whether or not any of the Claimant’s claims under customary international law are
actually sustainable as a matter of law or fact under each agreement is, of course, a
separate matter for determination at a later stage.

OPERATIVE ORDER

Accordingly, having carefully considered all the submissions presented to the Tribunal,
and having heard Counsel, the Tribunal DECIDES, ORDERS, DIRECTS
and DECLARES:

(1) _ that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to consider any claims against EDC
on the ground that KOC did not designate EDC as an agency or subdivision of
KOC within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention;

(2) _ that the Tribunal does have jurisdiction to hear the claims against KOC based on
customary international law;

(3) _ that the Tribunal does have jurisdiction to hear the claims against KOC under the
TA, PPA (if any) and the DOG;

(4) _ that the Tribunal makes the necessary Order for the continuation of the
proceedings pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4); and

(5) that the Tribunal reserves all questions concerning costs for subsequent
determination.

 

Page 83 of 84

ICSID ARBITRATION ARB/09/18
Cambodia Power Company v Kingdom of Cambodia and Electricité du Cambodge

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

[signed]
Signed ......... eee
John Beechey
Co-Arbitrator
[signed]
Signed ......... eee
Toby Landau QC
Co-Arbitrator
[signed]
Signed ......... eee

Neil Kaplan CBE QC SBS
Presiding Arbitrator

 

Page 84 of 84

