Arbitration under Chapter Eleven of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
and the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

 

CANFOR CORPORATION

Claimant

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Respondent

 

DECISION ON THE PLACE OFARBITRATION, FILING OF A
STATEMENT OF DEFENCE AND BIFURCATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS

 

Before the Arbitral Tribunal constituted
under Chapter Eleven of the North
American Free Trade Agreement, and
comprised of:

Joseph H. H. Weiler

Conrad K. Harper
Emmanuel Gaillard (President)

January 23, 2004

TI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE PLACE OF ARBITRATION .

 

A. The Arbitral Tribunal’s scope of choice

 

B. The ci of this arbitration

THE FILING OF A STATEMENT OF DEFENCE BY THE RESPONDENT AND THE
BIFURCATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS...

 

A. The position of the parties

 

B. The ci of this arbitration

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S DECISION......

 

PAGE

THE PLACE OF ARBITRATION

At the first Organizational Hearing held by the Arbitral Tribunal on October 28, 2003,
the parties did not reach an agreement on the place of arbitration. It was accordingly
decided that, “failing an agreement between the Parties on the place of arbitration,
such place shall be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal having regard to the
circumstances of the arbitration” (Terms of Agreement, October 28, 2003, para. 12).

The place of arbitration shall be determined in accordance with Article 1130 of the
NAFTA, which provides that:

“Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, a Tribunal shall hold an
arbitration in the territory of a Party that is a party to the New York
Convention, selected in accordance with : a. the ICSID Additional
Facility Rules if the arbitration is under those Rules or the ICSID
Convention; or b. the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules if the arbitration is
under those Rules.”

Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides in turn that:

“Unless the parties have agreed upon the place where the arbitration is
to be held, such place shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal,
having regard to the circumstances of the arbitration.”

The Arbitral Tribunal’s scope of choice

The Claimant’s position is that the place of arbitration should be a city in Canada,
either Vancouver (British Columbia) or Toronto (Ontario) (Claimant’s Submission on
Place of Arbitration and Request that the Respondent Provide a Statement of Defence,
November 11, 2003, hereafter “Claimant’s Submission”; Claimant’s Reply
Submission on Place of Arbitration and Request that the United States Provide a
Statement of Defence, December 3, 2003, hereafter “Claimant’s Reply Submission”).

The Respondent’s position is that Washington, D.C. should be the place of arbitration
(Respondent’s Submission on Place of Arbitration, Bifurcation and Filing of a
Statement of Defense of Respondent United States of America, November 25, 2003,
hereafter “Respondent’s Submission”; Respondent’s Rejoinder Submission on Place
of Arbitration, Bifurcation and Filing of a Statement of Defense of Respondent United
States of America, December 11, 2003, hereafter “Respondent’s Rejoinder
Submission”).

The Tribunal is therefore requested to select a place of arbitration among the proposed
cities in Canada (Vancouver or Toronto) and the United States (Washington, D.C.).

During the first Organizational Hearing of October 28, 2003, the Tribunal raised with
the parties the issue of alternative seats in other countries. In this respect, the
Tribunal observes that the language of Article 1130 of the NAFTA allows for some
flexibility as the disputing parties may agree to a place of arbitration in the territory of

a State that is not a NAFTA Party (“unless the disputing parties agree otherwise”).
Therefore, Article 1130 does not restrict the disputing parties’ choice of the place of
arbitration to the three NAFTA Parties. This issue was discussed during the October
Hearing. Subsequently, in its first written submission, the Claimant accepted, subject
to the Respondent’s agreement, the possibility of selecting either London (England) or
Geneva (Switzerland) as the place of arbitration (Claimant’s Submission, paras. 6 and
44). This option, however, was not accepted by the Respondent (Respondent’s
Submission, p. 2). Should the disputing parties not wish to agree to a place of
arbitration in a State that is not a NAFTA Party, the arbitral tribunal has the option of
choosing, under Article 1130 of the NAFTA, the place of arbitration in the territory of
any of the three NAFTA Parties, the United States, Canada or Mexico.

  

By letter of November 18, 2003, the parties advised the Tribunal that they had agreed,
pursuant to Article 1(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, to modify Article 16(1)
of those Rules to provide that, “[u]n/ess the parties have agreed upon the place where
the arbitration is to be held, the Tribunal shall fix the place of arbitration at a city in
Canada or the United States of America, having regard to the circumstances of the
arbitration.”

The parties have taken the view that the Tribunal is constrained by their agreement—
which excludes Mexico as a seat of arbitration—and shall determine the place of
arbitration only amongst Canada and the United States (Claimant’s Submission, paras.
38-44; Respondent’s Submission, p. 2).

The Tribunal observes that the parties’ initiative raises important questions as regards
NAFTA policy considerations. Article 1130 of the NAFTA gives the arbitral
tribunals, in the absence of an agreement of the parties on the place of arbitration, the
possibility of choosing such place among the three NAFTA States. The effect of the
parties’ agreement of November 2003 is to modify the scope of Article 1130 and
restrain the tribunal’s options to two of the NAFTA Parties, those that are involved in
this dispute (the United States as the Respondent, Canada as the State of the investor’s
nationality). Under Article 1128 of the NAFTA, when a question of interpretation of
the Agreement arises, a NAFTA Party may make submissions on the question of
interpretation. In this arbitration, however, the two other NAFTA Parties, Canada and
Mexico, have not taken any position with respect to the interpretation of Article 1130
and the possibility for disputing parties to modify the scope of that Article.

The Tribunal notes that the disputing parties are involved in an international
arbitration, a method of settling international disputes that is based on the principle of
the agreement of the disputing parties. The only exception to this principle is the
requirement that the agreement of the parties complies with any applicable rules of
public policy. In the present case, the Tribunal observes that the determination of the
place of arbitration in both Article 1130 of the NAFTA and Article 16(1) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules is primarily based on the agreement of the disputing
parties. Although the disputing parties have agreed not to agree to any particular
place of arbitration, they have expressed their clear agreement to limit the scope of the
Tribunal’s choice regarding the legal place of the arbitration. Such an agreement
should be given effect.

As a result, the Tribunal will, in the absence of an agreement between the parties
(except to limit the Tribunal’s scope of choice to Canada and the United States), fix

the place of arbitration at a city in Canada or the United States of America, having
regard to the circumstances of the arbitration.

The circumstances of this arbitration

In order to provide guidelines to the Tribunal in the determination of the place of
arbitration, the parties have referred to the UNCITRAL Notes on Organizing Arbitral
Proceedings (hereafter “UNCITRAL Notes”) and, in particular, Paragraph 22 of the
Notes which discusses various factual and legal factors. That Paragraph provides
that:

“Various factual and legal factors influence the choice of the place of
arbitration, and their relative importance varies from case to case.
Among the more prominent factors are: (a) suitability of the law on
arbitral procedure of the place of arbitration; (b) whether there is a
multilateral or bilateral treaty on enforcement of arbitral awards
between the State where the arbitration takes place and the State or
States where the award may have to be enforced; (c) convenience of the
parties and the arbitrators, including the travel distances; (d)
availability and cost of support services needed, and (e) location of the
subject-matter in dispute and proximity of evidence.”

The binding force of these Notes has been the subject of discussion among the parties.
While referring to the UNCITRAL Notes as guidelines, the Claimant has emphasized
that they do not bind the Tribunal and that the place of arbitration should be
determined in consideration of all the “circumstances of the arbitration” (Claimant’s
Submission, para. 7; Claimant’s Reply Submission, para. 17). According to the
Respondent, the UNCITRAL Notes set forth the “primary factual and legal criteria
for the Tribunal to consider in selecting the place of arbitration” (Respondent’s
Submission, p. 2).

The Tribunal considers that it must determine the place of arbitration in light of any
relevant circumstances in this arbitration and that the factors enumerated in the
UNCITRAL Notes provide no more than non-binding guidelines, as Paragraph 2 of
the Notes makes clear (“The arbitral tribunal remains free to use the Notes as it sees
fit and is not required to give reasons for disregarding them”).

The Tribunal will therefore examine each of the factors offered for consideration by
the parties, without according particular weight to any individual circumstance over
another. These factors include neutrality, which is not referred to in the UNCITRAL
Notes but which constitutes one of the key features of international arbitration.

1) The neutrality factor

Neutrality is a factor on which the parties are in sharp disagreement. Having argued
that all five factors provided for by the UNCITRAL Notes weigh equally and do not
point to either Canada or the United States, the Claimant contends that the factor of
neutrality, or perceived neutrality, should direct the Tribunal to determine the place of
arbitration in Canada. In support of this position, the Claimant relies on the NAFTA.
cases in Ethyl v. Canada and UPS v. Canada. It also makes a distinction between the

20.

21.

present arbitration and the previous cases involving the United States as a respondent
in Loewen, Mondev, ADF and Methanex. The Claimant argues that, unlike in those
cases where Washington, D.C. was held to be the appropriate place of arbitration, in
this case the Tribunal should consider Vancouver as an appropriate place of
arbitration given its substantial connection to the proceedings; should Vancouver not
be perceived as neutral, Toronto could in the alternative be determined as the place of
arbitration where neutrality would be best ensured (Claimant’s Submission, paras. 30-
37).

The question of neutrality, or the perception of neutrality, has been emphasized by the
Claimant as the critical factor in the determination of the place of arbitration
(Claimant’s Reply Submission, paras. 4-8 and paras. 26-30). In this respect, the
Claimant maintains that Washington, D.C., which is not only the seat of the United
States Government but also the place where the disputed measures were taken, is the
least neutral location for the place of arbitration (Claimant’s Reply Submission,
paras. 27-28).

The Respondent considers, for its part, that the venues proposed by each ‘Party are
equally neutral (Respondent’s i pp. 14-15; fp

Submission, pp. 6-8). First, relying on the Methanex v. USA case, the Respondent
argues that a neutral national venue is not possible in this case (the parties in
Methanex had also limited the tribunal’s choice to Canada or the United States, see
Written reasons for Decision of September 7, 2000 on the Place of arbitration, para. 6,
annexed to Claimant’s Submission, Exhibit B3). Second, the Respondent submits that
neutrality is not an important factor to be taken into consideration, given that it was
excluded from the UNCITRAL Notes, that Chapter Eleven limits the place of
arbitration to one of the three NAFTA Parties, and the fact that the parties have agreed
to exclude Mexico as an alternative place of arbitration. Only if the five factors set
forth in the UNCITRAL Notes do not result in the determination of a place of
arbitration could neutrality be considered as a tie-breaking factor. Third, the
Respondent submits that neutrality could be addressed by holding the hearings in
ICSID’s headquarters in Washington, D.C. In addition, the Respondent has
emphasized that the softwood lumber issue is an important local issue in British
Columbia and Ontario and that, should neutrality be weighed at all, it should not be
considered a factor favoring a Canadian venue (Respondent’s Rejoinder Submission,
p. 8).

 

The Tribunal is not convinced by the parties’ arguments.

The Tribunal observes that Article 1130 of the NAFTA has limited the choice of the
place of arbitration, absent an agreement between the disputing parties, to one of the
three NAFTA Parties. In the present arbitration, had the disputing parties intended to
ensure neutrality, they were at liberty to agree to a neutral forum outside any of the
three NAFTA Parties. In the alternative, the disputing parties were at liberty to leave
open the option of Mexico. Rather, the parties have chosen expressly to exclude such
options and to limit the scope of the Tribunal’s choice to a venue in either Canada or
the United States. As a result, because of the choice made by the negotiators of the
NAFTA and because of the procedural choices made by the disputing parties in this
arbitration, the Tribunal considers that, with regard to the place of arbitration, a
neutral venue is not available.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Further, the Tribunal is not persuaded, in the circumstances of this arbitration, by the
argument of perceived neutrality. In particular, the Tribunal finds little assistance in
the Respondent’s argument that any concern of neutrality in this arbitration could be
addressed by holding the hearings at the ICSID facilities in Washington, D.C. First,
the Respondent’s implication that the mere physical location of a building may ensure
the neutrality of the place of arbitration is at odds with the distinction, on which it has
laid emphasis, between the legal seat of an arbitration and the physical location of
hearings (see below, para. 28). Second, the Tribunal does not find any reason in the
facts of this case to give consideration to ICSID as a weighing circumstance with
respect to the determination of the place of arbitration. Absent the ratification of the
Washington Convention by Canada, the guarantees offered by ICSID, including the
true neutrality provided by a system which is genuinely independent from any
national legal order, are not available to the disputing parties in this arbitration.

As a result, the Tribunal concludes that the neutrality factor does not favor either the
United States or Canada. To the contrary, by the very choice of the disputing parties,
any decision on the place of arbitration taken by the Tribunal will result in having one
of the parties arbitrate in the other’s forum. In this respect, the Tribunal endorses the
analysis of the distinguished tribunal in Methanex v. USA:

“[...] in assessing the significance of neutrality or perceived neutrality,
the Tribunal bears in mind (i) that it was open to the NAFTA parties to
agree that in the interests of neutrality Chapter Eleven disputes should
be arbitrated in the territory of any third Party not directly involved in
the dispute, yet they did not do so, and (ii) that in circumstances where
(as in this case) the disputing parties have further limited the choice of
place of arbitration by their arbitration tribunal to one or the other's
state, a neutral national venue is simply not possible. In this
arbitration, either the Claimant or the Respondent, effectively by their
own choice, will have to arbitrate in the other's home state. Strict
neutrality is perhaps a circumstance much to be desired for certain
arbitrations; but it was not so desired by the parties to this
arbitration.” (Methanex v. USA, Written reasons for the Decision of
September 7, 2000 on the Place of Arbitration, para. 36, annexed to
Claimant’s Submission, Exhibit B3).

2) The suitability of the law on arbitral procedure

The Claimant and the Respondent agree on the suitability of both U.S. and Canadian
arbitral laws. The Claimant argues that this factor weighs equally between Canada
and the United States and finds strong support, on this issue, in previous decisions
such as Ethyl v. Canada, Methanex v. USA and ADF vy. USA (Claimant’s Submission,
paras. 10-21; Claimant’s Reply Submission, para. 9). The Respondent also considers
that the relevant laws of the United States and Canada are equally suitable, while
raising the issue of the standard of review for Chapter Eleven arbitrations in Canada
as expressed in the UPS and Pope & Talbot cases because of the position taken by the
Government of Canada before the British Columbia Supreme Court in Metalclad v.
Mexico (Respondent’s Submission, pp. 10-12).

The Tribunal agrees with the parties that this factor weighs neutrally, and that the
laws applicable in British Columbia and in Ontario as well as the Federal Arbitration

26.

27.

28.

Act are equally suitable, including on questions concerning the applicable standards
of review for Chapter Eleven arbitral awards. The Tribunal notes that the same
conclusion was reached by all previous NAFTA tribunals which had to consider the
issue, notwithstanding the concern expressed by the tribunals in UPS v. Canada and
Pope & Talbot v. Canada with respect to the procedural position taken by Canada in
the Metalclad case (see UPS v. Canada, Decision on the Place of arbitration of
October 17, 2001, paras. 9-10, annexed to Claimant’s Submission, Exhibit B1; Pope
& Talbot v. Canada, Ruling concerning the Investor’s motion to change the place of
arbitration, March 14, 2002, paras. 15-19, annexed to Claimant’s Submission, Exhibit
BS). The Tribunal does not share the concern expressed by these tribunals and
regards the factor of the suitability of the law on arbitral procedure as neutral in this
arbitration.

3) The existence of a multilateral treaty on enforcement of arbitral awards

The Tribunal observes that it is common ground between the parties that both the
United States and Canada are parties to the New York Convention on the enforcement
of arbitral awards and that therefore this factor weighs neutrally between the United
States and Canada (Claimant’s Submission, para. 22; Respondent’s Submission,
p. 13).

4) The convenience of the parties and the arbitrators

The parties are in disagreement as to the weight to be accorded to the third factor cited
in the UNCITRAL Notes. The Claimant argues that it weighs neutrally and does not
point to any one place over another since the parties have agreed, in accordance with
Article 16(2) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, that the seat of the arbitration and
the place of hearings need not coincide and that hearings or meetings may take place
at any appropriate place, including Washington, D.C., Vancouver or Toronto
(Claimant’s Submission, para. 23; Claimant’s Reply Submission, paras. 10-13). The
Respondent does not agree. It contends that holding the arbitration in Washington,
D.C. would be less inconvenient than Vancouver or Toronto for the members of the
Tribunal as well as for the U.S. officers from the various governmental agencies
involved in this arbitration, without such venue being inconvenient for Canfor
(R dent’s ission, pp. 8-10; R dent’s Rejoinder Submission, pp. 5-6).

 

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimant and considers that this factor, which should not
be accorded a great weight in this arbitration, is neutral. The Tribunal is attentive to
the Respondent’s argument regarding the convenience of Washington, D.C. The
Tribunal is also mindful that, as emphasized by the Respondent, a distinction should
accurately be drawn between the legal seat of an arbitration and the geographical
location of hearings (Respondent’s Submission, pp. 6-8 and 10; Respondent’s
Rejoinder Submission, p. 1). However, in light of Paragraph 13 of the Terms of
Agreement signed by the parties at the Hearing of October 28, 2003, the Tribunal
considers that the parties’ agreement, without prejudice to the legal seat of the
arbitration, to hold the hearings and the meetings at any appropriate place—which
may include, as need be, Washington, D.C.—adequately satisfies, in the
circumstances of this arbitration, the convenience factor.

29.

5) The availability of cost and support services

This factor is also the subject of disagreement between the parties. The Claimant
argues that the availability and cost of support services is neutral, and that the cost of
support services may become relevant at the time of the determination of the place
where particular hearings will be held (Claimant’s Submission, para. 24). The
Claimant further argues that the facilities of ICSID in Washington, D.C. may be
compared, in terms of costs, to equivalent facilities in either Vancouver or Toronto
(Claimant’s Reply Submission, paras. 14-16). The Respondent contends that this
factor favors Washington, D.C. as a less costly venue. The relevant factors
considered by the Respondent are travel costs for the members of the Tribunal, the
parties and their attorneys, and the fact that ICSID facilities are available for use at
rates that are likely more competitive than equivalent facilities in Vancouver or
Toronto (Respondent’s ission, pp. 12-13; Respondent’s Rejoind bmissi
pp. 5-6).

The Tribunal finds that this factor does not favor any venue over the other and
considers that the parties’ agreement to hold the hearings and the meetings at any
appropriate place allows the Tribunal to conduct the arbitration in a cost-effective
manner.

6) The location of the subject matter in dispute and the proximity of evidence

The final factor set forth in the UNCITRAL Notes, that of the location of the subject
matter in dispute and the proximity of evidence, sharply divides the parties. The
Claimant finds it to be neutral (Claimant’s Submission, para. 25; Claimant’s Reply
Submission, paras. 18-25). In particular, the Claimant disputes the Respondent’s
submission that the subject matter of the dispute is located exclusively in Washington,
D.C.: according to the Claimant, the subject matter in dispute relates to decisions
made by the United States in relation to the alleged conduct of Canadian softwood
lumber companies operating in British Columbia (Claimant’s Reply Submission,
paras. 19-20).

The Respondent argues to the contrary that the subject matter in dispute is located in
Washington, D.C. for the following reasons: the Claimant’s allegations are based on
antidumping and countervailing duty determinations which were made in
Washington, D.C. by the U.S. Department of Commerce and the International Trade
Commission; the significant events underlying the Claimant’s allegations took place
in Washington, D.C.; and most or all of the relevant evidence is located in
Washington, D.C. In contrast, the Respondent finds no connection between either
Vancouver or Toronto and the subject matter in dispute (Respondent’s Submission,
pp. 3-8; Respondent’s Rejoinder Submission, pp. 2-4). The Respondent further
argues that the subject matter in dispute points to a U.S. venue given that the
Claimant’s allegations that it has been denied national treatment or most-favored
nation treatment may only be made with respect to its U.S. investments (Respondent’s
Rejoinder Submission, pp. 3-4).

The Tribunal finds that, as regards the proximity of evidence, it is irrelevant in this
arbitration given the parties’ agreement to hold hearings and meetings at any
appropriate place (see above, para. 28).

As regards the subject matter in dispute, the parties have not presented the Tribunal
with a uniform definition of what constitutes the “subject matter”. The Claimant
refers to the determination of the location of a particular hearing and considers that
“[t]he ‘subject matter’ of the dispute is the treatment of a Canadian investor situate in
Canada and the United States, by organs of the United States government situate in
Washington, D.C.” (Claimant’s Submission, para. 25). The Claimant further refers to
the “physical subject-matter of the dispute” which it situates in British Columbia and
to “legal facts” it claims have occurred in British Columbia (Claimant’s Reply
Submission, paras. 19-20). The Respondent, referring to the decision rendered in
ADF v. United States, considers “the ‘subject-matter’ of the dispute as ‘the issue
presented for consideration; the thing in which [or in respect of which] a right or
duty has been asserted’ [...)” (Respondent’s Rejoinder Submission, p. 2, quoting
ADF vy. USA, Procedural Order No. 2, para. 20, annexed to Claimant’s Submission,
Exhibit B4).

The Tribunal considers that the subject matter, independently from the proximity of
evidence, does not, in this arbitration, relate to the Claimant’s conduct in British
Columbia. It rather relates to the Respondent’s measures determining the Claimant’s
softwood lumber importations into the United States as subsidized or dumped, which
are alleged by the Claimant to have affected its investments in the United States and
breached Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA. Indeed, the Tribunal is requested to decide
the dispute on the basis of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA which “applies to measures
adopted or maintained by a Party relating to: (a) investors of another Party; (b)
investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party; and (c) with
respect to Articles 1106 and 1114, all investments in the territory of the Party”
(NAFTA, Article 1101(1)). The particular issue before the Tribunal is to determine
whether the measures adopted or maintained by the Respondent as to the Claimant’s
investments in the United States are in breach of the Respondent’s treaty obligations
under Articles 1102, 1103, 1105 and 1110 of the NAFTA (see Notice of Arbitration
and Statement of Claim, July 9, 2002, para. 18 and paras. 96 ef seq.), should the
Tribunal have jurisdiction to that effect (see Objection to Jurisdiction, October 16,
2003). The Tribunal notes that the three cases referred to by the Claimant have taken
into account, in order to determine the place of arbitration, the acts of the Respondent
State with respect to alleged breaches of the NAFTA (see Ethyl v. Canada, Decision
regarding the Place of Arbitration of November 28, 1997, at pp. 7 and 9, annexed to
Claimant’s Submission, Exhibit B2; Methanex v. USA, Written reasons for Decision
of September 7, 2000 on the Place of arbitration, para. 33, annexed to Claimant’s
Submission, Exhibit B3; ADF v. USA, Procedural Order No. 2, para. 20, annexed to
Claimant’s Submission, Exhibit B4).

The Tribunal therefore finds that, with respect to the subject matter in dispute in this
arbitration, substantial connections point to a venue in the United States: the United
States is the territory in which the Claimant’s investments are alleged to have been
made (see Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, July 9, 2002, para. 18:
“Canfor is an investor of a Party as defined in NAFTA Article 1139, and [...] has
investments in the territory of the United States as contemplated by NAFTA Article
1101 and defined in NAFTA Article 1139”); it is the place where the alleged
measures were taken; it also happens to be the country of the defendant’s domicile in
this case.

40.

41.

7) The Tribunal’s decision

The Tribunal has carefully balanced each of the factors discussed by the parties and
has found most of these factors to weigh equally between a venue in Canada and a
venue in the United States. The Tribunal finds however that the location of the
subject matter in dispute is a factor pointing to a venue in the United States. As a
result, the Tribunal considers that Washington, D.C. (United States) should be
designated as the place of arbitration.

THE SUBMISSION OF A STATEMENT OF DEFENCE BY THE
RESPONDENT AND THE BIFURCATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS

The Claimant filed its Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim on July 9, 2002.
The Respondent has challenged the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal by submitting
an Objection to Jurisdiction on October 16, 2003, whereby it requested that the
Tribunal address its jurisdictional objection as a preliminary question. The issue was
raised during the first Organizational Hearing of October 28, 2003. By Procedural
Order No. 2 of November 3, 2003, the Tribunal ordered the parties to address in their
written submissions on the place of arbitration the issue of whether the proceedings
should be bifurcated into a first jurisdictional phase and a second phase on the merits.

The parties are also in dispute as to whether a statement of defence should be
submitted by the Respondent prior to any decision by the Tribunal on the requested
bifurcation of the proceedings.

Given that the issue of the submission of a statement of defence by the Respondent
and that of the bifurcation of the proceedings are related, the Tribunal will address
them together.

The position of the parties

1) The Claimant's position

The Claimant has requested the Tribunal to direct the Respondent to provide a
statement of defence. Relying on the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (as well as the
commentary of the Rules), the Claimant submits that: (1) Article 19 of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules makes it an obligation for a respondent to file a
statement of defence in a timely manner, normally 45 days in accordance with Article
23 of the Rules; (2) such a submission will allow the issues in dispute to be clearly
defined; (3) ordering the submission of a statement of defence will ensure an equal
treatment of the parties and enable the Claimant to know the defences that the
Respondent intends to raise; (4) ordering the filing of a statement of defence will
ensure that all jurisdictional issues that the Respondent intends to raise are articulated
at this stage; and (5) the submission of a statement of defence is consistent with prior
NAFTA arbitration cases (Claimant’s Submission, paras. 45-60; Claimant’s Reply
Submission, paras. 31-38). The Claimant further disputes the Respondent’s argument
according to which it is not under an obligation to file a statement of defence absent a
demonstration by the Claimant that the Respondent has agreed prima facie to arbitrate
the claim. According to the Claimant, such a prima facie agreement is to be found in

42.

43.

44,

45.

the provision of Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA and the Claimant’s allegations
regarding the violation of those provisions (Claimant’s Reply Submission, para. 34).

The Claimant requests that the Respondent’s statement of defence be submitted
before the Tribunal makes a determination with respect to the bifurcation of the
proceedings (Claimant’s Submission, para. 61). The Claimant’s position is that the
issue of bifurcation cannot be decided in the absence of the Respondent’s statement of
defence, in particular in light of the complexity of the facts underlying the claim and
the Claimant’s allegations under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA (Claimant’s Reply
Submission, paras. 39-45).

2) The Respondent's position

The Respondent does not consider that a statement of defence would help the
Tribunal to determine whether or not to bifurcate the proceedings. In addition, the
Respondent emphasizes that it has not agreed prima facie to arbitrate the type of claim
asserted by the Claimant in this case, i.e. antidumping and countervailing duty claims
under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA (Respondent’s Submission, pp. 18-20;
Respondent’s Rejoinder Submission, pp. 9-10). As regards the Claimant’s concern
that all jurisdictional issues should be articulated at this stage of the proceedings, the
Respondent argues that the reservation of rights it has made in its Objection to
Jurisdiction is a simple precaution against future waiver arguments made by the
Claimant. It further emphasizes that it is making only one jurisdictional argument for
which it seeks preliminary treatment (Respondent’s Submission, pp. 18-20).

Relying on Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the Respondent argues
that its jurisdictional objection should be addressed as a preliminary matter. In
support of a separate proceeding, the Respondent also contends that its jurisdictional
objection presents a straightforward matter of textual interpretation and that the
bifurcation of the proceedings would be the most efficient and economical way to
proceed (Respondent’s Submission, pp. 15-16; Respondent’s Rejoinder Submission,
p. 8).

The circumstances of this arbitration

The Tribunal is not convinced by the Claimant’s reading of the provisions of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Article 19(1) of the Rules provides that “[w]ithin a
period of time to be determined by the arbitral tribunal, the respondent shall
communicate his statement of defence in writing to the claimant and to each of the
arbitrators.” This provision simply recognizes an arbitral tribunal’s discretion to
define a period of time for a respondent to submit its statement of defence, the timely
submission of which is therefore subject to the deadline fixed by the tribunal. Article
23 of the Rules provides that “[t]he periods of time fixed by the arbitral tribunal for
the ication of written (i ding the of claim and
statement of defence) should not exceed forty-five days. However, the arbitral tribunal
may extend the time-limits if it concludes that an extension is justified.” There is a
distinction to be made between the period of time to be granted by an arbitral tribunal
for the submission of written statements (which is the object of Article 23) and the
date as of which that period starts (which is to be determined by the tribunal in each

 

46.

47.

48.

49.

case). Neither of these provisions determines the time at which the statement of
defence is to be filed.

Further, the Tribunal does not consider that, in this case, the submission of a
statement of defence by the Respondent is a prerequisite to the issue of whether or not
it can decide the bifurcation of the proceedings. Article 21(3) of the Rules makes it
possible for a respondent to raise jurisdictional objections “not later than in the
statement of defence”, which indicates that it may raise such objections in a separate
document before it files its statement of defence. Article 21(4) further allows an
arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction as a preliminary question. Nothing in these
provisions limits the Tribunal’s power to determine whether it may decide to hold a
preliminary phase without having ordered the prior submission of a statement of
defence. As a legal as well as practical matter, a statement of defence that would be a
formality and that would simply deny all of the Claimant’s allegations would not be
of great assistance to either the Tribunal or the Claimant.

As a result, the Tribunal considers that the bifurcation of the proceedings between a
preliminary phase on the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections and a merits phase—
each phase involving issues of a different nature—may be ordered without the
submission of a statement of defence. In particular, the Tribunal considers that the
bifurcation of the proceedings with respect to the Respondent’s Objection to
Jurisdiction on the basis of Chapter Nineteen of the NAFTA may be decided without
the submission of a statement of defence. The Tribunal however observes that,
straightforward as this latter issue is deemed to be by the Respondent, the parties may
find it constructive to discuss the texts at issue as well as any evidence of fact or law,
including, insofar as the parties may find it relevant, preparatory materials to the
negotiation of the NAFTA and the opinions of the most highly qualified publicists.

The Tribunal’s acceptance that the proceedings may be bifurcated in no way implies
that, should the Tribunal decide that it has jurisdiction to hear the merits of the
Claimant’s allegations, the Respondent may seek to raise new jurisdictional
objections at the merits phase. Indeed, the Tribunal shares the Claimant’s legitimate
concern that “all jurisdictional issues that the United States intends to raise [be]
articulated now” and that the Respondent in this case has “reserved its ability to
advance other arguments that may be characterized as jurisdictional, but without
articulating what they might be” (Claimant’s Submission, paras. 56 and 59).

Unlike the respondent in UPS v. Canada (Decision on the Filing of a Statement of
Defence, October 17, 2001, paras. 16-17, annexed to Claimant’s Submission, Exhibit
B14), the Respondent in this case has not presented the Tribunal with all of its
jurisdictional arguments and has made the following reservation of rights in its
Objection to Jurisdiction:

“The United States wishes to underscore, in objecting to the

jurisdiction of the Tribunal, that it in no way concedes that Canfor’s
claims with respect to the measures at issue have any merit. To the
contrary, Canfor’s claims are defective both as a matter of law and as a
matter of fact. The United States reserves its right to contest the merits
at a later time should it be necessary, as well as to defend the case on
grounds that Canfor has not proven elements of its case that could be
considered jurisdictional” (Objection to Jurisdiction of Respondent
United States of America, October 16, 2003, p. 34).

The Respondent explains this reservation of rights “simply as a precaution against
any future argument that it has waived its rights with respect to factual defenses that
could be construed to have jurisdictional aspects” (Respondent’s Submission, p. 18).
Referring to the parties’ discussion with the Tribunal during the first Organizational
Hearing, the Respondent further argues that such a position could cover defenses on
the grounds that the Claimant has not proved that it is an investor in the United States
or whether there is an investment pursuant to the relevant provisions of the NAFTA
(d., at footnote 52).

The Tribunal is not convinced by the Respondent’s attempt to draw a distinction
between legal jurisdictional defenses related to Chapter Nineteen of the NAFTA—
which are presented as straightforward—and “factual defenses that could be
construed to have jurisdictional aspects” (Respondent’s Submission, p. 18)—which it
reserves for the phase on the merits, if any. The Tribunal has no reason to doubt that
the Respondent is in a position, at this stage, to make every jurisdictional argument it
may have, including those relating to whether or not the Claimant is an investor of a
Party as defined in the NAFTA, or whether or not the Claimant has made investments
in the territory of the United States as contemplated by the provisions of the NAFTA.
Even though objections such as those may be fact-based, they nevertheless have the
same jurisdictional nature. It is for the Tribunal, not the Respondent, to decide
whether any particular jurisdictional objection should be treated as a preliminary
matter or joined to the merits of the dispute.

The Respondent may find a strategic advantage in presenting the Tribunal, at this
stage, with one jurisdictional argument, “the only one for which its seeks preliminary
treatment” (Respondent’s Submission, p. 18). However, the Tribunal should not be
constrained, when conducting the arbitration, by any of the parties’ procedural and
strategic choices. The Tribunal must conduct this arbitration in a way that is
compatible with the equal treatment of the parties. The Tribunal would indeed be
treating the parties without equality if it were to allow the Respondent to make
piecemeal objections to its jurisdiction. It is also unquestionable that the efficiency of
the arbitral procedure would be seriously impaired by the duplication of the phases of
the proceedings, one jurisdictional phase regarding Chapter Nineteen of the NAFTA
and, if any, one phase on the merits which may include jurisdictional and other
arguments to be idered before the ination of the merits.

 

The Tribunal considers that the Respondent is, at this stage, in a position to determine
whether it has, or may have, any other jurisdictional or preliminary objections.
Should its jurisdictional defense relating to Chapter Nineteen of the NAFTA prevail,
such other objections will simply not be considered.

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal decides that:

(1) The Respondent shall file a Statement of Defence limited to and setting
forth all of its jurisdictional objections;

(2) The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction of October 16, 2003 shall be
treated as a preliminary question;

(3) Only after the Respondent has presented all of its jurisdictional objections
and the Claimant has had an opportunity to comment on which, in its view,
should be treated as a preliminary question, will the Tribunal (i) determine

which jurisdictional objections, if any, may, in addition to the Respondent’s
Objection to Jurisdiction relating to Chapter Nineteen of the NAFTA, be
decided as a preliminary question, and which, if any, should be joined to the
merits phase, and (ii) fix the procedural calendar for the submission of the
parties’ memorials on the jurisdiction of the Tribunal (together with all
documents and written statements of all witnesses that the parties may deem
relevant to file).

TIL. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

55. For the reasons set out above, the Arbitral Tribunal decides as follows.

A. On the place of the arbitration:

qd)

The place of arbitration shall be Washington, D.C. (United States).

B. On the filing of a Statement of Defence by the Respondent:

(2)

(3)

(4)

The Respondent shall submit a Statement of Defence setting forth the
entirety of the Respondent’s objections to the Arbitral Tribunal’s
jurisdiction;

The Claimant shall have the opportunity to express its views as to whether
any additional objections should be treated as a preliminary question or
joined to the merits of the dispute;

The procedural calendar for the exchange of the parties’ written
submissions shall be as follows:

- February 27, 2004: Respondent’s Statement of Defence setting forth the
entirety of the Respondent’s objections to the
Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction;

- March 8, 2004: Claimant’s comments on the Respondent’s statement
of February 27, 2004 on the issue of whether, in its
view, any additional objections should be treated as a
preliminary question or joined to the merits of the
dispute.

C. On the bifurcation of the proceedings:

(5)

(6)

The Tribunal decides that the Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction of
October 16, 2003 shall be treated as a preliminary question;

After the above exchange of written submissions, the Tribunal will
determine which additional jurisdictional issues, if any, shall be examined
as a preliminary question, and will fix the corresponding procedural

calendar for the submission of the parties’ memorials on the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal (together with all documents and written statements of all
witnesses that the parties may deem relevant to file).

Made by the Arbitral Tribunal on January 23, 2004

Joseph H. H. WEILER Conrad K. HARPER

Emmanuel GAILLARD (Pres

 

