INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

CARATUBE INTERNATIONAL OIL COMPANY LLP
CLAIMANT
Vv.
REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN
RESPONDENT

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/08/12
Arbitral Tribunal:
Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, President
Dr. Gavan Griffith QC, Arbitrator

Dr. Kamal Hossain, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Milanka Kostadinova

Assistant of the Tribunal:
Yun-I Kim

Award

Claimant’s counsel: Stuart H. Newberger

Clifton S. Elgarten

Baiju S. Vasani (until 1 June 2012)
Michael L. Martinez (until 1 May 2012)
Dana Contratto

Tan Laird

Claire Stockford

Meriam Alrashid

Emily Alban

Julia Cayre

Crowell & Moring LLP

Respondent’s counsel: Peter M. Wolrich

Geoffroy Lyonnet

Gabriela Alvarez Avila

Askar Moukhitdinov

Jennifer M. Morrison

Jéréme Lehucher

Leila Shayakhmetova

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Date of despatch to the Parties: 5 June 2012

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS
A. THE PARTIES
B. THE TRIBUNAL
C. SHORT IDENTIFICATION OF THE CASE...
C.L CLAIMANT’S PERSPECTIVE
C.Il. RESPONDENT’S PERSPECTIVE
D. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 12
E. THE PRINCIPAL RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS ..
EJ. THE KAZAKHSTAN—U.S. BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY......
EI. CONTRACT NO. 954 — THE EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION CONTRACT ..
EI. RELEVANT ICSID CONVENTION PROVISIONS.
E.[V. VIENNA CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF TREATIES
F. | RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE PARTIE:
Fl. RELIEF SOUGHT BY CLAIMANT 44
F.I. RELIEF SOUGHT BY RESPONDENT. 47
G. SUMMARY OF FACTS. 49
G.I. THE CARATUBE PROJECT
G.I. CIOC AND CONTRACT ASSIGNMENT.
G.I. PERFORMANCE OF THE CONTRACT BY CIOC (2002-2007) AND CONTRACT TERMINATION IN 2008..
G.IV. ALLEGED INTIMIDATION BY THE AUTHORITIE:
H. SHORT SUMMARY OF CONTENTIONS 57
HI. CONTENTIONS REGARDING THE JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL. 7
H.IL CONTENTIONS REGARDING THE ADMISSIBILITY OF THE CLAIMS PRESENTED
HAIL. Summary of Ce by Claimant 57
HIL2. Summary of C by Re 1 57
HII. CONTENTIONS REGARDING LIABILITY. “
HLIIL1, Summary of Ce by Claimant 58
HLIIL2. Summary of Ce by Re de 59
HIV. CONTENTIONS REGARDING DAMAGES AND QUANTUM
HLIV.1, Summary of Ce by Claimant 60
HLIV.2.. Summary of Ce by Re de 61
L ANALYSIS BY THE TRIBUNAL — PRELIMINARY MATTERS. .
LI. APPLICABLE LAW 62
1.1.1. Positions of the Parties.
11.2. The Tribunal.
LIL TREATY INTERPRETATION AND RELEVANCE OF DECISIONS OF OTHER COURTS AND TRIBUNALS...
LIN. PROCEDURAL ISSUES REGARDING LATE SUBMISSIONS OF DOCUMENTS.
LIIL.1. Claimant's Perspective
LAIL2. Re ’s Perspectit
LAIL.3. The Tribunal. 68
LIV. PROCEDURAL ISSUES REGARDING THE ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS AND EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES AT
THE HEARING 69

 

L1V.1. Claimant’s Perspective 70

 

 

 

 

 

LIV.2. Re dent's 72

L1V.3. The Tribunal. 75
J. JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL 8
J. INTRODUCTION 78
J. | THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE ICSID CONVENTION FOR CIOC TO CLAIM U.S. NATIONALITY — ARTICLE

25(2)(B) 78

 

JIL. Claimant's Position
JIL2. Re dent's Position
JIL.3. Tribunal’s Analy:
of Article 25(2)(b)
o Article VI(8) of the BIT
(c) Burden of Proof.
JJ. Dogs CLAIMANT SATISFY THE REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE VI(8) OF THE BIT?..
JL 1, Is Claimant a Kazakh Company, as Defined in the BIT?.
J.IL2. Was Claimant an Investment Owned or Controlled by a U.S. National at the Time Immediately
Before the Events which Gave Rise to the Dispute? ..
(a) Events that Gave Rise to the Disput
(b) U.S. Nationality of Devineci Hourani ...
@ Claimant’s Position
s Position
& Tribunal’s Analysi:
(c) Ownership or Control
(1) Ownership
(i) Claimant’s Position

 

 

s

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
   
 
 
  

 

(ii) 's Position
(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis.
(2) Control
® Claimant's Position
iti
ti Tribunal’s Analys
(d) Is CIOC an Investment of Devineci
a) s Position
(2) Claimant's Position
(3) Tribunal’s Analysi
(i) Did Devincci Hourani Make Any Contribution to CIOC?
(ii) Personal Guarantee by Devineci Hourani...
(iii) Bona Fid

J.IV. CONCLUSION ON JURISDICTION

 

 

 

K. CONSIDERATIONS REGARDING COSTS...
KI. CLAIMANT’ POSITION,
K.IL. RESPONDENT’S POSITION
KI. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

 

 

Abbreviations

BIT

C-IV
Cc-V
C-VI
C-VIII

C-IX

CCC
CIOC

Contract,
Contract No. 954

DCF

ICSID

ICSID Arbitration Rules
ICSID Convention

ILC Draft Articles

(on State Responsibility)
JOR

MEMR

Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic
of Kazakhstan concerning the encouragement and reciprocal
protection of investment of 19 May 1992

Exhibit to Caratube International Oil Company

Claimant’s Request for Arbitration of 16 June 2008

Claimant’s Memorial of 14 May 2009

Claimant’s Reply Memorial of 30 July 2010

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief of 27 June 2011

Claimant’s Application for Costs of 7 November 2011

Claimant’s Comments on Respondent’s Statement of Costs of
18 November 2011

Consolidated Contractors (Oil and Gas) Company S.A.L.
Caratube International Oil Company

Contract for Exploration and Production of Hydrocarbons with-
in Blocks CCIV-20-C (partially); CCIV-21-A (partially),
including Karatube Field (oversalt) in Baiganin District of
Aktobe Oblast of the Republic of Kazakhstan of 27 May 2002
(as amended)

Discounted Cash Flow

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States of 18 March 1965

Draft articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts (2001)

JOR Investments Inc.
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources

Page

para(s).

PO

R-II

R-IV

R-V
R-VII

R-VIII

Subsoil Law

Tr

Transfer Agreement

TU Zapkaznedra

USD

VCLT

Paragraph(s)
Procedural Order
Exhibit to the Republic of Kazakhstan

Respondent’s Summary Reply to Claimant’s Request for
Arbitration of 31 March 2009

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction
and the Merits of 22 December 2009

Respondent’s Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction and the
Merits of 14 December 2010

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief of 27 June 2011
Respondent’s Statement of Costs of 7 November 2011

Respondent’s Comments on Claimant’s Application for Costs
of 18 November 2011

The Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan “On Subsoil and
Subsoil Use” dated 27 January 1996

Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits of 7 to
17 February 2011

Transfer Agreement Regarding Subsoil Use of 8 August 2002
Western Kazakhstan Territorial Administration of Geology and
Subsoil Use, a sub-committee of the Committee on Geology
and Subsoil Resources Management

United States dollar(s)

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969

A. The Parties

The Claimant

Represented by

The Respondent

Represented by

Caratube International Oil Company LLP

Stuart H. Newberger

Baiju S. Vasani

Michael L. Martinez

Tan Laird

Theodore R. Posner

Dana Contratto

Crowell & Moring LLP

1001 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington D.C. 20004-2595
USA

Republic of Kazakhstan

Peter Wolrich

Geoffroy Lyonnet

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
6, avenue Vélasquez

75008 Paris

FRANCE

Galileo Pozzoli

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Corso Venezia, 5

20121 Milano

ITALY

Gabriela Alvarez Avila

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle S.C.
Ruben Dario 281 Piso 9

Col. Bosque de Chapultepec

11580 Mexico City

MEXICO

Askar Moukhitdinov

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
The Nurlay-Tau Centre

13 al-Faraby Street

Block 1-V, 4th floor, Suite 5

Almaty, Kazakhstan 050059
KAZAKHSTAN

Jennifer Morrison

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, New York 10178

USA

Jéréme Lehucher

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
6, avenue Vélasquez

75008 Paris

FRANCE

B. The Tribunal

Appointed by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council on 18 February 2009.

after consultation with the Parties:

Professor Dr. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, President
Parkstrasse 38

D-51427 Bergisch-Gladbach

GERMANY

Appointed by Claimant by letter of 4 November 2008:

Dr. Gavan Griffith QC
Essex Court Chambers
24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WCA 3 EG
UNITED KINGDOM

Appointed by Respondent by letter of 22 December 2008:

 

in and Associates
Chamber Building, 2" Floor
122-124 Motijheel Commercial Area
Dhaka 1000

BANGLADESH

Cc.

Short Identification of the Case

A short identification of the case is set out below. It is made without prejudice to the full
presentation of the factual and legal details of the case by the Parties and the Tribunal’s
considerations and conclusions.

C.I. Claimant’s Perspective

The following quotation from Claimant’s Memorial of 14 May 2009 summarises the main
aspects of the dispute as follows (C-IV, paras. 7-12):

“7,

10.

In this Memorial, CIOC sets out what is a substantial claim against
Kazakhstan, currently estimated in the Quantum Report to be USD 1,121.4
million, for damages and compensation (including interest) arising out of the
expropriation of its investment, a significant oil field in an oil rich area of the
country. [Note by the Tribunal: the reference to the quantum of allegedly
tained damages in ‘millions’ was corrected by Claimant in later
submissions to ‘billions’.]

 

Not only had CIOC invested millions of dollars in the exploration of the oil
field and its development, it was also entitled to an exclusive 25-year
commercial production licence since it had a commercial discovery. These
rights, of which CIOC has been deprived, underpin CIOC’s claim for damages
and compensation, but CIOC also claims non-material damages in respect of
the moral harm that CIOC, its majority owner, senior management and
employees have suffered at the hands of Kazakhstan.

For five years CIOC had successfully, and without any serious controversy,
pursued its investment. New oil wells were drilled and Soviet-era ones were
reopened, extensive geological testing and exploration work was carried out,
infrastructure was installed at the field and pilot production commenced.
Suddenly in mid 2007, the political landscape changed. A political rivalry that
had developed between President Nazarbayev and his powerful son-in-law,
Rakhat Aliyev flared into open hostility. In Kazakhstan’s campaign to
persecute Rakhat Aliyev that followed, it seems it became no longer politically
convenient for Kazakhstan to allow CIOC to continue its business since the
brother of Devincci Hourani, CIOC’s majority owner, is Rakhat Aliyev’s
brother-in-law. A reasonable person might have thought that CIOC was
sufficiently far removed from the dispute between the President and Rakhat
Aliyev however, in Kazakhstan, “politics is a family affair” [emphasis in
original and footnote omitted]. Family, business partners and associates of
Rakhat Aliyev have all been victimised in the course of the fall out between the
President and Mr Aliyev.

As a result, CIOC, its majority owner, senior management and employees have
been subjected to a campaign of harassment, intimidation and persecution at

9

the hands of the Kazakh authorities. As at the date of this Memorial the
victimisation continues. Armed guards remain at the site of CIOC’s oilfield
and its offices in Aktobe. Kazakh authorities have seized and still retain
(amongst other items) large numbers of CIOC’s documents and files, as well
as corporate seals and computer hard drives from CIOC’s head office in
Almaty, its branch office in Aktobe and from the oil field itself. Devincci
Hourani, his brothers and his senior manager Omar Antar feel unable to
return to Kazakhstan. CIOC is not the only investment that Devincci Hourani
has lost as a result of the abusive exercise of Kazakh sovereign power. He and
his brothers have lost all their substantial business interests in Kazakhstan.

11. Kazakh officials concocted unsubstantiated allegations that CIOC was in
breach of its contractual obligations as a pretext for what was no more than a
politically-motivated campaign against the company and its owner. CIOC’s
answers to these allegations went unheard and unanswered. In its haste to
purport to terminate the Contract, Kazakhstan also failed to follow the
stipulated legal procedures.

12. The Tribunal is likely to read and hear a great deal about CIOC’s
performance of its obligations under the Contract during the course of this
proceeding, but this case is not about CIOC’s contractual performance, which
in any event provided no reason for complaint let alone termination. In the
normal course, a contractual counterpart does not substantiate its grounds for
termination by seizing the other party’s majority owner from his bed in the
middle of the night and subject him to hours of questioning at its interior
Ministry. In the normal course, the focus of such questioning would not be on
the owner's family relationship with the President’s sworn political enemy. In
the normal course, it would also be highly unlikely that parties would mutually
agree to extend a contract by a further two years, for one party later to allege
that all along the other had been in material breach. But this is not a normal
case, and the dispute at its heart is not at all about contractual termination.”
(C-IV, paras. 7-12)

C.II. Respondent’s Perspective

In its Summary Reply to Claimant’s Request for Arbitration Respondent states (R-I, para.
6):

“[...] Respondent will show that all of the claims currently brought by Claimant
relate to lawful actions the Republic took in an effort to obtain that to which it was
rightfully entitled, namely Claimant’s proper performance of the Contract. Despite
Claimant's ion to the contrary, Resp will di ate that the

termination notices issued by the Republic were justified.”

 

The following quotations from Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction and the Merits further summarise the main aspects of the dispute (R-III,
paras. 2, 5, 18):

“[...] The Contract was awarded to Consolidated Contractors (Oil and Gas)
Company S.A.L. (“CCC”) on May 27, 2002. CCC assigned it to CIOC for USD 9.4
million on August 8, 2002, less than three months later. CIOC had come into
existence on July 29, 2002, a week before the assignment.” (R-III, para. 2)

“[...] [A]s will be explained and fully documented in that Section, CIOC never came
close in any year to fulfilling its obligations as set out in the Contract, the contractual
Minimum Work Program and the Annual Work Programs. In particular, CIOC never
even began drilling the required exploratory wells in the deeper subsalt region. CIOC
was notified by the Republic of its non-performance and was threatened with
termination on numerous occasions beginning in 2003. [...] These facts belie what
CIOC alleges in its Memorial: namely, that CIOC was performing perfectly well and
that the Termination was caused by political motivations arising in mid-2007 and not
by CIOC’s material breaches of the Contract. In fact, the Termination occurred as
part of the Republic’s ongoing review of the contractual performance of sub-soil
users in Kazakhstan. During the relevant period between late 2007 and early 2008,
eighty-seven contracts were terminated for material breach, including CIOC’s.
Moreover, the record clearly shows that CIOC’s material breaches and the
Republic’s repeated notices regarding those breaches occurred beginning in 2003,
long before the unrelated political events referred to by CIOC.” (R-II, para. 5)

“From the beginning and continuously throughout the life of the Contract, CIOC
systematically and significantly failed to meet its annual investment obligations. This
is indeed one of the reasons that led to the Termination of CIOC’s Contract. In
addition, there is no evidence that CIOC itself or its apparent owner and purported
investor, Devincci Hourani, had the ability to finance or mobilize the financing
necessary to sustain the future development of the Caratube project that CIOC
predicts in its damage claim.” (R-II, para. 18)

D. Procedural History

On 16 June 2008 Claimant filed its Request for Arbitration against the Republic of
Kazakhstan with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
pursuant to the Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of
Kazakhstan concerning the encouragement and reciprocal protection of investment of 19
May 1992 (the “BIT”). The Centre registered the Request for Arbitration on 26 August
2008.

By letter of 4 November 2008 Claimant appointed Dr. Gavan Griffith QC as an arbitrator.
By letter of 22 December 2008 Respondent appointed Dr. Kamal Hossain as an arbitrator.
The Parties agreed to have the party-appointed arbitrators select the President of the
Tribunal. The co-arbitrators were unable to reach such an agreement. On 18 February
2009, on the request of the Claimant and pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention,
the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Professor Dr. Karl-Heinz
Bockstiegel as presiding arbitrator in the case at hand. All three arbitrators accepted their
appointments.

By letter of 23 February 2009, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID notified the
Tribunal and the Parties that the Tribunal was deemed to having been constituted and the
proceedings to having begun on that date. Furthermore, the Acting Secretary-General
advised that ICSID Counsel Tomas Solis would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

By letter of 25 February 2009 the Tribunal proposed to hold the First Session in
Frankfurt, Germany on 16 April 2009, to which both Parties agreed.

By letter of 26 February 2009 the Tribunal asked Respondent to file a Summary Reply to
Claimant’s Request for Arbitration by 31 March 2009.

On 31 March 2009, Respondent submitted its Summary Reply to Claimant’s Request for
Arbitration.

By letter of 3 April 2009, the Parties submitted a joint advice on any points of the
provisional agenda on which they were able to reach agreement.

On 14 April 2009, Claimant filed a Request for Provisional Measures.

The First Session of the Arbitral Tribunal was held at the Frankfurt International
Arbitration Centre (FIAC) at the Frankfurt Chamber of Commerce in Frankfurt, Germany
on 16 April 2009.

The Minutes of the First Session contained the following sections which are relevant for
the later procedure:

“ou)

6. Place of Proceeding (Convention Articles 62 and 63; Administrative and
Financial Regulation 26; Arbitration Rule 13(3))

13.

14.

The Parties agreed that the place of the proceeding shall be Frankfurt,
Germany, although individual hearings may take place elsewhere if the
Parties and the Tribunal so agree.

Written and Oral Procedures (Arbitration Rules 20(1)(e) and 29)

13.1. The proceedings shall consist of a written procedure and an oral
procedure.

13.2. The length of time allocated to each Party during the oral procedure(s)
shall in principle be equal, subject to the Tribunal’s determination,
based on all relevant factors, including the number of witnesses for
each Party, that one Party should be afforded a greater share of the
available time.

13.3. The oral procedure(s) may include oral closing arguments if so
decided by the Tribunal. The oral procedure(s) may be followed by
written post-hearing submissions if so decided by the Tribunal, limited
by page number and including specific issues as may be identified by
the Tribunal, unless the Parties otherwise agree.

Number and Sequence of Pleadings, Time Limits, Supporting
Documentation (Arbitration Rules 20(1)(c) and 31)

14.1. By 14 May 2009:
Claimant’s Principal Memorial on all aspects of the case including
jurisdiction and the merits including quantum, together with witness
statements, documents, and expert reports (if any). The Tribunal made
reference to Exhibit 5 to the request for arbitration and invited the
Claimant to comment in its Memorial on the assignment of the
Contract.

14.2. By 14 July 2009:
The Respondent shall indicate whether or not it will request bifurcation
of the proceeding.

14.3. By 14 September, 2009:
Respondent may submit a Brief with reasoned objections to jurisdiction
and a request for bifurcation of the proceeding.

14.3. [sic] If such a Brief is submitted, by 16 November 2009:
The Claimant may submit a reasoned Reply-Brief.

14.4. Thereafter, the Tribunal will take appropriate steps to deal with this
matter in consultation with the Parties, and, if it decides to bifurcate
the proceedings, decide on a new timetable. The Tribunal shall issue a
summary decision on bifurcation prior to the due date for the
Respondent's Counter-Memorial (see item 14.6 below). The summary
decision shall contain only the dispositif of the Tribunal’s decision, a
reasoned decision will be issued shortly thereafter;

14.5,

14.6.

14.7.

14.8.

14.9.

14.10.

14.11.
14.12.

14.13.

14.14.

14.15.

14.16.

14.17.

14.18.

If Respondent has not objected to jurisdiction or if the Tribunal has
decided that there shall be no bifurcation of the proceeding, the
Timetable shall continue as follows:

By 15 December, 2009:

Respondents [sic] Principal Counter-Memorial on all aspects of the
case including jurisdiction and the merits including quantum, together
with witness statements, documents, and expert reports (if any)

By 15 January 2010:
Parties exchange document requests (if any) without sending copies to
the Tribunal.

By I February, 2010:
Parties try to agree on document requests, if any.

By 19 February 2010:

In so far as they have not reached agreement, the Parties may submit
reasoned applications to Tribunal in the form of “Redfern Schedules”,
to order the production of documents.

By 19 March 2010:
Tribunal rules on applications.

The parties shall produce the documents so ordered by 16 April 2010.

By 16 July 2010:
Claimant's Reply Memorial.

By 16 November 2010:
Respondents '[sic] Rejoinder Memorial.

In their Reply and Rejoinder Memorials, the Parties may only include
new factual allegations and additional evidence of any kind responding
to or rebutting matters raised by the other Parties in their Ist Round of
memorials or regarding new evidence obtained in the above procedure
on document production. Thereafter, no new evidence may be
submitted, unless agreed between the Parties or expressly authorized
by the Tribunal, in accordance with item 15.1 below.

By 17 December 2010:

Parties submit notifications of the witnesses and experts presented by
themselves or by the other Party whom they wish to examine at the
Hearing.

By 10 January 2011:
Pre-Hearing Conference between the Parties and the Tribunal, if
considered necessary by the Tribunal, either in person or by telephone.

As soon as possible thereafter, [the] Tribunal issues a Procedural
Order regarding details of the Hearing.

From 7 to 18 February 2011:
Hearing which shall be held in Paris, unless otherwise agreed between
the Parties and the Tribunal.

14.19. After consultation with the Parties during the Hearing, the Tribunal
may, if it considers that necessary, extend the Hearing from 21 to 22
February, 2011. The Parties and the members of the Tribunal will
block all these days and book accommodation for the full period.

14.20[.] By dates set at the end of the Hearing after consultation with the
Parties, Parties may submit Post-Hearing Briefs (no new documents
allowed).

20. Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures

The Tribunal noted that the Claimant submitted on 14 April, 2009 a request
for provisional measures.

The Respondent shall submit its response to the Claimant’s request for
provisional measures on 15 June 2009 (within two months from the first
session). The Respondent noted that, if necessary, it may request an extension
of this deadline.

A hearing on provisional measures is provisionally fixed by 30 June 2009 in
London, if considered necessary by the Tribunal after consultation with the
Parties.

If the need arises, the Tribunal shall request from the parties additional
information prior to issuing its decision on the Claimant's request.

21. _ Assistant to the President of the Tribunal

The Parties agreed to the possibility of the President of the Tribunal hiring an
assistant of the Tribunal for logistical assistance on the file in this case. In due
time, the Parties will be informed of the costs involved and invited to submit
any comments they might have.

()”

By letter of 24 April 2009, Claimant notified the Tribunal about purported violations of
the integrity of the arbitral process by Respondent, namely that the Republic of
Kazakhstan’s Committee of National Security (KNB) had raided several of Claimant’s
offices in Kazakhstan on 16 and 17 April 2009. With this letter, Claimant requested relief
against these purported measures by seeking a letter from the Tribunal to the Parties
recommending to refrain from taking steps which aggravate the dispute or violate the
Parties’ duties of good faith and equality pending the hearing on the Request for
Provisional Measures; further by requesting the Tribunal to accelerate the schedule for
dealing with the Request for Provisional Measures and by urging the Tribunal to issue
any other relief as it sees fit.

By a letter of 4 May 2009, the Tribunal set the date for the Hearing on Provisional
Measures for 30 June 2009 at the International Dispute Resolution Centre in London,
United Kingdom.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

By letter of 11 May 2009, ICSID notified the Parties that in accordance with the
arrangements of the First Session the President of the Tribunal had appointed Mr Dmitry
Marenkov as assistant. The Parties did not raise any objections to this appointment.

On 14 May 2009 Claimant filed its Memorial.

By letter of 19 May 2009, Claimant notified the Tribunal of the alleged house arrest of
two of Claimant’s overseas workers at Claimant’s office in Aktobe by Kazakh authorities.
Claimant urged Respondent to release the two employees and return their purportedly
confiscated travel and identity documents to them.

By letter of 2 June 2009, the Tribunal sent a draft Procedural Order No. 1 (PO-1) to the
Parties regarding the details of the Hearing on Provisional Measures in London on 30
June 2009. The Parties were given the opportunity to comment on draft PO-1 by 17 June
2009.

On 15 June 2009, Respondent submitted its Response to CIOC’s Amended Request for
Provisional Measures.

On 17 June 2009, the Parties affirmed that after reviewing draft PO-1 they had no
comments thereon.

On 18 June 2009 the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. | regarding the details of the
hearing on provisional measures on 30 June 2009.

By letter of 22 June 2009, Claimant responded to a letter dated 10 June 2009 by
Executive Secretary of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR) Mr K.
Safinov addressed to CIOC, a copy of which was sent to the Tribunal by ICSID. Claimant
regarded this letter as reply to its letter dated 9 December 2008 where Claimant
purportedly expressed its willingness to cooperate with the Kazakhstan government
regarding the orderly handover of the Contract Area without prejudice to Claimant’s legal
rights and defences. In view of the upcoming Hearing on Provisional Measures on 30
June 2009, Claimant proposed a meeting on 24, 25, or 26 June 2009.

Respondent by letter of 24 June 2009 communicated that it was logistically not feasible to
organise a handover meeting on the dates proposed by Claimant in its letter of 22 June
2009, however, Respondent confirmed its willingness to hold constructive meetings in the
Contract Area.

A hearing on Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures was held on 30 June 2009 in
London, UK.

On 2 July 2009, ICSID forwarded to the Tribunal a letter from Claimant dated 1 July
2009 addressed to Respondent regarding the handover meeting of the Contract Area on 8
and 9 July 2009. The letter contained logistical details as well as a draft handover
agreement.

By letter of 6 July 2009, counsel for Claimant notified the Tribunal of further alleged
measures of hi ent of CIOC and its Director in the offices of Hourani family
companies in Kazakhstan. Claimant requested the Tribunal to take these purported actions
into account when considering Claimant’s Amended Request for Provisional Measures.

 

29.

30.

31.

Also on 6 July 2009, ICSID forwarded a letter from Respondent dated 3 July 2009 to
Claimant regarding the handover of the Contract Area. On the same day, ICSID
forwarded to the Tribunal a reply letter from Claimant addressed to Respondent dated 6
July 2009. In it, Claimant addressed inter alia terms and conditions for the handover
meeting of the Contract Area and expressed its discontent with the representations made
by opposing counsel in its letter of 3 July 2009.

In its letter to the Tribunal of 9 July 2009, Respondent notified ICSID that it would not
request a bifurcation of the proceedings, but would reserve its right to submit
objections to jurisdiction in its Counter-Memorial on the merits in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(1). This declaration by Respondent was later amended in footnote 7
to the Counter-Memorial (p. 11):

“The Republic did not request the bifurcation of these proceedings, since it concluded
that the Tribunal needed factual information in order to assess these objections [to
jurisdiction] and such information was best presented with the merits of the case. This
however does not mean that the Republic considers these objections to be less serious,
and the Republic therefore asks the Tribunal to uphold the objections and to refrain
from considering the merits of the case.” (emphasis added)

The Tribunal issued its Decision Regarding Claimant’s Application for Provisional
Measures on 31 July 2009. After a detailed reasoning, the decisions were as follows:

“TL Decisions of the Tribunal

A, Regarding the individual Requests:

11. Regarding Claimant’s Request (a), the requested meeting has been
held and therefore the Request is moot and thus there is no need any
more for any recommendations in this regard.

1.2. Regarding Claimant’s Request (b), the Tribunal considers that
presently there is no need to recommend provisional measures in this
regard.

1.3. Regarding Claimant’s Requests (c), the Tribunal takes note of and
confirms Respondent's undertaking that

° all documents taken by Respondent shall be preserved by
Respondent,

° Respondent will grant to representatives of Claimant access to
all documents to which Claimant requests access,

. the Representatives of Claimant may copy any such documents,

° the Representatives of Claimant may take such copies out of

Kazakhstan to London.

In this context, the Tribunal understands that the term “documents”
includes files, computer disks and other material taken from
Claimant’s offices by representatives of Respondent so that the
undertakings by Respondent above also refer to these other materials.

The Tribunal does not consider it necessary to issue any further
recommendations for provisional measures in this regard.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

1.4. Regarding Claimant’s Requests (d), (e) and (f), the Tribunal confirms
that the Parties have an obligation to conduct the procedure in good
faith and that this obligation includes a duty to avoid any unnecessary
aggravation of the dispute and harassment of the other party.

1.5. Regarding Claimant’s Request (g), the Tribunal decides not to
recommend any provisional measures concerning the criminal
investigation conducted by Respondent, but points out that this is
without prejudice to any claims for damages in this regard that the
Claimant may raise in the procedure on the merits.

Concluding Decision:

1.6. Without prejudice to the rights of the Parties under the ICSID
Convention to make renewed applications for provisional measures, for
the reasons stated the Tribunal declines Claimant’s requests for
provisional measures.”

By letter of 19 August 2009 to counsel for Respondent, Claimant addressed issues
regarding the handover of the Contract Area as well as the alleged continuing harassment
of its employees by Respondent’s officials and agents. Also attached was a draft
Handover Agreement for the Caratube oil field.

On 3 September 2009, ICSID forwarded a letter from counsel for Respondent of 2
September 2009 addressed to counsel for Claimant regarding the draft Handover
Agreement and geological documents concerning the Contract Area. Also attached were a
copy of the Minutes of the meeting of 8 and 9 July 2009 and a letter from the MEMR to
CIOC of 2 September 2009 regarding the transmission of the above-mentioned geological
documents.

By letter of 16 October 2009, ICSID forwarded a letter to the Tribunal directed from
counsel for Claimant to counsel for Respondent regarding the proposal for the Handover
Agreement and related issues thereto.

By letter of 30 November 2009, Respondent replied to Claimant’s letter from 16 October
2009 referring to the Handover Agreement and related matters thereto.

Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and the Merits
on 22 December 2009.

On 15 January 2010, ICSID notified the Tribunal and the Parties that Mr Marat Umerov
has been appointed Secretary of the Tribunal to replace Mr Tomas Solis.

By letter of 12 February 2010, the Parties requested two amendments to the timetable for
the production of documents on which they had reached agreement beforehand. The
Tribunal by letter of 13 February 2010 notified the Parties that it did not object to the
proposed extensions.

By letters of 26 February 2010, the Parties each submitted a document production request
as specified in accompanying Redfern Schedules.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

47.

By letter of 1 March 2010, ICSID on behalf of the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit
within one week from the date of the letter, any comments they might have on the other
Party’s submission of 26 February 2010 and within one further week, any comments in
reply to the other Party’s comments submitted the week before.

On 4 March 2010, Respondent referring to its letter of 30 November 2009 to Claimant,
requested Claimant to advise as to Claimant’s intentions regarding the handover of the
Contract Area.

By letters of 8 March 2010, the Parties submitted their comments on the other Party’s
submission of 26 February 2010. Further, the respective Parties replied to these comments
regarding the other Party’s submission of 8 March 2010 in letters of 15 March 2010.

By letter of 20 April 2010, Respondent reiterated its request to Claimant concerning the
orderly handover of the Contract Area and asked for a response within two weeks.

By letter of 21 April 2010, ICSID notified the Tribunal that Ms Milanka Kostadinova had
been appointed Secretary of the Tribunal to replace Mr Marat Umerov.

By letter of 29 April 2010, Claimant notified the Tribunal of a change in counsel.
Claimant also informed the Tribunal of a petition it filed under U.S. Code, Title 28, Part
V, Chapter 117, § 1782 (Section 1782) in the U.S. District Court for the District of
Columbia to compel the production of documents and requested an extension of six
months to the procedural schedule.

On 3 May 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 (PO-2) concerning its
decision on the Parties’ document production requests. The Tribunal also invited
Respondent to submit written observations on Claimant’s Applications of 29 April 2010
by 10 May 2010. Claimant was granted the right to file a reply thereto by 17 May 2010 to
which Respondent could file further comments by 24 May 2010.

In view of its later relevance for decisions taken in this Award, sections 1.5., 2.1, and 4 of
PO-2 are hereafter quoted:

“1. Introduction
()

1.5. Finally the Tribunal notes that, insofar as a Party has the burden of proof, it
is sufficient for the other Party to deny what the respective Party has alleged
and then respond to and rebut the evidence provided by that respective Party
to comply with its burden of proof.

2. Documents to be produced

2.1 Having considered the related arguments by the Parties regarding the
outstanding Requests of Claimant, the Tribunal invites the Parties to produce
the documents and information so identified in the right hand column of the
Redfern Schedules attached to this PO and also to conduct the investigations
specified in the right hand column of the annexed Redfern Schedules and
produce such documents if the investigations confirm that these documents are
in Respondent's possession.

()

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

4. Adverse Inference

Insofar as documents ordered are not produced or not produced as ruled in
this Order, the Tribunal may take this into account in its evaluation of the
respective factual allegations and evidence including an inference against the
Party refusing production.”

PO-2 was accompanied by two annexes containing both Claimant’s and Respondent’s
Redfern Schedules with respective Decisions by the Tribunal. Some of the decisions dealt
with documents allegedly seized by Respondent as follows:

“In so far as the documents were seized, they are to be produced if Respondent has
the documents with TU Zapkaznedra. Otherwise, Respondent has to admit access to
Claimant according to section I.A.I.3. of the Tribunal’s Decision of 31 July 2009.”

On 10 May 2010, Respondent provided their observations on Claimant’s Applications of
29 April 2010, requesting the Tribunal to order Claimant to cease and desist from its
action in the U.S. District Court and to reject Claimant’s request for an extension of time.

On 17 May 2010, Claimant submitted their reply to Respondent’s letter of 10 May 2010.
In its letter, Claimant requested the Tribunal to confirm that no supportive order from the
Tribunal was needed for Claimant’s petition under Section 1782 and that the petition was
not inconsistent with the rules guiding and governing the Tribunal. Claimant also
reiterated its request to obtain a six-month extension.

By letter of 19 May 2010, Respondent commented on PO-2 requesting the Tribunal to
decide that translations of documents need not be produced by the providing party.

Claimant disagreed with Respondent’s request of 19 May 2010 by letter dated 21 May
2010, requesting the Tribunal that the paragraph at issue remain unchanged.

The Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 (PO-3) on 26 May 2010 of which sections
still relevant at this stage are quoted hereafter:

“ou)

2. Claimant’s Request for a Minimum 6-Month Extension and Respondent’s
Requests regarding the Section 1782 Petition

(00)

2.5. First, change of counsel, in the view of the Tribunal, is a procedural
choice of a party which in itself cannot form a basis for a substantial
change in the agreed timetable. This particularly is the case where the
application for a long extension is made late in the procedure, in this
case four months after the last Memorial by Respondent and more than
two months before the Claimant's Reply Memorial is due.

2.6. Second, whilst the Tribunal might have been minded to find that its
prior consent should have been sought by Claimant before the
presentation of its Section 1782 petition, the Tribunal concludes that it
is not necessary for it to order Claimant to cease and desist from the
US action. A party starting a Section 1782 procedure before the US
courts does so and chooses the time for such a petition at its own risk.

20

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

But the existence of such a petition to domestic courts cannot interfere
with the Tribunal’s maintenance of its authority over the arbitral
procedure and with the timetable established with the consent of the
Parties.

2.7. Regarding the additional request submitted by Respondent in its letter
of 24 May 2010, the Tribunal considers that this is a matter for a later
decision. Reference is made to section 2.3. of PO-2. Should Claimant,
at a later stage of this arbitral procedure apply to admit any document
produced in the Section 1782 procedure, this Tribunal will have to
decide on such an application having regard to its obligation to accord
procedural fairness to the Parties and particularly to Respondent's
right to object and to reply to such a document.

3. Respondent’s Request to change section 5.1. of Procedural Order No. 2
regarding the translation of documents

i)

3.3. For the reasons mentioned in section 5.1 of PO-2, and as this provision
equally applies to the production of documents by both parties, the
Tribunal concludes that section 5.1 should be maintained.”

By letter of 28 May 2010, Respondent informed the Tribunal that it is intervening in the
petition under Section 1782 brought by Claimant in the U.S. District Court.

By letter of 12 July 2010 to the Parties, the Tribunal granted Claimant an extension to 30
July 2010 and Respondent a period of four months plus the extension used by Claimant.
The Tribunal reminded the Parties that the date for submission of the lists of witnesses
and experts of 17 December 2010 would be maintained.

Claimant submitted its Reply Memorial on 30 July 2010.

By letter of 12 August 2010, Claimant withdrew the witness statement of Mr Harvey
Jackson due to a recent request by his employer.

By letter of 13 August 2010, Respondent advised the Tribunal that the court had rejected
Claimant’s petition under Section 1782 in a decision of 11 August 2010. Claimant’s
petition to reconsider was rejected on 22 September 2010.

By letter of 13 September 2010, Claimant requested the Tribunal to issue an order
immunising Claimant’s participants, witnesses, and experts from legal process. Claimant
further asked the Tribunal to condemn asserted breaches by Respondent of Articles 21
and 22 of the ICSID Convention.

By letter of 22 September 2010, Respondent filed its observations regarding Claimant’s
Request for Immunity from Legal Process requesting the Tribunal to reject Claimant’s

request. The Parties exchanged further correspondence on the issue.

In its letter of 1 October 2010, Respondent objected to Claimant’s request for witness
immunity.

21

62. The Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 (PO-4) regarding Claimant’s Request for
an Order on Immunity on 19 October 2010, sections of which are still relevant and are

quoted hereafter:

“(u)
4.

Regarding the alleged risks of Claimant’s witness Dr. Rakhat Shoraz, born
Aliyev, the Tribunal considers the following:

4.1.

4.2.

The article in the newspaper FALTER only reports on suspicions and
allegations without confirming or proving their validity.

The “Memorandum” of the Austrian Federal Interior Ministry first
reports on a letter received from Mr. Aliyev’s attorneys KWR without
confirming the authenticity or the correctness of the contents of the
letter. However, the memorandum goes on to state:

“Regarding the facts at issue — after an exhaustive analysis of
the letter — the order was given to inform Attorney Prof. Dr.
Brandstetter of the current, actually existing danger situation
regarding Dr. Soraz.”

From this wording, it is not clear which information was given by
whom to Prof. Brandstetter. But the wording does indicate that the
Austrian authority accepted that there was indeed some information
regarding a current, actually existing danger situation regarding Dr.
Soraz. Finally, the Memorandum records a_ statement of Prof.
Brandstetter, the attorney of Mr. Aliyev, but does not confirm the
contents of the statement.

While the Tribunal considers that the two documents of evidence submitted by
Claimant in this context are not sufficient proof of the alleged threatening
activity of Respondent, under the circumstances of this case, the Tribunal finds
it appropriate to state the following.

3.

5.2.

The immunity granted by Art. 21 and 22 is applicable without a specific
order of an ICSID Tribunal. This Tribunal confirms that the immunity
granted by Art. 21 and 22 is also applicable to the persons
participating in the present ICSID proceedings and particularly that
Art. 22 is also applicable to Mr. Aliyev in his capacity as a witness in
these proceedings. The tribunal notes with pleasure that Respondent, in
its most recent letter of 15 October 2010, expressly states that it
welcomes and has no objection to Mr. Aliyev appearing as a witness in
the forthcoming hearing.

Beyond these provisions of Art. 21 and 22, the Tribunal agrees with the
Tribunal in the Libananco Case (http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/
Libanco-Decision.pdf) that every ICSID tribunal has an inherent power
required to preserve the integrity of its own process and assure that the
parties can advance their respective cases freely without interference,
and as well that the parties have an obligation to arbitrate fairly and in
good faith, and that this duty also applies to States as parties to ICSID
proceedings, even if in the exercise of their sovereign powers and
including criminal proceedings, though the State’s right to exercise
such sovereign powers and criminal jurisdiction is not questioned.

 

22

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

5.3. This obligation includes the duty of parties not to intimidate, harass,
retaliate against, or physically harm parties, witnesses and other
participants in ICSID proceedings or prevent them from fulfilling their
functions.

5.4. For the present case, this is recalled in view of concern expressed by
the Austrian authorities in the Memorandum and also in view of the
criminal proceedings of the Respondent against participants in the
present case as parties or witnesses from Claimant’s side, and
particularly in view of the measures taken in Kazakhstan on the same
date as the I" Session of the present proceeding on 16 April 2009
during which many documents were taken from the Claimant's offices.
In this regard, reference is made to the respective rulings in the
Tribunal’s Decision of 31 July 2009 regarding provisional measures
and in Procedural Order No.2 regarding document production.

6. In so far as Claimant’s Requests go beyond the Tribunal’s Statements in
section 4 above, they are dismissed.”

By letter of 2 December 2010, the Tribunal urged the Parties to adhere to the time limits
for their respective filings due before the Christmas holidays and reminded them to send
these particular submissions not only to ICSID but also directly to the Members of the
Tribunal as well as to the new Assistant of the Tribunal Ms Yun-I Kim.

By a letter of 13 December 2010, Claimant informed about asserted inacceptable conduct
of Respondent which was purported to run counter to the arbitral process.

Respondent filed its Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction and the Merits dated
14 December 2010, accompanied by witness statements, expert reports, and exhibits. Due
to technical difficulties there was a delay of seven days in transmission of the documents
to the Tribunal and to Claimant.

 

On 15 December 2010, Respondent submitted its Response to Claimant’s Request
to Examine Witnesses Under the Control of Respondent.

By email of 17 December 2010, Claimant requested an extension for the filing of the
notifications of the witnesses and experts each party wished to examine at the hearing due
to the tardy submission of Respondent’s Rejoinder. Respondent commented on
Claimant’s request also on 17 December 2010, noting that Claimant’s request was
disproportionate.

By email of 18 December 2010, the President on behalf of the Tribunal granted an
extension. The Parties were thus given time until 22 December 2010 to submit their
notifications of the witnesses and experts from each side respectively who they wished to
examine at the hearing. The Tribunal further reminded the Parties that they should send
any comments they might have regarding draft Procedural Order No. 5 by 22 December
2010 also. Furthermore, Respondent was invited to submit a reply to Claimant’s
Application of 13 December 2010.

On 21 December 2010, ICSID transmitted hard copies of Respondent’s Rejoinder and

Respondent’s Response to CIOC’s Request to Examine Witnesses Under the Control of
Respondent to the Tribunal.

23

70.

71.

72.

By letter of 22 December 2010, the Parties submitted their respective lists of witnesses
and experts whom they wished to examine at the hearing in Paris. By letter of that same
date, Respondent submitted its comments on draft PO-5. In a further letter of that day,
Respondent provided comments to Claimant’s request of 13 December 2010.

By letter of 23 December 2010, Claimant provided its response to Respondent’s letter of
22 December 2010 regarding Claimant’s request of 13 December 2010.

By email of 29 December 2010, Procedural Order No. 5 and Procedural Order No. 6
were issued to the Parties. As the preparation of the hearing was highly disputed between
the Parties, relevant sections are quoted hereafter:

“Procedural Order (PO) No. 5
Regarding further details of the Hearing in Paris

In order to allow the Parties an early and efficient preparation of the hearing in Paris
scheduled to start on 7 February 2011 and without prejudice to the option for a pre-
hearing conference provided in section 14.16. of the Minutes of the 1" Session, a draft
of this PO has been communicated to the Parties who were invited to submit any
comments they may have by 22 December 2010.

Now, taking into account:

+ the comments on the draft received from the Parties,

+ the Respondent's Rejoinder,

+ the Parties witness notifications[,]

+ the further submissions received from the Parties,
the Tribunal decides that in view of the extensive written submissions received from
the Parties, a telephone conference is not necessary, and hereby issues the PO in its

final form.

d. Introduction

1.1. This Order recalls the earlier agreements and rulings of the Tribunal
and particularly takes into account the recent submissions and letters
of the Parties.

1.2. In particular, sections 8 and 15 of the Minutes of the Ist Session are
recalled and hereby confirmed. The Parties are invited to assure that
these provisions are complied with.

1.3. By 17 January 2011, the Parties:

e may submit further documents, but only in rebuttal of the recent
submissions by the other Party; thereafter, no further documents may
be submitted before or at the hearing unless expressly authorized by
the Tribunal;

e shall submit notifications of the persons who will be attending the
hearing on their respective sides;

© may submit a notification if they do not intend to examine any of the
witnesses so far notified. If a Party does not call a witness for cross-
examination at the hearing, this will not be considered as an
acceptance of that witness’ testimony;

24

e shall notify which of its witnes.
interpretation from and to English;

e may submit a notification on any agreement they have reached
regarding the order for the examination of witnesses and experts
during the hearing;

e shall submit either agreed or separate lists suggesting which experts
should be examined together by Expert Conferencing;

e shall submit either agreed or separate short lists of issues which they
suggest for each group of experts to be raised by Expert Conferencing,
taking into account that no repetition of the contents of the written
expert reports is necessary and that the Conferencing should focus on
the clarification of major issues on which the experts disagree.

 

s and experts, if any, require

2.2. As agreed, ten working days are blocked from 7 to 18 February 2011,
and the hearing may be extended to include 21 and 22 February 2011,
if considered necessary by the Tribunal after consultation with the
Parties.

2.3. To give sufficient time to the Parties and the Arbitrators to prepare for
and evaluate each part of the Hearings, the daily sessions shall not go
beyond the period between 9:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. However, the
Tribunal, in consultation with the Parties, may change the timing
during the course of the Hearings.

Conduct of the Hearing

3.1. In addition to the provisions of the Minutes of the I Session, the
following shall apply:

3.2. The following Agenda is established for the Hearing:

I. Introduction by the Chairman of the Tribunal.

2. Opening Statements of not more than 1.5 hours each for the
a) Claimant,
b) Respondent.

3. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties: Examination of

Claimant’s fact witnesses. For each:

a) Affirmation of witness to tell the truth.

b) Short introduction by Claimant (This may be up to 10
minutes and may be longer to include a short direct
examination on new developments after the last written
statement of the witness or expert.).

o Cross-examination by Respondent.

d) Re-direct examination by Claimant, but only on issues
raised in cross-examination.

e) Re-cross examination by Respondent but only on issues
raised in re-direct examination.

A Remaining questions by members of the Tribunal, but

they may raise questions at any time.

4. Examination of Respondent's fact witnesses. For each:

25

vice versa as under 3.a) to f) above.

5 Examination of Claimant’s and Respondent’s industry experts,
if any, by the method of Expert Conferencing. For each: as
under 3.a) to f) above. The Tribunal intends to start the
Conferencing by questions of its own taking into account the
above lists of issues received from the Parties, and thereafier,
the Parties may raise further questions.

  

6. Examination of Claimant’s and Respondent’s experts on
quantum, if any, by the method of Expert Conferencing. For
each: as under 3.a) to f) above. The Tribunal intends to start the
Conferencing by questions of its own taking into account the
above lists of issues received from the Parties, and thereafier,
the Parties may raise further questions.

 

7. Any witness or expert may only be recalled for rebuttal
examination by a Party or the members of the Tribunal, if such
intention is announced in time to assure the availability of the
witness or expert during the time of the Hearing.

8 At an appropriate time during the hearing, after consultation
with the Parties, the Tribunal will decide, how much time of a
break shall be allotted to the Parties for preparation of their
Closing Statements.

9. Closing arguments of up to 2 hours each for the
a) Claimant,
b) Respondent.

10. Remaining questions by the members of the Tribunal, if any.

11. Discussion regarding the timing and details of post-hearing
submissions and other procedural issues.

()

3.6. No documents may be presented at the Hearing, unless authorized by
the Tribunal. According to section 15.1. second paragraph of the
Minutes of the Ist Session, this also applies to documents impeaching
the credibility of a witness or expert. But demonstrative exhibits may be
shown using documents submitted earlier in accordance with the
Timetable.

(J)

4.3. The Tribunal may change any of the rulings in this order Order[sic],
after consultation with the Parties, if considered appropriate under the
circumstances.”

73. Attached to PO-5 was a timetable with a calculation of hearing time.
74. For the same reasons, hereafter PO-6 is quoted which was as well issued on 29 December
2010:

26

“Procedural Order (PO) No. 6
regarding outstanding applications by Claimant

Claimant’s Request to Examine Witnesses under the Control of Respondent

1.

The Tribunal has taken note of the Claimant’s Request dated 10
November 2010, of Respondent’s undated Response received on 22
December 2010, and of the Parties’ further submissions with further
references to issues in that context. The Tribunal does not consider it
necessary to repeat or summarize the factual and legal arguments
submitted by the Parties which it has carefilly evaluated and taken into
account in coming to the following conclusions.

Regarding the Tribunal’s authority to order the presence of persons for
examination at the hearing, the Parties agree, and the Tribunal also
agrees, that Art. 43 ICSID Convention provides for such an authority
and that Art. 4.11 of the IBA Rules of Evidence (1999) provides
guidance in this context.

The Tribunal recalls the agreement recorded in section 15.2 of the
Minutes of the 1" Meeting.

In that context, the Tribunal clarifies that if a witness or expert whose
statement has been submitted by a Party and whose examination at the
Hearing has been requested by the other Party does not appear at the
Hearing, his or her statement will not be taken into account by the
Tribunal. A Party may apply with reasons for an exception from that
rule and in such a case the Tribunal may take the arguments of both
Parties into account in its decision regarding the evaluation of the
evidence provided by such testimony including the option to draw
inferences from the non-appearance.

If the presence is requested by a Party of persons who have not
submitted written statements, but on whose statements, letters or
behaviour the Parties have relied in their submissions, guided by Art.
4.11 IBA Rules of Evidence, the Tribunal invites both Parties to use
their best efforts to provide their appearance at the hearing. If such a
person does not appear, the Tribunal will take into account the
relevancy and materiality, if any, that could have been expected from
an oral examination of that person in view of the existing submissions
of the Parties, the reasons put forward for the non-appearance, as well
as the respective arguments of both Parties, in its decision regarding
the evaluation of the evidence of the case including the option to draw
inferences from the non-appearance of such persons.

Particularly regarding any persons referred to by the Parties in
connection with the allegedly forged documents, the Tribunal would
consider it helpful if these persons could be available for oral
examination at the hearing. In so far as they do not attend, the Tribunal
will apply the approach described above in section 5.

The Parties are invited to submit by 17 January 2011 a list of the
persons whose presence they will provide for at the hearing in view of
the above rulings.

27

B.

Claimant’s Request dated 13 December 2010 for an Additional Order

1.

The Tribunal has taken note of Claimant's Request of 13 December
2010, of Respondent’s Reply letter of 22 December 2010, as well as of
the other submissions by the Parties relevant in this context. Again, the
Tribunal does not consider it necessary to repeat or summarize the
factual and legal arguments submitted by the Parties which it has
carefully evaluated and taken into account in coming to the following
conclusions.

The Tribunal recalls its Procedural Order No.4.

The Tribunal considers that its following adapted rulings from section
5 of PO No. 4 shall also apply to all persons referred to above in
section A of the present PO:

3.1. The immunity granted by Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID
Convention is applicable without a specific order of an ICSID
Tribunal. This Tribunal confirms that the immunity granted by
Articles 21 and 22 is also applicable to the persons
participating in the present ICSID proceedings and,
particularly, that Article 22 is also applicable to the persons
participating according to section A above.

3.2. Beyond the provisions of Articles 21 and 22, the Tribunal
agrees with the Tribunal in the Libananco Case
(http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Libanco-Decision.pdf) that
every ICSID tribunal has an inherent power required to
preserve the integrity of its own process and assure that the
parties can advance their respective cases freely without
interference, and as well that the parties have an obligation to
arbitrate fairly and in good faith, and that this duty also applies
to States as parties to ICSID proceedings, even if in the exercise
of their sovereign powers and including criminal proceedings,
though the State’s right to exercise such sovereign powers and
criminal jurisdiction is not questioned.

3.3. This obligation includes the duty of parties not to intimidate,
harass, retaliate against, or physically harm parties, witnesses
and other participants in ICSID proceedings or prevent them
from fulfilling their functions.

3.4. For the present case, this obligation is recalled in view of the
criminal proceedings of the Respondent against participants in
the present case as parties or witnesses from Claimant’s side,
or as persons whose presence at the hearing Claimant now
requests, in view of the measures taken in Kazakhstan on the
same date as the I“ Session of the present proceeding on 16
April 2009 during which many documents were taken from the
Claimant’s offices, and also in view of the further actions which
Claimant alleges Respondent [has] taken thereafter but without
prejudice to the correctness or relevance of such allegations. In
this regard, reference is also made to the respective rulings in

28

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

the Tribunal’s Decision of 31 July 2009 regarding provisional
measures and in Procedural Order No. 2 regarding document
production.

4. The Tribunal recalls section 15.1 of the Minutes of the 1" Session and,
in order to have all relevant evidence available at the time of the final
hearing in this case, hereby admits the evidence submitted by the
Parties so far. In accordance with the last sentence of the 3"
paragraph of that section, the Tribunal, in section 1.3 of PO-5, has
granted the Parties the opportunity to submit evidence in rebuttal by 17
January 2011.

C In so far as Claimant’s Requests go beyond the Tribunal’s rulings in sections
A and B above, they are dismissed.”

By letter of 29 December 2010, Respondent objected to Claimant’s purported intention to
file new exhibits in response to Respondent’s Rejoinder without prior authorisation of the
Tribunal.

By email of 4 January 2011, ICSID wrote to the Parties as instructed by the President of
the Tribunal noting that Respondent’s letter of 29 December 2010 seemed to have crossed
with the issuance of PO-5 and PO-6 and informing them of clarifications and
amendments regarding the filing of further exhibits. Claimant was thus required to submit
any further exhibits in rebuttal to Respondent’s Rejoinder by 12 January 2011 to which
Respondent might submit evidence with its filings of 17 January 2011.

By email of 12 January 2011, Claimant submitted further exhibits in rebuttal to
Respondent’s Rejoinder of 14 December 2010.

By email of 13 January 2011, Claimant provided an additional exhibit it had just received
that day in rebuttal to Respondent’s allegation of forgery in Respondent’s Rejoinder.

By letter of 14 January 2011 to the Parties, ICSID confirmed the hearing dates, time and
location and invited them to advise ICSID of any logistical or other requirements by 19
January 2011.

By letter of 14 January 2011, Claimant submitted three further exhibits.

By letter of 17 January 2011, Respondent provided a list of witnesses and experts whom
it wished to examine at the Paris hearing together with information on the persons who
would be attending the hearing on their side, the witnesses Respondent did not intend to
examine, the witnesses and experts who would require interpretation to and from English,
the experts that Respondent suggested to be examined by Expert Conferencing, and issues
that should be raised by each group of experts during Expert Conferencing.

By further letter of 17 January 2011, Respondent provided comments on Claimant’s
submissions of 13 and 14 January 2011 as well as Claimant’s submissions of December
2010. The letter was accompanied by exhibits and expert opinions.

Also by letter of 17 January 2011, Claimant submitted a list of persons attending the
hearing on its behalf, a list of those witnesses it did no longer intend to examine at the
hearing, a list of witnesses requiring interpretation to and from English, a list of experts to

 

29

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

be examined together by Expert Conferencing, and further issues regarding the
preparation of the hearing.

In a letter of 18 January 2011, Claimant sought authorisation by the Tribunal to submit
further exhibits as rebuttal evidence in the proceedings. The exhibits at issue were
attached to the letter.

By letter of 19 January 2011, Claimant responded to Respondent’s letter of 17 January
2011 in which Respondent had requested the Tribunal to exclude certain exhibits
submitted by Claimant between 12 and 14 January 2011. Claimant further addressed
procedural issues with regard to the hearing.

By email of 19 January 2011, ICSID transmitted two letters from Mr Rashid Farah of the
Lebanese law firm Abouhamad, Marheb, Nohra, Chamoun, Chedid to the Tribunal.

By email of 21 January 2011, ICSID transmitted a letter from one of Claimant’s
witnesses, Mr Fadi Hussein, who declined to testify at the hearing to the Tribunal.

By letter of 23 January 2011, Respondent provided comments on Claimant’s letters of
17, 18, and 19 January 2011 as well as on issues regarding the hearing and recent filings
of Claimant.

After many further submissions of the Parties, by letter of 24 January 2011, ICSID
notified the Parties as instructed by the Tribunal of its decisions regarding the
admissibility of certain party submissions, witnesses and experts, and further outstanding
matters. In view of its relevance later in the proceedings, the letter is quoted hereafter:

“dL. The Tribunal has carefully considered the many recent submissions by the
Parties regarding the preparation and conduct of the Hearing in Paris.
In view of the many issues addressed and in order to give the Parties guidance
for their preparation of the Hearing without further delay within the very short
time available up to the Hearing, and in order to avoid longer time that would
be needed for the members of the Tribunal, who also have mandatory
commitments in other cases during that period, to elaborate and agree
on a longer text defining in detail the considerations and reasons of the
Tribunal, the Tribunal has decided to hereby inform the Parties of its
following preliminary rulings.

2. Documents Submitted by the Parties

2.1. The Tribunal appreciates the submissions of the Parties indicating that
and why certain documents recently submitted by the Parties should or
should not be admitted. However, the Tribunal considers it as
important that, at the final hearing of this case, all documents that the
Parties consider as relevant, can be considered and discussed.

2.2. Therefore, the Tribunal provisionally admits all documents submitted
[by] the Parties up to now, and the two letters submitted by Mr. Rashid
Farah forwarded to the Parties by the Tribunal’s Secretary at ICSID
by e-mail of 19 January 2011.

2.3. At the Hearing, the Parties should be prepared to comment on all new
documents, may refer to and rely on these documents (provided they

30

are in English or translated into English), may explain why they
consider them admissible or inadmissible beyond what they have
already argued in their written submissions, and may request to further
discuss these documents in their post-hearing submissions.

2.4. Any further submissions by the Parties have to be made, as is the
general rule in ICSID proceedings, to ICSID without any copies sent
directly to members of the Tribunal.

2.5. Taking all these presentations of the Parties into account, the Tribunal
will then decide on the final admissibility of documents it considers
it{sic] relevant for its decisions and whether it can rely on such
document for its decision.

Witnesses and Experts

3.1. Again, the Tribunal appreciates the submissions of the Parties
indicating that and why certain witnesses and experts should or should
not be admitted and examined at the Hearing. However again, the
Tribunal considers it as important that, at the final hearing of this case,
all evidence that the Parties consider as relevant, can be considered
and discussed.

3.2. The Tribunal recalls and confirms its Procedural Order No. 6.

3.3. The Tribunal has taken note of and accepts the Parties’ submissions
regarding the witnesses and experts that will and will not be present at
the Hearing and regarding the witnesses they do not intend to examine
at the Hearing. The rulings of PO6 will be applied in this regard and
their examination will be conducted in accordance with Procedural
Order No. 5.

3.4. Since the Parties have not agreed on any changes, the examination will
be conducted in the order given by the Agenda given in sections
3.2 and 3.3 of POS.

3.5. In so far as certain witnesses or experts cannot be present for the
entire period of the Hearing, the Parties are invited to agree on certain
time frames in this regard and inform the Tribunal at the beginning of
the Hearing.

3.6. The Tribunal has taken note that the Parties’ suggestions regarding the
groups of experts for the expert conferencing are not identical. The
Parties are invited to agree in this regard and inform the Tribunal at
the beginning of the Hearing.

Outstanding Matters

4.1. The Tribunal will deliberate in the morning before the hearing whether
it considers any further rulings as necessary and inform the Parties at
the beginning of the Hearing.

4.2. Any further outstanding matters will be discussed with the Parties at
the beginning or at an appropriate time of the Hearing.”

31

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

Also by letter of 24 January 2011, Claimant commented on Respondent’s letter of
23 January 2011, in particular on Respondent’s objection to the attendance of three
persons at the hearing on Claimant’s behalf.

By letter of 26 January 2011, the Tribunal proposed changes in the logistical
arrangements of the upcoming hearing.

By letter of 31 January 2011, the ICSID Secretariat provided the Parties with further
logistical information about the hearing.

Also on 31 January 2011, Respondent provided comments on ICSID’s letter of
24 January 2011 concerning Claimant’s filing of 13 December 2011 and Claimant’s filing
of voluminous documents shortly before the hearing. Respondent further commented on
matters of procedure regarding witness and expert testimony as well as the proposed
attendance of certain persons at the hearing.

On 1 February 2011, Claimant provided the Arabic transcription and the English
translation of exhibit C-288.

On 2 February 2011, Claimant submitted several exhibits relating to the Law of the
Republic of Kazakhstan “On Subsoil and Subsoil Use” No. 2828 of 27 January 1996 as
requested by ICSID on 11 January 2011.

By letter of 2 February 2011, ICSID provided further information regarding the logistical
arrangements for the upcoming hearing to the Parties.

By letter of 4 February 2011, Claimant introduced further exhibits with respect to
allegations regarding the transfer of the Caratube Contract from CCC to CIOC (C-313 to
C-317) for which it sought authorisation for submission in the proceedings.

With letter of 5 February 2011, Respondent informed the Tribunal of changes in the
availability of one of its witnesses. Furthermore, Respondent modified its list of
attendants for the hearing.

By letter of the same day, Respondent replied to Claimant’s letter of 4 February 2011 and
requested the authorisation to submit further exhibits in return should the Tribunal
approve Claimant’s request of 4 February 2011.

From 7 to 17 February 2011, the Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits was held in
Paris, France. It was attended by:

Members of the Tribunal:

Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel, President
Dr. Kamal Hossain, Arbitrator

Dr. Gavan Griffith OC, Arbitrator

For the Tribunal:

Milanka Kostadinova, Secretary to the Tribunal

Yun-I Kim, Assistant to the Tribunal

Tanha Zarrin Ahmed, Assistant Accompanying Dr. Kamal Hossain

32

101.

On behalf of the Claimant:

Stuart H. Newberger, Baiju S. Vasani, Michael L. Martinez, Ian Laird, Clifton
Elgarten, Dana Contratto, Claire Stockford, Meriam Alrashid, Emily Alban, Julia
Cayre, Staci Gellman, Natalie Figuereo, George Smith and Benjamin Folkinshteyn,
Crowell & Moring, LLP

Bassem Waarie, Khalil Hawari and Danik Mashru, Caratube International Oil
Company LLC

Didier Bollecker and Eve-Marine Bollecker, Human Rights Counsel for Dr Rakhat
Aliyev

Dr Otto Dietrich, Austrian Counsel to Dr Rakhat Aliyev

Sven Tiefenthal, TRACS International

Tim Giles and Jessica Resch, Charles River Associates

Scott Horton, Expert to Claimant

On behalf of Respondent:

Peter M. Wolrich, Geoffroy Lyonnet, Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Jéréme Lehucher,
Jennifer Morrison, Stéphanie Picot, Leila Shayakhmetova, Diora Ziyaeva, Jorge
Stepensky Koplewicz, Kamilla Hassen, Suleika Jouad, Kateryna Kuntsevich and
Noemie Solle, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Marat Beketayev, Executive Secretary of the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of
Kazakhstan

Yerlan Tuyakbayev, Director of the Department of the Protection of Property Rights
of the State of the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Kazakhstan

Meiram Tautenov, Head of the Department of Central Transport Prosecutor Office of
the Republic of Kazakhstan

Dr Mihir K. Sinha, Victoria Baikova and Suresh Chugh, IFM Resources, Inc.

Dr Mangat R. Thapar, International Geophysical Company, Inc.

Vladimir Brailovsky, Economia Aplicada SC

Max-Peter Ratzel, Former Head of the Department Counteracting International
Crime at the German Bundeskriminalamt and Former Director of Europol

Martha Brill Olcott, Senior Associate at Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace

Interpreters:

Vadim Poliakov, Iouri Ostrovski, Paul Belopolsky and Jan Krotki, Russian
interpreters

Asma Benyagoub, Mohamed Assi and Anne-Marie Arbaji-Sfeir, Arabic interpreters

Court Reporter:
Trevor McGowan

The details of the hearing were provided in the Transcript delivered each day after the
hearing in electronic and paper format. Regarding possible objections of the Parties to the
procedure by the Tribunal, the following passage from the Transcript of the Hearing is
quoted (Tr, day 10, p. 73-74):

“THE PRESIDENT: [...] This then brings us to the real end of our procedure, and I

would like to thank both counsel for being so helpful in finely focusing again [on]
things in such a short time. Of course, we will get much more focusing and longer

33

102.

103.

focusing in the post-hearing briefs, and that’s indeed what we need, but this has been
helpful, let me say that.

As we all know, this has not been an easy case. I think we have all had easier
procedures in the past. There were many reasons for that, and I don’t think we should
go into that. We are also aware that at various stages a party put an objection on the
record. That happens, and again that is nothing so unusual.

Nevertheless let me at this final stage also raise the usual question: do the parties
have any objection of the way this Tribunal has conducted the procedure?

MR VASANI: Claimant has no objection.
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you. Respondent?

MR WOLRICH: Mr Chairman, respondent certainly has no objection to the manner
in which the Tribunal has conducted this procedure. We just maintain whatever
objections we made on the record for the record, and those we maintain. But they
don’t really go to the way the Tribunal conducted this hearing, which I think is
exemplary.

THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much indeed. [...]”

Taking into account the discussion and agreement with the Parties at the end of the
hearing, on 22 February 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7 regarding the
post-hearing procedure. In view of their relevance for the final procedure in this case, the
following excerpts are quoted hereafter:

“.)
1.7. With regard to the withdrawal of the documents C162, C175, C238,
C239, C240 and “ALIYEV 25” communicated by Claimant during the
hearing, the Tribunal accepts such withdrawal. But the Parties may
refer to the filing and withdrawal of these documents.
()
2. Questions of the Tribunal
Without prejudice to the final relevance the Tribunal may attribute to them for
its decisions, the Parties are particularly requested to address the following
questions and issues in separate sections of the Post-Hearing Briefs:
2.1. Which considerations do the Parties have regarding jurisdiction at this
stage?
2.2. Which Party has the burden of proof for which aspects of the case?
2.3. To which extent may alleged breaches of the contract be relevant for
alleged breaches of the BIT, either by application of the Umbrella-
Clause or otherwise?
2.4. After receiving the Post-Hearing Briefs of the Parties, and in the
course of its deliberations thereafter, the Tribunal may invite comments
from the Parties regarding further issues.
()”

On 12 April 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 8 regarding the Parties’
applications to submit further documents. It read as follows:

34

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

“Procedural Order (PO) No. 8
Regarding the Parties’ Applications to Submit Further Documents

The Tribunal has reviewed the Parties’ letters of 4 April 2011 and the enclosed
applications for the exceptional admission to submit further documents according to
§ 1.3 of Procedural Order No. 7.

Taking into account the respective discussions during the hearing with regard to the
criteria for the admission of new documents, in the view of the Tribunal the
applications in the form of Redfern Schedules contain all relevant further arguments.
The Tribunal therefore does not consider it necessary to repeat the arguments with
regard to the individual applications in the Schedules.

Rather, after its evaluation of the respective arguments, the Tribunal herewith
attaches the two Redfern Schedules in which, in the right hand column, the Tribunal
has inserted its respective decisions regarding each individual application. The two
Redfern Schedules form an integral part of this Procedural Order.”

By letter of 3 May 2011, Claimant informed the Tribunal of alleged bankruptcy
proceedings at the request of Kazakh authorities and requested the Tribunal to elicit
Respondent to cease and desist, and instruct its organs to cease and desist, to declare
Claimant bankrupt or seek its liquidation or change its legal status and require the
Tribunal’s permission before any other measure against Claimant of any nature is taken
which could affect these proceedings.

 

On 17 May 2011, Respondent informed that the bankruptcy proceedings are being
discontinued.

By letter of 3 June 2011, the Tribunal informed the Parties of a submission made by a
non-disputing party. The Parties filed their observations in accordance with Rule 37(2) of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

By letter of 22 June 2011, the Tribunal informed the Parties and Counsel for the non-
disputing party that the submission of the non-disputing party shall not be admitted.

On 27 June 2011 the Parties submitted their post-hearing briefs.

By separate letters of 11 July 2011, Respondent submitted an application for rebuttal
submissions. Claimant informed the Tribunal that it would not submit an application for
rebuttal submissions.

On 2 August 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 9 (PO-9) regarding the
Parties’ applications to submit rebuttal arguments, inviting the Parties to submit
additional arguments simultaneously by 10 August 2011, in memorials not exceeding
10 pages.

By 10 August 2011, the Parties submitted short memorials in accordance with PO-9.
By letter of 12 October 2011, the Tribunal asked the Parties to submit their respective

statements of costs no later than 31 October 2011 and to submit comments on each
other’s cost statements by 11 November 2011.

35

113.

114.

115.

116.

By letter of 26 October 2011, Claimant informed the Tribunal that the Parties had
mutually agreed to an extension for the submission of statements of costs to 7 November
2011 and an extension to submit comments on each other’s statements of costs by 18
November 2011.

By letter of 7 November 2011, the Parties simultaneously submitted their statements of
costs and corresponding documentation.

On 18 November 2011, the Parties submitted comments on each other’s statement of
costs.

On 9 May 2012 the Tribunal closed the proceedings. The arbitrators are satisfied that both
Parties had ample opportunities to present their case in written and oral form.

36

E. The Principal Relevant Legal Provisions

117.

E.I. The Kazakhstan-U.S. Bilateral Investment Treaty

The principal relevant legal provisions for this arbitration in the BIT are as follows:

“Article I

I. For the purposes of this Treaty,

@

()

oO

@

©

“investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one
Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or
companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and
investment contracts; and includes:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including movable and
immovable property, as well as rights, such as mortgages, liens
and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or
interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic
value, and associated with an investment;

(iv) _ intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights relating
to:
literary and artistic works, including sound recordings,
inventions in all fields of human endeavor, industrial designs,
semiconductor mask works, trade secrets, know-how, and
confidential business information, and trademarks, service
marks, and trade names; and

) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and
permits pursuant to law;

“company” of a Party means any kind of corporation, company,
association, enterprise, partnership, or other organization, legally
constituted under the laws and regulations of a Party or a political
subdivision thereof whether or not organized for pecuniary gain, or
privately or governmentally owned or controlled;

“national, [sic]” of a Party means a natural person who is a national of
a Party under its applicable law;

“return” means an amount derived from or associated with an
investment, including profit; dividend; interest; capital gain; royalty
payment; management, technical assistance or other fee; or returns in
kind;

“associated activities” include the organization, control, operation,

and disp of | ies, branches, ies, offices,

37

factories or other facilities for the conduct of business; the making,
performance and enforcement of contracts; the acquisition, use,
protection and disposition of property of all kinds including intellectual
property rights; the borrowing of funds; the purchase, issuance, and
sale of equity shares and other securities; and the purchase of foreign
exchange for imports;

2. Each Party reserves the right to deny to any company the advantages of this
Treaty if nationals of any third country control such company and, in the case
of a company of the other Party, that company has no substantial business
activities in the territory of the other Party or is controlled by nationals of a
third country with which the denying Party does not maintain normal
economic relations.

3. Any alteration of the form in which assets are invested or reinvested shall not
affect their character as investment.”

“Article VI

I. For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute between a
Party and a national or company of the other Party arising out of or relating
to (a) an investment agreement between that Party and such national or
company; (b) an investment authorization granted by that Party’s foreign
investment authority to such national or company; or (c) an alleged breach of
any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.

2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should initially
seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation. If the dispute cannot
be settled amicably, the national or company concerned may choose to submit
the dispute for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that in[sic] a
Party to the dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-
settlement procedures; or

(o) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

3. (a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not submitted the
dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or (b) and that six months
have elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose, the national or
company concerned may choose to consent in writing to the submission
of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration:

(i) to the International Centre for the[sic] Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“Centre”) established by the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals
of other States, done at Washington, March 18, 1965 (“ICSID
Convention”), provided that the Party is a Party to such
Convention; or

38

(ii) to the Additional Facility of the Centre, if the Centre is not
available; or

(iii) in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL); or

(iv) _ to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance with any
other arbitration rules, as may be mutually agreed between the
parties to the dispute.

(b) Once the national or company concerned has so consented, either
Party to the dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance with the
choice so specified in the consent.

Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment dispute for
settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the choice specified in
the written consent of the national or company under paragraph 3. Such
consent, together with the written consent of the national or company when
given under paragraph 3 shall satisfy the requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for purposes of Chapter II
of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and for purposes
of the Additional Facility Rules; and

(b) an “agreement in writing,” for purposes of Article II of the United
Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958 (“New York
Convention”).

Any arbitration under paragraph 3(a)(ii), (iii) or (iv) of this Article shall be
held in a state that is a Party to the New York Convention.

Any arbitral award rendered pursuant to this Article shall be final and binding
on the parties to the dispute. Each Party undertakes to carry out without delay
the provisions of any such award and to provide in its territory for its
enforcement.

In any proceeding involving an investment dispute, a Party shall not assert, as
a defense, counterclaim, right of set-off or otherwise, that the national or
company concern adf[sic] has received or will receive, pursuant to an
insurance or guarantee contract, indemnification or other compensation for
all or part of its alleged damages.

For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article, any
company legally constituted under the applicable laws and regulations of a
Party or a political subdivision thereof but that, immediately before the
occurrence of the event or events giving rise to the dispute, was an investment
of nationals or companies of the other Party, shall be treated as a national or
company of such other Party in accordance with Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention.”

39

E.IL Contract No. 954 — The Exploration and Production Contract

118. Subject to the Parties

submi:

   

ions, the following provisions from Contract No. 954 are

the principal legal provisions relevant for this dispute:

“27.

27.1

27.2

27.3

27.4

Procedure for Dispute Resolution

The Parties shall take all measures to resolve all disputes arising from the
Contract by negotiations.

Referral to Arbitration. In the event that any dispute cannot be resolved by
amicable settlement within sixty (60) days after notice in writing of such by
one Party to the other Party, the Parties agree that their exclusive means of
dispute resolution shall be (a) to submit the matter to arbitration for final
settlement in accordance with the then current Rules of Conciliation and
Arbitration of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(‘ICSID”) if the Competent Authority has become a party to the ICSID
Convention at the time a proceeding is instituted, or (b) to submit the dispute
for resolution according to the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules of
ICSID if the Competent Authority has not become a party to the ICSID
Convention at the time when any proceeding is instituted. Any arbitral tribunal
constituted pursuant to this Contract shall consist of three arbitrators, one
d by the Contractor and one appointed by the Comp Authority,
and a third arbitrator, who shall be president of the Tribunal and shall not be
a resident of Kazakhstan, appointed by agreement of the Parties, or failing
such agreement, by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID. In
the event that the Contractor or the Competent Authority fails to appoint an
arbitrator within ninety (90) calendar days after the notice of registration of a
request for arbitration has been sent, the remaining arbitrators shall be
appointed in accordance with the Rules under ICSID.

 

If for any reason the request for the arbitration proceeding is not registered by
ICSID or if ICSID fails or refuses to take jurisdiction over any matter
submitted by the Parties under this Section 27, such matter shall be referred to
and resolved by arbitration in accordance with the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (“UNCITRAL”) Arbitration Rules in
effect at the date of submission of the matter. The seat of Arbitration shall be
London, England. In such event the Parties hereby consent to the jurisdiction
of the London Court of International Arbitration and all the provisions of this
Article 27 shall equally apply to such arbitration.

Proceedings. The English language shall be used throughout the arbitral
proceedings and the proceedings shall be held in London, England unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties. The Parties shall be entitled to be legally
represented at the arbitration proceedings, however the absence or default of
a Party shall not prevent or hinder the arbitration proceedings at any stage.
All notices given by one Party to the other in connection with the arbitration
shall be given in accordance with this Contract.

40

27.5

27.6

27.7

27.8

27.9

27.10

Arbitral Award. Any arbitral award made in respect of any matter submitted to
arbitration pursuant to Section 27.2 shall be final and binding upon the
Parties. Any award of a monetary sum shall be rendered in hard currency, free
of any tax or any other deduction. The award shall include interest from a date
determined by the arbitrators, at a commercial fate to be fixed by the
arbitrators. Within three (3) months from the date determined by the
arbitrators, full payment of any arbitral award shall be made. The arbitral
award may provide for specific performance or any other remedy awarded by
the arbitral tribunal.

Costs. The costs of the arbitration, including legal costs, shall be borne by the
unsuccessful Party or, if neither Party is wholly successful, shall be borne by
the Parties in such proportions as may be specified in the arbitral award or, if
no such specification is made, shall be borne by the Parties in equal shares.
Any costs, fees or Competent Authority charges incidental to enforcing the
arbitral award shall, to the maximum extent permitted by law, be borne by the
Party against whom such enforcement is made.

Enforcement and Consent. Each of the Parties hereby consents to submit to
ICSID any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or in connection with
this Contact[sic]. Each of the Parties agrees that any judgement rendered by
the arbitrators against it and entered in any court of record in London,
England or any other competent court, may be executed against its assets in
any jurisdiction. The Parties consent to being sued for enforcement of the
award and any costs, fees or other charges for which they may be liable under
this Article. Each of the Parties hereby agrees that all of the transactions
contemplated by this Contract shall constitute and shall be deemed to
constitute an investment within the jurisdiction of ICSID. The Competent
Authority warrants that it is a structural subdivision and agent of the
Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

Furthermore, it is hereby agreed that the Contractor is a resident of Lebanon,
or in the event of assignment as a national of the resident country of the
assignee, and therefore the Contractor shall be treated as a resident of
Lebanon, or other country if appropriate, for purposes of the ICSID
Convention.

Waiver of Immunity. Each of the Parties expressly and irrevocably waives any
claim to immunity (including, but not limited to, sovereign immunity, immunity
from service of process, immunity of property from award) from suit, execution,
set-off, attachment or other legal process under any applicable law or in
respect of any arbitral award rendered.

Continued Performance. If a matter is submitted to arbitration pursuant to
Section 27.3 of this Contract the Parties shall, during the period of such
arbitral proceedings and pending the resolution of such matter or the making
of the arbitral award, continue to perform their respective obligations under
this Contract so far as circumstances will allow and such performance shall
be without prejudice to any final agreement, judgement or award made in
respect of that matter. To the extent that the circumstances do not allow the

41

performance of obligations under this Contract then the period for the
performance of those obligations and any obligations relevant thereon shall be
extended by the period between the date of the notice of arbitration to the date
of compliance with the award.”

E.IL. Relevant ICSID Convention Provisions

119. The principal legal provision of the ICSID Convention relevant for the present dispute is
as follows:

“Article 25

@)

2

3)

4

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that
State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given
their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

“National of another Contracting State” means:

 

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the
parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration
as well as on the date on which the request was registered pursuant to
paragraph (3) of Article 28 or paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does not
include any person who on either date also had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute; and

 

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the
parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration
and any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting
State party to the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign
control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of
another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.

Consent by a constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State shall
require the approval of that State unless that State notifies the Centre that no
such approval is required.

Any Contracting State may, at the time of ratification, acceptance or approval
of this Convention or at any time thereafter, notify the Centre of the class or
classes of disputes which it would or would not consider submitting to the
jurisdiction of the Centre. The Secretary-General shall forthwith transmit such
notification to all Contracting States. Such notification shall not constitute the
consent required by paragraph (1).”

42

E.IV. Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

 

120. The Parties in their submissions referred the Tribunal to the VCLT, the terms of which
are also considered declaratory of customary international law. The principal relevant
provisions are:

“Article 31
General rule of interpretation

I. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light
of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in
addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the
parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection

with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as
an instrument related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so
intended.

Article 32
Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the
preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to
confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to determine the
meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or
(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”

4B

F. Relief Sought by the Parties

FL

Relief Sought by Claimant

121. As identified in Claimant’s Request for Arbitration of 16 June 2008, Claimant asks the
Tribunal to award as follows (C-I, para. 86):

“Accordingly the Claimant requests the following relief:

@

(ii)

(iii)

iv)

an order declaring that Kazakhstan has violated Articles II(2)(a), (b) and (c)
as well as Article III of the BIT, as well as its obligations under international
law, Kazakh law and the Contract;

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay damages equivalent to the financial loss
and damage, including lost profit, which CIOC has suffered as a result of
Kazakhstan’s breaches of the BIT as well as its obligations under international
law, Kazakh law and the Contract;

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay all costs incurred in connection with
these arbitration proceedings, including the costs of the arbitrators and of
ICSID, as well as legal and other expenses incurred by CIOC including the
fees of its legal counsel, experts and consultants and those of CIOC’s own
employees on a full indemnity basis, plus interest thereon at a reasonable rate
from the date on which such costs are incurred to the date of payment; and

such other relief as the arbitral tribunal may deem just and proper.”

122. Claimant’s Memorial of 14 May 2009 contains the following prayer for relief (C-IV,
para. 285):

“For the foregoing reasons, CIOC hereby requests:

@)

orders adjudging and declaring:

(a) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty, by failing to
accord to CIOC’s investment “fair and equitable treatment”;

(b) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty, by failing to
ensure that CIOC’s investment “shall enjoy full protection and
security”;

(o) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty, by failing to
ensure that CIOC’s investment shall not be accorded “treatment less
than that required by international law”;

44

2)

(3)

a

(3)

6)

(d) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(b) of the Treaty,
by impairing CIOC’s investment “by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures”;

(e) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty, by failing
to “observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard
to investments”;

ap that Kazakhstan has violated Article III of the Treaty by unlawfully
expropriating CIOC’s investment:

(i) without public purpose;
(ii) in a discriminatory manner; or

(iii) not in accordance with due process of law and the general
principles of treatment provided for in Article II(2) of the
Treaty;

(g) that Kazakhstan has violated Article III of the Treaty by expropriating
CIOC’s investment without payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation; or

(h) _ that Kazakhstan has violated its legal obligations under customary
international law, Kazakh law and the Contract;

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay to CIOC the sum of USD 1,005.7
million, being damages or compensation for the violations listed in sub-
paragraphs I(a) to (h) above and determined by reference to the “fair market
value” of CIOC’s investment as at 31 January 2008, in “fully realizable” and
“freely transferable” currency;

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay to CIOC interest on the sum of
USD 1,005.7 million, at the rate of 3.7% per annum, compounded quarterly,
being a “commercially reasonable rate of interest”, calculated from 31
January 2008 to the date of award;

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay to CIOC such monetary damages as the
Tribunal considers reasonable in all the circumstances for the moral, non-
material damage done to CIOC, its majority owner, senior management and
employees;

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay all costs incurred in connection with
these arbitration proceedings, including the costs of the arbitrators and of
ICSID, as well as legal and other expenses incurred by CIOC including the
fees of its legal counsel, experts and consultants and those of CIOC’s own
employees on a full indemnity basis, plus interest thereon at a reasonable rate
from the date on which such costs are incurred to the date of payment; and

such other relief as the arbitral tribunal may deem just and proper.”

45

123.

Claimant corrected the requested amount of damages as stated in its Memorial from
USD 1,005.7 million to USD 1.149 billion excluding interest and thus modified its relief
sought in its Reply Memorial of 30 July 2010 requesting the Tribunal to award as follows
(C-V, para. 377):

“[Fl]or the foregoing reasons, CIOC hereby requests:

@)

2

orders adjudging and declaring:

(a) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty, by failing to
accord to CIOC’s investment “fair and equitable treatment”’[sic]

(b) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty, by failing to
ensure that CIOC’s investment “shall enjoy full protection and
security”;

(o) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty, by failing to
ensure that CIOC’s investment shall not be accorded “treatment less
than that required by international law”;

(d) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty, by
impairing CIOC’s investment “by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures”;

(e) that Kazakhstan has violated Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty, by failing to
“observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to
investments”;

ap that Kazakhstan has violated Article III of the Treaty by unlawfully
expropriating CIOC’s investment:

(i) without public purpose;
(ii) in a discriminatory manner; or

(iii) not in accordance with due process of law and the general
principles of treatment provided for in Article II(2) of the
Treaty;

(g) that Kazakhstan has violated Article III of the Treaty by expropriating
CIOC’s investment without payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation; or

(h) _ that Kazakhstan has violated its legal obligations under customary
international law, Kazakh law and the Contract;

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay to CIOC the sum of US $1.149 billion,
being d or 1p ion for the violations listed in sub-p ‘aphs
1(a) to (h) above and determined by reference to the “fair market value” of
CIOC’s investment as at 31 January 2008, in “fully realizable” and “freely

transferable” currency;

46

(3)

4

(3)

6)

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay to CIOC interest on the sum of US $
1.149 billion, at the rate of 3.7% per annum, compounded quarterly,
calculated from 31 January 2008 to payment in full of the Award;

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay to CIOC such monetary damages as the
Tribunal considers reasonable in all the circumstances for the moral, non-
material damage done to CIOC, its majority owner, senior management and
employees;

an order directing Kazakhstan to pay all costs incurred in connection with
these arbitration proceedings, as well as legal and other expenses incurred by
CIOC on a full indemnity basis, plus interest thereon at a reasonable rate from
the date on which such costs are incurred to the date of payment; and

such other relief as the arbitral tribunal may deem just and proper.”

124. Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief of 27 June 2011 sets out as follows (C-VI, para. 218-220):

“Lu]

Thus, his calculation that the fair market value of what was taken from CIOC, as of
the day before the expropriation, is, at a minimum, $1.145 billion provides the proper
basis for the award.

[219.] Beyond the core amount, the award should include the following:

(a)

(b)

()

Interest at 3.7% per annum, compounded quarterly from February 1, 2008 to
the date of payment of the award.

Such moral damages as the Tribunal deems appropriate, given the nature of
Respondent's actions.

An award of costs and attorneys’ fees, given the nature of Respondent's
actions and its purported defenses here.

[220.] For the reasons and in the amounts set forth above, the Tribunal should render
an award in favour of Claimant, Caratube International Oil Company.”

F.II. Relief Sought by Respondent

125. In its Counter-Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and the Merits of 22 December
2009, Respondent sought the following relief (R-II, para. 468):

“For the reasons set forth above and to be developed further during the course of

these proceedings, CIOC’s cl
jurisdiction or for inadmis

ims should be rejected in their entirety for lack of
ibility. In the event that the Tribunal were to find

 

 

jurisdiction and admissibility with respect to any of the claims asserted, those claims

47

should nevertheless be dismissed for the substantive reasons set forth above. In
addition, CIOC should be ordered to reimburse the Republic for all reasonable costs
and expenses relating to this Arbitration including without limitation legal fees and
expert fees.”

126. Respondent reiterated its prayer for relief in its Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction
and the Merits of 14 December 2010 (R-IV, para. 648):

“For the reasons set forth above and to be developed during the further course of
these proceedings, CIOC’s claims should be rejected in their entirety for lack of
jurisdiction or for inadmissibility. In the event that the Tribunal were to find
jurisdiction and admissibility with respect to any of the claims asserted, those claims
should nevertheless be dismissed for the substantive reasons set forth above and in
the Republic’s Counter-Memorial. Should the Tribunal nonetheless find that CIOC is
entitled to damages, which the Republic firmly denies, the Tribunal should reject the
exaggerated damage claims of CIOC and only award damages as set forth by the
Republic in this Rejoinder. In addition, CIOC should be ordered to reimburse the
Republic for all reasonable costs and expenses relating to this Arbitration including
without limitation legal fees and expert fees.”

127. Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief of 27 June 2011 sets out the following (R-V, para. 191):

“For the reasons set forth above and in the Republic’s prior submissions, CIOC’s
claims should be rejected in their entirety for lack of jurisdiction or for
inadmissibility. In the event that the Tribunal were to find jurisdiction and
admissibility with respect to any of the claims asserted, those claims should
nevertheless be dismissed for the substantive reasons set forth above and in the
Republic’s prior submissions. Should the Tribunal nonetheless find that CIOC is
entitled to damages, which the Republic firmly denies, the Tribunal should reject the
exaggerated damage claims of CIOC and only award damages as set forth by the
Republic herein and in the Rejoinder. In addition, CIOC should be ordered to
reimburse the Republic for all reasonable costs and expenses relating to this
Arbitration including without limitation legal fees and expert fees.”

  

48

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

G. Summary of Facts

Without prejudice to their relevance for the considerations and conclusions of the
Tribunal, the following section briefly summarises the facts of the case as presented by
Claimant and Respondent in chronological order. A more comprehensive coverage of the
facts can be found in Claimant’s Memorial of 14 May 2009 (C-IV, paras. 46-155),
Claimant’s Reply Memorial of 30 July 2010 (C-V, paras. 16-114), Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial of 22 December 2009 (R-III, paras. 93-245) and Respondent’s
Rejoinder of 14 December 2009 (R-IV, paras. 87-345).

 

G.I. The Caratube Project

Kazakhstan is a former Soviet Republic that declared its independence from the Soviet
Union in 1991. It is a country rich in natural resources, which are an important part of the
country’s economic success.

 

In December 2000, Consolidated Contractors (Oil & Gas) Company S.A.L. (“CCC”)
responded to Kazakhstan’s open tender for exploration and development of an area of the
Caratube oil field. The area was previously explored during the Soviet era. Some oil
deposits were discovered, but no production was ever commenced. CCC is a large
construction company owned by a Lebanese family — the Khourys.'

On 27 May 2002 the Kazakh Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (“MEMR”),
acting on behalf of Kazakhstan, and CCC, signed the “Contract for Exploration and
Production of Hydrocarbons within Blocks XXIV-20-C (partially); XXIV-21-A
(partially), including the Caratube Field (oversalt) in the Baiganin District of the Aktobe
Oblast of the Republic of Kazakhstan”, also called “Contract No. 954” (C-4).

The Contract gave CCC the exclusive right to carry out exploration and production of
hydrocarbons within the Contract area (Clauses 4.1 and 7.1). The exploration period
under the Contract was five years (up to 2007), later extended by the Parties for another
two years. The production period, commencing from the date of commercial production
for each deposit, was 25 years (up to 2032) (Clauses 3.2 and 9.1). A Minimum Work
Programme, subdivided into annual work programmes, was attached to the Contract

‘The domicile of CCC is unclear. Claimant refers to CCC as a Greek company. (C-V, para. 193) The Tribunal
notes that the Transfer Agreement refers to CCC as “duly registered in Lebanon” (C-53), and that in the
Contract the parties “agreed that [CCC] is a resident of Lebanon”. (C-4, para. 27.8) The issue whether CCC is
domiciled in Greece or Lebanon was discussed but not decided before the English courts (C-292, Masri v.
Consolidated Contractors International Company SAL & Anor (2007] EWHC 3010 (Comm) (20 December
2007). The issue of CCC’s domicile is not relevant in the case at hand and therefore does need to be decided by
the Tribunal.

49

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

(“Five-Year Work Programme”). The key elements of the Five-Year Work Programme
were:

a) to re-enter existing old wells and to drill new wells in the shallower, supra-
salt formations;
b) to carry out pilot testing (trial production) in the supra-salt zone;

c) to carry out a 3D seismic survey (a geophysical study) by the end of the
second year; and to prepare a report as to the available reserves; and

d) to drill two wells in the deeper sub-salt formation (one by the end of year four,
another by the end of year five).

In case of a commercial discovery, the contractor had an exclusive right to proceed to the
production stage. In case of a commercial discovery the contractor was entitled to
reimbursement of its expenses in connection with exploration (Clause 10.5—10.6). If no
commercial discovery was made by the end of the exploration period, the Contract
terminated (Clause 9.6).

Western Kazakhstan Territorial Administration of Geology and Subsoil Use (“TU
Zapkaznedra”) is the competent regional branch of the MEMR’s Geological Committee
that was the body for the reporting and performance connected with the Contract. The
main high-level supervisory body was a Monitoring Division of MEMR.

G.IL CIOC and Contract Assignment

On 8 August 2002, CCC and CIOC signed a “Transfer Agreement Regarding the Right of
Subsoil Use”. (C-53) (“Transfer Agreement”) The Transfer Agreement contained no
price. According to Claimant, and not contested by Respondent, CCC was paid
approximately USD 9.4 million for transferring the Contract. The Transfer Agreement
stated that it “comes into effect from the date of registration at the [MEMR] of all
amendments and addenda to the Contract which reflect the change of the Contractor's
name (...).” (C-53, Clause 3) MEMR approved the assignment on 7 November 2002. On
26 December 2002, MEMR approved Amendment 1 to the Contract reflecting the
assignment. The motivation and circumstances of the decision to assign the Contract are
disputed between the Parties.

CIOC is a Kazakh entity, registered on 29 July 2002. (C-54) Its founder was Fadi
Hussein, a Danish citizen and a distant cousin of Devincci Hourani and his brothers:
Issam Hourani and Hussam Hourani. It is not clear at what point a 7 % share in CIOC
was acquired by Waheeb Antakly (a U.S. citizen). The Parties are disputing the role of
Fadi Hussein in CIOC.

 

On 17 May 2004 Fadi Hussein and Devincci Hourani signed a share purchase agreement
on the basis of which Devincci Hourani was to acquire an 85% share in CIOC
representing 850,000 tenge and sold for this amount. Ownership to the share was
supposed to pass to Devincci Hourani upon payment of the full price for the share within
three days and introduction of appropriate amendments to the founding documents of
CIOC. (C-55)

On 8 April 2005 Waheeb Antakly and Devineci Hourani signed a share purchase
agreement on the basis of which Devincci Hourani was to acquire a 7 % share in CIOC

50

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

representing 70,000 tenge and sold for this amount. Ownership to the share was supposed
to pass upon payment of the full price for the share within three days and introduction of
appropriate amendments to the founding documents of CIOC. (C-56)

On 18 May 2006 Devincci Hourani, acting on behalf of Fadi Hussein, signed a share
purchase agreement with Kassem Omar. On the basis of that agreement Kassem Omar
was to acquire an 8 % share in CIOC with a nominal value of 80,000 tenge and sold for
this amount. The price was to be paid “in a manner agreed to by the parties.” (WS
Kassem Omar, Exhibit 1) There is no mention in that agreement when and under what
conditions the ownership to the share was supposed to pass to Kassem Omar.

Devincci Hourani is a U.S. citizen. He received his U.S. citizenship on 16 July 2001.
Before that he did not hold the nationality of any country. He was a stateless Palestinian
refugee born in Lebanon. His business interests in Kazakhstan started in the early 1990s,
when he became a partner in his brother Issam’s medical equipment business. His U.S.
in-laws participated in an oil and gas business with Issam Hourani (Kulandy Energy
Corporation) since the late 1990s. Devincci Hourani purchased 100 % of the shares in
that company from Issam Hourani in 2002. He was also involved in a media (TV)
business, in which Issam Hourani and Gulshat Aliyev had a majority stake. He advised
his brother-in-law Kassem Omar in a poultry business and advised in other family
businesses in Kazakstan (airline and airport operations).

 

 

G.I. Performance of the Contract by CIOC (2002-2007) and
Contract Termination in 2008

The following facts are highlighted by the Parties in relation to the Contract performance
and termination.

By letter of 8 December 2003, TU Zapkaznedra called CIOC’s attention to its “actual
geological survey performance on exploration and extraction of hydrocarbons on the
Caratube field for 9 months of 2003 [which] is 44.1 % of the planned” and requested it to
“take appropriate measures to complete the geological survey” and provide “written
explanation of the reasons for non-fulfillment of approved amounts.” (R-9)

On 29 December 2003 TU Zapkaznedra and CIOC met to discuss the performance results
of the approved work programme for the reporting year 2003 and review the work
programme for 2004. The minutes of the meeting record that, among other things, “/t/he
3D seismic field survey was not fulfilled’ and that “fa]ll outstanding obligations are
carried over to 2004, and their fulfillment shall be guaranteed.” The 2004 work
programme included “the outstanding unfulfilled obligations of the[sic] 2003 related to
drilling and 3-D Seismic works.” The 2004 work programme was approved. (R-17)

On 21 December 2004 TU Zapkaznedra and CIOC met to discuss the performance results
of the approved work programme for the reporting year 2004 and review the work
programme for 2005. The minutes of the meeting, according to Respondent’s translation
(R-9) record that, among other things, “CDP Seismic 3D field surveys were not performed
and therefore, the construction of a deep subsalt well was not performed” and that “[a/Il
outstanding obligations are carried forward to 2005, and their fulfillment shall be
guaranteed considering financial obligations for 2005.” (R-18) The 2005 work

Sl

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

programme was approved. The translation submitted by Claimant (C-105) differs slightly:
“Seismic field CDP 3D works were not performed and construction of a deep subsalt
well.”

On 17 January 2005 MEMR issued a “Notice of Breach of Contract No. 954 of 27 May
2002” to CIOC. The document notified CIOC that it is in breach of the Contract, in
particular of “the Work Program [which] has not been performed in full (clause 8.1)”.
The notice called CIOC to “eliminate the above-stated breaches, provide all necessary
documents confirming the elimination of such breaches, and report on measures taken to
eliminate and prevent further breach of contractual obligations (...).” (R-10)

On 9 March 2005 CIOC replied to the MEMR’s Notice of Breach informing that “/a/t
present we are conducting an expedited implementation of the 2005 Work Program
approved by “TU Zapkaznedra”, which provides for the correction of deficiencies with
regards to the obligations” and providing details of the works. CIOC informed that the
3D seismic study will be conducted in the first half of 2005 and the deep wells in the
subsalt deposits will be constructed afterwards, also in 2005. (R-19)

On 21 December 2005 TU Zapkaznedra and CIOC met to discuss the performance results
of the approved work programme for the reporting year 2005 and review the work
programme for 2006. The minutes of the meeting record that “it appears that production
prevails over exploration, despite the fact that during the period of trial production
(2002-2006) the company should have focused on geological exploration to create a
basis for final evaluation and estimation of field reserves.” The minutes also record that,
among other things, “CDP Seismic 3D field works were not performed and consequently
construction of a deep subsalt well was not performed, due to the difficulty of developing
methodology (...)” and that “/a/ll outstanding obligations are carried forward to 2006,
and their fulfillment shall be guaranteed considering financial obligations for 2006.”
(R-20; Claimant’s translation reads “it appeared” but is otherwise identical, C-102) The
2006 work programme was approved.

On 28 February 2006, TU Zapkaznedra issued a Notice to CIOC calling its attention to
“the non-fulfillment of the approved 2005 Annual Work Program” and delay in filing
their fourth quarter report. TU Zapkaznedra informed CIOC that it must take appropriate
action to eliminate the non-performance and explain the reasons for delay by 10 March
2006. TU Zapkaznedra further pointed out that failure to do so would require it to “take
appropriate actions according to the legislation of [the] R{epublic of |K[azakhstan].”
(R-21)

On 11 July 2006, the Parties concluded Amendment 2 to the Contract which reduced the
value added tax and at the same time increased the royalty rate.

On 18 August 2006 TU Zapkaznedra issued a Notice to CIOC calling its attention that
from CIOC’s report for the second quarter of 2006 it follows that CIOC’s financial
performance amounted to 12.7 % under the Annual Work Program of 2006 and asked
CIOC to take appropriate measures to fulfil its obligations.

On 27 November 2006 CIOC sent a letter to MEMR requesting “prolongation of the
exploration period for 2 years (27.05.20087[sic])”. (R-36; C-83)

52

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

On 29 November 2006 TU Zapkaznedra and CIOC met to discuss the performance results
of the approved work programme for the reporting year 2006 and review the work
programme for 2007. The minutes of the meeting record, among other things, that the 3D
survey was not completed and that “/cJonstruction of the deep subsalt well has not been
performed.” (R-23) The outstanding obligations under the Work Program with regard to
drilling works were carried over to 2007.

By letter dated 11 December 2006, TU Zapkaznedra informed CIOC that “based on the
results from 9 months of the current year (...) [CIOC] was put on the list of companies
whose performance of financial obligations, percentage-wise, amounted to less that 30 %
(i.e. 20.9 %), which constitutes a breach of Contract (...).” (R-11)

In a letter of 21 February 2007 MEMR informed CIOC that it decided to “extend the
period for hydrocarbon prospecting within the licensed blocks, including the Caratube

field (suprasalt) (...) for two more years till 27.05.09 with the minimum working program
for the amount of US$ 18 million during the extension period (...).” (C-7)

On 25 March 2007 MEMR issued a “Notice of Breach of Obligations under Contract
No. 954 of May 27, 2002.” The notice informed CIOC that it breached certain terms and
conditions of the Contract. The list of breaches included that “the Work Program has not
been performed [in Claimant’s translation: “fulfilled”| (clause 8.1)”. It requested that
those breaches be eliminated within one month. The notice stated that in case of CIOC’s
failure to remedy the breaches MEMR “may unilaterally dissolve the Contract”.
No response from CIOC was received. Claimant claims that it received this notice only in
September 2007. (R-24; C-109)

On 27 July 2007 MEMR and CIOC signed Appendix No. 3 to the Contract, extending the
term for prospecting until 27 May 2009. The amendment also included the work program
for the extended period.

On 7 September 2007, the Prosecutor’s Office in Aktobe issued a “Recommendation on
elimination of disregard of the rule of law” for MEMR, stating that “despite the continued
nonperformance of the terms of the Contract and of the work programs (...)
[TU “Zapkaznedra”] annually approves work programs and, moreover, carries over part
of the unfulfilled obligations of the current year to the following year. This shows (...)
[MEMR’s] lack of appropriate monitoring of the activities of the subsoil user and failure
to take measures to rectify noncompliance with the terms of the Contract.” (R-27)

According to Respondent, from 11 to 30 September 2007, TU Zapkaznedra conducted an
on-site audit at the Caratube field and subsequently issued a Prescriptive Order pointing
out breaches and deficits that had to be remedied. According to Claimant it received the
Prescriptive Order on 28 September 2007 (see C-IV, para. 127). (R-28; C-70)

In September 2007 (the date is disputed) MEMR resent its notice of 25 March 2007 to
CcIoc.

On 1 October 2007 MEMR sent a “Notice of termination of operations under Contract
No. 954 of May 27, 2002” to CIOC. The notice reminded CIOC of MEMR’s Notice of
25 March 2007 and informed CIOC that it had received it on 28 March 2007. However,
during the hearing, Claimant alleged that it had not received the notice in March 2007.
(Tr, day 6, pp. 134 and 135) MEMR further informed CIOC that documents requested in

53

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

the March notice have not been submitted within deadlines and “/fJor this reason, in
accordance with Article 45-2, clause 2 of the Law, [MEMR] is hereby requesting
immediate termination of operations under Contract No. 954 of May 27, 2002, pending a
decision on the unilateral termination of the contract.” (R-26; C-10)

In a letter to MEMR of | or 3 October 2007 (Respondent states the letter was ‘dated’
1 October, Claimant holds the letter was ‘sent’ 3 October, cf. C-IV, para. 130, R-III, para.
144) CIOC requested MEMR to re-examine its decision of the same day.

On 27 November 2007 MEMR responded with a “Notice of Resumed Operations Under
Contract No. 954 (...) and of Breach of Contract No. 954 (...)”. (R-32) (Claimant’s
translation (C-14) reads: “Notification for Resumed Operations Under Contract No. 954
of May 27, 2002 and On the Failure to Exercise Provisions under Contract No. 954 of
May 27, 2002”.) The notice allowed CIOC to resume operations but listed breaches of
Contract. MEMR requested that the ongoing breaches be cured within one month.

 

On 3 December 2007 MEMR issued a “Notification for Resumed Operations Under
Contract No. 954 of May 27, 2002 and On the Failure to Exercise Provisions under
Contract No. 954 of May 27, 2002” (C-14; Respondent’s translation is “Notice of breach
of obligations Under Contract No. 954 dated May 27, 2002”) in which it informed CIOC
that, according to the 3“ quarter report data, CIOC was in breach of its obligations under
the Contract. It requested that the breach be remedied within one month. The notice also
informed that, in the event its requirements are not fulfilled MEMR “will take the steps to
terminate the Contract as provided for by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan”.
(R-15; C-15)

CIOC responded with a letter of 13 December 2007.

According to Claimant, on 29 December 2007, TU Zapkaznedra considered and approved
CIOC’s 2008 Annual Work Programme.

By an Order of 30 January 2008 MEMR ordered to terminate the Contract “due to failure
to fulfill the requirements of the Notice within the specified period.” (R-33; Claimant’s
translation in C-17 is: “due to failure of completion of notice requirements within the
specified period.”) On 1 February 2008 MEMR issued a “Notice of termination of the
Contract No. 954 dated May 27, 2002”, requesting CIOC, among others, to hand over the
Contract territory, return geological information and the Contract and fulfil the
outstanding obligations and to rehabilitate the contract area. (C-18; R-34)

On 12 February 2008 CIOC sent a letter to MEMR requesting it to allow CIOC to
complete the works under the Contract. In its letter of 6 March 2008 CIOC requested
MEMR for a meeting to explore the possibility of resolving the dispute by way of
negotiations under Article 27 of the Contract.

On 13-14 March 2008 MEMR and CIOC representatives met for discussion. In
conclusion of the meeting “/rJepresentatives of MEMR assured CIOC that they would
notify the management of MEMR no later than by March 21, 2008, [of] the standpoint of
CIOC, and shall respond on their position in writing, until March 29, 2008.” (C-22)

In a letter of 14 May 2008, in response to CIOC’s letters, MEMR reiterated its decision
on termination.

54

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

178.

According to Claimant, in June 2008, Claimant’s bank accounts were frozen.

G.IV. Alleged Intimidation by the Authorities

The following facts are, among others, highlighted by Claimant in relation to its claims of
alleged harassment and intimidation of CIOC, its employees and other individuals by
Kazakh authorities.

On 27 June 2007 the building housing offices of many businesses belonging to the
Hourani family, including CIOC, was raided by police, the premises were searched and
computers, documents, and details of bank accounts were seized. Following the raid
CIOC employees were interrogated at the company’s office or at the Ministry of Interior,
and further documents were seized.

On 28 June 2007, Devinceci Hourani was questioned at the police station.

According to Claimant, in a meeting with the President’s daughter Dariga Nazarbayeva in
early July 2007, Devineci Hourani was informed that the nature of these attacks was of a
political nature. At the same time, the Hourani family and CIOC’s senior management
were placed under surveillance by Kazakh authorities.

Claimant further held that until mid-July 2007 the offices raided on 27 June 2007 were
inspected on a daily basis by a Kazakh police officer.

Devincci Hourani described being stopped and his car searched, extortion attempts, and
receiving anonymous calls with threats. On 1 September 2007 the private homes of
CIOC’s Director Hussam Hourani, to which Devincci Hourani moved, was raided.
Devincci Hourani was taken for interrogation. He left Kazakhstan on 4 September 2007
for London and came back in January 2008 and left again in March 2008. After that the
harassment of CIOC’s employees and Devincci Hourani continued.

In 2007 various criminal investigations were commenced by Kazakh authorities against
Issam Hourani; an arrest warrant against him was issued by Interpol Astana and he was
stripped of his Kazakh citizenship and his civil and diplomatic passports.

According to Claimant, Issam Hourani and Devincci Hourani were deceived or coerced to
assign shares in their various companies to Dariga Nazarbayeva. One of their companies
was forced into an unjustified bankruptcy.

From June to November 2007 CIOC was subject to many investigations, audits and
complaints, including:

e an audit by the Customs Control Committee of the Ministry of Finance,

e an environmental audit by the Ministry of Environmental Protection,

e the imposition of a penalty by MEMR’s Committee of State Emergency Situations
and Industrial Safety Control for breach of safety rules in the petroleum industry,

e the imposition of a penalty by a state inspector of land use and protection for
illegal use of state land,

55

179.

180.

e an inspection of arrangements on civil defense and rescue operations, finding the
non-fulfilment of a previously issued prescriptive order and resulting in a new
prescriptive order,

e an audit by the prosecutor for environmental protection resulting in the initiation
of proceedings concerning the violation of the law against CIOC and CIOC’s
Director, Hussam Hourani,

e an inspection of legality of the financial and economic activities by public
prosecutors,

ean audit of compliance with labour regulations by state labour inspection.

On 12 October 2007 the Investigations Unit of the Almaty City Department of Internal
Affairs ordered seizure of CIOC’s legal and accounting documents in connection with
criminal investigations of a company (Ruby Roz Agricol) belonging to Issam Hourani.

Claimant links the alleged intimidation and harassment with political events in
Kazakhstan, in particular with the fact that Issam Hourani had since 1996 been married to
Gulshat Aliyev. She is a sister of Rakhat Aliyev. Rakhat Aliyev was married to Dariga
Nazarbayeva, daughter of the President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev and
belonged to the close circle of the President. In May 2007 a conflict arose between
Rakhat Aliyev and the President, as the former opposed the idea of the constitutional
changes granting Nursultan Nazarbayev presidency for life. As a result, Claimant alleges
the resulting campaign of the Kazakh authorities against Rakhat Aliyev included also the
Hourani family.

56

H. Short Summary of Contentions

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

187.

188.

The following summary of the Parties’ contentions is subject to more details as set out in
the submissions of the Parties and reflected in the Tribunal’s considerations in later
sections of this Award.

To provide a better understanding of the full dispute, the summaries include those on
aspects of the case which, in view of later considerations and conclusions of the Tribunal
regarding jurisdiction, need not be examined by the Tribunal later in this Award.

  

H.I. Contentions Regarding the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal

The Parties’ contentions regarding jurisdiction will be taken up below in this Award
together with the Tribunal’s Considerations and Conclusions regarding jurisdiction.

H.IL Contentions Regarding the Admissibility of the Claims
Presented

The matter of admissibility of claims was heavily disputed between the Parties as set out
below.

H.IL1. Summary of Contentions by Claimant

A more comprehensive coverage of Claimant’s contentions on admissibility can be found
in Claimant’s Reply Memorial of 30 July 2010 (C-V, paras. 149-202).

Claimant asserts that its claims are admissible and that CIOC has not waived its right to
ICSID arbitration with regard to its claims under the BIT.

Claimant clarifies that its claims are properly identified as treaty claims, which cannot be
waived by a forum selection clause in the Contract. Even if this were possible, no such
waiver was ever declared. Also, according to Claimant the forum selection clause in the
Contract was never intended as a waiver of ICSID jurisdiction and thus, should not be
interpreted as one. Even if the forum selection clause applied to some of the claims at
hand, Claimant assures that this Tribunal would be the proper forum to entertain those
claims.

 
 

 

 

H.IL2. Summary of Contentions by Respondent

A more detailed presentation of Respondent’s contentions regarding the admissibility of
the claims can be found in Respondent’s Counter-Memorial of 22 December 2009 (R-II,
paras. 47-78) and Respondent’s Rejoinder of 14 December 2010 (R-IV, paras. 55-69).

57

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

194.

195.

196.

Respondent holds that CIOC’s claims are inadmissible since the Contract contained a
waiver by means of which CIOC had disposed of any right to jurisdiction it might have
had before this Tribunal. As a consequence, all of CIOC’s claims are rendered
inadmissible before this Tribunal and the exclusive jurisdiction clause contained in the
Contract has to be executed. Respondent points out that all of CIOC’s claims are
contractual in nature and as such a waiver is enforceable as a matter of international law.

Respondent strongly denies that Claimant has any rights under the BIT in this dispute.
However, even if CIOC had brought claims under the BIT, these can no longer be
entertained by this Tribunal.

H.IIL Contentions Regarding Liability

H.III.1. Summary of Contentions by Claimant

A more detailed presentation of Claimant’s contentions regarding liability can be found in
Claimant’s Request for Arbitration (C-I, paras. 43-53), Claimant’s Memorial of 14 May
2009 (C-IV, paras. 156-238), and Claimant’s Reply Memorial of 30 July 2010 (C-V,
paras. 203-291).

Claimant holds that Respondent breached numerous obligations both under the Contract
as well as under the BIT. With regard to the Contract, Claimant purports that Respondent
violated the terms of Contract through the unilateral termination without cause, contrary
to the provisions of the Contract. In addition, Respondent allegedly violated several
obligations under the BIT.

Claimant affirms that Respondent failed to accord at all times fair and equitable treatment
to its investment. In particular, Claimant upholds that Respondent failed to provide a
stable legal and business framework. Further, Claimant asserts that Respondent did not
act in good faith respecting the legitimate expectations of CIOC. Moreover, Respondent
did not act in accordance with due process and procedural propriety nor did it act in a
consistent, transparent and non-discriminatory manner.

 

Moreover, Respondent allegedly violated its obligation to grant full protection and
security to CIOC’s investment by failing to protect CIOC and its owners, senior
management and employees from harassment and legal and physical abuse such as illegal
detentions, interrogations, raids, searches, false allegations of criminal conduct, attempted
extortions, and threats to personal safety.

 

According to Claimant, Respondent further impaired CIOC’s investment by unlawfully
terminating Contract No. 954. Claimant purports that this constitutes an unreasonable or
discriminatory measure for the purposes of the BIT.

In Claimant’s view, Respondent expropriated CIOC of all or substantially all of its
investments without complying with any conditions that would render such an
expropriation lawful. Respondent neither acted for a legitimate public purpose, nor did it
act on a non-discriminatory basis or pay a prompt, adequate and effective compensation.
In particular, CIOC was deprived of its long-term rights under the Contract to further
explore and commercially develop hydrocarbons.

58

197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

Claimant further alleges that Respondent failed to comply with obligations it has entered
into with regard to Claimant’s investment, especially with its obligations assumed under
the Contract. According to Claimant, these breaches of the Contract are transformed into
violations of the BIT and thus constitute direct breaches of the BIT’s so called umbrella
clause.

In addition, Claimant argues that Respondent accorded CIOC’s investment treatment less
than that required by international law and thus also violated the minimum standard of
treatment in international law.

At the Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits, Claimant withdrew all documents which
were challenged by Respondent (C-162, C-175, C-238, C-239, C-240, Aliyev 25) to
avoid any controversy even though in Claimant’s view “no real record was developed to
allow issues of authenticity and provenance to be resolved”, also in light of the fact that
Respondent did not interrogate Dr Aliyev on the subject and likewise did not present
witnesses which were asserted to have provided some of the documents. Claimant
therefore holds that it will not, does not, and need not rely on these documents to make its
case and that they should have no bearing on its credibility or the outcome of the Award.
(C-VI, paras. 144-145)

H.III.2. Summary of Contentions by Respondent

Respondent’s contentions on liability issues are covered in more detail in Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial of 22 December 2009 (R-III, paras. 79-347) and Respondent’s
Rejoinder of 14 December 2010 (R-IV, paras. 70-409).

With regard to a breach of the so-called umbrella clause which obliges Respondent to
observe the obligations it has entered into with regard to investments, Respondent
emphasises that at no point it has breached Contract No. 954 by any means.

Even if this were the case, Respondent observes that the umbrella clause cannot cure
deficits with regard to jurisdiction and admi: lity. In particular, Respondent points out
that this clause does not transform CIOC’s contract claims into treaty claims and that
Claimant thus cannot circumvent its contractual obligations by invoking the umbrella
clause. Moreover, Respondent affirms that even if the umbrella clause could transform
some of Claimant’s contract claims into treaty claims, they would be inadmissible.

 
   

In addition, Respondent notes that it has not expropriated any property from CIOC and
CIOC has failed to meet its burden of proof with regard to its alleged expropriation. In
particular, in Respondent’s opinion Claimant has failed to show that it owned production
rights under the Contract of which it could have been expropriated. Respondent further
asserts that it exercised its rights under the Contract like any other party would have done
in a similar situation and thus did nothing more than what it was legitimately entitled to.

Respondent also purports that it accorded CIOC fair and equitable treatment by providing
a stable legal framework, fulfilling CIOC’s legitimate expectations and adhering to the
standards of transparency, due process and non-discrimination. Respondent argues that all
it did was to exercise its rights under the Contract and enforce its regulations. In
Respondent’s opinion, Claimant has failed to prove otherwise and thus CIOC has not met
its burden of proof concerning a breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment.

59

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

Furthermore, Respondent holds that it fulfilled its duty to provide full protection and
security to CIOC at all times. Acts taken in the exercise of legitimate state powers cannot
form the basis for a claim to having violated the standard of full protection and security.
Also, Respondent purports that this obligation does not include a duty to provide legal
protection. Finally, Respondent asserts that Claimant once again failed to meet its burden
of proof regarding a breach of full protection and security.

Lastly, Respondent contests that it acted in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. On the
contrary, Respondent claims that the measures taken were based on a rational policy,
addressing a matter of public interest and were supported by logic and good sense.

In its Rejoinder, Respondent further sets out that no harassment of CIOC took place at
any time. Moreover, Respondent purports that certain documents (C-162, C-175, C-238,
C-239, C-240, Aliyev 25) brought forward by Claimant in the attempt to prove the
allegations of harassment are “almost certainly forged”. (R-IV, para. 332)

H.IV.Contentions Regarding Damages and Quantum

H.IV.1. Summary of Contentions by Claimant

A more comprehensive coverage of Claimant’s contentions regarding damages and
quantum can be found in Claimant’s Memorial of 14 May 2009 (C-IV, paras. 239-284)
and Claimant’s Reply Memorial of 30 July 2010 (C-V, paras. 292-376).

Claimant holds that Respondent is internationally responsible for the violations of the
Treaty as has been codified in the ILC Draft Articles on State Responsibility.

With regard to the asserted expropriation, Claimant opines that should the Tribunal fail to
conclude that the expropriation was unlawful, CIOC should be entitled to compensation
for a lawful compensation. The standard for compensation is to be taken from the BIT
which specifies that the compensation should be equivalent to the fair market value.

If, however, the Tribunal determines that the expropriation was in fact unlawful, Claimant
is purportedly entitled to damages. Claimant points out that the measure for damages can
be higher than compensation in a case of a lawful expropriation.

Furthermore, Claimant asserts that it is entitled to moral damages due to the
internationally wrongful acts caused by Respondent. Moreover, Claimant underscores
that this entitlement is not affected by the fact that the claim is brought by a juridical
person, namely CIOC. Claimant observes that moral damages can be awarded to both
juridical and natural persons.

Claimant also affirms that Respondent is liable for breaches of the Contract, especially for
the wrongful termination. Accordingly, Claimant is entitled to compensation for damages
under Kazakh law which suffered as a result of the wrongful termination. Claimant
notices that the alternative remedy of restoration of the Contract is not possible in the
present case.

60

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

222.

With regard to the appropriate valuation methodology, Claimant affirms that all
compensation and damages should be calculated using the Discounted Cash Flow (DCF)
Analysis. Claimant purports that this method is the most reliable to value the investment
that had been expropriated by Respondent.

Claimant further requests relief for moral damages as the Tribunal considers reasonable in
the circumstances, taking into account the damage done to CIOC, its management, its
majority owner and its employees as well as the malicious nature of Respondent’s
conduct.

Lastly, Claimant substantiates its entitlement to compound interest.

H.IV.2. Summary of Contentions by Respondent

A more detailed presentation of Respondent’s contentions regarding damages and
quantum can be found in Respondent’s Counter-Memorial of 22 December 2009 (R-III,
paras. 348-467) and Respondent’s Rejoinder of 14 December 2010 (R-IV, paras. 410-
647).

Respondent maintains that Claimant is not entitled to lost profits. This would only have
been the case if CIOC had made and declared a commercial discovery in the first place.
Claimant’s entitlement to commercial production was conditioned upon making a
commercial discovery. However, Claimant only brought a certificate of reserves.
Respondent opines that this does not constitute a declaration of a commercial discovery,
especially in view of the fact that the certificate was not obtained from the competent
authority.

Furthermore, any allegedly lost profits would have been highly speculative and uncertain
and thus lack reasonable certainty; Respondent also points out that Claimant would not be
entitled to future lost profits when applying the so-called Discounted Cash Flow (DCF)
method on which Claimant based all its calculations regarding damages.

Respondent asserts that the appropriate valuation methodology is to apply the Updated
Investment Value rather than the DCF method preferred by Claimant which, on top of
being the inappropriate method as such, is also erroneous as applied by Claimant.

Respondent denies that CIOC has suffered any moral damages and is thus not entitled to
the latter. Respondent claims that such extraordinary relief can only be granted for
substantial harm and injury which amounts to egregious conduct. However, in
Respondent’s opinion such acts did not occur.

With regard to interest, Respondent emphasises that merely simple interest should be
paid, the measure being a commercially reasonable interest rate. Also, interest payment
should be calculated not earlier as of 31 January 2008.

 

61

L

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

Analysis by the Tribunal — Preliminary Matters

LI. Applicable Law

1.1.1. Positions of the Parties

Claimant holds that the law applicable to its claims for breaches of the BIT is public
international law since Claimant accepted Respondent's offer to arbitrate disputes arising
under the BIT. Claimant further purports that this is necessarily so because its claims
relate to the interpretation and application of provisions in a treaty. (C-IV, para. 157)

 

With regard to the substantive law applicable to the investment agreement and related
agreements concluded on its basis, both Parties refer to Clause 26.1 of the Contract which
reads (C-IV, para. 158; R-III, para. 61, note 57):

 

“This Contract and other agreements signed on the basis of this Contract, shall be
governed by the law of the State unless stated otherwise by the international treaties
to which the State is a party.”

In addition, Claimant asserts that to the extent that its claims require the interpretation of
the Contract, said Contract would be interpreted in accordance with the applicable
contract law without prejudice to the pertaining BIT claim. (C-V, para. 201) Respondent
asserts that in the case at hand, breaches of contract remain an issue of private law since
Respondent acted in its capacity as a private party. Therefore public international law is
not applicable to the Contract. (R-V, para. 144) Claimant stresses in particular that Article
70 of the Subsoil Law is applicable in its version before December 2004, in accordance
with the stability clause as provided by Clause 28 of the Contract. (cf. e.g. C-V, para. 110,
note 212) Respondent counters that Article 70 of the Subsoil Law in either version is
irrelevant since Respondent merely exercised its right of termination under Clause 29.6 of
the Contract.

Overall, Claimant thus argues that international law, including customary international
law and the BIT itself, and Kazakh law are applicable to the dispute. (cf. C-I, para. 83; C-
IV, para. 180) Without elaborating on its applicability, Respondent concedes that
international law is applicable to the dispute, e.g. by relying on principles of public
international law in its argument, such as the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
and the Draft Articles on State Responsibility of the International Law Commission. (cf.
e.g. R-IV, paras. 7 et seq.)

1.1.2. The Tribunal

There does not seem to be a dispute between the Parties regarding the applicable
procedural and substantive law.

62

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

234,

Regarding the procedural rules to be applied by the Tribunal, the Parties have agreed that
the ICSID Arbitration Rules as amended and effective on 10 April 2006, shall apply to
the proceedings as has been recorded in paragraph I.5. of the Minutes of the First Session
of the Arbitral Tribunal.

Furthermore, the Parties have agreed on Frankfurt, Germany, as the place of proceeding
according to paragraph I.6. of the Minutes of the First Session of the Arbitral Tribunal.

Regarding substantive law, according to Art. 42 of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal
shall decide on the basis of the law of Kazakhstan and of such rules of international law
as may be applicable. The latter particularly include the BIT, the VCLT, and rules of
customary international law.

L1II. Treaty Interpretation and Relevance of Decisions of other
Courts and Tribunals

In their written and oral submissions, the Parties rely on numerous decisions of other
courts and tribunals. Accordingly, it is appropriate for the Tribunal to make certain
general preliminary observations in this regard.

First of all, the Tribunal considers it useful to make clear from the outset that it regards its
task in these proceedings as the very specific one of applying the relevant provisions of
the BIT as far as necessary in order to decide on the relief sought by the Parties. In order
to do so, the Tribunal must, as required by the “General rule of interpretation” of Article
31 of the VCLT, interpret the BIT’s provisions in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to them in their context and in light of the BIT’s object and
purpose. The “context” referred to in the first paragraph of Article 31 is given a specific
definition in the second paragraph of Article 31 and comprises three elements: (i) the
BIT’s text, including its preamble; (ii) any agreement between the parties to the BIT in
connection with its conclusion; and (iii) any instrument which was made by one of the
parties to the BIT in connection with its conclusion and accepted by the other party to the
BIT. The “ordinary meaning” as defined above applies unless a special meaning is to be
given to a term if it is established that the parties to the BIT so intended, as it is stated in
the fourth paragraph of Article 31.

 

   

As provided in the “Supplementary means of interpretation” of Article 32 of the VCLT,
the Tribunal may have recourse to supplementary means of interpretation (i) in order to
confirm the meaning resulting from the application of Article 31 of the VCLT, or (ii)
when the interpretation according to Article 31 of the VCLT either leaves the meaning
ambiguous or obscure, or leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.
Those supplementary means of interpretation include the preparatory work of the treaty
and the circumstances of its conclusion. Thus, recourse to the supplementary means of
interpretation of Article 32 may only be had if the situations mentioned at (i) and (ii)
above occur.

It is not evident whether and if so to what extent arbitral awards are of relevance to the
Tribunal’s task. It is in any event clear that the decisions of other tribunals are not binding
on this Tribunal. The many references by the Parties to certain arbitral decisions in their
pleadings do not contradict this conclusion.

63

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

240.

241.

However, this does not preclude the Tribunal from considering arbitral decisions, and the
arguments of the Parties based upon them, to the extent that it may find that they shed any
useful light on the issues that arise for decision in this case.

Such an examination is conducted by the Tribunal later in this Award, after the Tribunal
has considered the Parties’ contentions and arguments regarding the various issues argued
and relevant for the interpretation of the applicable BIT provisions, while taking into
account the above-mentioned specificity of the BIT to be applied in the present case.

LIL Procedural Issues regarding Late Submissions of Documents

Certain issues regarding the late submission of documents were highly disputed between
the Parties before and during the hearing.

L111. Claimant’s Perspective

By letter of 12 January 2011, Claimant submitted exhibits C-180 to C-298 in rebuttal to
Respondent’s Rejoinder of 14 December 2010. Claimant stated that some of the exhibits
had only been provided to Claimant’s counsel “in the last few days” and that therefore,
some exhibits had not been translated yet. However, Claimant noted that since most of
these documents were in Respondent’s official language Russian, this would not cause
any undue inconvenience.

Claimant submitted an additional exhibit (C-299) on 13 January 2011 asserting that this
exhibit had just been received and was filed in rebuttal to the allegation of forgery as set
out in Respondent’s Rejoinder.

Claimant provided three more partly untranslated exhibits to the Tribunal on 14 January
2011 (C-300 to C-302), purportedly rebutting allegations concerning the relationship
between JOR and CIOC. Claimant further conceded that these exhibits had inadvertently
not been produced due to a production error in Claimant’s office. However, Claimant also
observed that since these exhibits were official documents of the National Bank of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, the submission of these exhibits should not be of any
inconvenience to Respondent seeing that they should already be in Respondent’s
possession.

In a further letter dated 18 January 2011, Claimant sought the Tribunal’s authorisation to
submit four more exhibits (C-303 to C-306) which were attached to the letter. In support
of its case, Claimant argued that the documents were “offered solely in the nature of
rebuttal evidence” to Respondent’s allegations of forgery and that Mr Aliyev, Claimant’s
witness, had made an effort to obtain these documents before the expiration of the
12 January 2011 deadline. However, Claimant pointed out that due to the sensitive nature
of the exhibits at issue it had not been easy to access these documents “by someone who is
under constant threat of physical harm, and must regularly move his residence (and keep
his whereabouts confidential)” for protection. Lastly, Claimant underscored that it had
tried to obtain Respondent’s consent to submit these documents at this point of the
proceedings which however, had been declined.

64

242.

243.

244,

245.

246.

247.

248.

By letter of 19 January 2011, Claimant addressed Respondent’s request of 17 January
2011 to the Tribunal to exclude the exhibits submitted by Claimant between 12 and 14
January 2011 and requested that Respondent’s motion should be rejected.

Claimant purported that Respondent complained about the number of documents, the
language they were in, their date, the date on which the exhibits were physically received
and the fact that they were not accompanied by a written submission. Assertedly for these
reasons the only way to protect Respondent’s right of defence was to strike Claimant’s
new exhibits from the record. However, Claimant emphasised that out of the 123 new
exhibits only 27 were such that Respondent could not have seen or noticed them
previously.

With regard to the language of the submitted documents, Claimant pointed out that it did
not receive Respondent’s exhibits to its Rejoinder until 21 December 2010, thus seven
days after the deadline for the Rejoinder and that Claimant then had a mere fourteen
business days to submit exhibits in rebuttal of the rejoinder. Claimant thus held that it was
to be excused for not providing translations of the submitted exhibits immediately.
Claimant further drew support for its argument from the fact that translations were to be
provided as soon as “practicable” and moreover, from the fact that virtually all
untranslated exhibits were in Russian, an official language of Respondent which was also
spoken by Respondent’s counsel and Respondent’s governmental representatives. Finally,
Claimant put forward that nothing in Paragraph 7.1 of the Minutes of the First Session
suggested that a timely submission of exhibits was prevented by not providing a
corresponding English translation instantaneously.

 

In addition, Claimant expressed its astonishment with regard to Respondent’s allegations
of forgery of certain documents produced by Claimant and especially the fact that
Respondent waited for almost five months before making its allegations while it had
purportedly been in possession of said documents since early August 2010.

Regarding the date of the documents submitted, Claimant held that it was “simply
absurd” that no documents could be produced that pre-dated its Reply Memorial. Rather,
Claimant contended that documents could be brought forward regardless of their date as
long as they were in rebuttal of issues discussed in Respondent’s Rejoinder. Claimant
further noted that Respondent itself on 17 January 2011 had produced exhibits in rebuttal
which dated e.g. from 2002 and that it was thereby contradicting its own argument.

With regard to the physical receipt of the rebuttal exhibits, Claimant asserted that it had
offered Respondent shipping options in order for Respondent to receive the exhibits “as
soon as can be arranged” and that out of these options Respondent had accepted to pick
up a flash drive at 10.30 a.m. on 13 January 2011 from Claimant’s counsel’s London
office without contradiction. Therefore, Respondent could not legitimately hold this
against Claimant now.

In its letter, Claimant further confirmed that all exhibits filed from 12 January 2011 were
in rebuttal to matters raised in Respondent’s Rejoinder and that when Claimant did not
provide a written submission accompanying these exhibits, it acted in strict compliance
with the Minutes of the First Session as well as with the Tribunal’s Procedural Orders
No. 5 and No. 6. Claimant further mentioned several examples of exhibits which were in
direct rebuttal to matters raised in Respondent’s Rejoinder.

65

249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

255.

Lastly, Claimant purported that “Respondent’s theory that it will not have a sufficient
opportunity to respond to Claimant’s rebuttal exhibits is flawed.” Claimant underscored
that Respondent had been aware for some time that it would have five days to make
submissions in rebuttal to Claimant’s exhibits, that it could submit further exhibits if it
showed the Tribunal “good cause” and that Respondent had weeks and months to
comment on Claimant’s exhibits at the hearing in Paris as well as in post-hearing briefs.

In its letter of 19 January 2011, Claimant also requested that the exhibits submitted on
18 January 2011 as well as exhibits C-307 and C-308 should be admitted into the record.

L.IIL.2. Respondent’s Perspective

In a letter of 29 December 2010, Respondent objected to Claimant’s intent to file new
exhibits in response to Respondent’s Rejoinder of 14 December 2011. Respondent relied
on paragraphs 14.14 and 15.1 of the Minutes of the First Session to emphasise that new
evidence can only be submitted upon consent of the Parties or express authorisation of the
Tribunal and moreover, that any new and material evidence or new facts come to the
knowledge of a Party or arisen since the date of a witness’s or expert’s last signed
statement, may be addressed in writing to the Tribunal with a subsequent opportunity for
the other Party to provide comments. Further, should such evidence be admitted, the other
Party will be granted an opportunity to submit evidence, witness statements and expert
statements in rebuttal. According to Respondent, Claimant’s “unilateral and unauthorized

 

filing of new exhibits” was thus seeking to bypass the procedural rules agreed upon

previously.

Respondent further held that Claimant had already breached these rules when filing the
witness statement of Mr Fadi Hussein on 13 December 2010 “along with many other
exhibits” without obtaining prior authorisation of the Tribunal, and Respondent had
requested to exclude and reject these exhibits from the record by letter of 22 December
2010. Respondent also contended that it was impossible to reply in rebuttal to these
exhibits within the time available.

By letter of 17 January 2011, Respondent requested the Tribunal to exclude the exhibits
submitted by Claimant on 13-14 January 2011 (C-299 to C-302). Alternatively, should
these exhibits not be stricken from the record, Respondent noted it “must regretfully state
that it has no choice but to reserve all of its rights”. Respondent reiterated its request to
strike Claimants exhibits from the record in its letter of 23 January 2011, claiming that
their admissibility would violate the basic principles of fundamental fairness and due
process.

Respondent complained that Claimant had not met its 12 January 2011 deadline for
submission of new documents and that, on top of that Claimant’s exhibits were not
accompanied by Claimant’s letter, but rather that Respondent had been invited to pick up
the exhibits at issue itself at the London office of Counsel for Claimant on 13 January
2011.

In further support of its argument, Respondent emphasised that 102 of the 119 exhibits
(C-180 to C-298) had never been submitted before. Furthermore, Claimant filed another
four exhibits on 13 and 14 January 2011 (C-299 to C-302), which Respondent could not
adequately rebut, given that Claimant had filed 575 pages of new documents, more than

66

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.

150 pages of which were not in English and had come untranslated. This, Respondent
alleged, was in violation of Paragraph 7.1 of the Minutes of the First Session. This was
particularly true, in Respondent’s view, given the short amount of time. Respondent
pointed out that it only had five days until 17 January 2011, including two non-working
days in Kazakhstan, to produce documents in rebuttal of Claimant’s exhibits. Respondent
contended that this constituted a violation of fundamental fairness and due process.

Moreover, Respondent purported that Claimant had infringed the spirit of Paragraph 15.1
of the Minutes of the First Session that all evidence is to be submitted together with the
written submissions. However, according to Respondent, Claimant did not indicate which
arguments the exhibits were trying to rebut and by doing so Claimant had robbed
Respondent of a proper opportunity to reply to Claimant’s arguments. Respondent gave
several examples of documents which could easily have been submitted with Claimant’s
Reply Memorial and asserted that Claimant had failed to explain why it had not done so.

Respondent’s position can best be summarised by citing the following passage from its
letter of 17 January 2011 (p. 2):

“In light of the quantity of new documents and untranslated documents, it is
physically impossible for Counsel for the Republic to translate, study, guess which of
the Republic's arguments CIOC’s new exhibits are supposed to rebut, discuss them
with representatives of the Republic and then search for, translate, if necessary, and
submit by January 17 a full set of new exhibits in response to CIOC’s January 13-14
filings.”

Respondent alleged that Claimant had filed certain documents which purportedly
contained a large number of unsubstantiated allegations, on the day before the filing date
of Respondent’s Rejoinder to ensure that these documents could not be replied to in the
Rejoinder.

Respondent also commented on the asserted inadmissibility of Mr Harvey Jackson’s
witness statement. As Mr Jackson’s witness statement had been withdrawn on 12 August
2010 at the request of Mr Jackson’s employer at the time, Merrill Lynch, Respondent “did
not look for a corresponding witness to reply to him and did not deal with his withdrawn
witness statement in the Rejoinder”. By submitting Mr Jackson’s witness statement back
on the record, Claimant had thus eliminated Respondent’s possibility to reply adequately
to the witness statement. Consequently, Respondent requested that Mr Jackson’s witness
statement be stricken from the record and that additionally, Mr Jackson be excluded from
testifying at the hearing. Respondent reiterated its objections concerning Mr Jackson’s
witness statement in its letter to the Tribunal of 23 January 2011.

 

Respondent further noted in its letter of 23 January 2011 that to this date it had not
received the English translations of the newly filed exhibits on 13 January and thereafter.
In addition, Respondent pointed out that according to Section 5.1 of Procedural Order
No. 2 the Parties were invited to produce documents which were not in English to the
other Party together with an unofficial English translation and that Section 7.1 of the
Minutes of the First Session provided that the procedural language shall be English.

With regard to the date on which Claimant had received the Rejoinder, Respondent

pointed out that the 12 January 2011 deadline for Claimant’s new exhibits had been set
after the receipt of the Rejoinder and that the delays in December had been caused by

67

262.

263.

264.

265.

Claimant’s submission of 13 December 2010, which had disrupted Respondent in
finalising its Rejoinder.

Respondent further held that it was perfectly entitled to raise the allegations of forgery
made in two of its exhibits for the first time together with its Rejoinder, as it constituted
a written submission under Section 15.1 of the Minutes of the First Session.

Moreover, Respondent reproached that Claimant had still failed to fully explain or
indicate which of Respondent’s arguments it was trying to rebut in submitting Claimant’s
exhibits and thus continued “to deprive the Republic of its right to know the underlying
explanations” (p. 11, para. 6) and by doing so violated the principles of fairness and due
process. In Respondent’s view, this also held true for recent exhibits filed on 18 January
2011 (C-303 to C-306) and thus Respondent requested that all of Claimant’s exhibits
should be stricken from the record, in particular the exhibits submitted by Claimant on
18 January 2011.

Respondent also noted that Claimant had requested to be provided with a “live internet
connection, including to Caratube International Oil Company’s website”. As Claimant
had not provided any explanation as to why it required such a connection, Respondent
objected to the request in so far as the connection should serve to present new documents
or to make the hearing available through the website (Respondent’s letter of 23 January
2011, p. 10).

L11.3. The Tribunal

The relevant passage from the letter of 24 January 2011 by the Tribunal as conveyed to
the Parties by ICSID is recalled:

“I. The Tribunal has carefully considered the many recent submissions by the
Parties regarding the preparation and conduct of the Hearing in Paris. In
view of the many issues addressed and in order to give the Parties guidance
for their preparation of the Hearing without further delay within the very short
time available up to the Hearing, and in order to avoid longer time that would
be needed for the members of the Tribunal, who also have mandatory
commitments in other cases during that period, to elaborate and agree on a
longer text defining in detail the considerations and reasons of the Tribunal,
the Tribunal has decided to hereby inform the Parties of its following
preliminary rulings.

2. Documents Submitted by the Parties

2.1. The Tribunal appreciates the submissions of the Parties indicating that
and why certain documents recently submitted by the Parties should or
should not be admitted. However, the Tribunal considers it as
important that, at the final hearing of this case, all documents that the
Parties consider as relevant, can be considered and discussed.

2.2... Therefore, the Tribunal provisionally admits all documents submitted
[by] the Parties up to now, and the two letters submitted by Mr. Rashid
Farah forwarded to the Parties by the Tribunal’s Secretary at ICSID
by e-mail of 19 January 2011.

68

2.3.

2.4,

2.5.

At the Hearing, the Parties should be prepared to comment on all new
documents, may refer to and rely on these documents (provided they
are in English or translated into English), may explain why they
consider them admissible or inadmissible beyond what they have
already argued in their written submissions, and may request to further
discuss these documents in their post-hearing submissions.

Any further submissions by the Parties have to be made, as is the
general rule in ICSID proceedings, to ICSID without any copies sent
directly to members of the Tribunal.

Taking all these presentations of the Parties into account, the Tribunal
will then decide on the final admissibility of documents it considers
it{sic] relevant for its decisions and whether it can rely on such
document for its decision.”

266. Regarding the admission of new documents, the Tribunal recalls the following passage
from the Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits of 9 February 2011
(Tr, day 3, p. 6-7):

“THE PRESIDENT: [...] Perhaps I should first define what we call new documents.

New documents from our side are all documents submitted on 1. 3" December or later,
except the documents submitted with the rejoinder. [...]

Now regarding these new documents, our ruling is the following:

I.

LIV.

The Tribunal recalls its rulings in the minutes of the first session, paragraph
14.14, in Procedural Order No. 5, paragraph 3.6, in Procedural Order No. 6,
paragraph B4, and in our letter of 24"" January, section 2.

On that basis, the further procedure during this hearing shall be as follows:

@

()
oO

If a party wishes to rely on a new document, in the definition that I
gave you, it shall identify the document and give the reasons why the
Tribunal should admit the document.

The other party will be heard in this regard.

Then the Tribunal will decide on a document by document basis on the
request.”

Procedural Issues regarding the Attendance of Persons and
Examination of Witnesses at the Hearing

267. Certain issues regarding the attendance of persons and the examination of witnesses at the
hearing were highly disputed between the Parties before and during the hearing.

69

268.

269.

270.

271.

272.

273.

274.

275.

276.

LIV.1. Claimant’s Perspective

By letter dated 10 November 2010, Claimant submitted its Request to Examine Witnesses
Under the Control of Respondent, petitioning that Respondent make available five
individuals for the hearing in Paris in February 2011. Claimant asserted that none of these
witnesses would appear voluntarily at Claimant’s request. Claimant further explained that
each of these persons could provide relevant and material testimony to the dispute.

Claimant also noted that the Tribunal had the authority to require the production
of witnesses under the ICSID Convention, the ICSID Arbitration Rules, and according to
the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial Arbitration.
Furthermore, Claimant argued that its request was supported by the practice of ICSID
Tribunals.

Claimant then substantiated why the testimonies of Ms Dariga Nursultanovna
Nazarbayeva, Mr Aglan Espullayevich Musin, Mr Kanat Saudabayev, Mr Alexander
Mirtchev, and Mr Timur Kulibayev were crucial to the proceedings and acknowledged
that these persons would be subject to immunity as granted under Articles 21 and 22 of
the ICSID Convention as stated in a previous Procedural Order of the Tribunal.

By letter of 22 December 2010, Claimant submitted its list of witnesses it wished to
examine at the hearing in February 2011, a total of 14 witnesses for direct and
17 witnesses for cross-examination. With its submission, Claimant filed the witness
statement of Mr Harvey Jackson, who was no longer employed by Merrill Lynch and was
now ready to testify at the hearing.

 

Claimant also explained why in its opinion the testimony of certain persons under the
control of Respondent as stated in its request of 10 November 2010, was crucial to the
dispute. Moreover, Claimant added Ambassador Yerzhan Kazykhanov to its pending
request of 10 November 2010.

On 23 December 2010, Claimant requested two more witnesses for cross-examination,
Ambassador Idrisov and Mr Kasymbekoy, to testify at the hearing in February 2011, on
account of Respondent relying on letters of these persons rather than witness statements
in trying to prove its allegations of forgery.

On 17 January 2011, Claimant submitted its list of attendees for the hearing in Paris.
Claimant furthermore informed the Tribunal that in view of Respondent’s abbreviated
witness list, Claimant no longer intended to call six of the witnesses from the list
submitted on 22 December 2010, among them Mr Harvey Jackson.

In its letter of 19 January 2011, Claimant notified the Tribunal that Mr Fadi Hussein and
his family had purportedly been threatened by agents of Respondent and that Mr Hussein
thus refused to testify at the hearing. Claimant requested that in light of the circumstances
that led to Mr Hussein’s non-appearance at the hearing, his witness statement remain on
the record.

With regard to Mr Kassem Omar, Claimant pointed out that according to Paragraph 1.3 of
PO-5 the Parties were permitted to notify the Tribunal by 17 January 2011 if they did not
intend to examine any of the witnesses so far notified. Claimant emphasised that this
provision only allowed for the dropping of a witness that had originally been required for

70

277.

278.

279.

280.

281.

282.

283.

examination, however, that it did not entail that a witness could be added who had
previously not been notified for examination. As Mr Omar had not been on Respondent’s
list of witnesses of 22 December 2010, and Claimant had subsequently decided not to call
him either, Mr Omar upon notification of this decision, had made other plans and was
thus no longer available. Claimant requested the Tribunal to confirm that no witnesses
could be added to the original list of 22 December 2010.

Regarding the witness statement of Mr Harvey Jackson, Claimant contended that it had
been admitted to the record in the Tribunal’s letter of 4 January 2011 according to Section
B.4 of PO-6.

Claimant further notified the Tribunal of its decision not to call Mr Mangat Thapar, the
reason being that his interpretation of Claimant’s 3D survey was “utterly irrelevant” to
the decisive matters in dispute. Also, Claimant noted that it would be obviously unfair to
pair its industry expert Mr Tiefenthal with two experts for Expert Conferencing as had
been suggested by Respondent (Claimant’s Letter of 19 January 2011, p. 10). Moreover,
Claimant asserted that Mr Thapar’s expertise as geophysicist was different from the
expertise of its own expert witnesses and not conducive to Expert Conferencing. Claimant
thus requested Mr Thapar to be limited to ten minutes of direct examination by
Respondent.

With regard to Expert Conferencing, Claimant further requested the Tribunal to grant its
experts a period on rebuttal only before starting Expert Conferencing. In addition,
Claimant provided the order in which it would conduct direct examination of its witnesses
and presented its proposal for Expert Conferencing.

Finally, Claimant added Dr Otto Dietrich, Counsel to Dr Rakhat Aliyev, to the list of
attendees for the days on which Dr Aliyev would testify.

By letter of 24 January 2011, Claimant replied to Respondent’s letter of 23 January 2011.
In particular, Claimant underscored that neither Rule 32(1) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules nor any other rule entitled a party to require evidence from the opposing party to
justify its selection of hearing attendees on its behalf. This held true even more so as none
of the three individuals to which Respondent had objected were witnesses in the
proceedings. “Rather, they have been designated as agents of Claimant solely for the
purpose of attending the hearing.” (p. 1, section 1). Thus, in Claimant’s opinion,
Respondent had failed to provide any reason that would prevent these persons from
attending the hearing, and had also failed to explain why these persons would have to be
“true corporate representatives” (Respondent’s letter of 23 January 2011, p. 10).

Claimant further explained that Dr Dietrich’s presence at the hearing was important in
light of proceedings brought by Respondent in Austrian courts against Dr Aliyev in which
Respondent seeks Dr Aliyev’s extradition to Kazakhstan. Dr Dietrich serves as counsel
for Dr Aliyev’s in these proceedings.

Mr Didier Bollecker and Ms Eve-Marine Bollecker of CAAvocats represent Dr Aliyev
advising him on matters of safety, including immunity protection under the ICSID
Convention, Dr Aliyev’s travels to France as well as handling INTERPOL red bulletins
and procedural and substantial matters arising under French law in this regard. Claimant
thus held that their presence was crucial for Dr Aliyev’s personal safety.

71

284.

285.

286.

287.

288.

289.

290.

291.

Lastly, Claimant added Mr Benjamin Folkinshteyn of Crowell and Moring LLP to the list
of hearing attendees.

L.IV.2. Respondent’s Perspective

In its Response to CIOC’s Request to Examine Witnesses Under the Control of
Respondent of December 15, 2010, Respondent requested that Claimant’s petition be
denied.

Although Respondent conceded that the Tribunal would have the authority to request the
production of certain witnesses, Respondent emphasised that this was only the case if the
testimony at issue was relevant and material for the outcome of the dispute.
In Respondent’s opinion, the witnesses in question would neither serve to clarify the facts
of the case as Claimant itself had stated that it had already “submitted numerous witness
statements by individuals with first-hand knowledge” of the relationships fundamental to
the dispute and how it affected Claimant’s investment (Claimant’s Request, para. 20), nor
would their testimonies be relevant and material to the dispute since the request for their
examination was based on forged or almost certainly forged documents which would in
consequence be inadmissible.

 

Relying on Article 9.2(g) of the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence, Respondent also
pointed out that a Tribunal may decline to consider evidence in view of fairness or
equality (Respondent’s Response, para. 22).

Furthermore, Respondent submitted that Claimant’s Request was to be rejected also on
the ground of having been made in an untimely manner. In support of its argument,
Respondent drew upon Claimant’s late submission of the Oligarchs Report which had
been available to Claimant for several months and its late request of individuals to appear
as witnesses, whose purported involvement in the dispute had been known for some time,
in case of Ms Dariga Nazerbaeva from the beginning of these proceedings and in case of
Mr Kanat Saudabaev from at least January 2010.

On 22 December 2010, Respondent filed a list of the witnesses and experts whom
Respondent wished to examine at the hearing in direct or cross-examination.

By letter of 17 January 2010, Respondent provided the Tribunal with a list of the
witnesses and experts whose presence they would provide for at the hearing, the order in
which they intended to conduct their examination, the persons attending the hearing on
their side, notifications on the witnesses they did not intend to examine, the witnesses and
experts who would require interpretation from and to English, the experts that should be
examined together by Expert Conferencing and issues that should be raised by each group
of experts during Expert Conferencing.

 

Respondent had added three additional witnesses, namely Ambassador Erlan Idrissov,
Ambassador Yerzhan Kazykhanov, and Mr Sanat Isayev. Respondent further pointed out
that it would not make available any of the five witnesses requested by Claimant in its
motion of 10 November 2010 for the reasons stated in Respondent’s Response to CIOC’s
Request to Examine Witnesses Under the Control of Respondent. In addition, Respondent
explained that it would not present Major General Sergey Kuzmenko, Mr Adil Abenov,
Mr Serik Burkitbayev, and Mr Murat Musabekov as these persons were currently serving

72

292.

293.

294.

295.

296.

297.

298.

in prison and could not be released. Moreover, Respondent held that Claimant had failed
to prove that any of these persons were in any way related to the documents in dispute.
Further, Respondent noted that Mr Makhmud Bazarkulovich Kasymbekov would not
serve as witness at the hearing due to his unavailability.

In another letter of 17 January 2011 dealing mainly with Claimant’s submissions of
exhibits on 13-14 January 2011, Respondent also commented on the inadmissibility of
Mr Harvey Jackson as witness in the upcoming hearing. Since Respondent did not have
an opportunity to deal with and reply adequately to Mr Jackson’s witness statement,
Respondent requested that Mr Jackson’s witness statement be stricken from the record
and that additionally, Mr Jackson be excluded from testifying at the hearing.

 

 

By letter of 23 January 2011, Respondent submitted comments on Claimant’s letters of
17-19 January 2011, inter alia on issues regarding witnesses, experts and Expert
Conferencing as well as on the hearing attendees and logistical requirements.

With regard to Dr Mangat Thapar, Respondent strongly objected to Claimant’s request to
limit Dr Thapar’s testimony to ten minutes of direct examination. This would not only be
in breach of the Party agreement to conduct Expert Conferencing for industry experts (cf.
Respondent’s letter of 22 December 2010 providing comments on PO-S, including agreed
points between the Parties), but also run counter to Section 3.2.5 of PO-5 which provided
for the examination of industry experts by the method of Expert Conferencing.
Respondent thus held that it was entitled to Dr Thapar being examined by Expert
Conferencing and that otherwise Respondent would be deprived of its right to be heard on
crucial subjects in dispute.

Moreover, according to Respondent, Claimant’s reasons why Expert Conferencing should
be avoided were invalid. Respondent contended that Dr Thapar’s expert report had been
in direct rebuttal of Claimant’s expert Mr Tiefenthal’s statements covering compliance,
discovery and reserves as far as 3D seismic was concerned. In fact, according to
Respondent, Mr Thapar had conducted a review of Mr Tiefenthal’s reinterpretation of
Claimant’s 3D survey rather than interpreting the 3D survey himself. In Respondent’s
view, Claimant cannot on the one hand regard Mr Tiefenthal as competent to express his
views and conclusions on 3D seismic and on the other hand not regard him as competent
to discuss these views and conclusions with Mr Thapar.

Respondent further argued that Claimant’s assumption of Mr Thapar’s interpretation of
Claimant’s 3D seismic being utterly irrelevant to the matters at dispute was erroneous.
Rather, Respondent alleged that Claimant had either misunderstood the matter in dispute
or was seeking to avoid a review of one of its purportedly most striking material breaches
under the Contract as well as a recalculation of reserves and quantum.

Respondent also objected to Claimant’s assertion in its letter of 19 January 2011 that
Respondent had approved Claimant’s 3D survey. Respondent pointed out that Claimant’s
3D survey had been prepared for Claimant by SaratovNefteGeofysika, had been presented
to TU Zapkaznedra and had been subjected to correction by the Scientific and Technical
Council. Respondent noted that Claimant had neither produced this report in these
proceedings nor given Mr Tiefenthal access to it.

Although Respondent was convinced that it would be more efficient to examine both
Mr Chugh and Dr Thapar on the one side and Mr Tiefenthal on the other side through the

73

299.

300.

301.

302.

303.

304.

305.

method of Expert Conferencing, Respondent would not be opposed to pair Mr Tiefenthal
with Dr Thapar alone “regarding the aspects of those areas that concern 3D seismic”
(Respondent’s letter of 23 January 2011, p. 6).

With regard to Claimant’s witness Mr Fadi Hussein, Respondent asserted that the
allegations of threats and bribery were not true and that Respondent had had no
knowledge about Mr Hussein’s former wife or a son with her. Respondent also purported
that caution should be exercised while examining Hussein’s allegations, considering that
he was related to the Houranis, obviously a member of their clan and due to the fact that
his witness had been ii duced late in the p dit and that he had
immediately thereafter been removed from examination as witness which “raises very
serious suspicions regarding his statements” (p. 7). Respondent further indicated that
Mr Hussein had made additional false allegations of coercion and bribery in July 2007 in
his witness statement.

 

Respondent also purported that Claimant had withdrawn Mr Hussein as witness to avoid
cross-examination. In addition, Respondent strongly emphasised that it welcomed
Mr Hussein’s appearance as witness at the hearing and in fact requested the Tribunal to
order Claimant to produce Mr Hussein as witness at the hearing (p. 8).

With regard to Mr Harvey Jackson’s witness statement, Respondent reiterated its
objections of 17 January 2011 to strike it from the record (p. 9).

Respondent objected to Claimant’s request to grant a period of direct examination with
regard to rebuttal only before Expert Conferencing commences. Respondent held that this
was not provided for in the rules. Paragraph 15.1 of the Minutes of the First Session and
Paragraph 1.2 of PO-5 stipulated that expert reports constitute the direct testimony of
each factual or expert witness and that there would be no direct examination at the oral
procedure by the Party presenting the witness or expert, save an introduction to the
witness. Paragraph 3.5 of PO-5 further provided that the direct examination of an expert
or a fact witness shall be limited to a confirmation of their written testimony, a short
introduction and questions on new developments that occurred after their last report or
statement. Consequently, Respondent was opposed to Claimant’s request for a direct
examination of experts.

 

Respondent further objected to the presence of three individuals (Mr Waarie, Mr Hawari,
and Mr Mashru) designated as Claimant’s representatives as well as to the presence of
Mr Didier Bollecker and Ms Eve-Marine Bollecker as human rights counsel for
Dr Aliyev and Dr Otto Dietrich as Austrian counsel to Dr Aliyev. To support its
argument, Respondent drew upon Rule 32 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules stating that
none of the latter three were agents, advocates or counsel to Claimant, but only related to
Dr Aliyev and should thus not be permitted to attend the hearing.

With regard to Mr Waarie, Mr Hawari and Mr Mashru, Respondent demanded that
Claimant provide evidence to show that these persons were “true corporate
representatives” of CIOC; otherwise Respondent would persist to object to the attendance
of the hearing by these individuals (p. 10).

Lastly, Respondent added two representatives of IFM Resources, Inc., one attorney, three
paralegals, and one IT specialist from Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP to their
list of hearing attendees.

 

14

LIV.3. The Tribunal

306. The following excerpt from the Tribunal’s letter of 24 January 2011 to the Parties
concerning witnesses and experts is recalled:

“3. Witnesses and Experts

3.1.

3.2.
3.3.

3.4.

3.5.

3.6.

Again, the Tribunal appreciates the submissions of the Parties
indicating that and why certain witnesses and experts should or should
not be admitted and examined at the Hearing. However again, the
Tribunal considers it as important that, at the final hearing of this case,
all evidence that the Parties consider as relevant, can be considered
and discussed.

The Tribunal recalls and confirms its Procedural Order No. 6.

The Tribunal has taken note of and accepts the Parties’ submissions
regarding the witnesses and experts that will and will not be present at
the Hearing and regarding the witnesses they do not intend to examine
at the Hearing. The rulings of PO6 will be applied in this regard and
their examination will be conducted in accordance with Procedural
Order No. 5.

Since the Parties have not agreed on any changes, the examination will
be conducted in the order given by the Agenda given in sections
3.2 and 3.3 of POS.

In so far as certain witnesses or experts cannot be present for the entire
period of the Hearing, the Parties are invited to agree on certain time
frames in this regard and inform the Tribunal at the beginning of the
Hearing.

The Tribunal has taken note that the Parties’ suggestions regarding the
groups of experts for the expert conferencing are not identical. The
Parties are invited to agree in this regard and inform the Tribunal at
the beginning of the Hearing.”

307. The following ruling made during the Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits on
8 February 2011 concerning the attendance of persons and confidentiality of the
proceedings is recalled (Tr, day 2, p. 36-37):

“The Tribunal has agreed on the following three rulings.

1.

Mr Waarie, Mr Hawari and Mr Mashru may not be present in the
hearing room. Mr Omar Antar is accepted as the designated agent of
the claimant and may be in the hearing room continuously.

Mr Bollecker, Ms Bollecker, Dr Dietrich may only be present in the
hearing room during the testimony of Dr Aliyev, but the claimant may
request permission to show them designated parts of the transcript of
the parties’ opening statements.

75

3. The Tribunal orders that the proceedings of this hearing shall remain
confidential, that neither the transcript of this hearing nor the audio
recording of it shall be communicated to any third parties, and that all
the individuals present in the hearing shall keep confidential the
contents of these proceedings and not communicate them to third
parties.”

308. The Tribunal furthermore recalls the following excerpt from the Transcript of the Hearing
on Jurisdiction and the Merits of 8 February 2011 (Tr, day 2, p. 101-104):

“THE PRESIDENT: Now, as far as witnesses are concerned, we maintain the ruling
of paragraph 3.5 of Procedural Order No. 5 which in fact means -- you can read it
yourself -- but which in fact means ten minutes’ introduction, direct examination, plus
a short further introduction on new developments.

We stick with the “short”. Now, short does not mean two minutes; it’s related to the
subject obviously. But we feel we should stick with this “short”. And I should also say
-- it was raised later in your discussion, but it should be mentioned here -- that this
examination, both the ten minutes and anything on new developments, should only be
possible relating to the substance of the statement submitted by the witness and not
any new subjects.

Okay, that’s number 1.

Number 2, expert conferencing. We are not quite sure whether we only confirm
something that you agreed to but let us make it clear. Each expert has ten minutes of
introduction, that is what the parties agreed as well, and then conferencing starts
right away. Later in the week, and perhaps not consistently for the two groups we
have, we will discuss in the Tribunal whether we feel we should start with some
questions or whether we would invite the parties first to raise questions. Of course we
do have lists of issues that you have submitted in that regard.

But anyway, there will be ten minutes plus any new development, if there is, related to
the substance of the witness statement, and then conferencing starts right away.

As far as the industry experts are concerned, we took note and accept what the parties
agreed: that these ten minutes will come up three times for the three topics that you
have: compliance, reserves and 3D, I think it is. So this is witness-conferencing.

Number 3, witness statement of Fadi Hussain[sic]. The statement we noted is dated
6" November. It was submitted by claimant's letter of 13 December, where we have
a reference to that on page 3. The Tribunal does not find in this letter of 13"
December sufficient reasoning why the statement was, after having been available
from 6" November, only filed at that particular date, 13"" December.

Therefore, for the time being it is not admitted, unless claimant can show that it
submitted a reasoned application according to paragraph A4 of Procedural Order
No. 6, because we didn’t want to overlook anything that perhaps we have overlooked
in that short period. But for the time being it is not admitted.

The same applies basically to the witness testimony of Mr Jackson, which was
submitted again by a letter of 22"! December as far as we can see. Again, we do not
find either in that letter or otherwise from the claimant's side a reasoned application
according to paragraph A4 of PO6 why it was submitted so late, even though -- well,
we know the procedure; it had been submitted before and so on. Let me exemplify

76

that. If, for instance, we were told that the employment stopped two days before 22"
December, that may perhaps be a consideration to be taken into account. But we
don’t see that.

Finally, number 5, just as a clarification -- again, we are not quite sure whether that
is needed or whether the parties agreed on that -- the rule on no new documents is
quite clear, we think. We maintain the ruling in paragraph 3.6 of Procedural Order
No. 5, which means no new documents. Demonstrative exhibits may, of course, be
shown.”

77

J. Jurisdiction of the Tribunal

J... Introduction

309. Respondent requested the Tribunal to reject CIOC’s claims in their entirety for lack of
jurisdiction or for inadmissibility. (R-II, para. 468; R-IV, para. 648; R-V, para. 191)
In this context, the Tribunal notes that, Article 41 of the ICSID Convention provides:

“() The Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence.

(2) _ Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the competence of
the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal which shall determine
whether to deal with it as a preliminary question or to join it to the merits of
the dispute.”

Further, the Tribunal notes that Rule 41(2) of the Arbitration Rules provides that:

“The Tribunal may at its own initiative consider, at any stage of the proceeding,
whether the dispute or any ancillary claim before it is within the jurisdiction of the
Centre and within its own competence.”

The Tribunal agrees with the Aguas del Tunari tribunal that the Tribunal’s authority also
includes “the power to consider ways in which an ambiguous or unclear objection may
bear on jurisdiction and to restate such objections, as appropriate, so as to allow a full
examination of jurisdiction.”* The Tribunal will therefore first turn to the issue of
jurisdiction.

J.11. The Requirements of the ICSID Convention for CIOC to
Claim U.S. Nationality — Article 25(2)(b)

310. Respondent’s principal objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is that Claimant is not a
national of another Contracting State for the purposes of Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention, inasmuch as Claimant contends it is a U.S. national by virtue of the BIT, and
Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, which allow locally incorporated companies to
bring claims against States of their incorporation, “because of foreign control”.

S. A. v. Republic of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Respondent’s
ion of 11 October 2005, para. 78 (“Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia”).

? Aguas del Tuna
Objections to Juris

 

  

78

311.

312.

313.

314.

315.

Both the U.S. and Kazakhstan are Contracting States of the ICSID Convention. The
ICSID Convention entered into force in the United States of America on 14 October 1966
and for Kazakhstan on 21 October 2000.

Claimant is an entity incorporated in Kazakhstan and the key question for the Tribunal is
whether Claimant satisfies the conditions pursuant to which a juridical person
incorporated in the State which is a party to the dispute can be treated as a national of
another Contracting State for the purposes of ICSID arbitration. The provision addressing
this issue in the ICSID Convention is Article 25(2)(b).

The Parties disagree as to the content and application of the legal test required by Article
25(2)(b). Crucially, they disagree as to whether the test requires evidence that CIOC is an
investment of Devincci Hourani. Further, if such a requirement indeed exists, the next
question is what is meant by ‘investment’ in this context and what evidence should be
presented.

Article 25(2)(b) provides that

“(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(0)

(b) — ¢...) any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting
State party to the dispute on [the date on which the parties consented to
submit such dispute to arbitration] and which, because of foreign
control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of
another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.”

In presenting their arguments the Parties use the notions of jurisdiction ratione personae
and ratione materiae. These concepts are related to Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention and the jurisdiction proper of the Tribunal. The issue whether, under Article
25(2)(b) of the Convention, a juridical person incorporated in the host State can bring a
claim against that host State is a threshold jurisdictional question.* The threshold
question is whether a juridical person can be regarded as a national of another Contracting
State ‘because of foreign control’, in particular, whether ‘because of foreign control’ the
parties have agreed to treat Claimant as national of another Contracting State. Only after
this threshold is cleared may the Tribunal move to analysing whether the conditions of
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention are satisfied.

> The Tribunal agrees here with the Vacuum Salt tribunal: “The parties diverge, however, on the threshold
jurisdictional issue (...) regarding whether ‘because of foreign control, the parties agreed [that Vacuum Salt]

should be treated as a national of another Contracting State [Greece] for the purp

 

ses of [the] Convention’,

specifically Article 25(2)(b). It is crucial to ICSID jurisdiction in this case and it is to this issue that the

Tribunal first must turn.” See Vacuum Salt Products Limited v. Government of the Republic of Ghana, \CSID

Case No. ARB/92/1, Award of 1 February 1994, para. 27 (“Vacuum Salt v. Ghana”).

79

J.IL1. Claimant’s Position

316. Claimant holds that it is majority owned and controlled by the U.S. national Mr Devincci

Hourani and is therefore a national of the other party as required under Article VI(8) of
the BIT as well as a “national of another Contracting State” under Article 25(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention. (C-I, paras. 61, 76; C-IV, paras. 25-45) By Claimant’s interpretation,
Article 25(2)(b) requires the elements of:

a) control,
b) by a foreign national, and
c) the parties’ agreement to treat CIOC as a ‘national of another Contracting

State’ because it is foreign controlled. (C-IV, para. 26)

317. The requirement of ‘control’ stems from the wording of Article 25(2)(b). Since ‘control’

318.

is undefined in the Convention, Claimant relied on decisions of ICSID tribunals to
establish the meaning of control, including consideration of various factors as evidence of
such control, such as shareholding, domination in the company’s decision-making, legal
capacity to control.*

Hence, to satisfy this part of the test it suffices to show Devincci Hourani’s 92 %
participation in CIOC and his responsibilities at CIOC establish the required element of
control of the company. (C-IV, para. 27; C-V, paras. 121-129)

 

319. The requirement of foreign nationality is met by proof that Devincci Hourani is a U.S.

national in accordance with U.S. law. (C-IV, paras. 28-39)

320. The third requirement is met since CIOC, as a company controlled by a U.S. national,

321.

concluded an agreement with Kazakhstan to treat CIOC as a national of another
Contracting State. Kazakhstan’s offer to submit disputes to arbitration in Article VI of the
BIT included Article VI(8) of the BIT, which constitutes an offer to conclude an
agreement required by Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. CIOC accepted this
offer by filing its Request for Arbitration and thus concluded an agreement with
Kazakhstan to treat CIOC as a national of another Contracting State. (C-IV, paras. 25-26,
40-42)

Claimant also fulfils the requirements of Article VI(8) of the BIT. CIOC is a company
legally constituted under the laws and regulations of Kazakhstan. (C-IV, paras. 5-6, 61)
Immediately before the occurrence of the events giving rise to the present dispute, CIOC
was an investment of Devincci Hourani, who was a majority shareholder of CIOC and
controlled that company. (C-I, para. 61; C-IV, para. 27; C-V, paras. 121-129) Lastly,

* Claimant relied here mainly on: Vacuum Salt v. Ghana; Amco Asia Corporation and others v.
Indonesia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Award of 5 June 1990 (“Ameo v. Indonesi: Kl
Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of Cameroon and Société Cameroun
Case No. ARB/81/2, Award of 21 October 1983 (“Kléckner v. Cameroon”); Liberian Eas
Corporation v. Republic of Liberia, CSID Case No. ARB/83/2, Award of 31 March 1986 (“LETCO v.
Liberia”) and Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia.

 
  

  

80

Devincci Hourani is a national of the U.S. as he falls within the definition of a ‘national’
contained in Article I(1)(c) of the BIT. (C-I, paras. 6, 61; C-IV, paras. 28-39)

J.I1.2. Respondent’s Position

322. Respondent argues that the Tribunal must first discern whether the case falls within the

jurisdictional requirements set out in the Convention. (R-II, para. 22) As a result
Respondent bases its argumentation on Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.*

323. Respondent does not question Claimant’s argument that the arbitration agreement

between CIOC and Kazakhstan, which incorporates Article VI(8) of the BIT, constitutes
an agreement required by Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and thus, at least
formally, confers on CIOC a status of a ‘national of another Contracting State’ under
Article 25(1). Respondent argues, however, that the Tribunal must not limit itself to such
formalities but investigate the existence of actual control arising from all of the facts and
circumstances. The enquiry arises because protection granted by the ICSID Convention
does not and cannot include an agreement to recognise sham transactions lacking bona
fides. (R-IV, para. 34-37)

324. Respondent points out that Article 25(2)(b) was introduced to recognise “the business

model commonly employed by international investors, who often make their investments
through a local investment vehicle.” Its purpose is to include within the scope of the
ICSID Convention all investors that operate through locally incorporated companies. To
rely on Article 25(2)(b), CIOC has to be a local investment vehicle of a foreign investor.
Inasmuch as Claimant asserts that this foreign investor is Devincci Hourani due to his
purported ownership and control of CIOC, Respondent contends that the requirements for
the materiality and existence of control need to be objectively proven and not limited to a
mere semblance or formality. (R-II, paras. 27-29)

325. Respondent further contends that the decisive criterion for the existence of a foreign

investment is the nationality of the investor; if Devincci Hourani made no investment in
CIOC, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction. (R-III, para. 29) This inference may at first glance
appear illogical.° However, the proposition is clear when read in conjunction with the
passage from Dolzer and Schreuer relied upon by Respondent.’ It follows from it that the
requirement of nationality of ownership or control informs only the foreignness of an
investment. It does not inform whether it is an investment. Thus, to rely on Article
25(2)(b) and the BIT, CIOC must be a foreign investment of Devincci Hourani. Claimant

* This follows from Respondent’s reliance on the TSA Spectrum award, where the tribunal stated that “the
provisions of the BIT cannot provide ICSID jurisdiction unless the conditions of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention are satisfied.” TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/5,
Award of 19 December 2009, para. 156.
It prompted the Claimant to observe that Respondent is “misstating the relevant test” (C-V, para. 118).

7 “The decisive criterion for the existence of a foreign investment is the nationality of the investor. An investment
is a foreign investment if it is owned or controlled by a foreign investor. There is no additional requirement of
foreignness for the investment in terms of its origin.” [footnotes omitted] (R. Dolzer and C. Schreuer, Principles
of International Investment Law, Oxford University Press (2008), pp. 67-68).

 

  

81

326.

327.

328.

329.

330.

must show that it is a foreign investment but also that it is an investment of the U.S.
national. (R-III, paras. 29-30)

J.IL.3. Tribunal’s Analysis

Respondent’s jurisdictional objection is built around Article 25(1) and 25(2)(b) and their
interpretation. The Tribunal therefore starts its analysis from the Convention.

Claimant interprets Article 25(2)(b) as requiring that a local company is controlled by a
national of another Contracting State. Respondent contends that Article 25(2)(b) also
requires that CIOC must be an investment of Devincci Hourani.

On this issue of construction of Article 25(2)(b) the Tribunal first turns to the 1969
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (VCLT).

(a) Interpretation of Article 25(2)(b)

Article 31(1) of the VCLT requires the Tribunal to interpret Article 25(2)(b) in good
faith, by discerning the ordinary meaning of its terms in their context and in the light of
the object and purpose of the ICSID Convention. It is clear from the wording of Article
25(2)(b) that its application depends on the existence of an agreement of the parties. The
Tribunal must therefore first identify such agreement and the first question for the
Tribunal is: who are the parties to that agreement? The ICSID Convention consequently
uses the word ‘parties’ to describe the parties to the dispute. Claimant argues, and
Respondent does not deny, that the agreement between the disputing parties was
concluded by Claimant’s acceptance, in its Request for Arbitration, of Respondent’s offer
to submit to ICSID arbitration disputes contained in the BIT. While the Tribunal accepts
such interpretation, if Claimant’s reasoning is to mean that a mere existence of such an
agreement gives Claimant standing in the present arbitration,* the Tribunal disagrees.

In most of the previous ICSID proceedings concerning Article 25(2)(b), its provisions
were applied to an investment contract signed between a locally incorporated company
(claimant) and a host State (respondent).” In such cases the agreement was negotiated
directly between the parties to the dispute, with the host State’s awareness of the identity

Claimant argued that “By the offer to submit disputes to arbitration in Article VI of the Treaty, and CIOC’s
acceptance of that offer in filing its Request for Arbitration, the parties have agreed to treat CIOC as a ‘national
of another Contracting State’ for the purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.” From this Claimant
concludes that “CIOC therefore has standing to claim by virtue of Article 25(2)(b) (...).” (C-IV, paras. 25 and

° Without having to rely on specific cases which the Parties have not commented upon, the Tribunal points to
e.g. Holiday Inns S.A, and others v. Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1 (an investment agreement); Amco v.
Indonesia (an individual consent to ICSID arbitration); Kléckner v. Cameroon (a joint venture agreement);
LETCO v. Liberia (a concession agreement); Société Ouest Africaine des Bétons Industriels (SOABI) v. Senegal,
ICSID Case No. ARB/82/I (an establishment agreement); Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited v.
Independent Power Tanzania Limited, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/8 or Vacuum Salt v. Ghana (a lease agreement).

82

331.

332.

333.

of the locally incorporated company. In many of those cases, the agreement to treat the
locally incorporated company as a national of another Contracting State was implied from
an ICSID arbitration clause contained in the investment contract. In such circumstances,
the existence of an express or implied agreement to treat the locally incorporated
company as a foreign national gave that company standing in the dispute. In the present
dispute the investment contract between the parties (the Contract) contains an ICSID
arbitration clause. However, Claimant is relying on the BIT, not the Contract, to establish
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.”

Ifa tribunal’s jurisdiction is based on an investment treaty, claimant does not negotiate an
individual agreement with the host State but accepts a non-negotiable offer addressed to
persons or entities that fulfil its conditions. That offer is contained in an investment treaty
and its conditions are agreed between the parties to that investment treaty. Unlike in the
context of investment contracts, the acceptance of an offer contained in an investment
treaty cannot create an assumption that the claimant fulfils the conditions of that offer.

If a claimant wants to rely on Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention in the context of
an investment treaty arbitration, that investment treaty must allow for the application of
Article 25(2)(b). The decision of the parties to the investment treaty to allow application
of Article 25(2)(b) in their bilateral relations is an exercise of their ultimate discretion,
expressly reserved in the ICSID Convention, to consent to submit disputes to ICSID
jurisdiction granted to the Contracting States.'!

 

 

Article VI(8) of the BIT contains the decision of Kazakhstan and the United States to
allow application of Article 25(2)(b) to disputes arising out of the BIT. However, Article
VI(8) contains more than that. It spells out conditions of application of Article 25(2)(b) to
disputes based on the BIT. In Article VI(8) of the BIT, Kazakhstan and the United States
exercise their discretion, as parties to the ICSID Convention, to agree on the
Convention’s interpretation or application in a particular area of their bilateral relations.
Such agreements are allowed, as long as they do not contradict the meaning of the treaty
to which they pertain. The Tribunal is obliged to take any such subsequent agreement
between the parties into account, to the same extent as the treaty’s context. Article
31(3)(a) of the VCLT states:

  

'° The Tribunal notes that it does not follow from the Contract that Claimant can be treated as a national of
another Contracting State. The Contract states that the parties “agreed that the Contractor is a resident of
Lebanon, or in the event of assignment as a national of the resident country of the assignee, and therefore the
Contractor shall be treated as a resident of Lebanon, or other country if appropriate, for purposes of the ICSID
Convention.” (C-4, Clause 27.8) This original wording of the Contract, initially concluded between Kazakhstan
and CCC, was not addressed in connection with the transfer of the Contract from CCC to CIOC.
"The last recital of the ICSID Convention Preamble provides that “no Contracting State shall by the mere fact
of its ratification, acceptance or approval of this Convention and without its consent be deemed to be under any
to submit any particular dispute to concil or arbil ”, This is also confirmed in para. 30 of
the Report of the Executive Directors: “A juridical person which had the nationality of the State party to the
dispute would be eligible to be a party to the proceedings under the auspices of the Centre if that State had
agreed to treat is as a national of another Contracting State because of foreign control.” (emphasis added).

 

   
  

83

334.

335.

336.

“There shall be taken into account, together with the context: [...] any subsequent
agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the
application of its provisions [...]”

The discretion of the ICSID Convention Contracting States to agree the details of
application of Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention also follows from the rationale of this
provision. ICSID is an institution designed for the resolution of disputes between States
and nationals of other States. Only in exceptional circumstances companies are permitted
to bring claims against States of their incorporation, and the second half of Article
25(2)(b) sets out the conditions of this exception.

The wording of Article 25(2)(b) is a result of a compromise. This provision was
introduced to prevent the exclusion from the ambit of the Convention of situations of
foreign investors carrying out their business through a company organised under the laws
of the host State.'? In the drafting process two positions emerged with regard to dealing
with this issue. One was to leave it to the discretion of the host State and the other to
define the link between the company and a foreign national in the Convention.'* The final
wording combines “the elements of agreement and foreign control by permitting
agreement to treat a corporation of host State nationality as a national of another
Contracting State because of foreign control.”'*

It follows from the above, that the ICSID Convention Contracting States can agree on the
conditions of their submission to ICSID jurisdiction as long as their agreement does not
contradict the meaning of the Convention. Article 25(2)(b) sets ‘foreign control’ as such
‘outer limit’, an objective requirement that cannot be replaced by an agreement.’ It is a
floor below which the parties’ agreement cannot reach. On the other hand, it gives the
parties flexibility within those ‘outer limits’. As stated by Broches, it leaves “the greatest
possible latitude to the parties to decide under what circumstances a company could be
treated as a ‘national of another Contracting State”, which means that “any stipulation
(..) which is based on a reasonable criterion should be accepted.”'® This interpretation is
uncontroversial and accepted by ICSID tribunals and commentators.'” Hence, it is correct
to say that the term ‘foreign control’ is ‘flexible and deferential’ and is meant “to

" Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other
States, Recueil des Cours 1972 II, Vol 136, pp. 337-410, at pp. 358-359; C. Schreuer, L. Malintoppi, A.
Reinisch, A. Sinclair, The ICSID Convention, A Commentary, 2" edition, Cambridge University Press (2009),
p. 296, para. 760; see also: Aguas del Tunari y. Bolivia, para. 216: “(...) the ICSID Convention and the majority
of BITs, recogn that the investor of one of the State Parties may incorporate an entity in the other State
Party as a vehicle for its investment activity.”

' Broches, ibid., pp. 359-360; Schreuer et al., ibid., pp. 296-297, paras. 761-762.

"4 Schreuer et al., ibid., p. 297, para. 762.

'S Schreuer et al., ibid., p. 312, para. 813.

"6 Broches, ibid., pp. 360-361.

'T See e.g. Vacuum Salt v. Ghana, para. 37; Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia, paras. 280-281; Autopista
Concesionada de Venezuela v. Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/5, Decision on Jurisdiction of 27 September
2001, paras. 109, 113-116; and comments by Schreuer et al., ibid., para. 273, p. 287 (where it is stated that “Any
reasonable determination of the nationality of juridical persons contained in (...) a treaty should be accepted by
an ICSID (...) tribunal.”).

 

 

84

337.

338.

339.

340.

341.

342.

accommodate a wide range of agreements between parties as to the meaning of ‘foreign
vo I
control”.

The factual element of foreign control under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention
cannot be examined independently from the agreement on nationality contained in the
applicable investment treaty, because it is the investment treaty that would normally
contain the test by which such foreign control is established in the circumstances of the
case. However, if the agreement plainly contradicts the meaning of the ICSID
Convention, e.g. by stipulating that any locally incorporated company should be treated
as a foreign national, the tribunal cannot go beyond the mandatory limits established by
Article 25 of the Convention. Therefore, at least to the extent to which the agreement
contradicts the Convention, the Tribunal must find that there is no agreement providing
jurisdiction under Article 25(2)(b).

For the above reasons the Tribunal must first turn to Article VI(8) of the BIT.

(b) Article VI(8) of the BIT
Article VI(8) provides that:

“For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article, any company
legally constituted under the applicable laws and regulations of a Party or a political
subdivision thereof but that, immediately before the occurrence of the event or events
giving rise to the dispute, was an investment of nationals or companies of the other
Party, shall be treated as a national or company of such other Party in accordance
with Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.”

This provision contains the BIT parties’ agreed conditions of application of Article
25(2)(b). The Tribunal thus needs to determine whether Article VI(8) contradicts the
ICSID Convention and, if it does not, apply the test to the circumstances of the present
case.

By virtue of its references to Article VI(3) of the BIT, which designates ICSID arbitration
as one of the dispute settlement options, and to Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention,
Article VI(8) of the BIT limits its application to arbitration under the ICSID Convention.
It extends the BIT protection to companies that are registered in one Party to the BIT and
constitute “investment[s] of nationals or companies of the other Party” to the BIT.

In interpreting the phrase “any company legally constituted under the applicable laws and
regulations of a Party” the Tribunal applies the BIT’s definition of the term “company” in
Article I(1)(b):

““company” of a Party means any kind of corporation, company, association,
enterprise, partnership, or other ¢ ization, legally i / under the laws and

'S Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia, paras. 280-286.

85

343.

344.

345.

regulations of a Party or a political subdivision thereof whether or not organized for
pecuniary gain, or privately or governmentally owned or controlled (...)””

In the context of the present dispute, the juridical person can invoke ICSID jurisdiction if
it is a Kazakh company, provided that all other jurisdictional requirements are met.

In interpreting the phrase “investment of nationals or companies of the other Party” the
Tribunal resorts to the above definition of “company”, as well as to the BIT’s definitions
of the terms “investment” and “national”:

Pursuant to Article I(1)(c) of the BIT,

““national,[sic] "of a Party means a natural person who is a national of a

Party under its applicable law”.

Pursuant to Article I(1)(a) of the BIT,

“investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the
other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and investment contracts; and
includes:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including movable and immovable
property, as well as rights, such as mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or
interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic value,
and associated with an investment;

(iv) _ intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights relating to:
literary and artistic works, including sound recordings, inventions in
all fields of human endeavor, industrial designs, semiconductor mask
works, trade secrets, know-how, and confidential business information,
and trademarks, service marks, and trade names; and

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and permits
pursuant to law”.

In the light of the above definitions, the meaning of the terms “national” and “company”
is clear enough. However, the meaning of the term “investment” is not so immediately
clear. The phrase

““investment” means every kind of investment”
is problematic.
It appears to the Tribunal that the two words ‘investment’ used in the above phrase do not

mean exactly the same thing. The first word ‘investment’ is defined: the text of Article
I(1)(a) after the phrase ‘“investment” means’ and finishing with the word ‘/aw’ in

86

346.

347.

subparagraph (v) constitutes a definition of the first word ‘investment’. However, if we
substituted the second word ‘investment’ used in the above phrase with this definition, the
result would be nonsensical. '? Rather, following general rules of interpretation, the
second word ‘investment’ in the above phrase should be treated as an undefined term and
interpreted in accordance with its ordinary meaning in its context and in the light of the
BIT’s object and purpose pursuant to Article 31(1) of the VCLT which instructs the
interpreter to interpret a treaty “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to
be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and
purpose.” There is no evidence that the parties have intended to give that second word
‘investment’ any special meaning. Pursuant to Article 31(4) of the VCLT “a special
meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended.”

 

 

The definition of investment in Article I.1(a) follows a familiar pattern of investment
definitions in bilateral investment treaties. It consists of a general description of the
meaning of the term ‘investment’, followed by a non-exhaustive illustrative enumeration
of assets that are included in the definition of investment. However, the BIT defines
‘investment’ as “every kind of investment (...)”. This phrase is common in U.S. bilateral
investment treaties.*” However, it differs from definitions used in other (non-U.S.)
investment treaties, which define ‘investment’ as “every kind of asset (...)”.' Thus, the
parties to the BIT intended the term ‘investment’ to mean something different than
merely an ‘asset’.

 

 

Turning to the ordinary meaning of the term ‘investment’, the Tribunal consulted the
following dictionaries:

The Oxford Compact English Dictionary (2" ed., 2003):

‘investment’ 1. The action or process of investing. 2. A thing worth buying
because it may be profitable or useful in the future.

‘invest’ 1. To put money into financial schemes, shares or property with the
expectation of achieving a profit. 2. Devote (time or energy) to an undertaking
with the expectation of a worthwhile result. 3. (invest in, informal) Buy
(something) whose usefulness will repay the cost.

'° Tt would actually require inserting the definition of Article I(1)(a) into itself ad infinitum.

> Of 45 bilateral investment treaties signed by the U.S. and available in the UNCTAD database, only four (with
Cameroon, Egypt, Rwanda and Uruguay) do not define ‘investment’ as “every kind of investment (...)” or by
equivalent wording.

2"'See e.g. bilateral investment treaties signed by Kazakhstan with: Belgium (Article 1.2: “The term
‘investments’ shall mean any kind of assets (...)”); Greece (Article 1.1: ‘Investment’ means every kind of asset
(..)”y; Hungary (Article 1.1: “The term ‘investment’ shall comprise every kind of asset (...)”); the Netherlands
(Article 1(a): “the term “investments” means every kind of Sweden (Article 1(1): “The term
‘investment’ shall mean any kind of asset (...)"); Switzerland (Article (a): “The term ‘investments’ shall include
every kind of assets[sic] (...)”); Turkey (Article 1.2: “The term ‘investment’ (...) shall include every kind of asset
(...)°); United Kingdom (Article I(a): “ ‘investment’ means every kind of asset (..)”).

    

    

    

 

87

348.

349.

Chambers 21‘ Century Dictionary (1999):

‘investment’ 1. A sum of money, invested. 2. Something, such as business,
house, etc in which one invests money, time, effort etc. 3. The act of investing.
‘invest’ 1. To put (money) into a company or business, eg by buying shares in
it, in order to make a profit. 2. To devote (time, effort, energy, etc.) to
something.

Black’s Law Dictionary (9" ed., 2009):
‘investment’: 1. An expenditure to acquire property or assets to produce
revenue; a capital outlay. 2. The asset acquired or the sum invested.
‘invest’ 2. To apply (money) for profit. 3. To make an outlay of money for
profit.

Oxford Dictionary of Business (1996):

‘investment’ I. The purchase of capital goods, such as plant and machinery in
a factory in order to produce goods for future consumption. This is known as
capital investment; the higher the level of capital investment in an economy,
the faster it will grow. 2. The purchase of assets, such as securities, works of
art, bank and building-society deposits, etc., with a primary view to their
financial return, either as income or capital gain. This form of financial
investment represents a means of saving. The level of financial investment in
an economy will be related to such factors as the rate of interest, the extent to
which investments are likely to prove profitable, and the general climate of
business confidence. (emphasis in the original)

 

Dictionary definitions, much as they help establish the ordinary meaning of the phrase,
are not the end of the Tribunal’s analysis.” It must also look at the ordinary meaning of
the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of the object and purpose of the
BIT, as required by Article 31(1) of the VCLT.

The preamble of the BIT provides (emphasis added):

“Desiring to promote greater economic cooperation between them, with respect to
investment by nationals and companies of one Party in the territory of the other
Party;

Recognizing that agreement upon the treatment to be.[sic] accorded such investment
will stimulate the flow of private capital and the economic development of the
Parties;

POR. The ional Centre for of Disputes and D through
the Multinational Corporation, 9 Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law 793 (1976), 815 (“[DJictionary
definitions devised for the purpose of economic science or financial analysis may be irrelevant for the purpose
of defining investment in connection with the Centre's jurisdiction. So also tax law or investment law definitions

in municipal law are intended to relate to special objectives and would be of limited usefiines

 

 

88

350.

351.

352.

Agreeing that fair and equitable treatment of investment is desirable in order to
maintain a stable framework for investment and maximum effective utilization of
economic resources;

 

Re izing that the develop of ic and busi ties can contribute to
the well-being of workers in both Parties and promote respect for internationally
recognized worker rights; and

Having resolved to conclude a Treaty concerning the encouragement and reciprocal
protection of investment (...)”.

The parties clearly refer in the preamble to investment understood as a flow of private
capital from the U.S. to Kazakhstan and vice versa as a flow of capital stemming from
nationals and companies of the respective parties. The primary subject-matter of the BIT
is the treatment of investments. The BIT is approached as an “agreement upon the
treatment to be accorded [to] (...) investment[s]” and one of its main goals was to
stimulate the flow of private capital. This follows not only from the preamble but also
from the U.S. President’s letter of transmittal of the BIT to the Senate, which provides:
“The Treaty is fully consistent with U.S. policy toward international and domestic
investment. A specific tenet, reflected in this Treaty, is that U.S. investment abroad and
foreign investment in the United States should receive fair, equitable, and
nondiscriminatory treatment.”

 

Article I(1)(a) of the BIT defines ‘investment’ from the perspective of assets, claims and
rights to be protected (or accorded specific treatment, prescribed in the following
provisions of the BIT). As one of the goals of the BIT is the stimulation of flow of private
capital, BIT protection is not granted simply to any formally held asset, but to an asset
which is the result of such a flow of capital. Thus, even though the BIT definition of
‘investment’ does not expressly qualify the contributions by way of which the investment
is made, the existence of such a contribution as a prerequisite to the protection of the BIT
is implied.

In this context, the Tribunal notes the recent Decision of the Tribunal in the Abaclat case
as a confirmation, though this Tribunal does not rely on this decision since the Parties did
not have an opportunity to refer to it and comment on it. The Abacl/at tribunal finds that
the definition of investment, which is similar to the one in Article I.1(a) of the BIT
applicable in the present case, “is drafied in a way describing the rights and values which
may be endangered by measures of the Host State, such as expropriation, and therefore
deserve protection under the BIT. Thus the focus here is on the rights and the value that
potential contributions from investors can generate. Nevertheless, this definition is of
course based on the premise of the existence of such contribution.”” This reflects the two
aspects which the concept of investment covers: (i) the contribution that constitutes the
investment, and (ii) the rights and the value that derive from that contribution.

® Abaclat et al. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 4
August 2011, para. 347.

89

353.

354.

355.

356.

The preamble of the BIT also stresses the economic aspect of the subject of the treaty
protection. The aim of the protections accorded by the BIT is the “maximum effective
utilization of economic resources” stimulated by the flow of private capital from the other
party to the BIT. That flow of capital will influence the economic development of the
parties and increase their economic cooperation. Thus, in the light of the BIT’s preamble,
the investment is understood as a flow of capital that is economic in nature. This
understanding is also bolstered by the U.S. President’s letter of transmittal of the BIT to
the Senate, which states that the BIT is “designed to encourage economic opportunity (...)
in both countries.”

 

The concern of Kazakhstan and the United States with abuse of the BIT’s protections
when a claimant does not represent any economic link between the two States is visible in
Article I(2) of the BIT. This provision allows each of the parties to deny the benefits of
the BIT’s protection to a company that is controlled by nationals of a third State and does
not have any substantial activities in the other State-party to the BIT. The Tribunal is
aware that Article I(2) of the BIT is not applicable to the present case. As a context of the
term ‘investment’, however, it elucidates the economic aspects of the subject of the BIT’s
protection.

The Tribunal agrees with Claimant that, subject to express provisions to the contrary, the
origin of capital used to make an investment is immaterial for jurisdiction purposes.”*
However, there still needs to be some economic link between that capital and the
purported investor that enables the Tribunal to find that a given investment is an
investment of that particular investor.”°

This interpretation which the Tribunal makes is confirmed by the drafting history of U.S.
Model BITs. As reported by Vandevelde in relation to the definition of the term
‘investment’:

“U.S. BIT drafters wanted to ensure that future forms of investment perhaps not
anticipated by them would be covered by the agreement. Leaving the term undefined
would permit it to evolve along with the changing nature of economic circumstances.
(.)

The most common definition of “investment” in the European BITs had been “every
kind of asset.” The purpose of the BITs, however, was to protect investment, not all
U.S.-owned property in the territory of the BIT party. U.S. negotiators thus wished to

* Procedural Order No. 2, Annex 2. Claimant relied here on: Tradex Hellas S. A. v. Republic of Albania, \CSID
Case No. ARB/94/2, Award of 29 April 1999; Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republicc of Egypt, \CSID Case
No. ARB/98/4, Award of 8 December 2000; Eudoro A. Olguin v. Republic of Paraguay, \CSID Case No.
ARB/98/5, Award of 26 July 2001; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 29 April 2004; ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. Hungary,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16, Award of 2 October 2006; Saipem S.p.A. v. People's Republic of Bangladesh,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures of 21
March 2007 and Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/05/15, Decision on Jurisdiction of 11 April 2007.

5 The capital can come from the investor’s own funds located in any country, from its subsidiaries or affiliates
located in any country, from loan, credit or other arrangements.

90

357.

358.

make clear that an asset would be covered by the definition only if it had the
character of an investment. Accordingly, (...) the 1983 model (...) defines investment
as “every kind of investment.” In effect, the treaty applies to all investment and to
nothing more or nothing less. Despite its circularity, this phrase was thought to
convey the flexibility that BIT drafters wanted to incorporate into the definition.

(...) The secretary of state’s submittal letters have noted that the BIT concept of
investment is “broad and designed to be flexible; although numerous types of
economic interests are enumerated, the intent is to include all legitimate interests in
the territory of either Party ... having economic value or ‘associated’ with an
investment.” (footnote omitted) The secretary’s language (...) should have
emphasized more clearly that to be protected an economic arrangement must have
the character of an investment.

(.)
The 2004 modified the tautological definition of investment that had appeared in the
U.S. BITs since the inception of the program. It defines investment as “every asset ...
that has the characteristics of an investment, including such characteristics as the
commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or profit, or the
assumption of risk.” Thus, the 2004 model continues the U.S. practice of limiting
investment to those assets that have the character of an investment (...). me

 

Respondent argues that finding whether there is an investment requires the application of
a comprehensive set of six factors, developed by the Phoenix Action tribunal.?” From
those six factors Claimant points out three which it regards as particularly important in
the present case:

 

a) contribution of money or assets,
b) an element of risk, and
c) assets invested bona fide. (R-III, paras. 32-33)

Claimant agrees that the term ‘investment’ has a certain inherent meaning and that there
are certain features which are typical of most transactions that have been accepted as
investments. However, Claimant disagrees that such features constitute a formal legal test
for the purposes of ICSID jurisdiction. (C-IV, paras. 20-24; C-V, paras. 133-148)
Describing his investment in CIOC Devincci Hourani explained that he saw the Caratube
field as a considerable, interesting and potentially profitable investment with a great
potential and that it was his “major commitment between 2004 and 2009”. (WS 2
Devincci Hourani, paras. 27, 31) He testified that his investment in CIOC consisted not
only of the purchase price for the share in the company, but also of other liabilities he
took on, worth ‘tens of millions of dollars’. He also explained that he took the risk

 

°K. J, Vandevelde, U.S. International Investment Agreements, Oxford University Press (2009), pp. 114-115
and 121-122.

my

a contribution of money or other assets; 2 — a certain duration; 3 — an element of risk; 4 — an operation

made in order to develop economic activity in the host State; 5 — assets invested in accordance with the laws of
the host State; 6 — assets invested bona fide. (Phoenix Action Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/5, Award of 15 April 2009, para. 114 (“Phoenix Action”).)

91

associated with investment in the Caratube field because he saw it as ‘the opportunity of
my life.’ (Tr, Day 4, pp. 156-157)

359. The Tribunal is aware of lists of typical characteristics of an investment identified by

ICSID tribunals. It is also mindful that most of them were developed in the context of
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. The context of ‘investment’ under Article 25(1) is
different from the context of the term used in the BIT. In the present case the term
‘investment’ is not used to establish whether there is a dispute between the parties (‘legal
dispute arising directly out of an investment’) but to determine whether the purported
Claimant is a ‘national of another Contracting State’ despite formally being a company
registered in Kazakhstan. Thus, if any previous decisions of ICSID tribunals will be
considered, this difference of contexts will have to be observed.

 

360. The inherent meaning of the term investment identified by tribunals and commentators

361.

includes existence of a contribution over a period of time and requiring some degree of
risk.’* Such minimum requirements have been identified not only by ICSID tribunals, but
also in investment treaty arbitrations not based on the ICSID Convention.”? Hence, the
Tribunal is confirmed in its concluding that the term ‘investment’ used in the definition of
investment in Article I(1)(a) of the BIT, in the circumstances of the present case, denotes
an economic arrangement requiring a contribution to make a profit and thus involving
some degree of risk.

Thus, in the circumstances of the present case, the conditions in Article VI(8) for treating
CIOC as a U.S. company require that:

a) CIOC is a company legally constituted under the applicable laws and
regulations of Kazakhstan;

b) it is an investment of a U.S. national, where:
i. “investment” is defined in Article I.1(a) and requires evidence of:

lL. ownership or control by a U.S. national,

2. being an investment (an economic arrangement requiring a
contribution to make profit, and thus involving some degree of
risk),

ii. the U.S. nationality is determined under the U.S. law;
c) conditions defined in sub-section (b) were present immediately before the

occurrence of the events that give rise to the dispute.

?8 This approach is also followed by the 2004 U.S. Model BIT which define:
an investor owns or controls, directly or indirectly, that has the characteris
characteristics as
assumption of risk.
? E.g. Romak S.A. (Switzerland) v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, PCA Case No. AA280 (UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules), Award of 26 October 2006, para. 207.

“investment” as “every asset that
s of an investment, including such
the commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation of gain or profit, or the

 

 

  

 

92

362. The conditions must be analysed from the particular point of time, referred to in Article

363.

25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, namely the date on which the Parties consented to
submit their dispute to ICSID arbitration.

(c) Burden of Proof

Before the Tribunal turns to analyse whether Claimant satisfied the requirements of
‘foreign control’ as stipulated in Article VI(8), it must first make some observations
concerning the issue of burden of proof, namely which of the Parties is required to present
evidence that the requirements of Article VI(8) of the BIT have or have not been fulfilled.

364. In response to the Tribunal’s question as to which Party bears the burden of proof, the

Parties generally agreed that Claimant bears the burden of proof to establish that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction over the present dispute. (PO-7, sec. 2.2; C-V, para. 162; R-V,
paras. 2, 8-9)?

 

365. However, the Tribunal here refers to an argument, reported by Schreuer et al. in

connection with Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention that “an agreement on
nationality would create a strong presumption in favour of foreign control that should be
discarded only if it amounts to an unreasonable selection of the facts.”*' Such ‘strong
presumption’ in the present case would mean that the burden of proof is on Respondent to
show that the conditions of Article VI(8) of the BIT have not been met. Such an
interpretation of the BIT would be unreasonable and the Tribunal rejects it.

366. The argument of the strong presumption in favour of existence of foreign control was

suggested by Amerasinghe in the mid-1970s.™ Later, in light of the early awards, he
stressed that the main element to be proven is that the host State was “at least (...) aware
of the foreign control at the time of the agreement” and that burden of proof in that
respect was on the claimant. This suggestion arose in the circumstances when investment
treaty arbitration was not considered by any commentators or tribunals in the context of
the ‘parties’ agreement’ under Article 25(2)(b).™ It cannot be applied to circumstances

 

* Respondent by “preponderance of evidence” (R-V, para. 4), Claimant by bearing the “initial burden to
produce evidence” (C-VI, para. 162).

*! Schreuer et al., p. 313, para. 815.

* Amerasinghe, Jurisdiction ratione personae under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States, 47 British Yearbook of International Law (1975), p. 264 (“(...)
agreement between the parties on a foreign nationality based on foreign control would raise a strong
presumption that there was adequate foreign control on which to predicate a foreign nationality.”), repeated in
Amerasinghe, Interpretation of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, in R. Lillich and C. Brower (eds.),
International Arbitration in the 21" Century: Towards ‘Judicialization’ and Uniformity?, Twelfth Sokol
Symposium, Transnational Publishers (1994), p. 240.

3° Amerasinghe, Interpretation of Article 25(2)(b)..., ibid., p. 232.

* Neither the drafters of the Convention nor early commentators or tribunals considered investment treaties as a
source of the agreement required by Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. It was assumed that any such
agreements on nationality will be concluded between the host State and the locally incorporated companies or in
a host State’s legislation (see e.g. drafting history referred to by Broches and Schreuer; Report of the Executive
Directors on the Convention, para. 24; commentaries by: Broches, Szasz, Amerasinghe (both articles); awards:
Amco v. Indonesia, Kléckner v. Cameroon, LETCO v. Liberia, etc.).

 

93

367.

368.

369.

370.

371.

372.

373.

when the host State is clearly not aware of the foreign control of the locally incorporated
company at the time when that State agrees to treat a juridical person as a foreign
national, i.e. when it signs an investment treaty in question. Schreuer et al. also do not
seem to endorse it.*°

Hence, the Tribunal concludes that the burden is on Claimant to show that it fulfils the
criteria set out by Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Article VI(8) of the BIT.

  

The burden may shift with regard to issues reflected in documents that have been seized
by Respondent from CIOC. The situations when such change of control over documents
has occurred are addressed below in connection with the Tribunal’s analysis of individual
issues.

J.II. Does Claimant Satisfy the Requirements of Article VI(8) of the
BIT?

The Tribunal will now apply the test identified in para. 361:

J.IIL.1. Is Claimant a Kazakh Company, as Defined in the BIT?

The first requirement of Article VI(8) of the BIT is for CIOC to show that it is a company
legally constituted under the applicable laws and regulations of Kazakhstan (part a) of the
test identified in para. 360). To fulfil this criterion CIOC can be “any kind of corporation,
company, association, enterprise, partnership, or other organization, legally constituted
under the laws and regulations of a Party or a political subdivision thereof whether or
not organized for pecuniary gain, or privately or governmentally owned or controlled.”

Claimant presents a ‘state registration certificate of a legal entity’ issued by the Ministry
of Justice of the Republic of Kazakhstan and dated 29 July 2002 as evidence that CIOC is
a Kazakh company. (C-IV, para. 25; C-54) The certificate states that it

“grants the right to perform activities under the foundation documents in compliance
with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.”

Respondent does not dispute the fact that CIOC is a Kazakh company.
There is no dispute between the Parties that CIOC is a company legally constituted under

the applicable laws and regulations of Kazakhstan. However, it is not clear what kind of
corporate entity CIOC is. It is referred to as “limited liability partnership” or “LLP” (C-

In another part of their commentary, Schreuer et al. observe that: “the existence of a consent agreement (...)

cannot be taken as an automatic recognition that the investor has
requiremen

met the Convention's nationality
s. This holds true also for the satisfaction of the nationality conditions to qualify for protection

 

 

under investment protection treaties.” (p. 264, para. 639)

94

374.

375.

376.

377.

54, C-55, C-56, C-173, C-174) as well as “limited liability company.” (C-53) From
Article 1.10 of its Charter and Section 4.1 of its Incorporation Agreement it follows that
the shareholders’ liability is limited to the value of their shares. (C-173, C-175) Thus, the
tribunal assumes that CIOC’s legal form is equivalent to a limited liability company.

J.III.2. Was Claimant an Investment Owned or Controlled by a U.S.
National at the Time Immediately Before the Events which Gave

Rise to the Dispute?

The Tribunal now turns to the next requirement of Article VI(8), as identified in para.
361, namely, whether immediately before the occurrence of the events that gave rise to
the dispute Claimant was an ‘investment’ owned or controlled by a U.S. national. Since
the issue of timing permeates the whole requirement, the Tribunal first turns to this issue.

(a) Events that Gave Rise to the Dispute

Claimant points to late 2007 or early 2008 as the time immediately before the occurrence
of the relevant events:

“(...) 31 January 2008, being the day immediately before the notice of termination
which completed the expropriation, or even earlier, in 2007 when Kazakh authorities
suddenly made unfounded allegations with regard to CIOC’s performance of the
Contract and started to harass and intimidate Devincci Hourani and his family, as
well as CIOC’s senior management and employees.” (C-IV, para. 42)

There is no dispute between the Parties in relation to this assertion. However, Respondent
points out that problems with performance by Claimant of its obligations under the
Contract started already in 2003, five months before Devincci Hourani purchased his first
share in CIOC. (R-9) This point is made to highlight the timing of acquisition of those
shares. Respondent argues that, because the alleged share purchase happened when a
dispute between CIOC and the Kazakh authorities over the Contract performance was
already easily foreseeable, the transaction lacks bona fides. (R-III, para. 44) This issue
will be addressed below.

(b) U.S. Nationality of Devincci Hourani
(1) Claimant’s Position

Devincci Hourani is a U.S. national. Claimant submitted a copy of the U.S. passport of
Devincci Hourani issued on 14 November 2007 which states “United States of America”
in the section ‘nationality’. (C-2) Claimant further submitted Devincci Hourani’s
certificate of naturalisation, issued on 16 July 2001 by the Attorney General of Detroit,
Michigan. (C-59)

 
  

95

378.

379.

380.

381.

382.

(2) Respondent’s Position
Respondent is not contesting Devincci Hourani’s U.S. nationality.
(3) Tribunal’s Analysis

Article I(1)(c) of the BIT refers to the U.S. law as the law applicable to the determination
of nationality of Devincci Hourani. The documents presented by Claimant, issued by U.S.
authorities and confirming Devincci Hourani’s U.S. nationality are sufficient evidence
that he has been a U.S. national since 16 July 2001.

(c) Ownership or Control

As found above, in order to find that this Tribunal has jurisdiction, the Claimant must
prove that it satisfies the requirements both of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention,
and of Article VI(8) of the BIT. Regarding the term ‘investment’ in Article VI(8), the
BIT’s definition in Article I(1)(a) uses the phrase ‘owned or controlled’ not merely
‘control’ as does Article 25(2)(b). The two words are connected by an ‘or’. While, thus,
this wording of the BIT seems to imply that it is sufficient to prove either ownership or
control to satisfy this requirement, as seen above, the definition in the BIT cannot go
beyond the limits established by Art. 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention which makes no
reference to ownership, but expressly requires control.

In this context, the Tribunal is aware of the considerations of the Plama*® tribunal (CLA-
98) which also had to evaluate evidence regarding ownership and control (paras. 94 and
95). However, that case, though also administrated by ICSID, was a procedure based on
the Energy Charter Treaty. The relevant Article 17 of the ECT requires that nationals
“own or control” the entity claimed to be the investment. While that is the wording we
also find in the BIT, it is different in scope to Art. 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention
where, as seen above, only ‘control’ can be the basis for jurisdiction. Further, in the
Plama procedure, the Tribunal had considerably more evidence supporting ownership
or control to rely on than Claimant has provided in the present case to comply with its
burden of proof.

On the other hand, if majority ownership is shown, such a finding implies a presumption
of control, even though it will have to be examined whether in the present case this
presumption is a sufficient indication of control. Therefore, the test of ownership will be
separated from the issue of control in the Tribunal’s analysis.

% Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, (CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award of 18 August 2008

(“Plama”),

96

383.

384.

385.

386.

387.

388.

389.

390.

391.

(1) Ownership
(i) Claimant’s Position

Claimant argues that the requirement of ownership is met because Devincci Hourani
“holds 92 % ownership share in CIOC.” (C-V, para. 126) Devincci Hourani acquired an
85 % share in CIOC on 17 May 2004 from Fadi Hussein. (C-55) He then acquired further
7% of CIOC’s shareholding on 8 April 2005 from Waheeb Antakly. (C-56)

(ii) Respondent’s Position

Respondent points out that, even if payment was made, the purchase price for the share
was nominal (it was the equivalent of USD 6,500 in local currency) and thus Devincci
Hourani did not make an investment in CIOC.

(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis

Here there are some unusual aspects to the determination of whether the Claimant has
established ownership to the requisite level of proof.

Respondent requested documentary proof of payment in request No. 5 of Annex 2 to PO-
2 (Respondent’s Redfern Schedule, p. 16-17).

Claimant held that such documents had been seized by Respondent.

Respondent replied that such documents should be in the possession, custody or control
of Devincci Hourani, as they concern his personal payments to the sellers of the shares,
Fadi Hussein and Waheeb Antakly. However, if the Tribunal concluded that this was not
the case, Respondent requested authorisation from the Tribunal to consult the seized
documents in order to locate the requested document.

Claimant replied that the documents related to his personal bank account in Kazakhstan
were kept by Devincci Hourani in his office in 92a Palezhayeva Street in Almaty, which
had been raided by Kazakh officials.

Taking note of Claimant’s assurance that the documents were among those seized in
criminal investigations, which was not contested by Respondent the Tribunal concluded
that said documents were in Respondent’s possession and control. Respondent’s
document production request was therefore denied. Furthermore, the Tribunal noted that
it did not see a basis for granting the authorisation requested by Respondent, but gave
such authorisation should it be needed.

 

Respondent further requested from Claimant documents evidencing the source of funds
used by Devincci Hourani to acquire the shares in CIOC. Claimant argued that the
relevant documents were in possession of Respondent who seized them during a raid on
Claimant’s premises. The Tribunal denied this request, but authorised Respondent to

 

97

392.

393.

394.

395.

access the relevant documents. (PO-2, Annex 2, request 6, pp. 16-21) No documents were
presented by Respondent.

In this context, the Tribunal is aware of the decision of the ICSID Tribunal in the Saba
Fakes award*’ (CLA-101) which found that no sufficient proof had been provided by the
claimant in that case that it acquired legal ownership of the share certificates. Though that
case has certain similarities to the present one, particularly in view of the very low
purchase price for the shares in both cases, as far as legal ownership is concerned the
present case is to be distinguished from the Saba Fakes case, because the burden of proof
regarding legal ownership turns out to lead to a different conclusion.

  

The Tribunal observes that the share purchase agreements presented by Claimant are
conditional. They provide that the buyer acquires the ownership rights to the share in
CIOC upon payment of the “cost of the Share” and introduction of appropriate
amendments to the founding documents of CIOC. (C-55, C-56) There is no evidence of
payment of the purchase price for the share in CIOC. However, regard has to be had that,
as seen above, some of the documents evidencing payment of the purchase price for the
shares were controlled by Respondent and not produced. The Claimant also presented no
evidence of introduction of amendments to the founding documents of CIOC required by
the share purchase agreements (e.g. minutes of the amendments to the previous version of
the founding documents on or after the dates of the share purchase agreements, evidence
of filing or registration of such amendments in an appropriate public register).

 
 

However, regarding ownership, payment of the purchase price and accurate company
records, the Tribunal notes in particular:

First, here, the key evidence was controlled by Respondent. The Tribunal should not draw
inferences from this silence in favour of Respondent. The Tribunal found that evidence of
payment of the purchase price was controlled by Respondent and Respondent was granted
permission to access the seized documents. Thus, the burden of proof was on Respondent,
who did not address the issue of the documents later on.

   

Second, Respondent did not deny that Devineci Hourani acquired the shares and was an
owner of the 92 % share in CIOC.**

Third, Respondent also requested from Claimant any minutes of CIOC’s Board of
Directors and/or shareholders concerning the shareholder’s ownership of shares in CIOC
and any transfer of shares of CIOC. (PO-2, Annex 2, request 8(iv), pp. 29-30) This
request was granted by the Tribunal. No documents were presented by Claimant.

As mentioned above, the nature of the corporate entity of CIOC is not entirely clear.
However, based on the text of its founding documents the Tribunal treats CIOC as a

* Mr. Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/20, Award of 12 July 2010 (“Saba Fakes”).
8S E.g, R-lIL, para. 41 (“(..) he acquired 85 and 7 percent, respectively of the shares of CIOC for the total sum of
approximately USD 6,500.”); R-IV, paras. 38-39 (“(...) Devincci Hourani acquired his interest in CIOC in 2004
for the negligible sum of USD 6,500 (..)”); R-V, para. 32 (“(...) Devincci obtained a majority stake in CIOC
paying only USD 6,500 out of pocket.”).

98

396.

397.

398.

399.

400.

proprietary company. Article 3.2 of its Incorporation Agreement of 10 May 2005 lists
Devincci Hourani as holder of 92 % “membership interest” and Fadi Hussein as holder of
8% “membership interest” in CIOC. (C-173) The Tribunal also notes that the share
purchase agreement of 18 May 2006 between Devincci Hourani (representing Fadi
Hussein) and Kassem Omar states that 92 % share in CIOC belongs to Devineci Hourani.
(WS Kassem Omar, Exhibit 1) Thus, this indirect evidence appears to show that Devincci
Hourani was an owner of a 92 % share in CIOC.

In view of the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes that jurisdiction cannot be
denied for the mere reason that Claimant has not fully complied with its burden of proof
regarding ownership by the U.S. national, Devincci Hourani.

(2) Control
(i) Claimant’s Position

Devincci Hourani owns 92 % of CIOC’s shareholding and exercises control over CIOC
“consistent with that ownership interest” (C-IV, para. 27) Claimant argues that Devincci
Hourani’s responsibilities as a majority shareholder and director at CIOC constitute
evidence of his control of the company. As evidence of these responsibilities Claimant
points to CIOC’s Charter and Incorporation Agreement and the authority granted to
shareholder by these documents. (C-V, para. 127; C-173, C-174) as well as
tatements of Devincci Hourani, who explained that he was regularly informed by
Director Omar Antar on matters relating to the company, participated in
ms concerning the project, negotiated certain contracts on behalf of CIOC, visited
the Caratube project site three times, corresponded daily in relation to the project, made
key decisions concerning the company and, when he himself was CIOC’s Director from
15 August 2006 to 18 June 2007, he was “overseeing the running of CIOC”. (WS 1
Devincci Hourani, paras. 11-13; WS 2 Devincci Hourani, paras. 29-31, 36) (C-V, para.
27)

   
 

Claimant relies here on the Aguas del Tunari majority decision that evidence of the actual
control over a company is not required. A capacity to control is sufficient, whether or not
the controlling shareholder actually exercises it. (C-V, paras. 124-125; Aguas del Tunari
v. Bolivia, paras. 242-248, 264)

(ii) Respondent’s Position

Respondent points out that Devincci Hourani did not exercise actual control, which, it
argues, was exercised by JOR Investment, Inc. (“JOR”) and those who controlled JOR.
(R-V, paras. 39-44)

Respondent relies on Vacuum Salt to argue that the Tribunal must determine existence of
actual control of Devineci Hourani over CIOC and take into consideration all facts and
circumstances of the particular context. (R-IV, para. 36) Respondent’s main arguments
concentrate on whether CIOC was an investment of Devincci Hourani, where it implies
that the actual control over CIOC was exercised by Issam Hourani, brother of Devincci
Hourani. (R-IV, para. 31)

99

401.

402.

403.

404.

405.

406.

407.

(iii) Tribunal’s Analysis

Again, the starting point for the Tribunal’s examination is that Claimant has the burden of
proof.

In its request for evidence Respondent asked for minutes of meetings of CIOC’s Board of
Directors and/or shareholders’ meetings concerning any investment in the Caratube
project to assess the existence and materiality of Devincci Hourani’s control over CIOC.
The Tribunal ordered production of such documents. (PO-2, Annex 2, pp. 26-27)

Respondent also requested minutes of meetings of CIOC’s Board of Directors and/or
shareholders’ meetings concerning the performance and management of the project. The
Tribunal denied that request, as the documents were seized by Respondent and under its
control, and granted Respondent authorisation to access the documents for the purposes
of the proceedings. (PO-2, Annex 2, pp. 27-29)

The documents requested by Respondent and ordered by the Tribunal have not been
produced by Claimant. Even if some of the relevant documents were among those seized
by Respondent, it is to be noted that none were produced by Claimant, and it seems also
highly unlikely to the Tribunal that none of the relevant documents were held by
Claimant or the Hourani family outside Kazakhstan.

In this context, the Tribunal notes that Claimant did submit great numbers of other
documents obviously held outside Kazakhstan. And while the allegedly forged documents
were withdrawn by Claimant during the hearing (C-162, C-175, C-238, C-239, C-240,
Aliyev 25; see Tr, day 6, pp. 228-229), and therefore the Tribunal will not rely on them,
and while the Tribunal sees no indication that counsel for Claimant were aware of any
doubts regarding these documents, the Tribunal cannot overlook that their submission and
later withdrawal throw a doubt on Claimant’s credibility. This has a bearing on the
Tribunal’s evidentiary evaluation of the fact that Claimant did not provide any documents
showing the exercise of effective control by Devincci Hourani.

As a witness, Devincci Hourani admitted that he did not participate in a day to day
running of CIOC in times when he was not a director of CIOC. (WS Devincci Hourani,
para. 18) His evidence of control is based on a reference to CIOC’s Charter and
Incorporation Agreement, which give him certain competences. However, no evidence
was shown that such competences and control were actually exercised by him.

Thus, there is not sufficient evidence of exercise of actual control over CIOC by
Devincci Hourani. In view of the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes that
Claimant has not provided sufficient proof for control as required by Art. 25(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention. The Tribunal is not satisfied that a legal capacity to control a
company, without evidence of an actual control, is enough in light of Devincci Hourani’s
characterisation of his purported investment in CIOC (see para. 358 above). However, as
Article I(1)(a) of the BIT requires ownership or control of an investment and, based on
indirect evidence, Claimant could be regarded as owned by Devincci Hourani, a U.S.
national, the Tribunal moves now to analyse further conditions for treating CIOC as a
U.S. national under the BIT.

100

408.

409.

410.

411.

412.

413.

414,

(d) Is CIOC an Investment of Devincci Hourani?

Even if control had been shown, as discussed above, existence of an investment denotes
an economic arrangement requiring a contribution to make profit, and thus involving
some degree of risk.

In answering the question whether CIOC is an investment of Devincci Hourani the
Tribunal must first enquire whether Devincci Hourani made any contribution and took
any risk. The elements are usually addressed individually for the sake of reasoning.
However, at least in the context of the present case they are interdependent and therefore
they will be assessed together hereafter.

(1) Respondent’s Position

Respondent argues that Devincci Hourani made no contribution of money and assets of
any significance, took no risk and, to the extent there were any assets invested by him,
these assets were not invested in bona fide. (R-III, para. 40)

According to Respondent, to satisfy the requirement of a contribution, the putative
investor should show that it contributed a substantial financial resource or transfer of
know-how, equipment and personnel. The price paid and a guarantee put up need to be
substantial enough relative to the entire project to be considered an investment. Similarly,
a nominal price paid for assets that purportedly amount to an investment raises doubts as
to an existence of an investment and requires in-depth inquiry into the circumstances of
the transaction. (R-II, para. 34)

Respondent further argues that Devincci Hourani was not a viable source of operating
capital. There is no evidence that CIOC looked to Devincci Hourani as a source of
operating capital and that Devincci Hourani contributed any of his own assets to the
operating expenses of the company. (R-III, para. 41)

Respondent argues that the financial arrangements between CIOC, JOR and Devincci
Hourani do not reveal the existence of a contribution or risk on the side of Devincci
Hourani. Rather, they show that Devincci Hourani provided a front for the real parties in
interest, namely JOR and its shareholders, including his brother Issam Hourani. Neither
JOR nor Issam Hourani, nor Kassem Omar, another of JOR’s shareholders, were of a
nationality that could grant them access to ICSID arbitration. According to Respondent,
CIOC was financed by JOR from its inception, even before JOR was formally registered.
Financing by JOR agreed at the time the majority share in CIOC was owned by Fadi
Hussein was secured mainly by a collateral pledge on CIOC’s ‘right to use natural
resources under the Contract’ and any transaction with respect to that collateral required
JOR’s written consent. In case of CIOC’s default, JOR would gain control over the
Contract. Thus, these arrangements gave JOR the actual control over CIOC and the
Contract. (R-V, para. 34) Respondent contends that a personal pledge provided by
Devincci Hourani has no substance. (R-V, para. 37) Further, the explanation given by
Devincci Hourani concerning Kassem Omar’s purchase of an 8 % share in CIOC in lieu
of interest on the loans to JOR is not credible. (R-V, paras. 38-43)

 

In Respondent’s opinion, Devincci Hourani had no expertise to contribute to CIOC. He
could not have acquired valuable expertise working at Kulandy, since he was at the same

101

415.

416.

417.

418.

419.

time managing a Central Asian branch of a medical equipment company and was required
to reside in the U.S. awaiting his citizenship. Section 1430 of Title 8 of the U.S. Code of
Laws requires a person seeking citizenship to be a permanent resident in the U.S. for at
least three years and spend at least one half of the time of the permanent residency
physically in the U.S., including all of the three months immediately preceding the
application. (R-III, para. 41) At the time when he allegedly was gaining his experience he
was living in the U.S. and spending less than three months a year in Kazakhstan. (R-V,
para. 30)

 
  

Respondent argues that, given the absence of evidence of any other contribution by
Devincci Hourani to CIOC, the nominal amount, equivalent to USD 6,500, paid by him
for a 92 % share in CIOC calls for an inquiry into the circumstances of the transaction.
Respondent purports that all that is known is that Devincci Hourani neither made any
substantial contribution nor took any risk. Moreover, in Respondent’s opinion, it shows
that CIOC did not acquire the Contract in good faith and that other persons and entities,
not the nominal CIOC shareholders, are the real investors in the project. It therefore
shows that Devincci Hourani’s nominal ownership and control over CIOC was created
only to gain access to international arbitration.

Existence of risk requires the use of an investor’s own financial means at its own
financial risk, with the objective of making a profit within a given period of time. For the
risk to be present the investor must commit financial resources at the initial phase of the
project. (R-III, para. 35)

Since as Respondent maintains Devincci Hourani did not make any financial
commitments, invested nothing of significance in the CIOC and paid only nominal
amount for his share in the company, he also took no risk. He was not able to personally
recoup the profits of CIOC and his participation was more that of an employee. (R-III,
para. 42)

As, according to Respondent, Devincci Hourani did not contribute anything of legitimate
value to CIOC and took no risk, there was no legitimate business motive underlying the
purchases of his share in CIOC. The only thing of value he had to offer was his U.S.
nationality. Thus, Respondent points out the transactions are to be explained only by the
motivation to gain access to ICSID arbitration by virtue of Devincci Hourani’s U.S.
nationality. This is reflected by the timing of the transaction, only five months after
CIOC was cited for underperformance of the Contract. As CIOC was blacklisted for
having low performance rate a year and a half later, it is also obvious in Respondent’s
view that Devincci Hourani did not purchase his share in the company to turn it around.
(R-III, para. 43-44) The only motive for acquisition of his share in CIOC was to
transform any emerging dispute as to the project into an international dispute subject to
ICSID arbitration under the BIT. Respondent maintains that for this reason his purchase
of the share was not a bona fide transaction and does not deserve international law
protection. (R-II, para. 45)

 

 

Respondent further argues that CIOC is a creation of Issam Hourani, brother of Devincci
Hourani. Issam Hourani cooperated with CCC in the bid for the Contract and according to
Respondent later pushed CCC out of the project. Respondent contends that CIOC is a
company set up for the purpose of the assignment of the Contract and it allegedly
acquired the Contract by corporate raiding of CCC. Its capitalisation was only USD 6,500
and its founder, Fadi Hussein, was a young relative of Issam Hourani with no funds or

102

420.

421.

422.

423.

424.

expertise in the industry. Furthermore, Respondent holds that CIOC received its financing
almost entirely from JOR, a Lebanese company owned by Issam Hourani. As a collateral
for its financing from JOR, CIOC pledged all of its rights under the Contract. The costs of
financing were initially very high (50 % interest) but were later reduced to zero. Issam
Hourani is a Kazakh citizen and is thus not eligible for the protection of international law.
Respondent asserts that thus Issam Hourani sought to acquire protection of the BIT by
transferring the shares to Devincci Hourani. The transaction therefore lacks bona fides
and does not deserve protection. (R-IV, para. 21)

Because Issam Hourani was a Kazakh citizen, he thus sought to create an international
protection for CIOC by placing its shares first in the hands of his cousin, Fadi Hussein, a
Danish citizen, and then his brother, Devincci Hourani, a U.S. citizen. According to
Respondent, CIOC was treated as a Hourani family business at the time the Contract was
transferred from CCC to CIOC. In Respondent’s view there is no explanation for
Devincci Hourani’s purchase of CIOC’s shares for a low price and obtaining of
completely non-commercial financing terms from JOR other than that he was acting on
behalf of somebody else and providing them with the benefit of his U.S. nationality. (R-
V, paras. 26-28) Shortly after he was granted U.S. citizenship, Devincci Hourani
purchased shares in Kulandy Energy from his brother Issam Hourani. He did not
remember how much money he paid for a 100 % share in that company, not even whether
it was more than a million dollars. He admitted that he had never visited the oil field of
Kulandy Energy. (R-V, para. 31)

 

(2) Claimant’s Position

Claimant’s position throughout this arbitration was that the issue whether Devincci
Hourani made an investment in CIOC is not part of the applicable legal test. This position
was based on the assumption that Claimant’s submission of its Request for Arbitration
constitutes an agreement by which the parties have agreed to treat a transaction as an
investment and to treat Claimant as a national of another Contracting State. Thus,
Claimant concentrated on the legal test provided in Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention and the issue whether CIOC made an investment in Kazakhstan. (C-IV, para.
18; C-V, para. 119)

 

However, Claimant agrees that the term investment has some inherent meaning, even
though the characteristics of investments recognised by investment tribunals should not
be understood as jurisdictional requirements. (C-IV, para. 24)

Claimant submits that it presented documents and witness statements to show that
Devincci Hourani invested in CIOC not only by way of payment of the purchase price for
his share in CIOC but also by taking up a personal guarantee for loans owed by CIOC to
JOR.

(3) Tribunal’s Analysis

(i) Did Devincci Hourani Make Any Contribution to CIOC?

The Parties argued extensively the issue of Devincci Hourani’s contribution to CIOC,
discussing his alleged contribution of money, leverage and managerial skills. The main

103

425.

426.

427.

428.

429.

430.

431.

432.

433.

reason for such an extensive discussion was the fact that Devincci Hourani paid only a
nominal price for his 92 % share in CIOC.

With regard to the evidence regarding the existence of contribution, the tribunal notes that
in the document production procedure, Respondent requested documentary evidence of:

a) the source of funds invested in the project (PO-2, Annex 2, pp. 11-12, request
2),

b) any loans made to CIOC and any guarantees related to these loans (PO-2,
Annex 2, pp. 13-16, requests 3 and 4),

c) payment by Devincci Hourani for the shares in CIOC (PO-2, Annex 2, pp. 16—
20, request 5),

d) the source of funds used by Devincci Hourani to pay for the shares in CIOC
(PO-2, Annex 2, pp. 20-22, request 6),

e) any minutes of the meetings of CIOC’s board of Directors and/or shareholders
(PO-2, Annex 2, pp. 24, 26-27, 30-32) concerning

i. any investment in the project, and
ii. any loans to or by CIOC.

The requests a), b) and e) were granted. No documents were provided by Claimant.

Requests c) and d) were denied. However, given that the documents concerning these
issues were seized by Respondent the Tribunal authorised Respondent to access them. No
documents were produced.

Particularly regarding the requested documents evidencing the source of funds used by
Devincci Hourani to acquire the shares in CIOC in request 6 of Annex 2 to PO-2
(Respondent’s Redfern Schedule, p. 20), the following is recalled.

Claimant maintained that such documents were neither material nor relevant to the
proceedings and in any event, that they had been seized by Respondent as they had been
kept in Devincci Hourani’s office in 92a Palezhayeva Street in Almaty, which had been
raided by Kazakh officials.

Respondent maintained that the requested documents were relevant and material to the
proceedings and that these documents should be in the possession, custody or control of
Devincci Hourani. However, if the Tribunal concluded that this was not the case,
Respondent requested authorisation from the Tribunal to consult the seized documents in
order to locate the requested documents.

 

The Tribunal concluded that the documents at issue were in Respondent’s possession and
control. Furthermore, it did not see a basis for granting the requested authorisation, but
gave such authorisation should it be needed. The document production request was
denied.

Anyhow, no documents were produced.
Indeed, the nominal price, if any, paid for the acquisition of the shares raises doubts about
the existence of an investment in which at least USD 9.4 million had already been sunk,

especially if it is the only element of the transaction. In such situation the Tribunal is
required to review closely the circumstances of the transaction.

104

434,

435.

436.

437.

The Tribunal notes that the above approach has also been taken by other ICSID tribunals
including the Phoenix Action tribunal (para. 119, RL-20) and the Saba Fakes tribunal
(para. 121 and 147, CLA-101). Regarding the latter, as noted above, it differs from the
present case in so far as that tribunal found there was no legal transfer of ownership while
in the present case this Tribunal has found that the jurisdiction does not fail on the lack of
proof of ownership. However, the Saba Fakes tribunal concluded in its award, an only
nominal price of only a few thousand US dollars paid cannot be reconciled with the
significance of the underlying business as expressed in Claimant’s valuation of the
alleged investment and the relief sought in that respect. This Tribunal notes that, while
that is not an ICSID case, this approach is also confirmed by the tribunal in Société
Générale v. Dominican Republic” which is referred to in the Phoenix decision submitted
by Respondent. In Toto v. Lebanon”, at paragraph 84, the tribunal made the following
observation: “/I]n the absence of specific criteria or definitions in the ICSID Convention,
the underlying concept of investment, which is economical in nature, becomes relevant: it
implies an economical operation initiated and conducted by an entrepreneur using its
own financial means and at its own financial risk, with the objective of making a profit
within a given period of time.”

 

Indeed, payment of only a nominal price and lack of any other contribution by the
purported investor must be seen as an indication that the investment was not an economic
arrangement, is not covered by the term ‘investment’ as used in the BIT, and thus is an
arrangement not protected by the BIT.

Further, the Tribunal recalls from its examination of ownership above that there is no
direct evidence that Devincci Hourani actually paid even the nominal amount for the
shares, but that Respondent was in control of the relevant documents which may establish
payment. Given that Respondent did not present such evidence, and did not dispute that
Devincci Hourani was at least formally the majority owner of CIOC, the Tribunal has
inferred from that, as well as from indirect evidence, that jurisdiction cannot be denied in
the present case simply due to lack of proof that Devincci Hourani paid the purchase
price.

However, as already mentioned, the purchase price for the 92 % share in CIOC was the
nominal price of USD 6,500-equivalent in the local currency, namely 920,000 tenge. The
total charter capital of CIOC is 1,000,000 tenge. (C-173, C-174) CIOC claims USD 1.145
billion plus interest in damages in this arbitration in connection with its main economic
activity — performance of the Contract. (C-VI, para. 219) When Devincci Hourani
allegedly purchased his share in CIOC, CIOC was already a holder of the Contract for
which it paid approximately USD 9.4 million. (WS Omar Antar, para. 39; Devincci
Hourani, Tr, day 4, pp. 153-155) These facts necessarily raise doubts as to Devincci
Hourani’s investment in CIOC and require the Tribunal to analyse the circumstances of

 

® Société Générale In respect of DR Energy Holdings Limited and Empresa Distribuidora de Electricidad del
Este, S.A. v. The Dominican Republic, LCIA Case No. UN 7927 (UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules), Award on

Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction of 19 September 2008, para. 36.

*° Toto Costruzioni Generali S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/12, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 8 September 2009.

105

438.

439.

440.

441.

the transactions. A putative transaction to pay USD 6,500 for 92 % for an enterprise into
which over USD 10 million have been invested"! and for which later a relief of over USD
1 billion is sought calls for explanation and justification.

No documentation was provided concerning the valuation of CIOC’s share for the
purpose of its purchase by Devincci Hourani. Devincci Hourani did not answer questions
concerning such valuations.” Neither Fadi Hussein nor Waheeb Antakly seem to have
been interested in selling their participation for a market price. Devincci Hourani testified
that only after he bought his share in CIOC he found out about the USD 9.4 million paid
by CIOC to CCC for the Contract. (Tr, day 4, pp. 153-154) With regard to the share
purchase from Waheeb Antakly, Devincci Hourani answered that he did not know how
much Waheeb Antakly paid for his shareholding in CIOC as well when he became
shareholder of CIOC. Devincci Hourani stated that “/m/aybe I was never really interested
in trying to find out.” (Tr, day 4, pp. 160-161)

(ii) Personal Guarantee by Devincci Hourani

With reference to the low purchase price, Devincci Hourani explained that “all sorts of
obligations were associated with that” that “there was a personal risk involved, a
personal obligation vis-a-vis JOR and others.” (Tr, day 4, p. 156) He referred to “debt I

took on”, “tens of millions of dollars that are still a noose around my neck that have to be
returned to Fadi Hussein and to JOR Investment.” (Tr, day 4, p. 157)

No evidence was presented of any debt owed by Devincci Hourani to Fadi Hussein.
Claimant further explained the above:

“... cash alone did not reflect what he [i.e. Devincci Hourani] invested. To acquire his
shares, he personally guaranteed the company debt, then held by JOR Investment, a
Lebanese company. Kassem Omar, the principal owner of JOR (with his brother) and
a Hourani relative, also took 8 % equity interest in CIOC, partly in exchange for
cancelling interest on loans to CIOC and providing an additional line of credit on
very favourable terms.” (C-VI, para. 46)

 

*' CIOC paid USD 9.4 million for the concession and by May 2004 JOR invested USD 2.6 million into CIOC
and was committed to provide further USD 12.4 million.

* Asked whether, when purchasing a share in CIOC, he had “a valuation or an idea in your mind as to what you
think the company was worth” Devincci Hourani answered, “J can’t really answer that, because when you are
involved in such a big deal, it wasn’t just peanuts.” (Tr, day 4, p. 158) Similarly, asked about the fair market
value of CIOC as of 1 February 2008, at the time the Contract was terminated, Devincci Hourani said, “/
couldn't put a figure on the fair market value of the company in March of 2008, but I know that we had proven
reserves (...). Now, I don’t know how many billions it would be (...). That is really a question that would need to
be put to experts, to perhaps engineers. I mean, my experts have put figures on paper and they've been very
high. But, I mean, it’s difficult to be precise.” (Tr, day 4, pp. 158-160) Asked whether the amount of the proven
reserves as of February 2008 was greater than what was known in the Soviet times, Devincci Hourani answered,
“I fear that if I were to answer that question I might misinform you. I’m not an engineer. I think it would be
more appropriate to put that question to an engineer.” (Tr, day 4, p. 16

 

 

106

442.

443.

444,

445.

446.

The only document presented in relation to Devincci Hourani’s ‘personal guarantee’ is a
one-page document dated 1 June 2004 and signed between Devincci Hourani and JOR.**
(WS 2 Devincci Hourani, Exhibit 8) The document contains the following obligations:

“I. Beginning in the second year of commercial production period at Caratube
Oil field the first party [i.e. JOR] will pay, from his own personal income
gained as net profit from the sale of the mentioned production, to the second
party [i.e. Devincci Hourani] annual instalments of 20 percent of the loan
amount in addition to 14 percent interest rate on the above 20 percent.

2. The second party [i.e. Devincci Hourani] commits himself to pay all loans with
the 14 percent annual interest with 10 years from the beginning of the second
year of commercial production.”

If the agreement is to be seen as evidence of a personal guarantee by Devincci Hourani of
debts owed by CIOC to JOR, the first paragraph of the agreement seems to contain an
error, mixing up creditor and debtor. Assuming that it is a typographical error, Devincci
Hourani’s guarantee of the debt does not contain any contribution. He promises to use the
profits from the investment to repay the loan. This does not explain how that promise can
constitute a contribution to the investment in the first place.

However, this is not the only problem with the above document. No explanation has been
provided what “his own personal income gained as net profit from the sale of the (...)
production” is. As a shareholder, there is no evidence that he is entitled to anything more
than a dividend.

The agreement refers to a loan agreement no. 2K-02 between JOR and CIOC dated 2
December 2002, i.e. from the first year of CIOC’s corporate history, when Fadi Hussein
held either 100 % or a majority share in CIOC. On the basis of that loan agreement JOR
granted CIOC a loan of USD 15 million at 14 % interest p.a., to be repaid by 5 December
2007. That loan agreement was secured by CIOC’s pledge of “its rights to use natural
resources under the Contract” and CIOC’s obligation not to perform any transaction with
respect to that collateral without the written consent of JOR. Thus, if Devineci Hourani
added his ‘personal guarantee’ to the above collateral, the ‘personal guarantee’ would be
securing the same amount (loan plus interest) to be repaid from dividends Devincci
Hourani would receive after CIOC has already paid the same amount. There is no
economic sense in such ‘personal guarantee’. More importantly, it does not constitute a
contribution from the perspective of CIOC or, for that matter, an additional security to
JOR. With or without Devincci Hourani’s ‘personal guarantee’ the economic undertaking
between CIOC and JOR remains unchanged.

 

More importantly, in the Financial Assistance Agreement dated 3 November 2004 and
signed between CIOC and JOR, JOR granted CIOC a loan of USD 25 million to be repaid
by 10 November 2014. (WS 2 Devincci Hourani, Exhibit 9) This time the loan was

* Respondent commented on this document in its Rejoinder (R-IV, para. 41).

107

447.

448.

449.

450.

interest-free. This loan was signed at the time when Devincci Hourani held an 85 % share
in CIOC. The Financial Assistance Agreement states (in Section 8.2) that:

“All previous written and verbal agreements, pertaining to the subject and conditions
of the present Agreement, are no longer valid, after the parties sign the present
Agreement.”

Thus, the Financial Assistance Agreement annulled the agreement of 2 December 2002
and established a new, unsecured, obligation between CIOC and JOR.“ Asa result, the
agreement of 1 June 2004 refers to and ‘secures’ a loan agreement that was annulled
shortly after Devincci Hourani signed the ‘personal guarantee.”

The timing of the ‘personal guarantee’ is also problematic. It is dated 1 June 2004 but
refers to a meeting between CIOC and JOR of 25 November 2006, during which CIOC
and JOR decided to cancel interest from the agreement no. 2K-02. CIOC and JOR signed
an agreement to cancel the interest rate from the USD 15 million loan in an agreement
dated 4 December 2006. (WS 2 Devincci Hourani, Exhibit 10) Thus, it seems that the
agreement between Devincci Hourani and JOR was signed in 2006 rather than 2004. This
also does not clarify the issue of Devincci Hourani’s alleged investment in CIOC and
does not answer the questions why the share purchase price was so low and what his other
contribution to CIOC was.

Another aspect of Devincci Hourani’s ‘personal guarantee’ of CIOC’s debts is that no
evidence was provided that JOR ever tried to enforce the security against him or against
CIOC, once the problems with the Caratube project started.

There is also no evidence that Kassem Omar acquired the 8 % share in CIOC, on the basis
of the share purchase agreement dated 18 May 2006, in return for cancelling the interest
rate on the loan between JOR and CIOC. Even assuming that the loan was still in place,
there is no evidence that Kassem Omar’s purchase of shares was connected with the
financial arrangements between Devincci Hourani and JOR. First, Kassem Omar did not
purchase the share from Devincci Hourani but from Fadi Hussein, who still owned an 8 %
share at the time. Secondly, Kassem Omar treated the purchase as “my investment in the
company”. In relation to the fact that JOR’s office in Kazakhstan was in the same
building as the offices of CIOC, he explained, “Jn addition, as an officer of JOR
Investment Inc., the Lebanese company that was providing financing to CIOC for its
investment into the field, I was also kept aware of developments in CIOC’s monetary
expenditure.” (WS Kassem Omar, para. 12) Thus, Kassem Omar’s statement does not
confirm that his shareholding in CIOC was anyhow connected with JOR’s financing to
CcIoc.

 

  

From the above it follows that the evidence presented does not confirm that Devincci
Hourani’s alleged contribution to CIOC as his investment included a substantial personal
guarantee of CIOC’s debt to JOR. His alleged personal guarantee referred to a loan that

“The documents do not confirm Devincci Hourani’s testimony that the loan of USD 25 million was additional
to the previous loan of USD 15 million. (Devineci Hourani, Tr, day 4, pp. 177-178

108

451.

452.

453.

454,

455.

was annulled by the parties. Even assuming that the loan was still in place, it was already
secured on the same assets and revenue stream. Devincci Hourani’s alleged personal
guarantee did not contribute anything to the economic arrangement existing between
CIOC and JOR.

 

 

There is also no evidence that Devincci Hourani’s contribution constituted of his know-
how or managerial skills. Devincci Hourani admitted himself that:

“Other than when I was the Director of CIOC I have not been actively involved in the
day to day running of CIOC.” (First WS Devincci Hourani, para. 18)

CIOC was not an ordinary business venture. It was set up to operate an oil concession the
value of which CIOC now claims to be over USD 1 billion. Yet CIOC’s nominal share
capital is 1,000,000 tenge according to Article 4.1 of CIOC’s Charter, i.e. about USD
7,000 (C-174) and it employs a maximum of 50 persons.** CIOC’s shares were always
held by individuals. Nothing is known about any substantial contribution by any of those
individuals, neither in terms of money, nor assets or know-how. Fadi Hussein’s total
contribution to CIOC was USD 11,000. Both Fadi Hussein and Waheeb Antakly sold
their shares for their nominal value and if any valuation was made in connection with
those transactions, none was presented. No evidence of payment of even those nominal
amounts was presented.

 

CIOC purchased its main asset, the Contract, from CCC and allegedly paid USD 9.4
million. No documentary evidence of this purchase price and its payment was provided.
From the time of its establishment JOR was the main capital provider to CIOC. It was
contributing to CIOC before CIOC finalised the transfer of the Contract from CCC and
before JOR itself was formally registered in Lebanon. At the time Devincci Hourani
purchased his share in CIOC, JOR provided CIOC with open credit lines of USD 15
million. The loan was granted at 14 % interest p.a. but CIOC never paid any interest
under the loan agreements. (Tr, day 4, p. 169) The interest was ultimately cancelled.

Change of shareholding did not have any impact on the relationship between CIOC and
JOR. In January and April 2004, shortly before Devincci Hourani acquired 85 % of the
shares, JOR transferred USD 6 million to CIOC.*®

From the above considerations it follows that, even if Devincci Hourani acquired formal
ownership and nominal control over CIOC, no plausible economic motive was given to
explain the negligible purchase price he paid for the shares and any other kind of interest
and to explain his investment in CIOC. No evidence was presented of a contribution of
any kind or any risk undertaken by Devincci Hourani. There was no capital flow between
him and CIOC that contributed anything to the business venture operated by CIOC.

+ Article 1.15 of its Charter describes it as “small business with an average annual number of employees not
exceeding 50) people” (C-174).

“© According to a table showing investments in favour of CIOC from 2001 to 2007, on 14 January 2004 JOR
transferred almost USD 1.8 million and on 12 April 2004 JOR transferred USD 4.2 million (R-105).

109

456.

457.

458.

459.

460.

461.

462.

Claimant insisted that the origin of capital used in investments is immaterial. This is
correct, however, the capital must still be linked to the person purporting to have made an
investment. In this case there is not even evidence of such a link.

Claimant insisted throughout the proceedings that it presented all necessary evidence to
prove that the Tribunal has jurisdiction. The Tribunal disagrees. Claimant failed to
discharge its burden of proof with regard to the fact that CIOC was an investment of U.S.
national (Devincci Hourani) as required by Article VI(8) of the BIT. At the least, the
Tribunal is not satisfied that Claimant has established the fact of that investment.

(iii) Bona Fides

Respondent devoted a substantial part of its submission on jurisdiction to the issue of
bona fides. It followed the Phoenix Action tribunal which included ‘assets invested bona
fides’ in its list of elements that have to be taken into account in determining whether an
investment can benefit from international protection of ICSID. (Phoenix Action, para.
114, RL-20)

In this context, Claimant, as mentioned above in the respective summary, emphasises
with regard to the additional criterion mentioned in Phoenix Action that an investment has
to be made bona fide, that no tribunal has treated this criterion as a mandatory
requirement. Claimant substantiates the argument that the so-called Salini criteria have
not been established as a formal set of requirements that must be met by relying on
numerous arbitral decisions and awards as well as several scholarly writings. (C-IV,
paras. 17, 21-22, 24; C-V, paras. 130, 133-134, 136-146, 148, notes 256 and 257)

Relying on ICSID awards, Respondent argued that the object and purpose of the ICSID
Convention — promotion of private investment in a balanced way — serves the interests of
host States and investors. Protection under the Convention is available if an investment
actually been made by a private party who itself qualifies as an
investor under the terms of the Convention. States cannot be deemed to have consented to
grant protection to investments not made in good faith. Acquisition of an investment must
be a bona fide transaction. In the absence of a bona fide transaction there can be no ICSID
jurisdiction. (R-IV, paras. 8-12)

 

Respondent’s arguments with regard to lack of good faith in the circumstances of the
present case concentrated on the following three issues:

a) CIOC’s investment in the Contract was not bona fides because the Contract
had been acquired by corporate raiding.

b) Devincci Hourani’s investment in CIOC was not bona fides because he was
not the real person in control.

c) Devincci Hourani’s investment in CIOC was not bona fides because its only

motivation was for CIOC to acquire protection granted by the BIT.

Regarding the first issue, Claimant notes that until this arbitration “/t/here was not even a
whisper from CCC, or anyone else for that matter, that CCC had somehow been
“corporate raided” out of the project by Issam Hourani”. (R-V, para. 43) In Claimant’s
opinion, it would simply defy common sense that the Hourani family could pressure the
multi-national, multi-billion dollar business CCC into refusing to cooperate with
Respondent or to retreat from the Caratube concession. Claimant purports that the

110

463.

464.

465.

466.

467.

evidence does not support such a conclusion. The Tribunal agrees that, given the
economic strength of the parties involved, a raid has neither been shown nor does it seem
probable. However, this does not, by itself, prove bona fides. This is not an
under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. In the present case it is a question
whether CIOC was itself an investment of Devineci Hourani. Since Claimant has not
stepped successfully over the threshold jurisdictional question concerning CIOC’s
nationality, there is no need of addressing the issue of CIOC’s investment in Kazakhstan.

 

The second issue is directly linked to the issue whether CIOC was an investment of
Devincci Hourani and the Tribunal agrees that this is an important point in the present
context. If Claimant had presented sufficient evidence to show that it was an investment
of Devincci Hourani, the Tribunal would have to address the doubts raised by Respondent
with regard to this issue. This is, however, not necessary, given that Claimant’s evidence
does not support a conclusion that CIOC was an investment of Devincci Hourani.

The third issue rai
to deny jurisdiction.

 

an important point, which prompted some previous ICSID tribunals

In the present case it could indeed be argued that the acquisition of a share in CIOC by
Devincci Hourani for a nominal consideration in 2004 took place at a time when notices
were being served to CIOC for underperformance rendering CIOC liable to have the
exploration contract terminated. The evidence relating to the circumstances surrounding
this acquisition could lead to the inference that the sole rationale for Devincci Hourani’s
belated involvement in CIOC was to invoke later the ICSID jurisdiction in order to seek
BIT protection through ICSID, which would otherwise not have been available to either
Lebanese or Kazakh investors, who would appear from the evidence to be the real
investors. However, the Tribunal concludes that it does not have to rely on such a
speculation and that there is not sufficient proof in the present case that the nationality
shelter was the exclusive motivation for the transaction.

 

  

Regarding the relevance of the motivation for a transaction, this Tribunal is aware of the
decision of the tribunal in Saluka v. The Czech Republic®’ that the definition of
investment in the applicable BIT did not make the investor’s motivation part of the
definition of investment (CLA-50, cf. para. 209). However, as seen above, Claimant was
first required to show the existence of an at least plausible economic motivation in
Devincci Hourani’s alleged investment in CIOC. Since no plausible economic motivation
has been shown by Claimant, and in view of Claimant’s burden of proof, the Tribunal is
not obliged to enquire what the real motivation behind Devincci Hourani’s purchase of
the shares in CIOC was.

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that no further examination of the issues of bona fides
and good faith is required in the present case.

*” Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules/PCA, Partial
Award of 17 March 2006.

lit

468.

469.

470.

471.

J.IV. Conclusion on Jurisdiction

Resulting from the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes that the facts presented
and proved by Claimant do not satisfy Claimant’s burden of proof to establish jurisdiction
of this Tribunal.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that it does not have jurisdiction over the claims raised in
this case.

This conclusion also means that the Tribunal does not have to consider the further
arguments of the Parties regarding admissibility and regarding the merits of the dispute
because they are moot.

In this regard, the Tribunal notes that, while in view of the above conclusion of the
Tribunal, in hindsight, it would have been more cost-efficient had the further submissions
regarding admissibility and regarding the merits not been made and examined in the
hearing, it must be recalled that

* according to sections 14.1 to 3. of the Minutes of the 1* Session, the Parties
agreed that a bifurcation of the procedure with a first phase only regarding
jurisdiction would only take place if Repondent so requested by 14 July 2009,

and that, by its letter of 9 July 2009, Respondent gave notification that it did
not request bifurcation;

this declaration by Respondent was later amended in footnote 7 to the
Counter-Memorial (p. 11): “The Republic did not request the bifurcation of
these proceedings, since it concluded that the Tribunal needed factual
information in order to assess these objections [to jurisdiction] and such
information was best presented with the merits of the case. This however does
not mean that the Republic considers these objections to be less serious, and
the Republic therefore asks the Tribunal to uphold the objections and to
refrain from considering the merits of the case.”

the result is that a one phase procedure including both the jurisdiction and the
merits of the case was conducted on the basis of the agreement of the Parties.

112

K. Considerations Regarding Costs

472.

473.

474.

475.

476.

477.

478.

479.

K.I. Claimant’s Position

Regarding costs, Claimant seeks an order by the Tribunal directing Kazakhstan to pay all
costs incurred in connection with the arbitral proceedings and further all legal and other
expenses incurred by Claimant on a full indemnity basis. Furthermore, Claimant seeks
interest at a reasonable rate from the date on which the costs are incurred to the date of
payment. (C-I, para. 86; C-IV, para. 285; C-V, para. 377)

In Claimant’s Application for Costs of 7 November 2011, Claimant requests a total
amount of fees and costs of USD 5,948,908.25. (C-VIII, paras. 2, 15)

Claimant holds that the requested costs have been “significantly reduced from the full
value of attorney time devoted to this matter” (emphasis in original) as they only
comprise amounts that have already been billed and paid under an alternative fee
arrangement. (C-VIII, para. 5) Claimant further points out that its initial counsel Allen &
Overy LLP had billed Claimant based on reduced hourly rates and additional write-
downs. (C-VIII, para. 6)

Claimant submitted its comments on Respondent’s Statement of Costs on 18 November
2011 claiming that “it contains a number of unsupported accusations, distortions and
misstatements” which Claimant subsequently addresses in its comments. (C-IX, para. 1)

Claimant invokes Article 27.6 of the Contract to submit that in accordance with the
Parties’ agreement in the Contract the unsuccessful party should bear the costs of the
proceedings. (C-IX, para. 2)

Claimant further contests Respondent’s overall costs exceeding USD 15 million and
holds that it is evident that Respondent has not conducted the necessary review and
evaluation of the time and billings of counsel to ensure that Respondent’s costs are
reasonable. (C-IX, paras. 4, 6)

Claimant further comments on each of Respondent’s specific cost claims one by one and
details why, in Claimant’s opinion, Respondent’s request for an award of costs and fees
should be rejected. These specific claims relate inter alia to the handover and request for
provisional measures, to document production and withdrawal, proceedings in a U.S.
Court, requests for witness examination and immunity, and Claimant’s request for an
extension. (C-IX, paras. 8-24)

K.IL Respondent’s Position

Respondent requests the Tribunal to order CIOC to reimburse Respondent for all
reasonable costs and expenses related to these arbitral proceedings including without
limitation legal fees and expert fees. (R-III, para. 468; R-IV, para. 648; R-V, para. 191)

113

480.

481.

482.

483.

484.

485.

486.

487.

488.

In its Statement of Costs dated 7 November 2011, Respondent requests to be reimbursed
for its costs totalling USD 15,675,206.71. (R-VII, paras. 4, 49) Respondent holds that this
is in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules, as in its
opinion no contrary agreement of the Parties exists. (R-VII, para. 4)

Respondent further emphasises that its costs were “reasonably incurred (...) in
connection with these proceedings and out of necessity to defend its interests” in the
present case. Moreover, Respondent alleges that Claimant acted “improperly” and
brought “extravagant claims” before the Tribunal. (R-VII, para. 49)

Respondent comments on Claimant’s Application for Costs on 18 November 2011,
holding that the alternative fee arrangement between Claimant and its counsel cannot
serve as a basis to evaluate whether Respondent’s fees and expenses regarding its counsel
were reasonable. (R-VIII, para. 3)

Furthermore, Respondent maintains that the costs of the proceedings should be awarded
against Claimant, noting that Claimant did not identify any separate procedural action by
Respondent resulting in additional time and costs while Respondent attributed almost
20% of its costs to be the result of Claimant’s “multiple maneuvers, unsuccessful
requests and improper conduct”. (R-VIII, para. 4)

 

Lastly, Respondent criticises certain specific cost claims by Claimant as unnecessary and
unreasonable such as the costs incurred in relation to the attendance of Rakhat Aliyev at
the Hearing in Paris and costs incurred for unidentified third-party consultants. (R-VIII,
para. 5)

K.IIL. The Tribunal’s Decision

Each of the Parties’ costs submissions claimed full actual costs were that party successful,
with Claimant disclosing the existence, but not the terms, of an additional succ fee
arrangement. Respondent’s claim was for professional fees for some 31,000 hours, and
expenses, to the total of USD 11.387 million, USD 950,000 ICSID deposits and other
witnesses’ and experts’ fees and reports and expenses to the total of USD 15.675 million.

 

Claimant’s fees and expenses, expressed to be discounted and, apart from the element of
success fee, was USD 5.948 million, plus USD 975,000 paid to ICSID (including USD
25,000 representing the case registration fee).

In the result Claimant has failed on the first hurdle of jurisdiction. With the wisdom of
hindsight, the majority of the costs and expenses of each party and of the dispute, both in
duration and expense, would have been avoided had Respondent opted for bifurcation and
the preliminary determination of its equivalent of Rule 41(1) objections under the Rules.

In this regard, the savings in costs and expenses would have enured both for the benefit of
Respondent, in defeating the claims on the threshold issue had it had the confidence to
take that course, and for Claimant, who would have had its claim disposed at this initial
level. Indeed, upon analysis, none of the experts’ reports, directed to the subjects of
technical, valuation, political and even authentication, and also the proceedings in the
U.S. Courts for documentary disclosure would need to have been engaged. And the initial

  

114

489.

490.

491.

492.

493.

494,

495.

(and as we now know, dispositive) hearings on jurisdiction would have been shorter and
focussed.

Few of the score or more of counsel and experts on each side would have needed to
attend over the extended two weeks of hearings engaging on the merits. In retrospect,
apart from short parts of the opening, closing and post-hearing submissions, almost the
entire hearings were directed to merits rather than jurisdictional issues, in a proportion of
more or less 9:1.

 

Further, the Tribunal takes as its reference point for its assessment the level of reasonable
rather than actual costs. No doubt Respondent’s legal team has committed 31,000 hours
to the matter, roughly 3,750 working days or 10 working years. As most of this effort was
devoted to issues related to the merits, the advantage of electing for a bifurcated
procedure is confirmed by the later events.

 

Further, Respondent also contends that in any event Claimant should bear the costs of
applications for interim measures, contested disclosures of documents, including Redfern
Schedules, U.S. discovery proceedings, hand-over issues and the authentication of
documents proffered and later withdrawn by Claimant, and other procedural skirmishes.

As the Tribunal has determined this dispute short of any findings on the merits, even on
cost issues it cannot make any informed allocation of responsibilities for costs.

Further, although the Tribunal did not order interim issues, on any view the actions of
regulatory authorities during the pendency of this matter were aggressive, and even
confrontational, as for example, steps being foreshadowed to wind up Claimant whilst the
post-hearing procedures were engaged.

Doing the best it can on having regard to these factors, and the entire course of the robust
pursuit by each party of it entitlement to contest, and to defend, exhaustively on each
issue, the Tribunal regards it as appropriate to abate Respondent’s amount of actual costs
and expenses to an estimated proportion more obviously related to jurisdictional
is also to take account of an estimate of Claimant’s corresponding costs on merit
which might not have been incurred were jurisdiction first determined.

 

 

The Tribunal’s conclusion is that Respondent is to be awarded costs and expenses of USD
3 million, together with recovery of USD 200,000 from amounts paid as ICSID costs, to a
total of USD 3.2 million.

 

(For convenience, the decisions and signatures of this Award are printed
hereafter on a separate page)

115

Decision

The Tribunal decides and orders that:

1. The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the Claimant’s claims
herein.

2. Costs: The Claimant pay the Respondent USD 3.2 million, comprising
USD 3 million for its legal costs and USD 200,000 to recoup part of monies
paid for ICSID deposit.

Co fom

Gavan Griffith QC Dr. Kamal Hossain
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date /5, OS, 2012_ Date:

 
 
 
  

lQa@mm) 2or

s fi
Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Bickstiegel,

President
Date: Zo ae) Zolt

116

