INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Caratube International Oil Company LLP
v.

Republic of Kazakhstan

(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12)

Annulment Proceeding

DECISION ON THE ANNULMENT APPLICATION
OF CARATUBE INTERNATIONAL OIL COMPANY LLP

Members of the Ad Hoc Committee
Mr. Juan Ferndndez-Armesto, President
Tan Sri Dato Cecil W.M. Abraham, Member
Judge Hans Danelius, Member

Secretary of the Ad Hoc Committee
Ms. Milanka Kostadinova

Representing the Applicant Representing the Respondent

Mr. Hamid G. Gharavi Mr. Peter M. Wolrich

Ms. Sophie Von Dewall Mr. Geoffroy P. Lyonnet

DERAINS & GHARAVI CURTIS, MALLET-PREVOST, COLT
Paris, France & MOSLE LLP, Paris, France

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

CURTIS, MALLET-PREVOST, COLT
& MOSLE S.C., México D.F., México
Mr. Askar N. Moukhitdinov

CURTIS, MALLET-PREVOST, COLT &
MOSLE (KAZAKHSTAN) LLP, Almaty,
Kazakhstan

Date of dispatch to the Parties: February 21, 2014

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS i

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS .....ccsscsssssssssssessessessesseescencencenceneeneeneencsecsseenes ii

LIST OF CASES CITED iv

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1

II. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS. .......cccssssssssssssssssessesncssessecsncencencenceneeneenceneenecsecsnesnes 4
1. Introduction 4
2. Applicant’s Position 4
3. Respondents Position oo... cece ccs eeeseeeeseeeeseseseseseessceseseteseeeeeeneeeecee 5

Ill. THE AWARD 7
1. Facts 7
2. The Tribunal’s Reasoning ....

IV. GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT .......ccssssssssessessessesnessessecencencenceneeneeneeneesecsneenees 13
1. Manifest Excess of PowetS.........ccccsccesesteesteesteeeneseeee
2. Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure. 16
3. Failure to State ReasOMs ..........cccecccesesseseeteseeteseeeseeeseenes

V. THE TRIBUNAL’S FOREIGN NATIONALITY TEST .......ccscssessesseeseeseeeneee 20
1. Applicant’s Position 20
2. Respondents Position oo... cece ees eeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeecesseeteseneneneeeaeaeee 23
3 Decision by the Committee

VI. DEFINITION OF CONTROL AND INVESTMENT
1. Applicant’s Position 36
2. Respondents Position oo... cece ees eeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeecesseeteseneneneeeaeaeee 38
3 The Committee’s Decision ..........ccccccsesceseeceseesesteeseeeseeseseeseseeseatensseensseenes 40

VII. OBITER DICTUM 51
1. Applicant’s Position 51
2. Respondents Position oo... cece ees eeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeecesseeteseneneneeeaeaeee 52
3. The Committee’s Decision ...........cccccceccceeseseeeeteseeteseeteseeeseeeseeneseeseseensseenes 52

VIII. COSTS. 56

IX. DECISION 57

 

ABBRE

Applicant/Claimant/CIOC

Arbitration Rules

Award

BIT

ccc

cI
cil

Committee

Contract

EUR

HT

ICSID Convention/Convention

ICSID/Centre

Kazakhstan/Respondent

Letter of Transmittal

 

TIONS AND ACRONYMS

Caratube International Oil Company LLP

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Award issued by the Arbitral Tribunal on June 5,
2012

Treaty between the United States of America and
the Republic of Kazakhstan concerning the
encouragement and reciprocal protection of
investment of May 19, 1992

Consolidated Contractors (Oil and Gas)
Company S.A.L.

Claimant’s Memorial on Annulment
Claimant’s Reply on Annulment

Ad hoc Committee composed of Mr. Juan
Fernaéndez-Armesto as President, Tan Sri Dato
Cecil W.M. Abraham, and Judge Hans Danelius

English version of Contract No. 954 dated May
27, 2002 relating to the exploration and
production of hydrocarbons in the Caratube Field
in the Baiganin District of the Aktobe Oblast
Region of Kazakhstan.

Euros

Transcripts of Hearing on Annulment of
September 12, 2013

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States

International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes

Republic of Kazakhstan
The Letter of Transmittal of the BIT by the

President of the United States to the U.S. Senate,
September 7, 1993

Mr. Hourani

Parties

RI
RII
Secretary

Secretary-General

Tribunal

US.
USD

Vienna Convention

Mr. Devincci Hourani

Caratube International Oil Company LLP and
Republic of Kazakhstan

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment
Respondent’s Rejoinder on Annulment
Secretary of the Committee

Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes

Tribunal which rendered the Award issued on
June 5, 2012

United States of America
United States Dollar

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of
May 23, 1969

AES

Aguas del Tunari

Amco IT

Azurix

Bogdanov

CMS

Duke Energy

Enron

Fraport

Helnan

Klockner I

Klockner IT

Lucchetti

LIST OF CASES CITED

AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii Kft. v. Hungary,
ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment, June 29, 2012.

Aguas del Tunari S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, CSTD Case No. ARB/02/3,
Decision on Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction, October 21, 2005.

Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSID Case
No. ARB/81/1, Annulment Decision, December 17, 1992.

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12,
Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic,
September 1, 2009.

Yury Bogdanov v. Republic of Moldova, SCC Arbitration No. V
(114/2009), May 30, 2010.

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/O1/8, Decision on the ad hoc Committee on the Application for
Annulment of the Argentine Republic, September 25, 2007.

Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1, Ltd. v. Republic of
Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28, Decision of the ad hoc Committee,
March 1, 2011.

Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation)
and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/O1/3, Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine
Republic, July 30, 2010.

Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Service Worldwide v. Republic of the
Philippines, CSID Case No. ARB/03/25, Decision on the Application for
Annulment of Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide,
December 23, 2010.

Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case
No. ARB/05/19, Decision of the ad hoc Committee, June 14, 2010.

Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of
Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des Engrais, ICSID Case No.
ARB/81/2, Decision on the Application for Annulment Submitted by
Klockner, May 3, 1985.

Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of
Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des Engrais, ICSID Case No.

ARB/81/2, Decision on the Application for Annulment, May 17, 1990.

Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert, S.A. (formerly

Malaysian
Historical Salvors

Malicorp

MINE

MTD

Phoenix Action

Romak

Rumeli

Sempra

Soufraki

Victor Pey Casado

Vivendi I

Wena

Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and Lucchetti Pert, S.A. v. Republic of Peru,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Decision on Annulment, September 5, 2007.

Malaysian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia, CSID Case No.
ARB/0S5/10, Decision on the Application for Annulment, April 16, 2009.

Malicorp Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/08/18,
Decision on the Application for Annulment of Malicorp Limited, July 3,
2013.

Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea,
ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment, January 6, 1988.

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, ICSID
Case No. ARB/O1/7, Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007.

Phoenix Action Ltd v. Czech Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/S,
Award, April 15, 2009.

Romak S.A. (Switzerland) v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, UNCITRAL,
PCA Case No. AA280, Award, November 26, 2009.

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S.
v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Decision of the
ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, March 25, 2010.

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/16, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Application for
Annulment of the Award, June 29, 2010.

Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/7, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for
Annulment of Mr. Soufraki, June 5, 2007.

Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of
Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2, Decision on the Application for
Annulment of the Republic of Chile, December 18, 2012.

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment,
July 3, 2002.

Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/4, Decision (Annulment Proceeding), February 5, 2002.

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On October 2, 2012, Caratube International Oil Company LLP filed with the
Secretary-General of ICSID an application requesting the annulment of the Award
of the Tribunal rendered on June 5, 2012 in ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12 in the
arbitration proceeding between CIOC and the Republic of Kazakhstan.

CIOC’s Application was made within the time period provided in Article 52(2) of
the ICSID Convention.

On October 5, 2012, the Secretary-General registered the Application and
transmitted a Notice of Registration to the parties on the same date. In that Notice,
the Secretary-General observed that the Application contained a request for a stay
of enforcement of the Award in accordance with Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings. The Secretary-General informed the
parties that the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed, pursuant to
Rule 54(2).

On November 5, 2012, the Centre informed the parties of the ensuing
recommendation to the Chairman of the Administrative Council of the
appointment of Mr. Juan Fernandez-Armesto (Spain), Tan Sri Dato Cecil W.M.
Abraham (Malaysia), and Judge Hans Danelius (Sweden) to the ad hoc
Committee, each of whom was designated to the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators by
his State of nationality.

By letter of November 12, 2012, in accordance with Rule 52(2), the Secretary-
General notified the parties that the ad hoc Committee was constituted and was
composed of Mr. Juan Fernandez-Armesto, as President, Tan Sri Dato Cecil W.M.
Abraham and Judge Hans Danelius, as members. The parties were also informed
that Ms. Milanka Kostadinova, Team Leader/Legal Counsel, ICSID, would serve
as Secretary.

On December 10, 2012, Applicant filed a request to the Committee to continue
the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award until rendition of the
Committee’s decision on the annulment application.

On December 14, 2012, the Secretary wrote to the parties, on behalf of the
Committee, inviting Respondent’s comments on Applicant’s request for
continuing stay of enforcement of the Award.

On January 10, 2013, Respondent submitted observations on Applicant’s request.
Respondent consented to the stay, but requested that the Committee order
Applicant to provide a bank guarantee or other equivalent security for the amount
due under the Award.

On January 11, 2013, the Committee held its first session by telephone
conference. Procedural Order No. 1 was issued on January 17, 2013. In order to
give the parties an opportunity to fully present their observations on the issue of
continuing stay of enforcement, the Committee invited Applicant and Respondent

to file a further round of written observations by January 21, 2013 and by January
31, 2013, respectively.

On January 21, 2013, Applicant filed its response to Respondent’s observations of
January 10, 2013, concerning the request for continuing stay of enforcement of
the Award.

On January 25, 2013, CIOC filed a Memorial on Annulment.

On January 31, 2013, Kazakhstan filed further observations on the request for
continuing stay of enforcement of the Award.

On March 14, 2013, the Committee, having duly deliberated and carefully
analyzed each party’s position on the stay request, issued its Decision on
Applicant’s Request for Continuing Stay of Enforcement of the Award.

The Committee determined that the stay of enforcement of the Award should
continue throughout the annulment proceeding, without a financial security. The
Committee reserved its right to revisit at any time, at the request of either party,
its decision and order the modification or termination of the stay, and/or amend its
decision regarding the posting of a security. None of the parties requested so.

On May 10, 2013, Kazakhstan filed a Counter-Memorial on Annulment.
On June 28, 2013, CIOC filed a Reply on Annulment.
On August 23, 2013, Kazakhstan filed a Rejoinder on Annulment.

A hearing for CIOC’s Application for annulment of the Award was held on
September 12, 2013 at the World Bank Office in Paris.

Present at the hearing were:
THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

Mr. Juan Ferndndez-Armesto, President
Tan Sri Dato Cecil W.M. Abraham, Member
Judge Hans Danelius, Member

ICSID SECRETARIAT

Ms. Milanka Kostadinova

COUNSEL FOR CLAIMANT: Derains & Gharavi
Dr. Hamid Gharavi

Mr. Stephan Adell

Ms. Sophia von Dewall

Ms. Dipna Gunnoo
Ms. Olga Kuprenkova

20.

21.

22.

Caratube International Oil Company LLP

Mr. Nassib Chedid (local co-counsel)

COUNSEL FOR RESPONDENT: Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Peter Wolrich

Mr. Geoffroy Lyonnet

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

Ms. Sabrina Ainouz

Ms. Marie-Claire Argac
Ms. Claire Selden

Republic of Kazakhstan

Mr. Nurlan Nurgabylov
Mr. Meyram Tautenov

ENGLISH LANGUAGE COURT REPORTER

Mr. Trevor McGowan, The Court Reporter, Ltd.

On October 15, 2013, each party filed a Statement of Costs.
The Committee declared the proceedings closed on December 23, 2013.
During the course of the proceedings, the Members of the Committee have

deliberated by various means of communication and have taken into account all
pleadings, documents and evidence before them.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Il. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
INTRODUCTION

Parties to the underlying arbitration were CIOC, Claimant, a Kazakh company,
and Kazakhstan, Respondent.

The basic rule in the ICSID Convention regarding jurisdiction of the Centre
(Article 25(1)) provides that an ICSID tribunal lacks jurisdiction over disputes
between a Contracting State - and Kazakhstan is a Contracting State — and a
national or company of that same Contracting State. This basic rule is, however,
subject to a specific exception: Article 25(2)(b) offers standing to a local company
from the Contracting State, provided that

- such company is under foreign control, and
- there is an agreement between the parties to treat the company, because
of foreign control, as a national of another Contracting State.

CIOC filed the arbitration against Kazakhstan arguing that it met the requirements
set forth in Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, because it was 92% owned and
controlled by an American citizen, Mr. Hourani. CIOC further argued that its
investment, “a significant oil field in an oil rich area of the country”, had been
expropriated by Kazakhstan giving rise to damages and compensation in excess of
USD 1.1 billion’.

Respondent requested the Tribunal to reject CIOC’s claims for lack of
jurisdiction.
The Tribunal concurred and concluded

“that the facts presented and proved by Claimant do not satisfy Claimant’s
burden of proof to establish jurisdiction of this Tribunal.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that it does not have jurisdiction over the
claims raised in this case”.

In essence, the Tribunal accepted that Mr. Hourani was the formal owner of 92%
of the capital of CIOC, but held that mere formal ownership of shares was not
sufficient basis for finding jurisdiction under the provisions of the Convention and
the BIT. On that basis, the Tribunal issued an Award dismissing Claimant’s
claims, without considering the merits of the dispute, and ordered Claimant to pay
Respondent USD 3.2 million for its legal costs.

APPLICANT’S POSITION

The Award dismissed jurisdiction because

' Award, at 2 (quoting Claimant’s Memorial of May 14, 2009, at 7).
* Tbidem, at 468 and 469.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

“Claimant failed to discharge its burden of proof with regard to the fact that
CIOC was an investment of U.S. national (Devincci Hourani) as required by
Article VI(8) of the BIT”*.

This holding was reached — argues Applicant — notwithstanding the undisputed
fact that Mr. Hourani is a U.S. citizen since 2001 and the Tribunal’s own findings
that “indirect evidence appears to show that Mr. Hourani was an owner of a 92%
share in ClOC™*.

Applicant argues that this is a textbook case of annulment, since the Award denied
jurisdiction pursuant to an imaginary requirement, not raised by Respondent nor
shared with Claimant: the condition that a majority shareholding by a U.S.
national in a Kazakh company is not sufficient to qualify the company as a U.S.
national’.

Applicant is requesting annulment of the Award in its entirety, arguing that the
Tribunal violated

- Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention by manifestly exceeding its powers,

- Article 52(1)(d) of the Convention by seriously departing from a
fundamental rule of procedure, and/or

- Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention by failing to state the reasons on
which the Award was based’.

These three grounds for annulment must be applied — in CIOC’s submission — to
three findings of the Tribunal:

- The first is the Tribunal’s holding that the U.S. national must own or
control and invest in CIOC to comply with the foreign nationality test.

- The second is the definition and application by the Tribunal of the
“control” and “investment” requirements set forth in the BIT and the
Convention.

- The third is an obiter dictum made by the Tribunal, in relation to the
contractual submission to ICSID jurisdiction.

RESPONDENT’S POSITION

Respondent argues that there is not a single ground for annulment of the Award.
Under the guise of a claim for annulment, Applicant is in fact seeking to obtain an
entire de novo review of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over CIOC’s claims.
However, annulment is not an appeal and Applicant’s attempt to appeal the
Award through annulment proceedings must be rejected’.

Respondent adds that the Award clarifies, consistently with the double-keyhole
approach of ICSID jurisdiction, that in order for Claimant to benefit from Mr.

* Award, at 457.

* Tbidem, at 395, CI, at 5.
SCLat2.

SCL at 244.

TRL at.

36.

37.

38.

Hourani’s U.S. nationality and for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction, Claimant
must have established that the foreign nationality requirements of both the ICSID
Convention and the BIT are met. Claimant failed to do so, and consequently the
Tribunal declined jurisdiction on two separate and independent grounds:

- (i) Claimant failed to provide sufficient proof that it controlled CIOC, as
required by Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention.

- (ii) Claimant also failed to prove that CIOC is an investment of a U.S.
national, as required by Article VI(8) of the BIT*.

Respondent therefore disagrees with Applicant and requests the Committee to
issue a decision dismissing Applicant’s application for annulment.

Finally, both parties ask for reimbursement of costs.

He

In order to decide this annulment proceeding, the Committee will

- briefly summarize the Award, including the proven facts and the findings
of the Tribunal,

- provide a conceptual overview of the three grounds for annulment
invoked by Applicant,

- analyze the application of these grounds for annulment to the three
findings of the Tribunal (nationality test, definition of control and
investment and obiter dictum), and

- consider the issue of costs.

* Ibidem, at 110.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

Ill. THE AWARD
Facts

Mr. Hourani is a U.S. citizen. He received his U.S. citizenship in 2001. Before
that he did not hold the nationality of any country, being a stateless Palestinian
refugee born in Lebanon.

In 2002, after convening a public tender, the Kazakh Ministry of Energy and
Mineral Resources signed Contract No. 954 with a company called Consolidated
Contractors (Oil and Gas) Company S.A.L., incorporated in Lebanon. Under the
Contract, which included an ICSID arbitration clause, CCC acquired certain rights
for the exploitation of the so-called Caratube oil field situated in Kazakhstan,
against the payment of an amount in excess of USD 9 million.

A few months after signing the Contract, CCC transferred the Contract to CIOC,
as documented in a Transfer Agreement dated August 8, 2002. At that time, CIOC
was controlled by Mr. Fadi Hussein, a Danish citizen and a distant cousin of
Mr. Hourani.

In mid-2004 Mr. Hourani acquired 85% of the shares in CIOC from Mr. Hussein,
against payment of a price of 850,000 Tenge. A year later, in April 2005,
Mr. Hourani acquired an additional 7% shareholding in CIOC from Mr. Waheeb
Antakly for 70,000 Tenge (the total price of 920,000 Tenge being equal to
approximately USD 6,500)”.

Mr. Hourani never made any capital contribution to CIOC. The company was
funded through loans and other financings provided by JOR Investments Inc., a
Lebanese corporation apparently not related to Mr. Hourani.

In February 2008 the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources issued a notice of
termination, alleging that CIOC had breached the Contract and requesting that
CIOC hand over the Contract territory, return geological information, fulfil the
outstanding obligations and rehabilitate the Contract area. Termination was
confirmed in a letter from the Ministry dated May 14, 2008.

Claimant commenced ICSID arbitration against Respondent on June 16, 2008.
The Award dismissing jurisdiction was issued on June 5, 2012. The application
for annulment was filed on October 2, 2012.

Subsequently, CIOC and Mr. Hourani have jointly commenced a new, separate
ICSID arbitration against Kazakhstan. This arbitration is still pending.

° Award, at 437.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

THE TRIBUNAL’S REASO! iG

 

The essential part of the Award is the Tribunal’s analysis of its own jurisdiction,
which led the Tribunal to the conclusion that it lacked jurisdiction to adjudicate
the dispute’®.

A. Legal Provisions

The Award interpreted the following legal provisions:

Provisions on the Tribunal’s Competence to Decide on Jurisdiction
The starting point of the analysis was Article 41 of the Convention which reads:
“(1) The Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence.

(2) Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the competence
of the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal which shall determine
whether to deal with it as a preliminary question or to join it to the merits of
the dispute”.

Further the Tribunal noted that Rule 41(2) of the Arbitration Rules provides that

“The Tribunal may at its own initiative consider, at any stage of the
proceedings, whether the dispute or any ancillary claim before it is within
the jurisdiction of the Centre and within its own competence”.

The Tribunal then agreed with the Aguas del Tunari decision that a tribunal’s
authority also includes

“the power to consider ways in which an ambiguous or unclear objection
may bear on jurisdiction and to restate the objections, as appropriate, so as to
allow a full examination of jurisdiction” ''.

Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention

Claimant is an entity incorporated in Kazakhstan and the key question for the
Tribunal was whether Claimant satisfied the conditions which allow a local
company to be treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes
of ICSID arbitration. The provision addressing this issue in the ICSID Convention
is Article 25(2)(b), which provides that “national of another Contracting State”
means:

“any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other
than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented
to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person
which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute on that

© Thidem, at 309 et seq.

" Award, at 309, referring to Aguas del Tunari, at 78.

53.

54.

55.

56.

date and which, because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be
treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention”.

The Tribunal pointed out that Contracting States to the Convention can agree on
the conditions of their submission to ICSID jurisdiction as long as their agreement
does not contradict the meaning of the Convention. Article 25(2)(b) sets foreign
control as such outer limit, an objective requirement that cannot be replaced by an
agreement. It is a floor below which the parties’ agreement cannot reach. The
parties’ agreement cannot contradict the meaning of the Convention (e.g., by
stipulating that any local company should be treated as foreign nationals), and to
the extent that any such agreement contradicts the Convention, the Tribunal must
find that there is no agreement providing jurisdiction under Article 25(2)(b)"”.

Article VI(8) of the BIT

The Tribunal then turned to Article VI(8) of the BIT, which is the provision
containing the parties’ agreement:

“For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article, any
company legally constituted under the applicable laws and regulations of a
Party or a political subdivision thereof but that, immediately before the
occurrence of the event or events giving rise to the dispute, was an
investment of nationals or companies of the other Party, shall be treated as a
national or company of such other Party in accordance with Article 25(2)(b)
of the ICSID Convention”.

The Tribunal noted that Article VI(8) of the BIT contains the conditions agreed
between Kazakhstan and the United States of America for the application of
Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. The key requirement in Article VI(8) is
that the local company be “an investment of nationals or companies of the other
Party”.

The BIT contains a definition of the term “investment” in Article I(1)(a), which
provides:

“1, For the purposes of this Treaty,

(a) "investment" means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the
other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and investment contracts; and
includes:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including movable and immovable
property, as well as rights, such as mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or interests
in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic value, and
associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights relating to:

"° Award, at 336 and 337.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

literary and artistic works, including sound recordings, inventions in all
fields of human endeavor, industrial designs, semiconductor mask works,
trade secrets, know-how, and confidential business information, and
trademarks, service marks, and trade names; and

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and permits
pursuant to law”.

Article I(1)(a) defines investment from the perspective of assets, claims and rights
to be protected. But the Tribunal pointed out that BIT protection is not granted
simply to any formally held asset, one of the goals of the BIT being the
stimulation of capital flows, and consequently protected investments must be
assets which result from such a flow of capital. Even though the BIT definition of
investment does not expressly qualify the contributions by way of which the
investment is made, the existence of such contribution as a requisite to the
protection of the BIT is implied'*. Consequently, the Tribunal considered that the
term “investment” denotes an economic arrangement requiring a contribution to
make a profit and thus involving some degree of risk'*,

In the Tribunal’s view, the burden is on Claimant to show that it fulfils the criteria
set out by Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention and Article VI(8) of the BIT.

B. Application to the Case

Having set the legal framework, the Tribunal then applied it to the case at hand.

First Requirement: The U.S. Nationality

The Tribunal pointed out that the first requirement set forth in Article VI(8) was
the U.S. nationality of Mr. Hourani. This requirement was not contested by
Respondent, and the Tribunal concurred and found that Mr. Hourani was indeed a
USS. citizen during the relevant period.

Second Requirement: Ownership

The second requirement was Mr. Hourani’s ownership of 92% of the share capital
of CIOC. Here the Tribunal accepted that there was evidence showing that Mr.
Hourani was the owner of 92% of the share capital of CIOC and concluded

“that jurisdiction cannot be denied for the mere reason that Claimant has not
fully complied with its burden of proof regarding ownership by the U.S.

national, Devincci Hourani’”’.

Third Requirement: Control

The third requirement was control, which the Tribunal interpreted to mean actual
control over CIOC. The starting point for the Tribunal’s examination was that

'S Award, at 351.
'* Award, at 360.
'S Award, at 396.

10

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Claimant had the burden of proof'®. Weighing the available evidence, the Tribunal
came to the conclusion that Mr. Hourani had not provided sufficient proof of
control. The Tribunal was not satisfied that the legal capacity to control, without
evidence of actual control, was enough in light of Mr. Hourani’s characterization
of his purported investment in cioc”’.

The Tribunal thus concluded that Mr. Hourani had proven ownership but not
control of CIOC. However, as Article I(1)(a) of the BIT requires ownership or
control, and based on indirect evidence Claimant could be regarded as owned by
Mr. Hourani, the Tribunal then moved to analyze further conditions for treating
CIOC as a U.S. national under the BIT'®.

Fourth Requirement: Investment Made by Mr. Hourani

In answering the question whether CIOC was an investment of Mr. Hourani the
Tribunal first enquired whether he had made any contribution and had taken any
tisk, because, in the Tribunal’s view, the existence of an investment requires a
contribution to make profit and thus involves some degree of risk””,

The starting point of the Tribunal’s enquiry was that Mr. Hourani had only paid a
nominal price equivalent to USD 6,500 for his 92% share in CIOC. This nominal
price raised doubts about the existence of an investment in which at least USD 9.4
million had already been sunk. Indeed, the Tribunal considered that payment of
only a nominal price and lack of any other contribution by the purported investor
must be seen as an indication that the investment was not an economic
arrangement, was not covered by the term “investment” as used in the BIT and
thus was an arrangement not protected by the BIT”.

The Tribunal then analyzed Mr. Hourani’s allegation that he had contributed a
personal guarantee for the financing of CIOC and, after weighing the evidence,
concluded that the evidence presented did not confirm that Mr. Hourani had
contributed a substantial personal guarantee of CIOC’s debt to JOR Investments
Inc.

The Tribunal concluded that even if Mr. Hourani had acquired formal ownership
and nominal control over CIOC, no plausible economic motive had been given to
explain the negligible purchase price. No evidence had been presented of a
contribution of any kind made or any risk undertaken by Mr. Hourani. There had
been no capital flow between him and CIOC that had contributed anything to the
business venture operated by c1oc”!.

Claimant insisted that the origin of capital used in investments is immaterial.
Although the Tribunal acknowledged this to be correct, the capital must still be

© Award, at 401.
"” Award, at 407.
'S Thidem.

© Award, at 409.
°° Award, at 435.
*! Award, at 455.

linked to the person purporting to have made an investment. In this case the
Tribunal found that there was no evidence of such link”.

He

69. Summing up, the Tribunal concluded

- that Claimant had failed to discharge its burden of proof with regard to
the fact that CIOC was an investment of a U.S. national, as required by
Article VI(8) of the BIT”’,

- that the facts presented and proved by Claimant did not satisfy
Claimant’s burden of proof to establish jurisdiction, and

- that the Tribunal therefore did not have jurisdiction over the claims raised
in the case™’.

» Award, at 456.
°3 Award, at 457.
* Award, at 468-469.

70.

71.

72.

723.

74.

75.

IV. GROUNDS FOR ANNUL

 

Applicant is invoking three grounds for annulment:

- that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in violation of Article
52(1)(b) of the Convention,

- that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure
in violation of Article 52 (1)(d) of the Convention, and/or

- that it failed to state the reasons on which the Award is based in violation
of Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention.

The Committee will briefly review these standards, in light of the arguments
presented by both parties.

The starting point of such analysis is Article 53(1) of the Convention, which
explicitly states that the award “shall not be subject to any appeal”. The award
may however be subject to annulment if an ad hoc committee finds that one or
more of the five grounds for annulment established in Article 52(1) apply. The
powers of ad hoc committees are limited to annul awards issued by tribunals — not
to amend or replace such awards, nor to review the merits of the dispute. Factual
findings and weighing of evidence made by tribunals are outside the remit of ad
hoc committees’, except in those cases where the applicant can prove that the
errors of fact or of law committed by the tribunal are so egregious as to give rise
to one of the grounds for annulment listed in Article 52(1) of the Convention.

MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS

Applicant invokes as a first ground for annulment that by rendering the Award
“the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers” (Article 52(1)(b) of the
Convention).

In this respect, the Committee notes that the power of any arbitral tribunal derives
from the authority vested upon it through the consent of the parties; if arbitrators
address disputes not included in the powers granted, or decide issues not subject
to their jurisdiction or not capable of being solved by arbitration, their decision
cannot stand and must be set aside.

A. Failure to Exercise Jurisdiction

The Committee further points out that excess of power can be committed both by
overreach and by defect. Awards can be annulled if tribunals assume powers to
which they are not entitled, and also if arbitrators do not use the powers that have
been vested upon them by the parties. ICSID annulment committees have at the
request of the investor set aside awards in cases where the tribunal, having
jurisdiction, failed to exercise its powers. Somewhat paradoxically, a manifest

°5 Malicorp, at 119.

76.

77.

78.

shortfall in the exercise of jurisdiction may also constitute a manifest excess of
power and lead to annulment of the award”°.

In the history of ICSID there seem to be only three instances where committees
have used their power to annul awards on the ground that the tribunal had failed to
exercise jurisdiction””.

- The first case is Vivendi I, where the committee partially annulled the
award, because the tribunal had dismissed a claim on the ground that
such claim could have been dealt with by a national court?®,

- The second case is Helnan, in which the award was also partially
annulled, due to the tribunal’s failure to exercise jurisdiction: the tribunal
had imposed the requirement that an administrative decision before being
construed as constituting a treaty breach had to be challenged in local
courts”.

- In the third case, Malaysian Historical Salvors, the committee annulled
the award on jurisdiction rendered by the sole arbitrator, on the ground
that the arbitrator manifestly exceeded his powers by failing to exercise
jurisdiction over a treaty dispute™’; the crux of this case was whether the
requirement that an investment represent a contribution to the economic
development of the host state, was or was not a condition for jurisdiction
under Article 25(1) of the Convention; the arbitrator found that it was,
the majority of the committee found otherwise and annulled the award on
jurisdiction*!.

B. Failure to Apply the Proper Law

The Committee notes that ‘excess of power’ is a polysemic concept, which can be
argued not only in cases of failure to exercise jurisdiction, but also in the context
of tribunals failing to choose the proper law. Powers vested on arbitrators are not
unlimited, but restricted. Arbitrators are only authorized by the parties to make
their adjudication in accordance with applicable law, not on the basis of a law
different from that agreed by the parties. If arbitrators do otherwise, they violate
the empowerment received from the parties and their decision merits annulment.

Accepting this principle ad hoc committees have concluded that arbitrators
manifestly exceed their powers if they

- totally disregard applicable law, or
- ground their award on a law other than the applicable law provided for in
Article 42 of the Convention — i.e. the rules of law agreed by the parties,

°° Vivendi I, at 115; Malaysian Historical Salvors, at 80.
27 RI, at 75; C Il, at 27.

°8 Vivendi I, at 102.

» Helnan, at 28-57.

* Malaysian Historical Salvors, at 56-82.

*! Malaysian Historical Salvors, at 61-81.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

or, subsidiarily, the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute and
such rules of international law as may be applicable”.

It is important to emphasize here that in order for an award to be annulled, the
committee must find that the error committed by the tribunal consisted of
applying the wrong law, not of wrongly interpreting the correct law. To
understand the contrary would imply transforming the well-settled standard of
failure to apply the proper law into an error of law standard, changing the nature
of the ICSID annulment procedure, and transforming it into an appeal mechanism.
Accepting this principle, ad hoc committees have made it clear that an error in the
interpretation of the proper law does not constitute a manifest excess of powers*.

The parties have discussed whether the concept of manifest excess of power can
be stretched to cover errors of law™,

The Committee finds the correct position to be that misinterpretation or
misapplication of the proper law, even if serious, does not justify annulment. That
being said, in exceptional circumstances, a gross or egregious error of law,
acknowledged as such by any reasonable person, could be construed to amount to
a failure to apply the proper law, and could give rise to the possibility of
annulment*». But the threshold for applying this exceptional rule must be set very
high*® — otherwise the annulment mechanism permitted by the Convention would
expand into a prohibited appeal system.

C. The Meaning of “Manifest”

Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention only permits annulment if a dual requirement
is met: there must be an excess of power, and the excess of power must be
“manifest”.

The parties have discussed the precise meaning of the term “manifest”. For
Respondent, manifest means self-evident, while for Applicant the term implies
that the excess must be serious. Applicant adds that establishing the existence of
an excess of power may require a detailed analysis of complex factual and legal
questions”’.

The Committee agrees with Respondent that the term “manifest” basically
corresponds to “obvious” or “evident”. However, this does not prevent that in
some cases an extensive argumentation and analysis may be required to prove that
such a manifest excess of power has in fact occurred**,

Applicant has argued that any excess of power which relates to jurisdiction would
in itself comply with the manifest test. Such a conclusion does not derive from the

* Azurix, at 46 and 136; CMS, at 49; Lucchetti, at 98; Soufraki, at 45; Enron, at 67; Helnan, at 55;
Sempra, at 205-207.

* Duke Energy, at 99; Sempra, at 164.

“CIL at 47; RII, at 47.

 Soufraki, at 86.

*© AES, at 33.

CHL ats

 

Il, at 50.

* Victor Pey Casado, at 69.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

wording of Article 52(1)(b) and has not been accepted by previous ad hoc
committees. Nor does the Committee find any sufficient basis for applying in
this respect different rules to jurisdiction and merit.

SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE

The second ground for annulment invoked by Applicant is that the Tribunal has
engaged in a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, in violation
of Article 52(1)(d) of the Convention.

The Committee considers that serious violations of due process, which undermine
the principles that each party has a right to be heard on equal terms and to
contradict the arguments of the other party, justify annulment of an award; justice
cannot be achieved through a deeply flawed procedure. Serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure is a ground frequently invoked by applicants,
normally in conjunction with other grounds. But the hurdles for the acceptance of
this ground are high: in only a few cases has it led to the annulment of ICSID
awards”.

The hurdles are reflected in the wording of Article 52(1)(d), which involves three
requirements:

- The procedural rule must be fundamental.
- The tribunal must have departed from it.
- The departure must be serious.

Applicant has focused its arguments on two rules of procedure, from which the
Tribunal allegedly departed: (A.) the right to be heard, and (B.) the burden of
proof.

A. Right to Be Heard (and iura novit curia)

Applicant identifies the right to be heard as a fundamental procedural rule, and
submits that the Tribunal used in its Award legal reasoning which had never been
argued by or disclosed to the parties. Applicant avers that by so doing the
Tribunal violated its procedural rights*!, Respondent disagrees and argues that the
parties’ right to be heard does not prevent a tribunal from adopting its own
reasoning or even raising new arguments”.

What the parties are discussing is, in fact, the relationship between two legal
principles:

- the parties’ right to be heard, and

* Schreuer: “The ICSID Convention: A Commentary” (CUP 2ed.), 2010, p. 943, at 149; Soufraki, at 118
and 119; MTD, at 54.

* Amco II; Fraport; Victor Pey Casado.

“CT, at 116.

© HT p. 85, 1. 24.

- the tribunal’s right (or even duty — a tribunal confronted with inept
pleadings cannot content itself with the less implausible of the parties’
arguments“*) to apply the principle iura novit curia.

92. Ad hoc committees have a number of times been confronted with the issue
whether tribunals can sua sponte raise legal arguments which had not been
pleaded by the parties. Schreuer has summarized the findings by saying that
committees

“have uniformly rejected the idea that the tribunals in drafting their awards
are restricted to the arguments presented by the parties”.

93. But this conclusion is subject to an important caveat: a tribunal (and also a
committee) is only free to adopt its own solution and reasoning without obligation
to submit it to the parties beforehand, if it remains within the legal framework
established by the parties. And vice versa: if a tribunal prefers to use a distinct
legal framework, different from that argued by the parties, it must grant the parties
the opportunity to be heard. As the committee in Kléckner I held*:

“The real question is whether, by formulating its own theory and argument,
the Tribunal goes beyond the “legal framework” established by the Claimant
and Respondent. This would for example be the case if an arbitral tribunal
rendered its decision on the basis of tort while the pleas of the parties were
based on contract”.

94. Consequently, tribunals do not violate the parties’ right to be heard if they ground
their decision on legal reasoning not specifically advanced by the parties,
provided that the tribunal’s arguments can be fitted within the legal framework
argued during the procedure and therefore concern aspects on which the parties
could reasonably be expected to comment, if they wished their views to be taken
into account by the tribunal.

95. That tribunals are entitled, within certain limits, to proceed without asking for the
parties’ views, does not mean that it is always good practice to do so. If iura novit
curia is exercised, an invitation to the parties to comment on the new legal
arguments may reduce the risk of errors or mistakes. And as the arbitrator in
Bogdanov wrote, tribunals should avoid that parties be

“surprise[d] by the consideration of legal issues that were not taken into
consideration in the proceedings””®.

96. But surprise in itself does not give rise to a ground for annulment. As the
committee in Vivendi I wrote,

4 Paulsson: “International Arbitration and the Generation of Legal Norms”, in ICCA Congress Series
No. 13 at 879.

“ Schreuer: “Three Generations of ICSID H Procedures” in “Annulment of ICSID Awards”
(Gaillard/Banifatemi eds.), 2004, p. 30.

* Klockner I, at 91.

46 Bogdanov v. Moldova, SCC case 93/2004, quoted in Bigge: “Jura Novit Curia in Investment Treaty
Arbitration”, Kluwer Arbitration Blog, December 29, 2011.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

“[iJt may be true that the particular approach adopted by the Tribunal in
attempting to reconcile the various conflicting elements of the case before it
came as a surprise to the parties, or at least to some of them. But even if true,
this would by no means be unprecedented in judicial decision-making, either
international or domestic, and it has nothing to do with the ground for
annulment contemplated by Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.”

B. Burden of Proof

A breach of the general principles on burden of proof can also lead to an
infringement of Article 52(1)(d) of the Convention. As the committee in Kléckner
II stated,

“a reversal of the burden of proof could well lead to a violation of a
fundamental rule of procedure. It all depends on the importance, for the
decision of the Tribunal, of the subject regarding which the burden has been
reversed”.

C. Seriousness

There is an additional requisite: Article 52(1)(d) of the Convention requires that a
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, if it is to provoke the annulment
of an award, must also be “serious”.

A departure is serious if the violation of the fundamental rule of procedure
produced a material impact on the award. The applicant however is not required to
prove that the violation of the rule of procedure was decisive for the outcome, or
that the applicant would have won the case if the rule had been applied. As the
Wena committee stated, what the applicant must simply demonstrate is

“the impact that the issue may have had on the Award’.
FAILURE TO STATE REASONS

The third ground for annulment on which Applicant relies is that the award has
failed to state the reasons on which it is based, as required by Article 52(1)(e) of
the Convention.

The obligation to state reasons stems from Article 48(3) of the Convention, which
requires the tribunal to “deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal” and
to “state the reasons upon which it is based”. Unreasoned awards can be annulled,
because parties are entitled to be able to ascertain to what extent a tribunal’s
findings are sufficiently based on a correct interpretation of the law and on a
proper evaluation of the facts™’. But as long as reasons have been stated, even if
incorrect or unconvincing, the award cannot be annulled on this ground. Article

” Vivendi I, at 84.

“8 Klockner I, at 6.80.

* Wena, at 61; Victor Pey Casado, at 78.
* Lucchetti, at 98.

52(1)(e) does not permit any inquiry into the quality or persuasiveness of reasons.
As was stated in MINE,

“the requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one
to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A to Point B, and
eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law?!

102. Nonetheless, ad hoc committees have held that contradictory or frivolous reasons
are to be equated with a failure to state reasons and can result in annulment™.
Contradictory reasons cancel each other and will not enable the reader to
understand the tribunal’s motives**. Frivolous reasons are those manifestly
irrelevant and knowingly so to the tribunal®*. But an examination of the reasons
presented by a tribunal cannot be transformed into a re-examination of the
correctness of the factual and legal premises on which the award is based.
Committees do not have the power to review the adequacy of the reasons set forth
by the tribunal in its award. Rather, the role of the committee is limited to
analyzing whether a reader can understand how the tribunal arrived at its
conclusion. Broadening the scope of Article 52(1)(e) to comprise decisions with
inadequate reasons would transform the annulment proceeding into an appeal.

*! MINE, at 5.09.

* Amco II, at 1.18.

* Kldckner I, at 116.

* Broches: “Observations on the finality of ICSID awards” in ICSID Review, 321 (1991), at 366.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

V. THE TRIBUNAL’S FOREIGN NATIONALITY TEST

Applicant alleges that there are three separate reasons warranting the annulment of
the Award on the invoked grounds:

- The first relates to the Tribunal’s holding that the U.S. national must
“own or control” an investment in CIOC to comply with the foreign
nationality test.

- The second is the definition and application by the Tribunal of the
“control” and “investment” requirements set forth in the BIT and in the
Convention.

- The third refers to an obiter dictum made by the Tribunal with regard to
the contractual submission to ICSID jurisdiction.

The first of these allegations will be analyzed in this section, and the other two in
subsequent sections (VI and VII).

APPLICANT’S POSITION

Applicant submits that the Tribunal dismissed jurisdiction on the ground that

“Claimant failed to discharge its burden of proof with regard to the fact that
CIOC was an investment of U.S. national (Devincci Hourani) as required by
Article VI(8) of the BIT”.

Applicant avers that, in doing so, the Tribunal violated Article 52(1)(b), (d) and
(e) of the Convention.

A. — Article 52(1)(b): Manifest Excess of Powers

Applicant argues that by failing to exercise jurisdiction, the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers, in violation of Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention © In
particular, the Tribunal failed to apply or alternatively manifestly erred in
applying the provisions of the BIT and of the Vienna Convention to the foreign
nationality test under Article VI(8) of the BIT and the associated “ownership or
control” requirement of Article I(1)(a) of the BIT®’.

Applicant points out that, pursuant to Article VI(8) of the BIT, a local Kazakh
company like CIOC must be treated as a “foreign national” for the purposes of
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention and be given access to ICSID arbitration, if it
qualifies as “investment” of U.S. “nationals or companies”. In Applicant’s
opinion, the requirement of foreign nationality was satisfied by the mere fact that
Mr. Hourani owned 92% of the shares in CIOC™. The Tribunal, however, went on
to examine the alternative requirement of “control” contained in Article I(1)(a) of
the BIT, and moreover added to the foreign nationality test the requirements that

* Award, at 457.
CI, at 146.
CL, at 147.
SCI, at 152.

20

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

the person exercising ownership or control should prove that it had made an
investment in the local investment vehicle - CIOC — and that a link existed
between CIOC’s capital and Mr. Hourani®’.

Applicant therefore considers that the Tribunal imposed a “foreign capital”
requirement to the BIT’s notion of “foreign nationality”, contained in Article
VI(8) of the BIT, and thereby altered and exceeded the scope of such rule, as
agreed between two sovereign states. It subsequently found, by replacing the
foreign nationality test of Article VI(8) by its self-created test, that CIOC did not
qualify as an investment of the U.S. national Mr. Hourani and did not qualify as a
foreign investment for purposes of ICSID jurisdiction®.

In Applicant’s opinion, the Tribunal reached this conclusion despite the clear
wording of Article I(1)(a) of the BIT, which does not require that the investment
be made by a U.S. national directly in the local company. To the contrary, this
provision of the BIT only requires the investment to be “owned or controlled” by
a U.S. national. Applicant considers that the Tribunal’s reasoning and conclusion
run counter to the express wording of the BIT® and that the Letter of Transmittal
of the BIT confirms that the assets enumerated in the non-exclusive list of Article
I(1)(a) constitute investments without any further requirements having to be
satisfied”.

Applicant concludes that the Tribunal, although acting under the pretext of Article
1(1)(a) and Article VI(8) of the BIT, in reality did not apply these provisions and
hence failed to apply the applicable law, or misapplied the BIT in such egregious
manner that it amounts to effective disregard of the applicable law. In both cases,
the error by the Tribunal indisputably amounts to a manifest excess of powers.
This error, in Applicant’s view, is both flagrant and incomprehensible.

Applicant points out that the Tribunal thus effectively failed to exercise the
jurisdiction conferred upon it by the BIT and Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention
and to apply the law agreed by the parties, and this failure constitutes manifest
excess of power. Applicant argues that it is settled that an ICSID tribunal commits
an excess of powers not only if it exercises a jurisdiction which it does not have
under the relevant treaty, but also if it fails to exercise a jurisdiction which it
possesses under that instrument™.

B. Article _52(1)(d): Serious Departure _from_a Fundamental Rule_of

Procedure

Applicant also argues that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental
tule of procedure by depriving CIOC of its right to be heard, in violation of
Article 52(1)(d) of the Convention. This is because the objection applied by the
Tribunal was not raised by Respondent.

© CL at 153; C IL, at 109.

CI, at 154.

"CL, at 155.

© CHL, at 112.

CI, at 157.

CI, at 168, by reference to Vivendi I, at 86.

21

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

The record shows that Claimant in its Memorial based the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
on the satisfaction of the foreign nationality test under Article VI(8) of the BIT,
while in its Counter-Memorial Respondent based its objections to jurisdiction
exclusively on the requirement of a bona fides investment under Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention”.

As Applicant sees it, the Tribunal did not merely restate unclear and ambiguous
objections raised by Respondent, but rather relied on new legal provisions and
arguments which had not been raised by Respondent in the proceedings”.

Such new legal provisions were not shared by the Tribunal during the proceedings
and so Claimant was not heard on the objection ultimately applied by the Tribunal
and was deprived of the opportunity to correct the misapplication of the law by
providing the Tribunal with appropriate arguments”.

What is more, Applicant points out that the Tribunal was aware of this serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, because in the Award”, it
attempts to preemptively justify its behaviour in anticipation of a challenge,
relying on its right, under Rule 41(2) of the Arbitration Rules, to raise ex officio
jurisdictional questions at any time of the proceedings”.

Applicant emphasizes that any prerogative the Tribunal may have to raise ex
officio new grounds or arguments, cannot override the principle of due process
which implies that “the parties shall be treated with equality and each party shall
be given opportunity to present his case”””, and that they must be “given the right
to be heard before an independent and impartial tribunal’””!, including the right of
a party “to state its claim or its defense and to produce all arguments and evidence
in support of it”. In Victor Pey Casado the ad hoc committee held that the
tribunal’s right to independently proceed to the evaluation of a category of
damages, did not relieve it from its obligation to “allo[w] each party the right to
present its arguments and to contradict those of the other party”.

Applicant argues that where a tribunal bases its conclusions on arguments that are
beyond the legal framework established by the parties, the tribunal is under the
obligation to hear the parties first and to allow them to advance their arguments”.
In the present case, the Tribunal failed to hear the parties on issues that proved to
be critical for its conclusion on jurisdiction. The Tribunal therefore departed from
a fundamental right of procedure, and this departure was “serious”.

Applicant accordingly concludes that the Tribunal should have — at the very least
— afforded CIOC the opportunity to be heard and to present its case on these ex

°C IL, at 137.
CI, at 172.
°C I, at 170.

® Award, at 309.
© CL at 171.

” MINE, at 5.06.
™ Wena, at 57.
” Ibidem.

® Victor Pey Casado, at 262.
™ CII, at 159.

SC IL, at 169.

22

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

officio and/or completely reshuffled objections. Applicant argues that the Tribunal
failed to do so” and that it acted in violation of the fundamental right to be heard
embodied in Article 52(1)(d) of the Convention and reached a result which could
have been different from what it would have been had such a rule been

observed”.

C. Article 52(1)(e): Failure to State Reasons

Applicant advances a third argument: the Tribunal also violated Article 51(1)(e)
of the Convention, by basing its findings on an incomprehensible reasoning
tantamount to a failure to state reasons.

Applicant finds it impossible to see what support the Tribunal mustered to sustain
its conclusions, and to follow the little motivation the Tribunal has provided. The
Tribunal — it is alleged — jumps from one notion to another, from one treaty to
another, from one article to another, in a manner which defies common sense. In
Applicant’s view, the Tribunal failed to render an award which at the minimum
enables the reader to follow the reasoning on points of fact and law, as required by
Articles 48(3) and 52(1)(e) of the Convention 8.

RESPONDENT’S POSITION

Respondent rejects Applicant’s contention that the Award should be annulled, on
the ground that the Tribunal erred when it applied the foreign nationality test.

A. Article 52(1)(b): Manifest Excess of Powers

Respondent argues that the Tribunal did not exceed its powers when applying the
foreign nationality test”.

Respondent finds it obvious that there can be no excess of powers, let alone a
manifest excess of powers, on the ground that the Tribunal failed to apply the
relevant provisions of the applicable law. The rare instances when committees
have annulled awards by reason of the tribunal’s failure to apply the applicable
law were extreme cases in which the tribunal simply ignored the relevant
provisions, or the applicable law as a whole.

Respondent avers that the Tribunal, in determining whether Claimant met the
foreign nationality test under Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, applied the
relevant provisions of the BIT in accordance with the Vienna Convention. The
Tribunal correctly turned to Article VI(8) of the BIT and the definition of
investment contained in Article I(1)(a) of the BIT. The Tribunal interpreted
“investment” in accordance with its ordinary meaning, in its context and in light
of the BIT’s objective and purpose, pursuant to Article 31(1) of the Vienna
Convention. The Tribunal held that the term “investment” had an inherent

CI, at 177.
"CL, at 178.
SCI, at 179.
RIL at 79.

23

127.

128.

129.

130.

So

131.

RL
'RL
SRE
SR

meaning, which included the existence of contribution over a period of time and
requiring some degree of risk*’. The Tribunal noted that even though the BIT
required “ownership” or “control”, the BIT could not go beyond the objective
outer limits of the Convention, which expressly requires that control be

established, as only control can be the basis for jurisdiction®!,

Respondent therefore considers that, in applying Articles VI(8) and I(1)(a) of the
BIT, the Tribunal did not commit any error, let alone an egregious error wanting
annulment. The Tribunal’s analysis thus meets “reasonable”, “plausible” or
“tenable” standards, which exclude a finding of manifest excess of powers®.

B. Article _52(1)(d): Serious Departure _from_a Fundamental Rule_of

Procedure

Respondent also denies that the Tribunal departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure, because the question of the foreign nationality of CIOC was actually
argued during the proceedings. The parties debated the issues whether there was
an investment of Mr. Hourani and whether Mr. Hourani actually controlled such
investment. Applicant’s artificial argument that Respondent’s objection was based
on the ICSID Convention and not on Article VI(8) of the BIT, while Article VI(8)
contains the foreign nationality agreement required under Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention, must be rejected®*,

In any event, even if it were considered that CIOC was not heard on the question
of control and/or investment (which Respondent denies), the Tribunal’s reasoning
undoubtedly remained within the legal framework established by the parties when
they debated foreign nationality for the purposes of ICSID jurisdiction™.

Furthermore, Article 41(2) of the Arbitration Rules confers on ICSID tribunals the
power to address jurisdictional questions of its own motion. This means that, in
Respondent’s opinion, an arbitral tribunal is perfectly free to reformulate or
clarify an objection to its jurisdiction made by one of the parties. In accordance
with the principle iura novit curia, the parties’ right to be heard does not require
an ICSID tribunal to submit to the parties every new reason on which it bases its
decision”.

Respondent avers that the issue of the applicable test for determining CIOC’s
nationality was amply debated by the parties. Even if this were not the case, the
Tribunal was empowered to reformulate or even raise a new argument or
reasoning, without first submitting it to the parties, provided that such argument or
reasoning remained within the legal framework established by the parties.
Article VI(8) of the BIT was indeed part of the legal framework established by the
parties. All relevant provisions of the Convention and the BIT were in the debate,
and the Tribunal was not bound to submit its interpretation to the parties

at 120.
at 123.
at 137.
at 140.

“RIL at93.

SRI,

at 158.

24

132.

N

133.

134.

135.

beforehand. Therefore, Respondent concludes that the Tribunal did not violate
Claimant’s right to be heard or depart from any rule of procedure 86

C. Article 52(1)(e): Failure to State Reasons
Respondent finally argues that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons.

Respondent avers and explains that the reasoning of the Tribunal on the points of
law and fact related to the foreign nationality requirements of the BIT and the
ICSID Convention are clear, precise and logically developed*”.

Furthermore, Respondent argues that the adequacy and sufficiency of reasons are
irrelevant for annulment purposes. The applicable standard requires only that the
award contain reasons that support the tribunal’s decision, even if the line of
reasoning adopted by the tribunal contains errors of law or of fact. Applicant
seeks to appeal the Tribunal’s decision, but has not presented a single plausible
argument against the Tribunal’s well argued, logical and comprehensible
conclusion that CIOC did not meet the foreign nationality test””.

DECISION BY THE COMMITTEE

A. Introduction
The foreign nationality test of Mr. Hourani revolves around three legal provisions:
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention:

“(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any
juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to
the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign control, the parties
have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for
the purposes of this Convention”.

Article VI(8) of the BIT:

“For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article, any
company legally constituted under the applicable laws and regulations of a
Party or a political subdivision thereof but that, immediately before the
occurrence of the event or events giving rise to the dispute, was an
investment of nationals or companies of the other Party, shall be treated as a
national or company of such other Party in accordance with Article 25(2)(b)
of the ICSID Convention”.

*R I, at 170.
“RI, at 172.
SR IL at 112.

25

Article I(1)(a) of the BIT:

“1,

For the purposes of this Treaty,

(a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the
other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and investment contracts ...”.

136. In the Award, the Tribunal construed these provisions as follows:

Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention must be interpreted as a floor below
which the parties’ agreement cannot reach; the term foreign control is
flexible and deferential and is meant to accommodate a wide range of
agreements between the parties; however, if the agreement plainly
contradicts the meaning of the Convention, e.g. by stipulating that any
locally incorporated company should be treated as a foreign national, the
tribunal cannot go beyond the mandatory limits established by Article
25".

Article VI(8) of the BIT, applied to the circumstances of the present case,
permits CIOC to be treated as a U.S. company, provided that it is an
investment of a U.S. national”’.

Article I(1)(a) defines investment as an economic arrangement requiring
a contribution to make profit and thus involving some degree of risk.

137. The facts which the Tribunal declared as proven are the following:

In 2002 CIOC purchased its main asset, the Contract, from CCC and paid
approximately USD 9.4 million’.

In 2004-2005 Mr. Hourani, a U.S national, purchased 92% of the share
capital of CIOC, a Kazakh company, for a price of approximately USD

Even though there was evidence which appeared to show that
Mr. Hourani was the owner of 92% of the shares in CIOC, Claimant has
not provided sufficient evidence that Mr. Hourani exercised actual
control over CIOC. The Tribunal, weighing the available evidence,
established that (i) no plausible economic motive was given to explain
the negligible purchase price he paid for the shares; (ii) no evidence was
presented of a contribution of any kind or any risk undertaken by
Mr. Hourani; (iii) there was no capital flow between him and CIOC that
contributed anything to the business venture operated by croc’.

138. On the basis of these findings, the Tribunal concluded that Claimant had failed to
discharge its burden of proof with regard to the fact that CIOC was an investment
— i.e. an economic arrangement requiring a contribution to make profit and thus
involving some degree of risk — of a U.S. national as required by Article VI(8) of

*® Award,
* Award,
°! Award,
* Award,
° Award,

at 336-337.

at 361.

at 437 and 453.

at 437.
at 455.

26

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

the BIT™ with the consequence that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction over
Claimant’s claims.

Applicant alleges that in reaching this conclusion the Tribunal committed separate
violations of Article 52(1)(b), (d) and (e) of the Convention. The Committee will
address these allegations in three separate sections (B through D infra).

B. Manifest Excess of Powers

a. The Parties’ Positions
In order to justify its request for annulment, Applicant argues

“that the Tribunal, although acting under the pretext of Article I(1)(a) and
Article VI(8) of the BIT, in reality did not apply Article I(1)(a) and Article
VI(8) of the BIT and hence failed to apply the applicable law or misapplied
the BIT in such a[n] “egregious” manner that “it amounts to effective
disregard of the applicable law.” In both cases, the error by the Tribunal

indisputably amounts to a manifest excess of power”.

The starting point of Applicant’s line of reasoning is that the Tribunal
acknowledged that Mr. Hourani, who undisputedly was a U.S. national, owned
92% of the capital of CIOC. And — in Applicant’s opinion — such ownership
should have been sufficient to comply with the foreign nationality test of Articles
VI(8) and I(1)(a) of the BIT (a test which requires that the investment be “owned
or controlled” by a U.S. national). Since the Tribunal accepted that Mr. Hourani
was the owner of 92% of CIOC, the necessary consequence should have been that
CIOC met the foreign nationality test. By holding otherwise and by replacing
these norms with its own rules, the Tribunal totally disregarded Articles I(1)(a)
and VI(8) of the BIT”®.

Respondent is of the contrary opinion: it submits that the Tribunal indisputably
applied the relevant provisions of both the Convention and the BIT, and
consequently there could be no excess of power based on the Tribunal’s failure to
apply the applicable law”.

b. The Committee’s Construction of the Concept

The Committee has already clarified the standards which an applicant must meet
in order to annul an award for manifest excess of powers:

- The arbitrators must have manifestly exceeded their powers by totally
disregarding the law, or by grounding their award on a law other than the
applicable law’,

°* Award, at 457.

SCI, at 156.

°° CL at 167; C IL, at 101.
TRI, at 126.

°§ See para. 78 supra.

27

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

-  Misinterpretation or misapplication of the proper law, even if serious,
does not justify annulment”.

- In exceptional circumstances, however, a gross or egregious error of law,
acknowledged as such by any reasonable person, could be construed to
amount to failure to apply the proper law 100.

Under normal circumstances errors of law do not permit annulment: applicant
must prove a gross or egregious error of law, which can be perceived by any
reasonable person. If the tribunal’s legal interpretation is reasonable or tenable,
even if the committee might have taken a different view on a debatable point of
law, the award must stand — otherwise the annulment procedure would expand
into an appeal mechanism, in contravention of the clear wording of the

Convention'”’.

c. Analysis of the Award

The Committee notes that the Tribunal in its Award indicated as applicable law
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention!” as well as Articles VI(8) and I(1)(b) of the
BIT. Additionally it found that the factual element of foreign control under
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention could not be examined independently from the
agreement on nationality contained in the applicable investment treaty, because it
is the investment treaty that would normally contain the test by which such
foreign control is established in the circumstances of the case. Moreover, to the
extent that the investment treaty would contradict the Convention, the Tribunal
must find that there is no agreement providing jurisdiction under Article 25(2)(b).
For these reasons, the Tribunal found that it must first turn to Article VI(8) of the
BIT

After examining the case in relation to Article VI(8) of the BIT, the Tribunal
concluded that Claimant had failed to discharge its burden of proof with regard to
the fact that CIOC was an investment of the U.S. national Mr. Hourani as required
by Article VI(8). At the least, the Tribunal was not satisfied that Claimant had

established the fact of that investment'”.

In summary, under Article 25(2)(b) a local juridical person can only have standing
in ICSID arbitration, if two requirements are met:

- The local juridical person must be under “foreign control”.
- The two Contracting States must have agreed that the juridical person,
because of foreign control, shall be treated as a foreign national.

In investments between the U.S. and Kazakhstan the provision in which such
agreement is formalized is Article VI(8) of the BIT (a rule which includes a

° See para. 79 supra.
1 See para. 81 supra.
'°! Rumeli, at 96.

‘© Award, at 329-337.
‘8 Award, at 339-362.
'* Award, at 337-338.
‘5 Award, at 457.

28

149.

150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

cross-reference to Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention). When the the BIT Parties
drafted Article VI(8) they could have chosen to simply reproduce the wording of
Article 25(2)(b), recognizing standing to any U.S. controlled Kazakh juridical
person (and vice versa). However, the BIT has a wording of its own.

(i) Local juridical person ...

According to Article VI(8), the local juridical person shall be a company, but it
appears from Article I(1)(b) of the BIT that the term “company” shall be given a
very wide meaning. According to Article I(1)(b), “company” of a Party means any
kind of corporation, company, association, enterprise, partnership, or other
organization, legally constituted under the laws and regulations of a Party or a
political subdivision thereof whether or not organized for a pecuniary gain, or
privately or governmentally owned or controlled.

(ii) ... under foreign control ...

The Tribunal emphasized that Article 25(2)(b) sets “foreign control” as an outer
limit, an objective requirement that cannot be replaced by an agreement: it is a
floor below which the parties’ agreement cannot reach’. This implies that all
companies which are investments of foreign nationals must also be under foreign
control.

(iii) ... treated as a foreign national

Of more importance in the present case is the fact that, according to Article VI(8),
the company shall be “an investment of nationals or companies of the other
Party”. Consequently, while Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention refers to juridical
persons which the parties, “because of foreign control”, have agreed should be
treated as nationals of another Contracting State, Article VI(8) of the BIT
mentions “any company ... that ... was an investment of nationals or companies
of the other Party”. This terminological distinction was given considerable weight
by the Tribunal in its Award.

He

In a second step, the Tribunal tried to give meaning to the concept “company
which is an investment of nationals of the other Party” !°”, Since the term
investment is defined in Article I(1)(a) of the BIT, the Tribunal decided to use that
definition for the purposes of Article VI(8).

The Tribunal then went on to examine the wording of Article I(1)(a), which states
that “investment means every kind of investment ... such as equity, debt, and
service and investment contracts” and adds a non-exhaustive list of assets covered
by the general notion of “investment”.

Applying Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, the Tribunal found:

‘6 Award, at 336.
7 Award, at 343.

29

155.

156.

157.

158.

“Article I(1)(a) of the BIT defines ‘investment’ from the perspective of
assets, claims and rights to be protected (or accorded specific treatment,
prescribed in the following provisions of the BIT). As one of the goals of the
BIT is the stimulation of flow of private capital, BIT protection is not
granted simply to any formally held asset, but to an asset which is the result
of such a flow of capital. Thus, even though the BIT definition of
‘investment’ does not expressly qualify the contributions by way of which
the investment is made, the existence of such a contribution as a prerequisite
to the protection of the BIT is implied”.

The Tribunal thus concluded that the term investment as used in Articles I(1)(a)
and VI(8) of the BIT means “an economic arrangement requiring a contribution to
make a profit and thus involving some degree of risk” !,

On this legal basis, the Tribunal analyzed the facts, weighed the evidence
marshalled by the Parties and reached these conclusions:

- Indirect evidence appeared to show that Mr. Hourani was the owner of a
92% share in CIOC, and jurisdiction could not be denied for the mere
reason that Claimant had not fully complied with its burden of proof
regarding ownership by the U.S. citizen Mr. Hourani!"”,

- Even if Mr. Hourani acquired formal ownership and nominal control over
CIOC, no plausible economic motive was given to explain the negligible
purchase price he paid for the shares and to explain his investment in
CIOC. No evidence was presented of a contribution of any other kind or
any risk undertaken by Mr. Hourani. There was no capital flow between
him and CIOC that contributed anything to the business venture operated
by cloc!".

Consequently, Claimant failed to discharge the burden of proof with regard to the
fact that CIOC was an investment of a U.S. citizen (Mr. Hourani), as required by
Article VI(8) of the BIT. At the least, the Tribunal was not satisfied that Claimant
had established the fact of that investment'!.

d. The Committee’s Decision

Factual findings and weighing of evidence made by a tribunal are outside the
powers of review of an annulment committee, except if the applicant can prove
that the errors of fact are so egregious, or the weighing of evidence so irrational,
as to constitute an independent cause for annulment. The respect for tribunals’
factual findings is normally justified because it is the tribunal who controlled the
marshalling of evidence, and had the opportunity of directly examining witnesses
and experts.

‘8 Award, at 351.
'® Award, at 360.
'° Award, at 395-396.
' Award, at 455.
"2 Award, at 457.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

In the present case, the Tribunal carefully analyzed and weighed the available
evidence, and explained in some detail the reasons for its findings!" The
Committee sees no reason why the Tribunal’s factual findings with regard to
Mr. Hourani’s involvement should not stand.

Confronted with the factual conclusion that it had not been shown that
Mr. Hourani, although formal owner of CIOC, had made any contribution, that he
was running any risk and exercised actual control over the company, the Tribunal
decided to deny jurisdiction, on the basis that CIOC was not “an investment of [a
U.S.] national” as required by Article VI(8) of the BIT.

The Tribunal’s conclusion presents a difficulty, which has been emphasized by
Applicant: Article I(1)(a) of the BIT defines investment as every kind of
investment “owned or controlled” by a national or a company of the other Party.
In Applicant’s opinion, since the Tribunal found that Mr. Hourani was the owner
of 92% of the share capital of CIOC, the necessary consequence should be that
such investment meets the definition of Article I(1)(a) (“owned or controlled” by
a U.S. national) and that CIOC must be deemed to be an investment of a U.S.
national for the purposes of Article VI(8).

The Tribunal confronted this difficulty by reiterating that the term investment has
an inherent meaning identified by tribunals and commentators which includes the
existence of a contribution over a period of time and requires some degree of risk.
Accordingly, the Tribunal considered that the term “investment” in Article I(1)(a)
of the BIT denoted “an economic arrangement requiring a contribution to make a
profit and thus involving some degree of risk?!"

The Committee acknowledges that the term “investment”, as used in the
Convention and in different BITs, has been the object of much debate, and that
there is no unanimous opinion on the precise requirements which an investment
must meet. However, the position adopted by the Tribunal — that an investment
requires a contribution by the investor and some degree of risk — finds support in
many previous awards and in legal doctrine. This position is therefore clearly
tenable and the Award cannot on this point be considered to be based on a
manifest excess of powers.

Although the Tribunal accepted that Mr. Hourani owned an equity participation in
CIOC, and that equity is among the categories of assets specifically mentioned as
investments in Article I(1)(a), it concluded that Mr. Hourani’s equity stake failed
to qualify as an investment for the purposes of the foreign nationality test, because
Mr. Hourani’s investment in CIOC did not meet the inherent characteristics of an
investment: a contribution over a period of time and the assumption of some
degree of risk'!,

Summing up, the Tribunal decided to deny CIOC’s standing, because it had not
been shown that Mr. Hourani had made any contribution, that he had assumed any
risk and that he exerted actual control. The fact that Mr. Hourani had not paid
more than a negligible purchase price for the shares (without plausible economic

"8 See Award, at 424-456.
' Award, at 360.
"8 Tbidem.

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

justification) undoubtedly also influenced the Tribunal’s decision. To deny
jurisdiction, the Tribunal thus chose the route of attaching an inherent meaning to
the concept of “investment”, as used in Article VI(8), and of finding that
Mr. Hourani had failed to prove the elements which constitute such inherent
meaning.

For annulment purposes a mere divergence of opinion or of interpretation between
the committee and the tribunal is irrelevant. An award should not be annulled if
the tribunal’s approach is reasonable or tenable, even if the committee’s opinion
diverges from that of the tribunal. Bearing this principle in mind, the Committee
concludes that the Tribunal’s findings are tenable, and that the Award does not
meet the high threshold required for annulment because of manifest excess of
powers.

The Comitteee also notes that the Tribunal’s findings are not unprecedented. In
Romak, which also denied jurisdiction, the Tribunal based its finding on the
argument that the term investment had an inherent meaning which included the
existence of

“contribution that extends over a certain period of time and that involves
some risk”!"°.

The Committee thus finds no basis for considering that the Tribunal failed to
apply the applicable law or misapplied it in such egregious manner as to amount
to disregard of that law. The Committee must therefore reject Applicant’s request
for annulment for manifest excess of powers.

C. Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Applicant also argues that the Award should be annulled because the Tribunal
seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure.

The Committee has already summarized its understanding of this ground of
annulment: tribunals can sua sponte raise legal arguments which had not been
pleaded, without having to revert to the parties, and without violating the parties’
right to be heard, provided that the tribunal’s arguments can be fitted within the
legal framework argued during the procedure!!”,

a. Applicant’s Position

Applicant points out that the Tribunal based its conclusion not on Article 25 of the
Convention, the framework discussed by the parties, but on the notion of
“investment” contained in Articles I(1)(a) and VI(8) of the BIT. In Applicant’s
submission, the Tribunal did so ex officio, without giving the parties the
opportunity to state their views, and moreover upon grounds that were not
advanced by Respondent, nor shared by the Tribunal with Claimant during the

"© Romak, at 207.
"7 See para. 94 supra.

172.

173.

174.

175.

176.

proceedings. In so doing, the Tribunal deprived Claimant of its right to be
heard'!®,

b. Respondent’s Position

Respondent disagrees: in its opinion the nationality test was in debate and in any
event the Tribunal was empowered to reformulate or even raise new jurisdictional
arguments, provided they remained within the legal framework!!”,

c. The Committee’s Findings

The Committee notes that the Tribunal declined jurisdiction on the basis that
Claimant had not proved that CIOC was an investment of the U.S. citizen
Mr. Hourani, as required by Article VI(8) of the BIT. The question is thus
whether the Tribunal, in reaching this conclusion, went beyond the framework of
the dispute and ruled on a matter on which Claimant had not had a reasonable
opportunity to comment.

(i) The Framework of the Dispute

The issue of whether CIOC was an investment under Article VI(8) of the BIT was
raised by Claimant for the first time. Claimant’s initial contention in the arbitral
proceeding was that its claims complied with the conditions in Article 25 of the
Convention as well as Article VI(8) of the BIT. In its Memorial, Claimant
specifically averred that

“it is therefore clear that the requirements of Article VI(8) of the Treaty, and
thus Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, are satisfied”!””.

In a subsequent memorial, Claimant stated that it had an investment in
Kazakhstan that met the definition of “investment” in both the BIT and the ICSID
Convention'?!. Claimant added that, since Respondent did not deny that CIOC
had made an investment that met the definition in the BIT and the requirement of

the ICSID Convention, Claimant did not have to dwell further on this subject!”*,

Respondent’s comments on the jurisdictional aspects mainly related to the ICSID
Convention, arguing that Mr. Hourani had made no contribution of money or

assets of any significance and had taken no risk. Moreover he had not made any
bona fides investment!>, However, Respondent also added'*:

“Such behavior is not of the sort the Convention and the Treaty [i.e. the
BIT] were intended to protect and this Tribunal should not condone it by
granting jurisdiction in this case”.

"SCI, at 157.

"RIL, at 94.

0 Memorial of May 14, 2009, at 42.

! Reply Memorial of July 31, 2010, the heading before 130.

'2 Reply Memorial, at 147.

'° Counter-Memorial of December 22, 2009, at 40, and Rejoinder of December 14, 2010, at 44.
'4 Rejoinder of December 14, 2010, at 44.

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

1s

(ii) The Committee’s Decision

Since Article VI(8) of the BIT contains the agreement between the United States
and Kazakhstan which is necessary to give effect to the nationality exception in
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, there is a very close link between both
provisions. Whilst it is true that the debate between the parties essentially
concerned the issue whether the Tribunal had jurisdiction under Article 25 of the
Convention, it is equally accurate that both parties also referred to the BIT.

The Committee thus finds that the basis of Claimant’s claims was the existence of
an investment protected under Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention in conjunction
with Article VI(8) of the BIT. Although Respondent mainly relied on arguments
derived from Article 25 of the Convention, it must have been clear to Claimant
that the provisions of the Convention and the BIT were closely linked and in
reality inseparable as far as the scope of protection of investments was concerned.
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention and Article VI(8) of the BIT were therefore
both part of the legal framework on the basis of which the jurisdictional issue
would be examined and decided by the Tribunal.

It follows that the Tribunal’s reasoning in the Award, which was mainly based on
Article VI(8) of the BIT, did not involve any new element extraneous to the
parties’ debate in their submissions to the Tribunal. On the contrary, Claimant had
every reason to expect that Article VI(8) of the BIT would be part of the relevant
legal considerations in the case and Claimant must be considered to have had full
opportunity to comment on the repercussions of Article VI(8) in its submissions to
the Tribunal.

The Committee thus concludes that the Tribunal’s reasoning never went beyond
the legal framework defined by the parties, and that Claimant’s right to be heard
remained unaffected.

D. Failure to State Reasons

a. The Parties’ Positions

Applicant argues that the Award should also be annulled, because the Tribunal
failed to state reasons for its foreign nationality test.

In Applicant’s view, the Tribunal violated Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention by
basing its findings on incomprehensible reasoning, tantamount to a failure to state
reasons: in reaching its conclusion the Tribunal jumped from one notion to
another, from one treaty to another and from one provision to another, in a manner
that defies common sense’”».

The Respondent disagrees: in its opinion the reasoning of the Tribunal on foreign
nationality is clear, precise and logically developed!”

CI, at 179.

PORT, at 172.

184.

185.

186.

187.

b. The Committee’s Findings

The Tribunal started its Award with sections devoted to the interpretation of
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention and Article VI(8) of the BIT and to the burden
of proof. In a subsequent section, the Tribunal analyzed the question: “Does
Claimant satisfy the requirements of Article VI(8) of the BIT?” The Tribunal then
used separate sub-sections to discuss the nationality of Mr. Hourani, the
ownership or control of CIOC and the question whether CIOC was an investment
of Mr. Hourani. In each of the sections and sub-sections, the Tribunal summarized
the parties’ positions, and explained its own conclusions, quoting precedents and
authorities in support.

  

It is not the Committee’s task to judge the quality or the persuasiveness of the
Tribunal’s reasoning. The Convention requires arbitrators to state reasons for their
decisions, but the requirement is satisfied if the reasoning can be followed. Only
reasons considered as contradictory or frivolous can be equated to a failure to state
reasons and may lead committees to the setting aside of the award!?’,

In the present case, the Committee considers that there would be no difficulty for
a normal reader of the Award to understand the Tribunal’s arguments and to
follow its line of reasoning leading up to its final conclusions. Nor can the
Committee find the reasoning in any way contradictory or frivolous.

The Committee thus concludes that the reasoning provided by the Tribunal is
adequate, complies with the requirement of Article 52(2)(e) and does not justify
annulment of the Award.

"27 See para. 102 supra.

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

VI. DEFINITION OF CONTROL AND INVESTMENT

The Committee has analyzed in the previous section Applicant’s first ground for
annulment: the foreign nationality test.

The second ground for annulment alleged by Applicant relates to the definition
and application by the Tribunal of the “control” and “investment” requirements
set forth in the BIT and in the Convention. This second ground will be analyzed in
this section.

APPLICANT’S POSITION

Applicant contends that the Tribunal made two erroneous interpretations, and
subsequent applications, of the notions of (A.) “ownership or control” and
(B.) “investment”, which constituted separate violations.

A. Ownership or Control

During the hearing before the Committee, counsel for Applicant summarized
Applicant’s argument as follows'?*: the Tribunal accepted that Mr. Hourani was
owner of 92% of the share capital of CIOC, and that he thus satisfied the
nationality test of Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention; but then the Tribunal went
on to state that Claimant had failed to discharge its burden of proof with regard to
the fact that CIOC was an investment of a U.S. national, as required by Article
VI(8) of the BIT. In holding this and in rejecting jurisdiction, the Tribunal, in
Applicant’s opinion, committed two independent violations of Articles 52(1)(b),
(d) and (e) of the Convention each of which constitutes an excess of power and
warrants annulment:

- The first is that the Tribunal additionally required that control be
interpreted as actual control, majority shareholding not being sufficient to
comply with this requirement.

- The second is that the Tribunal decided to add a further requirement, that
of control, which is not referred to in Article VI(8).

First, the Tribunal committed independent breaches of these Articles when setting
the standard of “ownership or control”, since from the wording of Article I(1)(a)
of the BIT it is clear that this provision requires either “ownership” or “control”.
But the Tribunal came to the conclusion that, by application of Article 25(2)(b) of
the Convention, the ownership requirement could be dispensed with, and
disregarded the fact that Mr. Hourani was the undisputed legal owner of a 92%
stake in CIOC and could thus control ClOc’”.

Furthermore, the Tribunal found the requirement of “control” to mean “actual
control”, despite its contrary prior holding that majority ownership implies “a
presumption of control”. This “actual control” test finds no basis in the BIT.

PS HT p. 11 et seq.
CL, at 186.

194.

195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

Article I(1)(a) of the BIT in fact only requires formal control — conveyed by
ownership — by a U.S. national, as opposed to actual control. This self-created
criterion of “actual control” is contrary to every single case where a similarly
worded U.S. BIT has been invoked’.

Applicant thus considers that the Tribunal acted in manifest excess of powers by
failing to apply both the very text of the BIT and the Vienna Convention and by
establishing that “control” means “actual control”, and this, in Applicant’s
opinion, warrants in itself the annulment of the Award?!

Additionally the Tribunal did establish the “actual control” test without the parties
having advanced this argument. The Tribunal did so at its own instigation, without
ever giving CIOC the opportunity to comment',

Secondly, the Tribunal committed further independent breaches of Articles
52(1)(b), (d) and (e) of the Convention when applying its flawed “actual control”
test. Notably, the Tribunal violated Article 52(1)(d) by failing to reverse the
burden of proof from Claimant to Respondent and by stating that Claimant had
the burden of proof to demonstrate that Mr. Hourani exercised “actual control” 33,

Applicant also considers that the Tribunal failed to explain why the evidence
submitted by CIOC was insufficient to establish that Mr. Hourani exercised
“actual control” over CIOC. The Tribunal drew a general negative inference from
the withdrawal of documents previously submitted by CIOC, which affected
Claimant’s credibility in the proceedings. In doing so, the Tribunal rendered an
Award the reasoning of which the reader cannot follow, but which also constitutes
a manifest excess of powers and a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure! .

B. Investment

Applicant further considers that the Tribunal, in examining the meaning of the
term “investment” under Article I(1)(a) of the BIT, failed to apply or alternatively
manifestly erred in the application of the definition of “investment”, in a manner
that constitutes multiple independent violations of Article 52(1)(b) of the
Convention. The Tribunal, instead of applying the broad and clear definition of
“investment” provided for in the BIT, as was done in other cases involving a U.S.
BIT, manifestly disregarded the BIT’s express provisions and embarked on a

we - ces 9 5 od 3
mission to redefine the term “investment restrictively! -

The Tribunal came to the conclusion that “investment” denotes an economic
arrangement requiring a contribution to make a profit and thus involving some
degree of risk. In doing so, the Tribunal disregarded or alternatively grossly

misapplied the BIT and the Vienna Convention, by importing into the definition
of the term investment the notions of contribution and risk, as developed by other

CT, at 189.
S' CT, at 198.
2 CT, at 199.
'S CT, at 203.
CT, at 212.
SCT, at 220.

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

205.

tribunals, not in relation to the BIT, but to the ICSID Convention. In Applicant’s
opinion, these acts of the Tribunal constitute a manifest excess of powers |*°,

Moreover the Tribunal established the meaning of the term investment under
Article I(1)(a) of the BIT ex officio, without asking the parties for their views —
which constitutes an Article 52(1)(d) violation’. Applicant accepts that in the
course of the arbitration, the parties debated the notion of investment under the
ICSID Convention — but never under the BIT'*. The Tribunal’s failure to first
approach the parties on the question of the definition of investment in the BIT is a
serious departure from the legal framework established by the parties. Applicant
regards this failure as a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure'*?.

Applicant finally argues that the Award should be annulled for violation of Article
52(1)(e) of the Convention, for failure to state reasons in relation to the definition
and application of the term investment!*°.

RESPONDENT’S POSITION

Respondent disagrees with Applicant’s contentions, both as regards ownership or
control and as regards the definition of investment.

A. Ownership or Control

Respondent argues that Applicant’s assertion that the Tribunal could simply have
dispensed with an assessment of the control requirement under Article 25(2)(b) is
wrong and cannot constitute a basis for annulment: the requirement of control
must be considered objectively, independently from the relevant BIT’s agreement
on foreign nationality '*!.

Thus Applicant’s argument that since the BIT required “ownership or control”
and “ownership” had been established, the Tribunal could have dispensed with an
assessment of the alternative control requirement simply ignores the objective
outer limit set out in the Convention itself. Even if ownership had been
conclusively established, this would not have dispensed the Tribunal from
assessing whether the objective, outer limit of control under Article 25(2)(b) of
the Convention was respected.

Respondent denies Applicant’s contention that the Tribunal did not define actual
control on the basis of the arguments advanced by the parties. Actual control, as
compared with legal control, had been amply debated by the parties in the context
of Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention. Consequently, the Tribunal did not violate
CIOC’s right to be heard on the interpretation of the requirement of control nor

6 CT, at 229.
ST CT, at 232.
"8 CTI, at 239.
' CTL, at 240.
CT, at 235.
“RT at 181.

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

did it manifestly exceed its powers in requiring that actual control be established
for this purpose aa

Respondent further alleges that the Tribunal did not exceed — let alone manifestly
exceed — its powers, nor did the Tribunal violate any rule of procedure by
requiring that Claimant establish Mr. Hourani’s control of CIOC in order to

benefit from his U.S. nationality for the purpose of ICSID jurisdiction '“*,

Applicant also argues that the Tribunal failed to state reasons when setting the
standard of “ownership or control”. However, what the Tribunal concluded is that
the definition of foreign control in the BIT could not go beyond the “outer limits”
established in Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, and thus control needed to be
proven’.

In sum, with respect to the Tribunal’s interpretation and application of the control
requirement under Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, Applicant is unable to
establish manifest excess of powers, violation of a procedural rule or deficiency in
the analysis, reasoning and conclusions of the Tribunal that would warrant
annulment.

B. Investment

Respondent also denies that the Tribunal exceeded its powers by manifestly
disregarding the BIT’s express provisions for interpreting the term investment.
The Tribunal held that the inherent meaning of the term investment included the
existence of a contribution over a period of time and required some degree of risk.
Respondent submits that from the Tribunal’s sequential and reasoned analysis it is
clear that it did not disregard Article I(1)(a) of the BIT. Rather, the Tribunal
logically and methodically interpreted this provision. Consequently, Applicant’s
claim that the Tribunal exceeded its power by failing to apply or by grossly
misapplying the definition of investment under Article I(1)(a) must fail!®,
Applicant’s second argument, that the Tribunal exceeded its power by
“importing” into the definition of investment under the BIT the notions of
contribution and risk must also be rejected’. In addition to the Tribunal in this
case, a number of other investment treaty tribunals have, despite broad
formulations of the term “investment” contained in the respective BITs, found that
there is an intrinsic or objective meaning of the term, which is generally linked to
the requirements of contribution, risk and duration of the investment, and which
must be complied with in order to qualify as a protected investment!*’,

Respondent adds that the question of the inherent meaning of investment for the
purposes of CIOC’s foreign nationality test was debated by the parties, and the
parties’ respective positions were taken into account by the Tribunal in its

‘RT, at 201.
SRI, at 216.
“4 RIL, at 124.
“SRI at 231.
“ORT, at 234.
“TRI, at 250.

212.

213.

214.

215.

decision'*, In any event, the Tribunal had the power to interpret the BIT
definition of investment without first submitting its interpretation to the parties.

Applicant’s third argument is that the Award must be annulled on the ground that
the Tribunal failed to state reasons in relation to the definition and application of
the term investment under the BIT. The Respondent disagrees: the Tribunal
provided ample and detailed reasons in 15 paragraphs as to how it reached its
conclusion on the definition of investment under the BIT and supported those
reasons with numerous cases and commentaries. Under the guise of an alleged
failure to state reasons, Applicant is in fact criticizing the Tribunal’s reasoning
itself ™.

The Tribunal also explained in great detail why it considered that Mr. Hourani had
made no “investment” in CIOC: the ownership of shares was not in itself
sufficient to establish the existence of a protected investment under the BIT and
did not dispense CIOC of its burden of establishing the existence of an economic
arrangement requiring a contribution to make profit and thus involving some
degree of risk'*?,

Respondent finally points out that it is a well-established principle that
committees cannot reassess the probative value of the evidence in the record as if
they were a court of appeal. In short, Applicant may dislike the Tribunal’s
analysis of the evidence and subsequent conclusions but is unable to show how
the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its decision. Applicant’s claim for
annulment on this ground must be rejected'*!,

THE COMMITTEE’S DECISION
A. Introduction

The Two Alleged Violations

Applicant alleges that the Tribunal committed two independent violations, when
in its Award it analyzed the “ownership or control” requirement and then added a
self-invented additional requirement that there be an “investment of
Mr. Hourani”:

- The Tribunal violated the “ownership or control” requirement established
in Article I(1)(a) for two reasons: (i) because it required actual control,
when formal control was sufficient, and disregarded that Mr. Hourani
was owner of 92% of the share capital of CIOC and did hold formal
control; and (ii) because it put the burden of proving actual control on
CIOC.

- The Tribunal also failed to apply the definition of “investment” set forth
in Article I(1)(a) of the BIT.

“SRI, at 258.
“RI, at 261.
‘ORT, at 263.
SIRI, at 265.

40

216.

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

In Applicant’s opinion the Tribunal’s decisions gave rise to a manifest excess of
powers, serious departures from fundamental rules of procedure and a failure to
state reasons.

Respondent disagrees and denies that any of the alleged violations occurred.

Analysis of the Tribunal’s Findings

The starting point for the analysis of CIOC’s allegation must be the factual
context established by the Tribunal. After weighing the available evidence it
observed that

“[a] putative transaction to pay USD 6,500 for 92% for an enterprise into
which over USD 10 million have been invested and for which later a relief
of over USD 1 billion is sought calls for explanation and justification”.

Another important element in the Tribunal’s evaluation of the evidence, was the
withdrawal by CIOC of certain documents previously submitted:

. while the allegedly forged documents were withdrawn by Claimant
during the hearing (C-162, C-175, C-238, C-239, C-240, Aliyev 25; see Tr,
day 6, pp. 228-229), and therefore the Tribunal will not rely on them, and
while the Tribunal sees no indication that counsel for Claimant were aware
of any doubts regarding these documents, the Tribunal cannot overlook that
their submission and later withdrawal throw a doubt on Claimant’s
credibility. This has a bearing on the Tribunal’s evidentiary evaluation of the
fact that Claimant did not provide any documents showing the exercise of

effective control by Devincci Hourani”'™.

Against this evidentiary and factual background, the Tribunal reviewed CIOC’s
standing and came to the following conclusions:

- CIOC, a Kazakh company, is only authorized to institute ICSID
arbitration against the Republic of Kazakhstan if it can prove that it is an
investment of a U.S. national, as required by Article VI(8) of the BIT.

- For the purposes of the BIT, investments include equity holdings owned
or controlled by U.S. nationals [Article I(1)(a)].

- There is evidence which proves that Mr. Hourani was the owner of 92%
of the capital of CIOC.

The Tribunal established that it lacked jurisdiction to adjudicate Claimant’s claims
because CIOC did not meet the Article VI(8) test for two independent reasons.

The first reason is that Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention requires control, and the
existence of control of the local company represents an outer limit, which
Contracting States cannot disregard. The Tribunal found that “control” should be
understood in this context as “actual control” and considered that CIOC had been

' Award, at 437.
'SS Award, at 405.

41

222.

223.

224.

225.

unable to prove that it was actually controlled by Mr. Hourani. On this point the
Tribunal concluded:

“Thus, there is not sufficient evidence of exercise of actual control over
CIOC by Devincci Hourani. In view of the above considerations, the
Tribunal concludes that Claimant has not provided sufficient proof for
control as required by Art. 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention .... However,
as Article I(1)(a) of the BIT requires ownership or control of an investment
and, based on indirect evidence, Claimant could be regarded as owned by
Devincci Hourani, a U.S. national, the Tribunal moves now to analyse
further conditions for treating CIOC as a U.S. national under the BIT”'™.

 

The second reason is that Article VI(8) of the BIT refers to an investment of a
USS. national. The Tribunal has found that investment has an inherent meaning,
which requires the investor to make a certain contribution and assume a certain
tisk, and that CIOC has been unable to prove that Mr. Hourani met this test. The
conclusion reached with regard to absence of control was as follows:

“Claimant insisted throughout the proceedings that it presented all necessary
evidence to prove that the Tribunal has jurisdiction. The Tribunal disagrees.
Claimant failed to discharge its burden of proof with regard to the fact that
CIOC was an investment of U.S. national (Devincci Hourani) as required by
Article VI(8) of the BIT”'®.

It is important to bear in mind that in the Tribunal’s analysis the two requirements
are cumulative: if CIOC fails to prove that it is controlled by Mr. Hourani or that
Mr. Hourani has made an investment by way of contribution and assumption of
tisk, the necessary result will be dismissal of the claim for lack of jurisdiction.

Since the inexistence of an investment by Mr. Hourani is the main reason for the
Tribunal’s decision, the Committee will analyze this requirement in first place [B)
infra]. Thereafter, the Committee will refer to the control requirement [C) infra].

B. The Requirement That CIOC Be an Investment of Mr. Hourani

CIOC claims that the Tribunal, in interpreting the term “investment” used in
Articles I(1)(a) and VI(8) of the BIT and concluding that CIOC failed to establish
that it was an investment of Mr. Hourani

- manifestly exceeded its powers,
- seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure, and
- failed to state reasons for its conclusion.

'S4 Award, at 407; emphasis in the original.
8S Award, at 457.

42

226.

227.

228.

229.

230.

231.

a. Manifest Excess of Powers

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Tribunal based its interpretation of the term “investment” on its ordinary
meaning, in light of the object and purpose of the BIT, as required by Article 31
of the Vienna Convention. The Tribunal first looked at dictionary definitions of
investment to ascertain its ordinary meaning. Then it looked at the preamble of the
BIT, in which the parties refer to investment as a “flow of private capital” from
one contracting state to the other. The Tribunal noted that Article I(1)(a) of the
BIT defines investment from the perspective of assets to be protected, but that the
protection is not granted to any formally held asset, but only to assets which result
from such a flow of capital. From this the Tribunal induced that the existence of a
contribution is a prerequisite to the protection of the Bir',

The Tribunal also indicated that the origin of the capital invested was immaterial
for jurisdictional purposes. However, the Tribunal insisted that

“there still needs to be some economic link between that capital and the
purported investor that enables the Tribunal to find that a given investment is

an investment of that particular investor”!*”.

The Tribunal confirmed its interpretation of the term “investment” with the
drafting history of the U.S. model BITs. It cited the 2004 U.S. model BIT, which
changed the circular definition of investment to

“every asset ... that has the characteristics of an investment, including such
characteristics as the commitment of capital or other resources, the
expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk”!**.

The Tribunal referred to Kenneth Vandevelde, the leading authority on U.S. BITs,
who noted that

“the 2004 U.S. Model BIT continues the U.S. practice of limiting investment
to those assets that have the character of an investment”!”’.

Based on the above, the Tribunal held that the inherent meaning of the term
investment — as used in Articles I(1)(a) and VI(8) of the BIT — requires the
existence of a contribution over a period of time and some degree of risk'®,

The Tribunal then applied this finding to the present case, concluding that
Mr. Hourani’s formal ownership of a 92% equity stake in CIOC is insufficient; for
Mr. Hourani to hold an investment, he must also prove that he made a

8° Award, at 351.

ST Award, at 355.

‘SS RLA 4, Article 1.

‘8° K. Vandevelde: “U.S. International Investment Agreements”, 2009, at 122; RLA 5.
'® Award, at 360.

43

232.

233.

234.

235.

236.

237.

contribution to the company and that he assumed some risk (citing the Romak
decision!*!).

Applicant’s Disagreement
Applicant disagrees with the Tribunal’s argument.

It alleges that the Tribunal disregarded the fact that the BIT is a lex specialis:
instead of establishing the meaning of investment included in Article I(1)(a) of the
BIT by examining its proper context, the Tribunal construed its meaning pursuant
to the Convention, by importing into the definition of investment under the BIT
the notions of contribution and risk developed by tribunals in relation to Article
25 of the Convention’.

 

The Committee’s Decision

The Tribunal’s main finding is that the term “investment”, as used in Article VI(8)
of the BIT, has an inherent meaning, which requires contribution and risk
assumption by the investor — two elements which Mr. Hourani was unable to
prove.

ICSID Tribunals have analyzed the term investment predominantly in the context
of Article 25 of the Convention. A number of tribunals have reached the
conclusion that the existence of an investment requires some inherent
characteristics. While the precise definition of such characteristics has been the
object of debate, it is commonly accepted that contribution and risk assumption
form part of the core elements which characterize an investment'®.

In the present case, the Tribunal decided to extend the inherent meaning of
investment, developed in the context of Article 25 of the Convention, to Article
VI(8) of the BIT, a provision which is intimately linked with and includes a cross-
reference to Article 25(2)(b). The Tribunal’s decision is not unreasonable: if the
mere holding of equity, without contribution or risk, is not to be considered an
investment for obtaining jurisdiction under Article 25(1), it seems reasonable that
the same factual situation, but in the circumstances described in Article VI(8),
should produce the same result.

The Committee has already established

- that an award can be annulled if the arbitrators have manifestly exceeded
their powers by totally disregarding the law, or by grounding their award
on a law other than the applicable law,

- that misinterpretation or misapplication of the proper law, even if serious,
does not justify annulment'®; and

‘S| Award, at 360; Romak, at 207.

' CT, at 228.

‘6 Schreuer: “The ICSID Convention: A Commentary” (CUP 2ed.), 2010, p. 128, at 153.
't See para. 78 supra.

6s

See para. 79 supra.

44

238.

239.

240.

241.

242.

243.

244.

- that only in exceptional circumstances a gross or egregious error of law,
acknowledged as such by any reasonable person, could be construed to
amount to failure to apply the proper law 166.

Measured against that standard, the Tribunal’s finding that the inherent meaning
of investment requires a contribution and some assumption of risk, does not
justify the annulment of the Award.

b. Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Applicant alleges that the Tribunal interpreted and applied the term investment ex
officio, without asking the parties for their views. Hence, by depriving CIOC of its
right to be heard, the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure'®,

Applicant’s allegation cannot succeed, for the same reasons as those already
established supra'®: CIOC argued its standing based on a legal framework which
comprised Articles 25(2)(b) of the Convention and VI(8) of the BIT and
specifically pointed out that the requirements of both these Articles were satisfied.
Respondent also noted that CIOC’s behaviour was not of the sort the Convention
and the BIT were intended to protect.

It follows that Article V1(8) of the BIT was part of the relevant legal framework
on which Claimant could be expected to comment if it wished its arguments to be
taken into account by the Tribunal.

The Committee thus concludes that Claimant was not deprived of its right to be
heard and that there was no breach of a fundamental rule of procedure.

ec. Failure to State Reasons

Applicant also seeks annulment of the Award on the ground of the Tribunal’s
alleged failure to state reasons for its definition of investment. Applicant
specifically avers that the Tribunal failed to explain why Mr. Hourani, despite his
ownership of the shares in CIOC, was not considered to have made an investment
in that company!®,

The Committee agrees with Applicant that the question why Mr. Hourani, despite
being the owner of a majority stake in CIOC, did not meet the Article VI(8) test,
is a crucial question in this case. The Award provides the following reasoning for
the finding on this point:

- Para. 361 gives the Tribunal’s interpretation of the term investment as
used in Article V1I(8): investment is “an economic arrangement requiring
a contribution to make profit and thus involving some degree of risk”.

'6 See para. 81 supra.
‘CT, at 232.

'8 See paras. 173-180.
' CT at 235-236.

45

245.

246.

247.

248.

249.

- Para. 455 records the factual findings with regard to Mr. Hourani’s
investment: although he acquired “formal ownership”, “no plausible
economic motive was given to explain the negligible purchase price” and
“no evidence was presented of a contribution of any kind or any risk
undertaken” by him; “there was no capital flow between him and CIOC
that contributed anything to the business venture operated by CIOC”.

- Para. 457 draws the conclusion: “Claimant failed to discharge its burden
of proof with regard to the fact that CIOC was an investment” of
Mr. Hourani.

The Committee has already established in which cases deficiencies in the
reasoning can lead to the setting aside of awards: if the reasoning can be followed
and understood by a reader, the award should stand, while contradictory or
frivolous reasons will lead to annulment!”°. On the other hand, it is not the
Committee’s role to judge the quality or persuasiveness of the Tribunal’s
argumentation.

Applying this threshold, the Committee finds that the Award has provided
sufficient reasoning and cannot be annulled for this cause.

The Requirement That CIOC Be Controlled by Mr. Hourami

The Tribunal established a second (and additional) reason why CIOC failed to
meet the standing requirements necessary to file an ICSID arbitration: Article
25(2)(b) of the Convention requires foreign control of the local corporation, the
existence of such control represents an outer limit and is a requirement that cannot
be replaced by an agreement'”!, and Mr. Hourani was unable to prove that he
actually controlled CIOC 2.

Applicant argues that the Tribunal’s findings with regard to control should lead to
annulment, under Article 52(1) of the Convention, for two separate reasons:

- First, because Article I(1)(a) of the BIT requires either “ownership” or
“control”, and in violation of that rule the Tribunal established an actual
control test [(a) infra].

- Second, because the Tribunal, when applying this test, failed to reverse
the burden of proof from CIOC to Respondent and stated that CIOC had
the burden of proof [(b) infra].

a. The Actual Control Test
The Tribunal’s findings with regard to control can be summarized as follows:
- Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention requires foreign control, and this

requirement represents an outer limit to ICSID jurisdiction; although
Article I(1)(a) of the BIT defines investments as those “owned or

"7 See para. 102 supra.
' Award at 336.
'® Award at 407.

46

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

controlled” by nationals or companies of the other Party, Article 25(2)(b)
establishes control as a necessary requirement!”*,

- Control means actual control, and legal capacity to control a company,
without evidence of actual control, is therefore not sufficient ‘".

- There is not sufficient evidence that Mr. Hourani exercised actual control
over CIOC’”.

First Finding

The Tribunal’s first finding, that Article 25(2)(b) creates an outer limit, which the
Contracting States must respect, has been accepted by a number of tribunals,
starting with Vacuum Salt:

“The reference in Article 25(2)(b) to "foreign control" necessarily sets an
objective Convention limit beyond which ICSID jurisdiction cannot exist and
parties therefore lack power to invoke same no matter how devoutly they may
have desired to do so”!”*.

Second Finding

The Tribunal’s second finding is that control as used in Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention means actual control, and that a tribunal may investigate the reality to
check whether actual control exists; this also corresponds to a view which is
commonly held.

Under Article 25(2)(b) a local juridical person, to have access to the ICSID
adjudication mechanism, must be under “foreign control”. For these purposes,
control is the capacity of a person or a company to decide the main actions to be
undertaken by a juridical person. Such juridical persons are usually governed by a
corporate body (e.g., the general shareholders meeting), in which decisions are
taken by votes. Control is premised on the right to cast a majority of votes in such
main corporate body.

Control is normally achieved by ownership of a majority stake in the juridical
person, which affords a sufficient number of votes, so that the controller can have
a decisive influence on any decisions or resolutions.

But the owner of the equity may only formally be the owner or can by — tacit or
explicit — agreement transfer actual control to a third party (e.g., the owner can
enter into a fiduciary arrangement with a third party, holding ownership on behalf
of such third party, or he can assign his voting rights to another person). Thus
third parties who are not owners of equity stakes can, by contractual arrangements
with the formal owners, have actual control over juridical persons’.

" Award at 336.
" Award at 407.
"5 Thidem.

7 At 36.

‘7 Control gives rise to a number of additional is

 

ies, like indirect control and joint control by various

persons, which are irrelevant for the present discussion.

47

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

Control is a factual element. The ownership of a majority of the share capital,
granting the capacity to cast a majority of the votes, constitutes circumstantial
evidence of control and even creates a presumption of control. But, when applying
Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention, tribunals may have to establish whether the
presumption of control corresponds to the real situation or, in other words,
whether the formal majority owners of a company also exercise actual control
over the company.

Third Finding

In the present case, the Tribunal weighed the evidence regarding the actual control
of CIOC in the following manner:

- The submission and later withdrawal by Claimant of certain documents
threw “a doubt on Claimant’s credibility”!”*,

- Claimant did not provide any documents showing the exercise of
effective control by Mr. Hourani'”.

- Mr. Hourani, when heard as a witness, based his evidence of control on
his competences under CIOC’s Charter and Incorporation Agreement,
but the Tribunal found that “no evidence was shown that such
competences and control were actually exercised by him’'®°.

In view of the above considerations,

“the Tribunal conclude[d] that Claimant ha[d] not provided sufficient proof
for control as required by Art. 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.”

The Committee has already established that manifest excess of powers in the
application of the law only leads to annulment of an award if the arbitrators totally
disregarded the law, grounded their award on a law other than the applicable law
or committed a gross or egregious error of law'®', A tribunal’s weighing of
evidence and factual findings must stand, except if the errors of fact are so
egregious, or the weighing so irrational, as to constitute independent causes of
annulment.

Measured against these standards, the Tribunal’s findings that Article 25(2)(b)
refers to actual control, and that Mr. Hourani failed to satisfy this requirement,
cannot lead to the annulment of the Award.

Applicant has also argued that in making these findings the Tribunal violated
Articles 52(1)(d) and (e) of the Convention, because it seriously departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure and failed to state reasons. These allegations must
fail, for the reasons already explained in the previous sections!*?,

"8 Award at 405.

'® Tbidem.

‘8 Award, at 406.

'S! See para. 79 supra

182

See paras. 242 and 246 supra.

48

261.

262.

263.

264.

265.

266.

267.

b. The Failure to Reverse the Burden of Proof

Applicant submits that the Tribunal committed a further independent breach, in
this case of Article 52(1)(d) of the Convention, by failing to reverse the burden of
proof from Claimant to Respondent and by stating that Claimant — as opposed to
Respondent — had the burden of proof to demonstrate that Mr. Hourani exercised

actual control over the Kazakh company'®?,

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Tribunal’s findings with regard to the burden of proof can be summarized as
follows:

The starting point of the Tribunal’s investigation was that the parties had
generally agreed

“that Claimant bears the burden of proof to establish that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction over the present dispute”.

The Tribunal then added that

“if majority ownership is shown, such a finding implies a presumption of
control, even though it will have to be examined whether in the present case
this presumption is a sufficient indication of control’”'**.

The Tribunal then analyzed whether Mr. Hourani could be considered as owner of
92% of the equity of CIOC; the Tribunal concluded that certain indirect evidence
appeared to show that Mr. Hourani was an owner of a 92% share in CIOC and
added:

“In view of the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes that jurisdiction
cannot be denied for the mere reason that Claimant has not fully complied
with its burden of proof regarding ownership by the U.S. national, Devincci
Hourani”!*®,

As a next step, the Tribunal analyzed Mr. Hourani’s control of CIOC, stating:

“Again, the starting point for the Tribunal’s examination is that Claimant has
the burden of proof”'*’.

The Tribunal’s final conclusion, after weighing the available evidence, was that
“there is not sufficient evidence of exercise of actual control over CIOC by
Devincci Hourani”'**.

'S CT at 203.
'S Award, at 364.

Award, at 382.
Award, at 396.

'S Award, at 401.
'SS Award, at 407

49

268.

269.

270.

271.

272.

273.

274.

The Committee’s Decision

In accordance with the general rule of evidence actori incumbit probatio it is
CIOC who bears the burden of establishing that the requirements of the applicable
legal tests have been met, since CIOC is the one seeking to benefit from
Mr. Hourani’s U.S. nationality and control. The Committee therefore finds no
reason to question the Award’s initial assumption that “Claimant bears the burden
of proof to establish that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the present dispute” 189.

As a next step, the Tribunal accepted that Mr. Hourani had met his burden of
proving that he was the owner of a 92% stake in CIOC. The Tribunal then added
that, as a general rule, the majority owner of a company must be presumed to
control it, this being a presumption already established in a number of previous
awards.

Having come to that conclusion, the Tribunal decided that, in the circumstances of
the present case, the presumption of control could not be applied in Mr. Hourani’s
favour. Doubts on this matter were already expressed when the presumption was
established (“it will have to be examined whether in the present case this
presumption is a sufficient indication of control”!”’), and the doubts were
confirmed when the Tribunal in its subsequent reasoning unequivocally averred
that, as regards control, “Claimant has the burden of proof”

The Committee finds it appropriate at this juncture to make a few general remarks
on the character and scope of the general presumption that a majority owner of a
company also controls the company. In the Committee’s opinion, this
presumption, which is based on an owner’s normal legal rights under company
law, is valid only as long as there are no special elements which create doubts
about the owner’s actual control and which therefore justify a closer examination
of the facts.

In the present case, the Tribunal first found that already the circumstances of
Mr. Hourani’s acquisition of 92% of the stock in CIOC created doubts about his
role as owner. These doubts were further strengthened by the absence of any
convincing evidence that he had in reality exercised control over CIOC.

The existence of special circumstances justifies in the present case that the
Tribunal deviate from the general presumption that majority ownership of a
company also entails its control. Consequently, in the absence of the presumption,
whether Mr. Hourani controls CIOC is a matter to be proven; and in accordance
with the general rule of actori incumbit probatio it is for Mr. Hourani to do so.

Summing up, the Committee does not find in this respect any violation of Article
52(1)(d) of the Convention which could lead to the annulment of the Award.

'® Award, at 364.
'® Award, at 382.
8" Award, at 401.

50

VII. OBITER DICTUM

275. The Committee will analyze in this section the third ground for annulment alleged
by Applicant, which refers to the Tribunal’s holding in an obiter dictum.

1. APPLICANT’S POSITION

276. Applicant argues that in an obiter dictum the Tribunal used a false translation of
Clause 27.8 of the Contract (No. 954) regarding CIOC’s investment in
Kazakhstan.

277. The Tribunal used the following translation:

.it is hereby agreed that the Contractor is a resident of Lebanon, or in the
event of assignment as a national of the resident country of the assignee, and
therefore the Contractor shall be treated as a resident of Lebanon, or other
country if appropriate, for purposes of the ICSID Convention”'””.

 

278. The correct translation, in Applicant’s opinion, should be the following:

 

it is hereby agreed that the Contractor is a national of Lebanon, or in the
event of an assignment, a national of the country of residence of the
assignee, and the Contractor will accordingly be considered a national of
Lebanon or other relevant country for the purposes of the ICSID
Convention”"”*.

279. Applicant argues that the obiter dictum must be annulled for two reasons:

- First, the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure, because it issued the obiter dictum without first hearing the
parties, thus depriving CIOC of the opportunity to present its case!™*,

- Second, the Tribunal also evidently and manifestly exceeded its powers,
because it disregarded the authoritative Russian version of the Contract
and applied an incorrect translation, without first verifying whether the
English version of this provision was consistent with the authoritative
Russian version'®’. The Tribunal did so in violation of Article 30.2 of the
Contract!”*. In deciding as it did, the Tribunal disregarded the applicable
norm or committed a gross error of law, which constitutes in itself a
manifest excess of power”

CT, at 239.
SCT at 241.
' CTL, at 255.
5 CII, at 257.
°° CTI, at 261.
"7 CII, at 264.

Sl

280.

281.

282.

283.

284.

285.

on

286.

In the course of the hearing before the Committee, Applicant confirmed that —
assuming that the Award was not annulled in toto — it was still requesting that the
obiter dictum itself be annulled'”*.

RESPONDENT’S POSITION

Respondent argues that Applicant’s contentions must fail for the following
199
reasons ~:

First, the obiter dictum character of the observation excludes any possibility of
annulment; it has no impact on the decision of the Tribunal and therefore cannot
be subject to annulment under Article 52 of the Convention.

Second, in any event the grounds for annulment are not present in this case, since
the Tribunal did not breach a fundamental rule of procedure by failing to give
Claimant the opportunity to discuss Clause 27.8, nor did the Tribunal manifestly
exceed its powers by relying on the allegedly wrong version of such clause.

Third, Applicant has misrepresented or misunderstood the meaning of the
Tribunal’s observation.

With respect to Applicant’s allegation that there was a translation error, neither
party ever questioned or criticized the correctness of the translation of Clause
27.8. Consequently, the Tribunal’s reliance on the correctness of the English
version does not constitute an error. Furthermore, the use of the translation now
favoured by Applicant does not affect the meaning of the Tribunal’s obiter
dictum. Any error could not possibly rise to the level of a “manifest” excess of
powers or a “serious” departure from a fundamental rule of procedure”.

THE COMMITTEE’S DECISION

The relevant Section of the Award"! is devoted to the interpretation of Article
25(2)(b) of the Convention, and specifically to the necessity of an agreement
between the parties for a local juridical person to be considered national of
another Contracting State. In its Award, the Tribunal noted that in most of the
previous ICSID proceedings concerning Article 25(2)(b) the agreement was
negotiated directly between the parties or was implied from an ICSID arbitration
clause contained in an investment contract. The Tribunal added:

“In such circumstances, the existence of an express or implied agreement to
treat the locally incorporated company as a foreign national gave that
company standing in the dispute. In the present dispute the investment
contract between the parties (the Contract) contains an ICSID arbitration

'S HT p. 129, 1. 4.
RI, at 266.

2 R IL, at 160.

°°! Section J.IL.3.

52

287.

288.

289.

290.

291.

292.

clause. However, Claimant is relying on the BIT, not the Contract, to
establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction”.

At the end of the same paragraph, the Tribunal inserted the following footnote:

“The Tribunal notes that it does not follow from the Contract that Claimant
can be treated as a national of another Contracting State. The Contract states
that the parties “agreed that the Contractor is a resident of Lebanon, or in
the event of assignment as a national of the resident country of the assignee,
and therefore the Contractor shall be treated as a resident of Lebanon, or
other country if appropriate, for purposes of the ICSID Convention.” (C-4,
Clause 27.8) This original wording of the Contract, initially concluded
between Kazakhstan and CCC, was not addressed in connection with the
transfer of the Contract from CCC to ClOc”””’.

Applicant submits that in making this observation with regard to Clause 27.8 of
the Contract, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and committed a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. Applicant requests the
Committee to annul — if not the Award in toto — at least the footnote.

A. Manifest Excess of Powers

Applicant’s first argument is that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers,
because it relied on an inaccurate translation of the Contract, and not on the
authoritative Russian version.

The translation used by the Tribunal is this:

“... itis hereby agreed that the Contractor is a resident of Lebanon, or in the
event of assignment as a national of the resident country of the assignee, and
therefore the Contractor shall be treated as a resident of Lebanon, or other
country if appropriate, for purposes of the ICSID Convention [...]”7"*.

Applicant avers that the correct translation should be the following:

“... itis hereby agreed that the Contractor is a national of Lebanon, or in the
event of an assignment, a national of the country of residence of the
assignee, and the Contractor will accordingly be considered a national of
Lebanon or other relevant country for the purposes of the ICSID
Convention”.

The basic difference between the two versions is that in the translation used by the
Tribunal the Contractor is treated as a “resident” of Lebanon, or other country if
appropriate, and in the other as a “national” of Lebanon or other relevant country.

2 Award at 330 in fine.
° Egotnote No. 10.
CT, at 239.

5 CL, at 241.

53

293.

294.

295.

296.

297.

298.

299.

300.

Respondent has not agreed to this new translation?” and it is not for this

Committee to establish which of the two translations is more accurate.

Even apart from the fact that Applicant’s allegation concerns a statement in a
footnote without any impact on the outcome of the case, the Committee considers
that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers by relying on a —now
allegedly incorrect — translation, which had been submitted by Claimant itself”.
Since Claimant never drew the Tribunal’s attention to the existence of a mistake
and never submitted a corrected version, the Tribunal cannot be reproached for
having assumed that the translation was accurate.

It is therefore misplaced for Applicant to accuse the Tribunal of having committed
a manifest excess of powers by relying on an English version of the Contract
which Claimant itself had submitted and had never corrected.

B. Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Applicant’s second allegation is that the Tribunal departed from a fundamental
tule of procedure, because CIOC was never given the opportunity to state its case
in relation to the question addressed in the footnote.

This allegation also fails for two reasons.

First, both Parties agree that the footnote inserted in the Award is an obiter
dictum”, i.e. an incidental comment made in connection with the Award. This
means that what is stated in the footnote is unnecessary to support the main
decision, and that it therefore has no precedential value and does not have any
effect as res iudicata. The Tribunal never again referred or alluded to this footnote
in the rest of the document, and its drafting shows that it had no conclusive effect
for the dispositive section of the Award, nor did it affect the Tribunal’s reasoning.

Since obiter dicta are purely incidental to a tribunal’s determination, inclusion of
any such comment in the text of a decision cannot affect the parties’ right to be
heard, which by its very nature only extends to those issues which are actually
adjudicated by the tribunal.

Second, in the present case the obiter dictum falls squarely within the legal
framework established by Claimant in order to prove standing and jurisdiction”.
This framework covers Articles VI(8) of the BIT and 25(2)(b) of the Convention,
and the Tribunal made the statement in the footnote in the course of its
interpretation of the second of these provisions.

oR

On June 5, 2013, CIOC and Mr. Hourani initiated a new ICSID arbitration against
the Republic of Kazakhstan, involving the Contract”!”, A question which may

2 R I, at 278.

2’ Doc. CA 16, which was originally submitted as Doc. C 4 in the underlying arbitration.
8 C I, at 243; R I, at 267.

2 See para. 274 supra.

OR TL, at 162.

54

arise in that proceeding is whether, when applying the Contract, CIOC should be
considered a national of another ICSID Contracting State for the purposes of
access to ICSID jurisdiction. That is a question for the new ICSID tribunal to
determine. Any issue on the meaning and interpretation of the Contract is beyond
the scope of decision of the original ICSID Tribunal (and of this Committee).

55

301.

302.

303.

304.

305.

an

306.

307.

VIII. COSTS

The parties submitted their statements on costs simultaneously on October 15,
2013. Applicant informed the Committee that its total costs incurred in connection
with this annulment proceeding were EUR 600,000 in legal fees plus USD
282,913 in ICSID costs (lodging fee and advances) (these amounts having been
paid in full)?! Subsequently, the Applicant made an advance payment of USD
70,000 on December 24, 2013.

Respondent declared that its legal fees and expenses in connection with this
annulment proceeding were USD 1,758,782 (of which USD 1,158,908 has already
been paid)?"”,

Each party has asked that its legal and arbitration costs be borne by the other
213

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

“... the Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise agree, assess the
expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings, and
shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award”.

Article 52(4) extends the application of this provision to annulment proceedings.

Respondent acknowledges that the parties have the undeniable right to challenge
an award. However, it argues that such right should not be misused in order to
obtain an appeal on the merits. Respondent argues that Applicant’s purpose in
filing the request was to obtain a review on the merits. For this reason, Applicant
should bear the entire costs of the annulment proceedings”"*,

The Committee considers that CIOC’s case was not frivolous and that Applicant
exercised its right to apply for annulment in accordance with Article 52 of the
Convention. In light of the bona fides nature of Applicant’s application for
annulment, the ad hoc Committee considers that Applicant should not bear the
entire costs of the proceedings. Therefore the Committee decides

- that the ICSID fees shall be borne by Applicant and
- that each party shall bear its own legal fees and expenses.

*!! Claimant's Final Statement of Costs of October 15, 2013.
2! Respondent's Final Statement of Costs of October 15, 2013.
23 CII, at 274; RII, at 167.

2!4 Respondent's Final Statement of Costs of October 15, 2013.

56

IX. DECISION

308. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee unanimously decides as follows:

1.

The application of Caratube International Oil Company LLP for annulment
of the Award issued by the Tribunal on June 5, 2012 is dismissed.

Each of the Parties shall bear its own legal fees and expenses, and Caratube
International Oil Company LLP shall bear the direct costs of the proceeding,
comprising the fees and expenses of the Committee and the costs of using
the ICSID facilities, in their entirety.

The stay of enforcement of the Award is declared automatically terminated
in accordance with Rule 54(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

s7

The Ad Hoc Committee

[Signed]

Mr. Juan Fernandez-Armesto

 

President
Date: 18 February 2014
[Signed] [Signed]
Tan Sri Dato Cecil W.M. Abraham Judge Hans Danelius
Member Member

Date: 7 February 2014 Date: 10 February 2014

