International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

Caratube International Oil Company LLP & Mr. Devincci Salah
Hourani

The Claimants

Republic of Kazakhstan
The Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/13/13

 

DECISION ON THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST FOR
PROVISIONAL MEASURES

 

Rendered by the Members of the Arbitral Tribunal
Dr. Laurent Lévy, President
Prof. Laurent Aynés, Arbitrator
Dr. Jacques Salés, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Milanka Kostadinova

Assistant to the Tribunal
Dr. Silja Schaffstein

Date: 4 December 2014

TABLE OF CONTENT

[The Parties oo... cece cece csenesnecececesesenseeesssnesneceteseseseneeeesiaenaeee 4
Il. Procedural History
Il. Relief Sought by the Parties .
A. Relief Sought by the Claimants ..........ccccec cee ceeneeeteeneeeteceeeneneeeaeee 8
B. Relief Sought by the Responden
IV. Position of the Parties
A. The Claimants’ Position
1. The requirements for granting provisional MeasureS............cceeeee 13

a The existence of a right to be preserved.

b. Necessity
c
d

 

 

 
 
 

 

ULQeNnCy see ceceecesseeeecececsceeseesessseseneeeeeecscecessneeesessaeneeeeesaneeasanee

No prejudgment on the merits.

B. The Respondent's Position ....
The requirements for granting provisional measures.
a. Specific and existing rights requiring preservation in the arbitration 20

b. | Urgency and necessity to avoid irreparable harm caused to the
Claimants by the party against whom measures are sought

i. The alleged current or ongoing actions of the Respondent
ii. | The alleged past pattern of conduct of the Respondent..

 
 
 
 

 

 

c. The provisional measures requested must not be too broad........... 26
d. — The provisional measures must not prejudge the merits of the case
26

2. The Claimants’ four individual requests for provisional measures must

be rejected in their entirety 0... cee cece ee cece csesceeseesesseneneeeneneneeeeanee 26
a. The Claimants’ request for disclosure concerning the Websites and
the Protest.........ccccc cece cesses cece cecscecseseesseseseneeeseceessecesesesseseeeeeeee 26
b. | The Claimants’ request for justification of the Respondent's actions
in the NovikOVa CSC oo... .eecece cece cece es cscseteseeececeteeeseneessessssesenenenaneneeanee 27

c. | The Claimants’ request for the omission by the Respondent of any
direct or indirect measures or any action that would aggravate the dispute
and/or jeopardize the integrity and the legitimacy of this arbitration and the
equality of the Parties... eee ceeesseeseeeeecteeeceeecseeeteeeteeeeieeeseeeeteeeetee 27

d. The Claimants’ request with respect to the fundamental principles of
the presumption of innocence and of the prohibition of unlawful attacks on
one’s honour and reputation

Vv. Analysis

  
 

A. Timeliness of the Claimants’ Amended Request.........cccccceeeeeeeeee 28
B. Applicable Legal Framework .........:.cccccee cee eeecsceseneneeecetsseeessneteenens
C. Requirements for Provisional Measures

 

 

1. The existence of rights requiring preservatio:
2. Urgent necessity to avoid an irreparable harm to the Claimants’ rights 38
a. | The Respondent's alleged involvement in the Websites and the

PLOteSt.o..ce cece cs cceneecececscecscseecsssessseeeececssecessnesssessaseesesetsseeeseneseseaaas 42
b. | The Respondent's allegedly unlawful involvement in the Novikova

case before the Lebanese COULS .......c.ccscceee ccc cece eeseseeeseteeneeeeeneeeeatee 44
C.— CONCIUSION oo... ce cece cece esceeeeteeneeeteneeeseseessesseeeeneeenanenecanee 50

3. The recommendation of the requested provisional measures must not
prejudge the Tribunal’s decision on the merits of the case

4. The provisional measures must not be too broad
5. Final observations oo... cece cece eees cee neeee cece sees seesessesseneeeeneeaneeeeanee
VI. De CISION oo. eee cece c ee teneeececececsceesessesseeaeecenanecssenesesesieeneneeenaneeenanee

 

|. THE PARTIES

1. The Claimants are Caratube International Oil Company LLP (“Caratube”), a
Kazakh-incorporated company, and Mr. Devincci Salah Hourani, a U.S. national
(jointly “the Claimants’).

2. The Respondent is the Republic of Kazakhstan (“Kazakhstan” or “the
Respondent’).

Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

3. On 5 June 2013, the Claimants submitted a Request of Arbitration against the
Respondent (the “Request of Arbitration”) to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”).

4. On 28 June 2013, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request of
Arbitration pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, dated 18
March 1965 (the “ICSID Convention’).

5. The Tribunal was constituted on 7 January 2014, in accordance with the ICSID
Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules, and reconstituted on 29 April 2014,
following the disqualification of an arbitrator and the subsequent appointment of
Dr. Jacques Salés.

6. The first session of the Arbitral Tribunal was held on 4 June 2014 at the World
Bank Paris Conference Centre. Thereafter, on 20 June 2014, the President of
the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, together with the Timetable
for the present arbitration in Annex A.

7. The last issue addressed in Procedural Order No. 1 (“Other matters”) recorded
a concern voiced by the Claimants at the end of the first session with respect to
the Respondent’s conduct in the present proceedings. The Claimants expressly
reserved their right to request provisional measures. The relevant paragraph of
Procedural Order No. 1 states as follows:

' Request of Arbitration dated 5 June 2013, para. 1, p. 3.

At the end of the first session, counsel for the Claimants raised
expectations that the Republic of Kazakhstan would not interfere
indirectly in the proceedings, by way of example and without any
intention to be exhaustive, by attempting to intimidate or harass
any person involved or potentially involved, such as fact
witnesses, expert witnesses, or party representatives. Counsel
clarified that Claimants did not apply for a protective order at this
time, but indicated that they might seek such an order from the
Tribunal should the situation change.
On 14 July 2014, the Claimants submitted a Request for Provisional Measures
(the “Request’), together with three witness statements by Messrs. Thomas

Kennedy, Yasser Mahmoud Abbas and Issam Salah Hourani.

On 17 July 2014, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the Claimants’ Request
and invited the Respondent to file a response by 31 July 2014, while at the
same time authorizing the Respondent to request an extension of this time limit
if necessary. In the same letter, the Tribunal also invited the Parties to state (i)
by 24 July 2014, which dates for a possible hearing would be convenient; and
(ii) by 18 August 2014, whether a hearing in the matter would be required.

On 24 July 2014, the Respondent requested a two week extension for the filing
of its response to the Claimants’ Request, namely until 14 August 2014.

On 25 July 2014, the Tribunal granted the Respondent's request and extended
the time limit to file a response until 14 August 2014. At the same time, the
Tribunal informed the Parties that it had reserved Wednesday, 8 October 2014
for a possible hearing with respect to the Claimants’ Request.

On 14 August 2014, the Respondent submitted its Response to Claimants’
Request for Provisional Measures (the “Response”), together with witness
statements of Mr. Andrey Nikolayevich Kravchenko and Ambassador Yerzhan
Khozeyevich Kazykhanov, as well as expert reports of Professors Hadi Slim
and Martha Brill Olcott.

On 15 August 2014, the Claimants requested an extension until 20 August 2014
of the time limit to provide the Parties’ position as to the necessity of a hearing.
On 16 August 2014, the Claimants clarified that they requested such extension
of the time limit not until 20 August 2014, but until 26 August 2014.

20.

21.

22.

On 19 August 2014, the Tribunal granted the Claimants’ request for an
extension until 26 August 2014 for stating their position as to the necessity of a
hearing.

On 26 August 2014, the Claimants requested that a hearing on provisional
measures be held on 8 October 2014. While the Respondent considered “that
the time and cost of a hearing is not warranted with respect to Claimants’
request for provisional measures’, it indicated that it would not object to a
decision by the Tribunal ordering the taking place of such a hearing, while at the
same time “reserving its right to claim reimbursement of the costs incurred by
the Republic with respect to the Claimants’ request”.

On 2 September 2014, the Tribunal, inter alia, confirmed that a hearing on the
Claimants’ Request would take place on 8 October 2014 at the World Bank
Paris Conference Centre.

On 12 September 2014, the Parties submitted a joint tentative hearing schedule
for the hearing on provisional measures.

On 1 October 2014, the Parties provided their lists of attendees at the hearing.

On 8 October 2014, a hearing on the Claimants’ Request took place at the
World Bank Paris Conference Centre. Following the Parties’ opening
statements, the Tribunal heard the Respondent's fact witness, Mr. Andrey
Nikolayevich Kravchenko in his capacity as Deputy Prosecutor General of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, followed by the Respondent's expert witness,
Professor Martha Brill Olcott.

On 10 October 2014, the Claimants submitted amended prayers for relief, in
accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions at the hearing of 8 October 2014.

On 16 October 2014, the Respondent submitted its comments on the
Claimants’ amended prayers for relief, in accordance with the Tribunal’s
instructions at the hearing of 8 October 2014.

On 13 November 2014, the Claimants, due to the urgency of the situation and
having received no acknowledgement of receipt from ICSID, directly transferred
to the Arbitral Tribunal an email, informing the Tribunal that a demonstration

6

23.

24.

25.

26.

had been held on 13 November 2014 in front of Mr. Devincci Hourani’s home in
Mclean Virginia, similar to the one held in London on 19 June 2014. The
Claimants also advised that they would brief the Tribunal of this event in more
detail shortly.

Following up on the 13 November email, by letter dated 16 November 2014, the
Claimants provided details on the latest events, namely a gathering held on the
night of 31 October/1 November 2014 in front of Mr. Devincci Hourani’s home.
In their letter, the Claimants stated that they “will not comment on the timing and
implications of above event that reinforce Claimants’ pending application for
provisional measures so as not to cause delay and open further round of
submissions [...]”. The Claimants also specified that (i) items 2.2 and 2.3 of their
amended prayers for relief should be adjusted in accordance with the latest
developments; (ii) their request for moral damages would be increased in due
course; and (iii) they reserve their right to seek an earlier hearing date and to
waive the Reply Memorial.

By email dated 18 November 2014, the Claimants directly informed the Tribunal
of a further demonstration held on 17 November 2014 outside Kensington
Palace in London, near the Lebanese Embassy, and targeting Messrs. Devincci
and Issam Hourani on the basis of allegations of murder of Ms. Anastasiya
Novikova. The Claimants requested the Tribunal to adjust items 2.2 and 2.3 of
their amended prayers for relief accordingly and reiterated their call for an
urgent ruling on their Request for Provisional Measures.

Also on 18 November 2014, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to comment on
the Claimants’ latest correspondence by no later than 24 November 2014.

On 24 November 2014, the Respondent advised the Tribunal that it had
requested Mr. Andrey Kravchenko, the Deputy General Prosecutor of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, to conduct an enquiry as to whether the Respondent
had any involvement with the events described in the Claimants’
correspondence of 13, 16 and 18 November 2014. The Respondent further
advised that Mr. Kravchenko would be able to submit the results of his enquiry
on or before 28 November 2014 and requested a corresponding extension of
their deadline to provide comments.

27.

28.

29.

30.

The Respondent provided its comments at midnight on 28 November 2014: Mr.
Kravchenko’s enquiries confirmed that the Republic of Kazakhstan “had no
involvement with these new developments” and that the “Claimants have
provided no evidence of any involvement of the Republic with respect thereto”.

On 29 November 2014, the Claimants noted that they “maintain their amended
requests for interim measures”.

On 2 December 2014, the Claimants directly informed the Tribunal that the
Lebanese border authorities had a few hours earlier on that same day “withheld
at the Beirut airport, upon Mr. Devincci Hourani’s arrival, his passport pending
consideration by the Bureau of Intelligence Services of the General Security, on
the basis that his name appears in their system of persons warranting
investigation for murder”. At the time of the Claimants’ email, Mr. Hourani was
still blocked at Beirut airport. The Claimants further specified that, other than
informing the Tribunal of this latest event, they make “no particular requests”,
but “reserve their right to make all appropriate requests once further information
is obtained, the situation is fully assessed, and the decision of the Tribunal on
provisional measures issued [...]”.

RELIEF SOUGHT BY THE PARTIES

A. Relief Sought by the Claimants

In their Request (para. 82, pp. 26-27), the Claimants request the Arbitral
Tribunal to order the Republic of Kazakhstan to:

82.1. Disclose any role it had, whether as direct or indirect
funder or instigator, as well as all associated internal and
external documents (be it emails, letters, memos, notes,
minutes, invoices, instructions and the like), in relation to the two
websites, www.justicefornovikova.com and
www.rakhataliyev.com, the “protests” that occurred in London on
June 19, 2014, including correspondence with the company
Envisage Promotions Ltd. and/or any other company, individual
or the like and to take all measures required for the immediate
closure of these websites;

82.2. Justify the fierceness and timing of the prosecution by
Kazakhstan of the allegations of murder against the Houranis
and the associated lobbying before Lebanese authorities,

31.

including Ministers, prosecutors and ambassadors regarding the
investigations relating to the death of Ms. Anastasya Novikova,
which were closed multiples times;

82.3. Undertake that Kazakhstan will refrain from taking any
direct or indirect measures or any action that would aggravate
the dispute and/or jeopardize the integrity and the legitimacy of
this arbitration and the equality of the Parties, including any
assault or the like or threats and intimidation against the Hourani
family and any potential witnesses and their families, including
Messrs. Issam Hourani, Omar Antar, Kassem Omar, Hussam
Hourani, and Nader Hourani (Mr. Devincci’s cousin) and Ms.
Hiam Hourani (Mr. Devincci’s sister); and

82.4. Undertake that Kazakhstan comply with the fundamental
principle of the presumption of innocence of the Hourani family
and of the prohibition of unlawful attacks on one’s honor and
reputation, and refrain from taking any direct or indirect
measures or any action that would violate these principles,
including but not limited to refraining from directly or indirectly
organizing, instructing, funding, encouraging and/or the like of
protests, articles, books, and websites alleging murder
perpetrated by Hourani family.

At the hearing on provisional measures of 8 October 2014, upon invitation by
the President of the Tribunal (see Transcript, p. 2, lines 5-17), the Claimants
applied to amend their prayer for relief (see Transcript, p. 30, line 3 to p. 31, line
12). On 10 October 2014, the Claimants confirmed the amendment of their
prayers for relief in writing, in accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions at the
close of the hearing (see Transcript, p. 181, lines 14-19), in the following terms:

Claimants request the Arbitral Tribunal to order to Republic of
Kazakhstan to:

2.1. Withdraw as "partie civile" from the criminal proceedings
launched with Ms. Novikova's family on July 24, 2012 against
three (i.e. Messrs. Issam, Devincci and Hussam Hourani) out of
the four (being Mr. Rakhat Aliyev) persons specifically accused
of the murder of Ms. Novikova, and cease any direct or indirect
interference with or before the Lebanese authorities in relation
to these criminal proceedings, unless expressly required by the
Lebanese judges in relation to Kazakhstan's status as "partie
civile," including encouraging directly or indirectly, be it
financially or otherwise, members of the family of Ms. Novikova
or any third parties to initiate, maintain or provide testimonies in
the criminal proceedings against the Hourani family, until a Final
Award is rendered, or to order any other measures that the
Tribunal deems appropriate.

2.2. Proceed with investigations, before all organs of the State,
including the KNB, the Prosecutor General's Office, and the
Ministry of Interior in relation to their direct or indirect
involvement with the websites (www.justicefornovikova.com and
www.rakhataliyev.com) and the demonstrations carried out in
London on June 19, 2014 against the Hourani family and to
report as soon as possible in writing to the Tribunal as to the
conclusions:

- If Kazakhstan confirms that the State has direct or
indirect involvement with the websites and the
demonstrations, ORDER Kazakhstan to take all the
measures for the immediate closing of all the websites;

- If Kazakhstan finds that the State has no direct or
indirect involvement therewith, ORDER Kazakhstan (i) to
make a declaration that Kazakhstan has no involvement
in the websites or the demonstration held in London on
June 19, 2014, and that it condemns these acts as being
in violation of the presumption of innocence, for Mr.
Devincci Hourani to use if and when appropriate and (ii)
to make all necessary investigations to find out who is at
the origin of same, including with Ms. Novikova's family,
who Kazakhstan has access to, and to take every
measure necessary so that the instigators and/or authors
of these websites and demonstrations cease the same;

2.3. Undertake that Kazakhstan will refrain from taking any
direct or indirect measures or any action that would aggravate
the dispute and/or jeopardize the integrity and the legitimacy of
this arbitration and the equality of the Parties, including any
assault or the like or threats and intimidation against the Hourani
family and any potential witnesses and their families, including
Messrs. Kassem Omar, Hussam Hourani, and Nader Hourani
(Mr. Devincci's cousin) and Ms. Hiam Hourani (Mr. Devincci's
sister);

2.4. Undertake that Kazakhstan comply with the fundamental
principle of the presumption of innocence of the Hourani family
and of the prohibition of unlawful attacks on one's honor and
reputation, and refrain from taking any direct or indirect
measures or any action that would violate these principles,
including but not limited to refraining from directly or indirectly
organizing, instructing, funding, encouraging and/or the like of
protests, articles, books, and websites alleging murder
perpetrated by Hourani family; and

2.5. To order any other measures that the Tribunal deems
appropriate, including any variations to the above requested
orders.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

As mentioned in paragraphs 23 and 24 above, the Claimants have requested
the Tribunal to adjust their amended prayers for relief, taking into account the
latest developments reported in the Claimants’ correspondence of 13, 16 and
18 November 2014.

B. Relief Sought by the Respondent

In its Response (paras 100-102, p. 39), the Respondent requests the Arbitral
Tribunal:

[...] to reject in their entirety all four of Claimants’ requests for
provisional measures.

101. The Republic further respectfully requests that it be
awarded the costs it has incurred in connection with Claimants’
Request, including but not limited to legal fees and expenses
and expert fees and expenses.

102. Finally, the Republic hereby expressly reserves the right to
submit any additional defenses, arguments and authorities as it
may deem appropriate to supplement this Response and to
respond to any allegations made by Claimants.
On 16 October, the Respondent commented on the Claimants’ amended
requests for provisional measures (the “Amended Requests’).

Preliminarily, the Respondent objects to the Claimants’ last minute amending of
their requests for provisional measures. For the Respondent, this last minute
amendment is unjustified given the absence of new events or facts since the
submission of the Respondent's Response and the failure by the Claimants to
provide any, let alone any valid, reasons for this last minute amendment. For
the Respondent, the Claimants amending of their requests is inconsistent with
due process (Respondent's letter of 16 October 2014, p. 2).

The Respondent underscores that the Claimants’ requests for provisional
measures must not prejudge the merits of the present case. In this regard, the
Respondent firmly objects to the Claimants’ pleadings on the merits during the
hearing of 8 October 2014 and denies the Claimants’ allegations on the merits
(Respondent's letter of 16 October 2014, p. 2).

In addition, the Respondent argues that the Claimants’ Amended Requests
must be rejected, essentially for the following reasons:
11

38.

39.

40.

41.

First, the Claimants have not shown that the Respondent is “currently engaging
in any activity that creates an urgent necessity for provisional measures to
avoid an irreparable harm”. To the contrary, the Respondent has shown that it
was not involved in the launch and maintenance of the Websites, the
orchestration of the Protest and the recent arrest of Mr. Aliyev in Vienna.
Furthermore, it has shown that its actions with respect to the Novikova case
were legitimate and in accordance with the law (Respondent's letter of 16
October 2014, p. 2).

Second, concerning in particular the Claimants’ request to order the
Respondent to withdraw as an interested party (“partie civile’) from the
Lebanese criminal proceedings in the Novikova case against the Houranis and
to cease any kind of international cooperation with the Lebanese authorities
with respect thereto, the Respondent argues that this request does not meet the
urgency requirement and is too broad. Indeed, these criminal proceedings and
cooperation efforts have existed since long before the present arbitration and
are entirely independent from it (Respondent's letter of 16 October 2014, p. 2).

In addition, the Respondent submits that this Arbitral Tribunal should not
interfere with the Respondent's status as partie civile in the Lebanese criminal
proceedings and the international cooperation. As was held in the Caratube |
case, “a particularly high threshold must be overcome before an ICSID Tribunal
can indeed recommend provisional measures regarding criminal investigations
conducted by a State” (Exh. CLA-18, para. 137), and this threshold is not
overcome in the present case. That said, the Respondent underscores that the
Hourani brothers are considered innocent until proven guilty and that they will
have a full opportunity to present their case before the Lebanese courts
(Respondent's letter of 16 October 2014, pp. 2-3).

Third, with respect to the Claimants’ request to order the Respondent “to
proceed with investigations before all organs of the State, including the KNB,
the GPO and the Ministry of International Affairs” in relation to the Respondent's
alleged involvement with the Websites and the Protest and to declare that the
Respondent had nothing to do with these Websites and Protest, the
Respondent submits that this request is moot and too broad. The Respondent
insists that Mr. Kravchenko and his office have already conducted such

12

investigations with the relevant organs of the Republic of Kazakhstan and such
investigations have established that the Respondent was not involved with the
Websites and the Protest (Respondent's letter of 16 October 2014, p. 3).

42. Concerning the other requests, the Respondent submits that “it is entirely
inappropriate for an arbitral tribunal to order a nation State to conduct
investigations into and make condemnations regarding matters with which it has
no involvement” (Respondent's letter of 16 October 2014, p. 3).

43. Finally, in its email of 28 November 2014, in response to the Claimants’ latest
correspondence of 13, 16 and 18 November 2014, the Respondent “respectfully
requests that all of the Claimants’ Amended Requests, including those
concerning [the] new demonstrations, be rejected by the Tribunal”.

IV. POSITION OF THE PARTIES

A. The Claimants’ Position

44. According to the Claimants, the Respondent recently (at the time of filing the
Request) has increased its harassment, threats and intimidations against the
Claimants and affiliates to a point of further aggravating the dispute and the
Claimants’ well-being, as well as jeopardizing the integrity of the present
proceedings (Request, para. 1, p. 1). The Claimants’ Request for Provisional
Measures (see supra, paras 30 to 32) is based on all such alleged acts of
harassment, threats and intimidations against the Claimants.

1. The requirements for granting provisional measures

45. The Claimants assert that under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule
39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, arbitral tribunals have broad powers to order
“any provisional measures”. Such provisional measures are not limited to
substantive rights, but may include procedural rights (i.e. inducing behavior that
would be conducive to a successful outcome of the proceedings such as
securing discovery of evidence, preserving the parties’ rigths, preventing self-
help, keeping the peace) (Request, para. 6, p. 2).

46. According to the Claimants, the granting of provisional measures is subject to
two requirements: first, “provisional measures can only be ordered when it is

13

47.

48.

49.

50.

necessary to preserve the petitioner's rights”; and second, “the preservation of
such rights must be urgent to prevent irreparable harm”. It is the Claimants’
case that “the urgency requirement is met when States attempt to pressure
claimants, through various means, and aggravate the dispute in doing so”
(Request, paras 8-9, p. 3; para. 78, p. 24). The Claimants acknowledge that the
party applying for provisional measures must show that there is a right to be
preserved by means of the provisional measures (Request, para. 3, pp. 1-2 and
para. 78, p. 24). Furthermore, the Claimants also recognize that the provisional
measure must not prejudge the Tribunal’s finding on the merits (Request, para.
83, p. 27).

a. The existence of a right to be preserved

The Claimants seek protection of “their right to pursue their claims and the
integrity of the process in this arbitration in an orderly fashion without the
ongoing risk that they, or any potential witnesses on which they wish to rely to
produce evidence or to provide information or documents, be exposed to further
sanctions or harassment”. In this respect, they invoke “the right to access
evidence through potential witnesses” and the equality of the Parties (Request,
para. 79, p. 24 and para. 82, pp. 26-27).

Furthermore, the Claimants invoke the right to be presumed innocent until
proven guilty and to be protected against unlawful attacks on one’s honor and
reputation (Request, paras 79-80, pp. 24-25 and para. 82, p. 27).

b. Necessity

The Claimants submit that the requested provisional measures are “necessary
to assist the Parties to avoid actions that might aggravate or extend the dispute,
and render its resolution more difficult” (Request, para. 79, p. 24). It is the
Claimants’ case that the present dispute “indeed is being aggravated by the
abusive exercise of Sovereign means and persecution of Claimants, and
moreover, and in any event, by the violation of the principle of the presumption
of innocence, and the principle of prohibition of unlawful attacks on one’s honor
and reputation, which must cease” (Request, para. 79, pp. 24-25).

In support of their Request the Claimants refer to several alleged acts of
harassment and intimidation by the Respondent, including “the initiation of

14

51.

criminal proceedings against members of the Hourani family, both in
Kazakhstan and abroad, interrogations, searches, seizures, Interpol notices and
freezing of assets of the Hourani family’s businesses, including of Caratube,
and the criminal prosecution of its employees” (Request, para. 42, p. 13). In
particular, the Claimants rely on the Respondent's taking of the Claimants’
investments and their harassment as part of the larger framework of a State
campaign against Mr. Aliyev and, by extension, the Houranis. For the
Claimants, the exclusive political motivations behind the taking of the Claimants’
investments and their harassment are, inter alia, confirmed by the witness
statement of Mr. Yasser Abbas, to whom President Nazarbayev reportedly
confirmed this fact directly during an official visit together with the promise that
the Houranis would be able to return safely to Kazakhstan and their assets fully
returned in exchange for information about Mr. Aliyev (Request, paras 43-46,
pp. 13-14).

Furthermore, the Claimants invoke the “lobbying” allegedly undertaken in
Lebanon by the Respondent's highest authorities, including various Ministers,
prosecutors and ambassadors, in an attempt to incriminate the Houranis and
implicate them in the alleged murder of Ms. Novikova in Lebanon in 2004. In
this regard, the Claimants rely in particular on (i) a letter dated 9 March 2012, in
which the Lebanese Minister of Justice instructed the Public Prosecutor before
the Cour de Cassation of Lebanon to provide information regarding the
Novikova case to the Kazakh Delegation; (ii) a letter dated 27 March 2013,
addressed by the Honorary Consul of Lebanon to the Republic of Kazakhstan
to the Lebanese Minister of Foreign and Expatriate Affairs, in which the
Ambassador of the Republic of Kazakhstan to Lebanon requested the Minister
to take notice of the Respondent's and Ms. Novikova’s mother’s new claim in
the Novikova matter and requested “the necessary information to pursue the
claim and establish the truth”; and (iii) a letter dated 24 July 2013, transmitted
by the Kazakh Embassy in Amman, Jordan to its Lebanese counterpart in
Jordan, in which Mr. Kravchenko, in his capacity as Vice-Prosecutor General of
the Republic of Kazakhstan, offered Kazakhstan’s assistance to the Lebanese
authorities in investigating the Novikova case and requested information
regarding financial crimes committed by Mr. Aliyev and others. According to the
Claimants, as a result of the above lobbying efforts, the Novikova case has

15

52.

53.

54.

been reopened, after having been closed four times by the Lebanese
authorities (Request, paras 48-51, pp. 14-15).

The Claimants also submit that, shortly before the first session in the present
Arbitration, on 25 May 2014, a website was launched with the stated objective
to mark the tenth anniversary of Ms. Novikova’s alleged murder
(www. justicefornovikova.com). This website is regularly updated (Request,
para. 65, p. 20). Similarly, shortly after the first session, on 17 June 2014,
another website was launched relating to Mr. Aliyev and depicting him as a
“murderer, racketeer, transnational criminal, and money launderer’. The
website names the Hourani brothers as Mr. Aliyev’s accomplices, accompanied
by pictures of the latter and allegations of various crimes
(www.rakhataliyev.com). For the Claimants, it is obvious that the websites
“could only be made possible with the financial and human resources as well as
the persistence of backers with ulterior motives”, namely the Respondent
(Request, paras 53-58, pp. 16-18).

In addition, the Claimants allege that on 19 June 2014, a staged protest took
place in front of Mr. Issam Hourani’s apartment in London, with the protesters,
who were allegedly hired for this purpose and paid for, wearing masks
representing the late Ms. Novikova and carrying posters and banners with
photographs of Messrs. Devincci and Issam Hourani as well as Mr. Aliyev, with
“Murderer” written on top. A video of the protest was thereafter posted on the
above referenced website and on YouTube. It is the Claimants’ position that the
protest was aimed at discrediting and intimidating Messrs. Devincci and Issam
Hourani and their families. The Claimants point out that such protests can be
tailored and purchased in London from specialized companies (Request, paras
60-64, pp. 18-20).

As was seen in paragraphs 22 et seq., the Claimants argue that on the night of
31 October/1 November 2014 a further demonstration took place in front of Mr.
Devincci Hourani’s home in Mclean Virginia, similar to the one held in London
on 19 June 2014. Furthermore, another demonstration was organized on 17
November 2014 in London, near the Lebanese Embassy, which targeted
Messrs. Devincci and Issam Hourani on the basis of allegations of murder of
Ms. Anastasiya Novikova. In relation with these murder allegations, on 2

16

55.

56.

December 2014, Mr. Devincci Hourani was blocked at Beirut airport in Lebanon
and his passport withheld.

The Claimants question the Respondent's motivation, perseverance and timing
with respect to the matter of Ms. Novikova’s death, pointing out that the case
not only relates to the death in 2004 of an Uzbek national in Lebanon, with no
direct links to Kazakhstan, but also that it “was closed no less than four times by
the Lebanese authorities” before being reopened once again merely weeks
before the Ruby Roz final hearing in early 2013 (Request, paras 26-39, pp. 8-12
and para. 66, p. 20).

For the Claimants, the above actions of harassment and intimidation, taking into
consideration their timing, confirm the Respondent’s involvement therewith and
its underlying motives. This is further confirmed by the Respondent’s past
pattern of conduct, which includes — say the Claimants — “harassment, threats
and intimidation as well as other means necessary to ensure that any interest
adverse to those of Kazakhstan’s ruler are crushed or neutralized” (Request,
para. 12, p. 3). The Claimants draw this Tribunal’s attention in particular to the
Respondent's conduct in several dispute resolution proceedings initiated
against the Respondent. For instance, the Claimants submit that the
Respondent engaged in threats and intimidation in the Rumeli case, which
involved the brother, daughter and son-in-law of President Nazarbayev. In this
case, the Respondent allegedly exercised pressure not only against the
executives of the claimants by means of initiation of criminal proceedings, but
also against the professionals involved in the representation of the claimants. In
particular, Professor Didenko, who had provided a legal opinion on Kazakh law
in favor of the claimants before local Kazakh courts, later refused to testify in a
subsequent ICSID arbitration against Kazakhstan, allegedly as a result of the
pressure exercised against him by the Respondent. The Claimants observe that
Professor Didenko was later retained by the Respondent as an expert on
Kazakh law in the Ruby Roz arbitration. Around the same time, the partners in
Almaty of Salans, who were representing the claimants, also suddenly refused
to continue providing their assistance against the Respondent, allegedly as a
result of threats received from Kazakhstan (Request, paras 16-22, pp. 4-6).

57.

58.

59.

60.

According to the Claimants, the same pattern of conduct - of harassment,
threats and intimidation - was followed by the Respondent in arbitrations
involving the Hourani family, namely in the first Caratube arbitration and the
Ruby Roz arbitration (see Request, paras 23-39, pp. 6-12).

The Claimants submit that such acts of harassment, threats and intimidation “go
beyond legitimate State prerogatives and rights’. Even if some of the
Respondent’s acts are authorized per se, such as the initiation of criminal
proceedings, the manner in which they are being pursued by the Respondent
“turn them into persecution and/or an inequitable, unfair, abusive and/or
unreasonable process”. Moreover, the direct accusations against the Houranis,
as well as the protest and/or websites dubbing them as murderers, “which are
caused, promoted, encouraged and/or funded by Kazakhstan”, violate the
principles of the presumption of innocence and of the prohibition of unlawful
attacks on one’s honor and reputation. Finally, other acts, such as physical
threats, are intolerable (Request, para. 68, p. 21).

According to the Claimants, the Respondent's acts have had multiple impacts
on Caratube, Mr. Devincci Hourani and his family, namely (i) they have caused
a deterioration of Mr. Devincci Hourani’s health; (ii) they have inflicted on Mr.
Devincci Hourani and his family a loss of credit and reputation, with banks
unwilling to lend them money and businessmen unwilling to engage with them;
(iii) they have resulted in Mr. Devincci Hourani and his family being socially
isolated and humiliated. The Claimants submit that the requested measures
“are both necessary to preserve the Claimants’ rights and urgent”. The ongoing
and increasing blows to health, reputation and the humiliation must cease as
they cannot be remedied by compensation alone. It is further noted that with
respect to such impacts, the Claimants will request that “exceptionally high
monetary damages be awarded” in that they constitute “a textbook case for
moral and reputational damages” (Request, paras 69-76, pp. 21-23 and para.
81, p. 26).

For the Claimants, the Respondent's acts of threats and intimidation jeopardize
the integrity of the present arbitration, with witnesses being unwilling to testify
and Mr. Devincci Hourani being put under pressure by his family to drop the
claims. Furthermore, Mr. Aliyev, who had submitted a testimony in the previous

18

61.

62.

63.

64.

ICSID arbitration, will not be able to act as a witness in the present arbitration
as he “has been arrested on June 6, 2014 and placed in custody in Vienna on
allegations, made and pursued by Kazakhstan, of murder of two bankers”
(Request, para. 77, p. 23).

c. Urgency

According to the Claimants, the requested measures are urgent. Indeed “it has
been recognized that measures intended to protect the procedural integrity of
the arbitration, including in particular with respect to access to or integrity of
evidence, are urgent by definition, as they cannot await the rendering of an
award on the merits” (Request, para. 81, p. 26).

d. No prejudgment on the merits

Finally, the Claimants submit that the requested measures “would not prejudge
the Tribunal’s finding on the merits” (Request, para. 83, p. 27).

B. The Respondent’s Position”

The Respondent asserts “that it has not engaged and is not engaging in
harassment of Claimants or their witnesses, violations of good faith and
equality, or improper conduct” (Response, para. 3, p. 2).

. The requirements for granting provisional measures

With respect to the requirements for granting provisional measures, the
Respondent points out that while the Tribunal certainly has the power to issue
provisional measures, those measures should be considered extraordinary and
should not be recommended lightly. Furthermore, in accordance with ICSID’s
Note D to Rule 39, the recommended measures must be “provisional” and be
“appropriate in nature, extent and duration to the risk existing for the rights to be
preserved” (Response, para. 6, p. 4). Citing the decision on provisional
measures in Perenco Ecuador, the Respondent further stresses that the
extraordinary and limited nature of provisional measures is recognized in
particular in cases where the Arbitral Tribunal has not yet decided on its
jurisdiction (Response, para. 7, p. 4).

? For the Respondent's position on the Claimants’ Amended Requests, see supra paras 34 et

seq.

19

65.

66.

67.

68.

According to the Respondent, various cases show that the granting of
provisional measures is subject to the following requirements: (i) the claimant
must have a right that exists at the time of the request and that requires
preservation in the arbitration; (ii) there must be circumstances of necessity in
order to avoid irreparable harm caused to claimant by the party against whom
measures are sought; (iii) there must be circumstances of urgency; (iv) the
provisional measures requested must not be too broad; and (v) any
recommendation of the provisional measures must not prejudge the merits of
the case (Response, para. 8, pp. 4-5). It is the Respondent's case that the listed
requirements are not met in the present case. The Claimants’ have failed to
meet their burden of showing an entitlement to the provisional measures they
are requesting (Response, para. 16, p. 8).

a. Specific and existing rights requiring preservation in the arbitration

With respect to the first requirement, the Respondent states that under Rule 39
the Claimants (as opposed to anyone else) must clearly identify a specific right
that they have that needs to be preserved in the present proceedings. This right
must exist at the time of the request; it must not be a hypothetical or future right
(Response, para. 9, p. 5 and para. 15, p. 8).

The Respondent notes that the Claimants in their Request invoke their rights to
pursue their claims, to the integrity and legitimacy of the arbitration and the
equality of the parties therein, to the presumption of innocence and to the
prohibition of unlawful attacks on one’s honor and reputation (Response, para.
17, p. 9).

b. Urgency and necessity to avoid irreparable harm caused to the

Claimants by the party against whom measures are sought

Concerning the second and third requirements, the Respondent argues that
provisional measures must only be recommended if there is an urgent necessity
to avoid an irreparable harm to the Claimants’ rights caused by the party
against whom measures are sought. This means that provisional measures can
only be recommended if the Respondent is currently causing or will cause an
irreparable harm to the Claimants’ identified right, there is an urgent necessity
to avoid such irreparable harm, and the provisional measures requested by the

20

Claimants, when implemented, will in fact cause the irreparable harm to be
avoided (Response, paras 10-11, pp. 5-6 and para. 15, p. 8).

69. The Respondent points out that the Claimants have based their Request on
alleged past and current actions of the Respondent.

i. The alleged current or ongoing actions of the Respondent

70. The Respondent notes that the Claimants submit that provisional measures are
urgently needed with respect to the following four allegedly current or ongoing
actions of the Respondent, which — says the Respondent — “have nothing to do
with this Arbitration” (Response, paras 19-20, pp. 9-10): (i) the launch of two
websites targeting Messrs. Rakhat Aliyev, Issam Hourani, Devincci Hourani and
accusing them of the alleged murder of Ms. Anastasia Novikova in Lebanon in
2004, namely www.justicefornovikova.com and www.rakhatalivev.com; (ii) the
organization or orchestration of the protest of 19 June 2014 in front of Mr. Issam
Hourani’s apartment in London, which targeted Messrs. Rakhat Aliyev, Issam
Hourani and Devincci Hourani in that the protesters accused them of the
murder of Ms. Anastasia Novikova (the “Protest”); (iii) the arrest in June 2014 of
Mr. Rakhat Aliyev in Vienna; and (iv) the Respondent's involvement as “partie
civile” in the criminal investigation in Lebanon of Messrs. Rakhat Aliyev, Issam
Hourani and Devincci Hourani in connection with the alleged murder of Ms.
Anastasia Novikova.®

71. With respect to the first of these alleged current or ongoing actions, the
Respondent submits that it did not launch or maintain the two websites. The
Respondent asserts that the Claimants have not presented any evidence in
support of their allegations, which appear to be based on assumptions. By
contrast, in his witness statement, Mr. Andrey Kravchenko, Deputy General
Prosecutor of the Republic of Kazakhstan, has confirmed that the Respondent
has nothing to do with the two websites. Likewise, in her expert report, Prof.
Olcott has also confirmed that there is no evidence of any links between the
Respondent and the websites. Furthermore, her expert report undermines the
Claimants’ allegation that only the Respondent has the human and financial

3 As was seen in paragraph 27 above, it is the Respondent's case that it has no involvement with

the latest developments reported by the Claimants in their correspondence of 13, 16 and 18

November and the Claimants have provided no evidence of any involvement of the Respondent

with respect thereto.
21

72.

73.

resources to launch and maintain the websites. On this basis, the Respondent
asserts that it “has had no part in the launching or maintaining of these
Websites and has nothing further to disclose in that regard” (Response, paras
25-31, pp. 11-14).

Concerning the second alleged current or ongoing action, the Respondent
argues that the Claimants have not provided any proof of the fact that the
Respondent organized the Protest. By contrast, Mr. Kravchenko has confirmed
in his witness statement that the Respondent had nothing to do with the Protest
and had no contact with companies specialized in the orchestration of fake
protests. The absence of any involvement of the Respondent with respect to the
Protest is also corroborated by Prof. Olcott’s expert report. Furthermore, the
Respondent points out that the Protest took place on the tenth anniversary of
Ms. Novikova’s death and that, if the Protest was indeed a fake, “virtually
anyone could have had the means to organize it”, a fact which is acknowledged
by the Claimants. The Respondent concludes that it “did not organize the
Protest and has nothing further to disclose in this regard”; “there is no basis for
recommending the provisional measures with respect to the Protest requested
by the Claimants” (Response, paras 32-37, pp. 14-16).

With respect to the third alleged current or ongoing action, the Respondent
submits that the Claimants have not produced any evidence to support their
allegations that the arrest of Mr. Rakhat Aliyev in Vienna was intended to
prevent the latter from testifying in this Arbitration and that the Respondent was
somehow behind this. The Respondent points out that Mr. Aliyev was not
arrested by the Respondent. He was arrested in Vienna by the Austrian
authorities in accordance with Austrian law and procedure, in connection with
the kidnapping and murder of two managers of Nurbank, a Kazakh private bank
controlled by Mr. Aliyev at the time of the murders. Furthermore, the
Respondent argues that the Claimants’ account of Mr. Aliyev’s arrest is clearly
contradicted by Mr. Kravchenko’s witness statement and Prof. Olcott’s expert
report, which explain the background of the arrest, as well as by the evidence
linking Mr. Aliyev to the death of the two Nurbank managers, the death of Ms.
Novikova and other serious criminal charges against him. On this basis, the
Respondent concludes that the Claimants’ request for provisional measures

must be rejected to the extent that the Claimants suggest that Mr. Aliyev’s
22

74.

75.

arrest constitutes harassment by the Respondent to create a chilling effect on
other witnesses (Response, paras 38-44, pp. 16-17).

Regarding the fourth alleged current or ongoing action, the Respondent asserts
that its actions with respect to the Novikova case in Lebanon were entirely
justified and in conformity with the applicable law. In this regard, the
Respondent first observes that the Novikova matter and the evidence
implicating Mr. Aliyev and the Houranis in the alleged murder have nothing to
do with this Arbitration. The Respondent further submits that, as is detailed in
Mr. Kravchenko’s witness statement and confirmed in Prof. Olcott’s expert
report, there is very serious evidence that Ms. Novikova, who is alleged to have
been Mr. Aliyev’s mistress, was sequestered, tortured and murdered, including
(i) eyewitness accounts of two persons who were present during the
sequestration and torture of Ms. Novikova; (ii) the Kazakh forensic report of
August 2007; (iii) the German Charité Report which confirmed the Kazakh
forensic report and showed that Ms. Novikova must have been dead before the
fall from the balcony; (iv) the fact that neither Mr. Aliyev nor the Houranis
informed Ms. Novikova’s mother of her daughter's death due to what they claim
was a suicide; and (v) other evidence mentioned. According to the Respondent,
despite such serious evidence and Ms. Novikova’s mother’s attempts to have
the investigations reopened in Lebanon, no prosecution ever took place in
respect of this matter. Therefore, in July 2012 the Respondent, being under an
obligation to press charges against Mr. Aliyev and the Houranis to investigate
their role in the circumstances of Ms. Novikova’s death, agreed to file a joint
complaint with Ms. Novikova’s mother in Lebanon against Mr. Aliyev and the
Houranis. Thereafter, the criminal investigation was legitimately reopened in
Lebanon in accordance with Lebanese law, which is confirmed by Prof. Slim’s
expert report and Mr. Kravchenko’s witness statement. The validity of the
reopening of the Novikova investigations was also confirmed twice by
Lebanon’s highest court, the Cour de Cassation. In this regard, the Respondent
points out that, contrary to the Claimants’ allegation, the investigation in
Lebanon was never “closed”, but rather was archived, which means that it can
be reopened (Response, paras 45-70, pp. 18-26).

Furthermore, the Respondent refutes the Claimants’ allegation that the

Respondent, via inter alia two letters exchanged with the Lebanese authorities,
23

76.

77.

78.

was “lobbying” to unjustly incriminate Mr. Aliyev and the Houranis. Rather, it is
the Respondent's case that such letters, which are common practice in cases
where two countries are investigating the same alleged facts, were requests for
information and offers of assistance, prompted by the Lebanese authorities’
failure to respond to prior requests for information and offers of assistance.
Accordingly, the letters in question were legitimate cooperation efforts between
states and can in no way be considered as “lobbying” attempts before the
Lebanese authorities. In this regard, the Respondent draws the attention to the
fact that the Claimants were not entitled to obtain copies and submit in this
Arbitration the two letters in issue in that they constitute confidential diplomatic
correspondence (Response, paras 71-74, pp. 26-28).

Finally, while the Respondent agrees with the Claimants’ insistence upon the
presumption of innocence, it points out that “the presumption of innocence does
not mean that state authorities cannot prosecute individuals who are seriously
suspected of committing a crime, or that prosecuting under those
circumstances constitutes harassment” (Response, para. 75, pp. 28-29).

ji. The alleged past pattern of conduct of the Respondent

With respect to the alleged past conduct, namely “a ‘pattern of conduct in
investment arbitrations’ consisting of alleged threats, intimidation and
harassment by the Republic of Kazakhstan against adverse parties, their
attorneys, experts and factual witnesses” (Response, para. 77, p. 29), the
Respondent argues that it is not relevant because the Claimants have not
alleged that it is ongoing or that it could cause irreparable harm to the
Claimants in the future (Response, para. 18, p. 9 and para. 78, p. 29). This
notwithstanding, the Respondent submits that the Claimants’ allegations with
respect to past conduct are in any case incorrect, not supported by evidence
and have not been recognized by any arbitral tribunal.

Preliminarily, the Respondent points out that the Claimants sometimes
misleadingly construe certain alleged facts as “recent developments”, even
though they refer to events that allegedly occurred in 2007 and 2008, i.e.
between five and seven years ago (Response, para. 79, p. 30).

24

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

With respect to the allegations of harassment and intimidation by the
Respondent invoked in the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration and in Mr. Yasser
Abbas’ witness statement, the Respondent notes that all of these allegations
pertain to the merits of the Claimants’ case in this Arbitration. In addition, these
allegations are false.

First, in his witness statement, Ambassador Yerzhan Kazykhanov asserts that
President Nazarbayev and Mr. Yasser Abbas never had a private meeting in
October 2008 or at any other time (and, as a matter of protocol, never could
have had such a private meeting, at least not without agreement made prior to
the arrival of the visiting diplomat), and never discussed the Hourani family
(Response, para. 81, pp. 30-31).

Second, the Respondent firmly denies the Claimants’ allegations regarding its
purported misconduct in the Rumeli arbitration. The Respondent further points
out that Rumeli never requested any provisional measures in view of protecting
any individuals from alleged pressures exercised by the Respondent and that
the Rumeli tribunal did not make any findings against the Respondent regarding
any alleged misconduct, nor did it draw any adverse inferences against the
Respondent from such allegations (Response, para. 82, p. 31).

Third, the Respondent submits that in the Ruby Roz arbitration, the tribunal
refused to strike Prof. Didenko’s expert opinion from the record based on the
claimant’s accusations of lack of independence. Furthermore, the claimant
chose not to question Prof. Didenko’s credibility face-to-face during the hearing.
Ultimately, the tribunal dismissed Ruby Roz’s claims for lack of jurisdiction
(Response, para. 83, p. 32).

Fourth, the Respondent points out that in Caratube |, the tribunal rejected all of
the provisional measures requested by Caratube International Oil Company
LLP (“CIOC”) and ultimately rejected the CIOC’s case for lack of jurisdiction
(Response, para. 84, pp. 32-33).

Fifth, the Respondent refutes the Claimants’ arguments based on the alleged
intimidation of witnesses in the Ruby Roz arbitration. According to the
Respondent, the Claimants’ argumentation “does not make any sense”. Rather,
for the Respondent, “what appears to have happened is that Ruby Roz simply

25

wanted to avoid the cross-examination of its witnesses and sought to blame the
Republic [of Kazakhstan] for the non-appearance of nine witnesses, most of
whom had nothing to do with the Lebanese [Novikova] investigation or the
alleged intimidation” (Response, paras 85-87, pp. 33-34). Furthermore, the
Respondent points out that the Ruby Roz tribunal did not hold the Respondent
liable for any procedural misconduct and no provisional measures were ever
recommended against the Republic. As mentioned, ultimately, the tribunal
dismissed Ruby Roz’s case for lack of jurisdiction (Response, para. 88, p. 34).

85. Finally, the Respondent asserts that it “welcomes the opportunity to cross-
examine the Claimants’ witnesses” in the present Arbitration and “that it has no
interest whatsoever in trying to prevent them from testifying” (Response, para.
90, pp. 34-35).

c. The provisional measures requested must not be too broad

86. For the Respondent, the fourth requirement is that the provisional measure
must be specific in its object and scope. It must not be too broad and extend to
measures that are not urgently needed to avoid an irreparable harm (Response,
para. 12, pp. 6-7 and para. 15, p. 8).

d. The provisional measures must not prejudge the merits of the case

87. Finally, the fifth requirement is that the provisional measure requested must not
prejudge the merits of the case, which is further explained by the fact that it is a
measure of protection and not of enforcement (Response, paras 13-15, pp. 7-
8).

2. The Claimants’ four individual requests for provisional measures
must be rejected in their entirety*

a. The Claimants’ request for disclosure concerning the Websites and

the Protest
88. The Respondent asserts that while the Claimants have not produced any
evidence implicating the Respondent in the Websites and the Protest, the
Respondent, on the other hand, has shown that there is no evidence to the

* Regarding the Respondent's position on the Claimants’ amended prayer for relief, see supra,
paras 34 et seq.
26

89.

90.

effect that the Respondent was involved in the Websites or the Protest.® As a
result, the Respondent cannot be found to be causing irreparable harm to the
Claimants, even if it were to be found that the Websites or the Protest
themselves are causing such harm. The Respondent draws the conclusion that
“the Respondent has nothing further to disclose with respect to these matters
and, thus, the requested measure is moot” and should not be recommended
(Response, para. 92, p. 35).
b. The Claimants’ request for justification of the Respondent’s
actions in the Novikova case
According to the Respondent, it has shown that (i) “the murder charges against
the defendants in [the Novikova] case are very serious indeed”; (ii) the
Respondent's joining with Ms. Novikova’s mother in filing a complaint as
“parties civiles” in Lebanon and the reopening of the case by the Lebanese
authorities were justified and in accordance with Lebanese law. In particular,
the Claimants have not shown that the murder charges in the Novikova case
are frivolous or trumped up, nor that the prosecution of such charges is mere
harassment for the purpose of intimidating witnesses, whose testimony the
Respondent welcomes. Hence, the Claimants’ request for a provisional
measure recommending that the Respondent justify its actions in the Novikova
case is moot. Furthermore, the Respondent argues that it is difficult to
understand how recommending any further justification by the Respondent
would be urgently needed to avoid irreparable harm to the Claimants. Thus, this
provisional measure should not be recommended (Response, para. 93, p. 36).
c. The Clait ” req for the ission by the Respondent of any
direct or indirect measures or any action that would aggravate the

dispute and/or jeopardize the integrity and the legitimacy of this
arbitration and the equality of the Parties

 

The Respondent submits that the Claimants have not shown (and the
Respondent firmly denies) that the Respondent has engaged or will engage in
harassment, assault, threat and intimidation of Mr. Devincci Hourani, his family,
and the Claimants’ potential witnesses and families. Furthermore, the Claimants
have not shown that there have been any current or ongoing actions by the

5 As was seen in paragraph 27 and footnote 3 above, it is the Respondent's case that it has no
involvement with the latest developments reported by the Claimants in their correspondence of
13, 16 and 18 November and the Claimants have provided no evidence of any involvement of the
Respondent with respect thereto.

27

91.

Vv.

92.

Respondent which create an urgent necessity to avoid irreparable harm by
recommending a provisional measure.° In addition, the requested provisional
measure is far too broad and may require determinations connected to the
merits of the present Arbitration. Finally, the Respondent stresses that
authorities of any State have the duty and the right to prosecute entities and
individuals in accordance with the law and arbitral tribunals generally should not
interfere with such matters. Therefore, the Respondent concludes that the
requested provisional measure should not be recommended (Response, para.
94, pp. 37-38).

 

d. The Claii q with respect to the fi

of the presumption of innocence and of the prohibition of unlawful

attacks on one’s honour and reputation
While the Respondent agrees that any accused person is innocent until proven
guilty, it argues that the Claimants are not entitled, based on the presumption of
innocence, to use this Tribunal to shield them from legitimate criminal
investigations and prosecution unrelated to the present Arbitration.
Furthermore, the Respondent submits that the Claimants have not met their
burden of proving the allegations underlying this request for provisional
measures, which the Respondent firmly opposes. In particular, the Claimants
have not established the existence of any current or ongoing action by the
Respondent which creates an urgent necessity to avoid an irreparable harm by
recommending the requested provisional measure. In addition, the Respondent
submits that the requested measure is far too broad and may require
determinations connected to the merits of this Arbitration. Hence, the requested
provisional measure should not be recommended (Response, paras 96-99, p.
38).

ANALYSIS

A. Timeliness of the Claimants’ Amended Request

As was stated in paragraph 35 above, the Respondent objects “to the
Claimants’ last minute amending of their requests” (Respondent's letter of 16

® As was seen in paragraph 27 above (see also footnotes 3 and 5 above), it is the Respondent's
case that it has no involvement with the latest developments reported by the Claimants in their
correspondence of 13, 16 and 18 November and the Claimants have provided no evidence of any
involvement of the Respondent with respect thereto.

28

October 2014, p. 1). Therefore, the question of the timeliness of the Claimants’
Amended Requests as set forth in their letter of 10 October 2014 is posed.

93. This question concerns in particular the Amended Request 2.1.,’ where the
Claimants now request an order for the Respondent's withdrawal as “partie
civile’ from the criminal proceedings in Lebanon against Messrs. Issam,
Devincci and Hussam Hourani, who are accused (together with Mr. Aliyev) of
the murder of Ms. Novikova. Under the same Amended Request 2.1, the
Claimants now also request an order for the Respondent to cease any direct or
indirect interference with or before the Lebanese authorities in relation with
these criminal proceedings.

94. Moreover, the question of timeliness is raised with respect to the Claimants’
Amended Request 2.2.,° where the Claimants now request the Tribunal to order
the Respondent to declare that it had no involvement with the Websites and the
Protest (as well as the latest developments of November 2014) and to condemn
these acts, and to make all the necessary investigations to identify the
individuals behind these acts and to take the necessary measures for these
acts to stop.

95. As was seen in paragraphs 34 et seq. above, the Tribunal has noted the
Respondent’s objections to the Claimants’ “last minute” amending of their
requests. In particular, the Tribunal shares the Respondent’s concerns
regarding requirements of due process, which would require further
submissions by the Parties on the issue and thus additional resources in terms
of time, effort and costs.

96. That said, the spending of additional resources on the issue of the timeliness of
the Claimants’ Amended Request is not necessary. For the reasons set out
below, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants’ Requests for Provisional Measures
must in any event be rejected on the merits. Therefore, rather than further
investigating and deciding the issue of the timeliness of the Claimants’
Amended Requests, the Tribunal considers it more efficient and appropriate to

” See supra para. 31.
® See supra para. 31.
29

97.

98.

99.

° ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), 1986, ad Rule 39.

consider the merits of the Amended Requests and to set out below the reasons

why such requests cannot be granted.

B. Applicable Legal Framework

The Parties agree that Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the
2006 ICSID Arbitration Rules enable the Tribunal to recommend provisional

measures. Article 47 of the ICSID Convention reads as follows:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it
considers that the circumstances so require, recommend any
provisional measures which should be taken to preserve the
respective rights of either party.

Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides in relevant part:

(1) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party
may request that provisional measures for the preservation of its
rights be recommended by the Tribunal. The request shall
specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the
recommendation of which is requested, and the circumstances
that require such measures.

(2) The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a
request made pursuant to paragraph (1).

(3) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures on
its own initiative or recommend measures other than those
specified in a request. It may at any time modify or revoke its
recommendations.

(4) The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures, or
modify or revoke its recommendations, after giving each party
an opportunity of presenting its observations.

bel

The ICSID’s Notes to Rule 39° provide the following explanations:

A. This Rule provides the procedural framework for
implementing Article 47 of the Convention, which is based on
the principle that once a dispute is submitted to arbitration the
parties should not take steps that might aggravate or extend
their dispute or prejudice the execution of the award. Because of
the generality of this principle, not only can a party request the
Tribunal to recommend provisional measures at any time during
the proceeding, i.e., in principle from its institution (Arbitration

30

100.

101.

Rule 6(2)), but in practice only from the constitution of the
Tribunal (Arbitration Rule 6(1)) since it is the Tribunal that must
make the recommendation - until the award is rendered (Rule
48(2)), but the Tribunal may also make recommendations on its
own initiative (see paragraph (3) of the present Rule).

B. However, this power of the Tribunal exists (pursuant to Article
47 of the Convention) only "except as the parties otherwise
agree"; moreover, unless the parties otherwise agree, the
Tribunal only has the power to "recommena". This restriction is
not as serious as it appears, for not only is the authority of a
recommendation emanating from an international tribunal very
considerable but the Tribunal can normally take into account in
its award the effects of any noncompliance with its
recommendations.

C. Paragraph (2) is based on the assumption that to preserve
the rights of a party speedy action may be required. Accordingly
the President of the Tribunal may, if he considers the request as
urgent, propose a decision to be taken by correspondence (Rule
16(2)), or even convene the Tribunal for a special session.

D. The measures recommended must be "provisional" in
character and be appropriate in nature, extent and duration to
the risk existing for the rights to be preserved. Paragraph (3)
therefore allows the Tribunal to recommend measures other
than those proposed by the moving party, and to modify or
revoke its recommendations as circumstances may require.

E. In order to avoid surprises or unintentionally unfair
dispositions, paragraph (4) requires that both parties be given
an opportunity to present their observations before the Tribunal
makes its recommendations or modifies or revokes them. The
Tribunal must decide how this opportunity will be given.

C. Requirements for Provisional Measures

It is common ground between the Parties that provisional measures must (i)
serve to protect certain rights of the applicant and (ii) meet the requirements of
necessity and (iii) urgency, which imply the existence of a risk of irreparable
harm. Furthermore, it is not disputed that (iv) the recommendation of the
requested provisional measures must not prejudge the Tribunal’s decision on
the merits of the case.

However, it is unclear whether the Parties agree with respect to the existence of
a fifth requirement, namely that the provisional measures must not be too
broad, the Claimants not having taken a position on this requirement.

31

102.

103.

104.

The Parties disagree on the fulfilment in casu of the requirements referred to
above.

Before addressing these requirements, the Tribunal stresses that the applicant's
burden of proof is that it must establish the requirements with sufficient
likelihood, without however having to actually prove the facts underlying them. "°
Moreover, the Tribunal's assessment is necessarily made on the basis of the
record as it presently stands; any conclusion reached in this decision could be
reviewed if relevant circumstances were to change and would in any event not
be binding on the Tribunal when it shall rule on the evidence on record in the
ensuing conduct of this Arbitration.

The Respondent, relying on the decision on provisional measures in the
Perenco Ecuador case, has argued that a somewhat higher threshold should
apply in cases where the tribunal has not yet decided on its jurisdiction
(Response, para. 7, p. 4; Transcript, p. 53, lines 11-16). In this respect, the
Perenco Ecuador tribunal noted:

[Article 47 and Rule 39] also recognize that a Tribunal must be
slow to grant to a party, before a full examination of the merits of
the case, a remedy to which, on such examination, the party
may be found to be not entitled. The Tribunal must be even
slower where, as here, the jurisdiction of the tribunal to entertain
the dispute has not been established. So the test laid down by
the Article for the grant of provisional measures is a stringent
one: “if [the Tribunal] considers that the circumstances so

require’.

The Tribunal observes that the procedural setting in the Perenco Ecuador
decision was the same as in the present case to the extent that, at this time, the
Tribunal has formed, and expresses, no opinion on its jurisdiction to entertain
the Claimant’s claims, on the facts so far as these are in dispute, or on the
merits of the claims.'? These issues are not before it for decision at this stage
and have not been the subject of argument, even though at the first session the

‘© The Tribunal has taken note of the Claimants’ contention that “it is impossible in [the
circumstances of the present case], in such cases, to obtain direct documentary evidence, or
admission even. [...] [U]nder the circumstances, circumstantial evidence is enough [...]”
(Transcript, p. 9, lines 7-9 and lines 19-20).

' Perenco Ecuador Limited v. the Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos Del
Ecuador (Petroecuador) (Exh. RL-3), para. 43.

"? See Perenco Ecuador Limited v. the Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos Del
Ecuador (Petroecuador) (Exh. RL-3), para.19.

32

107.

Respondent expressed its intention to submit a jurisdictional objection with its
Counter-Memorial.'° In paragraph 14.3 of Procedural Order No. 1, the
Respondent also has expressly reserved its right to request a bifurcation of
jurisdictional issues after the first round of pleadings.

The Parties have not questioned this Tribunal’s authority to recommend
provisional measures. Indeed, as already noted, Article 39(1) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules confirms this authority and provides: “[a]t any time after the
institution of the proceeding, a party may request that provisional measures for
the preservation of its rights be recommended by the Tribunal”. This implies that
the Tribunal may decide a request for provisional measures before having ruled
on its jurisdiction. This rather uncontroversial statement is further confirmed by
SCHREUER, who pertinently states as follows:

Giving priority to a request for provisional measures means that
it has to take precedence over any other issues pending before
the tribunal. Where a party has raised jurisdictional objections,
the tribunal may have to decide on provisional measures before
having ruled on its own jurisdiction. As a consequence, a party
may be exposed to provisional measures even though it
contests the jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal. On the other hand,
the urgency of the matter often makes it impossible to defer
provisional measures until the tribunal's jurisdiction has been
fully argued and decided.

(Christoph SCHREUER, The /ICSID Convention, 2™ ed.,
Cambridge 2009, p. 771)
In the opinion of this Tribunal, the application by the Tribunal of such a stricter
standard to the Claimants’ Request is problematic as this would appear to entail
a prima facie assessment of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction." However, the Tribunal
cannot do so in the present case: first, at the hearing of 8 October 2014, the
Respondent - who requested the application of the stricter standard based on

‘8 The Tribunal notes that the Respondent in the Perenco Ecuador case also simply reserved the
right to challenge the jurisdiction of the tribunal (Perenco Ecuador Limited v. the Republic of
Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos Del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (Exh. RL-3), para. 18).

* Perenco Ecuador Limited v. the Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petroleos Del
Ecuador (Petroecuador) (Exh. RL-3), para. 39 (“While the Tribunal need not satisfy itself that it
has jurisdiction to determine the merits of the case for the purposes of ruling on the application for
provisional measures, it will not order such measures unless there is at least a prima facie basis
upon which such jurisdiction might be established: Victor Pey Casado and President Allende
Foundation v. Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/12, Decision on the request for provisional
measures, 25 September 2001 ff 1-12.”).

33

108.

the Perenco Ecuador decision - made it clear that the present decision on
provisional measures does not concern the question of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims in this arbitration.'® Second, unlike the
tribunal in the Perenco Ecuador case, this Tribunal does not find that there is a
reason to proceed with this prima facie assessment, given the lack of any
substantiated jurisdictional objection so far (unless, quod non, the Tribunal
should decide to raise an issue of jurisdiction ex officio). More importantly, the
Claimants would not be in a position to express their view on any such
jurisdictional objection. Given the alleged urgency of the Claimants’ Request for
Provisional Measures, it would defeat that Request’s purpose to first seek the
Parties’ respective positions on this issue. This is further confirmed by Article
39(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, which stipulates that “[t]he Tribunal shall
give priority to the consideration of a request made pursuant to [Article 39]
paragraph (1)”. It also bears mentioning that a preliminary examination of this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction has already taken place when the Claimants’ Request for
Arbitration was registered by the Secretary-General pursuant to Article 36(3) of
the ICSID Convention. '®

In the opinion of this Tribunal, there is no room for the application of a stricter
standard or, in the words of the Perenco Ecuador tribunal, of a “slower”
approach, simply because a party has reserved its right to raise a jurisdictional
objection. Rather, a tribunal may take such a reservation of rights into account
in the exercise of its discretion to recommend provisional measures, namely
when deciding whether or not the urgency of the matter requires it to defer the
provisional measures until after the issue of the tribunal's jurisdiction has been
argued and decided. For instance, there should be urgency to recommend
some measures that could not await the final Award in an arbitration while such
urgency would not make it necessary to recommend such measures before the

'§ See Transcript, p. 49, lines 1-10: “MR WOLRICH: [...] What the hearing is not about is whether
the Tribunal has jurisdiction over Claimants’ claims. As Procedural Order No. 1 clearly states, the
Republic of Kazakhstan has reserved its right to seek bifurcation of these proceedings at the time
of the filing of its memorial. The procedural order also clearly says that if that happens, the
Tribunal shall — if the other side doesn’t agree — determine whether or not to do this; and if so,
there will be a new schedule. But this hearing is not about that”.

'8 According to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, “[t]he Secretary-General shall register the
request unless he finds, on the basis of the information contained in the request, that the dispute
is manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre. [...]”.

34

109.

1.

110.

111.

112.

arbitral tribunal's determination on its jurisdiction.'” Be it as it may, as stated in
paragraph 107 above, this Tribunal finds that, given the alleged urgency of the
Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures, it would defeat that Request’s
purpose to first seek the Parties’ respective positions on the issue of
jurisdiction.

In any event, ultimately it is not necessary to further investigate and decide the
question of the applicability of a stricter standard to the Claimants’ Request for
Provisional Measures. For the reasons set out below, the Claimants’ Request
must be rejected even in application of the threshold outlined in paragraph 103
above.

The existence of rights requiring preservation

As noted in paragraph 100 above, the Parties agree that provisional measures
must serve to protect certain rights of the applicant.

Furthermore, as mentioned in paragraph 67 above, the Respondent does not
take issue with the Claimants invoking their rights to pursue their claims, to the
integrity and legitimacy of the arbitration and the equality of the parties therein,
to the presumption of innocence and to the prohibition of unlawful attacks on
one’s honor and reputation (see also Response, para. 17, p. 9; Request, para.
79, p. 24 and para. 82, pp. 26-27). The Respondent does not contest that these
are specific and clearly identified rights belonging to the Claimants and existing
at the time of the Request.

As will be seen in further detail below, the Respondent denies however that it
ever conducted itself in this Arbitration in a manner that would contravene these
rights and has affirmed in its written submissions and through its Counsel at the
hearing of 8 October 2014 that it will continue to abstain from such actions (see,
e.g., Response, para. 3, p. 2; paras 75-76, pp. 28-29; para. 94, p. 37 and para.

‘” In this sense, see also the Procedural Order No. 1 issued on 31 March 2006 in Biwater Gauff v.
Tanzania (Exh. CLA-14): “It is also clear, and apparently not in issue between the parties here,
that a party may be exposed to provisional measures even though it contends that ICSID has no
jurisdiction (SCHREUER, p. 764). As noted on behalf of the UROT, there may be cases,
however, where the likely objections to jurisdiction might be a relevant factor in a tribunal's
exercise of its discretion to recommend provisional measures (for example in a case where there
is no urgency or questionable necessity)”.

35

113.

97, p. 38; Transcript, p. 65, lines 18-25; p. 71, lines 15-16; Respondent's letter
of 16 October 2014, p. 3).

The Tribunal has taken note of these denials and representations. That said,
the Tribunal is of course aware that such kind of denials and representations
are not unusual and that even the most unethical parties will not concede their
sins but rather deny them and represent that they would profess to have
conducted themselves as they should and intend to continue doing so.
Moreover, while the honourability of Counsel is of course undeniable, it bears
mentioning that the arbitral tribunal in the first Caratube arbitration noted that
Kazakhstan may not always have been totally transparent towards its own
Counsel:

117. First of all, regarding Claimant's Request [that Kazakhstan
desists from any conduct which violates the parties' duties of
good faith and equality in this arbitration], this discussion
records that the Parties and the Tribunal agree to the effect that
the Parties indeed have an obligation to conduct the procedure
in good faith.

118. While this is now agreed and on the record of the hearing,
the Tribunal considers it nevertheless necessary to formally
record this duty of the Parties in the present Decision. In this
context, the Tribunal sees a particular need to remind
Respondent of this duty in view of certain measures taken by
various of its authorities after this arbitral procedure has started
which are identified by Claimant in its Amended Request of 29
April 2009. In particular, the Tribunal reiterates the “surprise” its
Chairman expressed during the hearing (Tr p. 95) that, on 16
April 2009, the same day the Parties and the Tribunal had their
1st Session in Frankfurt to discuss and decide on the further
procedure including the exchange and production of documents,
the Respondent raided Claimant's offices and seized a great
volume of documents and other evidence. This was done
without any notice at the Frankfurt session. While the Tribunal
appreciates the assurance of Respondent's Counsel that he did
not know of these measures of Respondent at the time of the
Session, this conduct and the further similar measures taken by
Respondent after that date make it necessary in the view of the
Tribunal to clearly put on record the basic procedural duties of
the Parties to an international arbitration procedure and
particularly an ICSID procedure.

119. Regarding the Claimant's requests [that Kazakhstan desist
from any conduct which violates the parties’ duties of good faith
and equality in this arbitration; and any other measures in
relation to Caratube that would aggravate the dispute], the
36

114.

115.

Tribunal agrees with the essence and result of the discussion at
the hearing referred to above to the effect that the accepted duty
of a party in an arbitration to act in good faith includes and
covers a duty to avoid any unnecessary aggravation of the
dispute and harassment of the other party. And again, in view of
the measures taken by Respondent and for the reasons
mentioned in the preceding paragraph, the Tribunal considers it
necessary to formally record this in this Decision.

120. In conclusion, therefore, the Tribunal confirms that the
Parties have an obligation to conduct the procedure in good
faith and that this obligation includes a duty to avoid any
unnecessary aggravation of the dispute and harassment of the
other party.

(Exh. CLA-18, Caratube | Decision on Provisional Measures,

paras 117-120)
This Tribunal appreciates the wisdom of this statement, it being specified
however that the Respondent's alleged “past pattern of conduct” in the
Caratube | arbitration or otherwise is not relevant for the purposes of deciding
whether the Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures must be granted and
can in no way be considered as evidence in support of the Claimants’ Request,
namely of the set of facts that would establish the Request's justification in this
Arbitration. It also bears mentioning that the above comments by the Caratube |
tribunal were made in rather particular circumstances, where the concomitance
between events was striking so as to warrant, in and of itself, a most solemn
admonition fitting the concrete factual circumstances.

As will be seen below, this Tribunal finds that, based on the record as it
presently stands, the Claimants have not satisfied their burden of proving that
the Respondent has indeed committed the alleged acts and thereby caused an
irreparable harm to the Claimants’ rights to be preserved in this Arbitration.
While it is therefore not necessary to render any decision on the Respondent's
representations, the Tribunal nevertheless stresses, as a general and abstract
advice to all Parties, that they have a general duty, arising from the principle of
good faith, not to take any action that may aggravate the dispute or affect the
integrity of the arbitration.

37

2. Urgent necessity to avoid an irreparable harm to the Claimants’
rights

116. The second and third requirements of urgency and necessity, which imply the
risk of an irreparable harm to the Claimants’ identified rights, can be subsumed
under one larger requirement, as has been done in the Occidental Petroleum
case in the following terms:

In order for an international tribunal to grant provisional
measures, there must exist both a right to be preserved and
circumstances of necessity and urgency to avoid irreparable
harm.

117. The same uncontroversial idea was pertinently expressed by Alan Redfern in
the following terms:

In considering whether it is “appropriate” to issue interim
measures, the tribunal must appreciate that in effect it is being
asked to take immediate action, without a full knowledge of the
facts, at the risk of pre-judging or even rendering irrelevant its
final Award in the arbitration. For this reason, the tribunal will
need to consider whether or not the measure sought is really
necessary. Is there an urgent need for the measure? What harm
will result if it is [pe] granted? Will that harm exceed the harm
likely to result if the measure sought is not granted?'®

118. And Redfern adds:

In other words, is the interim relief necessary in order to
preserve the rights that are the subject of the dispute, pending
the Tribunals decision, and in order to avoid irreparable damage
to the applicant? The concept of “irreparable damage” is one of
loss for which an award of monetary damages is unlikely to
compensate.”

119. Accordingly, this Tribunal must investigate whether there is an urgent need, i.e.
a need that cannot await the rendering of the Award, for the provisional
measures requested by the Claimants in order to avoid an irreparable harm to
the Claimants’ rights, namely “to pursue their claims and the integrity of the
process in this arbitration in an orderly fashion without the ongoing risk that
they, or any potential witnesses on which they wish to rely to produce evidence

'® Exh. CLA-10, para. 59.

‘? Alan REDFERN, Interim Measures, The Leading Arbitrators’ Guide to International Arbitration,
Newman, Hill (eds.), Juris Publishing Inc. 2004, p. 233.

2° REDFERN, op. cit. fn 19, p. 233, footnote 25.

38

or to provide information or documents, be exposed to further sanctions or
harassment” (Request, para. 79, p. 24), and to avoid this dispute “being
aggravated by the abusive exercise of Sovereign means and persecution of
Claimants, and moreover, and in any event, by the violation of the principle of
the presumption of innocence, and the principle of prohibition of unlawful
attacks on one’s honor and reputation” (Request, para. 79, pp. 24-25).

120. As has been pointed out by the Respondent, the requirement of urgent
necessity to avoid an irreparable harm presupposes that the irreparable harm is
caused by the party against whom the provisional measures are sought, and
the implementation of the requested measures will cause the irreparable harm
to be avoided (Response, para. 11, p. 6). This does not appear to be disputed
by the Claimants.

121. For the Tribunal, this implies that the requested measures be “appropriate” in
the circumstances of the individual case to achieve their purpose. This includes
a balancing of the Parties’ respective interests at stake.*' The fact that the
Respondent is a State is relevant in this regard. Indeed, any party to an
arbitration should adhere to some procedural duties, including to conduct itself
in good faith; moreover, one can expect from a State to adhere in that very
capacity, to at least the same principles and standards, in particular to desist
from any conduct in this Arbitration that would be incompatible with the Parties’
duty of good faith,” to respect equality and not to aggravate the dispute.*® But

*' This idea also emerges from Alan Redfern’s statement cited in paragraph 103 above where he
asks “What harm will result if it is [set] granted? Will that harm exceed the harm likely to result if
the measure sought is not granted?”
2 See, e.g., Articles 18 and 27 of the Vienna Convention on the law of treaties of 23 May 1969.
See also Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v. Mexico, Award (Exh. CLA-76), para. 71
(“Writings of publicists point out that Article 18 of the Vienna Convention does not only refer to the
intentional acts of States but also to conduct which falls within its provisions, which need not be
intentional or manifestly damaging or fraudulent to go against the principle of good faith, but
merely negligent or in disregard of the provisions of a treaty or of its underlying principles, or
contradictory or unreasonable in light of such provisions or principles. It should be noted that the
principle inspiring such article has been applied in order to settle, through international arbitration,
disputes between States and individuals which, in order to be decided, required a pronouncement
on obligations of the former vis-a-vis the latter based on the law of treaties. The Mixed Greek-
Turkish Arbitral Tribunal, in the case A.A. Megalidis v. Turkey, stated: qu'il est de principe que
déja avec la signature d’un Traité et avant sa mise en vigueur, il existe pour les parties
contractantes une obligation de ne rien faire qui puisse nuire au Traité en diminuant la portée de
ses clauses. Qu’il est intéressant de faire observer que ce principe —lequel en somme n’est
qu'une manifestation de la bonne foi qui est la base de toute loi et de toute convention- a regu un
certain nombre d’applications”). As additional authority, see also Patrick DAILLIER/Mathias
39

this Tribunal must be mindful when issuing provisional measures not to unduly
encroach on the State’s sovereignty and activities serving public interests.”

122. As was noted in paragraphs 100 to 102 above, while the Parties generally
appear to agree on the principle that the recommendation of provisional
measures is subject to the requirements of urgency and necessity as outlined
above, they disagree however on whether these requirements are met in the
present case. In particular, the Parties disagree whether the Respondent is
taking any actions that cause an irreparable harm to the Claimants’ identified
rights in this Arbitration and that urgently require the recommendation of the
measures requested by the Claimants.

123. As was seen in paragraphs 50 et seq. above, the Claimants rely on a certain
number of alleged acts of harassment and intimidation, which they attribute to
the Respondent. Of relevance for the Claimants’ Request for Provisional
Measures are the following three allegedly current or ongoing actions of the
Respondent, namely the alleged involvement of the Respondent in (i) the
websites www.justicefornovikova.com and www.rakhataliyev.com; (ii) the
protest carried out on 19 June 2014 in front of Mr. Issam Hourani’s apartment in
London; and (iii) the criminal proceedings in the Novikova case initiated in

 

FORTEAU/Nguyen QUOC DINH/Alain PELLET, Droit International Public, 8th ed., Paris 2009, p.
239, para. 39 (“Le principe de bonne foi s’éléve au rang d'une institution qui régit l'ensemble des
relations internationales”); Emmanuel GAILLARD, La jurisprudence du CIRDI, Vol. |, Paris 2004,
p.133, para. 4, regarding the ICSID Award in Kiéckner v. Cameroon of 21 October 1983 (“cette
[obligation de tout révéler a un partenaire ou cocontractant] trouve tout naturellement sa place
parmi les principes géné du droit ic aux contrats ii ic . Elle découle
directement des exigences de la bonne foi dans I’exécution des contrats que chacun s’accorde a
compter au rang des principes existant dans la quasi-totalité des systémes juridiques’).

*8 City Oriente Limited v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador), Decision on provisional measures (Exh. CLA-11), paras 57, 59 and 62 (‘the
principle that neither party may aggravate or extend the dispute or take justice into their own
hands prevails”); Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on provisional measures (Exh. CLA-13),
para. 67 (“II s‘agit du principe général, fréquemment affirmé dans la jurisprudence internationale,
judiciaire ou arbitrale, selon lequel ‘toute partie en litige a obligation de s'abstenir de tout acte ou
omission susceptibles d’aggraver le litige ou de rendre I’exécution de la sentence a intervenir plus
difficile”).

°4 See, e.g., the right of a State to conduct criminal investigations: Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision
on provisional measures (Exh. CLA-19), para. 164 (“The Tribunal has given serious consideration
to Respondent's argument that an order granting the provisional measures requested by
Claimants would affect its sovereignty. In this respect, the Tribunal insists that it does not
question the sovereign right of a State to conduct criminal cases”); City Oriente Limited v. The
Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petrdleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), Decision on
provisional measures (Exh. CLA-11), para. 62 (the Tribunal notes that it has great respect for the
Ecuadorian Judiciary and that it acknowledges Ecuador's sovereign right to prosecute and punish
crimes of all kinds perpetrated in its territory”).

 

40

124.

125.

Lebanon against Messrs Issam, Devincci and Hussam Hourani, as well as
against Mr. Rakhat Aliyev.”°

Before examining these three alleged actions, it is noted that, in their Request
for Provisional Measures, the Claimants also have briefly mentioned a fourth
current or ongoing action, namely the arrest on 6 June 2014 of Mr. Rakhat
Aliyev in Vienna on allegations of kidnapping and murder of two bankers,
without sufficiently clarifying however whether and, if so, how this arrest by the
Austrian authorities must be considered in this Arbitration as an act of
harassment and intimidation by the Respondent (Request, para. 77, p. 23).
Moreover, the Claimants have not addressed Mr. Aliyev’s arrest in Vienna
during the hearing of 8 October 2014 or in their letter of 10 October 2014. By
contrast, in its Response and at the hearing, the Respondent explained that Mr.
Aliyev was arrested in Vienna by the Austrian authorities on the basis of a
European arrest warrant issued by the Austrian authorities as a result of their
own investigations into the kidnapping and murder of the two bankers. Mr.
Aliyev returned to Vienna on 5 June 2014 and, as he then was within the
jurisdiction of the Austrian authorities, was arrested the following day by these
authorities in conformity with Austrian law and procedure (Response, paras 38-
44, pp. 16-17; Transcript, p. 62, line 3 to p. 63, line 11 and p. 111, line 7 to p.
112, line 1).

The Claimants do not dispute the Respondent's explanations. Nor do they
allege that the Austrian judiciary is biased or impervious to the requirements of
due process, or that the Respondent would have attempted to use the Austrian
judiciary against the Claimants in a way that would be incompatible with the
rights that the Request for Provisional Relief aims to preserve. Therefore, based
on the record as it presently stands, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have
not proven (to the extent that this might have been alleged) that Mr. Aliyev’s
arrest in Vienna could and should be considered in this Arbitration as an act of
harassment and intimidation by the Respondent, which causes an irreparable
harm to the Claimants’ rights as identified above. Hence, the Tribunal will not

5 As was seen in paragraphs 22 et seq. above, since the hearing of 8 October 2014, the
Claimants have informed the Tribunal of further events that occurred in November and December
2014, without however making any comments on the timing and implications of such events with
respect to the Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures, other than that such events would
reinforce the Claimants’ Request.

41

126.

127.

128.

further consider Mr. Aliyev’s arrest as a possible basis for the Claimants’
Request for Provisional Measures, it being recalled that the Claimants
themselves have not clearly identified this arrest as an act of the Respondent.
a. The Respondent's alleged involvement in the Websites and the
Protest
As was seen in paragraphs 52 and 53 above, the Claimants argue that the
websites www.justicefornovikova.com and www.rakhataliyev.com “could only be
made possible with the financial and human resources as well as the
persistence of backers with ulterior motives”. Put simply, this means that for the
Claimants the Respondent is behind the Websites and the Protest in one way
or another. Indeed, according to the Claimants, the Websites and the Protest
have been “caused, promoted, encouraged and/or funded by Kazakhstan in
blatant violation of the principle of the presumption of innocence, and of the
principle of prohibition of unlawful attacks on one’s honor and reputation”
(Request, para. 68, p. 21). Their purpose is to harass, discredit and intimidate
the Hourani brothers, thereby putting the integrity of this Arbitration in jeopardy
(Request, paras 70-77, pp. 21-23; Transcript, p. 6, line 14 to p. 8, line 4).
According to the Claimants, the evidence presented to this Tribunal —
condensed at the hearing into ten categories - proves that the Respondent is
behind the Websites and the Protest (Transcript, p. 9, line 25 to p. 29, line 4).

As was seen in paragraphs 71-72 above, the Respondent asserts that while the
Claimants have not provided any evidence in support of their allegations, the
Respondent has presented evidence by Mr. Andrey Kravchenko and Prof.
Olcott which shows that the Respondent has nothing to do with either the
Websites or the Protest (see also Transcript, p. 50, lines 14-19 and p. 60, line 4
to p. 62, line 2). As was seen in paragraph 41 above, the Respondent submits
that the Claimants’ requests pertaining to the Websites and the Protest are
moot because Mr. Kravchenko and his office have already conducted
investigations with the relevant organs of the Republic of Kazakhstan and such
investigations have established that the Respondent had nothing to do with the
Websites and the Protest (Respondent's letter of 16 October 2014, p. 3).

Based on the record as it presently stands, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants
have not proven that the Respondent was in any way involved with the

42

129.

Websites or the Protest. The evidence currently before the Tribunal does not
establish that the Websites and the Protest “could only be made possible with
the financial and human resources as well as the persistence of backers with
ulterior motives”, i.e. the Respondent, as alleged by the Claimants.

That said, neither has the Respondent been able to show that is was not
somehow behind the Websites and the Protest. It is obviously well known that
proving a negative fact is the “probatio diabolica”. But it bears mentioning that
the Tribunal was not particularly impressed by the testimony of Deputy
Prosecutor General Kravchenko with respect to the Websites and the Protest.
The Tribunal has no reason to question the candour of his testimony and thus
retains it. At the same time, the Tribunal has some reservations concerning the
conception, scope and implementation of the investigations and disclosures the
Respondent claims to have undertaken and submitted in these proceedings
with regard to the Websites and the Protest. Such investigations appear less
efficient than they could have been. Similarly, Professor Olcott failed to supply
fully conclusive evidence that the Respondent indeed had nothing to do with the
Websites and the Protest. Furthermore, the Tribunal has noticed the
conspicuous timing of the launching of the Websites and of the Protest, which,
as has been pointed out by the Claimants, coincides with developments in this
Arbitration, namely the holding of the first session on 4 June 2014 (see
Request, para. 53, p. 16; para. 57, p. 17 and para. 60, p. 18).

The Tribunal remains in doubt and is not convinced one way or the other. This
Tribunal is thus prepared to give credence to the Claimants’ allegations of
harassment. However, based on the record as it presently stands, it is not clear
to the Tribunal whether and to what extent the Respondent was involved with
the Websites and the Protest. Consequently, the Claimants having not met their
burden of proof, this Tribunal cannot but dismiss the Claimants’ allegations.
From this it follows that the Claimants also have not demonstrated how or why
the investigations and declarations in their Amended Request 2.2 are urgently
necessary to avoid irreparable harm to their rights in this Arbitration. The
Tribunal therefore must reach the conclusion that the Claimants have not
established that their Amended Request 2.2 is urgently needed in order to
prevent the Respondent from causing an irreparable harm to the Claimants’

rights to be preserved in this arbitration.
43

131.

132.

 

b. The Resp 's allegedly unlawful i t in the
case before the Lebanese courts

As was seen in paragraphs 51 and 55 above, the Claimants allege that the
Respondent has extensively “lobbied” the Lebanese authorities to incriminate
the Hourani brothers and implicate them in the criminal proceedings for the
alleged murder of Ms. Novikova in Lebanon in 2004 (see Transcript, p. 21, line
8 to p. 23, line 7). For the Claimants, the facts and circumstances underlying
these criminal proceedings, as well as the Respondent's motivation,
perseverance and timing with respect to the Novikova case confirm that this is
not an ordinary case of a State legitimately exercising its prerogatives and
rights, but rather of the abusive exercise of sovereign powers. While it may
have been lawful under Lebanese law for Ms. Novikova’s mother to request the
reopening of the Novikova case, there is nothing to suggest that the
Respondent has standing, i.e. to participate as it does as partie civile in these
criminal proceedings (see Transcript, p. 21, lines 8-17 and p. 23, line 10 to p.
24, line 9). Moreover, the involvement of the Hourani brothers and, in particular,
of Mr. Devincci Hourani, in the Novikova case as from July 2012 and, in
particular, their summoning to a hearing in Lebanon in February 2013, i.e.
merely days before the final hearing in the Ruby Roz arbitration and shortly
after the present Arbitration was initiated, further confirms the abusive nature of
the Respondent's conduct (see Transcript, p. 19, line 16 to p. 25, line 14).

As was seen in paragraphs 74 et seq. above, it is the Respondent's case that
its actions with respect to the Novikova case, which has nothing to do with the
present Arbitration, were entirely justified and in conformity with the applicable
law. Given the seriousness of the evidence it was the Respondent's obligation
to press charges against Mr. Aliyev and the Hourani brothers to investigate their
role in the alleged murder of Ms. Novikova. The evidence submitted by the
Respondent in this Arbitration confirms that the reopening of the Novikova case
was legitimate and in conformity with Lebanese law. Moreover, the Respondent
argues that there has not been any “lobbying” before the Lebanese authorities,
but rather legitimate requests for cooperation, which is common practice in
cases where two countries are investigating the same alleged facts or where
criminal investigations have ramifications in two countries. At the hearing of 8
October 2014 the Respondent further insisted that the evidence before this

44

134.

Tribunal shows that the murder charges against Mr. Aliyev and the Hourani
brothers were neither trumped up nor frivolous. They cannot be considered as
harassment but constitute compliance with the law. The Respondent contends
that it is not the role of this Tribunal to interfere with legitimate criminal actions
based on serious charges. In any event, this Tribunal has no jurisdiction over
Ms. Novikova’s parents so as to prevent them from continuing the criminal
proceedings (Transcript, p. 63, line 12 to p. 72, line 25).

What is at issue are the Respondent's investigations in the Novikova case and
its requests submitted to the Lebanese authorities, which the Claimants
describe as “excessive lobbying” of the Lebanese authorities to have the
Novikova case reopened and move forward against the Hourani brothers.
Furthermore, what is also at issue is the Respondent's standing in the
Lebanese criminal proceedings in the Novikova case. In a nutshell, this means
that this Tribunal is requested to recommend provisional measures with respect
to the Respondent's investigations and participation as partie civile in the
criminal proceedings.

The Tribunal agrees with the findings of the arbitral tribunal in the Caratube |
arbitration that “criminal investigations and measures taken by a state in that
context require special considerations”. In particular, in the Caratube |
arbitration, the tribunal pertinently held as follows:

136. [...] the language authorizing ICSID Tribunals in Article 47
of the Convention and Rule 39 is very broad and does not give
any indication that any specific state action must be excluded
from the scope of possible provisional measures. Therefore, this
Tribunal does not agree with the strict approach which seems to
have been taken by the Tribunal in the SGS decision (page 301)
quoted by Respondent. Rather this broad language can be
interpreted to the effect that, in principle, criminal investigations
may not be totally excluded from the scope of provisional
measures in ICSID proceedings. The present Tribunal, in this
regard, agrees with the approach taken by the ICSID Tribunal in
the Tokios case in its Orders 1 and 3 to which both Parties in the
present case have referred.

137. But, similarly to the considerations of the Tokios Tribunal in
§§ 12 and 13 of its Order No.3, this Tribunal feels that_a
particularly high threshold must be overcome before an ICSID
tribunal can indeed recommend provisional measures regarding
criminal investigations conducted by a state.

45

136.

137.

138. This threshold and the respective burden of proof cannot
be overcome by Claimant's Request (f) in the present case in
order for this Tribunal to issue provisional measures.

139. First of all, applying Rule 39(1), the Tribunal does not find
that the right to be preserved is threatened. Claimant has not
shown _that_its procedural_right_to continue with this_ICSID
arbitration is precluded by the criminal investigation [...].

(Emphasis added)

This Tribunal agrees that a “particularly high threshold must be overcome
before an ICSID tribunal can indeed recommend provisional measures
regarding criminal investigations conducted by a state”. Whether this high
threshold would affect the burden of proof as the Caratube / tribunal appears to
suggest may remain undecided. What is certain however is that it would take
proof of exceptional circumstances to recommend that a State refrain from
conducting criminal investigations, including from participating as partie civile in
criminal proceedings, including joining in already pending criminal proceedings,
possibly in another State. The Claimants would have to establish that the
Respondent's investigations and participation as partie civile in the criminal
proceedings in Lebanon constitute an impermissible act that prevents them
from asserting their rights in this Arbitration, thus causing an irreparable harm to
the Claimants’ rights to be preserved in this Arbitration by the recommendation
of urgent provisional relief. This would imply a showing that there is no higher or
equivalent public interest of the State to be a party to the criminal proceedings.

In the opinion of the Tribunal, this the Claimants have not done. It may well be
unusual for a State to conduct criminal investigations, or require the reopening
of criminal proceedings abroad and to participate as partie civile in such
criminal proceedings in circumstances such as the ones in the present case.
However, this does not mean that the Respondent's involvement in the criminal
proceedings in Lebanon is unlawful and that it deprives the Claimants of their
rights to be preserved in this Arbitration.

That said, it is true that doubts remain as to the Respondent's standing and
motivations in the criminal proceedings in Lebanon. Professor Hadi Slim’s
expert report does not answer this question, but refers to a decision by the
Lebanese Cour de Cassation in which the Court leaves this question open

46

138.

139.

because the standing of Ms. Novikova’s mother in the criminal proceedings is
enough for these proceedings to continue (see Professor Slim’s expert report
dated 13 August 2014, para. 59). Based on the record as it presently stands,
the Tribunal thus remains in doubt as to the Respondent's standing in the
criminal proceedings in Lebanon. That being so, it does not appear to be
disputed that Ms. Novikova’s mother has standing in the criminal proceedings in
Lebanon and that these proceedings would continue even if the Respondent
were to withdraw as partie civile (see Transcript, p. 54, line 7 to p. 55, line 2). It
is therefore not clear whether and how the Respondent's withdrawal as partie
civile constitutes an urgent and necessary measure, capable of avoiding the
alleged irreparable harm to the Claimants’ rights in this Arbitration that the
criminal proceeding in Lebanon would cause. In particular, there is no actual
evidence that the Respondent is using Ms. Novikova's family as a means to
pursue its own objectives rather than assist these relatives of a possible victim
of an alleged abominable crime looking for the truth and remedy.

At the hearing of 8 October 2014 the Claimants have relied on the decision on
provisional measures rendered in the Quiborax v. Bolivia arbitration (Exh. CLA-
19). According to the Claimants,

[fribunals in less harsh circumstances for the claimant have
gone as far as ordering the state to suspend criminal
proceedings within that state. | refer to Quiborax v Bolivia, tab
11 (CLA-19), because the tribunal considered that the claimants
could not in these circumstances put forward their case. | quote,
at tab 11, the tribunal saying: "146. Even if no undue pressure is
exercised on potential witnesses, the very nature of ... criminal
proceedings is bound to reduce their willingness to cooperate in
the ICSID proceeding." And: "... ‘ability to have [their] claims and
requests for relief in the arbitration fairly considered ..."" Here the
circumstances warrant -- even more so -- the provisional
measures that we are requesting.

While this Tribunal appreciates the wisdom of the Quiborax tribunal's findings,
they cannot apply in the present case. Indeed, the Quiborax decision must be
distinguished, given that the Quiborax tribunal found that the existence of a
direct relationship between the criminal proceedings and the ICSID arbitration
had been established, meriting the preservation of the claimants’ rights in that
arbitration. The Quiborax tribunal held in relevant part:

47

140.

121. In addition, although the Tribunal has every respect for
Bolivia's sovereign right to prosecute crimes committed within its
territory, the evidence in the record suggests that the criminal
proceedings were initiated as a result of a corporate audit that
targeted Claimants because they had initiated this arbitration.
Indeed, the Querella Criminal expressly states that the alleged
irregularities in Claimants’ corporate documentation were
detected in consideration of (“en atencidn a’) the Request for
Arbitration filed by Claimants against Bolivia. Lorena Fernandez,
one of the authors of Informe 001/2005, testified that the
corporate audit was made at the request of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs in the context of an arbitration proceeding and
was aimed at establishing whether the shareholders in NMM
were Chilean nationals. Indeed, the very content of Informe
001/2005 suggests that the underlying motivation for the audit
was to serve Bolivia in the defense of this arbitration claim, as it
contained specific recommendations for such defense.

122. The Tribunal cannot fail to note that these actions were
taken after an_ inter-ministerial committee — specifically
recommended in the 2004 Memo that Bolivia should try to find
flaws in Claimants’ mining concessions as a defense strategy for
the ICSID arbitration. Seen jointly with the 2004 Memo, the
corporate audit and the criminal proceedings appear to be part
of a defense strategy adopted by Bolivia with respect to the
ICSID arbitration.

bl

124. What is clear to the Tribunal is that there is a direct
relationship between the criminal proceedings and this ICSID
arbitration that may merit the preservation of Claimants’ rights in
the ICSID proceeding. [...]

146. [...] Given that the existence of this ICSID arbitration has
been characterized within the criminal proceedings as a harm to
Bolivia, it is unlikely that the persons charged will feel free to
participate as witnesses in this arbitration.

bl

148. Thus, the Tribunal finds that Claimants have shown the
existence of a threat to the procedural integrity of the ICSID
proceedings, in particular with respect to their right to access to
evidence through potential witnesses. [...]
As was noted above, doubts remain as to the Respondent's standing and
motivations in the Lebanese criminal proceedings. However, unlike the
Quiborax tribunal, it is not clear to this Tribunal that there is a direct relationship
between the criminal proceedings in Lebanon and this Arbitration so that the
48

141.

142.

Claimants’ rights in this Arbitration are being defeated and must thus be
protected. Unlike the claimants in the Quiborax case, the Claimants in the
present case have not met their burden of proof in this respect.

Finally, similarly to what was stated at paragraph 129 above, the Tribunal feels
the need to stress that there are troubling circumstances or coincidences also
with respect to the Novikova case, in particular when one puts various events
into perspective and looks at the timeline as a whole rather than individual
event by individual event. To take an example, it is conspicuous that the
Respondent's actions in Lebanon are often contemporaneous with events going
to the developments concerning Mr. Aliyev or the Ruby Roz and the Caratube |
arbitrations.

As has been pointed out at paragraph 114 above, the Respondent's alleged
past conduct in previous arbitrations is not relevant for this Tribunal’s decision
on the Claimants’ Request and can in no way be considered as evidence for the
Respondent's alleged current or ongoing actions. However, it is rather
conspicuous that the tribunals in the Caratube | and Ruby Roz arbitrations felt
the need to point out troubling circumstances and coincidences, as does this
Tribunal. The Ruby Roz tribunal made the following comment with respect to
the Hourani brothers being summoned to appear at a hearing before the
Lebanese juge d'instruction on 4 February 2013 and their ensuing failure to
testify before the arbitral tribunal during the 11-12 February 2013 hearing:

Having considered the matter with great care, the Tribunal notes
the timing of the criminal complaint in Lebanon, of the hearing
on that complaint and of the reported investigatory interview in
Lebanon. Respondent has not provided an entirely satisfactory
explanation of that timing. The Tribunal is not in a position to
ascertain precisely what has been taking place or why, but it
accepts the stated fear of reprisals by Claimant's witnesses,
whether those fears are in fact justified or not. Accordingly, the
Tribunal grants the Claimant's request that the witness
statements of the witnesses who, as of now, have declined to
appear to be cross-examined, will be maintained on the record
and will be given the weight that the Tribunal deems
appropriate. However, their failure to attend will have a very
serious impact on the weight the Tribunal gives to their
testimony.

(Exh. C-55, Ruby Roz Procedural Order No. 5, paras 18-19)

49

143.

144,

145.

146.

147.

As was mentioned in paragraph 114 above with respect to the Caratube |
arbitration, the above comments by the Ruby Roz tribunal were made in
particular circumstances, where the concomitance between events was more
striking than in the case at hand. Therefore, the present case is not directly
comparable. Suffice it to say that the summons to appear before the juge
diinstruction in Lebanon was served on the Hourani brothers not only days
before their scheduled testimony in the Ruby Roz arbitration, but also only a
few months after the Claimants had sent the Notice of Dispute in this Arbitration
(Request, para. 32, p. 10).

Based on the foregoing, this Tribunal finds that the Claimants have not
overcome the applicable “particularly high threshold”. While the record as it
presently stands lends credence to the allegations of harassment against the
Claimants, the Tribunal cannot but reach the conclusion that the Claimants
have not established that their Amended Request 2.1 is urgently needed in
order to prevent the Respondent from causing an irreparable harm to the
Claimants’ rights to be preserved in this Arbitration.

c. Conclusion

Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal must draw the conclusion that, while
doubts remain, the Claimants have not sufficiently proven that the Respondent
has taken any ongoing actions or is currently taking any actions that cause an
irreparable harm to the Claimants’ identified rights in this Arbitration, which, in
order to be preserved, urgently require the recommendation of the measures
requested by the Claimants.

As was seen above, this conclusion applies with respect to the Claimants’
Amended Requests 2.1 and 2.2, which concern the Respondent’s alleged
involvement in the Websites and Protest, as well as the criminal proceedings in
Lebanon in the Novikova case.

But this conclusion applies also with respect to the Claimants’ Amended
Requests 2.3 and 2.4, which broadly request an undertaking from the
Respondent to abstain from any direct or indirect measures or actions that
could aggravate the present dispute, jeopardize the integrity and the legitimacy
of this Arbitration and the equality of the Parties, or that could contravene the

50

148.

149.

fundamental principles of the presumption of innocence of the Hourani family
and of the prohibition of unlawful attacks on one’s honour and reputation.
Indeed, the Claimants have not proven that the Respondent has taken any
ongoing actions or is currently taking any actions that would contravene such
rights of the Claimants. What is more, as was seen in paragraph 112 above, the
Respondent has affirmed in its written submissions and through its Counsel at
the hearing of 8 October 2014 that it will continue to abstain from any actions
that would contravene such rights, thereby rendering any urgent provisional
measures aimed at protecting such rights unnecessary. The Tribunal will
definitely grant considerable weight to any representation Counsel, on either
side, would make in this Arbitration.

That being said, the Tribunal recalls its statement in paragraph 113, namely that
it would not be unprecedented that a party, be it a State, would in fact not keep
by its commitments and protestations of good faith, possibly even make
representations without the slightest intent to fulfil them. It remains that
recommending compliance with such representations would in practice not
significantly alter the situation, considering in particular the relative lack of
specificity of the Amended Requests 2.3 and 2.4.

In conclusion, the Claimants have shown a certain need for protection in this
Arbitration, and the filing of their Request for Provisional Measures does not
appear unreasonable in the circumstances of the present case. However, the
Claimants have not been able to concretely and specifically prove that the
Respondent has engaged, is engaging or will engage in any actions that could
cause an irreparable harm to the Claimants’ rights to be preserved in this
Arbitration and that would urgently require the provisional measures they
request.”*

°6 In the opinion of the Tribunal, the reasons and conclusions set forth in paragraphs 116 et seq.
also apply with respect to the latest events reported by the Claimants in their correspondence of
13, 16 and 18 November 2014, and their email of 2 December 2014. While the Tribunal remains
in doubt as to the origin of such events and is prepared to give credence to the Claimants’
allegations of harassment, it must conclude that the Claimants have been unable to meet their
burden of proof in this regard, namely that the Respondent has engaged, is engaging or will
engage in any actions that could cause an irreparable harm to the Claimants’ rights to be
preserved in this Arbitration. This Tribunal thus cannot but dismiss the Claimants' allegations.

51

3. The recommendation of the requested provisional measures must

150.

151.

not prejudge the Tribunal’s decision on the merits of the case

As was mentioned in paragraph 100 above, the Parties agree that the
recommendation of the requested provisional measures must not prejudge the
Tribunal’s decision on the merits of the case. However, the Parties disagree
whether such requirement is met in the present case.

In the light of the Tribunal’s conclusion that the Claimants have not sufficiently
proven the urgent necessity of the provisional measures requested, the Tribunal
can dispense with entering into a discussion of the Parties’ arguments with
respect to the requirement that the Tribunal must not prejudge the merits of the
case.

4. The provisional measures must not be too broad

152.

153.

As was mentioned in paragraph 101 above, it is not clear whether the Parties
agree with respect to the existence of a requirement that the provisional
measures requested must not be too broad. In fact, the Claimants have not
taken a position on such a requirement.

Again, in the light of the Tribunal’s conclusion on the requirements of urgency
and necessity, the Tribunal can dispense with entering into a discussion of such
a possible disagreement, should there be one.

5. Final observations

154.

155.

The Tribunal has concluded that the Claimants have not established an urgent
necessity for the recommendation of their Amended Requests 2.1 to 2.5.
Therefore, the Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures must be denied.
However, the Tribunal wishes to again expressly stress the Parties’ general
duty, arising from the principle of good faith, not to take any action that may
aggravate the present dispute, affect the integrity of the arbitration and the
equality of the Parties, or that could contravene the fundamental principles of
the presumption of innocence of the Claimants and of the prohibition of unlawful
attacks on one’s honour and reputation.

The Respondent requests the Tribunal “that it be awarded the costs it has
incurred in connection with Claimants’ Request, including but not limited to legal

52

fees and expenses and expert fees and expenses” (Response, para. 101, p.
39). The Tribunal has found that the Claimants have shown a certain need for
protection in this Arbitration and that it was not unreasonable under the
circumstances to have submitted its Request for Provisional Measures. In these
circumstances, the Tribunal finds that each Party shall bear its own costs.

VI. DECISION

156. For the foregoing reasons

(i) | The Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures, as amended in writing
on 10 October 2014, is denied.

(ii) Each Party shall bear its own costs, whereas the Tribunal’s costs will be
determined in the Final Award.

For the Arbitral Tribunal:

[Signed]

Dr. Laurent Lévy, President

53

