Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page | of 37

CITATION: Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622
DATE: 20111004
DOCKET: C52737
COURT OF APPEAL FOR ONTARIO
Rosenberg, Moldaver and Feldman JJ.A.
BETWEEN
The United Mexican States
Applicant (Appellant)
and
Cargill, Incorporated
Respondent (Respondent)
Patrick G. Foy, Q.C. and Robert J.C. Deane, for the appellant
John Terry, for the respondent, with the assistance of Jeffrey W. Sarles of the Illinois bar
Barry A. Leon, Daniel A. Taylor, for the intervener ADR Chambers
Malcolm N. Ruby, for the intervener United States of America
Roger Flaim, for the intervener Attorney General of Canada
Heard: March 14 and 15, 2011

On appeal from the order of Justice Wailan Low of the Superior Court of Justice dated June
3, 2010, with reasons reported at 2010 ONSC 4656.

Feldman J.A.:

1] In response to measures taken by Mexico to protect its sugar industry from competition
from imported high fructose corn syrup (HFCS), Cargill, Incorporated, a U.S. producer of HFCS,
and its Mexican subsidiary distributor, Cargill de Mexico S.A. de C.V. (CdM), sought arbitration
for breaches of Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade Agreement Between the
Government of Canada, the Government of Mexico and the Government of the United States, 17

December 1992, Can. T.S. 1994 No. 2 (NAFTA), and an award of damages for those breaches.

[2] While recognizing that under Chapter 11 of the NAFTA, the award of damages could

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 2 of 37

only encompass Cargill’s losses suffered “by reason of, or arising out of’ Mexico’s breaches of
Chapter 11 affecting Cargill’s Mexican investment, namely CdM, the arbitration panel’s damages
award included both CdM’s lost sales as well as Cargill’s lost sales of HFCS to CdM. The

application judge dismissed the application challenging the award.

[3] The issue on appeal is whether, and on what standard of review, the latter award to
Cargill is subject to being set aside by the court on review on the basis that it “deals with a
dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration, or
contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration”. For the reasons

that follow, I would dismiss the appeal.

BACKGROUND
Facts
[4] The history of the dispute between Mexico and the United States over Mexico’s

protection of its refined sugar industry against the U.S.’s importation of HFCS products before
and after the NAFTA is set out in detail at paras. 22-39 of the application judge’s decision. As
the application judge stated, the dispute between Cargill and Mexico is “but one battle in a larger

conflict”. For the purposes of the appeal, the relevant facts can be stated briefly.

[5] Cargill is a producer of HFCS, which is a low-cost substitute for cane sugar used
extensively to sweeten soft drinks and other products. In 1993, before the NAFTA came into
force on January 1, 1994, Cargill established a division of CdM, its existing wholly-owned
subsidiary, to begin to sell HFCS in Mexico through a distribution centre it built in Tula, in the
state of Hidalgo, Mexico. Cargill also built a new production plant in Nebraska, expanded its
HFCS plants in Iowa and Tennessee, and built a new distribution centre in McAllen, Texas at the
Mexican border. Cargill’s business model was to import HFCS that it manufactured in the U.S.

into Mexico through its border facility in Texas, for distribution in Mexico through CdM’s

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 3 of 37

distribution centre in Tula.

[6] The initial effect of the NAFTA was that the soft drink industry in Mexico, the second
largest per capita consumer of soft drinks in the world, began to use HFCS rather than sugar in
its products. In order to protect its sugar industry, Mexico enacted a number of trade barriers, all
of which were ultimately found in the Cargill arbitration to constitute breaches of the NAFTA.
Their effect on Cargill was that it was obliged to shut down a number of its HFCS production
plants in the U.S. and its distribution centre in McAllen Texas, while CdM was forced to close its

Tula distribution centre.

[7] In 2004, Cargill on behalf of itself and CdM, served on Mexico a notice of intent to
submit a claim to arbitration under Chapter 11 of the NAFTA for violation of Articles 1102,
1103, 1105, 1106 and 1110 of that Chapter and for the damages properly compensable to Cargill
and CdM as a result of Mexico’s breaches of those provisions. For ease of reference, these and

other relevant NAFTA provisions are included at Appendix “A”.

[8] The parties then executed a consent to arbitration under Chapter 11, following which, the
claim was registered by the Secretary-General of the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes (Additional Facility) (ICSID), and was heard by an expert panel in

Washington D.C. in October, 2007. The decision was released in September, 2009.

[9] Because the parties designated Toronto, Ontario as the “place of arbitration”, the Ontario
Superior Court of Justice had jurisdiction to review the award under the International
Commercial Arbitration Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. 1.9, which enacted the UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration (Model Law) as a Schedule to the Act. The Model Law

was adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on June 21, 1985.

The decision of the arbitration panel

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 4 of 37

[10] Having found that Mexico breached a number of provisions of Chapter 11 of the NAFTA,
the panel awarded damages to Cargill and to CdM for the resultant losses in the amount of
U.S.$77,329,240. Those losses included what were referred to as both “up-stream” and “down-
stream” losses. The down-stream losses of U.S.$36,166,885 were the direct lost sales and
associated costs suffered by CdM. The up-stream losses of U.S.$41,162,355 represented the cost

of lost sales to CdM of products manufactured by Cargill in the United States.

[11] At the arbitration, Mexico challenged the jurisdiction of the panel to award the up-stream
damages, which it characterized as losses Cargill suffered in the United States as a producer and

exporter of HFCS, rather than losses suffered as an investor in its Mexican investment, CdM.

[12] The panel addressed the matter directly. It concluded that a Chapter 11 arbitration panel
had the jurisdiction to determine what damages arose “by reason of, or arising out of’ Mexico’s
breaches (language in Article 1116), and to award damages to Cargill for losses to its business
operations in the United States if it concluded, as a matter of interpretation, that those damages

met the described jurisdictional criterion.

[13] The panel explained its conclusion on damages at paras. 519 -526 of its decision:

519. To evaluate the damages claimed, the Tribunal has found it helpful to
look at the lost profits claimed as divided at the United States-Mexican
border, with those lost profits attributed to Cargill’s inability to sell HFCS to
CdM as “up-stream losses” and the direct losses of CdM as “down-stream
losses.”

520. According to Article 1139 and the Tribunal’s previous conclusions, the
down-stream losses are clearly compensable due to the violations of Articles
1102, 1105 and 1106 of the NAFTA. The issue, therefore, is whether those
up-stream damages claimed by Claimant, and objected to by Respondent, are
also compensable.

521. With respect to this disagreement, the Tribunal is aware that Chapter
11 applies only to measures relating to investments that are in the territory of
the State Party enacting the measures. It was for this reason that the [Archer
Daniels Midland v. The United Mexican States] tribunal determined that it

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 5 of 37

lacked jurisdiction to award compensation for “lost profits on HFCS [the
claimants] would have produced in the United States and exported to Mexico
‘but for’ the Tax, as these losses were not suffered in their capacity as
investors in Mexico.”

522. This Tribunal notes, however, that as it stated at paragraphs 147 and
352 above, Article 1139’s definition of investment is “broad and inclusive.”
This Tribunal therefore has little difficulty in determining that business
income, particularly business income so closely associated with a physical
asset in the host country and not mere trade in goods, is both an element of a
larger investment and an investment in and of itself...

523. With respect to the particular facts of this case, the Tribunal finds that
the profits generated by Cargill’s sales of HFCS to its subsidiary, Cargill de
Mexico, for CdM’s marketing, distribution and re-sale of that HFCS, were so
associated with the claimed investment, CdM, as to be compensable under the
NAFTA. Cargill’s investment in Mexico involved importing HFCS and then
selling it to domestic users, principally the soft drink industry. Thus,
supplying HFCS to Cargill de Mexico was an inextricable part of Cargill’s
investment. As a result, in the view of the Tribunal, losses resulting from the
inability of Cargill to supply its investment Cargill de Mexico with HFCS are
just as much losses to Cargill in respect of its investment in Mexico as losses
resulting from the inability of Cargill de Mexico to sell HFCS in Mexico.

524. In this way, the situation of this dispute diverges from that which the
ADM tribunal faced. ADM and Tate & Lyle created a joint venture, ALMEX,
which began selling HFCS in Mexico in 1994 and commenced its own
production of HFCS in December 1995, which grew to be ALMEX’s “most
important product.” Cargill de Mexico, on the other hand, was not a producer
of HFCS and its HFCS business therefore depended on the HFCS sold to it by
its parent.

525. Claimant’s intent was to enter the Mexican HFCS market and attain a
significant share of that market; thus its investment included everything that it
took to achieve such a result. Viewed holistically, Claimant was prevented
from operating an investment that involved the sale into and distribution of
HFCS within the Mexican market. The inability of the parent to export
product to its investment is just the other side of the coin of the inability of
the investment, Cargill de Mexico, to operate as it was intended to import
HFCS into Mexico.

526. The Tribunal therefore determines that Claimant is to be compensated
for its net lost profits as determined for both Cargill de Mexico’s lost sales to
the Mexican market and Cargill, Inc.’s lost sales to Cargill de Mexico.
[Footnotes omitted.]

DECISION OF THE SUPERIOR COURT

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 6 of 37

Jurisdictional Issue

[14] Mexico asked the Superior Court to set aside the portion of the arbitral decision that
awarded the up-stream damages to Cargill. Article 34(2) of the Model Law provides the authority
for a Superior Court judge to set aside a decision of an international arbitral tribunal on limited

grounds:

Article 34. Application for setting aside as exclusive recourse against
arbitral award

(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the court specified in article 6 only
if:

(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that:

(i) a party to the arbitration agreement referred to in article 7 was under some
incapacity; or the said agreement is not valid under the law to which the
parties have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of
this State, or

(ii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the
appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise
unable to present his case, or

(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within
the terms of the submission to arbitration, or contains decisions on matters
beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration, provided that, if the
decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not
so submitted, only that part of the award which contains decisions on matters
not submitted to arbitration may be set aside, or

(iv) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not
in accordance with the agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in
conflict with a provision of this Law from which the parties cannot derogate,
or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with this Law; or

(b) the court finds that:

(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration
under the law of this State, or

(ii) the award is in conflict with the public policy of this State.

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 7 of 37

[15] In seeking to have part of the award set aside, Mexico relied on Article 34(2)(a)(iii).

[16] Mexico argued that under Chapter 11 of the NAFTA, the arbitration panel could only
award damages to Cargill as an “investor” (Article 1139) to compensate for losses suffered in
connection with its “investment” (Article 1139) in Mexico, which was CdM, and had no
jurisdiction to award damages for losses suffered by the investor in another capacity, here as

producer and exporter of its product into Mexico.

[17] | The application judge reasoned that the tribunal would have jurisdiction based on four

threshold questions: (1) Is Cargill an “investor” in Mexico within the meaning of Chapter 11? (2)
O]

Does Cargill have an investment in another Party to the NAFTA, Mexico? (3) Has Mexico

adopted or maintained one or more measures, as defined by NAFTA? and (4) Do those measures

relate (a) to the investor, Cargill, or (b) to the investment, CdM? If the answer to all four
threshold questions was “yes”, then the next issue was “are there express or necessarily implied

limitations on the scope and nature of damages open to the tribunal to award?”
Standard of Review

[18] In order to properly assess the panel’s response to these questions, the application judge
first addressed the issue of the standard of review to be applied by the court when reviewing

decisions of expert NAFTA international arbitration tribunals.

[19] Mexico argued that the standard of review on issues of jurisdiction is correctness. Cargill
argued that the standard was one of deference. The application judge referred to judicial
authorities for the “powerful presumption” that international arbitral tribunals act within their
jurisdiction and that as a matter of respecting international comity and the global marketplace,
courts should use their powers to interfere only sparingly: Quintette Coal Ltd. v. Nippon Steel
Corp. (1990), 50 B.C.L.R. (2d) 207 (C.A.), leave to appeal refused, [1990] S.C.C.A. No. 431;

United Mexican States v. Karpa (2005), 74 O.R. (3d) 180 (C.A.); Corporacion Transnacional de

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 8 of 37

Inversiones S.A. de C.V. v. STET International, S.p.A. (2000), 49 O.R. (3d) 414 (C.A.), leave to
appeal refused, [2000] S.C.C.A. No. 581; Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth
Inc., 473 U.S. 614 (1985). Based on those authorities, she concluded that the standard of review

to be applied on issues of jurisdiction is reasonableness.
Application of the standard of review by the Superior Court

[20] In order to decide whether the decision of the panel that it had the jurisdiction to award
Cargill its up-stream damages was a reasonable one, the application judge reviewed and
considered the merits of the arguments on both sides. The thrust of Mexico’s argument was that
Cargill was being compensated not as an investor in another NAFTA Party, but as a producer in
the home Party, the United States. That argument gained significant support from a recent
decision of another NAFTA panel that also dealt with the consequences of Mexico’s treatment of
HFCS, the decision in Archer Daniels Midland Company and Tate & Lyle Ingredients Americas,
Inc. v. the United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/05, dispatched November 21,

2007; Supplementary Decision and Interpretation, dispatched July 10, 2008 (ADM).

[21] In that case, the two claimants were each producers of HFCS in the U.S., who also
established a joint venture company in Mexico called Almidones Mexicanos S.A. de C.V.
(ALMEX) to produce and sell HFCS in Mexico and to import the product from the claimants to
sell in Mexico. As in the Cargill case, the claimants claimed both for ALMEX’s losses as well as
for their own lost profits from forgone sales of their U.S.- produced HFCS to ALMEX. The panel
in that case refused to award the latter losses, holding that it lacked jurisdiction to do so. It

explained its reasoning, at paras. 273 and 274 of its award:

273. Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA applies to measures adopted or
maintained by a Party relating to, inter alia “investments of investors of
another Party in the territory of the Party”, and pursuant to Article 1101(1)(b)
only measures relating to investments that are within the scope of Chapter
Eleven should be covered. This means that the protection applies only to
measures relating to investments of investors of one Party that are in the

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 9 of 37

territory of the party that has adopted or maintained such measures. In a case
such as the one at bar, this would exclude investments of ADM and TLIA
located outside of Mexico, even if such investments are destined to promote
fructose sales in Mexico.

274. The Tribunal has jurisdiction only to award compensation for the
injury caused to Claimants in their investment made in Mexico (through
ALMEX). Therefore, the Claimants are not entitled to recover the lost profits
on HFCS they would have produced in the United States and exported to
Mexico “but for’ the Tax, as these losses were not suffered in their capacity
as investors in Mexico.

[22] The application judge observed that the arbitral panel in Cargill distinguished the ADM
case on the facts. The panel viewed Cargill’s investment in Mexico as including both the
importation and sale of HFCS into Mexico through the Mexican subsidiary CdM and its facility
in Tula, while in ADM, the investment was only the ALMEX production facility. The panel
found that Mexico’s treatment of CdM destroyed it and thereby destroyed Cargill’s business of
distributing HFCS into the Mexican market through its subsidiary. As Article 1116 of Chapter 11
defines the required causation as loss to the investor “by reason of, or arising out of” the Party’s
breach, the panel was not unreasonable in concluding that the causation requirement had been
met in this case. The application judge also noted that none of the relevant Articles in Chapter 11
sets limits on damages other than the causation requirement. In particular, no Article requires that

the damages be suffered only in the territory of the investment.

[23] The application judge concluded that Mexico’s objection did not go to the jurisdiction of
the panel, but was an attack on the merits of the decision, which was beyond the scope of review

for the court.

[24] The application judge also addressed the jurisdiction issue on the basis of Mexico’s
alternative argument that the result reached by the panel was unreasonable, and not within a
range of reasonable outcomes, in accordance with the test established by the Supreme Court of

Canada in Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190. Mexico argued that having

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 10 of 37

established only a distribution facility in Mexico and not a production operation, it was
unreasonable for Cargill to be in a better position than the ALMEX investors whose investment

was more extensive and included a joint venture production facility in Mexico.

[25] The application judge dismissed this argument as well. She noted that the ADM decision
was not binding on the Cargill panel and that the panel had distinguished ADM on the facts. She
also found that the result reached was consistent with the objects of the NAFTA as a whole, as
set out in the Preamble, and with the objectives of the NAFTA agreement as set out in Article
102, including in particular, the elimination of trade barriers and the facilitation of cross-border

movement of goods and services, and that the result reached was therefore not irrational.
Issues on the Appeal

[26] There are two main issues raised on the appeal: (1) what is the standard of review to be
applied by the Superior Court in reviewing a decision of a Chapter 11 NAFTA arbitral panel
under Article 34(2)(a)(iii) of the Model Law? and, (2) did the application judge err in the
application of the standard of review? Within the second question, the appellant attacks several of

the application judge’s findings in upholding the merits of the panel’s decision.

ANALYSIS

Issue 1: The Standard of Review

[27] The appellant submits that the application judge erred by applying the reasonableness
standard to a decision on jurisdiction and that the appropriate standard of review is the
correctness standard. Canada, an intervener on the appeal, supported this position. The United
States, which was also granted leave to intervene on appeal, took no position regarding the
standard of review. The respondent agreed with the application judge that the standard is

reasonableness.

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 11 of 37

[28] ADR Chambers, which was given leave to intervene to assist the court on the issue of
standard of review of a decision of a NAFTA arbitral tribunal, suggested a more nuanced
approach to the issue. It submitted that the domestic administrative law tests do not apply when a
court reviews the decision of an international arbitration panel under Article 34 of the Model
Law. Rather, that Article provides a limited and exhaustive list of grounds for judicial review
relating to procedure, jurisdiction and public policy; no other ground may come under
consideration. The court must not use the jurisdiction inquiry to effectively review the merits of
the arbitral decision. Because the traditional arbitral nomenclature is not applicable, the proper

description of the standard to be applied is the highest degree of deference.

[29] Ina recent article titled “Judicial Review of NAFTA Chapter 11 Arbitral Awards” McGill
L.J. [forthcoming], Henri Alvarez argues that reviewing courts in Canada and the U.S. have to
date applied “various ill-defined standards of review”. He suggests that the introduction of
domestic administrative law standards, including reasonableness and correctness in Canada, and
“manifest disregard of the law” in the United States, creates inconsistency in the review process

and should be avoided.

[30] I agree that it is important to clearly define the standard of review to be applied by a court
in reviewing an arbitral decision on the grounds set out in Article 34 of the Model Law. I also
agree that importing and directly applying domestic concepts of standard of review, both from
administrative law and from domestic review by appeal courts of trial decisions, may not be
helpful to courts when conducting their review process of international arbitration awards under

Article 34 of the Model Law.

[31] The starting point for determining the appropriate standard of review to be applied to
NAFTA Chapter 11 arbitral decisions is the words of Article 34(2) of the Model Law set out

above. The Article provides that an award may only be set aside if the objecting party proves one

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 12 of 37

of the enumerated deficiencies. None of the grounds allows a reviewing court to review the
merits of a tribunal’s decision. Article 34(2)(a)(iii) allows a court to review the award based on

excess of jurisdiction by the tribunal and reads:

(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within
the terms of the submission to arbitration, or contains decisions on matters
beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration...

[32] In the case of a Chapter 11 arbitration, the terms of the submission have three
components: (1) the agreement of the parties, (2) the words of the relevant Articles from Chapter
11, and where relevant, from other Chapters of the NAFTA, (3) any interpretation of those words
subsequently agreed to by the NAFTA signatory Parties (Canada, the United States and Mexico).
The third component comes from Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 23
May 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331, 8 I.L.M. 679, which I will discuss later in these reasons. The

submission to arbitration is always subject to, and governed by, the terms of the NAFTA.

[33] Canadian reviewing courts have consistently stated that courts should accord international
arbitration tribunals a high degree of deference and that they should interfere only sparingly or in
extraordinary cases: Quintette; Karpa; Canada (Attorney General) v. S.D. Myers, Inc. [2004], 3
F.C.R. 368. In some cases, even on questions of jurisdiction, it has been said that the courts
should apply “a powerful presumption” that an expert international arbitral tribunal acted within
its authority: Bayview Irrigation District #11 v. Mexico, [2008] O.J. No. 1858 (S.C.), at para. 63;
Corporacion Transnacional de Inversiones S.A. de C.V. v. STET International S.p.A. (1999), 45
O.R. (3d) 183 (S.C.), at p. 192, quoting concurring reasons in Quintette. Other courts have said
that on questions of the tribunal’s jurisdiction, the standard of review is correctness, but then
have broken down the issues to be decided into questions of law, where the panel had to be
correct, and questions of fact or mixed fact and law, where the panel had only to be reasonable:

Myers, at paras. 58, 60 and 61.

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 13 of 37

[34] Because the court has been given the oversight power provided in Article 34(2) of the
Model Law, the question how a reviewing court is intended to perform the review and what test it
is to apply is a critical one. In this case, the specific question is what test does the court apply
under Article 34(2)(a)(iii) of the Model Law to determine whether the tribunal exceeded its
jurisdiction by deciding an issue that was not within the submission of the parties under the

provisions of Chapter 11?

[35] Accepting that courts should interfere only sparingly or in extraordinary cases, the court
must have some basis to test whether the panel acted beyond its jurisdiction. If we were to use
judicial review principles that apply in a domestic context, we would conduct a Dunsmuir
analysis and determine whether the applicable standard is reasonableness or correctness.
Normally, where the issue is one of pure jurisdiction, the correctness standard would apply,
implying possible consideration of, but no deference to, the decision of the tribunal under review.
In United Mexican States v. Metalclad Corp. (2001), 89 B.C.L.R. (3d) 359 (S.C.), and Myers,
both NAFTA review decisions under Article 34 of the Model Law, the courts held that the

standard of review on questions of jurisdiction was correctness.

[36] _ It is also instructive to look at the approach to court review of an international arbitral
award recently adopted by the English Supreme Court (replacing the House of Lords as the
highest appeal court in the U.K.) in Dallah Real Estate and Tourism Holding Co. v. Ministry of
Religious Affairs of the Government of Pakistan, [2011] 1 A.C. 763. In that case, Dallah sought
to enforce in England an international arbitration award made in its favour against the Pakistani
Ministry. Leave to enforce the award having been granted, the Ministry sought to set aside the
order granting leave on the basis that it had not been a party to the arbitration agreement and that
the arbitration tribunal’s decision that it had jurisdiction over the Ministry was reviewable by the
court. The English Arbitration Act 1996 (U.K.), c. 23, incorporates the 1958 United Nations

Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, usually known as

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 14 of 37

the New York Convention, rather than the 1985 Model Law. In that case, the court was applying
Article V(1)(a) of the New York Convention which contains similar wording to Article 34(1)(a)(i)

of the Model Law. It reads:

Article V

1. Recognition and enforcement of the award may be refused, at the request
of the party against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the
competent authority where the recognition and enforcement is sought, proof
that:

(a) The parties to the agreement referred to in article II were, under the law
applicable to them, under some incapacity, or the said agreement is not valid
under the law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication
thereon, under the law of the country where the award was made;

[37] The court found that the order granting leave should be set aside, holding that the
tribunal’s own view of its jurisdiction had no legal or evidential value, and that the court’s role

was to reassess the issue itself. Lord Mance explained his conclusion, at paras. 30-31 as follows:

The nature of the present exercise is, in my opinion, also unaffected where an
arbitral tribunal has either assumed or, after full deliberation, concluded that it
had jurisdiction. There is in law no distinction between these situations. The
tribunal’s own view of its jurisdiction has no legal or evidential value, when
the issue is whether the tribunal had any legitimate authority in relation to the
Government at all. This is so however full was the evidence before it and
however carefully deliberated was its conclusion. It is also so whatever the
composition of the tribunal — a comment made in view of Dallah’s repeated
(but no more attractive for that) submission that weight should be given to the
tribunal’s “eminence”, “high standing and great experience”. The scheme of
the New York Convention, reflected in sections 101-103 of the 1996 Act may
give limited prima facie credit to apparently valid arbitration awards based on
apparently valid and applicable arbitration agreements, by throwing on the
person resisting enforcement the onus of proving one of the matters set out in
article V(1) and section 103. But that is as far as it goes in law. Dallah starts
with the advantage of service, it does not also start 15 or 30 love up.

This is not to say that a court seised of an issue under article V(1)(a) and
section 103(2)(b) will not examine, both carefully and with interest, the
reasoning and conclusion of an arbitral tribunal which has undertaken a
similar examination. Courts welcome useful assistance. The correct position
is well summarised by the following which I quote from the Government’s
written case, at para. 233:

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 15 of 37

Under section 103(2)(b) of the 1996 Act/article V1(a) of the New York
Convention, when the issue is initial consent to arbitration, the court
must determine for itself whether or not the objecting party actually
consented. The objecting party has the burden of proof, which it may
seek to discharge as it sees fit. In making its determination, the court
may have regard to the reasoning and findings of the alleged arbitral
tribunal, if they are helpful, but it is neither bound nor restricted by them.

[38] In Dallah, the jurisdiction issue did not challenge the content of the award itself, but,
rather, the ability of the tribunal to adjudicate: in particular, whether one party had committed to
the arbitration process. In that context, the English Supreme Court’s approach was to address the
issue de novo, rather than as a review of the decision of the tribunal. One could view this
approach as a variant of applying the correctness standard. As the Court pointed out, the decision
of the tribunal is given prima facie credit, because the onus is on the challenging party to set it
aside. But because the court was deciding the validity of the agreement issue de novo, it heard
evidence, including expert evidence on the French law governing the issue of the validity of the

agreement, The court concluded that the agreement was not valid and therefore, the arbitration

[2]

panel had no jurisdiction.

[3]
[39] In this case, the jurisdiction issue is quite different under Article 34 (2)(a)(iii). | The
issue is whether the award itself complies with the submission to arbitration and, in particular,

whether it “contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration”.
Under this subsection, the court is charged with reviewing the award and the submission to
determine whether the tribunal stayed within its jurisdiction, based on the content of the

submission, and the application of Chapter 11 of the NAFTA.

[40] Therefore, does the wording of Article 34(2)(a)(iii) assist the court in determining the
standard of review the court is to apply? Although the subsection does not state a standard of
review, because the question is whether the tribunal acted within its jurisdiction, and there are no

words that limit the court’s task, there is nothing that detracts from the normal rule that on

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 16 of 37

questions of jurisdiction, the tribunal could not act beyond its jurisdiction. In the administrative

law context, Lebel J. stated the principle in Dunsmuir, at para. 59, as follows:

Administrative bodies must also be correct in their determinations of true
questions of jurisdiction or vires... ‘Jurisdiction’ is intended in the narrow
sense of whether or not the tribunal had the authority to make the inquiry. In
other words, true jurisdiction questions arise where the tribunal must
explicitly determine whether its statutory grant of power gives it the authority
to decide a particular matter. The tribunal must interpret the grant of authority
correctly or its action will be found to be ultra vires or to constitute a
wrongful decline of jurisdiction: D.J.M. Brown and J.M. Evans, Judicial
Review of Administrative Action in Canada (loose-leaf), at pp. 14-3 to 14-6.
An example may be found in United Taxi Drivers’ Fellowship of Southern
Alberta v. Calgary (City), [2004] 1 S.C.R. 485, 2004 SCC 19. In that case, the
issue was whether the City of Calgary was authorized under the relevant
municipal acts to enact bylaws limiting the number of taxi plate licences
(para. 5, per Bastarache J.). That case involved the decision-making powers
of a municipality and exemplifies a true question of jurisdiction or vires.

[41] | The tribunal therefore had to be correct in the sense that the decision it made had to be
within the scope of the submission and the NAFTA provisions. Its authority to make any decision
is circumscribed by the submission and the provisions of the NAFTA as interpreted in
accordance with the principles of international law. It has no authority to expand its jurisdiction
by incorrectly interpreting the submission or the NAFTA, even if its interpretation could be

viewed as a reasonable one.

[42] I conclude that the standard of review of the award the court is to apply is correctness, in
the sense that the tribunal had to be correct in its determination that it had the ability to make the

decision it made.

[43] | This conclusion is consistent with the reasoning in Dallah and with the decisions of the

Supreme Court of British Columbia in Metalclad and of the Federal Court in Myers.

[44] It is important, however, to remember that the fact that the standard of review on

jurisdictional questions is correctness does not give the courts a broad scope for intervention in

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 17 of 37

the decisions of international arbitral tribunals. To the contrary, courts are expected to intervene

only in rare circumstances where there is a true question of jurisdiction.

[45] In the domestic law context, courts are warned to ensure that they take a narrow view of
what constitutes a question of jurisdiction and to resist broadening the scope of the issue to
effectively decide the merits of the case. This point was emphasized by Lebel J. in Dunsmuir, the

leading case on standard of review in the administrative law context, in his discussion at para. 59:

These questions [of jurisdiction] will be narrow. We reiterate the caution of
Dickson J. in [Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 963 v. New
Brunswick Liquor Corp., [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227] that reviewing judges must not
brand as jurisdictional issues that are doubtfully so. [Emphasis added. ]

[46] This latter approach is magnified in the international arbitration context. Courts are
warned to limit themselves in the strictest terms to intervene only rarely in decisions made by
consensual, expert, international arbitration tribunals, including on issues of jurisdiction. In my
view, the principle underlying the concept of a “powerful presumption” is that courts will
intervene rarely because their intervention is limited to true jurisdictional errors. To the extent
that the phrase “powerful presumption” may suggest that a reviewing court should presume that
the tribunal was correct in determining the scope of its jurisdiction, the phrase is misleading. If
courts were to defer to the decision of the tribunal on issues of true jurisdiction, that would
effectively nullify the purpose and intent of the review authority of the court under Article 34(2)

(a)(iii).

[47] | Therefore, courts are to be circumspect in their approach to determining whether an error
alleged under Article 34(2)(a)(iii) properly falls within that provision and is a true question of
jurisdiction. They are obliged to take a narrow view of the extent of any such question. And when
they do identify such an issue, they are to carefully limit the issue they address to ensure that they

do not, advertently or inadvertently, stray into the merits of the question that was decided by the

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 18 of 37

tribunal.

[48] | One challenge for a reviewing court is to navigate the tension between the discouragement
to courts to intervene on the one hand, and on the other, the court’s statutory mandate to review
for jurisdictional excess, ensuring that the tribunal correctly identified the limits of its decision-

making authority. Ultimately, when deciding its own jurisdiction, the tribunal has to be correct.

[49] For example, if the submission to arbitration, agreed to by both parties, makes a claim for
damages suffered in the years 2007 and 2008, and the tribunal awards damages for 2009 and
2010, that would be an “award... not falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration.”
Another example might be where the “investment” made by an investor from one Party is located
in Brazil — i.e. not in the territory of another Party — and the tribunal awards Chapter 11 damages
for losses suffered by the investor in Brazil even though Chapter 11 defines an investment as
being located in the territory of another Party to the NAFTA i.e., Canada, the United States or

Mexico.

[50] The second challenge for the court is to limit its review to determining whether the award
“contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission” and not to review the merits

of the decision itself.

[51] While the respondent advocates for review under Article 34(2)(a)(iii) on a reasonableness
standard, as found by the application judge, in my view a reasonableness standard inevitably
leads to a review of the merits of the decision. Any time the court reviews on the reasonableness
standard, it undertakes an in-depth analysis of the reasoning and decision of the tribunal in order
to decide whether the result was a reasonable one. That may include a review in the form of an
exercise determining whether findings of fact made by the tribunal were reasonable. Once a court
enters into a reasonableness review, it is effectively considering the merits of the tribunal’s

decision and deciding whether that decision is acceptable because it is reasonable, not because it

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 19 of 37

was made within the jurisdiction of the tribunal.

[52] To summarize my approach, the role of the reviewing court is to identify and narrowly
define any true question of jurisdiction. Specifically, under Article 34(2)(a)(iiii), did the tribunal
decide an issue that was not part of the submission to arbitration, or misinterpret its authority
under the NAFTA? Another way to define the proper approach is to ask the following three

questions:

e What was the issue that the tribunal decided?

e¢ Was that issue within the submission to arbitration made under Chapter 11 of the NAFTA?

e Is there anything in the NAFTA, properly interpreted, that precluded the tribunal from

making the award it made?

[53] The role of the reviewing court is to identify and narrowly define any true question of
jurisdiction. The onus is on the party that challenges the award. Where the court is satisfied that
there is an identified true question of jurisdiction, the tribunal had to be correct in its assumption
of jurisdiction to decide the particular question it accepted and it is up to the court to determine
whether it was. In assessing whether the tribunal exceeded the scope of the terms of jurisdiction,

the court is to avoid a review of the merits.

Issue 2: Application of the Standard of Review

Positions of the Parties

[54] To restate, Mexico says that the tribunal did not have the jurisdiction under Chapter 11 of
the NAFTA to award damages to Cargill for losses it suffered as a producer and seller of HFCS

in the United States and not as an investor in Mexico.

[55] As noted above, both Canada and the United States appeared as interveners on the appeal.

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 20 of 37

They supported Mexico’s position on the basis that all three Parties to the NAFTA have agreed
on a common view of the interpretation of Article 1116: that it limits an investor’s damages “to
those incurred in its capacity as an investor in seeking to make, making or having made an
investment in the territory of another NAFTA Party.” Canada also supported Mexico on the issue
of standard of review, taking the position that the interpretation of the definition of “investment”
in Chapter 11 is an issue of law that goes to the jurisdiction of the tribunal and on which it must

be correct.

[56] Mexico divides its challenge into three specific issues. They are all versions of a similar
objection - that the tribunal erred in its interpretation of the relevant NAFTA provisions and that
those errors amounted to errors of jurisdiction. In particular, Mexico argues that the tribunal first
erred in concluding that the scope of the damages “arising by reason of, or arising out of”

breaches of Articles 1116 and 1117 were matters of interpretation or application of the facts.

[57] The tribunal’s second alleged error was failing to distinguish between Cargill in its

capacity as producer and as investor for the purpose of calculating its damages.

[58] Its third alleged error was the failure to recognize that Chapter 11 has a territorial
limitation to its application and to the scope of damages that can be awarded to an investor.
Mexico relies on the same argument asserted by the two interveners, Canada and the United
States, that the NAFTA Parties have all taken the common position, in accordance with Article
31(3) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which recognizes the territorial limitation

on the scope of damages.

[59] Taking these errors together, the tribunal is said to have exceeded its jurisdiction by
treating Cargill’s investment in a holistic manner, which effectively included a portion of its
production and export business in the United States, thereby offending the territorial limitations

of Chapter 11 and the jurisdictional limits imposed by the investment requirement. In making this

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 21 of 37

submission, Mexico explicitly acknowledged that the damage suffered by an investor is not
limited to damage suffered in the country where the investment is located, as long as the damage
is suffered by the claimant in its capacity as an investor. For example, an investor could recover
the cost of lobbying efforts in its home country in respect of the investment, as damages suffered

as an investor.

[60] The territorial limitation was clearly and explicitly recognized by the ADM tribunal when
it refused to award the claimant investors any damages for loss of sales to their Mexican

investment subsidiary. In its Supplementary Decision, at para. 52, the ADM tribunal stated:

...When the Claimants manufactured HFCS in the United States for sale in
Mexico, the investment of the Claimants responsible for generating the profits
is the investment in plant and other facilities in the United States. These
losses did not relate to an investment in Mexican territory, and therefore the
Tribunal did not have jurisdiction over these alleged losses.

[61] In this case, Mexico argues that neither the tribunal nor the application judge provided a
logical basis for distinguishing the ADM analysis. It also suggests that the ADM claimants had a
stronger claim to damages because, in accordance with the goals of the NAFTA, they had made a
substantial investment in a production operation in Mexico, not just a distribution center for

HFCS produced in the United States.
Analysis

[62] The focus of the jurisdictional challenge is two-fold: (1) the interpretation of the
provisions of Chapter 11 of the NAFTA that accord the power to make complaints and to receive
compensation for Party breaches affecting a local investment by an investor of another Party,
through the arbitration process; and (2) the exact definition and extent of the interpretation of the
Chapter 11 provisions that has been consented and agreed to by the Parties to the NAFTA, that

may impose a territorial limitation on Chapter 11 damages.

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 22 of 37

[63] Article 1116 of Chapter 11 allows an investor to submit a claim to arbitration for defined
breaches by a NAFTA Party where the “investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or
arising out of, that breach”. Article 1101 describes and confines the application of Chapter 11 to
“measures adopted or maintained by a Party to: (a) investors of another Party; (b) investments of
investors of another Party in the territory of the Party; and (c) with respect to Articles 1106 and
1114, all investments in the territory of the Party.” Finally, the definition of investment in Article

1139 includes:

(h) interests arising from the commitment of capital or other resources in the
territory of a Party to economic activity in such territory, such as under

(i) contracts involving the presence of an investor’s property in the territory of
the Party, including turnkey or construction contracts, or concessions, or

(ii) contracts where remuneration depends substantially on the production,
revenues or profits of an enterprise;

[64] The definition goes on to provide that an investment does not mean:

(i) claims to money that arise solely from
(i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or

enterprise in the territory of a Party to an enterprise in the territory of another
Party...

[65] | Mexico alleges that these provisions jurisdictionally limit the scope of an arbitration
award of damages to damages suffered by an investor by reason of Mexico’s trade barriers as
they affected Cargill’s investment in Mexico, but not as they affected its investments in the
United States, and therefore precluded awarding damages for lost sales from Cargill’s U.S.

production facilities to its Mexican investment, CdM.

[66] I do not agree. I agree with the application judge that Mexico’s submission seeks to
expand the jurisdictional question into issues that go to the merits of the case. Again, the inquiry

under Article 34(2)(a)(iii) is restricted to whether the tribunal dealt with a matter beyond the

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 23 of 37

submission to arbitration, not how the tribunal decided issues within its jurisdiction.

[67] The relevant provisions allow the investor, which is necessarily an individual or an
enterprise from another Party state, to claim damages. Those damages must arise from a breach
by the host Party as described in Chapter 11. All of these breaches, as set out in the Articles of
Chapter 11, are in respect of the investor’s investment in the host Party’s territory. For example,

Article 1103, “Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment’, provides:

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no less
favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investors of any other
Party or of a non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of
investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
investments of investors of any other Party or of a non-Party with respect to
the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation,
and sale or other disposition of investments.

[68] The investment must meet the definition and not be excluded as merely selling product to
buyers in the affected Party territory. Finally, the investor’s loss must have been incurred “by
reason of, or arising out of” the breach. Those are the jurisdictional limits on the award of

damages.

[69] It is up to the tribunal to make findings of fact, apply the facts to the definitions, and
determine whether, in any particular case, the claimed damages fall within the defined criteria.
As the application judge described, the criteria for compensable damages provide a causation
requirement but no specified territorial limitation except in the definitional requirements of an
investment. That definition also provides that an investment does not include mere contracts for
the sale of goods or services into a country; therefore where there is no actual investment, there

can be no damages that merely compensate for the loss of such sales.

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 24 of 37

[70] The tribunal correctly identified the jurisdictional limits on its ability to award damages
and sought to determine Cargill’s losses as an investor “by reason of or arising out of’ Mexico’s
trade barrier breaches. In doing so, it relied on the expert damages report by Navigant Consulting
Inc. submitted by Cargill. A copy of that report was provided to this Court at the hearing. That
report described Cargill’s business model in Mexico. Its strategy called for production of HFCS
by Cargill in the U.S. and sale to CdM at the U.S. border for distribution by CdM to end
customers in Mexico. Cargill targeted high-volume, large corporate customers in Mexico. It
therefore built two distribution centres to serve two areas of the country, one in Mexico and one
in Texas near the border. It then expanded its production facilities in the U.S. to supply the

Mexican market.

[71] The tribunal accepted that Cargill’s business model was an integrated enterprise for
business in Mexico through CdM, and also the expert’s characterization of Cargill’s loss as the
present value of the cash flows that both CdM and Cargill “would have earned from sales of
HFCS in Mexico from 2002 to 2007.” In order to calculate this loss, the report factors in lost

capacity in Cargill’s U.S. plants that were built to supply CdM with product.

[72] Clearly there is an argument as to whether lost capacity in Cargill’s U.S. plants constitutes
damages by reason of, or arising out of, Mexico’s breaches to the extent that those breaches
affected CdM. However, this is a quintessential question for the expertise of the tribunal, rather
than an issue of jurisdiction. Had there been language in the Chapter 11 provisions that prohibited
awarding any damages that were suffered by the investor in its home business operation, even if
those damages related to and were integrated with the Mexican investment, that would have been
a jurisdictional limitation that would have precluded the arbitration panel from awarding such
damages, even if in its view, they otherwise flowed from the breaches. But there is not such

limiting language.

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 25 of 37

[73] The panel distinguished the ADM case on its view of the facts. There, because the joint
venture Mexican subsidiary of the claimants was a producer of HFCS, it did not need to import
product produced by the claimants in the U.S. as a necessary part of the business plan for its
Mexican investment. Therefore, unlike in the Cargill case, because any losses suffered by
ADM’s U.S. production facilities could not be said to be by reason of, or arising out of, Mexico’s

breaches, there was no jurisdiction to award such losses.

[74] | Whether or not the tribunal’s distinction of the ADM case is a reasonable one is not an
issue for the court. The only issue is whether the tribunal was correct in its determination that it
had jurisdiction to decide the scope of damages suffered by Cargill by applying the criteria set
out in the relevant articles of Chapter 11, and that there is no language in Chapter 11, or as agreed
by the NAFTA Parties, that imposes a territorial limitation on those damages. Once the court
concludes that the tribunal made no error in its assumption of jurisdiction, the court does not go
on to review the entire analysis to decide if the result was reasonable. As I have determined that

the tribunal acted within its jurisdiction, there is no review of the merits of the decision.

Issue 3: Have the NAFTA Parties consented to an interpretation of Chapter 11 that
precluded the tribunal from ordering the up-stream damages?

[75] NAFTA tribunals are directed by Article 1131(1) to decide the issues in a dispute in
accordance with the NAFTA and the applicable rules of international law. The Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties is one of the governing documents that provides such rules.

Articles 31(1) and (3)(a) and (b) of that convention are relevant and provide:

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light
of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise,
in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the
parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 26 of 37

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with
the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument
related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation
of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes
the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between
the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the
parties so intended.

[76] The three NAFTA Parties submit that the intent of Chapter 11 is not to protect the cross-
border trade in goods, which is covered by other chapters, but specifically to address cross-border
investments and to provide a remedy where those investments are not treated by the host Party in
accordance with its obligations as set out in Chapter 11. This principle, as formulated, was
recognized by the Cargill tribunal, which noted at para. 515, that Cargill was making no claim

for any loss of trade sales it made directly to Mexican customers.

[77] | Neither does Chapter 11 protect investments in the investor’s home country. For example,
in The Consolidated Arbitration in the NAFTA Chapter 11/UNICTRAL Cattle Cases v. United
States of America, Award on Jurisdiction (28 January 2008), at para. 233, the tribunal decided it
had no jurisdiction over the claim against the United States for any measures it took, because the
Canadian claimants were claiming for damages in respect of their Canadian operations and
(unlike in the Cargill case) had no present or intended investment in the other Party’s territory, in

that case the United States.

[78] The Parties submit that in accordance with Article 31(3)(b) of the Vienna Convention,

their subsequent practice has been to consistently submit to NAFTA tribunals their agreement

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 27 of 37

that, quoting from the factum of the United States of America at para 19: “[T]he recovery
available for claims submitted under Article 1116 is limited to loss or damage suffered by the
claimant in its capacity as investor.” This statement, however, merely reflects the words of the

NAFTA, about which there is no dispute.

[79] In the context of this case, the Parties are effectively arguing that they have agreed, in
accordance with Article 31 of the Vienna Convention, that the only compensable damages are
those suffered in the territory of the Party where the investment is located and not losses suffered
by the investor in its home business operation, even where those losses resulted from the breach.
Reference is made in the factum filed by the United States, as evidence of the agreement, to

submissions made to the Myers tribunal by the United States and Mexico.

[80] I have examined those submissions. They bear out the general agreement by the Parties
reflected in the quote above: any compensable losses must be suffered by the investor in its
capacity as an investor of an investment. However, those submissions do not go so far as to put a

strict territorial limitation on the losses.

[81] Of course, because the fact situation and arguments in Myers posed a different problem
than the one faced in Cargill, and the Parties focused their argument to meet the Myers facts, the
argument does not address the specific damages issue that has arisen in Cargill. In Myers, it was
argued that the purpose of the Canadian investment was intended to facilitate orders for PCB’s to
be sent to Myers’ plant in the U.S. When Canada prohibited the cross-border transport of PCB’s,
the loss of business was suffered at the U.S. plant. Hence the argument was that the measures that
Canada took caused a loss to Myers in the U.S. mainly, with only incidental losses to the small
Canadian investment. Mexico included the following statement as part of its submission, para.

40:

In the case of lost profits, it will be important for the Tribunal to determine
the amount of foregone profit (if any) that properly would have accrued to the

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 28 of 37

Canadian investment rather than the U.S. investor. It would be wrong to lump
together the investment’s loss of profit that would have been earned by
rendering sales and administrative services in Canada with the investor’s loss
of profit that would have been earned by providing PCB waste disposal
services in the United States. This would compensate the investor for loss or
damage that does not arise out of a breach of Section A of Chapter Eleven,
but by reason (if at all) of a breach of Chapter Twelve, a chapter which falls
outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

[82] This submission reflects the premise asserted by the Parties that damages awarded under
Chapter 11 of the NAFTA must compensate the investor for breaches that affect it as an investor
in the investment. However, it does not provide a specific agreement by the Parties that in all
cases, damages awarded are to be limited only to those suffered by the investor in the territory of

the investment.

[83] In my view, it is clear that NAFTA tribunals understand that the damages that may be
awarded for Chapter 11 claims must be in relation to breaches that affect a claimant’s investment
in the host country and therefore affect the investor as an investor. That is the common position
of the NAFTA Parties as well. They say, however, that what they mean by that position is that
such damages are further limited to exclude losses suffered by the investor in its home business
operation as opposed, for example, to losses that reflect administrative expenses such as lobbying

expenses in the home country spent for the purposes of the investment.

[84] I agree that if that position of the three Parties was a clear, well-understood, agreed
common position, in accordance with Article 31(3)(b) of the Vienna Convention, that prohibited
the award of any losses suffered by the investor in its home business operation, even caused by
the breach, it would be an error of jurisdiction for the tribunal to fail to give effect to that
interpretation of the relevant provisions of Chapter 11. However, that does not appear to be the
case. The common position, as far as it went, that damages must relate to the investment and to
the investor as an investor, was understood and implemented by the Cargill tribunal, based on its

findings of the nature of the losses in this case. In my view, no jurisdictional error was made.

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 29 of 37

Issue 4: Reference to the NAFTA Objective

[85] The appellant raises one further issue in its factum. It objects to the reference by the
application judge to the NAFTA objective in Article 102(a) - the facilitation of the cross-border
movement of goods - as supporting her conclusion that the result reached by the tribunal was not
irrational. In light of my conclusion on the standard of review, it is not necessary to address this

issue.
CONCLUSION
[86] I would dismiss the appeal with costs. Counsel advised the court at the conclusion of oral
argument that they would resolve the issue of costs. I would not make any award of costs in
favour of or against the interveners, and thank them for their helpful submissions.
Signed: “K. Feldman J.A.”
“T agree M. Rosenberg J.A.”

“T agree M. J. Moldaver J.A.”
RELEASED: “MR” OCTOBER 4, 2011

Appendix “A”
Article 102: Objectives

1. The objectives of this Agreement, as elaborated more specifically through its principles and rules,
including national treatment, most-favored-nation treatment and transparency, are to:

(a) eliminate barriers to trade in, and facilitate the cross-border movement of, goods and services
between the territories of the Parties;

(b) promote conditions of fair competition in the free trade area;
(c) increase substantially investment opportunities in the territories of the Parties;

(d) provide adequate and effective protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights in
each Party's territory;

(e) create effective procedures for the implementation and application of this Agreement, for its
joint administration and for the resolution of disputes; and

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 30 of 37

(f) establish a framework for further trilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation to expand
and enhance the benefits of this Agreement.

2. The Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in the light of its objectives set
out in paragraph 1 and in accordance with applicable rules of international law.

Article 1101: Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to:
(a) investors of another Party;

(b) investments of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party; and

(c) with respect to Articles 1106 and 1114, all investments in the territory of the Party.

2. A Party has the right to perform exclusively the economic activities set out in Annex III and to
refuse to permit the establishment of investment in such activities.

3. This Chapter does not apply to measures adopted or maintained by a Party to the extent that
they are covered by Chapter Fourteen (Financial Services).

4. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from providing a service or
performing a function such as law enforcement, correctional services, income security or
insurance, social security or insurance, social welfare, public education, public training, health,
and child care, in a manner that is not inconsistent with this Chapter.

Article 1102: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no less favorable than that it
accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party treatment no less favorable
than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments of its own investors with respect to the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other
disposition of investments.

3. The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraphs | and 2 means, with respect to a state or
province, treatment no less favorable than the most favorable treatment accorded, in like
circumstances, by that state or province to investors, and to investments of investors, of the Party
of which it forms a part.

4. For greater certainty, no Party may:
(a) impose on an investor of another Party a requirement that a minimum level of equity in an enterprise

in the territory of the Party be held by its nationals, other than nominal qualifying shares for directors or
incorporators of corporations; or

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 31 of 37

(b) require an investor of another Party, by reason of its nationality, to sell or otherwise dispose of an
investment in the territory of the Party.

Article 1103: Most-Favored-Nation Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no less favorable than that it
accords, in like circumstances, to investors of any other Party or of a non-Party with respect to
the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other
disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party treatment no less favorable
than that it accords, in like circumstances, to investments of investors of any other Party or of a
non-Party with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.

Article 1105: Minimum Standard of Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party treatment in accordance
with international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.

2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1 and notwithstanding Article 1108(7) (b), each Party shall
accord to investors of another Party, and to investments of investors of another Party,
nondiscriminatory treatment with respect to measures it adopts or maintains relating to losses
suffered by investments in its territory owing to armed conflict or civil strife.

3. Paragraph 2 does not apply to existing measures relating to subsidies or grants that would be
inconsistent with Article 1102 but for Article 1108(7) (b).

Article 1106: Performance Requirements

1. No Party may impose or enforce any of the following requirements, or enforce any
commitment or undertaking, in connection with the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct or operation of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in
its territory:

(a) to export a given level or percentage of goods or services;

(b) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(c) to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods produced or services provided in its territory, or to
purchase goods or services from persons in its territory;

(d) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports or to the amount
of foreign exchange inflows associated with such investment;

(e) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such investment produces or provides by
relating such sales in any way to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings;

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 32 of 37

(f) to transfer technology, a production process or other proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory,
except when the requirement is imposed or the commitment or undertaking is enforced by a court,
administrative tribunal or competition authority to remedy an alleged violation of competition laws or to
act in a manner not inconsistent with other provisions of this Agreement; or

(g) to act as the exclusive supplier of the goods it produces or services it provides to a specific region or
world market.

2. A measure that requires an investment to use a technology to meet generally applicable health,
safety or environmental requirements shall not be construed to be inconsistent with paragraph 1
(f). For greater certainty, Articles 1102 and 1103 apply to the measure.

3. No Party may condition the receipt or continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with an
investment in its territory of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party, on compliance with any of
the following requirements:

(a) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;

(b) to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods produced in its territory, or to purchase goods from
producers in its territory;

(c) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the volume or value of exports or to the amount
of foreign exchange inflows associated with such investment; or

(d) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such investment produces or provides by
relating such sales in any way to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange earnings.

4. Nothing in paragraph 3 shall be construed to prevent a Party from conditioning the receipt or
continued receipt of an advantage, in connection with an investment in its territory of an investor
of a Party or of a non-Party, on compliance with a requirement to locate production, provide a
service, train or employ workers, construct or expand particular facilities, or carry out research
and development, in its territory.

5. Paragraphs 1 and 3 do not apply to any requirement other than the requirements set out in
those paragraphs.

6. Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or do not
constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or investment, nothing in paragraph 1(b)
or (c) or 3(a) or (b) shall be construed to prevent any Party from adopting or maintaining
measures, including environmental measures:

(a) necessary to secure compliance with laws and regulations that are not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Agreement;

(b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health; or
(c) necessary for the conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural resources.

Article 1110: Expropriation and Compensation

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 33 of 37

1. No Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an investment of an investor of
another Party in its territory or take a measure tantamount to nationalization or expropriation of
such an investment ("expropriation"), except:

(a) for a public purpose;

(b) on a non-discriminatory basis;

(c) in accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1); and

(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2 through 6.

2. Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment
immediately before the expropriation took place ("date of expropriation"), and shall not reflect
any change in value occurring because the intended expropriation had become known earlier.
Valuation criteria shall include going concern value, asset value including declared tax value of
tangible property, and other criteria, as appropriate, to determine fair market value.

3. Compensation shall be paid without delay and be fully realizable.

4. If payment is made in a G7 currency, compensation shall include interest at a commercially
reasonable rate for that currency from the date of expropriation until the date of actual payment.

5. If a Party elects to pay in a currency other than a G7 currency, the amount paid on the date of
payment, if converted into a G7 currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing on that date,
shall be no less than if the amount of compensation owed on the date of expropriation had been
converted into that G7 currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing on that date, and
interest had accrued at a commercially reasonable rate for that G7 currency from the date of
expropriation until the date of payment.

6. On payment, compensation shall be freely transferable as provided in Article 1109.

7. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in relation to
intellectual property rights, or to the revocation, limitation or creation of intellectual property
rights, to the extent that such issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is consistent with
Chapter Seventeen (Intellectual Property).

8. For purposes of this Article and for greater certainty, a non-discriminatory measure of general
application shall not be considered a measure tantamount to an expropriation of a debt security or
loan covered by this Chapter solely on the ground that the measure imposes costs on the debtor
that cause it to default on the debt.

Article 1116: Claim by an Investor of a Party on Its Own Behalf

1. An investor of a Party may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim that another Party
has breached an obligation under:

(a) Section A or Article 1503(2) (State Enterprises), or

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 34 of 37

(b) Article 1502(3)(a) (Monopolies and State Enterprises) where the monopoly has acted in a manner
inconsistent with the Party's obligations under Section A,

and that the investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

2. An investor may not make a claim if more than three years have elapsed from the date on
which the investor first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach
and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or damage.

Article 1117: Claim by an Investor of a Party on Behalf of an Enterprise

1. An investor of a Party, on behalf of an enterprise of another Party that is a juridical person that
the investor owns or controls directly or indirectly, may submit to arbitration under this Section a
claim that the other Party has breached an obligation under:

(a) Section A or Article 1503(2) (State Enterprises), or

(b) Article 1502(3)(a) (Monopolies and State Enterprises) where the monopoly has acted in a manner
inconsistent with the Party's obligations under Section A, and that the enterprise has incurred loss or
damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

2. An investor may not make a claim on behalf of an enterprise described in paragraph 1 if more
than three years have elapsed from the date on which the enterprise first acquired, or should have
first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the enterprise has incurred
loss or damage.

3. Where an investor makes a claim under this Article and the investor or a non-controlling
investor in the enterprise makes a claim under Article 1116 arising out of the same events that
gave rise to the claim under this Article, and two or more of the claims are submitted to
arbitration under Article 1120, the claims should be heard together by a Tribunal established
under Article 1126, unless the Tribunal finds that the interests of a disputing party would be
prejudiced thereby.

4. An investment may not make a claim under this Section.

Article 1131: Governing Law

1. A Tribunal established under this Section shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with
this Agreement and applicable rules of international law.

2. An interpretation by the Commission of a provision of this Agreement shall be binding on a
Tribunal established under this Section.

Section C - Definitions
Article 1139: Definitions

For purposes of this Chapter:

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 35 of 37

disputing investor means an investor that makes a claim under Section B;
disputing parties means the disputing investor and the disputing Party;
disputing party means the disputing investor or the disputing Party;
disputing Party means a Party against which a claim is made under Section B;

enterprise means an "enterprise" as defined in Article 201 (Definitions of General Application),
and a branch of an enterprise;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or organized under the law of a Party, and
a branch located in the territory of a Party and carrying out business activities there.

equity or debt securities includes voting and non-voting shares, bonds, convertible debentures,
stock options and warrants;

G7 Currency means the currency of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland or the United States;

ICSID means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes;

ICSID Convention means the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, done at Washington, March 18, 1965;

Inter-American Convention means the /nter-American Convention on International
Commercial Arbitration, done at Panama, January 30, 1975;

investment means:

(a) an enterprise;

(b) an equity security of an enterprise;

(c) a debt security of an enterprise

(i) where the enterprise is an affiliate of the investor, or

(ii) where the original maturity of the debt security is at least three years,

but does not include a debt security, regardless of original maturity, of a state enterprise;
(d) a loan to an enterprise

(i) where the enterprise is an affiliate of the investor, or

(ii) where the original maturity of the loan is at least three years,

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 36 of 37

but does not include a loan, regardless of original maturity, to a state enterprise;
(e) an interest in an enterprise that entitles the owner to share in income or profits of the enterprise;

(f) an interest in an enterprise that entitles the owner to share in the assets of that enterprise on
dissolution, other than a debt security or a loan excluded from subparagraph (c) or (d);

(g) real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, acquired in the expectation or used for the purpose
of economic benefit or other business purposes; and

(h) interests arising from the commitment of capital or other resources in the territory of a Party to
economic activity in such territory, such as under

  

(i) contracts involving the presence of an investor's property in the territory of the Party, including
turnkey or construction contracts, or concessions, or

(ii) contracts where remuneration depends substantially on the production, revenues or profits of an
enterprise;

but investment does not mean,
(i) claims to money that arise solely from

(i) commercial contracts for the sale of goods or services by a national or enterprise in the territory of a
Party to an enterprise in the territory of another Party, or

(ii) the extension of credit in connection with a commercial transaction, such as trade financing, other
than a loan covered by subparagraph (d); or

(j) any other claims to money,
that do not involve the kinds of interests set out in subparagraphs (a) through (h);

investment of an investor of a Party means an investment owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by an investor of such Party;

investor of a Party means a Party or state enterprise thereof, or a national or an enterprise of
such Party, that seeks to make, is making or has made an investment;

investor of a non-Party means an investor other than an investor of a Party, that seeks to make,
is making or has made an investment;

New York Convention means the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958;

Secretary-General means the Secretary-General of ICSID;

transfers means transfers and international payments;

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

Mexico v. Cargill, Incorporated, 2011 ONCA 622 Page 37 of 37

Tribunal means an arbitration tribunal established under Article 1120 or 1126; and

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules means the arbitration rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law, approved by the United Nations General Assembly on December 15,
1976.

1
The “Parties” to the NAFTA are Canada, Mexico and the United States.

[2]
As an interesting aside, at a subsequent hearing before a French court, the court determined that the agreement was valid:
“Dallah v. Pakistan: Vive la différence?” Global Arbitration Review (April 20, 2011) at www. globalarbitrationreview.com.

13] article 34(2)(a)(iii) is equivalent to Article V(1)(c) of the New York Convention.

http://www.ontariocourts.on.ca/decisions/201 1/201 1ONCA0622.htm 10/6/2011

