IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER THE
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
and
THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
FRANCE AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES ON THE
RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS
and
THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PORTUGUESE REPUBLIC AND THE UNITED
MEXICAN STATES ON THE RECIPROCAL PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF
INVESTMENTS
and
EL ACUERDO ENTRE EL GOBIERNO DE LOS ESTADOS UNIDOS MEXICANOS Y EL
GOBIERNO DE LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA PARA LA PROMOCION Y PROTECCION
RECIPROCA DE LAS INVERSIONES

- and -

THE ARBITRATION RULES OF THE
UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW

- between -

CARLOS SASTRE AND OTHERS
(the “Claimants”)

and

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES
(the “Respondent”)

ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 2

DECISION ON BIFURCATION

 

Tribunal
Prof. Eduardo Zuleta (Presiding Arbitrator)
Dr. Charles Poncet
Mr. Christer Séderlund

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Geraldine R. Fischer

August 13, 2020

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

L

5.

Procedural Order No. 2

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On May 26, 2020, the Tribunal held a First Session with the Parties. During the First
Session the Parties debated issues arising from Claimants’ submission in one single writ of
claims by six claimants with different investments under four different treaties
(“Treaties”). The Parties also debated Respondent’s other jurisdictional objections.

Further to the Parties’ exchanges during the First Session, the Tribunal directed the Parties
to make two rounds of written submissions on the following issues: (1) bifurcation, and
(2) whether the present proceeding is a multiparty arbitration or a consolidation of claims
and any procedural or substantive implications.

On May 28, 2020, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. | and deferred its decision on
the applicable arbitration rules and the procedural timetable.

Per the briefing schedule set by the Tribunal on May 26, 2020, the Parties made the
following written submissions:

a. On June 10, 2020, Respondent filed its written submission on bifurcation together
with Exhibits R-001 through R-009 and Legal Authorities RL-001 through RL-029
(“Bifurcation Application”).

b. On June 24, 2020, Claimants submitted the Claimants’ Written Submission in
Opposition to Bifurcation and Brief in Support of a Multiparty Proceeding together
with Legal Authorities CLA-001 through CLA-050 (““Claimants’ Opposition”).

c. On July 1, 2020, Respondent presented its Reply to the Claimants’ Bifurcation
Application together with Exhibit R-010 and Legal Authorities RL-030 through
RL-040 (“Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply”).

d. On July 8, 2020, Claimants filed their Rejoinder in Opposition to Bifurcation and
in support of a Multiparty Proceeding together with Exhibit C-036 and Legal
Authorities CLA-051 to CLA-057 (“Claimants’ Opposition Rejoinder’).

This Procedural Order sets out the Tribunal’s decision on Respondent’s Bifurcation
Application.

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

IL.

Procedural Order No. 2

THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

A. RESPONDENT’S POSITION

Respondent submits that the Tribunal should decide on the objections to jurisdiction as a
preliminary matter. Respondent argues that the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules have a
presumption in favor of bifurcation, which is commonly used for procedural efficiency.'

Respondent mentions three criteria for a tribunal to consider when deciding on bifurcation:

(i) If the objection, prima facie, is serious, substantial, and not
frivolous;

(ii) Whether, if the tribunal grants bifurcation, there would be a
material reduction in the next phase of the proceeding; and

(iii) | Whether the objection is closely related to the merits.

Respondent argues that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over this dispute and raises
objections ratione voluntatis, ratione temporis, ratione personae and ratione materiae.
First, Respondent argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione voluntatis because it
did not consent to the “auto-consolidation” of this arbitration, involving four treaties with
differing offers to arbitrate, five States, six investors and alleged government actions
occurring at different times and places.* Additionally, Respondent submits that the Treaties
prohibit self-consolidation, which conflicts with the concepts of pacta sunt servanda and
pacta tertiis, and such self-consolidation is de jure inadmissible and involves fundamental
questions of international law and treaty interpretation.*

Respondent asserts that ultimately it is the State that decides whether to consolidate
arbitrations in accordance with the relevant treaty provisions.> In the present case, three of
the Treaties (the Argentina-Mexico BIT, the Mexico-Portugal BIT and the NAFTA)
explicitly establish the scope of Respondent’s consent to join separate arbitrations, which

' Bifurcation Application, {ff 18, 21 (citing, e.g. RL-003, Mesa Power Group LLC v. Canada, PCA Case No. 2012-

17, Procedural Order No. 2, January 18, 2013).

2 Bifurcation Application, {{{ 22-23 (citing RL-005, Glencore Finance (Bermuda) Limited v. Bolivia, PCA Case No.
2016-39, Procedural Order No. 2, January 31, 2018; RL-002, Glamis Gold Ltd v. USA, UNCITRAL, Procedural Order
No. 2 (revised), May 31, 2005).

3 Bifurcation Application, {ff 30, 33, 36, 46.

+ Bifurcation Application, { 34 (also citing the Vienna Convention Law of Treaties, Arts. 31, 32, 33, 26, 34, 35 and

36).

5 Bifurcation Application, { 38.

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)
Procedural Order No. 2

 

distinguishes this case from others, like Alemanni v. Argentina, where no such
consolidation provision existed.° If the Tribunal considers that the Treaties allow for “self-
consolidation”, Respondent argues, that, in order to be valid, all the treaty requirements to
submit a claim to arbitration must be met, which Respondent underscores is not the present
case.’

10. In addition, Respondent asserts that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis as the
Treaties have an express limitation period to submit a claim to arbitration. Similarly,
Respondent submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione
materiae as Claimants have not demonstrated that they have an “investment” under the
Treaties. Respondent emphasizes that Claimants bear the burden of proof with respect to
jurisdiction.* Respondent makes the following specific jurisdictional objections:?

a. With respect to the Mexico-Argentina BIT applicable to Mr. Sastre, CETSA-
Tierras del Sol and HLSA and Hamaca Loca, Respondent submits that the treaty
requirements of “domicile”, “investor of Argentina”, “statute of limitations”;
legality of the investment and notice of intent were not met.!°

b. Under the NAFTA, Respondent asserts that the Claimants, Ms. Ménica Galan Rios
and Mr. Graham Alexander, were not “investors” during all the relevant times and
there is no consent as the notice of intent was defective.'!

c. Respondent submits that Mr. Renaud Jacquet was not a qualified “investor” under
the Mexico-France BIT during all the relevant times.'?

d. Respondent argues that Mr. Eduardo Nuno Vaz Osorio dos Santos Silva and Ms.
Margarida Oliveira Azevedo de Abreu did not qualify as “investors” under the
Mexico-Portugal BIT during all the relevant times nor did the alleged investment
comply with the BIT’s legality requirements.'*

© Bifurcation Application, {| 40-43 (citing RL-018, Giovanni Alemanni and others v. Argentina, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/8, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Concurring Opinion of Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC,
November 17, 2014).

7 Bifurcation Application, {ff 44, et seq.

8 Bifurcation Application, {f 48-51.

° Bifurcation Application, {ff 52-139.

10 Bifurcation Application, ff 52-108.

1! Bifurcation Application, {Jf 109-122.

!2 Bifurcation Application, {{f 123-127.

3 Bifurcation Application, {{f 128-139.

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

11. In the Reply to the Request for Bifurcation, Respondent explains that the Tribunal can only
exercise jurisdiction if each investor demonstrates on the balance of probabilities that it is
a qualified “investor” of a qualified “investment” on the dates of the alleged treaty
violations. Claimants’ contradictory, ambiguous and unspecific evidence fails to prove
these elements.'* Additionally, Respondent argues that its objections based on legality,
domicile and statute of limitations are not intertwined with the merits. Finally, Respondent
submits that if its jurisdictional objections were granted there would be a substantial
reduction in the merits phase.'>

12. Contrary to Claimants’ assertions, Respondent emphasizes that its jurisdictional objections
are not “frivolous” or “vexatious.”!° In fact, Respondent explains that this is the first self-
consolidated arbitration initiated without its consent, so its ratione voluntatis objection has
a significant impact for future arbitrations. '’ Furthermore, Respondent notes that
Claimants do not contest that each Claimant has to comply with the relevant treaty
requirements for this Tribunal to have jurisdiction over this arbitration.'® According to
Respondent, it is evident that the multiple treaty requirements have not been met, and,
therefore, it is essential that the Tribunal bifurcates the proceedings to deal with the
jurisdictional objections as a preliminary manner.!?

13. Respondent also disputes Claimants’ argument that joining two or more arbitrations is a
procedural question governed by the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules and policy considerations.
Respondent underscores that this is a question of consent as the arbitration agreement is
only formed when the State’s and Claimants’ consent match. Moreover, in three of the four
Treaties, there are specific consolidation provisions, which show that other forms of joinder
are prohibited. Therefore, Respondent concludes there is no arbitration agreement in the
present case.7°

14. With respect to the burden and standard of proof, Respondent argues that the “Higgins
Test” does not apply to its jurisdictional objections. Claimants have the burden to establish
jurisdictional facts, and the standard is the balance of probabilities, not the lower standards

of “prima facie”, “plausible” or “capable of constituting a BIT violation” that apply to the

4 Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply, {f 18-20.

15 Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply, §f 23-25.

16 Respondent's Bifurcation Reply, § 1.

17 Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply, §¥ 2, 5.

'8 In Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply, the Respondent notes that it uses the term “multi-party arbitration” to simplify
the discussion on its objection, but the Respondent uses this term to describe the joining of two or more arbitration
into one, which Mexico described as “self-consolidation” since its first communication. Respondent’s Bifurcation
Reply, 13.

'° Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply, { 8.

20 Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply, 4] 9-12.

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)
Procedural Order No. 2

 

merits. Furthermore, the need to consider facts, even complicated facts, to decide
jurisdictional questions, is not a reason to deny bifurcation. In the present case, a rigorous
jurisdictional phase is justified given the nature of the jurisdictional objection.”!

B. CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

15. Claimants oppose Respondent’s Bifurcation Application. Contrary to Respondent’s
assertion, Claimants argue that the Tribunal has ratione voluntatis jurisdiction over this
multiparty arbitration.”

16. First, the Treaties governing this arbitration permit Claimants to arbitrate their claims under

the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules.” Moreover, in contrast to Respondent’s earlier submissions,
Claimants note that the “Respondent’s submission refers only to Article 21(4) of the 1976
UNCITRAL Rules”, without referring to the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules. Claimants therefore
request that the Tribunal issue an order establishing that the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules
govern these proceedings.”*

17. Claimants submit that Article 15.1 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules gives the Tribunal
authority to manage the proceeding as it considers best.?° It is Claimants’ position that the
multiparty arbitration should be allowed in this case as it has been allowed in prior investor-
State arbitrations, even in cases involving multiple treaties and investors.2° Moreover,
policy considerations, such as access to justice, favor hearing the claims together, as the
claims share many of the same issues of fact an law (i.e. similar investments in Tulum
acquired in the same Ejido, involving treaty-breaching conducts undertaken between
October 31, 2011 to June 17, 2016).77 Given the similarities, Claimants also underscore
that consistency in awards and avoiding parallel proceedings is desirable.”*

18. Claimants further submit that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione voluntatis as
Respondent made a standing offer to consent to arbitration in the Treaties, which each

2! Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply, 4 13-17 (citing RL-032 (B-Mex, LLC and others v. Mexico) and RL-034
(Theodoros Adamakopoulos and others v. Cyprus) to demonstrate that prior cases have included rigorous jurisdictional
phases with witness and 1 ications).

2 Claimants’ Opposition, Section II.

23 Claimants’ Opposition, § 18.

24 Claimants’ Opposition, § 13.

25 Claimants’ Opposition, §ff 4, 19.

26 Claimants’ Opposition, 44] 22-28 (citing e.g. CLA-041, Suez and others v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19,
Award, April 9, 2015).

27 Claimants’ Opposition, § 32.

28 Claimants’ Opposition, § 34.

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

20.

21.

Procedural Order No. 2

Claimant perfected.? According to Claimants, “[o]nce a qualifying Claimant with a
qualifying investment crosses the consent threshold by accepting a standing offer to
arbitrate pursuant to the Treaty, consent is complete”*°, “Respondent’s ‘subsequent’
consent is neither relevant nor required in advance of proceedings to which Respondent
already consented in the Treaties.”*! Claimants argue that this is not a case of “auto-
consolidation” as there are not “two or more pending claims”, and when the Amended
Notice of Arbitration (““NOA#2”) was filed, amending Mr. Sastre’s claims and adding
those of the remaining Claimants, no arbitrator had been appointed. In fact, this Tribunal
is the only one that has ever been appointed to hear these claims.”

With respect to the standard of proof, Claimants argue that the Tribunal should follow the
“Higgins Test” used by prior tribunals, and, contrary to Respondent’s assertions, Claimants
need not “prove” every jurisdictional allegation at this early stage.*?

Claimants submit that neither the Treaties nor the UNCITRAL Rules favor bifurcation.
In Claimants’ view, “[a]t worst’, the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules “creates a ‘soft’
presumption toward bifurcation subject to a case-specific analysis by the Tribunal using
the Glamis Gold test [...] to determine the most procedurally efficient course.” *
Claimants assert that the first of the three-prong Glamis Gold test is not met as the
Respondent’s objections are frivolous or vexatious. To demonstrate this, Claimants
counter each of Respondent’s purported jurisdictional objections ratione personae and
ratione materiae and further argue that Respondent’s notice of intent objections are not
serious or substantial.*° Claimants moreover submit that the remaining jurisdictional
objections are inextricably intertwined with the merits, failing the second criterion.*”
Claimants also argue that the merits phase will not be substantially reduced.**

Claimants submit that in its Bifurcation Reply Respondent has “all but abandoned its
earlier position that this is an ‘auto-consolidation” and dispute “that the Treaties contain
an ‘inherent consent limitation’ against multiparty arbitration.”*? According to Claimants,

 

2 Claimants’ Opposition, fj 5, 40 (specifying the required steps taken by each Claimant under the relevant Treaty).
* Claimants’ Opposition, 4 5.

31 Claimants’ Opposition, § 47.

32 Claimants’ Opposition, § 42.

33 Claimants’ Opposition, 4 54, et seg. (citing e.g. CLA-021, Impregilo S.p.A. v. Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction, April 22, 2005; CLA-004, Bayindir v. Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29, Decision on
Jurisdiction, November 14, 2005).

¥ Claimants’ Opposition, {ff 67, et seq.

35 Claimants’ Opposition, § 70 (emphasis in original).

36 Claimants’ Opposition, {ff 66-95.

37 Claimants’ Opposition, §f] 77-82.

38 Claimants’ Opposition, 4] 104-109.

3° Claimants’ Rejoinder, § 2.

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

22.

Ill.

23.

24.

Procedural Order No. 2

Respondent misconstrues how consent is perfected in multiparty treaty arbitration. Citing
prior investor-State tribunals, Claimants submit that in multiparty proceedings involving
common issues of law and fact and multiple treaties, consent is perfected if each claimant
accepts Respondent’s offer to arbitrate, but if one claim does not meet the Treaty
requirements, only that claim fails, “not the entire multiparty proceeding.” Moreover,
Claimants posit that limiting multiparty arbitration “would be an improper modification of
the consent provisions in each of the Treaties.”*° Claimants also point out that Respondent
fails to disprove that each Claimant perfected its consent nor did it address Claimants’
arguments regarding procedural efficiency and access to justice.*!

Claimants emphasize that Respondent has failed to meet its burden to show that bifurcation
is warranted in this case.*? With respect to the standard of proof, Claimants reiterate that
the Tribunal should follow the majority of tribunals using the “Higgins Test’s presumption
upon Claimants’ presentation of a prima facie showing of jurisdiction”, but, in any case,
Claimants’ Amended Notice of Arbitration demonstrates that Claimants met the necessary
jurisdictional elements.*? According to Claimants, the Parties have agreed that the Glamis
Gold test provides the bifurcation framework and Respondent has not contested that all
three legs must be met for a Tribunal to bifurcate a proceeding. In Claimants’ view,
Respondent has failed to meet its burden for bifurcation.**

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYS:

 

The Tribunal has considered all the relevant factual and legal arguments presented by the
Parties in their written submissions. The fact that any argument, allegation, or specific
piece of evidence is not mentioned in the analysis below does not mean that the Tribunal
has not considered it.

The decision in this Procedural Order only relates to bifurcation. Moreover, the Tribunal’s
considerations and decisions regarding bifurcation do not prejudice any future decision the
Tribunal will make with respect to the substance of Respondent’s preliminary objections
or the Parties’ submissions on the merits.

“© Claimants’ Rejoinder, §{ 10-26 (citing CLA-019, Guaracachi America, Inc. and Rurelec PLC v. Bolivia,
UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2011-17, Award, January 31, 2014; RL-034, Theodoros Adamakopoulos and others v.
Cyprus, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/49, Decision on Jurisdiction, February 7, 2020.).

4! Claimants’ Rejoinder, $f] 9, 30-39.

“2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, Section III.

+3 Claimants’ Rejoinder, $f] 40-45.

4 Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 61-71.

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Procedural Order No. 2

The Tribunal must (A) evaluate whether Respondent’s preliminary objections can be
analyzed in one single proceeding, (B) establish the applicable standard on bifurcation, and
(C) analyze the preliminary objections raised under the Treaties.

A. WHETHER RESPONDENT’S PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS CAN BE ANALYZED IN ONE
SINGLE PROCEEDING

On June 14, 2019, Claimants appointed Dr. Charles Poncet through NOA#2 as arbitrator
in these proceedings.*> On October 7, 2019, by communication to the Secretary General of
ICSID, Respondent appointed Mr. Christer Séderlund as arbitrator in these proceedings.*°
On February 11, 2020, the Parties agreed to appoint Prof. Eduardo Zuleta as President of
the Tribunal.”

The Parties do not dispute that the arbitrators were properly appointed, and the Tribunal
was validly constituted. Neither Party has questioned the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to
decide on bifurcation or to hear and decide the preliminary objections submitted by
Respondent. The Tribunal therefore has the authority to decide on the preliminary
objections regarding the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and to decide whether or not to hear such
objections as a preliminary matter or together with the merits. The latter is an obvious
consequence of the kKompetenz-kompetenz rule.

The Tribunal also notes that the Parties have not objected to the Tribunal dealing with all
of the preliminary objections presented by Respondent, including the so-called “self-
consolidation”, in a concurrent fashion.

There is no doubt that under both the UNCITRAL Rules of 1976 and the UNCITRAL
Rules of 2010, the Tribunal has the obligation to conduct the proceedings in an efficient
manner. Thus, in order to decide on the preliminary objections submitted by Respondent,
the Tribunal may hear all such objections in one single proceeding, as opposed to holding
multiple separate proceedings related to the preliminary objections under each applicable
treaty.

Other considerations favor the Tribunal deciding on Respondent’s Bifurcation Application
and preliminary objections in one single proceeding. First, Respondent’s objections appear
to include: (A) objections that are particular to a given treaty; (B) objections that share
issues of law or fact with more than one treaty; and (C) objections that have common issues
of law or fact among the Treaties, particularly the objection regarding the so-called “self-

+5 Bifurcation Application, J 9.
46 Bifurcation Application, {{ 13.
47 Procedural Order No. 1 of May 28, 2020, Section 1.3.

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Procedural Order No. 2

consolidation” of the arbitration. Second, hearing all the objections together will result in
significant time and cost savings.

For the reasons elaborated above, the Tribunal will decide the dispute on bifurcation
regarding all the preliminary objections in one procedural order, and thereafter will hear
all the objections filed by Respondent that comply with the requirements for bifurcation
set out below in one single proceeding.

B. THE APPLICABLE STANDARD ON BIFURCATION
a) The UNCITRAL Rules

Both Parties agree that the applicable procedural rules are the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules. Yet, during the First Session, the Parties disagreed as to whether the 1976 or 2010
version of those rules applied.

Article 21(4) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules provides that:

In general, the arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its
jurisdiction as a preliminary question. However, the arbitral tribunal
may proceed with the arbitration and rule on such a plea in their final
award.

Article 23(3) of the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules provides that:

The arbitral tribunal may rule on a plea referred to in paragraph 2
either as a preliminary question or in an award on the merits. The
arbitral tribunal may continue the arbitral proceedings and make an
award, notwithstanding any pending challenge to its jurisdiction
before a court.

Respondent’s view is that Article 21(4) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
provides a presumption that objections to jurisdiction should be resolved as preliminary
questions, before consideration of the merits.*® On the other hand, Claimants assert that
Article 21(4) creates a “soft” presumption on bifurcation subject to a case-specific analysis
by the Tribunal in order to determine the most procedurally efficient course.*? According
to Claimants, none of the procedural guidelines set forth in the Treaties refer to the concept
of bifurcation.*°

+8 Bifurcation Application, 1 18.
* Claimants’ Opposition, § 70.
5° Claimants’ Opposition, 4 67.

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Procedural Order No. 2
The Parties do not dispute that the Tribunal has the power to bifurcate the proceedings.

The Tribunal notes that, under both the 1976 and the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules, it has ample
discretion to decide whether to deal with jurisdictional objections first or join them with
the merits in view of the specific circumstances of this dispute. What is paramount in
exercising this discretion is to conduct the proceedings so as to avoid unnecessary delay
and expense and to provide a fair and effi

 

  

ent process for resolving the Parties’ dispute.>!
b) The Three-Prong Test on Bifurcation

The Parties agree that efficiency is a key factor in determining whether the Tribunal should
tule on objections that may affect its jurisdiction as a preliminary matter. For that purpose,
the Tribunal must look for procedural economy, and the significant savings in time, energy
and costs that would be involved in avoiding entering the merits of the controversy.>*

Both Parties also agree that arbitral tribunals often consider the following three criteria in
order to examine whether or not bifurcation would be more efficient:>* a) whether the
request is substantial or the objection is prima facie serious and substantial; b) whether the
request, if granted, would lead to a material reduction in the proceedings at the next stage,
or whether the objection, if successful, will result in disposing of all or an essential part of
the claims raised; and c) whether bifurcation is impractical in the sense that the issues are
too intertwined with the merit that it is very unlikely that there will be any savings in time
or cost or can the objection be examined without prejudging or entering the merits of the
case.

Under the first criterion, the Tribunal must determine whether there is a credible basis for
the objection. As noted in Glamis Gold, this criterion involves evaluating “whether the
objection is substantial inasmuch as the preliminary consideration of a frivolous objection
to jurisdiction is very unlikely to reduce the costs of, or time required for, the
proceeding.”** At this stage, the Tribunal is required to examine whether the objections are
frivolous or vexatious. If a tribunal determines that a preliminary objection is “serious”—

5! RL-002, Glamis Gold Ltd v. USA, UNCITRAL, Procedural Order No. 2 (revised), May 31, 2005, {| 11; RL-007,
Cairn Energy PLC and Cairn UK Holdings Limited (CUHL) v. India, PCA Case No. 2016-7, Procedural Order No.
4, April 19, 2017, 74.

52 CLA-0035, Rand Investments Ltd. and others v. Serbia, ICSID Case No. ARB/18/8, Procedural Order No. 3, June
24, 2019, 15.

53 Claimants’ Opposition, 71; Bifurcation Application, §] 22; Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 46; RL-006, Philip Morris Asia
Limited v. Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 8, April 14, 2014, {{ 109; RL-002, Glamis Gold Ltd v. USA,
UNCITRAL, Procedural Order No. 2 (revised), May 31, 2005, | 12; RL-007, Cairn Energy PLC and Cairn UK
Holdings Limited (CUHL) v. India, PCA Case No. 2016-7, Procedural Order No. 4, April 19, 2017, 37.

54 RL-002, Glamis Gold Lid v. USA, UNCITRAL, Procedural Order No. 2 (revised), May 31, 2005, 4 12.

-10-

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

Procedural Order No. 2

understood as the opposite of superficial—or dispositive of the claims, this does not
necessarily mean that the objection will be successful at a later stage of this arbitration.

Under the second criterion, the Tribunal must evaluate whether the objection to
jurisdiction, if granted, would result in a substantial reduction of the proceedings at the
next phase. In order to determine whether the objection, if successful, would dispose of all
or an essential part of the claims raised,®° the Tribunal must assess whether bifurcation of
a preliminary objection would reduce time and costs. The Parties agree that this is the
standard the Tribunal should apply when deciding the effectiveness of bifurcating the
proceedings. In the present case, the Tribunal must analyze whether there would be a
reduction of time and costs in the arbitration if some of Respondent’s preliminary
objections succeed.

Under the third criterion, the Tribunal must consider the practicality of bifurcation,
meaning whether the objection can be examined without entering into the merits of the
case. On this point, the Glamis Gold tribunal concluded that bifurcation is “impractical in
that the jurisdictional issue identified is so intertwined with the merits that it is very unlikely
that there will be any savings in time or cost.”*® Conversely, in cases where jurisdiction
appears to be a distinct question to be resolved, the Tribunal could decide such questions
in a different award.

 

The Tribunal agrees that these criteria should be taken into consideration when deciding
bifurcation. The three factors identified are not “stand-alone” criteria. All three elements
of the test must be cumulatively satisfied to decide a preliminary objection to jurisdiction
in a separate phase.

The Tribunal also considers that such criteria serve as mere guidance and should not be
interpreted as restricting the Tribunal’s discretion to weigh each of the requirements when
arriving at its decision. In order to decide whether the bifurcation of jurisdictional
objections will lead to greater efficiency in the proceeding, the Tribunal must examine the
legal and factual circumstances of each particular case.

The Parties agree that “procedural efficiency”, understood as the reduction in time and
costs associated with the arbitration, is the principal factor that tribunals should consider
when deciding whether to bifurcate.*” The Tribunal agrees that the goal of bifurcation is
procedural efficiency. Yet, efficiency has to also be understood in a broader sense. The

55 RL-006, Philip Morris Asia Limited v. Australia (UNCITRAL) Procedural Order No. 8, April 14, 2014, J 63.
56 RL-002, Glamis Gold Ltd v. USA, UNCITRAL, Procedural Order No. 2 (revised), May 31, 2005, 4 12.
57 Claimants’ Opposition, § 52.

-ll-

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

46.

47.

48.

49.

Procedural Order No. 2

analysis of whether bifurcation would bring efficiency to the procedure should not focus
exclusively on the possible additional time or costs of the jurisdictional stage.

Both the 1976 and the 2010 UNCITRAL Rules seek to promote efficiency in the
proceedings. According to these rules, arbitration tribunals must ensure efficiency through
the early resolution of preliminary questions that resolve all or substantial parts of a case.
The Tribunal thus concludes that the decision to bifurcate the proceedings must balance
the benefits of procedural efficiency, against the risks of delay, increased costs, and
prejudging. The Tribunal is aware that any decision on bifurcation has to weigh those
inherent risks with the potential benefits of reducing costs and time for the Parties. In doing
so, the Tribunal will take into account the three-part test described above.

C. THE PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS RELATED TO EACH APPLICABLE TREATY

The Tribunal must analyze each of the preliminary objections presented by Respondent in
the light of the three-prong test set out on Section III.B of this decision. For the sake of
clarity and efficiency, —and given that some objections are repeated with respect to
different treaties— the preliminary objections raised by Respondent will be analyzed in
groups.

a) Respondent’s Objection regarding the “Self-Consolidation” of the Proceeding

The Tribunal faces a situation in which six different Claimants from different nationalities
decided to present their claims under four different Treaties in a joint notice of arbitration.
Respondent argues that the Treaties do not allow for “self-consolidation” of claims or, as
Claimants submit, a multi-party arbitration,’ and in any event, even if the Tribunal were
to consider that the Treaties allow for “‘self-consolidation”, the requirements provided in
the Treaties for consolidation are not met in the present case.*?

The Tribunal has already decided that, in the event of bifurcation, it will hear all of
Respondent’s objections that comply with the requirements for bifurcation in a single
proceeding. The Tribunal, however, will not decide in this procedural order the nature of
the objection filed by Respondent in connection with what it characterizes as a “self-
consolidation”, which Claimants describe as a “multiparty arbitration”. For the purposes
of this bifurcation decision, the Tribunal will focus on the analysis exclusively on whether
the said objection complies with the three-prong test on bifurcation.

58 Bifurcation Application, { 40-43.
°° Bifurcation Application, {| 44, et seq.

-12-

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

Procedural Order No. 2

Prima facie the objection is serious and substantial because the consent given by the Parties
to determine the procedure is essential to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction—if the objection were
to be considered a jurisdictional one —, or to conduct the proceedings — if the objection
were to be considered a procedural one.

In addition, any decision regarding this objection may reduce time and costs, which would
promote procedural efficiency. If upheld, all or part of the claims presented by Claimants
could be disposed of, and if this objection is rejected it may substantially reduce the scope
of the proceedings in the merits phase. Both scenarios would save the Parties considerable
time and costs.

Finally, the objection is not a question related to the merits of the dispute. This objection
is a matter of interpretation of the applicable procedural rules, and it has no bearing on the
merits of the case.

The Tribunal therefore finds that Respondent’s objection under this Section III.C(a) meets
the test for bifurcation.

b) Respondent’s Objection that Claimants have not Demonstrated that They are
Covered “Investors” of Covered “Investments” under the Treaties at All
Relevant Times

Respondent objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the ground that Claimants have not
proven that they are covered “investors” of covered “investments” under the Treaties,
which requires proving their nationality, the investments, and the legality of the
investments at all relevant times.

The Tribunal considers that this group of objections meets the three-prong test on
bifurcation for the reasons set out below.

First, the objections are prima facie serious as they raise a substantial issue regarding
whether each Claimant has proven that he or she complies with the definitions of “investor”
and “investment” contained in the applicable treaty during all the relevant dates. These
objections could impact the tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae.

Second, if all or some of these objections were upheld, the claims raised by all or some of
the Claimants would be disposed of, which would make the merits phase unnecessary or
lead to a significant reduction of the scope of the dispute.

© Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply, § 18.

-13-

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

Procedural Order No. 2

Third, these objections can be examined without prejudging or entering the merits of the
case for two main reasons. First, the question on what the relevant dates are for analyzing
whether Claimants are covered “investors” of covered “investments” under each treaty is
a matter of interpretation of the applicable law; the Tribunal need not address whether on
those critical dates Respondent breached its obligations under the Treaties. Second, the
evidence required for proving or disproving that the Claimants complied with the
requirements set out in each treaty to be covered “investors” of covered “investments” at
the critical dates is not intertwined with the merits of the case. While the Tribunal may
have to engage with some factual evidence, it is not convinced that significant issues
regarding Claimants’ substantive claims would have to be determined in the jurisdictional
phase.

c) Respondent’s Objection under the Argentina-Mexico BIT regarding Mr.
Sastre’s Dual Nationality and Domicile

Respondent contends that Article 2(3) of the Argentina-Mexico BIT is applicable in the
present case given that there is prima facie evidence that Mr. Sastre had his domicile in
Mexico as from the date of the investment to the date when the alleged breach of the treaty
occurred. According to Respondent, the critical dates to determine whether this provision
is applicable are the date of the investment and the day of the alleged breach of the treaty,
not the day the dispute settlement mechanism of the BIT was activated. Respondent also
contends that there is prima facie evidence that Mr. Sastre is also a Mexican national, and
therefore Claimants must prove that his Argentinian nationality was the dominant one at
all relevant periods of time.°!

The objections related to Mr. Sastre’s dominant nationality and domicile at the relevant
periods of time comply with the three bifurcation criteria.

First, the objections regarding Mr. Sastre’s dual nationality and domicile are prima facie
capable of impacting the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Both objections raise plausible
questions that must be analyzed before addressing the merits of the case.

Second, if one or both objections were upheld, Mr. Sastre’s claims under the Argentina-
Mexico BIT would be disposed of, which would significantly reduce the scope and
complexity of the dispute.

Third, these objections are not intertwined with the merits of the case. The question of
whether Mr. Sastre’s dual nationality has any bearing on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is, first,
a matter of law that has no relation with the merits of the case. Likewise, to resolve whether

©! Bifurcation Application, 11 59-69.

-14-

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Procedural Order No. 2

Article 2(3) of the Argentina-Mexico BIT is applicable in the case at hand, the Tribunal
must analyze the scope of interpretation of this provision, which is not related to the merits
of the case. Although both objections are fact-intensive, their factual basis is restricted to
the evidence regarding Mr. Sastre’s “dominant” nationality and “domicile” at “all the
relevant times”, and not to the merits of the case.

d) Respondent’s Objection that Mr. Sastre’s Claim Does Not Comply with the
Time Limit Set Out in Article 1(2) of the Argentina-Mexico BIT

Respondent argues that Article 1(2) of the Annex to the Argentina-Mexico BIT provides
that any claim must be presented no later than four years after the claimant knew or should
have known of the alleged breach and the losses or damages suffered. Yet, Mr. Sastre
submitted the NOA#1 on December 29, 2017, and the NOA#2 on June 14, 2019, more than
six years after he knew about the measures taken on October 31, 2011 related to the hotels
“Hamaca Loca” and “Tierras del Sol”, which allegedly breached the treaty. Therefore,
Respondent argues that the time limit (“prescription period” as characterized by
Respondent) to present a claim regarding said measures expired. Claimants in turn contend
that the denial of justice and judicial expropriation arising from the failure of Respondent’s
judicial system crystallized in 2015, and thus prima facie satisfies the four-year period,
provided in Article 1(2) of the BIT.

The Tribunal considers that the jurisdictional objection raised by Respondent complies
with the bifurcation test.

First, the objection raises a serious and reasonable question about the application of Article
1(2) of the Annex to the Argentina-Mexico BIT, which could impact of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.

Second, if the objection were upheld, all or some of Mr. Sastre’s claims would be disposed
of, leading to a significant reduction of the scope and complexity of the dispute.

Third, the objection is not intertwined with the merits of the case. While the Tribunal may
have to examine the measures taken by Respondent to determine, inter alia, whether they
constitute continuous or separate acts, this question is primarily a question of international
law. The factual basis necessary to conduct such analysis does not touch upon the issue of
whether the alleged measures taken by Respondent breached the Argentina-Mexico BIT or
any of the Treaties invoked by Claimants.

-15-

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

Procedural Order No. 2

e) Respondent’s Objection that Mr. Sastre, Mr. Alexander and Ms. Galan Did
Not Comply with the Notice of Intent Requirements in the Argentina-Mexico
BIT and the NAFTA

As regards Mr. Sastre, Respondent argues that he did not comply with the requirements
under Article 10(3) and (4) of the Argentina-Mexico BIT, given that the notice of intent
presented by Mr. Sastre on June 15, 2017 referred to the Mexico-Switzerland BIT and not
to the Argentina-Mexico BIT. Claimants contend that the second notice of intent presented
by Mr. Sastre on September 6, 2017, “expanded upon the original claims, by adding
additional claims arising from Respondent's same treaty violations under the Argentina
BIT.” Also, the NOA#1 dated December 29, 2017, and the NOA#2 dated June 14, 2019,
complied with the requirements of the Argentina-Mexico BIT.

As regards Mr. Alexander and Ms. Galan, Respondent contends that the notice of intent
presented by both Claimants on January 17, 2019, does not comply with the requirements
set forth on NAFTA Article 1119, which are necessary for the materialization of the
consent provided in NAFTA Article 1116.

The Tribunal considers that the jurisdictional objections raised by Respondent are not
frivolous.

If these objections were upheld, the scope of the case would be significantly reduced
because the objections are susceptible of barring the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione
voluntatis, and either Mr. Sastre’s, and/or Mr. Alexander and Ms. Galan claims would be
disposed of.

Also, these objections are matters of law with a narrow scope of factual grounds to be
analyzed, which are not related to the merits of the case. Thus, the Tribunal considers that
the ratione voluntatis objections comply with the criteria for granting bifurcation.

f) Respondent’s Objection that Mr. Sastre’s Attempt to Present Claims for
HLSA/Hamaca Loca is an Abuse of Rights Not Protected under the Argentina-
Mexico BIT

Respondent claims that Mr. Sastre’s alleged “investment” in HLSA was not made for the
purpose of carrying out an economic activity in Mexico but merely to initiate a claim in
this arbitration. According to Respondent, Mr. Sastre’s attempt to present claims for
HSLA/Hamaca Loca constitutes an abuse of rights and the alleged investment is therefore
not protected by the BIT.

® Claimants’ Opposition, 494.

-16-

Carlos Sastre and others v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/2)

 

75.

76.

IV.

77.

78.

79.

Procedural Order No. 2

The Tribunal considers that the objection raised by Respondent regarding Mr. Sastre’s
abuse of rights is serious and substantial, and if upheld, could reduce the scope of the
dispute given that the claims regarding HLSA/Hamaca Loca could be dismissed before
reaching the merits of the case. The Tribunal also notes that the factual basis to be analyzed
under this objection is not related to the alleged breach of the Argentina-Mexico BIT, but
ultimately to Mr. Sastre’s alleged “investment” in Mexico. Therefore, this is an issue that
can be analyzed without prejudging or entering the merits of the case. The Tribunal thus
considers that the objection regarding Mr. Sastre’s “abuse of rights” complies with the
three-prong test on bifurcation and therefore will be addressed in the preliminary phase of
the proceedings.

In sum, the Tribunal finds that the interests of procedural efficiency and fairness are best
served by bifurcating the preliminary objections raised by Respondent from the merits of
the case.

COSTS

Both Parties requested that the Tribunal award costs against the other Party for this phase
of the proceeding.®’ The Tribunal will decide the issue of costs together with its decision
on the jurisdictional objections of Respondent.

DECISION

Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal decides to bifurcate the proceedings and address the
preliminary objections raised by Respondent in a preliminary phase. The decision on costs
will be issued together with the decision on the objections submitted by Respondent.

The Tribunal will provide the Parties with the corresponding instructions as to the
procedure for the jurisdictional phase.

On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal,

[Signed]

Prof. Eduardo Zuleta
Date: August 13, 2020

© Bifurcation Application, { 142(2); Claimants’ Opposition, | 110(e); Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply, § 26(ii);
Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 72(e).

-17-

