INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
CARNEGIE MINERALS (GAMBIA) LIMITED

Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF THE GAMBIA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/19
Annulment Proceedings

 

DECISION ON REPRESENTATION

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Donald M. McRae, President
Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades
Prof. Zhidong Chen

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

 

 

 

1
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
Ill. ANALYSIS 3
TV. COMPETENCE OF THE COMMITTEE ...........cccccscscsescssesseseseseesesceseseessseessseesssnessseensseenes 4
V. RULE 18 OF THE ARBITRATION RULES .........cc.cescscestssessesessesessesesnesesteseaneseseeseseeneaeeneas 4
VI. ICSID PRACTICE ON REPRESENTATION .........cccccssesscsssessesessesseesessessessnssnssnssesseseeseneee 5

VII. THE CHALLENGE TO CLYDE & CO. ...ccccsccscsccstssestssesteeseeseseeseseesssnesesneseseeneseeneaeeeaeeneee 6

VIII. DECISION 10

 

I, INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

1. This case concerns an application for annulment of the award rendered on July 14, 2015
in the arbitration proceeding between Carnegie Minerals (Gambia) Limited
(“Carnegie”) and the Republic of The Gambia (“Applicant” or “The Gambia”)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/09/19) (the “Award”).

2. The application, was filed on November 11, 2015, in accordance with Article 52 of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States dated March 18, 1965 (the “ICSID Convention”), and Rule 50 of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”) (the
“Application”). The Application was submitted within the time period provided for in

Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention.

3. The original dispute was submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the ICSID Convention
and the Mining License dated 29 December 2005 (the “Contract”) granted to Carnegie

, a company incorporated under the law of The Gambia..
4. The Applicant and Carnegie are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties”.
5. This decision of the ad hoc Committee relates to the representation of Carnegie in these
annulment proceedings.
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

6. On November 18, 2015, ICSID acknowledged receipt of the Application. In that same
letter ICSID asked for confirmation that Clyde & Co. was still entitled to act for

Carnegie for purposes of these annulment proceedings.

7. On November 19, 2015, the Acting Secretary-General registered the Application in
accordance with Rule 50(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules and transmitted the Notice

of Registration to the Parties.

By letter of December 10, 2016, Clyde & Co. confirmed that it was authorized to act

on behalf of Carnegie for purposes of the annulment application.

By letter of January 4, 2016, Counsel for The Gambia, informed ICSID and the
Committee that Carnegie was in liquidation by order of the High Court of The Gambia
dated August 6, 2015, and requested that it and ICSID be provided a copy of the power
of attorney confirming Clyde & Co.’s authorization to act for Carnegie in these

annulment proceedings.

. By letter of January 22, 2016, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules,

the Secretary-General notified the Parties that an ad hoc Committee had been
constituted. The ad hoc Committee is composed of Donald McRae (Canadian) as
President, Zhidong Chen (Chinese) and Bernardo M. Cremades (Spanish) as Members
(the “Committee”). The Parties were also informed that the annulment proceedings
were deemed to have begun on that date and that Ms. Natali Sequeira would serve as

Secretary of the Committee.

. On February 8, 2016, counsel for The Gambia, reiterated its request that ICSID and

The Gambia be provided with the power of attorney confirming that Clyde & Co. is
authorized to act for Carnegie in this proceeding, considering that it has been placed in

liquidation.

. On March 8, 2016, Clyde & Co. sent a letter stating inter alia that they “[did] not regard

the alleged appointment of a liquidator as having any bearing” and that “it continues to
act with the authorisation of the ultimate parent company which exercised ‘foreign

control’ at all relevant times, and with the authorisation of the directors of Carnegie.”

. On June 8, 2016, The Gambia sent a letter to the Committee regarding the issue of

representation of Carnegie by Clyde & Co. and the Parties submissions on the matter
prior to holding the First Session. The Gambia proposed to the Committee a schedule

of pleadings and a hearing on the matter.

. The Parties exchanged further correspondence on this issue by letters of June 16, 2016

from Clyde & Co. and, June 27, 2016, from the Gambia.

2

15. On July 8, 2016, the Committee fixed the timetable for the Parties to submit any

additional observations on the question of representation.

a

. On July 25 2016, The Gambia submitted its observations, accompanied by exhibits 1-
6,

17. On August 19, 2016, Clyde & Co. filed its Response on the issue of representation,

accompanied by annexes 1-13,

18. On August 30, 2016, The Gambia submitted a Reply to Clyde & Co.’s letter of August
19, dated August 31, 2016 The accompanying exhibits 1 to 8 were submitted by The
Gambia on August 31, 2016.

19. On September 14, 2016, Clyde & Co. submitted a Reply to The Gambia’s submission
of August 30, 2016.

2

S

. On September 21, 2016, ICSID informed the Parties and the Committee that, due to a
redistribution of the Centre’s workload, Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain had been assigned
to serve as Secretary of the Committee in these proceedings, replacing Ms. Natali

Sequeira.

2

. By message of September 28, 2016, the Committee informed the Parties, through the
Secretariat, that it would not require a hearing on the issue of representation and that

the Parties would receive the Committee’s decision shortly.

TH.ANALYSIS

22.The question before the Committee is whether Clyde & Co. the law firm that
represented Carnegie in the arbitration proceedings before the ICSID tribunal, is

authorized to represent Carnegie in proceedings before this Committee.

23. The Gambia argues that Clyde & Co. is not so entitled. Carnegie, it argues, has been
placed in liquidation by the Gambian courts and a liquidator has been appointed who

is the sole representative of Carnegie under Gambian law. It further argues that

IV.

notwithstanding the Respondent’s requests for it to do so, Clyde & Co. has failed to
produce a power of attorney from Carnegie authorizing it to act on Carnegie’s behalf

in these annulment proceedings.

24. Clyde & Co. argues that the matter of representation is not to be determined by
Gambian law but rather by the ICSID Convention. It points out that its authority to
represent Carnegie was provided by resolution of the Board of Directors of Carnegie,
lodged with ICSID at the outset of the arbitration proceedings. That authorization,
according to Clyde & Co. remains in place, and Clyde & Co. confirmed its

representation in these proceedings in its letter to ICSID of 10 December 2015.

COMPETENCE OF THE COMMITTEE

25. At the outset, the Committee notes that under Article 41 of the ICSID Convention,
made applicable to ad hoc Committees by virtue Article 52(4), it is clear that the

Committee has the competence to decide this question of representation.

RULE 18 OF THE ARBITRATION RULES

26. The representation of parties is dealt with in Rule 18 of the Arbitration Rules, which

provides:

“(1) Each party may be represented or assisted by agents, counsel or
advocates whose names and authority shall be notified by that party to the
Secretary-General, who shall promptly inform the Tribunal and the other
party.

(2) For the purposes of these Rules, the expression "party" includes, where
the context so admits, an agent, counsel or advocate authorized to represent
that party.”
27. Thus, the Arbitration Rules require “authorization” for “agents, counsel and advocates”
in order for them to represent a party, but it does not specify the form of any such

authorization.

VI.

ICSID PRACTICE ON REPRESENTATION

28.

29.

3

So

31

The Committee has reviewed the practice of ICSID on the question of representation.
Evidence of authority to represent the entity requesting the initiation of arbitration
proceedings is often filed with the request for arbitration and evidence of authority to
represent the respondent state is filed subsequently, in some instances following the
registration of the request for arbitration under Article 36(3) of the Convention. The
ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings (“Institution Rules”) and the ICSID Arbitration Rules do not provide
specific formalities for parties’ in granting their “authority”. Hence, ICSID does not
require a power of attorney or a specific form of authorization to indicate
representation. Letters of engagement of the lawyers in question have been regarded

as sufficient.

When an application for annulment is received, ICSID reviews the parties’
representation documents found either in the arbitration proceeding file or
accompanying the application for annulment. If the power of attorney, or other
representation document, lodged with the arbitration proceeding is sufficiently broad
to consider that it also applies to post-award remedies, ICSID treats this as a continuing
authorization. If the text of the representation papers is insufficiently clear, ICSID
contacts the responding party (investor or State), or the lawyers in the original

proceeding, to confirm that the original authorization is still valid.

. This was the procedure that was followed in the present case. The authorization for

Clyde & Co. to represent Carnegie in the arbitration proceedings is found in a resolution
of the Board of Directors of Carnegie deposited with the Request for Arbitration on 14
September 2009. That resolution referred to the firm of Barlow, Lyde and Gilbert,
which later merged with Clyde & Co. The authorization for Mayer-Brown to represent
The Gambia was communicated to the Secretary-General of ICSID on 28 February

2010 in the form of a power of attorney.

. On 11 November 2015, Mayer-Brown filed an application for annulment of the award

of the ICSID tribunal of 14 July 2015. No mention was made in that application of the

5

authority of Mayer Brown to represent The Gambia. The request for annulment was
registered in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention on 19 November

2015.

3

N

. The authorizations referred to above were reviewed by ICSID following the receipt of
the request for annulment. Since the authorization for Carnegie was still in the name
of Barlow, Lyde and Gilbert, the letter to Clyde & Co. of 18 November 2015,

transmitting the Application for Annulment, added:

“We would be grateful if you could confirm, at your earliest convenience,
that your firm is authorized to act on behalf of Carnegie Minerals (Gambia)
Limited for purposes of the Annulment Application.”

3

o

. By letter of 10 December 2015, Clyde & Co. responded:

“We confirm that this Firm is authorised to act on behalf of Carnegie
Minerals (Gambia) Ltd for the purposes of the Annulment Application.”

3

rsa

. No request for confirmation of representation was made to The Gambia or to Mayer-

Brown.

3

an

. Thus, in accordance with ICSID practice both Mayer-Brown and Clyde & Co. were
recognized as authorized to represent Gambia and Carnegie respectively in this
annulment proceeding. In short, as far as representation was concerned the case had
followed the usual practice of ICSID in dealing with authorization of lawyers to

represent parties in ICSID proceedings including the annulment process.

VII. THE CHALLENGE TO CLYDE & CO.

36. On 4 January 2016, Gambia wrote to the Secretary-General of ICSID informing her
that, “Carnegie Minerals (Gambia) Ltd had been placed in liquidation by order of the
High Court of The Gambia dated 6 August 2015 which also appointed Mr. Augustine
Prom as the liquidator.” It then requested Clyde & Co., “to provide ICSID and The

Gambia with the power of attorney confirming that it is authorized to act for Carnegie

3

3

x

8.

oO

Minerals (Gambia) Ltd in liquidation in these annulment proceedings.” This request

has been reiterated on subsequent occasions.

. The Committee notes that Gambia’s request for a power of attorney from Clyde & Co.

is a request to provide authorization to act for “Carnegie Minerals (Gambia) Ltd in
liquidation”. In other words it is the position of Gambia that Clyde & Co. must provide
new evidence of its authority to represent Carnegie now that Carnegie is in liquidation.
Gambia argues in its letter of 26 July 2016 that in light of the liquidation of Carnegie,
under Gambian law the liquidator is the sole person who can represent Carnegie in
these proceedings. On that basis Gambia takes the view that Clyde & Co. must obtain
its authority to represent Carnegie in these proceedings from the liquidator. Carnegie,
by contrast, is claiming that the liquidator has no authority in these proceedings and
hence the authorization from Carnegie’s Board of Directors, provided to ICSID for the
arbitration proceedings, suffices. The essence of the question before the Committee is

whether the representation of Carnegie should be decided on the basis of Gambian law.

The Committee further notes that the question that arises in the present case is unique
to the particular facts of this case. The company that brought the claim, Carnegie
Minerals (Gambia) Ltd, is a national of the respondent state, The Gambia. In
accordance with ICSID Article 25(2)(b) such a company is to be included within the
definition of a “national of another contracting state” if it is a company which “because
of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of another
Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.” The Tribunal in the arbitration
proceedings concluded that at the time of consent to arbitration the parties had agreed
that Carnegie, a company incorporated under the laws of Gambia but with Australian
control, met the requirements of Article 25(2)(b) and thus could bring a claim against

The Gambia.

. In most ICSID arbitrations the claimant is a foreign company and thus the question of

the effect on representation of liquidation of that company under the laws of the
respondent state would not arise. Since Carnegie is incorporated under the laws of

Gambia, it is susceptible to being placed in liquidation under Gambian law. Thus, the

4

4

4

4

So

vv

oO

issue raised here is to some extent unique and limited. As a result, we make no
comment generally on the effects on ICSID proceedings of liquidation of a claimant
corporation by the law of the state of its nationality. We only deal with the effect of
liquidation by the respondent state of a claimant which is its own national but also
deemed to be a national of another contracting state for the purposes of the Convention
within the meaning of Article 25(2)(b). We have no evidence that this point has arisen

in other cases.

. The question for the Committee, then, is whether the appointment of a liquidator in

Gambia has any effect on the authority of Clyde & Co. to represent Carnegie in these
annulment proceedings, or to put it more broadly, does the domestic law of Gambia

govern the question of the representation of Carnegie in these annulment proceedings.

. The starting point in dealing with this question is the Convention itself. As pointed out

above, Rule 18 of the Arbitration Rules provides that each party to the arbitration is
entitled to be represented by “agents, counsel or advocates” whose authority to so act
“shall be notified by that party to the Secretary-General”. Hence it is clear that it is the
party before the ICSID tribunal that has the right to grant authority to a law firm to
represent it before an ICSID proceeding and to notify that authority to the Secretary-

General.

. The party before the arbitration proceedings is Carnegie, and Carnegie is the same party

in these annulment proceedings. The only question is whether the right to speak on
behalf of Carnegie, which was recognized as resting with the Board of Directors in the
case of the arbitration proceedings, has now changed as a result of the appointment of
a liquidator under Gambian law. In other words, should the domestic law of Gambia
apply to determine who is entitled to represent Carnegie in these annulment

proceedings?

. The domestic law of a party certainly has a role to play in investment arbitration,

particularly in the determination of whether an investment has been created. See
Campbell McLachlan, Laurence Shaw and Matthew Weiniger, International

Investment Arbitration (2008) 2.60-2.66. Thus, the domestic law of Gambia would be

8

4

4

4.

an

relevant to the question whether Carnegie had made an investment in Gambia. But,
just as the question of who is a party to proceedings before an ICSID tribunal is a matter
governed by the ICSID Convention, not by the domestic law of a party, so too the
question of who represents a party before ICSID must be a matter for the ICSID
Convention as well and not for the domestic law of a party to the proceedings. As
pointed out, Article 18 of the Arbitration Rules provides for representation of the
parties under the Convention, but it makes no renvoi to the domestic law of a party to
the proceedings before an ICSID tribunal for the purpose of deciding who represents a

party.

That the domestic law of the respondent state should not determine who is able to
represent a claimant in cases where the claimant is deemed to be a national of a foreign
state under Article 25(2)(b) follows as well from the logic of that provision. Under
Article 25(2)(b) investors who are nationals of the Contracting State are to be included
within the definition of a “national of another contracting state” where the parties have
agreed to treat it “as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention.” A respondent state cannot assert a right to determine the representation
of a claimant who is a national of another contracting state. Thus, a claimant who under
Article 25(2)(b) is deemed “a national of another contracting state” would not be truly
standing in the shoes of a national of another contracting state if the respondent state
could determine its representation in ICSID proceedings. If the domestic law of Gambia
were to be applied to determine who represents Carnegie in these proceedings,
Carnegie would not be treated in the same way as a national of another contracting state

for the purposes of the Convention.

. In light of the above, the Commission considers that there is no basis in the Convention

for concluding that the question of representation of a claimant who is a deemed
“national of another contracting state” under Article 25(2)(b) is to be decided by
application of the domestic law of the respondent state. Accordingly, the Committee
concludes that the issue of representation is not to be determined under Gambian law,
and thus the appointment of a liquidator for Carnegie does not resolve the question of

who represents Carnegie in this case.

46. In accordance with the normal practice of ICSID, the authority of Clyde & Co. to
represent Carnegie provided to ICSID for the arbitration proceedings continues for the
annulment proceedings. Although ICSID practice is not determinative on the
interpretation or application of the Convention, the Committee sees no reason to depart
from it in this case. Clyde & Co. was duly authorized to represent Carnegie in the
arbitration proceedings and Clyde & Co. has confirmed that its representation
continues. The only ground that has been raised to challenge that representation is the
appointment of a liquidator under Gambian law. But, the Committee has rejected the
application of Gambian law to determine the question of representation. Thus, the
Committee sees no ground for looking beyond the affirmation of Clyde & Co. in its
letter of 10 December 2015 that its representation of Carnegie continues for the

purposes of these annulment proceedings.

VIII. DECISION

47. In light of the above, the Committee decides that Clyde & Co. is the representative of

Carnegie in these annulment proceedings.

[Signed]

Donald McRae
President of the Committee
Date: October 7, 2016

On behalf of the Committee

