INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

CASINOS AUSTRIA INTERNATIONAL GMBH AND CASINOS AUSTRIA
AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

Claimants

AND

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/14/32

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte, President
Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill, Arbitrator

Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 5 November 2021

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Casinos Austria International Representing the Argentine Republic:
GmbH and Casinos Austria Aktiengesellschaft:

KNOETZL HAUGENEDER NETAL Dr. Carlos Alberto Zannini
Rechtsanwalte GmbH Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacion

Mr. Florian Haugeneder Dr. Horacio Pedro Diez

Mr. Emmanuel Kaufman Dr. Sebastian Antonio Soler

Herrengasse 1 Subprocuradores del Tesoro de la Nacion
A-1010 Vienna Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Austria Posadas 1641, CP 1112

Buenos Aires
Argentine Republic

moOwD>

F. Revocation of ENJASA’s License and Sut Events

Vv.

A.

1.
2.

3

1.

»

hr

w

wre

hr

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION. 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 2
REQUESTS FOR RELIEF 13
FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE...

 

The Privatization of the Gaming Sector in the Province of Salta...
Development of Claimants’
Development of Regulatory Framework and License Fee in the Province of Salta..
Investigations and Sanctions Prior to the Revocation of ENJASA’s License .
ENREJA’s Investigations Leading up to the Revocation of ENJASA’s License

lution No. 380/12

lution No. 381/12

lution No. 384/12

 

 

 

 

 

ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES ON LIABILITY.

Claimants’ A its on the Facts
Plan to Oust ENJASA from Salta’s Gaming Sector.
a) Mounting Interferences with ENJASA’s Operations Starting in 2007.
b) Administrative Inquiries and Sanctions from 2008 to May 2013
c) Role of Video Drome
d) Political Motivation of the Revocation of ENJASA’s License...
The Revocation of ENJASA’s License...
a) Charges Underlying ion No. 240/13
(1) Allegations in lution No. 380/12
(2) Allegations in Resolution No. 381/12
(3) Allegations in Resolution No. 384/12
b) The Revocation of the License Was Arbitrary and Disproportionate .
c) Violation of ENJASA’s Due Process Rights...
Claimants’ Analysis of the Law
licable Law
Breach of Article 4 of the BIT.
a) The Revocation of the License as an Abuse of Regulatory Powers....
b) Substantial and Permanent Deprivation of Claimants’ Investment
c) Expropriation of ENJASA’s License Contrary to Article 4(3) of the BIT.
Fair and Equitable Treatment
a) The Scope of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard...
b) The Content of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard
(1) Failure to Provide Due Process and Procedural Propriety
(2) Coercion and F
(3) Arbitrary Conduct and Conduct in Bad Faith...
(4) Failure to Provide Stability and Protect Claimants’ Legitimate Expectations
Respondent’s Analysis of the Facts
Motives for Revoking ENJASA’s Gaming License.....
Administrative Inquiries and Sanctions between 2007 and May 2013
The Revocation of ENJASA’s License Constituted a Regular Exercise of ENREJA’s Powers
a) Charges Underlying ion No. 240/13
(1) Allegations in lution No. 380/12
(2) Allegations in Resolution No. 381/12
(3) Allegations in Resolution No. 384/12
b) The Revocation of ENJASA’s License Was Justified and Proportionate
c) Respect of ENJASA’s Due Process Rights.
Respondent’s Analysis of the Law
icable Law
Breach of Article 4 of the BIT.
a) No Indirect Expropriation under Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   

 

 

 

 

iii

Vi

A. Applicable Law and Causes of Action

B. Expropriation

c
D.

VIL.

A.
B.

b)

3.

a)
b)

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS OF RESPONDENT’S LIABILITY .....

1.

a)

b)

2.

Fair and Equitable Treatment

Cc

No Direct Expropriation under Article 4(3) of the BIT...
Fair and Equitable Treatment
The Scope of Fair and Equitable Treatment under the BIT ..
Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard ....

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

Breach of Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT.

The Relevant Legal Principles ...

(1) Qualification of Claimants’ Claim as a Claim for Indirect Expropriation

(2) Distinction between Indirect Expropriation and Non-Compensable Exercises of the Host

State’s Regulatory and Police Powers

(3) Limitations on the Host State’s Exercise of Its Police Powers
Application of the Legal Framework to the Facts of the Case ..

(1) Permanent and Substantial Deprivation of Claimants’ Investment.

(2) ENREJA’s Use of Its Regulatory Powers.

(a) Plan to Oust ENJASA from Operating in the Gaming Sccto:

(b) ENREJA’s Power to Revoke the License under Article 13...

(c) ENREJA’s Determinations of ENJASA’s Breaches of the Regulatory Framewor'

 

 

 

  
 
  
 

 

 

 

(i) Allegations in Resolution No. 380/12 132
(ii) Allegations in Resolution No. 381/12 133
(iii) Allegations in Resolution No. 384/12 135
(iv) Conclusion on Allegations Underlying Resolution No. 240/13 138

 

(d) Proportionality of Resolution No. 240/13 139

(ec) Respect of Due Process

(6)
Claim for Breach of Article 4(3) of the BIT...

 

 

 

on °s Liability

QUANTUM 152

Standard of Ci
Valuation of Claimants’

1.

 

 

Claimants’ A

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a) Valuation Model.
b) Relevant Cash Flow
c) Discount Rate
d) i Rate.
e) Overall Valuation of Claimants’ Investment...
f) Alternative Valuation: The Market Approach.
dent’s Approach
a) Valuation Model.
b) Relevant Cash Flow
c) Discount Rate
d) h Rate.
e) Overall Valuation of Claimants’ Investment...
f) Alternative Valuation: The Market Approach.
The Tribunal’s Analysis
a) Valuation Model.
b) The Relevant Cash Flow
c) Discount Rate
d) h Rate.
e) Value of Claimants’ Investment at the Valuation Date
C ial Damages
Claimants’ Position
dent’s Position

wr

Interest.

 

 

The Tribunal’s Analysis

 

 

The Parties’ Position:

VUL

A.
B.

IX.

2.

The Tribunal’s Analysis
COSTS

 

 

The Parties’ Position:
The Tribunal’s Analysi

DECISION.

195
198

198
199

203

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARS Argentine Peso

Bianchi IV Fourth Expert Report of Alberto B. Bianchi, dated 3
December 2018

BIT Agreement between the Republic of Austria and the
Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and Protection
of Investments, signed on 7 August 1992 and in force
since | January 1995

Boldt Boldt S.A.

BPAS Banco de Préstamos y Asistencia Social

Cachi Valle Cachi Valle Aventuras S.A.

CAI Casinos Austria International GmbH

CAIH Casinos Austria International Holding GmbH

CAPEX Capital Expenditure

CASAG Casinos Austria Aktier lschaft

CCL Contado con Liquidacion (Implied ARS-USD Exchange
Rate)

CEMAT Expert Report of José P. Dapena, German Coloma, and
Agustin Flah, dated 14 March 2016

Centre or ICSID International Centre for Settlement of Investment

Disputes

 

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, dated 2 October
2015

 

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, dated 24 January 2020

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Clai ” Reply on the Merits Clai ” Reply on the Merits, dated 3 December 2018

CMG Complejo Monumento Giiemes S.A.

Dapena IT Expert Report of José P. Dapena, dated 23 May 2019

DCF Discounted Cash Flow

DEK Dek S.A.

EBITDA Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and
Amortisation

EMBI+ Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus

Emsenor Emsenor S.R.L.

ENJASA Entretenimientos y Juegos de Azar S.A.

ENREJA Ente Regulador del Juego de Azar

EV Enterprise Value

FATF Financial Action Task Force

 

vi

 

 

Garcia Pullés IV

Fourth Legal Expert Opinion by Dr. Fernando Garcia
Pullés, dated 3 December 2018

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ICJ International Court of Justice

Iberlux Tberlux International S.A.

ILC Articles International Law Commission’s Articles on
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful
Acts

L&E Leisure & Entertainment S.A.

Marcer I Expert Report of Ernesto Alberto Marcer, dated 14
March 2016

Mareer II Second Expert Report of Emesto Alberto Marcer, dated
27 May 2019

NAFTA North American Free Trade Agreement

New Star New Star S.R.L.

OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development

Prodec Prodec S.A.

 

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on
the Merits

Respondent’s Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction
and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, dated 15 March
2016

 

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, dated 24 January
2020

 

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, dated 27 May
2019

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Rosen I Expert Report of Howard N. Rosen and Jennifer
Vanderhart, FTI Consulting Inc., dated 2 October 2015

Rosen II Expert Report of Howard N. Rosen, dated 3 December
2018

Sigar Sigar S.A.

Transcript Transcript of the Hearing on the Merits

UNIREN Unidad de Revision y Renegociacion de Contratos y
Licencias otorgadas por la Administracion

UTE Union Transitoria de Empresas

VCLT Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

Video Drome Video Drome S.A.

WACC Weighted Average Capital Cost

Ws Witness S it

 

 

 

L

INTRODUCTION

The present dispute arises out of the revocation, in 2013, of an exclusive 30-year license
granted in 1999 to the Argentine company Entretenimientos y Juegos de Azar S.A.
(“ENJASA”) for the operation of gaming facilities and lottery activities in the Argentine
Province of Salta. ENJASA had been established by the Government of the Province of
Salta as part of the process of privatizing the Province’s gaming and lottery sector and
developing tourism in the region. Following a public tender and various changes in the
ownership structure, ENJASA became majority owned and controlled by Claimants,
Casinos Austria International GmbH (“CAI”), a limited liability company established
under the laws of Austria, and Casinos Austria Aktiengesellschaft (“CASAG”), a share-
company established under the laws of Austria (jointly “Casinos” or “Claimants”).
Claimants are operators of casinos and games of chance in a number of jurisdictions all
over the world. CAI is a subsidiary of CASAG and its international arm of gaming
operations.! Claimants held majority ownership and exercised control of ENJASA
through Leisure & Entertainment S.A. (“L&E”), a stock corporation under Argentine

law, in which Claimants were majority shareholders.

Claimants contend that the revocation of ENJASA’s license, followed by the transfer of
its gaming and lottery operations and personnel to a number of new gaming operators,
was an arbitrary exercise of power of the Ente Regulador del Juego de Azar
(“ENREJA”), the Province’s regulatory authority for the gaming sector, was politically
motivated in order to benefit local gaming operators and to increase the Province’s
revenue from gaming, and effectively destroyed Claimants’ investment in Argentina.
Claimants invoke the violation of their rights as foreign investors under the Agreement
between the Republic of Austria and the Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments (“BIT”), which was signed on 7 August 1992 and entered into
force on 1 January 1995,” in particular their right not to be expropriated without
compensation, to receive fair and equitable treatment, and to enjoy national treatment.
They seek, as a result of this conduct, damages from the Argentine Republic

(“Argentina” or “Respondent”) in an amount exceeding USD 50 million.

' Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 3.
2 Exhibit C-002.

IL.

Respondent, by contrast, claims that the revocation of ENJASA’s license was a
legitimate sanction that was provided for by the regulatory framework in place in the
Province of Salta, was imposed by ENREJA in observance of administrative due process,
and was motivated by both ENJASA’s repeated and prolonged non-compliance with
rules to prevent money laundering in the gaming sector and the involvement by ENJASA
of other operators of gaming activities in the Province without ENREJA’s authorization.
ENJASA’s conduct, Respondent claims, constituted grave and repeated violations of the
regulatory framework in place, which justified the revocation of its exclusive operating

license. Respondent therefore rejects any claim for breach of the BIT.

Following objections by Respondent to the Centre’s jurisdictions and to the Tribunal’s
competence, the Tribunal determined, in its Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 June 2018,
that the Centre had jurisdiction, and the Tribunal competence, under Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention in connection with the BIT over Claimants’ claims for breach of
Article 2(1) (fair and equitable treatment) and Article 4(1)-(3) (rules on expropriation) of
the BIT, but that it would not entertain claims for breach of Article 3(1) (national
treatment) of the BIT. The Tribunal found in particular that Claimants had made, in the
form of their indirect participation through L&E in ENJASA, an investment in Argentina
in the sense of both the BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, and that the
Parties had validly consented to the jurisdiction of the Centre under the BIT. By the
present Award, the Tribunal decides on Claimants’ claims on the merits, as far as the

Tribunal has found them to be under its competence.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 4 December 2014, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or “Centre”) received a request for arbitration from Casinos Austria
International GmbH and Casinos Austria Aktiengesellschaft against the Argentine
Republic (the “Request”).

On 18 December 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in
accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the
registration. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to
proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule
7(d) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration

Proceedings.

By correspondence of 3 December 2014, 29 December 2014, 13 January 2015, and 15
January 2015, the Parties agreed that the Tribunal would be comprised of three
arbitrators; one to be appointed by each Party and the third, presiding arbitrator, to be

appointed by agreement of the Parties.

By letter of 13 January 2015, Claimants appointed Prof. Dr. Stephan Schill, a national
of Germany, as an arbitrator in this case. Prof. Schill accepted his appointment on 26

January 2015.

By letter of 13 February 2015, Respondent appointed Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez, a
national of Spain, as arbitrator in this case. Dr. Torres Bernardez accepted his

appointment on 23 February 2015.

On 31 March 2015, Claimants informed the Secretary-General that the Parties had
reached an agreement to appoint Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte, a national of Belgium, as
President of the Tribunal. Respondent confirmed the agreement on the same date. Prof.

van Houtte accepted his appointment on 3 April 2015.

On 6 April 2015, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6 of the ICSID Rules
of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), notified the Parties
that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was
therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Giuliana Cané, ICSID
Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. Following Ms.
Cané’s departure from the Centre, on 15 January 2016, in accordance with ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the Secretary-General appointed Ms.

Alicia Martin Blanco, ICSID Legal Counsel, as Secretary of the Tribunal.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 13(1) and 20(1), the Tribunal held a first
session and preliminary procedural consultation with the Parties on 5 June 2015 by

teleconference.

Following the first session, on 23 June 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No.
1 recording the agreements of the Parties and the Tribunal’s decisions on procedural
matters. Procedural Order No. 1 provided, inter alia, that the applicable Arbitration
Rules would be those in effect from 10 April 2006, that the procedural languages would
be English and Spanish, and that the place of proceeding would be Paris, France.
Procedural Order No. | also set out the schedule of the proceedings included as Annex

A to that order.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

On 2 October 2015, Claimants submitted their Memorial on the Merits.

On 11 February 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 on document

production.

On 15 March 2016, Respondent submitted her Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction
and Counter-Memorial on the Merits. It included a request to treat the objections to the

jurisdiction of the Centre and/or the competence of the Tribunal as a preliminary matter.

On 8 April 2016, Claimants presented observations in opposition to Respondent’s

request to bifurcate the proceeding.

Having considered the Parties’ observations, on 25 April 2016, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 3 ruling that Respondent’s objections would be heard as a

preliminary question.

On 26 July 2016, Claimants submitted their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.
On 11 October 2016, Respondent filed her Reply on Objections to Jurisdiction.
On 23 December 2016, Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

On 13 March 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 on the organization of

the hearing on jurisdiction.
A hearing on jurisdiction was held in Paris, France, from 23 to 25 March 2017.

On 23 June 2017, the Parties submitted simultaneous Post-Hearing Briefs on

jurisdiction.

On 29 June 2018, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction. The operative part

of the Decision provides as follows:

341. On the basis of the reasoning above, the Tribunal decides:

1) that it has jurisdiction over the present dispute insofar as
Claimants’ claims for breach of Articles 2(1) and 4(1)-(3) of the
Argentina-Austria BIT are concerned;

2) that it has no jurisdiction over the present dispute insofar as
claims for breach of Article3(1) of the Argentina-Austria BIT
are concerned;

3) that both Parties will within two months as from the issuance of
this Decision take all required measures to withdraw the
domestic proceedings relating to the present dispute and inform
the Tribunal of their actions;

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

4) that a decision on costs is reserved for subsequent
determination.
The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction forms part of the Award and is attached hereto.
A more detailed procedural history of the jurisdictional phase can be found in the

Decision on Jurisdiction.

On 29 August 2018, in accordance with the Tribunal’s order in its Decision on
Jurisdiction to take all required measures to withdraw the domestic proceedings relating
to the present dispute, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they had filed their

respective withdrawals.

Following consultations with the Parties, an amended procedural calendar, including

the hearing weeks, was approved by the Tribunal on 30 October 2018.

In accordance with the amended procedural calendar, Claimants submitted their Reply

on the Merits on 3 December 2018.

Following a newly amended procedural calendar, on 27 May 2019, Respondent filed

its Rejoinder on the Merits.

On 9 July 2019, the Tribunal instructed the Parties to submit a timetable for the
notification of the witnesses and experts to be examined at the hearing, the Parties’
agreements on the organization of the hearing, the last opportunity to request leave to
submit new documents for the purpose of direct or cross-examination, the submission
of skeleton arguments and of a joint electronic hearing bundle, and the pre-hearing

conference call.

On 11 July 2019, the Parties notified the Tribunal of their agreed schedule regarding
the steps prior to the hearing, and on 19 July 2019, the Parties submitted their respective
lists of witnesses and experts called to testify at the hearing.

On 5 August 2019, unable to reach an agreement regarding the agenda for the hearing
on the merits, each Party sent their respective proposals.

On 12 August 2019, each Party filed a request for the Tribunal to decide on the

admissibility of new documents.

On 13 August 2019, the President held a pre-hearing organizational meeting with the

Parties by telephone conference. The following persons participated in the call:

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

Tribunal:
Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte President

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco Secretary of the Tribunal

On behalf of Claimants:

Mr. Florian Haugeneder Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Mr. Emmanuel Kaufman Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Mrs. Selma Tirié Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Mr. Nicolas Caffo Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH
On behalf of Respondent:

Ms. Maria Teresa Gianelli Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién.

Ms. Maria Alejandra Etchegorry Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién

Ms. Valeria Etchegorry Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién

Ms. Soledad Romero Caporale Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién

Mr. José Martin Ryb Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién

On 16 August 2019, the Parties respectively filed their observations on the other Party’s

request to admit new documents.

On 23 August 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 outlining the
organization of the hearing on the merits, including a request for the Parties to indicate
the reasons why Mr. Petersen (for Claimants) and Messrs. Marteau and Mata (for
Respondent) would not be available to attend the hearing or otherwise provide oral
testimony, and a request for Claimants to submit a document indicating the amounts of
the fines paid compared to the results of each operational unit. The Tribunal also took

note of the Parties’ agreement not to submit skeleton arguments.

By email of 27 August 2019, the Tribunal informed the Parties of its decision regarding

the admissibility of new documents.

On 27 August 2019, each Party informed the Tribunal of the reasons why Mr. Petersen
(for Claimants) and Messrs. Marteau and Mata (for Respondent) would not be able to
attend the hearing. On the same date, the Parties also submitted their joint schedule for

the hearing and estimated witness and expert examination time.

On 28 August 2019, as requested in Procedural Order No. 5, Claimants submitted a
table indicating the amounts of the fines imposed on ENJASA compared to the results

of ENJASA’s operational units.

On 29 August 2019, Claimants requested the Tribunal to reconsider its decision of 27

August 2019 to reject the evidence relating to Mr. Benvenuto’s written statement.

42.

Respondent submitted a reply to Claimants’ letter on the same date. The Tribunal

addressed this request during the hearing on the merits.

The Tribunal held a hearing on the merits from 2 to 13 September 2019 in Paris. Present

at the hearing were:

Tribunal:

Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte
Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill
Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco

On behalf of Claimants:

Counsel:
Mr. Florian Haugeneder
Mr. Emmanuel Kaufman
Mrs. Selma Tiri¢
Mr. Nicolas Caffo
Mr. Peter Behyl
Ms. Julia Hildebrandt

 

Parties:
Mr. Christoph Zurucker-Burda
Ms. Claudia Dotter

 

Witnesses:
Mr. Gustavo Anselmi
Mr. Juan Pablo Ortiz Fernandez
Mr. Claudio Sergio Frade
Mr. Alexander Tucek
Mr. Andreas Schreiner
Mr. José Antonio Ocantos
Mr. Juan Ignacio Gomez Naar
Mr. Thomas Kellner

Experts:
Mr. Howard Rosen
Mr. Eddie Tobis
Mr. Fernando Garcia Pullés
Mr. Alberto B. Bianchi
Mr. Liban Kusa

On behalf of Respondent:

Parties:
Ms. Maria Teresa Gianelli
Ms. Maria Alejandra Etchegorry
Ms. Maria Soledad Romero Caporale
Mr. Juan Manuel Falabella
Ms. Annabella Sandri Fuentes
Mr. José Martin Ryb
Ms. Cintia Emilse Yaryura

 

President
Co-Arbitrator
Co-Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH
Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal Rechtsanwalte GmbH

Casinos Austria International
Casinos Austria

CODERE and Textil Médica

ENJASA

Lo Bruno Estructuras S.A.

Retired (formerly Casinos Austria International)

Candioti Gatto Bicain & Ocantos
Gomez Naar y Asociados
Casinos Austria International

Secretariat International

FTI Consulting

Estudio O’ Farrell

Bianchi, Galarce & Castro Videla
Bruchou, Fernandez Madero & Lombardi

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

43.

Mr. Julian Darmin

Mr. Francisco Javier Garcia Elorrio
Ms. Natalia Paola Guillén

Mr. Nicolas Duhalde

Mr. Braian Joachim

Mr. Nicolas Grosse

Ms. Adriana Marcela Cusmano
Mr. Emiliano Gabriel Leanza

Ms. Cintia Pamela Calletti

Witnesses:
Ms. Silvina M.C. Cainelli
Ms. Maria Josefina Courel
Ms. Maria Veronica Courel Salas
Mr. Federico A. Saravia Sylvester

Experts:
Mr. Ernesto Alberto Marcer
Mr. Zenon Alberto Biagosch
Mr. Guillermo Coombes
Mr. Hernan Del Debbio
Mr. José Pablo Amadeo Dapena

Court Reporters:

Ms. Elizabeth Cicoria
Ms. Luciana Sosa

Ms. Anne-Marie Stallard

Interpreters:

Ms. Anna Sophia Chapman
Mr. Jesus Getan Bornn

Ms. Roxana Dazin

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Fiscal de Estado de la Provincia de Salta

ENREJA
ENREJA
ENREJA
ENREJA

Expert
Expert
Assistant to Mr. Biagosch
Assistant to Mr. Biagosch
Expert

Spanish-Language Court Reporter
Spanish-Language Court Reporter
English-Language Court Reporter

English-Spanish Interpreter
English-Spanish Interpreter
English-Spanish Interpreter

The following witnesses and experts were examined at the hearing on the merits:

Claimants’ Witnesses:

Mr. Gustavo Anselmi

Mr. Juan Pablo Ortiz Fernandez
Mr. Claudio Sergio Frade

Mr. Alexander Tucek

Mr. Andreas Schreiner

Mr. José Antonio Ocantos

Mr. Juan Ignacio Gomez Naar
Mr. Thomas Kellner

Claimants’ Experts:

Mr. Howard Rosen

Mr. Fernando Garcia Pullés
Mr. Alberto B. Bianchi

Mr. Liban Kusa

Respondent’s Witnesses:

Ms. Silvina M.C. Cainelli

Ms. Maria Josefina Courel

Ms. Maria Veronica Courel Salas
Mr. Federico A. Saravia Sylvester

CODERE and Textil Médica

ENJASA

Lo Bruno Estructuras S.A.

Retired (formerly Casinos Austria International)

Candioti Gatto Bicain & Ocantos
Gomez Naar y Asociados
Casinos Austria International

Secretariat International

Estudio O’ Farrell

Bianchi, Galarce & Castro Videla
Bruchou, Fernandez Madero & Lombardi

ENREJA
ENREJA
ENREJA
ENREJA

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

Respondent’s Experts:

Mr. Ernesto Alberto Marcer Expert
Mr. Zenon Alberto Biagosch Expert
Mr. José Pablo Amadeo Dapena Expert

The Parties filed their joint revised transcripts on 26 November 2019.

On 27 December 2019, Claimants wrote to the Tribunal informing them that they
planned to attach “an updated version of Exhibit C-299 with one additional worksheet,

i.e., the ‘Control Sheet’”, to their Post-Hearing Brief.

On 3 January 2020, the Tribunal invited Claimants to transmit the new version of
Exhibit C-299 to Respondent, and invited Respondent to file comments on Claimants’
communication of 27 December 2019 by 10 January 2020, which the Parties did.
Respondent argued that Exhibit C-299 included new calculations and should therefore
not be admitted at such a late stage in the proceeding. In the event that it was admitted,
Respondent requested the opportunity to make substantial observations, including new

calculations by Professor Dapena, after the filing of the Post-Hearing Briefs.

On 20 January 2020, Claimants submitted a response to Respondent’s observations of
10 January 2020. According to Claimants, there were no new calculations in the new
version of C-299, and no new data or new assumptions in the additional worksheet.
Therefore, they submit, there was no basis for the argument that a substantive review

would be required in the event of their admission into the record.

On 22 January 2020, Respondent requested the opportunity to respond to Claimants’
letter of 20 January 2020. The Tribunal granted Respondent’s request for leave to
respond by 30 January 2020, and reassured the Parties that, should Claimants be
allowed to submit an updated version of Exhibit C-299 and the corresponding control
sheet, as requested on 27 December 2019, the Parties would be afforded a procedural
opportunity to submit comments on the newly admitted materials after the Post-Hearing
Briefs. Since the Parties submitted their comments on the new materials de bene esse,
there was no need for the Tribunal to afford a further opportunity to submit comments
once the new materials (and the comments) were admitted into the record (see infra

para. 55).

The Parties filed their Post-Hearing Briefs on 24 January 2020.

50.

Sl.

On 30 January 2020, Respondent submitted its response to Claimants’ communication
of 20 January 2020. Respondent indicated that it followed from the preliminary review
conducted by Professor Dapena that the new spreadsheet was not a mere updated
version of Exhibit C-299. Additionally, Respondent noted that in their Post-Hearing
Brief, Claimants had included the title “1.9. Update of Exhibit C-299”, and cited
materials not included in the record. Respondent reiterated its objection to the late
presentation of a new spreadsheet as well as its request for a substantive review in the
event of its admission into the record. Respondent further requested the exclusion from
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief of section IV.1.9 and paragraph 484 together with its
footnotes 604 and 605 because section IV.1.9 referred to the new spreadsheet on which
admissibility the Tribunal had not yet ruled, and because paragraph 484 and footnotes
604 and 605 referred to pages of a document that were not on the record. On 31 January
2020, Claimants requested an opportunity to respond, by 4 February 2020, to
Respondent’s observations. The Tribunal granted Claimants’ request, and on 4
February 2020, Claimants filed a letter in response to Respondent’s letter of 30 January
2020. Claimants requested that the Tribunal authorize the submission of “the updated
version of C-299” and reject the request relating to the deletion of paragraph 484 of its
Post-Hearing Brief. According to Claimants, “the wording of paragraph 484 represents
Mr. Rosen’s explanations in his reports as well as during the Hearing of the Merits. As
a result, there is no basis to delete the full paragraph.” Claimants acknowledged that
there was a clerical mistake in footnotes 604 and 605 in that they contained references
to CL-036 that had been “inadvertently not deleted” and were not part of the record.

Claimants stated that they would submit a corrected version of the footnotes.
By email of 17 March 2020, the Tribunal notified its decision to the Parties, as follows:

The Tribunal refers to (i) the Claimants’ communications of December
27, 2019, January 20 and February 4, 2020, and to (ii) the Respondent’s
communications of January 10 and 29, 2020.

In their communications, the Claimants request that they be allowed to
submit “an updated version of Exhibit C-299 with one additional
worksheet, i.e. the “Control Sheet’, and indicate that they would have
no objection to the Respondent producing a similar worksheet.
According to the Claimants, the Control Sheet would allow the Tribunal
“to calculate the impact on Mr Howard Rosen’s DCF Model when
selecting different approaches to specific parameters of the
calculation.” The Claimants contend that that there are no new
calculations in the new version of C-299, and no new data, assumptions,

calculations or valuation model in the Control Sheet, which only
function is “to allow the Tribunal to toggle between the different views
of the experts on specific parameters discussed by them.” The Claimants
further contend that all the parameters considered have already been
discussed among the experts. As a consequence, should the Control
Sheet be admitted, “the Argentine Republic should not use such
opportunity to re-open the discussion about Mr Rosen’s expert reports”.
Finally, the Claimants request that the Respondent’s application to
exclude certain portions of the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief be
rejected.

In its communications, the Respondent contends that the President’s
questions at the hearing do not enable the Claimants to submit a new
spreadsheet at this stage of the proceeding, that the Control Sheet is not
merely an updated version of C-299 given that it includes new
calculations not previously submitted and that, should the new
spreadsheet be admitted into the record, the Respondent should be given
the opportunity to make substantial observations — including Professor
Dapena’s own calculations. The Respondent further requests the
exclusion of section IV.1.9, as well as paragraph 484 together with its
footnotes 604 and 605, from the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief.

The Tribunal considers that, should it become relevant to its decision on
the merits, it could be useful to be able to consult a document that
enables it to choose between the different opinions of the damages
experts on the various parameters discussed. In the absence of a joint
document of the Parties, the Tribunal would admit separate documents
—or one document supplemented by both Parties’ comments thereon. In
order to make this decision:

1. On March 24, 2020, the Claimants shall submit the updated
version of Exhibit C-299 as well as the Control Sheet (“CCS”).

2. On April 21, 2020, the Respondent shall submit its responsive

document on CCS as well as, if so wish, its own version of a

control sheet (“RCS”).

On May 5, 2020, the Claimants shall submit a reply to the

Respondent’s comments on the CCS as well as any comments on

admissibility they may have on the RCS, if submitted.

On May 19, 2020, the Respondent shall provide a reply to the

Claimants’ comments on the RCS.

»

-

All the above submissions shall be considered to have been filed de bene
esse. For the time being, the Tribunal confirms that these documents are
not admitted into the record. The Tribunal reserves in full its powers to
decide upon their admission or non-admission following consideration
of the Parties’ complete briefing on this issue.

Regarding the portions of the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief which
exclusion has been requested by the Respondent, the Tribunal
understands that the admissibility of section IV.1.9 will follow the

52.

53.

54.

55.

admissibility of the updated version of Exhibit C-299 and of the Control
Sheet. Regarding paragraph 484 and footnotes 604-605, the Tribunal is
satisfied with the Claimants’ explanations and requests that the referred
paragraph be corrected. The Tribunal requests that the Claimants submit
the amended pages of the Post-Hearing Brief in both languages, without
changing the paragraph numbers of the non-amended paragraphs, once
the Tribunal has decided on the admissibility of the updated version of
Exhibit C-299 and of the Control Sheet. Should the Respondent
maintain an objection to paragraph 484 and footnotes 604-605, it shall
indicate so within seven days from receipt of the amended pages of the
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief.

On 23 March 2020, Claimants filed an updated version of Exhibit C-299, including the

control sheet.

On 21 April 2020, Respondent submitted its responsive document on Claimants’

control sheet as well as its own version of a control sheet.

On 1 May 2020, Respondent submitted a request for an extension to file the last round
of comments on Claimants’ and Respondent’s control sheets. Claimants submitted a
response on 4 May 2020. On the same day, the Tribunal decided to grant a short
extension for the Parties to file their respective presentations. Claimants’ deadline was
extended from 5 May to 12 May 2020, and Respondent’s deadline was extended from
19 May to 29 May 2020. Both Parties complied and filed their respective submissions

in accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions.
On 30 July 2020, the Tribunal notified its decision to the Parties, as follows:

The Tribunal refers to its communication of March 17, 2020 requesting
that the Parties make the following submissions de bene esse, which the
Parties did on March 24, April 21, May 12 and May 29, 2020,
respectively:

1. The Claimants were requested to submit the updated version of
Exhibit C-299 as well as the Control Sheet (“CCS”).

2. The Respondent was requested to submit its responsive document
on CCS as well as, if so wished, its own version of a control
sheet (“RCS”).

3. The Claimants were requested to submit a reply to the
Respondent’s comments on the CCS as well as any comments on
admissibility they might have on the RCS, if submitted.

4. The Respondent was requested to submit a reply to the
Claimants’ comments on the RCS.

The Tribunal has decided to accept these submissions into the record.
As a consequence, the Tribunal also confirms the admissibility of

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

Ill.

section IV.1.9 of the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief. The Tribunal
clarifies that its decision on admissibility is without prejudice to the
Tribunal’s decision on the probative value of any of these documents.

Finally, the Tribunal reminds the Claimants of its decision regarding
paragraph 484 and footnotes 604-605 of the Claimants’ Post-Hearing
Brief, and requests that the Claimants submit the amended pages of the
Post-Hearing Brief in both languages, without changing the paragraph
numbers of the non-amended paragraphs, by Wednesday, August 5,
2020. Should the Respondent maintain an objection to paragraph 484
and footnotes 604-605, it shall indicate so within seven days from
receipt of the amended pages of the Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief.
Claimants wrote to the Tribunal on 4 August 2020 indicating they had already
submitted an amended version of their Post-Hearing Brief containing the requested
corrections to paragraph 484 and footnotes 604-605 on 20 February 2020, and noted

that Respondent had not objected to the submission of these amendments.

On 11 August 2020, Respondent submitted a word document with corrections to
paragraph 484 and footnotes 604 and 605 of Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief. The
Tribunal notes that these corrections reflected, apart from minor, but immaterial

differences, the corrections Claimants had submitted on 4 August 2020.

On 30 June 2021, the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit a joint proposal regarding

the contents of their respective costs statements, which the Parties did on 7 July 2021.

The Parties submitted their respective costs’ statements on 30 July 2021. Following the
Tribunal’s invitation, on 17 August 2021, Respondent filed comments on Claimants’
costs statement, and Claimants filed comments on Respondent’s comments on 24
August 2021. On the same day, and also pursuant to the Tribunal’s invitation,

Respondent filed a clarification of its communication of 17 August 2021.

The proceeding was declared closed on 5 October 2021.

REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

Claimants’ Requests for Relief

61.

Claimants request that the Tribunal render an award, stating that:

1. The Argentine Republic has breached Articles 4(1) and (2) of the BIT by

unlawfully expropriating Claimants’ investment.

2. The Argentine Republic has breached Article 4(3) of the BIT by
unlawfully expropriating the license and the gaming operations of
Claimants’ subsidiary ENJASA.

3. The Argentine Republic has breached Article 2(1) of the BIT by failing
to accord fair and equitable treatment.

4. The Argentine Republic is liable to pay damages for the breach of the
Articles 2(1), 4(1), 4(2) and 4(3) of the BIT.

5. The Argentine Republic shall pay not less than USD 51,919,998 to
Claimants.

6. The Argentine Republic is ordered to pay to the Claimants interest at a
rate of 6% compounded annually from 13 August 2013 until full
payment.

7. The Argentine Republic shall pay to Claimants all costs, expenses and
fees (including internal costs) relating to this arbitration and appropriate

interest thereon.?

Respondent's Requests for Relief
62. Respondent requests the Tribunal to

(a) reject each and every one of the claims put forward by Claimants;

(b) order Claimants to pay for all costs and expenses arising from these
arbitration proceedings, and

(c) grant the Argentine Republic such further relief as the Tribunal may

deem fit.*

Iv. FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

63. Most of the facts underlying the present dispute are uncontested between the Parties. This
is due not least to the fact that gaming in the Province of Salta is a highly regulated and
formalized sector of the economy, with the different administrative proceedings affecting
ENJASA being documented in detail, as the large record submitted in the proceedings
attests. What the Parties differ on are certain undocumented facts, which principally

concern the motive for ENREJA revoking ENJASA’s license, and their legal assessment

3 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 584.
4 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 358.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

of the revocation. The present section provides a summary of those largely uncontested

facts.

A. The Privatization of the Gaming Sector in the Province of Salta

In accordance with Articles 75 and 99 of the National Constitution of Argentina, the
regulation of games of chance falls outside the scope of competence of the Federal

Government. Such regulation is thus the competence of the respective Provinces. *

Since the 1970s, gaming facilities and lottery activities in the Province of Salta, which is
located in the Northwestern part of Argentina, were operated directly by, or under the
control of, Banco de Préstamos y Asistencia Social (“BPAS”), an autonomous entity
fully owned by the Province of Salta. When it was in charge of the gaming sector in
Salta, BPAS had issued a number of licenses for the operation of slot machine halls to

individuals and companies.”

In December 1995, the Province of Salta passed the “Principles for the Restructuring of
BPAS” as part of its Law No. 6836. This Law foresaw the restructuring of BPAS,
including the possible privatization of BPAS’ gaming and lottery operations, which was

necessary to attract substantial private investments. *

On 7 September 1998, the Executive of the Province of Salta passed Decree No. 2126/98.
It addressed the necessity of constant investments for the continuous development of the
gaming sector and also created ENJASA, a company with limited liability under
Argentine law in order to manage, commercialize, and exploit games of chance in the

Province of Salta.” ENJASA was to have a duration of 30 years.

Law No. 7020 of the Province of Salta, which entered into force on 30 December 1998,
provides the principal regulatory framework for the gaming and lottery sector in the
Province. '° The Law created ENREJA as the regulatory agency to oversee the gaming
and lottery sector within the Province (Art. 31). ENREJA was to issue operating rules

and oversee compliance with the applicable laws and regulations (Arts. 3, 32, and 33).

5 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 18.
6 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 10-14; Respondent's Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 134-

135.

7 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras 84-86; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 135.
8 Exhibit C-045.
° Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 19-24; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 137-

139.
‘© Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras.

 

5-27; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 140-

147. For the text of Law No 7020, see Exhibit C-048.

69.

70.

The regulatory framework, inter alia, prohibited the hiring of operators without the
authorization of ENREJA and required the appointment in each gaming facility of a
person responsible for overseeing and implementing anti-money laundering measures
(Art. 5). ENREJA also disposed of disciplinary and sanctioning powers, which included
the issuance of warnings, the imposition of fines, disqualification, and the suspension
and revocation of operating licenses (Art. 13).'' Operating licenses, however, were not

issued by ENREJA, but by the Government of the Province of Salta (Art. 4).

On 1 September 1999, the Executive of the Province of Salta conferred an exclusive
license to ENJASA for the operation of games of chance by Decree No. 3616/99. '* The
terms of this License, which was granted for a term of 30 years, provided that any breach
of the conditions of the License, of Law No. 7020, and of any regulation issued by
ENREJA were to be sanctioned pursuant to Law No. 7020 (see Art. 5.1 of the License).
The License furthermore specified that it would be extinct or forfeited, inter alia, in case
of non-payment of the license fee, non-compliance with the obligations imposed under
Article 5 of Law No. 7020, exploitation of any games of chance without prior
authorization by ENREJA, (full or partial) cession or transfer of the operations covered
by the License without prior authorization of the Executive, and bankruptcy of the
licensee (Art. 6). The impact the grant of an exclusive operating license to ENJASA had
on licenses issued previously by BPAS to slot machines operators is a matter of

controversy between the Parties.

Equally on 1 September 1999, the Ministry of Production and Employment of the
Province of Salta approved the Call for a National and International Public Tender to
offer 90% of ENJASA’s shares (the so-called “Class A-shares”) for sale. !3 Participants
in the tender needed to have at least ten years of experience in the operation of casinos
and games of chance. Moreover, they had to submit an investment plan that included the
number of employees to be hired, a tourism development program, and the amount of
investments to be made, and stipulate a yearly license fee to be paid to the Province for

the term of the License. The remaining 10% of ENJASA’s shares (the so-called “Class

'| The Parties disagree, however, whether Article 13 of Law No. 7020 continued to stay in force when Law No.
7020 was amended in May 2001. For details, see infra paras. 176-177, 254-255.

"? Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 28-30; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 148-
157. For the text of Decree No. 3616/99 containing the License, see Exhibit C-049.

'3 Resolution No. 411/99; Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 31-34; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on
the Merits, paras. 158-162.

71.

72.

73.

B-shares”) continued to be held by the Province of Salta under a joint ownership

participation program for former BPAS employees.

The only participant in the public tender was the Unidn Transitoria de Empresas
(“UTE”), a joint venture under Argentine law, consisting of Casinos Austria
International Holding GmbH (“CAIH”) (5%), Boldt S.A. (“Boldt”) (5%) and Iberlux
International S.A. (“Iberlux”) (90%). The UTE’s bid included the offer to pay an annual
license fee for the 30-year period (consisting initially of payments of USD 2,200,000 for
the first three years and USD 3,500,000 for the following 27 years) and a commitment to
invest USD 20,770,000 into tourism development in the Province of Salta, namely into
the construction of a five-star hotel and the establishment of hoteling and gastronomy
schools as well as of a fund for the promotion of tourism and culture. Following a request
by the Ministry of Production and Employment of the Province, the bid was revised,
resulting in an offer with higher annual payments for the License of USD 2,500,000 per
year for the first three years, and USD 4,100,000 per year for the following 27 years. '*

On 31 January 2000, the tender was awarded to the UTE by Resolution No. 20/00. On
15 February 2000, by Decree No. 419/00, the Executive of the Province of Salta!>
approved the Transfer Agreement which transferred the tendered shares in ENJASA to
the UTE. The Transfer Agreement also extended the sanctions of Law No. 7020 to the
buyer’s breaches of the Transfer Agreement, the bid, or any other documentation that

formed part of the tender. '°

B. Development of Claimants’ Investment

The UTE shortly thereafter requested ENREJA to authorize the transfer of its shares in
ENJASA to L&E, a stock corporation under Argentine law, which was formed by the
members of the UTE in accordance with their respective participation in the UTE (i.e.,
CAIH with 5%, Boldt with 5%, and Iberlux with 90%). ENREJA authorized this transfer,
and consequently L&E was registered as the owner of the Class A-shares of ENJASA in

the company register. !”

‘4 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 35-38; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras.
163-167.

'S Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 40; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 169-175.
16 Transfer Agreement, Art. 7.1.2 (Exhibit ARA-11).

‘7 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 50; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 176.

17

74.

75.

76.

77.

The ownership structure of the shareholding in L&E changed over the course of the
years. '* In 2001, Iberlux purchased the shares in L&E held by Boldt, thus increasing its
participation to 95%. In February 2007, CAIH, which initially held 5% of the shares in
L&E, increased its participation to 60% as a result of purchasing 55% of L&E shares
from Iberlux. On 26 March 2010, pursuant to an internal structuring, CATH transferred
its (then) 60% of L&E shares to CAI.

Also the shareholdership in respect of ENJASA changed over the years. On 19 October
2009, most of the beneficiaries of the joint ownership participation program authorized
the Government of Salta to sell their parts in the Class B-shares in ENJASA. On 4
November 2009, L&E purchased almost all of these shares in ENJASA with the
exception of a minor participation that remained with the Province of Salta because some
of the former employees of BPAS had not agreed to the sale of their shares in ENJASA
to L&E.'”

At the end of 2009, Complejo Monumento Giiemes S.A. (“CMG”), a stock corporation
under Argentine law, which was jointly owned by L&E (94.79%) and ENJASA (5.21%),
received a minor participation in ENJASA in exchange for transferring to ENJASA the
good will (‘fondo de commercio’) in the five-star hotel in the City of Salta that had been
built by CMG in fulfilment of the UTE’s investment obligations under the Transfer

Agreement.”°

Moreover, L&E established Cachi Valle Aventuras S.A. (“Cachi Valle”), a stock
corporation under Argentine law, in order to develop and administer real estate projects
and to promote tourism in Salta. L&E held 99% of the shares of Cachi Valle, while
ENJASA held the remaining 1% of the shares.?! Cachi Valle was the owner of the

building in which the five-star hotel, as well as one casino, Casino Salta, were located.”

18 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 50-56.

'9 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 57-62; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 177.
Of the aggregate shares of ENJASA, 90.56% were Class A-shares, which all were acquired by L&E. 9.44% of
the aggregate shares were Class B-shares, of which L&E acquired 98,80%. In their submissions and expert reports,
the Parties made abstraction of the 0.12% of ENJASA’s shares that L&E did not own and assumed a 100%
shareholding of L&E in ENJASA. Following the Parties’ position, the Tribunal likewise makes the same
assumption.

?° Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 60, footnote 85; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 12.

2! Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 12-13.

22 Rosen I, footnote 122.

Cachi Valle made those premises available for the operation of Casino Salta under a joint

venture agreement in which ENJASA had a 70% and Cachi Valle a 30% participation.”*

78. Asa result of the above transactions, and taking into account a capital increase that had

taken place in the meantime, the ownership structure in ENJASA therefore looked as

follows as of 13 August 2013, when ENJASA’s operating license for games of chance

eT ec)
iengesellschaft (“CASAG'

was revoked: 7+

    

eT ee Ug n er
Holding GmbH (“CAIH”)

eC Mur] | ert Mea car ea Se)
GmbH ("CAI") (Arm's length).

OER aclu e
Sociedad Anénima (“L&E”)

ae
La aS aC) Fewer Merits Cachi Valle Aventuras S.A.
Tz lasielel lea Weuu |

Guemes S.A. (“CMG”) aa (eet)

79. The shareholder structure underwent further changes after August 2013. On 15

November 2013, CAI purchased the remaining 40% of the shares in L&E from Iberlux
and became the 100% shareholder of L&E. It then transferred 2% of the shares in L&E

23 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 101-103.
24 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 13 (reproducing a graph from Rosen I, p. 16 (Exhibit C-26)).

19

80.

81.

to CAIH, whose sole shareholder is CASAG. Thus, at present, CAI directly holds 98%
of L&E. CASAG in turn indirectly holds 2% of L&E through its participation in CAIH
and the remaining 98% through its participation in CAI. Consequently, CASAG
indirectly controls 100% of L&E. Through L&E, CAI and CASAG in turn indirectly
hold 99.94% of ENJASA’s shares. The resulting ownership structure in ENJASA looks

as follows:7°

ENJASA's ownership structure (2014)

100%
Casinos Austria
Aktiengesellschaft (Austria)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

100%
— tome
Casinos Austria 90% 2%
interacional — International Holding GmbH
GmbH (Austria) | (Austria)
Leisure & Entertainment SA
(Galta, Argentina)
ovo cows 006s |
<
‘Complejo Monumento Entretenimientos y Juegos de
Guemes S.A. je ‘Azar S.A. (ENJASA)
(Salta, Argentina) (Satta, Argentina)
OS
O5i%

 

 

 

 

 

 

The above group of companies further developed the gaming, lottery, and tourism sector
in the Province of Salta. In August 2013, when its operating license was revoked,
ENJASA had become one of the most significant employers in the Province. It operated
four casinos, 15 slot machine halls, 14 lottery games, 1,376 slot machines, and 46 live
games tables; it employed around 750 employees and had a network of 700 lottery

agencies and 11 local lottery branches. ”°

ENJASA had also invested more than USD 20,000,000 into the construction of the
Sheraton Hotel Salta, the first five-star hotel in the region, which opened in August

2005.’ The construction of the hotel was part of the investment program that was

?5 Exhibit C-017.

26

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 58.

27 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 124-125.

20

82.

83.

84.

promised as part of the privatization process. In addition, ENJASA sponsored two
schools, one for hotel trade and one for gastronomy, and created the “ENJASA
Foundation” for the promotion and research of cultural, tourist, hotel and gourmet
activities in the Province of Salta, in fulfilment of the promises made in the course of the
privatization of ENJASA.?* Respondent agrees that all obligations to invest in tourism
undertaken under the Transfer Agreement by the UTE have been fulfilled. *?
C. Development of Regulatory Framework and License Fee in the Province of
Salta

The regulatory framework under which ENJASA operated games of chance in the
Province of Salta consisted of a combination of different legal instruments. These
included the License itself, which had been granted to ENJASA by the Province of Salta,
the statutory framework established under Law No. 7020, and regulations to implement

that Law, which were passed by ENREJA.

ENJASA’s exclusive license provided, in its Article 5, that any breach of Law No. 7020
or of regulations issued by ENREJA were to be sanctioned with the penalties and
sentencing provided for in Law No. 7020. The License also provided that the
determination of any penalty was subject to
the gravity of the offense, the damage caused upon the legal certainty, the
morality and good customs, the consequences suffered by the Provincial

Government and/or individuals, the social upheaval caused and the infringer’s
records of relapses. *°

Law No. 7020, inter alia, contained a prohibition for license holders for games of chance
to engage “operators” without ENREJA’s authorization and imposed duties in respect of
anti-money laundering (Art. 5). It further laid down the extent of ENREJA’s sanctioning
powers (Arts. 13 and 41) and contained provisions on the determination of sanctions
(Arts. 42, 43, 45, 48), as well as a statute of limitations (Art. 49). The relevant provisions
of Law No. 7020 are as follows:

Article 5

The licensee’s business shall be subject to this law. The licensee shall be
responsible for the selection and employment of the methods for the
exploitation and maintenance to secure compliance with the provisions set

?8 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 121-133.
2° See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 182.
3° Exhibit C-049.

21

forth hereunder, and in no event it shall be authorized to engage operators
without the authorization by [ENREJA], which shall establish the
requirements and conditions to be complied with by each operator.

The licensee shall appoint an individual who shall be in charge of the anti-
money laundering tasks and who shall be responsible for:

a) Centralizing all the information concerning customers, transactions known,
suspected or having reasons to suspect.

b) Reporting any transaction where the individual’s transaction has no
reasonable relationship with the development of business activities likely to
be declared.

c) Identifying through the Identity Document or Passport all those customers
to which a check is drawn or a transfer is made to offshore accounts for
amounts in excess of ten thousand pesos ($10,000.00).

Article 13

The violations or breaches to this law, its regulations, to the license agreement
and to all the regulations enacted by [ENREJA], shall be punished by
[ENREJA] with: a) Warning b) Fine c) Inability to operate d) Suspension of
the License e) License Revocation.

The penalties above shall be applied taking into consideration due
proportionality between the penalties and the violation, notwithstanding the
criminal liability and misdemeanor liability.*!

Article 40

Individuals and/or legal persons that with or without authorization, for profit
or not carry out [games of chance] in violation of one or more rules hereof,
its regulatory decree and [ENREJA’s] resolutions, shall be liable to
administrative penalties, without prejudice to the misdemeanor and criminal
penalties and the civil liability that may be applicable.

Article 41

[ENREJA] may impose jointly or indistinctly the penalties of fine, inability
to operate and closure.

Article 42

The fine shall consist in payment of a sum of money from one hundred pesos
($ 100) to one hundred thousand pesos ($ 100,000).

Article 43

The inability to operate games of chance by an individual or legal person may
not exceed the term of one year.

3! In addition to the sanctions laid down in Article 13 of Law No. 7020, non-compliance with the obligations
under Article 5 of the Law No. 7020 could lead to extinction and forfeiture of the License under the terms of the
License. See License, Articles 5.1 and 6 (Exhibit C-049). However, such “extinction” and “forfeiture” could only
be decided by the Executive, not by ENREJA. See Resolution No. 240/13, p. 33 (Exhibit C-031).

22

85.

86.

Article 45

Whenever the violation is committed by reason of the exploitation of an
agency, premises or business location, closure thereof may be ordered which
may not exceed thirty (30) days.

Temporary closure may be ordered for a maximum term of ten (10) days
extendable by another term, whenever it is deemed advisable by reason of the
gravity of the factual events.

Article 48

For purposes of the graduation of the penalties, [ENREJA] shall bear in mind
the gravity of the offense, the damage caused upon the legal certainty, the
morality and good customs, the consequences suffered by the Provincial
Government and/or individuals, the social upheaval caused and the infringer’s
records of relapses.

Article 49

Statutes of limitation applicable to the actions and penalties shall be of one
year. Actions shall be barred by the statutes of limitation as from the date of
the event and penalties as from execution of the resolution that imposes such
penalty. Statutes of limitation shall be interrupted with the commencement of
the summary investigation proceeding or the reiteration of the violation, and
the amounts of penalties shall be cumulative. *

Articles 40-49 reproduced above were not yet part of Law No. 7020 when it was adopted
in 1998. These provisions were introduced by Law No. 7133 of 9 May 2001 as

amendments to Law No. 7020.

In addition to Law No. 7020, ENJASA’s gaming activities were governed by
administrative regulations enacted by ENREJA in the form of resolutions. Of particular
importance for the present proceeding was ENREJA’s Resolution No. 26/00, which was
published in Salta’s Official Bulletin on 8 June 2000.*? It provided for details in respect
of the rules on anti-money laundering laid down in Article 5 of Law No. 7020. Resolution
No. 26/00 required that operators of games of chance had to keep a so-called “Anti-
Money Laundering Book” (Art. 1), which had to be made available to ENREJA for
inspection (Art. 2), and in which information on relevant transactions had to be recorded,
including in particular the identity of involved players (Art. 3). Relevant transactions
included payments made by check or money transfer exceeding the amount of Argentine

Pesos (ARS) 10,000, as laid down in Art. 5 c) of Law 7020 (Art. 3), as well as any other

>? Exhibit C-048.
33 Exhibit C-180.

23

87.

88.

89.

suspicious payment or transfer independently of the amount in question and the means

of payment (Art. 6).

As of 1 May 2012, Resolution No. 26/00 was replaced by Resolution No. 90/12.** This
Resolution laid down expressly as an instrument of combatting money laundering that
any prize above ARS 10,000 had to be paid by check or wire transfer. Resolution No.

90/12 provides in relevant part:

Article 1

With the purpose of complying with the anti-money rules, set forth in Law No. 7020
as amended, the games of chance licensees and concessionaires shall:

1) Pay through check or wire transfers to accounts in foreign countries all prizes for
amounts exceeding ARS 10,000. ...

Not only the regulatory framework, but also the calculation of the operating fee that
ENJASA had to pay to ENREJA changed over time.*> Initially, the fee consisted of fixed
annual amounts (see supra para. 71). This changed, however, when the operating fee was
renegotiated as part of a broader effort of the new Governor, Mr. Juan Manuel Urtubey,
who took office in December 2007, to renegotiate contracts concluded by the predecessor
government of Mr. Juan Carlos Romero in order to maintain the financial benefits
derived from those contracts for the Province, considering in particular the inflation and
depreciation of the Argentina currency following the pesification of US dollar-
denominated debt in the context of the country’s economic and financial crisis in

2001/2002.°°

Thus, in 2008, the license fee was renegotiated at the request of the Province of Salta
through an agency created specifically for the review and renegotiation of public
contracts and licenses, the so-called Unidad de Revision y Renegociacion de Contratos
y Licencias otorgadas por la Administracion (“UNIREN”). The change in conditions of
ENJASA’s gaming license was formalized in the so-called “Acta Acuerdo”, an
agreement concluded on 7 May 2008 between ENJASA and UNIREN and ratified by the
Government of Salta on 11 August 2008 through Decree No. 3428/08.*” The Acta

Acuerdo changed the operating fee from a fixed to a dynamic fee, which was calculated

4 Exhibit C-181.
35 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 134, 175-179; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 51-53;
Resolution No. 42/09, p.1 (Exhibit ARA-024).

36

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras 94-95; Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 39.

57 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 175-186; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 178-

184,

24

90.

91.

92.

93.

henceforth as a percentage of ENJASA’s annual net income and which rose over the

years in steps to 15% for lottery games and to 16% for live games and slot machines. **

The Acta Acuerdo also stated (i) that ENJASA and its controlling shareholder, L&E, had
complied with their obligations to increase ENJASA’s capital and invest in the tourism
sector, (ii) that there had been no breaches of the Transfer Agreement, and (iii) that “in
connection with the joint venture agreements ... entered into by and between EN.J.A.S.A
and Video Drome S.A. and Cachi Valle Aventura S.A. ... no breach of the license terms

has been incurred by the Licensee.”*?

Following the change in the way the annual fee was calculated, ENREJA introduced a
new control system for ENJASA’s gaming operations, which required all slot machines
to be linked to a real-time online system that could be controlled by ENREJA. To this
end, ENREJA introduced certain changes for the operation of slot machines, including
in particular new technical requirements that the machines had to fulfil, and required the

replacement of slot machines that did not comply with the new regulations.*°

D. Investigations and Sanctions Prior to the Revocation of ENJASA’s License

Compliance of ENJASA with the regulatory framework in place in the Province of Salta
was ensured through the exercise of supervisory powers of ENREJA as laid down in Law
No. 7020. To this end, ENREJA regularly made inquiries and conducted investigations
into ENJASA’s compliance with the regulatory framework in place. In a number of cases,
ENREJA also imposed sanctions against ENJASA for breaches of the regulatory

framework.

Before the conclusion of the Acta Acuerdo, ENJASA was sanctioned for breaching the
regulatory framework on two occasions. In 2005, ENREJA fined ENJASA in the amount

of ARS 20,000 for implementing unauthorized restrictions on bets in a lottery game.*!

38 Memorandum of Agreement of 7 May 2008 (Exhibit C-131); Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits,
para. 181.

°° Exhibit C-131_ENG. For the Tribunal’s majority, the text of the Acta Acuerdo of 7 May 2008, which is
incorporated in Decree No. 3428/08 of the Province of Salta, clearly confirm items (ii) and (iii). The Tribunal’s
majority does not accept, as the dissenting arbitrator does (Dissent, para. 184), that ENREJA, an administrative
agency, can undo this confirmation in 2013 by Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13.

4° Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 192-194; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 204-213;
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 181-184, 232-235; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits,
paras. 51-71, 104-107.

4! Exhibit C-239; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 258-260; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the
Merits, paras. 126-134; Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 193-196.

25

In 2007, ENREJA fined ENJASA in the amount of ARS 10,000 for operating a slot

. . se ge
machine without authorization.”

94. In the years between the conclusion of the Acta Acuerdo and the time when ENJASA’s
license was revoked, the number of administrative sanctions increased. Between 2007
and August 2013, ENREJA conducted several administrative inquiries into ENJASA’s
compliance with the regulatory framework in place and imposed several sanctions.

Sanctions involved the following incidents.

— In Resolution No. 31/08 (dated 10 March 2008), ENREJA fined ENJASA in the
amount of ARS 5,000 for issuing a check that did not contain the words “no a la
orden”, which makes the check non-transferable, as required by Resolution No.
26/00.**

— In Resolution No. 32/08 (dated 10 March 2008), ENREJA fined ENJASA in the
amount of ARS 10,000 for the loss of the anti-money laundering book, for
irregularities in recording payments, and for issuing transferable instead of non-
transferable checks for paying out prizes.+

— In Resolution No. 232/08 (dated 18 November 2008), ENREJA fined ENJASA in
the amount of ARS 62,000 because the payment of certain prizes of over ARS
10,000 at Casinos Golden Dream had not been made by check.*°

— In Resolution No. 244/08 (dated 25 November 2008), ENREJA issued a warning
against ENJASA because of the unauthorized removal of gaming devices from
Casino Salta and Casino Rosario de la Frontera, and for irregularities in the results
of poker tournaments. *°

— In Resolution No. 286/09 (dated 16 December 2009), ENREJA fined ENJASA in
the amount of ARS 15,000 for amending betting limits in Casino Golden Dreams

without prior authorization. *”

42 Exhibit C-240; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 261-264; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the
Merits, paras. 135-139.

43 Resolution No. 31/08 (Exhibit C-150).

4 Resolution No. 32/08, Exhibit C-151).

45 Resolution No. 232/08 (Exhibit C-155); Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 238; Claimants’ Reply
on the Merits, footnote 702; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 121.

46 Exhibit ARA-45; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 281-285; Respondent’s Rejoinder on
the Merits, paras. 178-184.

47 Resolution No. 286/09 (Exhibit C-153). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 188, footnote 237;
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 121.

 

26

— In Resolution No. 39/10 (dated 9 March 2010), ENREJA fined ENJASA in the
amount of ARS 100,000 for holding a poker tournament at Casino Golden Dreams
without authorization.“

— In Resolution No. 46/10 (dated 16 March 2010), ENREJA fined ENJASA in the
amount of ARS 20,000 because a payment of over ARS 10,000 had not been made
by check.*? This Resolution was confirmed by Resolution No. 106/10 (dated 3 May
2010), which was issued to decide on a recourse for reconsideration that ENJASA
had interposed against Resolution No. 46/10.°°

— In Resolution No. 104/10 (dated 3 May 2010), ENREJA fined ENJASA in the
amount of ARS 100,000 for paying a slot machine prize won on 13 December 2009
in Casinos Golden Dream in cash, rather than by check or wire transfer, and without
properly recording it. In addition, ENREJA fined ENJASA in the amount of ARS
200,000 for paying a slot machine prize won on 4 January 2010 in Casinos Golden
Dream in cash, rather than by check or wire transfer, and without properly recording
it. ENREJA also formally warned ENJASA that violations of anti-money
laundering rules could lead to an extinction or revocation of ENJASA’s license.*!

— In Resolutions Nos. 128/10, 129/10, and 130/10 (all dated 18 May 2010), as well
as Resolutions Nos. 151/10, 152/10, and 153/10 (all dated 7 June 2010), ENREJA
temporarily suspended the operation of certain gaming halls for periods between 7
and 13 days because of irregularities in the operation of slot machines. **

— In Resolution No. 161/10 (dated 15 June 2010), ENREJA fined ENJASA in the
amount of ARS 172,000 for paying prizes exceeding ARS 10,000 in cash, rather
than by check or wire transfer, and for failing to properly record the identities of

certain winners of prizes.**

48 Resolution 39/10 (Exhibit C-164). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 240; Claimants’ Reply on
the Merits, paras. 147-148; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 122.

4° Resolution 106/10 (Exhibit C-156).

5° Exhibit C 156; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 295-299; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief,
para. 117.

5! Resolution No. 104/10 (Exhibit C-152); Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 237; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, para. 117; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 122.

5 Resolution No. 128/10 (Exhibit C-158); Resolution No. 129/10 (Exhibit C-159); Resolution No. 130/10 (Exhibit
C-160); Resolution No. 151/10 (Exhibit C-161); Resolution No. 152/10 (Exhibit C-162); Resolution No. 153/10
(Exhibit C-163); Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 239; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para.
123.

53 Resolution No. 161/10 (Exhibit C-157). See Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 151-152; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, para. 117; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 123.

27

95.

96.

— In Resolution No. 200/10 (dated 27 July 2010), ENREJA fined ENJASA in the
amount of ARS 200,000 for operating a slot machine hall in the town of Metan
without the necessary authorization. *4

— In Resolution No. 178/12 (dated 10 July 2012), ENREJA fined ENJASA in the
amount of ARS 550,000 for irregularities in lottery drawings, which included the
use of too many balls for a drawing, an incorrect publication of the winning ticket
in another drawing, and other irregularities in further drawings.*°

— In Resolution No. 161/13 (dated 28 May 2013), ENREJA fined ENJASA in the
amount of ARS 200,000 for modifying prize limits without authorization in poker
games at Casino Golden Dreams, and in the amount of ARS 500,000 for operating

unauthorized jackpots in poker games at Casino Golden Dreams and Casino Salta.*°

E. ENREJA’s Investigations Leading up to the Revocation of ENJASA’s License

On 11 December 2012, ENREJA opened three separate investigations into breaches by
ENJASA of the regulations governing games of chance in the Province of Salta.*” One
investigation principally concerned charges for breach of the anti-money laundering rules
in the administration of a lottery game by ENJASA (Resolution No. 380/12);** one
concerned charges for breach of anti-money laundering rules in the operation of one of
ENJASA’s casinos (Resolution No. 381/12);>? and one concerned charges for breach of
the prohibition to hire operators without ENREJA’s authorization (Resolution No.

384/12).
1. Resolution No. 380/12

Resolution No. 380/12, which was notified to ENJASA on 11 December 2012, charged
ENJASA with the following breaches of Article 5 c) of Law No. 7020 as well as of
Resolutions Nos. 26/00 and 90/12:

54 Resolution No. 200/10 (Exhibit C-165). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 189; Respondent’s
Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 121.

55 Resolution No. 178/12 (Exhibit C-166). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 241; Claimants’
Reply on the Merits, paras. 209-212; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 121.

56 Resolution No. 161/13 (Exhibit C-154). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnotes 237, 243;
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 122.

57 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 228-236; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 382-

58 Exhibit C-172.
59 Exhibit C-173.
60 Exhibit C-174.

28

97.

98.

99.

— Late registration and payment of an expired prize of ARS 11,080 won on 4
December 2011 in the lottery game “Témbola”;

— Failure properly to register in the anti-money laundering book the payment of a
prize of ARS 12,000 won on 30 January 2012 and of a prize of ARS 15,000 won
on 2 March 2012 in the lottery game “Témbola”; and

— Failure properly to identify the personal data of the winner of a prize of ARS 11,480

won on a slot machine on 14 May 2012.°!

ENJASA responded to this investigation on 2 January 2013. It challenged ENREJA’s
allegations both on factual and legal grounds, and presented explanations to ENREJA for

the conduct in question.

In respect of the prize won on 4 December 2011, ENJASA claimed that that prize,
contrary to ENREJA’s allegations, had not expired. While the payment of the prize had
only been made and registered on 19 January 2012, i.e., more than one month after the
prize was won, the winning lottery ticket, ENJASA claimed, had been submitted for
payment two days after the lottery draw had taken place and, therefore, within the ten
days period foreseen by the rules of the lottery game “76mbola”.® The delay in payment,
ENJASA explained, had been due to a misunderstanding of the owner of the lottery
agency, who happened to be the winner of the prize, but who mistakenly believed that
the prize was going to be credited to the checking account of the lottery agency. After
the winner complained to ENJASA that the amount had not been credited, the required
information was submitted to ENJASA’s local branch and sent to ENJASA’s
headquarters for registration in the anti-money laundering book. ENJASA therefore was
of the view that the prize was paid in accordance with Article 3 of ENREJA’s Resolution
No. 26/00 and registered correctly in the anti-money laundering book after the check had

been issued.

In respect of the prize won on 30 January 2012, ENJASA submitted that its payment was
not formally registered in the anti-money laundering book due to an administrative
oversight, although all information required to make the registration had been collected,

as ENREJA itself confirmed, in the course of an inspection conducted on 24 April 2012.

6! Exhibit C-172.

© ENJASA’s Answer to Charges of 2 January 2013 (Exhibit C-182).

® Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 245; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 309.

© Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 246-248; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 310-311.

29

100.

101.

102.

ENJASA therefore considered that it had taken all necessary steps to fulfil the

requirements for registration set up by ENREJA’s Resolution No. 26/00.°

In respect of the prize won on 2 March 2012, ENJASA submitted that that prize had
expired because it had not been submitted for payment within the ten days foreseen by
the rules of the lottery game “7émbola”. As the prize had expired, no payment occurred.
Consequently, no payment had to be registered in the anti-money laundering book.
ENJASA further explained that ENREJA’s allegation was triggered by a wrong entry in
the accounts of ENJASA, which was caused by a bug in the electronic online registration
system for lottery prizes and an error of ENJASA’s staff, which was manually correcting
ENJASA’s accounting books. The error was corrected after ENREJA had issued
Resolution No. 380/12.

In respect of the payment of the prize of ARS 11,480 won ona slot machine on 14 May
2012, ENJASA submitted that that prize had been duly registered in the anti-money
laundering book. ENJASA admitted that the information was incomplete when ENREJA
reviewed the book on 16 May 2012. ENJASA submitted, however, that the missing
information was completed on 17 May 2012; the check making the payment of the prize,
in turn, was only issued after the missing information had been entered in the anti-money
laundering book.®’ ENJASA therefore submitted that no breach of anti-money

laundering rules had occurred.
2. Resolution No. 381/12

Resolution No. 381/12, which was notified to ENJASA on 11 December 2012, charged
ENJASA with the following breaches of Article 5 of the Law No. 7020 as well as of
Resolutions Nos. 26/00 and 90/12:

— Making payments between August and September 2011 in Casino Golden Dreams

and Casino Salta in excess of ARS 10,000 in cash rather than by check; and

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 251-254; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 316-318; Claimants’
Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 161-163.

66

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 255-262; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 319-323.

7 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 263-266; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 324-326; Claimants’
Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 167-168; WS I Frade, para. 92 (Exhibit C-019).

30

103.

104.

105.

106.

— Making cash payments in September 2011 to two customers in Casino Salta that
had not been registered in the anti-money laundering book and that differed from

the amounts reported in the Casino’s internal reports. *

ENJASA responded to this investigation on 2 January 2013.% It challenged ENREJA’s
allegations both on factual and legal grounds, and presented explanations to ENREJA for

the conduct in question.

In respect of the cash payments made in Casino Golden Dreams and Casino Salta,
ENJASA submitted that, at the relevant time in August and September 2011, no
obligation existed to pay prizes above ARS 10,000 by check or international wire transfer
and hence no registration of such payments was necessary in the anti-money laundering
book. The requirement to pay amounts above ARS 10,000 by check or international wire
transfer, ENJASA noted, was only introduced by Resolution No. 90/12, which entered
into force on 1 May 2012, adding that ENREJA was not permitted to apply Resolution
No. 90/12 retroactively.”

Moreover, even if a legal obligation to make payments of prizes by check had existed,
ENJASA submitted that ENREJA’s actions were time-barred pursuant to the one-year
statute of limitations contained in Article 49 of Law No. 7020 because ENREJA had
started the administrative inquiry more than one year after the alleged breaches.’! This
time-bar, ENJASA submitted, could only be interrupted by the initiation of an
administrative inquiry or by the repetition of the breach in question, neither of which had

in fact, nor was alleged to have, occurred.

Finally, ENJASA submitted that there was no factual basis to conclude that the payments
made above ARS 10,000 actually concerned prizes won by casino customers. The
information on which ENREJA’s charges had been based — namely so-called “Daily
Reports”, “Rating Card Forms”, and “internal checks” — provided no details of the prizes
actually won by individual customers. The Daily Reports and the Rating Card Forms, on
which ENREJA relied, only provided general estimates of the amounts won on each live
game table. Internal checks were obtained against money deposited by customers in the

casino’s treasury. Although internal checks could be exchanged for chips at the gaming

8 Exhibit C-173.

9 ENJASA’s Answer to Charges of 2 January 2013 (Exhibit C-183).

7 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 271-272; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 332-334.
7! Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 273-276; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 335.

31

107.

108.

tables, there was not necessarily a correlation between the amount of the internal checks
and the chips a client subsequently cashed.’” Moreover, no regulations in the Province

of Salta forbade to use internal checks in casinos.”>

In respect of the cash payments made to two unregistered customers, ENJASA submitted
that it was unclear to it what legal rule had supposedly been breached. ENJASA pointed
out that it did not have any obligation to pay an amount above ARS 10,000 by check at
the time and that it was impossible to determine whether the amounts paid involved
money won during live games or money that had been brought into the casino by the
customer. As for money that had been shared between the two individuals, ENJASA
observed that it was not uncommon for two individuals to pool their money for playing

and at the end of the day distribute it again amongst them.”*

3. Resolution No. 384/12

In Resolution No. 384/12, ENREJA charged ENJASA with having breached Article 5 of
Law No. 7020 by sub-licensing the operations of several slot machine halls in different
locations to third operators without ENREJA’s approval.”> The charges involved

ENJASA having allowed:

a

So

Emsenor S.R.L. (“Emsenor’’) to operate a slot machine hall in the city of Salvador

Mazza;

(2) Mr. Navarrete to operate two slot machine halls in the cities of Tartagal and

Salvador Mazza;

(3) Mr. Colloricchio to operate two slot machine halls in the cities of General Giiemes

and Rosario de la Frontera;

(4) Video Drome S.A. (“Video Drome”) to operate slot machines at Casino Golden
Dreams in the City of Salta (in a joint venture with ENJASA) and at five rented
gaming halls in the cities of San Ramon de la Nueva Oran, Tartagal, Metan, J.V.

Gonzalez, and Rosario de la Frontera;

7 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 277-282; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 336-337.
73 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 283-286; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 338-339.
74 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 283-286; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 338-339.
75 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 236; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 253.

32

109.

110.

111.

(5) Prodec S.A. (“Prodec’”) and its predecessor, Dek S.A. (“DEK”), to participate in
the management of, and share profits from, tables for Caribbean poker at Casino

Golden Dreams and Casino Salta; and

(6) New Star S.R.L. (“New Star’) to operate slot machines in the cities of San Ramon
de la Nueva Oran, Metan, Rosario de la Frontera, General Giiemes, and

Embarcacion.”°

Resolution No. 384/12 was notified to ENJASA on 7 June 2013.77 ENJASA’s response
to the investigation under Resolution No. 384/12 followed on 28 June 2013.’* ENJASA
contended that the seven companies and individuals identified in Resolution No. 384/12
were either operators of slot machine halls that had received authorizations to operate by
BPAS before ENJASA had been granted its exclusive license for games of chance or
were not operators of games of chance at all, but merely providers of slot machines,
premises for the operation of games of chance, or other hardware and software for games

of chance that ENJASA operated. Specifically, ENJASA submitted the following:

Emsenor was not operating the slot machine hall in Salvador Mazza City; it merely had
leased the premises in which the slot machine hall operated to ENJASA; the hall itself,
however, was operated solely by ENJASA’s personnel without any involvement of
Emsenor. The fact that the monthly rent consisted of a payment of 10% of the income
generated by the slot machines did not make Emsenor a partner or operator of the
business, but reflected a common practice in lease agreements in Argentina to protect
lessors against inflation.”? Moreover, ENREJA had been notified of the lease agreement
in 2004 and had approved the conditions. Emsenor’s financial statements and bylaws

further confirmed that Emsenor was not a gaming operator. °°

Mr. Navarrete had been authorized to operate slot machine halls in Tartagal and Salvador
Mazza by BPAS. ENREJA was fully aware that he continued to operate these slot
machine halls: ENREJA was provided with a copy of the contract with ENJASA, which

1

required Mr. Navarrete to obtain ENREJA’s approval for new slot machines;*! and

76 Exhibit C-174.

7 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 242; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 144.

78 ENJASA’s Answer to Charges of 28 June 2013 (Exhibit C-184); Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras.
288-317.

” Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 291-296; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 342, 345-350.

8 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 175-181.

8! Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 297-299; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 342, 357-360.

33

112.

113.

114.

115.

ENREJA regularly was informed of the payment of Mr. Navarrete’s share in the license

fee, and had received the full roster of slot machines he operated. *”

Mr. Colloricchio operated two slot machine halls on the basis of permits granted by
BPAS to his predecessors from whom he had taken over their businesses on 17
September 2008 and 24 February 2009 respectively. On 19 March and 24 April 2009,
ENJASA had duly informed ENREJA of these transfers and had received no objection.
ENREJA had also been provided with a copy of the contract between Mr. Colloricchio
and ENJASA, regularly had been informed of Mr. Colloricchio’s share in the license fee,

and also had received the full roster of slot machines operated by Mr. Colloricchio.*°

Video Drome was only a provider of slot machines operated by ENJASA outside the
City of Salta, but did not operate slot machine halls itself. The five contracts for the lease
of slot machines with Video Drome, which had been submitted to ENREJA, stated that
the halls were operated by ENJASA’s employees and that Video Drome did not
participate in the costs of the operation. The rent for the slot machines was between 30
and 35% of the gross income generated by the slot machines, i.e., the difference between

the bets and the prizes paid.**

Prodec and its predecessor, DEK, were not operators of games of chance in Casino Salta;
they merely supplied hardware and software for jackpot systems and poker gaming

tables, which were operated by ENJASA’s personnel. **

New Star, finally, was operating four slot machine halls (in San Ramon de la Nueva
Oran, Metan, Rosario de la Frontera, and General Giiemes) based on an authorization
granted by BPAS.*° ENREJA was fully aware that New Star had continued to operate
the slot machine halls: it was provided with a copy of the contract between New Star and
ENJASA and was regularly informed of the payment of New Star’s share in the license
fee. As regards the slot machine hall in Embarcacion, New Star was merely leasing the

premises to an operator who had been previously authorized by BPAS.

® Letter of 21 April 2014, p. 8 (Exhibit ARA-104); Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 191-193.

% Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 300-304; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 342, 351-356.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 186-190.

* Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 305-308; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 342, 361-363.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 182-183.

85 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 309-311; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 342, 364-366;
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 184-185.

86 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 312-314; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 342, 367-369.

34

F. Revocation of ENJASA’s License and Subsequent Events

116. On 13 August 2013, ENREJA proceeded to issue and notify ENJASA of Resolution No.
240/13 in which it made a joint determination on the three investigations initiated by
Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12.*” In respect of all three investigations,
ENREJA concluded that the charges brought against ENJASA were well-founded and
that ENJASA hence had violated its obligations under the regulatory framework. Finding
that ENJASA had violated anti-money laundering provisions and had breached the
obligation not to hire operators without ENREJA’s authorization, ENREJA concluded

that the appropriate sanction was the revocation of ENJASA’s license.

117. On 13 August 2013, within 40 minutes after ENREJA had notified ENJASA of the
revocation of its license, the President of ENREJA, Mr. Sergio Mendoza, and the
Minister of Economy, Infrastructure, and Public Services of the Province of Salta, Mr.
Carlos Parodi, held a joint press conference to inform the public about the revocation of
ENJASA’s license.*® During the press conference, Mr. Mendoza stated, inter alia, that
“ENJASA had an irresponsible attitude in the compliance with anti-money laundering

provisions, breaching them in a systematic manner.”*?

118. Equally on 13 August 2013, by Decree No. 2348/13, the Governor of Salta ordered
ENREJA to prepare a transition plan to transfer ENJASA’s operations, including its

employees, to new operators. 0

119. On 28 August 2013, ENJASA filed a Recourse for Reconsideration of Resolution No.
240/13.°! In this Recourse, ENJASA argued that Resolution No. 240/13 was unlawful
and should be revoked. It claimed, inter alia, that several of the investigated instances,
which were found to be in breach of the regulatory framework, had prescribed under the
statute of limitations; that ENREJA had disregarded evidence submitted by ENJASA
showing that ENJASA had not breached any anti-money laundering rules; and that
ENJASA had not hired “operators” in the meaning of Law No. 7020, but merely
contracted out certain services to third parties, or had engaged persons that were allowed
to operate games of chance under pre-existing authorizations issued by BPAS. ENJASA

87 Exhibit C-031. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 31.

88 Exhibit C-169.

% [bid, p. 1 (English translation).

°° Exhibit C-222. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 318-319; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on

the Merits, paras. 478-480.

°! Exhibit C-213. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 329-330; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on
the Merits, paras. 466-470.

further claimed that Resolution No. 240/13 was issued in breach of its right to be heard
and its right to offer and produce evidence, was issued without warning, that the
Resolution’s motivation was insufficient, was based on the retroactive application of
certain regulatory rules, was arbitrary, and constituted a disproportionate reaction to

minor breaches or mere human errors.

120. On 5 September 2013, ENJASA requested the First Instance Court of Salta, to suspend
the implementation of Resolution No. 240/13 pending its Recourse for

Reconsideration.** This request for interim relief was granted on 4 October 2013.”

121. On 15 November 2013, Claimants purchased the remaining 40% of the shares in L&E

from Iberlux.°*

122. On 19 November 2013, ENREJA dismissed ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration in
Resolution No. 315/13.°° On the same day, ENJASA shut down all of its gaming

operations. °°

123. On 20 November 2013, Mr. Tucek and Mr. Schreiner, two representatives of CAI, met
with the representatives of ENREJA and of the Province of Salta to discuss the modalities
of transition of ENJASA’s operations to new operators and an offer made to Claimants

to continue operating Casino Salta.”

124. On 20 November 2013, by Decree No. 3330/13, the Government of the Province of Salta
approved the Temporary Plan for the exploitation of games of chance prepared by
ENREJA.”* The Plan established conditions for the issuance of licenses to new operators
and contained a list of 11 individuals and companies that were to receive such licenses;

the list included Video Drome, New Star, and Mr. Navarrete.

® Exhibit C-214; Exhibit ARA-77. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 331; Respondent’s Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 481.

°3 Exhibit C-215, Exhibit ARA-78. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 332; Respondent’s Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 481.

°4 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 55; Stock Purchase Agreement (Exhibit C-079); Respondent Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, para. 660; Rosen I, para. 11.5.

°S Exhibit C-032. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 342-346; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on
the Merits, para. 471.

96 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 204.

°7 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 356-357; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 381.

°8 Exhibit C-033. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 347-350; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on
the Merits, paras. 490-492.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

On 26 November 2013, ENJASA requested the extension of the interim relief granted by
the First Instance Court of Salta, pending an Action for Annulment of Resolutions Nos.

240/13 and 315/13. The request for interim relief was rejected on 23 December 2013. !°°

On 28 and 29 November 2013, by Resolutions Nos. 332-339/13, ENREJA implemented
the Transition Plan, appointed on a provisional basis new operators in respect of three
casinos (Casino Golden Dream, Casino Oran, and Casino Boulevard), 15 slot machine
halls, and four lottery operations, and approved the transfer of ENJASA’s employees to

these new operators. !°!

On 3 December 2013, ENJASA filed another administrative recourse to suspend the
revocation of the Licence and the transfer of the operations, which was rejected as

inadmissible by Decree No. 1002/16 on 12 July 2016.!

On 12 December 2013, ENJASA filed further administrative recourses to revoke
ENREJA’s Resolutions Nos. 332—339/13, which implemented the Transition Plan.

On 30 December 2013, ENREJA passed Resolution No. 364/13 with which it
implemented the Transition Plan for Casino Salta, granting a provisional permit to
operate the casino to a joint venture consisting of New Star and Sigar S.A. (“Sigar”) and

transferring a number of ENJASA’s employees to the joint venture. !°

On 5 February 2014, ENJASA initiated proceedings before the First Instance Court of
Salta against Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13 for the annulment of the revocation of
its operating license. !* It not only claimed that the revocation was contrary to domestic

law, but also that it breached the BIT.!°

On 30 April 2014, CAI put Respondent officially on notice of its claim under the BIT

and invited it to participate in amicable consultations. By the same notice, it accepted the

°° Exhibit ARA-153.

100 Exhibit C-288.

101 Exhibits C-034 through C-041. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 351-353; Respondent’s
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 495.

102 Exhibit C-289.

103

Exhibit C-220. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 358; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the

Merits, para. 497.
04 Exhibit C-221. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 361; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, para. 472.

105 Exhibit C-221, pp. 130-131.

commitment of Respondent to submit the dispute to arbitration under Article 8 of the

BIT. '%

132. On 29 May 2014, the Province of Salta, by Decree No. 1502/14, granted the new
operators ten-year licenses. '!°’ On 24 June 2014, ENJASA filed a recourse for revocation

of Decree No. 1502/14, which was dismissed on 12 July 2016. !°

133. Pursuant to the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, the pending proceedings before the
First Instance Court of Salta concerning the challenge of Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and

315/13 were withdrawn in August 2018. !°

Vv. ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES ON LIABILITY

134. While the principal facts, including in particular the content of the administrative record
in the relationship between ENJASA and ENREJA, which ultimately resulted in the
revocation of ENJASA’s license, are uncontested, the Parties differ in respect of the
motives that underlie the revocation of the License and in their legal assessment of that
revocation. The present section summarizes the Parties’ arguments in this respect. These
summaries are not intended to be a comprehensive survey of all the points made by the
Parties, but rather identify the Parties’ principal positions. However, in reaching its
conclusions, the Tribunal has taken into consideration the full range of arguments

advanced by the Parties both in their written and oral submissions.

A. Claimants’ Arguments on the Facts

135. Claimants contend that the revocation of ENJASA’s gaming license has to be assessed
not as an isolated exercise of ENREJA’s supervisory powers, but as part of a larger plot
through which ENREJA and the Government of the Province of Salta aimed at ousting
ENJASA, and by prolongation L&E and its shareholders, from the remainder of their 30-
year monopoly in Salta’s gaming sector. This was motivated, Claimants claim, by an
interest on the side of the Province to redistribute ENJASA’s business to domestic

operators of games of chance at conditions that were economically more favorable to the

106 Exhibit C-008.

107 Exhibit C-176. See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 362; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, para. 504.

108 Exhibit C-289.

10° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 466-477; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
376-378.

Province than the fees paid by ENJASA.''° Claimants claim that, already for years,
ENREJA had developed a pattern of harassment and heavy-handed controls of ENJASA
in order to fabricate and collect violations of gaming regulations allegedly committed by
ENJASA. Towards the end of 2012, the authorities in the Province of Salta then devised
a concrete plan to oust ENJASA of its monopoly. This plan, Claimants contend,
culminated in the revocation of ENJASA’s exclusive license through Resolution No.
240/13, which ENREJA based on fabricated systematic and serious breaches of anti-
money laundering rules, and the subsequent distribution of ENJASA’s business to new
operators. The revocation of ENJASA’s license, Claimants claim, was arbitrary and
unlawful and lacked any justification, as ENJASA in fact had not committed serious

breaches of the regulatory framework in place in the Province of Salta. !!!

1. Plan to Oust ENJASA from Salta’s Gaming Sector

a) Mounting Interferences with ENJASA’s Operations Starting in 2007

136. In making their claim that the revocation of ENJASA’s license was part of a larger,
politically motivated plan to redistribute ENJASA’s business in the gaming sector to
local operators, Claimants draw on a large amount of circumstantial evidence. They
claim that already in 2007, after Mr. Juan Manuel Urtubey took office as the new
Governor of the Province of Salta, replacing his political rival, former Governor Mr. Juan
Carlos Romero, there were indications that the Province wanted to get rid of “the

Austrians,” |!

137. Starting in December 2007, following the takeover of Mr. Urtubey as new governor,
Claimants claim, representatives of the Province of Salta and ENREJA began exerting
pressure on ENJASA’s operations. To start with, the Province of Salta insisted on
renegotiating the conditions of ENJASA’s gaming license, threatening to terminate
ENJASA’s license if ENJASA did not accept the modification of the license fee by
paying a dynamic canon fee, instead of the previous fixed-fee arrangement. Claimants

consider that ENJASA had no choice but to accept the new license fee in the Acta

110 Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, paras. 9-10; Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 320 and 322;
Claimants’ Reply, para. 115.

‘11 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 327; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 214-267.

112 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 115; WS II Anselmi, para. 47 (Exhibit C-292); Transcript, Day 2, p. 207
(Tucek).

Acuerdo, which was concluded between ENJASA and UNIREN on 7 May 2008 and
ratified by the Government of Salta on 11 August 2008. !!3

138. Claimants further submit that, following the conclusion of the Acta Acuerdo, ENREJA
multiplied administrative inquiries against ENJASA relating to minor issues. These
inquiries, in Claimants’ view, were visibly aimed at finding minor formalistic mistakes
made by ENJASA. ENREJA allegedly also imposed fines for circumstances discovered
during its inspections that had occurred years before the conclusion of the Acta Acuerdo.
Claimants consider that the sole purpose of these inspections and fines issued by

ENREJA was to harass and exert pressure on ENJASA.!!4

139. Claimants also submit that ENREJA started interfering increasingly with ENJASA’s
conduct of lottery and slot machine operations. In respect of ENJASA’s lottery
operations, Claimants contend, ENREJA insisted on (i) the installation of a new CCTV
system; (ii) replacing newly purchased equipment with equipment that was leased from
the Province of Salta; and (iii) imposing disproportionate sanctions for old allegations
and minor isolated incidents that were diligently addressed by ENJASA.!> In connection
with the operation of slot machines, Claimants contend, ENREJA started requiring an
unrealistic and unreasonable minimum number of employees and technicians for their
operation. ENREJA also required ENJASA to change a large number of slot machines
by imposing new technical requirements. Moreover, Claimants point out, ENREJA
increased the administrative formalities for the approval of new slot machines, while
systematically delaying the approval of these slot machines. !!° Finally, Claimants claim,
ENREJA introduced senseless administrative burdens on ENJASA with the purpose of

causing minor clerical errors for which ENREJA could then impose harsh sanctions. !!7

140. As a consequence of the increasing controls and other conduct of ENREJA, Claimants
submit, ENJASA had to make additional investments and ENJASA’s management and
personnel had to spend a substantial amount of their time in responding to ENREJA’s

harassment. |!®

13 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 157-180; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 112-128.

‘4 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 189; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 140-153.

415 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 192-194; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 204-213.

416 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 195-206; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 154-203.

117 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 200-203.

418 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 152-206; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 140-213, 558.

40

b) Administrative Inquiries and Sanctions from 2008 to May 2013

141. Claimants also submit that ENREJA increasing the number of investigations and

sanctions for alleged breaches by ENJASA of the regulatory framework reflected the

harassing attitude taken towards ENJASA and was part of a broader plan to oust it from

the Province. Claimants specifically present arguments on the following sanctions that

ENREJA imposed on ENJASA between March 2008 and May 2013:

ENREJA’s Resolution No. 31/08 (dated 10 March 2008) imposed a fine of ARS
5,000 because a check issued by ENJASA did not contain the addition “no a la
orden” 30 months after this error was discovered during an inspection of the anti-
money laundering book for lottery games on 13 July 2005.'!? Issuing a sanction
after such a long time, Claimants point out, contravened Article 22 of ENREJA’s
internal rules, which required a decision within 15 days after initiating an
administrative investigation. Moreover, Claimants submit, ENREJA disregarded
that, while the words “no a la orden” were missing, the check had been “crossed”,
which had the exact same legal consequences, that is, to make the check non-
transferable, as the wording that was required by Resolution No. 26/00. '2°
ENREJA’s Resolution No. 32/08 (dated 10 March 2008) fined ENJASA ARS
10,000 for the alleged loss of the anti-money laundering book, for alleged
irregularities in recording payments, and for the alleged irregular issuance of checks
for the payment of prizes.'?! ENJASA challenged the timeliness of the fine with
respect to the issuance of checks. With respect to the loss of the anti-money
laundering book, Claimants note, ENJASA’s management diligently informed
ENREJA as soon as it had learned about the loss and dismissed the individual
responsible for the loss; in any event, no information had been lost as all entries to
be made since the loss of the book had been kept by the individual in question in a
separate excel sheet and were later copied into the new anti-money laundering
book. !?

ENREJA’s Resolution No. 232/08 (dated 18 November 2008) imposed fines in the
amount of ARS 62,000 on ENJASA because a payment of over ARS 10,000 was

19 Resolution No. 31/08 (Exhibit C-150).

'20 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 143-145.

21 Resolution No. 32/08 (Exhibit C-151).

'22 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 146, 205-208.

41

not made by check, although at the time, Claimants contend, payment by check was

not required. '2>

— ENREJA’s Resolution No. 286/09 (dated 16 December 2009), which fined
ENJASA ARS 15,000 for amending betting limits in Casino Golden Dreams
without prior authorization, concerned minor formalistic errors which had not
caused any prejudice to customers. !74

— ENREJA’s Resolution No. 39/10 (dated 9 March 2010), which fined ENJASA ARS
100,000 for holding an irregular poker tournament in one of its casinos, was issued
17 months after the tournament had taken place; moreover, the irregularity related
to the fact that the poker tournament had been held on both a Tuesday and a
Thursday, instead of only on a Thursday, as originally approved by ENREJA. '75

— ENREJA’s Resolution No. 46/10 (dated 16 March 2010), which was confirmed by
Resolution No. 106/10 (dated 3 May 2010), imposed a fine of ARS 20,000 on
ENJASA because a payment of over ARS 10,000 had not been made by check,
although at the time, Claimants contend, payment by check was not required. !7° In
addition, ENREJA imposed the fine almost two years after the event had taken place
and therefore contrary to the one-year time limit that Article 49 of Law No. 7020
established, !7”

— ENREJA’s Resolution No. 104/10 (dated 3 May 2010) fined ENJASA ARS
100,000 for making payments of prizes in cash, even though, Claimants contend,
no obligation to do so existed at the time. !7°

— ENREJA’s Resolutions Nos. 128/10, 129/10, and 130/10 (all dated 18 May 2010),
as well as Resolutions Nos. 151/10, 152/10, and 153/10 (all dated 7 June 2010)
temporarily suspended the operation of specific gambling halls for short periods
between 7 and 13 days because of clerical errors in the slot machine rosters

submitted to ENREJA.!”°

3 Resolution No. 232/08 (Exhibit C-155). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 238; Claimants’
Reply on the Merits, footnote 702.

'24 Resolution No. 286/09 (Exhibit C-153). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 188, footnote 237.

125 Resolution No. 39/10 (Exhibit C-164). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 240; Claimants’ Reply
on the Merits, paras. 147-148.

26 Resolution No. 106/10 (Exhibit C-156).

27 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 119; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 149-150.

"8 Resolution No. 104/10 (Exhibit C-152). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 237.

29 Resolution No. 128/10 (Exhibit C-158); Resolution No. 129/10 (Exhibit C-159); Resolution No. 130/10
(Exhibit C-160); Resolution No. 151/10 (Exhibit C-161); Resolution No. 152/10 (Exhibit C-162); Resolution No.
153/10 (Exhibit C-163). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 239.

42

— ENREJA’s Resolution No. 161/10 (dated 15 June 2010) imposed a fine of ARS
172,000 on ENJASA for not making payments by check when, Claimants contend,
there was no obligation to do so, and for three cases in which ENJASA had not
requested an identification of the winners of prizes. In addition, the fine was
imposed three years after the payments in questions had been made, thus violating
Article 21(2) of ENREJA’s internal rules. '°

— ENREJA’s Resolution No. 200/10 (dated 27 July 2010) imposed a fine of ARS
200,000 on ENJASA for opening a slot machine hall in the town of Metan without
authorization, even though the hall had been opened in 2004 and had been audited
regularly by ENREJA. |?!

— ENREJA’s Resolution No. 178/12 (dated 10 July 2012) imposed a fine of ARS
550,000 for three minor and isolated incidents in lottery draws, namely the use of
too many balls for a drawing, an incorrect publication of the winning ticket in
another drawing, and other minor irregularities in further drawings, that were all
immediately rectified by ENJASA and did not harm any customers. !?

— ENREJA’s Resolution No. 161/13 (dated 28 May 2013), which imposed on
ENJASA the maximum fine of ARS 200,000 for modifying prize limits without
authorization in poker games, as well as the maximum fine of ARS 500,000 for
organizing an unauthorized jackpot, involved merely minor formalistic errors and

did not cause any prejudice to ENJASA’s customers. '*?

142. Overall, Claimants claim that ENREJA, between 2008 and May 2013, imposed fines on
ENJASA in connection with events that partly had occurred years before the actual fines
were imposed. Furthermore, many of the sanctions, in Claimants’ view, lacked a legal
basis. Others related to what Claimants describe as obviously minor, formal errors that
did not affect the integrity of ENJASA’s conduct and administration of games of chance
and did not cause any prejudice to ENJASA’s customers. Furthermore, the amounts of
the fines imposed on ENJASA, Claimants contend, showed no relation to the facts they

were allegedly based upon and increased without explanation from ARS 5,000 in 2008

50 Resolution No. 161/10 (Exhibit C-157). See Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 151-152; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, para. 117.

'3! Resolution No. 200/10 (Exhibit C-165). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 189.

52 Resolution No. 178/12 (Exhibit C-166). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnote 241; Claimants’
Reply on the Merits, paras. 209-212.

33 Resolution No. 161/13 (Exhibit C-154). See Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, footnotes 237, 243.

43

to ARS 500,000 in May 2013.!*4 In any event, these prior incidents, Claimants contend,
could not give rise to the conclusion that ENJASA had a history of disregarding the
regulatory framework in place for operating games of chance, including in particular in
respect of anti-money laundering. Rather, the fines imposed by ENREJA formed part of
a pattern of harassing conduct that ENREJA had started after Mr. Urtubey had assumed

office as Governor of the Province of Salta in 2007.

©) Role of Video Drome

143. As further support for their argument that the revocation of ENJASA’s license was part
of a plan to redistribute ENJASA’s business among domestic operators, Claimants also
draw attention to a letter of 23 November 2012, which was sent to ENREJA by Video
Drome. !*5 Claimants contend that Video Drome had suggested to ENREJA in that letter
that it could operate gaming facilities in Salta at more favorable conditions than those in
place with ENJASA. In Claimants’ view, Video Drome’s letter to ENREJA triggered the
concrete decision to oust ENJASA from its position in the gaming sector in the Province
of Salta by means of revoking ENJASA’s license through Resolution No. 240/13. !*° This
is supported, Claimants submit, by the fact that Video Drome was one of the companies
to whom ENJASA’s business was transferred after the revocation of the License. In
addition, Claimants point out, the canon fee of 20%, which the Province ultimately
obtained from all new operators, was in line with the proposal Video Drome made in its

letter. 197

144. In this context, Claimants also point out that ENJASA and Video Drome had been in a
joint venture relating to slot machines installed in Casinos Golden Dreams and had
concluded agreements for the lease of slot machines in other locations. The relationship,
however, had turned sour due to various disputes concerning, inter alia, ENJASA’s
request to Video Drome to participate in the payment of the dynamic license fee
negotiated in the Acta Acuerdo and to replace older with new slot machines, which would
comply with ENREJA’s new technical requirements. Since Video Drome had refused
these requests, Claimants submit, ENJASA wanted to discontinue the joint venture and

lease agreements which were due to expire by 31 December 2012.!** It is against this

'4 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 191; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 120.

35 Letter of 23 November 2012 (Exhibit C-171).

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 225-227.

‘37 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 347-350; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 275-282, 392-430.
'38 See Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 122-128.

44

background, Claimants contend, that Video Drome sent the letter of 23 November 2012

to ENREJA.

d) Political Motivation of the Revocation of ENJASA’s License

145. Claimants further submit that political rivalries in the Province of Salta, which already

explained the renegotiation of ENJASA’s operating fee in 2008, also played a role in the
revocation of ENJASA’s license. To this end, Claimants claim that, during a meeting
with representatives of the Government of the Province of Salta on 27 August 2013, they
were informed that the real reason behind the revocation of ENJASA’s license was the
participation in L&E of Iberlux, which was allegedly held by a strawman of Mr. Romero,
the former Governor of the Province of Salta and political rival of Mr. Urtubey. '*? It was
following this meeting that Claimants purchased, on 15 November 2013, the remaining

40% of the shares in L&E from Iberlux. 4°

146. As further indication that the revocation of ENJASA’s license was politically motivated,

Claimants point to the close coordination between ENREJA and the Government of the
Province of Salta in relation to the revocation of ENJASA’s license. In particular,
Claimants note that, on 13 August 2013, within 40 minutes after ENJASA had learned
that the License had been revoked, the President of ENREJA, Mr. Sergio Mendoza, and
the Minister of Economy, Infrastructure, and Public Services of the Province of Salta,
Mr. Carlos Parodi, held a joint press conference, in which they claimed that ENJASA
had systematically breached the anti-money laundering regulations in place. In
Claimants’ view, the two officials made clear that ENJASA was no longer relevant in
the Province of Salta, stating that ENJASA “disappears from this story.”!4! The two
officials also suggested, Claimants submit, that any recourse by ENJASA against

Resolution No. 240/13 would be futile. 4

147. Claimants further contend that it was on the same day that the Governor of the Province

139
140
141
142
143

of Salta instructed ENREJA to prepare a transition plan to appoint new operators. '4 One

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 334-336; Transcript, Day 2, p. 227 (Tucek).

See supra para. 79.
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 265-274; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 146.
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 274.

Resolution No. 2348/13 of 13 August 2013 (Exhibit C-222).

45

day after the revocation, on 14 August 2013, Claimants submit, the Governor publicly

endorsed the revocation of ENJASA’s license at a press conference. '“4

148. Similarly, Claimants consider that the incredibly quick implementation of the transition
plan immediately following the issuance of Resolution No. 315/13 is illustrative of the
intention of the Government of Salta to remove ENJASA from the local gaming market
and to replace it with national operators. '*> In this context, Claimants point out, it was
only one day after ENJASA’s Request for Reconsideration had been dismissed, when,
on 20 November 2013, the Government of Salta approved the transition plan for the
exploitation of gaming in the Province and authorized 11 individuals and companies to
take over the operation of casinos, slot machines, and lotteries. '4° Claimants also note
that four of these entities, including Video Drome, were prior suppliers of equipment,
and seven were pre-existing operators, including New Star and Mr. Navarrete. Between
20 and 29 November 2013, the Province of Salta then granted licenses to new operators
for ENJASA’s four casinos, 15 slot machine halls, and four lottery operations and

definitely excluded ENJASA from these operations. !47

149. Furthermore, Claimants point out that even though ENJASA had initiated, on 5 February
2014, proceedings in the domestic courts and requested the annulment of the revocation
of ENJASA’s license and the appointment of new operators, on 29 May 2014, the
Government of Salta granted the new operators ten-year licenses in Decree No. 1502/14,
without conducting a public tender. '** This confirms, in Claimants’ view, that the sole
purpose of the revocation of ENJASA’s license, and the transfer of its business and staff
to the new operators, was an orchestrated action aimed at ousting ENJASA from Salta’s
gaming and lottery operations in order for the Province to benefit from more lucrative

fees under newly issued licenses with operators other than ENJASA. '4?

150. Claimants also submit that they and ENJASA had undertaken all measures available to
them to remedy the situation. In the weeks following the issuance of Resolution No.
240/13, CAI’s representatives Mr. Tucek and Mr. Schreiner attended several meetings

with representatives of the Province of Salta and of ENREJA. During these meetings,

4 Interview of Mr. J.M. Urtubey, 14 August 2013, p. 1 (Exhibit C-212); Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para.
148.

45 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 424-428,

446 Decree No. 3330/13, Art. 1-2 (Exhibit C- 032).

447 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 347-350; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 420-425.

448 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 360-362; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 431-442.

449 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 360; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 431-442.

46

151.

152.

153.

154.

Claimants contend, ENJASA’s alleged non-compliance with the applicable gaming
regulations was not even raised once. The only topic that the Provincial Government and
ENREJA were arguably focusing on was the alleged involvement in ENJASA, through
the shareholding of Iberlux in L&E, of Mr Carlos Juan Garramon, a supporter of the
political rival of Governor Urtubey. It is also for this reason, Claimant submit, that CAI
had purchased, on 15 November 2013, the remaining 40% of the shares in L&E from
Tberlux as a sign of good will and of CAI’s strong interest and commitment to continue

ENJASA’s operations in the Province of Salta. °°

Claimants further point out that a few weeks after the revocation, in November 2013, Mr.
Tucek and Mr. Schreiner of Casinos met with representatives of ENREJA and the
Province of Salta to discuss the modalities of transition of ENJASA’s operations to new
operators. During that meeting, Claimants allege, they were offered the possibility to
continue operating two casinos, namely Casino Salta and Casino Boulevard, provided

they waived all claims against the Province, an offer they, however, declined. '*!

The proposal to continue operations on a reduced scale was unacceptable to Claimants.
Casino Salta merely represented 2% of ENJASA’s total revenues and Casino Boulevard
even less. Moreover, Claimants note, they could only acquire new licenses for the two
casinos in question if they forfeited, in return, all claims against ENREJA and the
Province. '*? In Claimants’ view, the fact that the Province and ENREJA offered them to
continue operations on a reduced scale confirms that there was no genuine concern about

ENJASA’s alleged breaches of the applicable regulatory framework.

All of the above, in Claimants’ view, support their submission that the revocation of the
License was part of a politically motivated plan to oust ENJASA from its monopoly in
the gaming sector in the Province of Salta and to redistribute its business under conditions
that were more favorable for the Province than the conditions ENJASA was operating

under.

2. The Revocation of ENJASA’s License

The politically motivated plan to oust ENJASA from the gaming sector in Salta also

becomes apparent, Claimants argue, when considering the revocation of ENJASA’s

'50 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 401-402.
'5! Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 356-357.
152. WS III Tucek, para. 598 (Exhibit C-290).

47

155.

156.

153

license. Claimants submit that there was neither a legal nor a factual basis for the
underlying administrative inquiries and the breaches ENREJA found ENJASA had
committed. In Claimants’ view, the revocation of ENJASA’s license was arbitrary,
disproportionate, and politically orchestrated. In addition, Claimants’ submit, due
process was violated in the administrative proceedings leading to the revocation of

ENJASA’s license.

a) Charges Underlying Resolution No. 240/13

Claimants submit that there were no grounds for ENREJA to conclude that ENJASA had
systematically breached the anti-money laundering regulations of the Province of Salta
or hired third operators without ENREJA’s authorization. Instead, the charges against
ENJASA were fabricated and based on incidents that were either non-existent, consisted
of minor errors, partly dated from years before the revocation of the License, or involved
arbitrary interpretations or applications of the regulatory framework in place. Claimants
concretize their submission in respect of the charges brought forward by ENREJA in the
three investigations that Resolution No. 240/13 took as a basis for the revocation of

ENJASA’s license as laid down in the following sections.
qd) Allegations in Resolution No. 380/12

In respect of Resolution No. 380/12, in which ENREJA had charged ENJASA with
having breached anti-money laundering rules in its lottery operations and by making a
payment in respect of a prize won in a slot machine game, Claimants reiterate the same
arguments that ENJASA had already made in answering to ENREJA’s charges (see
supra paras. 97-101). They therefore claim that no breach of anti-money laundering rules
had occurred. At the most, minor administrative mistakes may have occurred in some of
the instances investigated by ENREJA in Resolution No. 380/12.'? To the extent
ENREJA based the revocation of ENJASA’s license on these instances, ENREJA had
relied on an incorrect factual basis and had not taken into account the explanations
ENJASA had furnished in response to ENREJA’s investigation under Resolution No.
380/12. Claimants also point out that they submitted the winning ticket for the prize of

ARS 11,080 in the present proceeding to prove that the prize indeed existed.'** In

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 233; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 250.

154 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para, 315. For the ticket in question, see Exhibit C-393.

48

15

15

15

16

161.

155
156
157

addition, the minor errors that had occurred could not be qualified as serious breaches of

the regulatory framework in place.

(2) Allegations in Resolution No. 381/12

7. In respect of Resolution No. 381/12, which concerned alleged breaches of anti-money
laundering rules in live games, Claimants reiterate the same arguments that ENJASA had

already made in answering to ENREJA’s charges (see supra paras. 103-107).

8. As for the charges relating to cash payments made to customers in August and September
2011, Claimants submit that, at the relevant time, no obligation had existed to pay prizes
above ARS 10,000 by check or international wire transfer and to register the payments
in the anti-money laundering book.'*> Consequently, ENREJA’s conclusion that
ENJASA had acted in breach of anti-money laundering rules by making cash payments

was an arbitrary exercise of its supervisory powers.

9. In this context, Claimants observe that Law No. 7020 only required registering the
identity of the recipient in case amounts above ARS 10,000 were paid by check, but did
not oblige ENJASA to make all payments above ARS 10,000 by check. Similarly,
Resolution No. 26/00 of 10 April 2000, which ENJASA also had to comply with, did not
require payments of amounts above ARS 10,000 to be made by check. This only changed,
Claimants point out, as from 1 May 2012, when Resolution No. 90/12 replaced
Resolution No. 26/00. !%6

0. In Resolution No. 90/12, ENREJA introduced the obligation for ENJASA to pay prizes
in excess of ARS 10,000 by check or via international wire transfer. The checks had to
mention the beneficiary and, if the amount payable by check was in excess of ARS
50,000, the check was to be made non-transferable. Thus, Claimants submit, before the
introduction of Resolution No. 90/12, no use of checks and identification of beneficiaries

were required for payments above ARS 10,000.!°”

Claimants further observe that, at the relevant times, no federal law in Argentina required
payments above ARS 10,000 to be made by check. Resolution No. 151/98 of the Federal

Tax Authority and National Law No. 25,345 only refused tax deductions when certain

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 271-272; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 332-334.

Resolution No. 90/12, Art. 1.1 (Exhibit C-181).
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 236-248.

49

means of payment (such as non-transferrable checks) were not used.!°* To confirm that
ENJASA had not breached anti-money laundering regulations, Claimants also refer to
the fact that inspectors of Argentina’s federal agency for the prevention of money
laundering in 2013 did not find reasons to further investigate ENJASA for breaches of

anti-money laundering laws. !°?

162. Nevertheless, and in spite of the clear regulations, Claimants submit, ENREJA stated in
Resolution No. 381/12 that even before 1 May 2012 ENJASA had to make payments
over ARS 10,000 by non-transferrable check and register the beneficiary in the anti-
money laundering book. ENREJA’s position, Claimants contend, could only be based
upon a retroactive — and hence unlawful — application of Resolution No. 90/12 to facts

that had occurred before 1 May 2012.'%

163. Moreover, Claimants submit that even if a legal obligation to make payments of prizes
by check had existed in August and September 2011, ENREJA’s investigation under
Resolution No. 381/12 against ENJASA was time-barred. Claimants contend that
pursuant to Article 49 of Law No. 7020, actions related to administrative infringements
were time-barred after one year from the date of the event in question; the statute of
limitations could be interrupted only by the initiation of an administrative inquiry or by
the repetition of the breach in question, both of which neither had in fact, nor was alleged
to have, occurred. Instead, ENREJA had started the administrative inquiry in question

more than one year after the alleged breaches. !°!

164. In this context, Claimants also submit that the five-year statute of limitations foreseen in
Argentina’s Federal Criminal Code was not applicable. This would entail a mistaken
reliance on the ruling in Filcrosa, where the Argentine Supreme Court had decided that
a longer statute of limitations established under local laws was inapplicable. Filcrosa did
not, however, allow applying a longer statute of limitations under federal law, when local
legislation imposed a shorter statute of limitations, as in the present case. Moreover,
Claimants add, a five-year statute of limitations for criminal offences would also not
apply, as none of the alleged regulatory breaches constituted crimes in the sense of

Argentina’s Criminal Code. !

'58 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 45.

'S9 Claimant Memorial, para. 241.

60 See Resolutions Nos. 232/08, 46/10, 106/10, and 161/10.

‘6! Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 273-276; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 335.
162 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 371-375.

165.

166.

167.

168.

Furthermore, Claimants argue that there was no factual basis to conclude that the
payments ENJASA had made above ARS 10,000 actually concerned prizes won by
casino customers. The information on which ENREJA’s charges were based — namely
so-called “Daily Reports”, “Rating Card Forms”, and “internal checks” from August and
September 2011 — provided no details on prizes actually won by individual customers.
The Daily Reports and the Rating Card Forms only provided general estimates of the
amounts won on each live game table. Internal checks were received against money
deposited by customers in the casino’s treasury. Although internal checks could be
exchanged for chips at the gaming tables, there was not necessarily a correlation between
the amount of the internal checks and the chips a client subsequently cashed.!%
Moreover, no regulation in the Province of Salta forbade the use of internal checks in

casinos. '

In respect of ENREJA’s charge relating to cash payments made in September 2011 to
two customers in Casino Salta, Claimants reiterate that it was not clear what legal rule
ENJASA’s conduct violated. Claimants stress that ENJASA did not have any obligation
at the time to make payments above ARS 10,000 by check.

Claimants also point out that it is impossible to determine whether the amounts paid
involved money won during live games or money that had been brought into the casino
by the customer. Furthermore, it was not uncommon for two individuals to pool their
money for playing and, at the end of the day, distribute what was left over or obtained at
the gaming table. In any event, Claimants submit, there was no basis for holding

ENJASA responsible for their clients’ behaviour. !®

Claimants concede that ENREJA had already sanctioned ENJASA for having paid prizes
above ARS 10,000 in cash instead of by check before Resolution No. 90/12 had entered
into force, that is, when Resolution No. 26/00 still applied. However, Claimants point
out, ENJASA had in fact challenged ENREJA’s interpretation of Resolution No. 26/00

as requiring the making of payments above ARS 10,000 by check or international wire

'63 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 277-282; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 336-337.
'64 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 283-286; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 338-339.
'65 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 283-286; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 338-339.

51

169.

170.

171.

transfer several times.'°° ENJASA had only accepted to pay the fines in earlier

administrative proceedings in order not to damage the relationship with ENREJA.

Claimants therefore conclude that the charges in Resolution No. 381/12 were based on
either an incorrect interpretation of the regulatory framework in place at the time (Law
No. 7020 and Resolution No. 26/00) or a retroactive application of Resolution No. 90/12,
disregarded the statute of limitations in Article 49 of Law No. 7020, and involved
mistakes in the investigations of the facts. The conduct targeted in Resolution No. 381/12
could therefore, Claimants contend, not serve as a basis for the finding of serious
breaches of the applicable regulatory framework, which could justify the revocation of

ENJASA’s license.

(3) Allegations in Resolution No. 384/12

In respect of Resolution No. 384/12, which charged ENJASA with having breached
Article 5 of the Law No. 7020 by sub-licensing the operations of several slot machine
halls in different locations to third operators without requesting ENREJA’s approval, and
involving third operators in certain live games, Claimants equally reiterate the arguments
that ENJASA had already made in answering to ENREJA’s charges (see supra paras.
109-115), namely that some of the individuals and companies in question were operating
slot machine halls under permits granted by the BPAS (Mr. Navarrete, Mr. Colloricchio,
and New Star), while others were not operators of games of chance at all (Emsenor,
Video Drome, Prodec, and DEK). Claimants moreover observe that ENREJA could see
from the investment plans Mr. Navarrete and New Star had submitted to ENREJA after
the revocation of ENJASA’s license that both had been appointed as operators of slot
machine halls by BPAS.!°”

Claimants further submit that ENJASA, although it had been granted an exclusive
license, had accepted, at the request of both the Province of Salta and ENREJA, who
otherwise feared social and political problems, that operators authorized by BPAS could
continue operating and that their status would not be altered due to the exclusivity of the

license granted to ENJASA. '®8 Moreover, Claimants point out, ENREJA was aware of

'66 ENREJA’s Answer of 28 October 2008, p. 1 (Exhibit ARA-212); Recourse for Revocation of 30 November
2009, p. 3 (Exhibit ARA-237); ENJASA’s Answer to Charges re Resolution No. 381/12, p. 4 (Exhibit C-183);
ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration, pp. 49 et seg. (Exhibit C-213); Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para.

118.

‘67 Letter of 21 April 2014, p. 8 (Exhibit ARA-104); Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 191-193.
‘68 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 65.

172.

173.

174.

all contractual arrangements ENJASA had with these pre-existing operators concerning
the operation of slot machines and had accepted that the fees from these operators would
be paid to ENREJA through ENJASA. Claimants also maintain that ENREJA had, at all
times, meticulously audited ENJASA’s operations of slot machine halls and therefore

had known about these arrangements all along.

Claimants also point out that Article 5 of Law No. 7020 forbids the licensee to appoint
operators without ENREJA’s authorisation, but does not provide a definition of what an
“operator” is. Claimants argue that ENREJA made an unjustifiably broad interpretation
of the term “operator” in Article 5 of Law No. 7020 if it included companies under that
definition that merely rented property to ENJASA for the operation of a slot machine hall
(Emsenor), that supplied hardware and software for games of chance to ENJASA (Prodec
and DEK), or leased slot machines to ENJASA (Video Drome). In this context,
Claimants further argue that one does not become an “operator” by the mere fact of

sharing revenues and profits from gaming operations.

Claimants further point out that the Acta Acuerdo confirms that there had been no
breaches of the applicable regulatory framework by ENJASA with respect to engaging
some of those alleged operators. °° Indeed, one of the parameters that was considered
during the negotiations with UNIREN at the time was the level of regulatory compliance
of ENJASA. Thus, Claimants note, Decree No. 3428/08, which approved the Acta
Acuerdo, confirmed that ENJASA’s compliance was examined. '”° Moreover, the Acta
Acuerdo contained specific assurances about ENJASA’s regulatory compliance, namely
that (i) ENJASA had complied with the payment of the license fee; (ii) ENJASA had
complied with its investment plan in the area of tourism and the increase of capital of
ENJASA; (iii) there were no factual or legal circumstances that could constitute a breach
of the terms of the public tender and transfer agreement through which ENJASA obtained
the gaming license; and (iv) the joint ventures of ENJASA, inter alia with Video Drome,
were not contrary to the terms of the License, but complied with Article 5 of Law No.

7020.17!

Claimants finally observe that, as part of the transition plan, ENREJA had transferred

600 of ENJASA’s employees to the companies that took over four casinos, 15 slot

16 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 180-181; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 129-139.

170 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 130-132; Decree No. 3428/08 of the Province of Salta, Recitals 8 and
14 (Exhibit C-090).

‘| Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 181; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 133-139.

53

machine halls, and four lottery operations from ENJASA. The large number of
employees transferred, Claimants submit, indicates that no third parties had been
operating ENJASA’s sites. Claimants also note that ENREJA granted permits to the very
same companies, namely Video Drome and New Star, and one individual, Mr. Navarrete,
that had participated in what ENREJA claimed had been “serious breaches”, namely the
involvement of operators of games of chance without ENREJA’s authorization. '7 All in
all, the allegation that ENJASA had illegally appointed third party operators was thus,

Claimants submit, merely a pretext to revoke ENJASA’s license. !7*

b) The Revocation of the License Was Arbitrary and Disproportionate

175. Claimants conclude from the above that there was no legal justification to revoke

ENJASA’s license. ENREJA simply accepted the findings of the administrative inquiries
described in Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12, without addressing any of
ENJASA’s explanations and arguments. Resolution No. 240/13, through which ENJASA
license was revoked, retroactively applied Resolution No. 90/12 to facts that had
occurred before its entry into force and misrepresented the facts underlying each
allegation. Claimants insist that ENJASA complied with the applicable anti-money
laundering regulations and did not illegally transfer its gaming license to unauthorized
operators. As a result, Claimants conclude, ENREJA’s revocation of ENJASA’s gaming

license was arbitrary. !”*

176. Claimants also cast into doubt the legal basis on which ENJASA’s license was

2
13
174
175

terminated. Whereas ENREJA relied on Article 13 of Law No. 7020 to revoke
ENJASA’s license for breaches of Article 5 of Law No. 7020, the allegations made in
Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12, which Resolution No. 240/13 confirmed,
concerned, Claimants submit, administrative infringements that could only be sanctioned
pursuant to Article 41 of Law No. 7020 with fines, a closure of at most 30 days, or an
inability to operate of at most one year. However, the revocation of the operating license
was not a sanction foreseen in Article 41. Claimants therefore conclude that ENREJA’s
allegations, even if they had been true, could not lead to a revocation of ENJASA’s

license. !75

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 350; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 425-427.

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 358-360; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 429-430.
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 266, 305-382.
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 385-386.

177.

178.

179.

180.

Claimants further contend that ENREJA could not have applied Article 13 of Law No.
7020, which provided for the revocation of the License as the most severe sanction, to
sanction administrative infringements. Moreover, Article 13 had been repealed by Law
No. 7133, which amended Law No. 7020.!"° This, Claimants submit, is a further reason
for why ENREJA could not have revoked the License on the basis of Article 13 of Law
No. 7020.!77

Moreover, Claimants contend that irrespective of the question as to whether or not the
breaches had occurred, the revocation of the License was in all events excessive. In this
context, Claimants point to Article 48 of Law No. 7020, which establishes the principle
of proportionality and lists the criteria for the graduation of sanctions (see supra para.
84). In Claimants’ view, ENREJA did not take into account the proportionality required
by the provincial regulations, nor did it take into account, or demonstrate the seriousness
of, infringements ENJASA had allegedly committed. ENREJA did not consider how
these infringements affected or may have affected the “legal certainty, the morality and
good customs” mentioned in Article 48 of Law No 7020. To support their argument,
Claimants refer to decisions from Argentina’s federal agency in charge of anti-money
laundering in cases that involved much more serious allegations, but limited the sanctions
imposed to fines. This indicates, Claimants conclude, that the revocation of ENJASA’s

license was a disproportionate sanction. !7*

Finally, Claimants reject the argument that ENJASA’s previous infringements justified
the revocation of the License as a sanction under Article 48 of Law No. 7020, which

allows imposing heavier sanctions in light of the licensee’s “record of relapses.”

©) Violation of ENJASA’s Due Process Rights

Claimants further submit that the revocation of ENJASA’s license, and the procedure
leading up to it, violated elementary due process rights. In addition to the lack of any
proportionality in, and the arbitrariness of, the decision ultimately made, ENREJA’s
conduct breached elementary due process guarantees by (i) not warning ENJASA about
the possible consequences of the administrative inquiries; (ii) completely disregarding
the facts underlying the allegations; (iii) failing to respect ENJASA’s right to be heard
by not addressing any of the factual explanations and legal arguments made by ENJASA

"76 Law No. 7133 of 19 April 2001 (Exhibit ARA-006); Transcript, Day 5, p. 18 (Garcia Pullés).
"77 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 300-304.
"8 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras, 384-391.

181.

182.

183.

in response to ENREJA’s investigations; (iv) depriving ENJASA of a fair opportunity to
present its defence, because the company was unable to review the complete file relating
to the allegations made by ENREJA and was not given adequate time to respond to the

administrative inquiries; and (v) revoking the License without adequate reasoning. !””

Claimants submit in particular that ENREJA was obliged to alert ENJASA of the possible
consequences of the administrative inquiries initiated by Resolutions Nos. 380/12,
381/12, and 384/12. ENREJA did not do so, however. Contrary to Respondent’s
contention, Resolutions Nos. 39/10, 104/10, and 161/10 did not contain sufficient
warnings about a possible revocation of ENJASA’s license arising out of the conduct
investigated under Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12. Moreover, by August
2013, when Resolution No. 240/13 was handed down, these earlier resolutions were three
years old and were not mentioned or referenced in Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and

384/12, 18°

Claimants further point out that ENJASA submitted, on 28 August 2013, an extensive
Recourse for Reconsideration of Resolution No. 240/13, which contained detailed
arguments of fact and law.'*! In this Recourse, ENJASA observed, for instance, that
ENREJA had misinterpreted the involvement of the third operators and requested
ENREJA to produce the permits of the BPAS authorizing these operators. Moreover,
ENJASA submitted that Video Drome, Prodec, and DEK were not operating the games
in question, but had only rented out slot machines or supplied hardware and software that
ENJASA used to operate games of chance. Furthermore, ENJASA submitted that
ENREJA had either misinterpreted Law No. 7020 and Resolution No. 26/00 by
requesting that all payments above ARS 10,000 had to be made by check, or was
retroactively applying Resolution No. 96/12 to conduct that had taken place before that

Resolution entered into force.

On 19 November 2013, ENREJA denied ENJASA’s Request for Reconsideration of
Resolution No. 240/13 and confirmed the revocation of ENJASA’s license by Resolution
No. 315/13. In Claimants’ view, Resolution No. 315/13 merely rubberstamped

Resolution No. 240/13 and sweepingly disregarded or misrepresented ENJASA’s

‘9 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 328; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 283, 293-299.
'80 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 256-264.
'8! ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration (Exhibit C-213).

56

arguments, considering its Request for Reconsideration a mere “dilatory activity.”!**

Claimants further point out that, for the first time in Resolution No. 315/13, ENREJA
denied that Mr. Navarrete, Mr. Colloricchio, and New Star had been authorized to operate
slot machine halls by BPAS.'** ENREJA also pretended, Claimants contend, that, in
accordance with Article 2 b) of UIF Resolution No. 199/11, any payment made to a
gambler in a casino, must be considered a “prize”, although this provision clearly
distinguished between the payment of “prizes” and of other amounts. '** All of this,
Claimants submit, are further indications that due process was not respected, as ENJASA
was, for the first time in Resolution No. 315/13, confronted with additional legal and

factual arguments and allegations and could not respond to ENREJA.

B. Claimants’ Analysis of the Law

184. In Claimants’ view, the plan to oust ENJASA of its business in the gaming sector, which
culminated in the revocation of its exclusive license, followed by the transfer of its
operations and employees to new operators, destroyed Claimants’ investment in the
Argentine Republic, with no compensation being paid. This, Claimants argue, constitutes
an unlawful expropriation in the sense of Article 4 of the BIT and breaches the obligation
of the host State to provide fair and equitable treatment under Article 2(1) of the same
treaty, as a result of which Claimants are entitled to damages. The Argentine Republic,
Claimants add, is responsible for the actions of the authorities of the Province of Salta,
which are attributable to her under international law, as already held by the Tribunal in

its Decision on Jurisdiction. !*5

1. Applicable Law

185. Given that their action involves a claim for breach of the international law standards set
forth in the BIT, Claimants contend that “[w]hen it comes to an issue of liability for a

claim founded upon an investment treaty obligation, the applicable law is the investment

treaty as supplemented by general international law.” '*°

182 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 342-346; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 393, 405-419,
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 204.

183 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 412.

'84 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 416.

185 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 462-464; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 462-464 (referring to
the Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 288).

186 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 449.

186. Claimants stress that Respondent may not rely on her domestic legislation “as a
justification for acts that are in violation of its treaty and other international law
obligations.”'’? This, Claimants argue, is confirmed by Article 27 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (“VCLT”), by Articles 3 and 32 of the International
Law Commission’s Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful
Acts (“ILC Articles”), as well as by “abundant and consistent authority of ICSID
tribunals,” which confirms that domestic law cannot justify the failure to comply with

international law. '**

187. Claimants further contend that domestic law is only relevant in determining a State’s
international responsibility as part of the factual matrix of the dispute, not as part of the
governing law, as confirmed by numerous international courts and tribunals. '*? In this
context, Claimants refer to several statements of the International Court of Justice

(“ICI”) to this effect, inter alia in the ELSI case, where the Court said:

Compliance with municipal law and compliance with the provisions of a treaty are
different questions. What is a breach of treaty may be lawful in the municipal law
and what is unlawful in the municipal law may be wholly innocent of violation of a
treaty provision. '°

188. For Claimants, the above principle is not altered by the reference to the domestic law of

the host State in Article 8(6) of the BIT, which states:

The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute with reference to the laws of the
Contracting Party involved in the dispute, including its private international law
tules, the provisions of this Agreement and the terms of any specific agreements
concluded in relation to such an investment, if any, as well as the applicable
principles of international law.

189. This provision, Claimants argue, must be interpreted pursuant to the VCLT and has to be

read together with Article 27 of the VCLT and customary international law, “both of

'87 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 365.

'88 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 365-370; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 448-455;
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 226-231.

'89 Reply on the Merits, paras. 456-458 (referring to Alps Finance and Trade AG v. Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL
Award (5 March 2011) para. 197(ii) (Exhibit CL-130) and Murphy Exploration & Production Company
International v. Republic of Ecuador, PCA Case No. 2012-16, Partial Award (6 May 2016) para. 361 (Exhibit
CL-179)); Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 238.

1% Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy), Judgment (20 July 1989) [1989] ICJ
Reports 15, 40, para. 73 (Exhibit ALRA-193). See Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 455; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, para. 235.

which prohibit a party to a treaty to invoke its national law as a justification for its failure

to perform a treaty.” 7!

190. Claimants further contest Respondent’s assertion that, in order to be able to rely on

Article 27 of the VCLT, Claimants must first establish a conflict between Argentine law
and international law. According to Claimants, this assertion “disregards the principle
according to which domestic law is not governing the question of liability under

international law.” !°?

2. Breach of Article 4 of the BIT

191. Claimants point out that Article 4 of the BIT protects both against expropriation and

measures having an effect equivalent to expropriation, and therefore encompasses both
direct and indirect or de facto expropriation. !°? According to Claimants, the revocation
of ENJASA’s license was an abuse of the regulatory powers of ENREJA and constituted
an indirect expropriation of Claimants’ investment in Argentina. Because of the
revocation of ENJASA’s license, Claimants claim to be entitled to damages because
Respondent thereby permanently deprived them of their investment in Argentina without
compensation in breach of Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT. Claimants further claim to be
entitled to damages pursuant to Article 4(3) of the BIT because the revocation of
ENJASA’s license qualifies as a direct taking of an asset (the License), which belongs to

ENJASA, an Argentine company in which Claimants hold shares.

a) The Revocation of the License as an Abuse of Regulatory Powers

192. Claimants accept that customary international law recognizes a host State’s “right to

regulate or take measures affecting foreign investors’ property interests without a finding
of compensable expropriation,” as long as such measures pursue a legitimate purpose,
are aimed at the general welfare, are not discriminatory, fall within the scope of the
State’s general regulatory or administrative powers, and are in accordance with due

process. !*4

193. According to Claimants, Respondent acknowledged that a State’s regulatory measures

must be “reasonable and proportionate,” and so have many investment tribunals. In order

"1 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 459.

2 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 460; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 226-239.

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 392-397; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 465-466;

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 241.
4 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 469; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 280-296.

59

194.

195.

196.

to satisfy the principle of proportionality, a measure must be: (a) one that is suitable to
achieve a legitimate purpose; (b) necessary for achieving that purpose in that no less
burdensome measures would suffice; and (c) not excessive in that its advantages are
outweighed by its disadvantages.'?> Claimants also stress that many commentators
confirm that the principle of proportionality should be applied to determine whether an
expropriation has taken place. Even a generally applicable regulation in the public

interest may require compensation if it is obviously disproportionate. '°°

In the present case, Claimants argue that the revocation of ENJASA’s license was not a
regular exercise of ENREJA’s supervisory powers under Law No. 7020, but instead was
done “in bad faith, with the specific purpose of transferring ENJASA’s gaming
operations to local Argentine companies by fabricating and exaggerating factually
incorrect accusations of non-compliance with gaming regulations.”!?’ In particular,
Claimants contend that Resolution No. 240/13 was issued without any warning,
specifically targeted Claimants’ investment in Salta, and relied on breaches collected
over a long period of time that, even if true, were marginal and without serious

consequences.

Claimants further consider the revocation of the License to have been politically
orchestrated, unlawful, arbitrary, and in breach of due process. According to Claimants,
ENREJA applied regulations that had not been in force at the relevant time, disregarded

the statute of limitations, and rendered any potential legal recourses moot. !°

Moreover, Claimants point out that despite the obvious lack of gravity of the alleged
infringements of the regulatory framework in place in the Province of Salta, Resolution
No. 240/13 imposed, without warning, the harshest and most severe sanction available.
Given that ENREJA could have resorted to less burdensome measures, the revocation of
ENJASA’s license was excessive, in violation of due process, and its issuance an abuse

of ENREJA’s regulatory powers. Therefore, Claimants conclude, the measures taken by

'5 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 470-477; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 287-290.

96 See Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 471 (referring to LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and
LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability (3 October
2006) para. 195 (Exhibit CL-003) and El Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/15, Award (1 October 2011) para. 241 (Exhibit CL-016).

7 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 479; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 366-382.

'8 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 480; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 366-382.

60

Respondent did not constitute a legitimate exercise of the host State’s regulatory powers

and failed to comply with the principle of proportionality. !?

b) Substantial and Permanent Deprivation of Claimants’ Investment

197. Claimants argue that a regulatory taking can be an indirect expropriation given that
“disproportionate general regulations can be considered as expropriatory if there is a
sufficient interference with the investor’s rights.”?°° Claimants identify two main criteria
to determine whether a regulatory measure amounts to an indirect expropriation: the

intensity of the effects of the measures on the investment and its duration.?°!

198. Regarding intensity, Claimants explain that the host State’s interference with the
investment must be substantial. The expropriatory effect of a regulatory measure is a
question of degree, with tribunals using language such as “substantial deprivation”,
rendering an investment “useless”, “effectively neutraliz[ing]” the investment, removing
the ability to make use of economic rights, depriving the investment of “any real
substance”, eroding the investor’s rights “to an extent that is violative”, or constituting a
“persistent or irreparable obstacle” to the use, enjoyment, or disposal of the

investment.?°?

199. Claimants point out that whether the investor retains control of the investment is not the
most accurate criterion to determine whether an indirect expropriation has taken place.
An indirect expropriation leaves the investor’s title untouched, but deprives it of the
possibility of using the investment in a meaningful way.?°? Criteria such as whether the
investor retains the investment’s economic use or the benefit to be reasonably expected
are more accurate. According to Claimants, the “decisive point for an expropriation is
the destruction of the capability to reasonably use the investment in an economic

sense.” In this case, Claimants contend that the Province’s unlawful measures

'9 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 481-483; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 383-393.

200 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 484-485 (relying inter alia on El Paso Energy International Company
v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Award (1 October 2011) para. 243 (Exhibit CL-016); AWG
Group Ltd. v. Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on Liability (30 July 2010) para. 132 (Exhibit CL-194)).
See also Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 280-283.

201 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 491, 496; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 244-245.

202 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 486-492; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 247-249.

23 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 486; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 250.

204 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 493-495,

61

201

201.

205
206
207
208
209
210

deprived Claimants of “all of the economic benefits of their shareholding in L&E and

ENJASA.”2°

0. Claimants further point out that the fact that they formally retained title to their
shareholding in L&E and ENJASA fails to take into consideration the essence of an
indirect expropriation and does not detract from the fact that the economic use of the
investment has been eradicated.”°° The same holds true, in Claimants’ view, concerning
the fact that ENJASA has not been deprived of the use of the five-star hotel, which was
never profitable on a standalone basis, was constructed as a condition for Claimants’
operations in the Province, and was not an asset having a significant independent
commercial value after the revocation of the License. Finally, Claimants contend that
Respondent’s offer to continue operating two casinos was unrelated to the exclusive right
to commercially exploit games of chance in the Province of Salta until 2029 under
ENJASA’s license. The offer to continue operating two casinos, in addition to never
having been made in a formal fashion, only accounted for about 5% of ENJASA’s
revenues and was made subject to various unacceptable conditions, such as waiving any

legal recourse against the revocation of ENJASA’s license.”

Regarding duration, Claimants contend that, in addition to the intensity of the measure,
tribunals have considered that the interference must not be merely transitional in order to
amount to a compensable indirect expropriation.?"* In the present case, Claimants point
out that the deprivation of the economic benefits attached to the shareholdings in L&E
and ENJASA was permanent, as ENJASA had to shut down operations, rendering the
purpose of the entire investment to operate games of chance in Salta impossible. As for
the remaining assets of ENJASA, Claimants contend that they were ancillary and lost the
capacity to generate profits following the revocation of ENJASA license.” In other
words, the revocation of the License constituted “a permanent obstacle to Claimants’ use
and enjoyment of their investment,”!?

shareholding in ENJASA that was contrary to Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT. The transfer

thus constituting an expropriation of Claimants’

Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 503.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 251-263.
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 497-501.
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 496.
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 497.
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 502.

62

202.

20:

a

204.

205.

by ENREJA and the Province of Salta of ENJASA’s gaming operations to local
companies consolidated the expropriation.7!!
co) Expropriation of ENJASA’s License Contrary to Article 4(3) of the
BIT

Claimants further argue that, in addition to a claim for breach of Article 4(1) and (2) of
the BIT, they also have a claim under Article 4(3) of the BIT for damages because the
revocation of ENJASA’s license and the forced transfer of its operations to local
competitors constitute a direct taking of ENJASA’s license that would entitle Claimants

to damages. ?!”

. Article 4(3) of the BIT, in the English translation offered by Claimants, provides:

Where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a company that, in accordance

with the provisions of Article 1, paragraph 2 hereof, is deemed to be a company

belonging to that Contracting Party, and in which the investor of the other

Contracting Party has shares, the provisions set forth in paragraph 2 of this Article

shall be applied by the former so as to guarantee the appropriate compensation of the

investor.
According to Claimants, Article 4(3) of the BIT, read in conjunction with the broad
definition of investment in Article 1 of the BIT, reveals that the BIT not only protects the
shares an investor has in a local company against direct and indirect expropriations
without compensation; it also protects individual assets of local companies in which a
foreign investor holds shares against expropriation.7!? Claimants thus reject the
interpretation of Article 4(3) of the BIT offered by Respondent, which is inspired by the
limited protection customary international law offers to shareholders, as developed by
the ICJ in Barcelona Traction and Ahmadou Sadio Diallo; such an interpretation,
Claimants argue, has no place where a BIT expressly protects the individual assets of a

company in which the investor holds shares, such as is the case with the BIT.?!*

Claimants further point out that provisions in other investment treaties that are similar to
Article 4(3) of the BIT have been interpreted, in conjunction with the wide definition of
investment included in those treaties, to the effect that “[w]hen such companies suffer

expropriation it is not the shares which constitute the ‘investment’ of the other

21 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 497, 502.

212 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 504; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 264-279.
213 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 506.

214 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 506-508.

63

contracting party but the assets of the local company which are expropriated.”?!> In such
circumstances, the host State’s obligation to compensate for the expropriation of the
company’s assets is owed to the investor in the local company, thus giving rise to claims

by the shareholders, not by the local company.7!®

206. Claimants also contend that the interpretative tools of the VCLT do not lend support to

Respondent’s argument that Article 4(3) of the BIT, by providing shareholders direct
protection against expropriation of the assets of the company, exclude the shareholder
from relying on other standards of protection, such as fair and equitable treatment.?!”
Neither the ordinary meaning of the terms of Article 4(3) of the BIT, nor the BIT’s object
and purpose, would support such an interpretation. It would go against the purpose of the
BIT, Claimants contend, if the BIT was to protect assets of locally incorporated property
only against expropriations, but denied protection granted to shareholders under other

standards of treatment contained in the BIT.

207. As for the type of assets of a locally incorporated company that are protected against

expropriations under Article 4(3) of the BIT, Claimants submit that Respondent’s
interpretation, which limits the protection of Article 4(3), based on the authentic version
of the BIT in Spanish language, to “financial assets”, contrary to the authentic version of
the BIT in German language, which refers only to “assets”, is not in conformity with
Article 33 of the VCLT.?'* In particular, Claimants rely on Article 33(1) and (3) of the
VCLT to argue that, except otherwise provided, the text of a treaty is equally
authoritative in each authentic language, so that one may assume that one text reflects
the will of the parties as expressed in the other languages. Only if, Claimants point out,
a difference in meaning persists in different authentic texts, the meaning which best
reconciles the texts in light of the treaty’s object and purpose should be preferred, as laid

down in Article 33(3) of the VCLT.

208. Thus, Claimants conclude, absent a provision to the contrary, the Spanish and German

versions of the BIT are equally authoritative. The relevant German term,
“Vermdégenswerte”, is used consistently in the BIT. It means “assets” and is also

translated as such in Spanish (“activos’”) everywhere else in the BIT except in Article

215 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 510.
See Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 509-513 (relying inter alia on Ros/nvestCo UK v. Russian

Federation, SCC Arbitration No. V (079/2005), Final Award (12 September 2010) para. 607 (Exhibit CL-103)).
?!7 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 514.
218 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 515-524; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 266-277.

64

4(3). By contrast, the term “activos financieros” appears only in the Spanish version of
Article 4(3) of the BIT, without any further definition or explanation. According to
Claimants, an interpretation that limits the protection granted by Article 4(3) of the BIT
to only one of the two authentic texts cannot be explained by the text or the object and
purpose of the treaty. Instead, in light of the BIT’s object and purpose, Article 4(3) of the
BIT must be read as protecting “all assets of a locally incorporated company against
expropriation,” including ENJASA’s license.?!? The term “activos financieros” is,

Claimants conclude, in all likelihood a translation mistake.?”°

3. Fair and Equitable Treatment

209. Claimants further argue that the revocation of ENJASA’s license results in a breach of

the fair and equitable treatment standard included in Article 2(1) of the BIT.*?! Fair and
equitable treatment, Claimants contend, is a standard with legal, not extra-legal, content
the application of which depends on the facts of the case. Claimants explain how various
tribunals have defined fair and equitable treatment and have given it specific meaning

depending on the factual situations at hand.”

a) The Scope of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard

210. Claimants object to Respondent’s understanding that the scope of fair and equitable

219
20
221

treatment is contained in, and limited by, the minimum standard of treatment under
customary international law. Moreover, the differences between how fair and equitable
treatment is defined under the North-American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”) and
the BIT make Respondent’s reliance on NAFTA jurisprudence unavailing. Claimants
contend that the reference to fair and equitable treatment in the BIT must be interpreted
pursuant to the VCLT, and that “the overwhelming weight of legal authority and tribunals

supports that the FET standard should be understood as an autonomous standard, whose

99223

 
 

precise meaning must be established on a case-by-case basis

Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 524.

Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 521-523.
Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 405 et seq.; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 525 et seq.;

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 402 et seq.

222

223,

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 406-410.
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 527-538 (quote at para. 533); Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras.

403-409.

65

b) The Content of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard

211. Claimants submit that, notwithstanding various nuances, there is a broadly shared
understanding as to the elements that form part of the fair and equitable treatment
standard, namely the protection of the investor’s legitimate expectations, procedural
propriety and due process, the prohibition of arbitrary conduct and the requirement of

good faith, as well as freedom from coercion and harassment. ??+

212. Claimants also recall that the Tribunal observed in its Decision on Jurisdiction, that fair
and equitable treatment
has been interpreted, inter alia, to protect covered investors and their investments
against the arbitrary exercise of public powers, as well as against harassment by
public authorities, to require public authorities to administer the applicable law in
good faith, to entitle foreign investors and their investments to due process and to
protect an investor’s legitimate expectations.”°
213. Claimants further contend that the actions of the authorities in the Province of Salta have
breached the above elements of fair and equitable treatment “in multiple ways,” including
by (1) failing to afford due process and procedural propriety; (2) engaging in coercion
and harassment; (3) acting arbitrarily and in bad faith; and (4) frustrating Claimants’

legitimate expectations.”°
qd) Failure to Provide Due Process and Procedural Propriety

214. Claimants stress that several investment tribunals have interpreted fair and equitable
treatment as requiring due process and procedural propriety in both administrative and
judicial proceedings. To live up to administrative due process, “the administrative bodies
need to conform to generally accepted requirements such as access to a file, reasonable
notices, a reasonable opportunity to present one’s case by making factual and legal
submissions and submitting evidence.”?”’ Claimants contend that serious administrative
negligence, inconsistencies, or idiosyncrasy can amount to a violation of fair and

equitable treatment.??*

224 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 411-422; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 539-541;
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 404, 409, 410-428.

225 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 542 (quoting the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 242).
Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 423; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 525; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, para. 429.

~7 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 547.

28 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 544-547; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 422.

226

66

215. In the present case, Claimants argue that “both the context of Resolution No. 240/13 and
the actual conduct of the administrative procedure show that ENREJA violated
elementary due process rights, thereby breaching the fair and equitable treatment
standard.”??° In particular, Claimants consider, due process would have required
ENREJA to engage with and consider ENJASA’s comments in the proceeding that led
to the revocation of the License. However, ENJASA was prevented from addressing
ENREJA’s accusations in a meaningful way. In the administrative investigation relating
to the alleged hiring of operators without ENREJA’s authorization, ENJASA was
notified of the charges only six months after the formal investigations had started and a
few weeks before the License was actually revoked.?*? Moreover, ENJASA did not get
complete access to ENREJA’s files.?*! The evidence submitted by ENJASA was rejected
without reason and submissions made by ENJASA were completely disregarded by
ENREJA. Due process, Claimants note, not only requires giving a right to be heard, but
also to consider submissions made in an administrative proceedings in a meaningful
way.?*? ENREJA, however, distorted the facts and misapplied the local law, including
by disregarding the applicable statute of limitations and applying anti-money laundering
rules retroactively.”*> Besides, ENREJA failed to notify ENJASA in a timely manner of
the risk of having its License revoked, thus depriving ENJASA of an opportunity to take

. 2
measures to prevent such revocation. 234

216. In sum, for Claimants, “the revocation of ENJASA’s license was, as the facts show, an
arbitrary act with the purpose of transferring Claimants’ business to local companies.
Neither the Provincial Government nor ENREJA were actually concerned about
compliance with regulations. The allegations of non-compliance were a facade for an

outright taking.”?7°

(2) Coercion and Harassment

217. Claimants further point out that tribunals have recognized coercion and harassment as

breaches of fair and equitable treatment.?*° In the present case, Claimants contend, “the

229 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 548; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 394-400, 420-422, 449-453.
230 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 551.

231 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 552; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 399.

232 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 295, 550; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 400.

233 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 425-427; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 548-554.

234 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 215, 256-264, 480-481.

235 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 549.

236 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 555-556.

67

218.

219.

220.

revocation of the license was the culmination of a pattern of harassment” that started after
the change of government in Salta in December 2007, was conducted “with the sole
purpose of preparing the transfer of Claimants’ investment to local companies,” and
manifested itself in “heavy-handed and harassive controls of ENJASA” that focussed on
“minimal formalistic human errors” and included fines related to events that had occurred
years before the fines were imposed.’ This, Claimants conclude, amounts to a violation

of fair and equitable treatment contrary to Article 2(1) of the BIT.

(3) Arbitrary Conduct and Conduct in Bad Faith

Claimants also argue that investment tribunals have acknowledged the obligation to
refrain from arbitrary conduct as a necessary element of fair and equitable treatment.**
According to Claimants, a conduct is arbitrary “when it is founded on prejudice or bias

without a rational explanation or without serving a legitimate purpose.”

Claimants moreover contend that the principle of good faith is a general principle of law
that plays a “significant role in investment law,” and that one “obvious application of the
notion of good faith is the duty to act for cause, and not for purely arbitrary reasons of
domestic politics.”**° Accordingly, bad faith would include

the use of legal instruments for purposes other than those for which they were

created. It also includes a conspiracy by state organs to inflict damage upon or to

defeat the investment, the termination of the investment for reasons other than the

one put forth by the government, and expulsion of an investment based on local

favouritism.”
In the present case, Claimants contend that Respondent’s “overall practice” that led to
the revocation of ENJASA’s license and to the transfer of its business to third operators
was driven by “opportunistic reasons and domestic politics,” as ENREJA availed itself
of minor infringements accumulated over years to construe a pretext to revoke
ENJASA’s license and transfer its business to local operators. According to Claimants,
this conclusion is supported by the fact that sub-licensing to local companies was one of
the reasons for the revocation, yet parts of ENJASA’s business were ultimately

transferred to the very same local companies. Similarly, although, according to ENREJA,

237 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 557-559.

238 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 560-567; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 418-419.

239 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 562.

240 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 563-564; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 413-416

24! Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 565 (quoting Frontier Petroleum Services Ltd. v. Czech Republic,
UNCITRAL, Final Award (12 November 2010) para. 300 (Exhibit CL-025)).

68

ENJASA’s “lack of compliance” with the regulatory framework justified the revocation
of the License, Claimants were later offered to continue operating two of the casinos

ENJASA had operated before. 747

(4) Failure to Provide Stability and Protect Claimants’
Legitimate Expectations

22

. Claimants finally point out that the overwhelming majority of tribunals have held that
the investor’s legitimate expectations constitute a key element of fair and equitable
treatment.** The obligation to protect legitimate expectations does not stem from
express language in the treaty, but “from another tenet of the rule of law, namely that
justified hopes i.e. legitimate expectations, should not be unreasonably disappointed.”?*+

These expectations “arise out of the legal framework of the host state at the time the

investment was made considering also any undertakings and representations made

explicitly or implicitly by the host state.”?45

222. In the present case, Claimants submit, they relied, at the time of making their investment
in Salta, upon “the Province’s invitation to develop the Province’s gaming sector in line
with international best practices and with the know-how of a renowned international
gaming operator.”?#° Claimants contend that they had the legitimate expectation to
exploit the License undisturbed and without harassment if they continued to operate in
the same manner that had been confirmed to be lawful during the renegotiation of the
license fee, as laid down in the Acta Acuerdo. This expectation, Claimants contend, was
based on the issuance of an exclusive license for a period of 30 years until September

2029.747

223. Claimants contend that the Province’s undertakings and policies were “completely
reversed” with the change of government in Salta in 2007. According to Claimants, there
was no legitimate regulatory interest to justify the revocation of the License. On the
contrary, the only interest was to transfer ENJASA’s license to local operators based on

fabricated circumstances serving as a justification. Accordingly, Claimants contend, the

242 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 424, 431; Reply on the Merits, para. 566.

243 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, paras. 411-414; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 539-543, 568-579.
> Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 573.

245 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 568-574.

246 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 575.

247 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 575-577. See also Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 439-441.

69

224.

225.

226.

Province of Salta “consciously and overtly breached Claimants’ expectations,” thus

breaching the fair and equitable treatment standard laid down in the BIT.”

C. Respondent’s Analysis of the Facts

Respondent disagrees with Claimants’ account of the reasons for, and the evaluation of,
the revocation of ENJASA’s license. Respondent submits that ENJASA had committed
serious breaches of the anti-money laundering rules in the Province of Salta, which amply
justified the revocation of ENJASA’s license to operate games of chance. In
Respondent’s view, ENREJA’s actions complied fully with the regulatory framework in
place and thus constituted a lawful exercise of the host State’s regulatory power that was

in compliance with the provisions of the BIT.

1. Motives for Revoking ENJASA’s Gaming License

Respondent submits that Claimants’ theory that ENJASA’s license was revoked to “get
rid of the Austrians” who indirectly controlled ENJASA, and to eliminate the
involvement of Mr. Garamon, a supporter of Governor Urtubey’s political rival, who
allegedly owned 40% of ENJASA through Iberlux, was plainly wrong. Respondent
highlights that Claimants failed to provide evidence of any of these unfounded
speculations. Respondent further points out that Claimants’ witness Mr. Tucek, upon
whose statement the underlying allegations were based, admitted at the hearing that he
had no first-hand knowledge of the matter, but was just reproducing what he had been

informed of by ENJASA’s local staff. 4?

Respondent stresses instead that the motives for revoking ENJASA’s license lay in the
serious and frequent breaches of the applicable anti-money laundering regulations that
ENJASA had committed. In this context, Respondent points to the necessity of anti-
money laundering regulations and to the State’s power to issue them. Furthermore,
Respondent submits that Law No. 7020, which required approval of operators of games
of chance and imposed on the licensee a certain number of duties, including the duty to
exercise due diligence in relation to its customers and to record payments made in excess
of ARS 10,000, was in full conformity with the recommendations made for casinos
issued by the Financial Action Task Force (“FATF’”), an inter-governmental body tasked

to combat money laundering and terrorist financing. These recommendations insisted on

248 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 578.
4° Transcript, Day 2, p. 229; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 13-14.

70

the need for authorities to regulate and control casino activities, to regulate the admission
of operators of games of chance, and to establish mechanisms to know and track the

transactions of players.?°°

227. Respondent submits that the decision to revoke ENJASA’s license was the result of the
company’s frequent breaches of the anti-money laundering regulations in place, which
had been introduced in Argentina as one of the consequences of the country’s financial
crisis that had occurred at the turn of the millennium. Especially since that grave social,
economic, and institutional crisis, financial concerns were important for Argentina.
Moreover, the Province of Salta, which borders three different countries (Paraguay,
Bolivia, and Chile), was a well-known risk-area, especially since games of chance were
forbidden in Bolivia. Respondent therefore insists that the Province of Salta was entitled
to introduce efficient anti-money laundering regulations and to vest ENREJA with

powers to monitor compliance with them and sanction any breaches.?°!

228. Respondent also rejects Claimants’ allegations that ENJASA had started to become a
subject of harassments by the Province of Salta when Mr. Urtubey took office in
December 2007. In this context, Respondent first points out that the country’s precarious
financial situation in 2001/2002 had led to the enactment of an Emergency Law in 2002,
which required the renegotiation of public service agreements and licenses. It was in
this context that the fee for ENJASA’s license was renegotiated by the Province of Salta
through UNIREN, an entity specifically created for this purpose. Respondent further
stresses that the renegotiation of the license fee was a reasonable and legitimate measure

in view of the economic situation of the country at the time.?>

229. Respondent points out that UNIREN and ENJASA agreed upon a new license fee in the
Acta Acuerdo, which was based on a different fee structure. Whereas originally a fixed
annual amount in USD had been agreed upon, this was changed into a percentage of

ENJASA’s net income, which rose over time to 15% for lottery games and 16% for

250 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 143-146; See 40 FATF Recommendations, Interpretative Note to
Recommendations 5, 12 and 16 (20 June 2003) (Exhibit ARA-031) and Interpretative Note to Recommendations
22 and 23 (February 2012) (Exhibit JM-05).

25! Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 213-243; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
72-119.

252 Law No. 25561 of 6 January 2002 (Exhibit ARA-17).

253 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 178-180; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
36-40.

71

casinos and slot machines.**+ This change from a fixed fee to an income-based fee,
Respondent submits, required stricter controls over ENJASA’s earnings. It was to this
end that ENREJA implemented an online information control system and introduced

regulatory changes for the operation of slot machines.?*>

230. Respondent also notes that two administrative inquiries that resulted in sanctions of
ENJASA’s business operation pre-dated the appointment of Governor Urtubey. Thus,
ENREJA’s Resolution No. 15/05 (dated 16 March 2005) fined ENJASA for imposing
unauthorized restrictions on bets. In respect of this investigation, ENJASA went from
first denying the events to then alleging that it had been a victim of persecution by
ENREJA before ultimately acknowledging the breaches in a request for suspension of
the sanction imposed.**° ENREJA’s Resolution No. 104/07 (dated 11 September 2007),
in turn, sanctioned ENJASA for operating a slot machine without authorization. In
respect of this investigation, ENREJA considered that ENJASA’s defence that the
machine was running on a temporary trial basis could not justify ENJASA’s failure to
report the machine. ENJASA did not challenge the decision and paid the fine.?°’ These
two investigations, in Respondent’s view, confirm that ENREJA had carried out
administrative investigations well before Governor Urtubey took office in December
2007, thus discrediting Claimants’ theory about the existence of a political plan to oust

ENJASA of its business in Salta.?**

231.

As a further indication that there was no plan to oust ENJASA of its business, Respondent
submits that, after ENJASA’s license was revoked, gaming operators in the Province of
Salta who complied with the legal and regulatory requirements were allowed to continue
their activities by means of temporary non-exclusive permits. The interested parties had
to demonstrate compliance with a series of requirements and submit their investment

plans in order to obtain a final license to operate games of chance.”*? Respondent submits

254 Memorandum of Agreement of 7 May 2008 (Exhibit C-131); Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits,
para. 181.

255 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 181-184, 232-235; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the
Merits, paras. 51-71, 104-107.

256 Exhibit C-239; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 258-260; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the
Merits, paras. 126-134.

257 Exhibit C-240; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 261-264; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the
Merits, paras. 135-139.

258 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 6.

259 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 478-505; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para.
379.

72

232.

233.

234.

235.

236.

that Claimants had an opportunity to participate in this process, but decided not to do

2
so.2°°

In Respondent’s view, Claimants are distorting the facts, when they claim that ENREJA
and the Province of Salta definitively transferred ENJASA’s business to third-party
operators in only ten days after the revocation of ENJASA’s license. New licenses were
in fact only awarded on 29 May 2014. The verification procedure, the temporary plan,
the assessment of compliance with the technical, contractual, and legal requirements for
the operation of games of chance, the approval of the investment plans, and the award of
the final licenses thus took at least some nine months of intense activity after the issuance

of Resolution No. 240/13.7¢!

Respondent also rejects Claimants’ criticism that the new licenses were granted without
a public bidding process. ENJASA’s license had also been granted in a direct manner
and, unlike the new licenses, it was an exclusive license. The legal requirements to grant

the new licenses were therefore met.?°

Finally, Respondent rejects Claimants’ criticism that the new licenses were awarded to
third parties that had been categorized by ENREJA as previously existing operators of
games of chance under arrangements with ENJASA for which authorizations by
ENREJA were missing and that therefore were themselves in breach of Law No. 7020.
The process following the revocation of ENJASA’s license regularized these illegal
operations of games of chance in the Province of Salta. Unlike in the past, ENREJA was
now able to supervise the actual gaming operators. Respondent also offered Claimants
the possibility to continue operating Casino Salta. However, Respondent points out,

Claimants refused this proposal.7°

In sum, Respondent submits, that no reasons other than breaches of the anti-money
laundering regulations led to the revocation of ENJASA’s license.
2. Administrative Inquiries and Sanctions between 2007 and May 2013

Respondent also submits that the administrative inquiries undertaken, and sanctions

imposed, by ENREJA between 2007 and May 2013 prior to the investigations that

260 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 380-382.
261 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 383-402.

262

 

espondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 505.

263 Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 406.

73

resulted in the revocation of ENJASA’s license had revealed serious and repeated
breaches by ENJASA of anti-money laundering and gaming regulations and were all
justified. During this period ENREJA had conducted a number of investigations, which
had found, inter alia, that ENJASA (i) repeatedly had breached anti-money laundering
rules; (ii) had imposed unauthorized restrictions on bets; (iii) had operated slot machines
without authorization; (iv) had amended betting limits without authorization; (v) had
opened casinos without authorization; (vi) had breached rules concerning lottery games;
and (vii) had amended prize limits without authorization.*™ In total, twenty-one
sanctions had to be imposed on ENJASA for breaches of the regulatory framework in

place prior to the revocation of the License.”
237. Respondent addresses the following investigations in more detail as follows:

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 31/08 (dated 10 March 2008), which sanctioned
ENJASA for issuing checks in breach of anti-money laundering rules, ENREJA
rejected ENJASA’s defence that the action was time-barred, considering that the
initiation of an administrative inquiry in 2005 had stopped the statute of
limitations and that the commission of the same breach, which was discovered in
another inquiry, prevented the infringement from becoming time-barred; the fine
ENREJA imposed also complied with the proportionality principle.?%

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 32/08 (dated 10 March 2008), which sanctioned
ENJASA for the loss of the anti-money laundering book, for irregularities in
recording payments, and for the irregular issuance of checks for the payment of
prizes, ENREJA considered that a severe sanction was in place, inter alia in view
of the delayed communication by ENJASA that the anti-money laundering book
had been lost and considering ENJASA’s record of prior infractions.7°”

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 232/08 (dated 18 November 2008), which
sanctioned ENJASA for making irregular payments of prizes in excess of ARS
10,000 in cash rather than by check at Casino Golden Dreams, ENREJA rejected
ENJASA’s defence that the law did not impose such an obligation, pointing out

24 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 252-355; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
120-269.

265 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 27.

266 Exhibit C-150. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 265-269; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 140-149.

267 Exhibit C-151. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 270-276; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 150-169.

74

that ENJASA’s interpretation of the law was completely at odds with its own
prior statements and with the intended purpose of the law. The fine that was
imposed took account of ENJASA’s record of recidivism.”

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 244/08 (dated 25 November 2008), which
sanctioned ENJASA for the unauthorized removal of gaming devices from
Casino Salta and Casino Rosario de la Frontera, and for irregularities in the results
of poker tournaments, ENREJA considered mitigating factors and issued a
warning rather than imposing a fine.?©

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 286/09 (dated 16 December 2009), which
sanctioned ENJASA for amending betting limits in Casino Golden Dreams
without prior authorization, ENJASA did not deny the facts under investigation,
but alleged that the resolution initiating the administrative inquiry was null and
void because of certain formal errors; ENREJA rejected ENJASA’s defence and
imposed a reduced fine, taking into consideration inter alia that ENJASA had no
previous record for this particular type of infraction.?”°

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 39/10 (dated 9 March 2010), which sanctioned
ENJASA for holding an unauthorized poker tournament, ENREJA rejected
ENJASA’s arguments that the breach was an excusable error that was
unintentionally committed by an employee of the casino; for ENREJA, the breach
was caused by a dysfunctional internal organization and it warned ENJASA that
such breaches could give rise to the termination of the License; the fine ENREJA
imposed on ENJASA took into consideration that ENJASA had no previous
records of this particular type of breach.?7!

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 46/10 (dated 16 March 2010), which sanctioned
ENJASA for breaching anti-money laundering rules by making irregular
payments in Casino Golden Dreams of prizes in excess of ARS 10,000 in cash
rather than by check, and which was confirmed by Resolution No. 106/10 (dated
3 May 2010), ENREJA rejected ENJASA’s defence that the action was time-

268 Exhibit C-155. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 277-280; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 170-177.
269 Exhibit ARA-45. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 281-285; Respondent's Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 178-184.
210 Exhibit C-153. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 286-289; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 185-191
21 Exhibit C-016. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 290-294; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 192-203.

75

barred and that no obligation existed to pay prizes in excess of ARS 10,000 by
check; ENREJA also took into consideration ENJASA’s history of recidivism
and imposed a fine.?””

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 104/10 (dated 3 May 2010), which sanctioned
ENJASA for paying prizes in Casino Golden Dreams in excess of ARS 40,000
without properly recording them; ENJASA acknowledged the infringement, but
invoked material errors of employees of the casino, who had not reported the
matter to the authorities, as an excuse; for ENREJA, the responsibility for the
breach rested solely with the operator and it imposed the maximum fine of ARS
300,000 (USD 77,160), taking into consideration the four prior administrative
inquiries for similar breaches; ENREJA also warned ENJASA about “the effects
that new breaches could have on the legal framework of the license” and
admonished that, in case of new breaches, ENJASA could lose its License under
Article 6 of Decree No. 3616/99.773

— In ENREJA’s Resolutions Nos. 128/10,?4 129/10,°7> and 130/10°”° (all dated 18
May 2010) and Resolutions Nos. 151/10,?77 152/10,°78 and 153/10?” (all dated 7
June 2010), which sanctioned ENJASA for irregularities in the operation of slot
machines, ENREJA discovered, following inspections carried out between 2009
and 2010, that ENJASA had operated unauthorized slot machines and machines
with betting amounts and prizes that differed from the ones approved by
ENREJA; ENREJA rejected ENJASA’s excuse that these breaches merely
consisted of minor clerical errors and sanctioned ENJASA with partial and
temporary suspensions of the License.?*°

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 161/10 (dated 15 June 2010), which sanctioned
ENJASA for paying prizes in excess of ARS 10,000 in cash, and for failing to

identify the winners of a poker tournament in Casino Salta, ENREJA imposed a

22 Exhibit ARA-168. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 295-299; Respondent’s
Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 204-213.

213 Exhibit C-152. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 300-306; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 214-226.

274 Exhibit C-158 (Casino Rosario de Lerma).

275 Exhibit C-159 (Casino Salvador Mazza).

276 Exhibit C-160 (Casino Cafayate).

277 Exhibit C-161 (Casino JV Gonzalez).

278 Exhibit C-162 (Casino Pichinal).

279 Exhibit C-163 (Casino General Giiemes).

280 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 307-340; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
236-260.

  

76

fine, taking into consideration ENJASA’s recidivism; ENREJA rejected
ENJASA’s request for reconsideration which alleged that too much time had
lapsed between the breaches and the initiation of the administrative inquiry and
that prizes in excess of ARS 10,000 did not have to be paid by check.?*!

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 200/10 (dated 27 July 2010), which sanctioned
ENJASA for opening a casino in the town of Metan without authorization,
ENREJA informed ENJASA that it could revoke its License, but, as it felt that
ENJASA had not acted with malice or in bad faith, only a fine was imposed under
the condition that ENJASA would cure the breaches within 60 days.?°?

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 178/12 (dated 10 July 2012), which sanctioned
ENJASA for the use of the wrong number of balls in a lottery drawing, erroneous
publications of results, and other irregularities in lottery games, ENREJA
considered these breaches to be “very serious” as they would “hinder and
adversely affect the transparency that must be maintained at all times, especially
when the operation was granted by means of a State permit;”?*? ENREJA
considered that ENJASA, while in good faith, had acted carelessly, negligently,
and imprudently, imposing, Respondent submits, an appropriate fine, considering
the number of breaches and their seriousness.7**

— In ENREJA’s Resolution No. 161/13 (dated 28 May 2013), which sanctioned
ENJASA for modifying prize limits without requesting authorization and for
operating unauthorized jackpots in Casino Golden Dreams and Casino Salta,
ENREJA imposed the maximum fines of ARS 200,000 and 500,000,
respectively, taking into consideration ENJASA’s history of recidivism as
demonstrated by similar breaches sanctioned in Resolutions Nos. 286/09, 128/09,

129/10, and 200/10.285

238. Respondent submits that the above Resolutions demonstrate that ENJASA had

committed serious and repeated violations of the regulatory framework applicable to

281 Exhibit C-154. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 341-346; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 227-235.

282 Exhibit C-165. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 346-347; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 261-263.

283 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 267.

284 Exhibit C-166. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 348-351; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 264-267.

285 Exhibit C-154. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 352-355; Respondent’s Rejoinder
on the Merits, paras. 268-269.

77

operating games of chance even before the investigations that resulted in the revocation
of ENJASA’s license.*° Respondent also points out that ENJASA’s argument that
certain mistakes by its employees were involuntary and due to the employees’ lack of
knowledge of specific regulations resulting from insufficient training is incompatible
with the admission of Claimants’ own witnesses that ENJASA’s employees were trained,

especially as regards anti-money laundering measures.7*’

239. Respondent also observes that ENJASA in most cases simply paid the fines, consenting
to and accepting the interpretation of the rules that led to the application of such fines.”*
Only in five instances did ENJASA file an administrative appeal, but did not resort to

domestic courts, thereby consenting to the administrative sanctions applied.?°?

240. Respondent concludes that the above Resolutions, with the inquiries and sanctions they
encompass, demonstrate that ENREJA performed its regulatory control over ENJASA
from the very beginning, and not only after Governor Urtubey took office in December
2007.7 In its investigations, ENREJA followed a strict internal procedure, granting
ENJASA an opportunity to file a defence and submit evidence. ENREJA acted within
the scope of its powers, took action in due time, and imposed sanctions that were
proportionate to the seriousness of the breach and that gradually increased in view of

ENJASA’s recidivism and lack of organization.??!

241.

Respondent also stresses that, contrary to Claimants’ arguments, the Acta Acuerdo did
not acknowledge that ENJASA had not committed any breaches of the regulatory
framework in place. The second paragraph of the Acta Acuerdo merely acknowledged
that (i) ENJASA and its controlling shareholder, L&E, had performed the capital increase

and their investment in tourism, and (ii) there had been no breaches of the terms of

286 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 2, 21-22.

?87 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, para. 20.

288 Resolution No. 128/10 (Exhibit C-158); Resolution No. 130 (Exhibit C-160); Resolution No. 151/10 (Exhibit
C-161); Resolution No. 152/10 (Exhibit C-162); Resolution No. 178/12 (Exhibit C-166); Resolution No. 200/10
(Exhibit C-165); Resolution No. 232/08 (Exhibit C-155); Resolution No. 244/08 (Exhibit ARA-45); Resolution
No. 286/09 (Exhibit C-153); Resolution No. 39/10 (Exhibit C-164); Resolution No.104/07 (Exhibit C-240);
Resolution No. 129/10 (Exhibit C-159); Resolution No. 153/10 (Exhibit C-163); Resolution No. 31/08 (Exhibit
C-150).

289 Resolution No. 104/10 (Exhibit C-152); Resolution No. 15/05 (Exhibit C-239); Resolution No. 161/10 (Exhibit
C-157); Resolution No. 32/08 (Exhibit C-151); Resolution No. 43/10 (Exhibit ARA-43); Respondent Post-
Hearing Brief, para. 32.

290 Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 273-274.

2°! Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 363-375; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
169, 273-284.

78

ENJASA’s Stock Purchase Agreement.” The terms of the Acta Acuerdo, Respondent
submits, are clear and restrictive. It contained no statement on any other type of breaches,

let alone breaches after the Acta Acuerdo had been signed on 20 April 2008.7

3. The Revocation of ENJASA’s License Constituted a Regular Exercise
of ENREJA’s Powers
242. Respondent further submits that the revocation of ENJASA’s license did not, as
submitted by Claimants, constitute an abuse of ENREJA’s supervisory powers. On the
contrary, in Respondent’s view, the revocation of the License had taken place as part of
the regular exercise of ENREJA’s powers. The charges brought against ENJASA in the
three investigations that lead to the issuance of Resolution No. 240/13 were all well-
founded. The sanction imposed on ENJASA, that is, the revocation of its License, was

justified and proportionate and did not violate any due process rights.

a) Charges Underlying Resolution No. 240/13

243. Respondent submits that ENREJA’s conclusions in Resolution No. 240/13, which lead
to the revocation of ENJASA’s license, were derived from investigations into three sets
of incidents that all qualified as serious breaches of the regulatory framework in place in
the Province of Salta. In drawing its conclusions, ENREJA accurately had investigated
the factual record and correctly had applied the regulatory framework in place. The
serious breaches ENREJA found were an appropriate basis for revoking ENJASA’s

license.

qd) Allegations in Resolution No. 380/12

244. In respect of Resolution No. 380/12, in which ENREJA had charged ENJASA with
having breached anti-money laundering rules in its lottery operations and by making a
payment in respect of a prize won in a slot machine game, Respondent observes that
Claimants do not dispute the facts giving rise to the breaches identified by ENREJA in
Resolution No. 380/12; they merely attempt to evade their consequences by alleging that
the breaches were due to unintentional human errors by those in charge of the respective

games of chance. Respondent submits that these excuses are inadmissible.** A purported

22 Memorandum of Agreement between UNIREN and ENJASA (7 May 2008) Second Item (Exhibit C-131);
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 42.

?°3 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 182, footnote 204; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits,
paras. 41-45.

2°4 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 355-358.

79

human error by the lottery agent would not justify the late registration and payment of an
expired prize; nor would the submission of the winning ticket together with Claimants’
Reply on the Merits in the present proceeding cure ENJASA’s failure to submit the ticket
to ENREJA at the time of the investigation.?°>

(2) Allegations in Resolution No. 381/12

245. Inrespect of Resolution No. 381/12, which concerned breaches of anti-money laundering
tules in live games, Respondent observes that spread sheets and records that ENJASA
kept internally to control payments to gamblers at gaming tables at Casino Salta and
Casino Golden Dreams revealed that, in the audited period, not fewer than 52 payments
exceeding ARS 10,000 had been made for prizes won at live gaming tables. These
payments had been made in cash or by means of “internal checks”; in addition, the
required identification of the winners in the anti-money laundering book was insufficient,
even though ENJASA, Respondent argues, had specific and detailed knowledge of the
players’ winnings and of the amounts paid thanks to the internal records they kept.
According to Respondent, Claimants’ contention that these records were kept only for
statistical purposes lacks credibility. In other words, ENJASA, which held the records,
could easily have complied with the legal requirements to make the proper registrations
of the payments and of the identity of the players in the anti-money laundering book.
However, Respondent submits, ENJASA totally disregarded the anti-money laundering
rules in the instances underlying the investigation.”°° There was no excuse for ENJASA’s

failing to record payments in excess of ARS 10,000 in the anti-money laundering book.

246. Respondent also rejects Claimants’ interpretation of the regulatory framework in place.
For Respondent, it is beyond question that, since 1 May 2012, prizes in excess of ARS
10,000 had to be paid by non-transferable check. At this point, Resolution No. 26/00 was
superseded by ENREJA’s Resolution No. 90/12, which made explicit the obligations
under Article 5 of Law No. 7020 of the licensee to (i) pay all prizes exceeding ARS
10,000 by check or wire transfer to foreign accounts; (ii) keep records of such payments
and any other relevant information about clients where grounds to suspect money
laundering existed; and (iii) appoint a person who is responsible for the functions and
obligations established by regulations for games of chance. In addition, Resolution No.

295

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 350-354.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 420-432; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
329-338: Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 179.

296

80

247.

248.

90/12 expanded the term for the obligation to keep and preserve documents from 2 to 10
years and set new requirements for the payment of prizes by check for amounts of up to

ARS 50,000.22”

However, Respondent submits that already before the enactment of Resolution No.
90/12, ENREJA considered that ENJASA had an obligation to pay all prizes in excess of
ARS 10,000 by check or wire transfer and to identify the individuals to whom such prizes
were paid. Although the legislative texts did not state so expressly, in Respondent’s view,
Article 5 of Law No. 7020 and ENREJA’s Resolution No. 26/00 already required that
prizes in excess of ARS 10,000 had to be paid by non-transferable check.” Article 5 of
Law No. 7020 imposed certain anti-money laundering measures on ENJASA whenever
a quantitative, objective criterion — i.e., payment of prizes in excess of ARS 10,000 — or
a qualitative criterion — i.e., the existence of “a suspicious transaction” — existed. In the
first case, the identity of the beneficiary had to be registered and the check had to be non-
transferrable; in the second case, the transaction needed to be reported. For Respondent,
a comprehensive and harmonious interpretation of Article 5 of Law No. 7020, which
respects its goal and purpose, thus required the licensee to pay all prizes in excess of ARS
10,000 by check or wire transfer.?°? Otherwise, it would simply be sufficient for the
licensee to decide not to pay prizes by check or wire transfer to be exempt from the
obligation to identify individuals, although such payment would be a suspicious
transaction. Such an interpretation would, however, go against the very purpose of Law

No. 7020.3°°

Respondent also points out that ENREJA had clarified this consequence of Article 5 of
Law No. 7020 vis-a-vis ENJASA and had indicated to ENJASA, on different occasions,
how payments to customers needed to be recorded.*°! Thus, ENREJA had insisted, in
several of its earlier resolutions addressed to ENJASA, that payments over ARS 10,000

302

had to be made by check and demanded compliance with this requirement In addition,

before Resolution No. 90/12 explicitly required to make payments of prizes above ARS

257 Resolution 90/12 of 24 April 2012, applicable on | May 2012 (Art. 7); Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on
the Merits, para. 237.

?°8 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 140.

2° Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 148-152.

300 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 173-175, 206-208, 213.

301 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 177, 279-280.

302 For example, Resolution No. 32/08 (11 March 2008) (Exhibit C-151); Resolution No. 232/08 (18 November
2008) (Exhibit C-155); Resolution No. 104/10 (3 May 2010) (Exhibit C-152); Resolution No. 106/10 (3 May
2010) (Exhibit C-156); Resolution No. 161/10 (15 June 2010) (Exhibit C-157).

81

10,000 by check, ENJASA had expressly acknowledged that Article 5 of Law No. 7020
obliged it to do so.*°? ENJASA has also never challenged ENREJA’s point of view, nor

questioned the fines imposed because of violations of that requirement.*°+

249. In respect of the cash payments made in September 2011 to two customers in Casino

Salta, Respondent argues that such payments by ENJASA to customers, one of which
had not even played, encouraged players to play with third-party funds and, by
prolongation, gave rise to money laundering. Such payments did therefore not comply

with the anti-money laundering regulations either.*°>

250. Finally, Respondent rejects Claimants’ argument that Article 49 of Law No. 7020 time-

barred ENREJA’s conduct because the administrative inquiry in question had started
more than one year after the facts had occurred. Respondent submits that the one-year
statute of limitations established by Article 49 of Law No. 7020 does not apply to
breaches of Article 5. Instead, according to Respondent, the five-year time-bar in Articles
62 and 67 of the Criminal Code applied to sanctions taken on the basis of Article 13 of
Law No. 7020. However, regardless of whether a one-year or a five-year statute of
limitations applied, the repeated breaches by ENJASA of anti-money laundering rules,
as found in ENREJA’s Resolutions Nos. 31/08, 46/10, and 161/10, prevented the statute
of limitations from expiring.*°° Due to ENJASA’s successive failures to record prizes in
excess of ARS 10,000 in violation of anti-money laundering rules, no statute of limitation

would apply to the breaches identified by ENREJA in Resolution No. 381/12.

(3) Allegations in Resolution No. 384/12

251. In respect of the charges in Resolution No. 384/12 that ENJASA had hired operators

without ENREJA’s authorization contrary to Article 5 of Law No. 7020, Respondent
observes that Decree No. 2126/98 had granted ENJASA an exclusive license for the
operation of games of chance in the Province of Salta. The only exceptions to this
exclusivity were licenses granted by BPAS in 1999 to two other operators for Casino de

las Nubes and Casino Central, which expired in 2003,*’ and the possibility that non-

303 ENJASA’s letter of 30 August 2005 (Exhibit ARA-193); ENJASA’s letter of 10 September 2005 (Exhibit

ARA-195); Request for Reconsideration against Resolution No. 46/10 (Exhibit ARA-239); Request for
Reconsideration against Resolution No. 104/10 (Exhibit ARA-165); Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, paras.
157-160; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 279.

304 Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 161-164.

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras, 341-346.

306 Respondent’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 25, 188-194.
307 Resolution No. 411/99 of | September 1999 (Exhibit RA-002).

82

252.

253.

254.

profit organizations, authorized by ENREJA, could operate bingos and raffles.*°*
Claimants’ allegation that some of the operators of games of chance had been authorized
by BPAS before ENJASA acquired its License and were entitled to continue operating
thereafter was therefore incorrect. Except for the two licenses explicitly maintained by
BPAS for Casino de las Nubes and Casino Central, all licenses granted by BPAS before

1998 were terminated once ENJASA had been granted its exclusive license. *°°

Respondent further rebuts Claimants’ allegation that ENREJA was fully aware of the
existence of third-party operators of slot machines and had accepted their involvement.
For instance, any payments of the canon fee for the operation of games of chance that
were made by third parties were actually made on ENJASA’s behalf and ENREJA was

therefore unaware of the true origin of such payments.*!°

b) The Revocation of ENJASA’s License Was Justified and
Proportionate
Respondent stresses that the revocation of ENJASA’s license by Resolution No. 240/13
was fully justified. In terms of competence, ENREJA had the disciplinary power to issue
the revocation on the basis of Article 13 of Law No. 7020. Article 13, Respondent
submits, authorized ENREJA to sanction ENJASA for violations or breaches of Article
5 of Law No. 7020, Resolutions Nos. 26/00 and 90/12, and of the license agreement,
which contained the obligation to comply with Law No. 7020.*!' One of the sanctions
mentioned expressly in that provision — although the most severe one — is the revocation
of a license. Article 13 also requires that the sanction is proportionate to the violation
committed. Respondent submits that, in the present instance, the revocation of the

License was a just, fair, and proportionate sanction.

Respondent argues that Claimants incorrectly allege that Article 13 was superseded in
2001 by the enactment of Law No. 7133, which amended Law No. 7020 and introduced
anew provision on sanctions into Law No. 7020, namely Article 41. It is true that Article
41 did not provide for the revocation of a license as a possible sanction, but only provided
for fines, disqualification, seizure, and/or closure of gaming locations.*!* Claimants,

however, incorrectly submit, Respondent argues, that Article 13 was abolished and that

308 Resolution No. 3616/99, Annex I, Art. 1.1.1. (Exhibit RA-010).
3 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras, 308-309.

310 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras, 304-307.

31! Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras, 288-295.

312 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 15-16.

83

ENREJA thus could only issue sanctions on the basis of Article 41 of Law No. 7020.
ENREJA could, therefore, still revoke ENJASA’s license on the basis of Article 13.°!>

255. Respondent submits that Law No. 7133 did not replace Article 13 with Article 41. Rather,

Law No. 7020 now has two different provisions that allow for the imposition of
sanctions: one for violations or breaches of gaming regulations and the license
agreement, which are subject to the sanctions laid down in Article 13, and one for
administrative infractions which can be sanctioned on the basis of Article 41. For
Respondent, the fact that Article 13 of Law No. 7020 was reproduced in its entirety in
the Official Bulletin of the Province of Salta when the full text of Law No. 7020, as
amended by Law No. 7133, was published, confirms the continued validity of Article
13.344

256. Furthermore, Respondent submits that Law No. 7020, including its Article 13, applies as

a mandatory regulation of the gaming sector in the Province of Salta. Furthermore,
ENJASA’s license agreement also confirms that Law No. 7020, including its Article 13,
apply in relation to ENJASA. Contrary to Claimants’ argument, the license agreement
does not exclude the application of Article 13; on the contrary, it confirms the validity of

Article 13 and its application to the relationship between ENREJA and ENJASA.*5

257. As for the proportionality of the revocation of ENJASA’s license, in Respondent’s view,

Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12 amply established ENJASA’s manifold
breaches of anti-money laundering regulations. Moreover, before 2012, ENJASA had
committed many other serious breaches of anti-money laundering regulations. Thus,
Respondent submits, these previous breaches could, and arguably had to, be taken into

consideration in devising the appropriate sanction.

258. Respondent further submits that anti-money laundering regulations concern the

313
314
3is

316

preservation of the social and financial order. A breach of these regulations, in its view,
affects the public interest, which ENREJA had to protect. The importance of the
regulations, coupled with the consideration that the sanctions previously imposed on
ENJASA during the term of the License did not have a deterrent effect on ENJASA,

made it impossible not to impose the revocation of the License as a sanction.*!®

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 288-295.
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 28-30, 293; Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 41-46.
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 25-27, 290-292; Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 35-55.
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 3.

84

259. Respondent also submits that, in the past, ENREJA had applied sanctions gradually and
progressively from warnings, over fines, to temporarily suspending certain local

operations. The following overview indicates this development:

ENREJA’s Resolution No. Breach of resolution and inaccuracy Warning
244/08 (Exhibit RA 45) in the information on poker

tournaments
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Lack of authorization of betting limit Fine
015/05 (C-239)
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Irregularities in slot machines Fine
104/07 (C-240)
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Violation of anti-money laundering Fine
031/08 (C-150) regulations
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Violation of anti-money laundering Fine
032/08 (C-151) regulations
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Violation of anti-money laundering Fine
232/08 (C-155) regulations
ENREJA’s Resolution No. Unauthorized modification of betting Fine
286/09 (C-153) chart
ENREJA’s Resolution No. Unauthorized implementation of a Fine
039/10 (C-164) Jackpot
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Violation of anti-money laundering Fine
106/10 (C-156) regulations
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Violation of anti-money laundering Fine
104/10 (C-152) regulations
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Violation of anti-money laundering Fine
161/10 (C-157) regulations
ENREJA’s Resolution No. Unauthorized opening of a casino Fine
200/10 (C-165)
ENREJA’s Resolution No. 7émbola lottery game irregularities Fine
178/12 (C-166)
ENREJA’s Resolution No. Modification of highest prize at poker Fine

161/13 (C-154)

tables and unauthorized
implementation of a Jackpot

ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Irregularities in slot machines Suspension of the
128/10 (C-158) License
ENREJA’s Resolution No. Modification of the approved betting Suspension of the
129/10 (C-159) chart License
ENREJA’s Resolution No. Modification of the approved betting Suspension of the

130/10 (C-160)

chart

85

License

ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Irregularities in slot machines Suspension of the

151/10 (C-161) License
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Irregularities in slot machines Suspension of the
152/10 (C-162) License
ENREJA’s Resolution No. _ Irregularities in slot machines Suspension of the
153/10 (C-163) License
ENREJA’s Resolution No. Breach of anti-money laundering Revocation of the
240/13 (C-031) regulations as a consequence of License

failure to record lottery prize

payments

260. Respondent also points out that, since 2010, ENREJA had substantially increased the
amount of fines due to ENJASA’s recidivism, as required by Article 46 of Law No.

7020.*!’ The amount of fines, as submitted by Respondent, developed as follows:

 

Fines imposed by ENREJA, including amounts for repeat breaches
(Law No. 7,020, Article 46)

= Sanction m Recidivism
500,900

450,000

3sqo00
300,00
253000
20000

vss

ss

~.._f1l l
= - i.

8 os i on i an Wo obi = Bs et ae a es 1

261. The increasing intensity of the sanctions notwithstanding, Respondent submits, ENJASA
continued to breach the regulatory framework in place, as the breaches identified in
Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12 show. ENREJA had also repeatedly warned
ENJASA that it had the power to revoke the License in the event of further breaches or

violations of the gaming regulations in place.*'* Under these circumstances, Respondent

37 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 28.

318 See Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 23 (referring to Resolution No. 39/10 (9 March 2010) (Exhibit C-
164); Resolution No. 104/10 (30 May 2010) (Exhibit C-152); Resolution No. 107/10 (3 May 2010) (Exhibit ARA-
231); Resolution No. 128/10 (20 April 2010) (Exhibit C-158; Resolution No. 161/10 (15 June 2010) (Exhibit C-
157).

86

concludes, the revocation of ENJASA’s license to operate games of chance in Salta

remained the only possible sanction for ENREJA.

c) Respect of ENJASA’s Due Process Rights

262. Respondent also submits that ENJASA’s due process rights and its right of defence were

at all times respected. Respondent points out that ENREJA had repeatedly warned
ENJASA that it had the power to revoke the License in the event of breach or violation
of the anti-money laundering regulations.*!° Resolution No. 240/13 also contained a
detailed explanation of the reasons and grounds leading to the revocation of the License.
Each administrative file referred to in Resolution No. 240/13 was processed separately
and maintained its autonomy. Moreover, each of these files, individually considered,

warranted the revocation of the License.*”°

263. Respondent further submits that, in all administrative inquiries, ENJASA was informed

of the charges on which it was being investigated and the evidence relied upon.
Furthermore, ENJASA was granted sufficient time to file a defence and to submit the
appropriate evidence. It could also always access the files — which it did — without any

restrictions from ENREJA.*7!

264. Finally, Respondent points out, ENREJA considered the arguments raised in ENJASA’s

answers, but concluded that these answers did not affect the sanction imposed. ENJASA
was entitled to challenge ENREJA’s decisions with ample room for submitting

arguments and evidence.

265. Respondent also points out that ENJASA submitted a recourse for reconsideration of

Resolution No. 240/13 on 28 August 2013. ENREJA addressed this Recourse and
confirmed the revocation of ENJASA’s license through Resolution No. 315/13 on 19
November 2013. In this context, Respondent refers to her expert, Prof. Marcer, who
confirmed that ENREJA “analysed and addressed all the arguments stated in the appeal
for review, and denied the appeal.”**? ENJASA also filed a complaint with the

319 Thid. See also Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 457-460; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the

Merits, paras. 367-368.

+20 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 455-456; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
365-366.

821 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 449-456, 461-465; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the
Merits, paras. 359-364.

Marcer I, para. 60.

87

Administrative Court of the Province of Salta on 2 February 2014,*?* but failed to move
the case forward until its complaint had to be withdrawn as a consequence of the
Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction in the present proceeding. Consequently, ENJASA

abandoned the claim and, with ENREJA’s consent, withdrew the appeal.*7*

266. All of the above shows, Respondent submits, that due process and ENJASA’s right of

defence were at all times respected.

D. Respondent’s Analysis of the Law

267. In Respondent’s view, the revocation of ENJASA’s license, followed by the appointment
of new operators and the transfer of ENJASA’s operations and employees to new
operators, was a lawful exercise of the host State’s regulatory powers. It did not,

Respondent submits, constitute a breach of either Articles 2(1) or 4 of the BIT.
1. Applicable Law

268. Respondent contends that the law applicable to the dispute pursuant to the first sentence
of Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention is the law agreed by the Parties; such an
agreement is contained in Article 8(6) of the BIT,*?> which provides in the translation

provided by Respondent:

The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the law of the
Contracting Party involved in the dispute including its rules on conflict of
laws, the provisions of this Agreement, and the terms of any specific
agreement concluded in relation to such an investment, if any, as well as the
applicable principles of international law.

269. According to this provision, Respondent submits, the applicable law in the present

proceeding is (i) Argentine law; (ii) the BIT itself — which should not be interpreted in

323 Complaint of 2 February 2014 (Exhibit C-221).

54 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 466-477; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
369-378.

*25 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 506-508. Respondent’s argument in her Rejoinder on
the Merits, paras. 411-412, is different, however. While in the Counter-Memorial, Respondent argues that
Argentine law applies pursuant to Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention as the law “agreed by the parties”,
the Rejoinder Respondent suggests that Argentine law forms part of the applicable law as the law applicable “in
the absence of such agreement,” which is consistent with the law applicable under the BIT. Both arguments lead
to the inclusion of Argentine law as part of the applicable law, but the two approaches seem otherwise
incompatible.

 

88

isolation from the remaining rules of international law;*”° and (iii) the principles of

international law on the subject.*?”

270. Contrary to Claimants’ argument, Respondent submits that Argentine law is not merely
part of the factual matrix of the dispute, but part of the applicable law.*** Amongst other
things, Argentine law will “determine the nature and scope of the investor’s rights arising

from its investment”?

and “is part of the law to be applied in order to determine whether
or not the Treaty has been complied with.”**° Argentine law would not be relied upon to
justify a breach of international law, but has to be applied in accordance with the
agreement of the Parties. In any event, in order to rely on Article 27 of the VCLT,
Claimants would have to establish “a clear and concrete conflict” between Argentine law
and international law, as they are both applicable to the dispute.**! In sum, Respondent
submits, “this Tribunal is required to harmoniously apply Argentine domestic law, the
BIT and the relevant principles of international law, so that none of them precludes the

application of the others.” **?

271.

Respondent further points out that Claimants have accepted the regulatory authority of
the Province of Salta over the gaming industry. In Respondent’s view, the Tribunal has
to consider whether the revocation of ENJASA’s license constituted a regular exercise
of ENREJA’s supervisory powers under Law No. 7020 or whether the revocation

constituted an abuse of those powers.

272. Respondent stresses that, as many arbitral tribunals have recognized, investment
tribunals must exercise a large degree of deference vis-a-vis the determinations of local
authorities. Respondent invokes, inter alia, the award in Koch Minerals, which stated that
“a tribunal cannot simply put itself in the position of the State and weigh the measure
anew, particularly with hindsight.” Similarly, the tribunal in Crystallex held that “it is

not for an investor-state tribunal to second-guess the substantive correctness of the

526 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 514

327 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 510; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 413.
328 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 414-415.

>?° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 513; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 415-
418, 420.

330 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 517; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 419-
420.

53! Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 511-512; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para.
419.

332 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 515, 517; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para.
420.

333 Koch Minerals Sarl and Koch Nitrogen International Sarl v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/11/19, Award (30 October 2017) para. 7.20 (Exhibit ALRA-305).

89

reasons which an administration were to put forward in its decisions, or to question the
importance assigned by the administration to certain policy objectives over others.”>**4
For the tribunal in SD Myers v Canada, a “tribunal does not have an open-ended mandate

99335

to second-guess government decision making, and the tribunal in Glamis Gold v

United States did not consider it as its role “to supplant its own judgment of underlying

factual material and support for that of a qualified domestic agency.”?7°

273. For Respondent, it is clear that ENREJA was best positioned to assess the facts and
impose a sanction, due both to its technical expertise and its direct knowledge of the

situation.**”

274. Referring to Laboratoires Servier v Poland, Respondent also insists that Argentina’s
international liability should not be presumed.*** Claimants who allege a violation of the

BIT have the burden of proof.**°

2. Breach of Article 4 of the BIT

275. In respect of Article 4 of the BIT, Respondent submits that the revocation of ENJASA’s
license was a lawful exercise of the host State’s regulatory powers and therefore
constituted neither an indirect expropriation of Claimants’ investment in Argentina, nor
a direct expropriation of a relevant asset of ENJASA that would entitle Claimants to the

payment of compensation pursuant to Article 4(3) of the BIT.

a) No Indirect Expropriation under Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT

276. As for the claim for an indirect expropriation contrary to Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT,
Respondent contends that Claimants have failed to show that the three cumulative
requirements for an indirect expropriation have been met in this case, namely that (i) the
contested measures interfere with the investor’s property rights that qualify as

investments; (ii) the interference be substantial; and (iii) the government measures that

34 Crystallex International Corporation y. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)11/2,
Award (4 April 2016) para. 583 (Exhibit CL-203); Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 237.

35 §.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Partial Award (13 November 2000) para.
261 (Exhibit ALRA-64).

336 Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Award (8 June 2009) para. 779 (Exhibit
ALRA-183).

337 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 242.

38 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 244; Les Laboratoires Servier, S.A.S. Biofarma, S.A.S. Arts et
Techniques du Progres S.A.S. v. Republic of Poland, UNCITRAL, Award (14 February 2012) paras 583-584
(Exhibit CL-193).

3 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras, 243-244.

 

90

constitute the interference do not qualify as regulatory measures that have been adopted

under the State’s police power. *“°

277. Regarding the first two requirements, Respondent submits that Claimants’ arguments to

demonstrate substantial interference are “false”.*4! According to Respondent, no “forced
transfer” of ENJASA’s personnel, premises, or title to assets had occurred. Decree No.
3330/13 of 20 November 2013 did not transfer ENJASA’s license to other operators, as
the License had already been revoked by Resolution No. 240/13 of 13 August 2013. The
Government of the Province of Salta only granted, at first, provisional permits for new
operators*” and eventually issued new licenses to them in order to keep the gaming
business going.*** For its part, Decree No. 3330/13 sought to preserve jobs by obliging
the permit holders to absorb the employees leaving ENJASA or other operators that also
stopped operating games of chance. There was no “forced transfer” of ENJASA’s
premises or assets. The Temporary Plan, which was approved by Decree No. 3330/13,
required the new operators to prove that their facilities were authorized and that they had
the devices to operate games of chance. Respondent points out that Claimants’ own
valuation experts confirmed that there was no “forced transfer” of ENJASA’s premises
or assets, but that some were sold voluntarily to the new operators and resulted in an

economic benefit for ENJASA.*4

278. According to Respondent, Claimants do not contend that, after the revocation of

ENJASA’s license, they were prevented from participating in the process to obtain
temporary operating permits and eventually licenses; Claimants recognize that they were

offered to continue operating Casino Salta, but Claimants did not accept this offer.*4°

279. In addition, after the revocation of the License, ENJASA continued operating the

Sheraton Hotel in Salta until it was sold for a real estate value of USD 4.2 million; also,
the goodwill of the hotel was sold later on.*#° Respondent contends that the sale of the

99347

hotel “proves that there was a purchaser interested in the operation of the hotel; also

*° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 522-523; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.

430-431.

341 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 432.

+ Decree 3330/13 of 20 November 2013, Art. 2 (Exhibit C-033).

33 Decree No. 1502/14 of 29 May 2014 (Exhibit C-176).

+4 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 539-545; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
433-437.

35 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 406.

Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 438; Dapena II, para. 14; Official Gazette of the Province of Salta

of 5 December 2016, p. 16 (Exhibit ARA-060).
+47 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 438.

91

the hotel to this day continues operating. Respondent moreover stresses that Claimants
have not submitted evidence to substantiate their allegation that the hotel only had limited

value for them. The sale of the hotel and of its goodwill refutes this allegation.***

280. As for the third requirement for an indirect expropriation, Respondent contends that a
distinction must be made between “compensable expropriation” and “non-compensable
regulation.” In order to distinguish between the two, most tribunals take into account the
purpose of the measure taken by the State, and recognize the State’s power to restrict
private property rights without compensation through regulatory measures that are
adopted in good faith, in accordance with due process, and in pursuit of a legitimate
purpose. *“? Respondent notes that Claimants admit the existence of the concept of non-
compensable regulation, although they incorrectly contend that that concept does not

apply to the facts of this case because its requirements are not met.>*”

281.

Concerning a State’s regulatory powers, Respondent refers to awards that have found
that it is not the function of an investment tribunal to second-guess the policies that a
State may deem useful or necessary for the public good, and that “the standard of review
of a State’s conduct to be undertaken by an international tribunal includes a significant
measure of deference towards the State making the impugned measure.”?>! Respondent
submits that the public purpose of ENREJA’s measures to ensure compliance with anti-
money laundering rules, which were themselves in line with international standards,

cannot be denied.**?

282. Respondent further contends that, far from abusing its powers, ENREJA had warned
ENJASA in the past that it could lose its License if it continued breaking the rules.*°?
The revocation of ENJASA’s license was a measure adopted within ENREJA’s powers,
it was reasonable and proportionate in view of ENJASA’s serious and repeated breaches.

It was adopted following a long list of lesser sanctions and warnings.*>+ Respondent also

+48 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 524-528; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
438-440.

+49 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 529-530.

35° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 531-532.

35! Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 422-443.

352 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 534-536; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para.
444,

353 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 538; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 448.
354 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 533; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 447,
449,

92

argues that due process was respected at all times, and ENJASA was granted extensions

for consulting records, submitting answers, and offering evidence.**>

283. Finally, Respondent refers to the principle recognized in international law that no claim

can be brought under international law where an agreement has been revoked according
to its terms. Respondent contends that this was the case here, considering that ENJASA’s
license had been revoked in accordance with its express provisions and the applicable

regulatory framework.?°°

b) No Direct Expropriation under Article 4(3) of the BIT

284. Respondent also submits that Claimants are not entitled to compensation or damages

under Article 4(3) of the BIT. In this context, Respondent contends that Article 4(3) of
the BIT does not protect ENJASA’s license. Respondent invokes two reasons for this.
First, the License does not qualify as a “financial asset” (“activos financieros”), which is
the term used by the authentic Spanish version of Article 4(3) of the BIT. This term is
more restrictive than the term used by the German version of the same provision
(“Vermégenswerte”), which would translate as “activos” in Spanish or “assets” in
English. According to Respondent, interpreting Article 4(3) of the BIT by reference to
the Spanish version should be preferred over any broader interpretation based on the
German version of the BIT because the Spanish version represents “the minimum point

of agreement between the Parties to the Treaty”>°”

and therefore constitutes the meaning
which best reconciles the two texts, as required by Article 33(4) VCLT. Second,
Respondent submits, that even if Article 4(3) of the BIT were interpreted to apply to
“assets” in general, and not just to “financial assets”, its scope of protection would remain
limited to the assets of L&E, the company Claimants are immediate shareholders of; it
could not extend to the assets of ENJASA in which Claimants are only indirect

shareholders.**

355 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 538.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 546.

357 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 427.
358 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 424-429.

93

285.

286.

287.

288.

3. Fair and Equitable Treatment

In respect of Article 2(1) of the BIT, Respondent submits that the revocation of
ENJASA’s license was lawful under domestic law and did not breach any of the rights

Claimants could derive from the fair and equitable treatment standard.
a) The Scope of Fair and Equitable Treatment under the BIT

Respondent contends that the fair and equitable treatment standard referred to in Article
2(1) of the BIT forms part of customary international law; its content therefore will be
determined by its customary law origin.*°’ By being included in an investment treaty
without further specification, fair and equitable treatment does not become an
autonomous standard, but continues to reflect the customary international law minimum
standard of treatment. Respondent concludes that Article 2(1) of the BIT, interpreted in

accordance with Article 31 of the VCLT, “coincides with that customary rule.”>©

To determine the standard to apply in order to find a violation of the customary
international law minimum standard of treatment, Respondent refers to the Neer case**!
and Glamis Gold v. United States.*°? According to Respondent, “[e]ven though that
standard reflects the evolution of customary international law, the threshold for finding

99363

a violation of the standard still remains high, and the acts which have been described

as amounting to a violation of the standard include “willful neglect of duty,” “subjective
bad faith,” “manifest failure of natural justice in juridical proceedings or a complete lack
of transparency and candour in an administrative process,” and “gross denial of justice

or manifest arbitrariness.”>°*

Respondent further relies on the commentary to Article 1 of the 1967 Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (“OECD”) Draft Convention on the
Protection of Foreign Property and, in the context of NAFTA, on the NAFTA Free Trade
Commission’s interpretation to the effect that fair and equitable treatment does “not

require treatment in addition to or beyond that which is required by the customary

35 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 551-553.
360 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 454-455.
361 LFH Neer and Pauline Neer (USA) v United Mexican States, Decision (15 October 1926) IV UNRIAA 60 et

seq. (Exh

 

it ALRA-1 12), referred to in Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 557.

36 Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Award (8 June 2009) para. 616 (Exhibit
ALRA-183), referred to in Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 558.

363 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 551-558, 564.

3 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 565-567.

94

28!

291

291.

365
366
367
368
369

international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens.”*°° Respondent contends that
this position has been explicitly referred to by several States and endorsed by
international courts and tribunals, as well as international jurists.*°° Respondent further
submits that the interpretation of the NAFTA Free Trade Commission of the fair and
equitable treatment standard contained in Article 1105 of the NAFTA does not only apply
to the wording of that provision in the NAFTA, but has to be understood as reflecting

“the ordinary meaning of fair and equitable treatment.”>°”

9. Given that, according to Respondent, the fair and equitable treatment standard contained
in the BIT is equivalent to the customary international minimum standard of treatment,
Article 2(1) of the BIT does not establish a “general and absolute guarantee of legal
stability,” does not constitute an “insurance policy,” and does not support Claimants’
allegation that “the most important function of the fair and equitable treatment standard
[is] to protect the investor’s legitimate expectations.”*° To the contrary, such an

approach is not contained in the BIT or in any other BIT signed by Argentina.*?

0. Respondent contends that international law cannot be distorted by, on the one hand,
recognizing that fair and equitable treatment is equivalent to the customary international
law minimum standard and, on the other hand, “incorporating, through the backdoor, a
whole series of new concepts that are completely alien to the international minimum
standard, such as the protection of the investor’s expectations, the stability of the
regulatory framework, etc.”*7° It would be, in any event, for Claimants to demonstrate

that customary international law recognizes these concepts.>”!

Respondent further points out that several arbitral tribunals have confirmed that the
threshold for finding a violation of the international minimum standard remains high. In
Genin v Estonia, for instance, it was decided that “[a]cts that would violate this minimum

standard would include acts showing a wilful neglect of duty, an insufficiency of action

falling far below international standards, or even subjective bad faith.”?”7

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 561.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 559-563.

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 456.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 568.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 568-569; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.

457-458.

370
371

372

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 573.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 573.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 565 (quoting Alex Genin and others v. Republic of

Estonia, CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Award (25 June 2001) para. 367 (Exhibit ALRA-114)).

95

292. For Respondent, the fair and equitable treatment standard contained in the BIT is not
aimed at providing a general and absolute guarantee of legal stability or an insurance
policy that would preclude the revocation of ENJASA’s license when the conditions for

this License have not been respected.*7

293. For Respondent, the fair and equitable treatment standard contained in the BIT also does
not protect the expectations of investors. The award in Tecmed v Mexico, which relied
on the expectations of the investor as the source of the obligations incumbent upon the
host State, was much criticized, Respondent argues.*”* At the very least, as was
elaborated in Saluka v. Czech Republic, a balance would need to be struck between the
expectations of foreign investors and the legitimate right of the host State to regulate

matters in the public interest.*”°

294. Finally, Respondent observes that, as was admitted in Lauder v. Czech Republic, fair and
equitable treatment “depends heavily on a factual context”?”° and that a breach of the

standard cannot be established in the abstract.*”’ In addition, in matters of public policy,

regulatory authorities must have a “margin of appreciation”.*”°

b) Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard

295. Respondent contends that Claimants’ allegations of breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard are unsupported. In particular, Respondent contends that (i) the
revocation of ENJASA’s license was not arbitrary; (ii) due process was observed in the
proceeding that led to the revocation; (iii) there was no breach of legitimate expectations;

and (iv) there was no harassment or coercion.*”?

296. Regarding the allegation that the License was revoked in an arbitrary manner,
Respondent submits that the revocation was lawful and reasonable, was decided by

ENREJA within its powers as granted by law, following investigations and inquiries

33 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 568.

374 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 570-571 (referring to Tecnicas Medioambientales
Tecmed S.A. v. United Mexican States \CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2, Award (29 May 2003) (Exhibit CL-008)).
315 Saluka Investments B.V. v. Czech Republic, Partial Award (17 March 2006) paras. 304-307 (Exhibit ALRA-
79); Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 572.

316 Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Award (3 September 2002) para. 292 (Exhibit ALRA-113);
see also Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, 1CSID Case ARB/O1/11, Award (12 October 2005) para. 181 (Exhibit
ALRA-109).

377 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 461-462; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para.
574.

38 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 460.

5” Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 557; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
452-453, 465.

96

already in progress in relation to previous breaches or infractions, and was based on three
serious breaches, namely the irregular hiring of other gaming operators, the lack of
identification of customers of live games and the payment of prizes in cash, and the
failure to identify players of the lottery and to register prices. Given the seriousness and
repeated nature of the breaches, and having already imposed numerous, progressively
increasing sanctions for previous breaches, “the only valid solution,” Respondent

submits, was the revocation of ENJASA’s license. **°

297. Respondent also submits that the fact that the government subsequently granted a license

to the local business partners with whom ENJASA had subcontracted without proper
authorization or knowledge by ENREJA was irrelevant for determining whether

ENREJA had breached the regulatory framework by revoking ENJASA’s license.**!

298. Regarding the allegation of a lack of due process in the proceedings leading to the

revocation, Respondent contends that ENJASA’s arguments are contradictory and
untrue. According to Respondent, due process and ENJASA’s right of defense were
observed both during the revocation proceeding as well as in the administrative inquiries
filed prior to the revocation of the License. Also, sanctions were applied gradually,
reasonably, and proportionately, considering both the seriousness and the frequency of
the breaches. In particular, the revocation of the License followed several breaches by
ENJASA that were recorded in resolutions and notified to Claimants, and it was based
on substantial grounds. ENJASA was notified of the charges against it through
Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12. It was given an opportunity to respond and
submit evidence, and had deadlines extended for this purpose on many occasions.
ENJASA also had access to the relevant files at all times. Despite numerous
opportunities, the breaches by ENJASA continued and became increasingly serious and
frequent. ENREJA had also warned ENJASA of the potential consequences, including
in particular of the possibility that ENJASA might lose its License.*8? ENJASA had
therefore been able to exercise its right of defense in all phases of the administrative

proceedings that concerned the revocation of its license. ***

38° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 577-579; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.

476-485.
38! Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 580-582.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 583-590; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.

468-475.

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 248.

97

299. As regards Claimants’ expectations, Respondent reiterates that these are not protected
under the BIT. However, even if the fair and equitable treatment standard in the BIT was
to include the protection of legitimate expectations, it would still not cover Claimants’
particular expectations, which were not legitimate.*** Respondent contends that, when
Claimants acquired their indirect shareholding in ENJASA, they had been (or should
have been) aware of the regulatory framework in place in the Province of Salta and had
themselves accepted the different arrangements contained in the License. ENREJA had
the authority to impose a range of sanctions, including the revocation of the License, in
case of breach of Law No. 7020, of the License Agreement, or of other applicable
regulations. ENJASA could not expect that ENREJA would not use its regulatory and
sanctioning powers when monitoring whether games of chance operated in full
compliance with the law.*8° ENJASA could also not expect to keep the License despite
breaches of the legal framework that applied to the License, particularly after having

been sanctioned and warned that further breaches could lead to the loss of the License. **°

300. Concerning Claimants’ allegation of harassment by ENREJA through its supervisory and
monitoring activities, Respondent contends that ENREJA merely applied the law and the
provisions of ENJASA’s license, and that Claimants could not have expected otherwise.
In particular, the online monitoring system implemented in 2008 improved the
supervision of slot machines as well as of transmission systems and thus contributed

towards transparency; it could therefore not be considered as harassing conduct.?*7

301. With regard to the reasonableness and proportionality of the revocation of ENJASA’s
license, Respondent refers to the concept of proportionality as it exists in Argentine law,
where “a measure will be proportionate if it pursues a legitimate aim and is appropriate
to that end.”*** For Respondent, the prevention of money laundering is a legitimate aim
and the revocation of ENJASA’s license was appropriate to prevent money laundering
practices.**° The regulatory requirements imposed were also reasonable. For instance, it
was reasonable to require registration of payments above ARS 10,000 (an amount three

times the minimum monthly wage and more than one average monthly wage in the

384 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 492.

385 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 591-597; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
493-496,

386 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 491.

387 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 598-600; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
486-487.

388 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 252.

389 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 253 and 257.

98

private sector). After all, Respondent states, in the bigger slot machine halls, prices above
ARS 10,000 were paid on average once or twice a week and in the smaller slot machine
halls, on average once a month, while for lottery games, prizes over ARS 10,000 were

only won two or three times a week.**°

302. Respondent further submits that the revocation of ENJASA’s license had no hidden
purpose that could undermine its legitimacy.*°! Respondent also observes that the
revocation did not exclude Claimants from the gaming sector. In fact, after the
revocation, Claimants were offered to continue operating games of chance in the

Province of Salta, but refused to accept that offer.*°

303. Respondent further observes that the revocation of the License was proportionate in view

of ENJASA’s recidivism and reluctance to comply with the regulatory framework in
place in spite of sanctions imposed on prior occasions. Besides, no appropriate, but less
intrusive sanctions were available to achieve the same purpose. A measure, such as a six-
month or one-year suspension of ENJASA’s license, would have affected other interests
protected by Law No. 7020, which provides that “in order to rank the sanction,
[ENREJA] shall take into account ... the damage caused to the Provincial State and/or
private persons.”>*> Suspending ENJASA’s license for six months or a year would have
left workers in the sector unemployed and would have deprived the Province of Salta of

fiscal resources aimed at funding social and educational policies.*°*

304. Respondent finally observes with regard to proportionality, that the Province of Salta

took Claimants’ interests into consideration and revoked only ENJASA’s exclusive
license for the operation of games of chance, while offering Claimants to continue

operating casinos and leaving the operation of the five-star hotel unaffected.*°°

VI. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS OF RESPONDENT’S LIABILITY

305. As becomes clear from the Parties’ arguments on the facts of the case and their legal

3 Transcript, Day 2, p. 188 and Day 4, p. 82; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 259. The Tribunal notes,

however, that the transcript does not exactly support these numbers. It states that, for slot machines, much depends
on the frequency and that sometimes ten prizes above ARS 10,000 may be won on one day. Moreover, the
evidence does not specify whether the prizes above ARS 10,000 were won per lottery game or for all lottery
games together. Finally, no numbers were given for table games, where probably the highest prizes can be won.
3! Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 254.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 255-256.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 210.

394 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 260.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 261.

99

assessment, the Tribunal is called to determine whether conduct of the authorities of the
Province of Salta, which is attributable under international law to Respondent pursuant
to Article 4(1) of the ILC Articles, resulted in a breach of the BIT, specifically its Articles
2(1) and 4. The measures Claimants alleged to breach the BIT consist of the
administrative proceedings that resulted in the revocation of ENJASA’s exclusive license
through Resolution No. 240/13 and its confirmation in Resolution No. 315/13 and the
subsequent transfer of ENJASA’s operations to third operators. Prior conduct of the
authorities in the Province of Salta is not claimed independently to have breached the
BIT, but rather is invoked as background in support of Claimants’ submission that there

was a long-term plan to oust ENJASA of its operation in Salta’s gaming sector.

306. Functionally, the Tribunal is therefore put by the Parties into a role akin to that of an

administrative court which is asked by an affected private actor to review the legality of
actions by the executive branch of government. However, as the Tribunal will specify in
a first step, the legal standard to determine the legality of that conduct does not consist
of domestic (administrative) law, but of the standards of treatment contained in the BIT.
The Tribunal, therefore, is not asked by the Parties to make a binding determination under
domestic law of the legality of the conduct of Respondent, respectively the authorities in
the Province of Salta, as would be the case for a domestic court seized of the underlying
dispute, but is limited to assessing the legality of that conduct under international law.
The Tribunal, in other words, has to exercise a form of internationalized judicial review

of administrative action.*°°

307. This notwithstanding, in determining the legality of Respondent’s conduct under

international law, the Tribunal will have to address several questions of domestic law as
incidental questions or preliminary matters. Article 8(6) of the BIT clarifies that the
Tribunal is empowered to do so. However, rather than reviewing questions of domestic
law de novo, as would presumably be the proper course for a court in the host State sought
of the underlying dispute, and thereby replacing domestic courts in their exercise of
domestic judicial review, the Tribunal will determine any such question of domestic law,

as is appropriate for an international adjudicatory body in its position, by exercising a

To clarify, the Tribunal is not called on to decide on any claim that ENJASA may have, or have had, vis-a-vis

the authorities in the Province of Salta or the Argentine Republic, nor is it called on to decide on any claims
between the Parties to the present proceeding that may arise out of the breach of legal obligations other than the
BIT. In particular, the Tribunal does not decide on, or even “resurrect”, any “contract claims” that may exist or
have existed between Claimants and/or ENJASA and the authorities in the Province of Salta, as argued by the
Dissent, paras. 3-5, 159.

100

308.

309.

310.

certain degree of deference. After all, the Tribunal’s function in the present proceeding
is not to replace domestic courts in exercising domestic judicial review, but to exercise a
form of internationalized judicial review. However, exercising deference in the
interpretation of domestic law and in the review of domestic legality of the host State’s
conduct, does not affect the Tribunal’s task to assess the legality of that conduct under

international law and determine whether it has given rise to breaches of the BIT.*””

The Tribunal will then, in a second step, address the alleged breaches of the BIT. These
encompass breach of the rules on expropriation contained in Article 4 of the BIT and of
the fair and equitable treatment standard contained in Article 2(1) of the BIT. In
interpreting the BIT, the Tribunal applies the rules on treaty interpretation laid down in
the VCLT, which is binding upon both the Argentine Republic and the Republic of
Austria. °°’ These rules — and the interpretive canons flowing from them — are well-known
and do not need to be further expounded in the abstract. Specifically for investment
treaties, they require that treaty interpretation is not to be guided by presumptions in favor
of either investors and their home States or of host States, nor by teleological preferences

about investor-State relations that are extrinsic to the treaty commitments made.

Furthermore, the Tribunal notes that, in its analysis of the governing law, it is not limited
to the arguments or sources invoked by the Parties, but is required, under the maxim iura
novit curia or, better, iura novit arbiter, to apply the law on its own motion. This
approach corresponds to the Tribunal’s public function as an adjudicatory body that is
part of the administration of international justice. It justifies reliance on arguments and
authorities on the governing law not submitted by the Parties, provided the latter are
given an opportunity to comment on arguments and legal theories that were either not

addressed or could not reasonably be anticipated.*””

A. Applicable Law and Causes of Action

The law applicable to the merits of the present proceeding is to be determined pursuant

to Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention. According to this provision, an ICSID tribunal

5°” For the Dissent (i.a. paras. 91, 395), Article 8(6) of the BIT requires the Tribunal to apply Argentine law to the
dispute and, under the laws of the Province of Salta, the revocation of the License was a lawful sanction, taken by
ENREJA in the regular exercise of its regulatory and supervisory powers. The Tribunal does not deny that
ENREJA was entitled to exercise these regulatory powers as a matter of international law, but found that, for the
reasons explained in the Award, the revocation of ENJASA’s license did not qualify as a regular exercise of
ENREJA’s regulatory powers.

3°8 Exhibit CL-001.

39 See Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 172 (with further references).

101

311.

312.

is, in the first place, called to “decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as
may be agreed by the parties.” In the present proceeding, on the basis of Respondent’s
offer to arbitrate contained in Article 8 of the BIT, which Claimants have accepted, the
Parties have agreed on Article 8(6) of the BIT, which provides in English translation as
submitted by the Parties (with differences in translation noted), as follows:

The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the laws of

the Contracting Party involved in the dispute — including its rules on conflict
of laws [Respondent]/private international law rules [Claimants], the
provisions of this Agreement, and the terms of any specific agreements
concluded in relation to such an investment, if any, as well as the applicable
principles of international law.*°°
Pursuant to Article 8(6) of the BIT, the Tribunal is therefore empowered and required to
apply Argentine law, the BIT itself, as well as other applicable principles of international
law in resolving disputes between investors covered by the BIT and the other Contracting

State, which are submitted to international arbitration on the basis of Article 8.

This does not mean, however, that the combination of domestic law, the BIT, and other
principles of international law, which is laid down in Article 8(6) of the BIT applies
necessarily to every claim or cause of action submitted by the parties, as part of their
dispute, to an arbitral tribunal established under Article 8 of that BIT. Article 8(6) is a
choice-of-law clause for the merits of the dispute on the basis of which a tribunal
established under Article 8 of the BIT is to determine the law that applies to the causes
of action before it. In providing that the applicable law encompasses the host State’s
domestic law, the provisions of the BIT, any specific agreements concerning the
investment, and applicable principles of international law, Article 8(6) has to be seen in
the context of the jurisdictional grant under Article 8(1), which allows an investor of one
Contracting Party to bring “[a]ny dispute with regard to investments ... concerning any
subject matter governed by this Agreement” to a treaty-based ICSID tribunal. This
provision may be understood as a wide dispute settlement provision that extends
jurisdiction to a variety of different causes of actions, including claims for breach of the
BIT (ie., treaty claims), claims for breach of investor-State contracts (i.e., contract
claims), or claims for breach of domestic law, provided these claims all regard an

investment the claimant investor has made in the host State and the dispute concerns a

400 Exhibits C-001 and ARA-001.

102

313.

314.

subject matter governed by the BIT, which would encompass any issue relating to the
promotion and protection of investments that comes up in the relations between covered
investors and host State. After all, as Article 7 of the BIT clarifies, contracts between
covered investors and host State, as well as domestic law governing investor-State
relations are covered by the term “subject matter of this Agreement” in the sense of

Article 8(1) of the BIT.*°!

Each of those types of claims, or causes of action, would be governed by its own
applicable law, as determined pursuant to Article 8(6) of the BIT. A claim for breach of
an investor-State contract would be governed by the law applicable to that contract (as
determined either by the host State’s conflict-of-law rules and/or a choice-of-law clause
in that contract); a claim for breach of a host State’s domestic statute would be governed
by domestic law; and a claim for breach of the BIT would be governed by the BIT itself.
In addition, Article 8(6) of the BIT ensures that applicable principles of international law
would apply independently of any other law that may be applicable (whether domestic
law or treaty law) in order to ensure that the host State’s obligations under international
law are always complied with. Article 8(6) of the BIT, therefore, does not substantially
differ from the approach to the determination of applicable law contained in Article 42
of the ICSID Convention, where applicable rules of international law also apply as a

corrective.

In sum, Article 8(6) of the BIT sets out the permissible range of causes of action that can
come before an Article 8 tribunal, but it does not have the effect that any dispute
submitted to an Article 8 tribunal, independently of the causes of action upon which the
disputing parties rely, is always governed by a combination of domestic and international

law. Above all, Article 8(6) does not provide, as seemingly suggested by Respondent,

4°! Article 7 of the BIT (with differences in translation between the Parties noted) provides:

 

(1) If the legislation of either C ing Party or obligations under i ional law existing
at present or established hereafter between the Contracting Parties in addition to this Agreement
contain provisions, whether general or specific, entitling investments by investors of the other
Contracting Party to a treatment more favourable than is provided for by this Agreement, such
provisions shall to the extent they are more favourable prevail over this Agreement.

 

(2) Each Contracting Party shall respect all contractual obligations it may have entered into in
respect of [investments in its territory by] [Respondent] investors of the other Contracting Party
[concerning investments admitted in its territory] [Claimants].

103

that Argentine law determines the scope of the investor’s substantive rights under the
BIT and whether or not Argentina has complied with the BIT. Whether the BIT and
international law have been complied with can only be assessed on the basis of an
autonomous interpretation and application of the rules and principles that form part of
the international legal system. A treaty claim, in other words, remains governed by treaty
law. As the ICJ has stated in the ELSI case, domestic law and international law, including

the BIT, are separate regimes, so that

[c]ompliance with municipal law and compliance with the provisions of a treaty
are different questions. What is a breach of a treaty may be lawful in the
municipal law and what is unlawful in the municipal law may be wholly
innocent of violation of a treaty provision. *°?

315. To the same effect, Article 3 of the ILC Articles provides:

The characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful is governed
by international law. Such characterization is not affected by the
characterization of the same act as lawful by internal law.

316. That a treaty claim remains governed by treaty law does not mean, however, that
domestic law is wholly irrelevant for the determination of compliance with, or liability
under, a BIT, including the BIT governing the present dispute. Domestic law will remain
relevant in governing a variety of incidental questions, or preliminary matters, including
questions for the determination of which a BIT may expressly refer to domestic law (such
as the determination of the nationality of an investor or compliance with domestic law
under an in-accordance-with-host-State-law clause, as is the case under Article 1(1) and
(2) of the BIT), *® or questions that must be assumed to be governed by domestic law for

other reasons, for example because certain elements of a treaty can only be determined

42 Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America y. Italy), Judgment (20 July 1989) [1989] ICJ
Reports 15, 51, para. 73 (Exhibit ALRA-193); Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 455; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, para. 235.

4°3 The provision in Article 1(1) in fine of the BIT, which provides that “[t]he contents and scope of the rights for
the different categories of assets shall be determined by the laws and regulations of the Contracting Party in whose
territory the investment is made,” clarifies that the domestic law of the host State determines the content and scope
of the rights that attach to the assets that qualify as protected investments under the BIT. This provision does not,
however, mean that the determination of whether host State measures that affect an investor or her investment in
respect of rights granted under domestic law qualify as a breach of the substantive protection granted under the
BIT becomes subject to domestic law, as suggested by the Dissent, paras. 12, 98, 126-129, 296, 373, 407(1) and
(2). Article 1(1) in fine of the BIT merely clarifies that no investor can complain that the denial of a benefit to
which the investor is not entitled under domestic law — for example the host State’s refusal to make payments to
an investor under an investor-State contract beyond what that investor is entitled to under the contract — could
give rise without more to a claim for breach of the BIT, but it does not mean that any measure of the host State
that complies with domestic law would in and of itself comply with the substantive standards of treatment laid
down in the BIT.

104

317.

318.

by recourse to domestic law (such as whether an investor has title to a certain asset or
what the treatment afforded under domestic law is for purposes of assessing compliance

with a national treatment provision).

In the present case, as their prayer for relief indicates, Claimants have brought claims for
breach of specific provisions of the BIT, namely of Article 4 (addressing expropriation)
and of Article 2(1) (addressing fair and equitable treatment). The law applicable to
determining these claims is international law, more specifically the BIT itself, as well as
other relevant rules of international law, including customary international law or general
principles of international law, to the extent they are not supplanted by the BIT.
Claimants have not brought claims before this Tribunal for breach of domestic law or
breach of contract. While the assessment of ENREJA’s conduct under domestic law, as
specified further below, is a relevant factor in the application of the substantive standards
of treatment under the BIT, the Tribunal is not called on deciding on a dispute between
ENJASA and ENREJA about the legality of the revocation of ENJASA’s license under
domestic law. This dispute was before the courts in the Province of Salta and has become
moot when the Parties withdrew it following the Tribunal’s order to do so in its Decision

in Jurisdiction.4
B. Expropriation

The Tribunal will first assess Claimants’ claim for breach of the rules on expropriation
in Article 4 of the BIT, which provides in English translation, with remaining differences

between the Parties indicated, as follows:

(1) The term “expropriation” includes both nationalization as well as any
other measure having an equivalent effect.

(2) The investments of investors of a Contracting Party shall not be
expropriated in the territory of the other Contracting Party except for a public
purpose, in accordance with due process of law and against compensation.
Such compensation shall amount to the value of the investment expropriated
immediately before the expropriation or the impending expropriation became
public knowledge. Compensation shall be paid without undue delay and shall
bear interest until the date of payment, at the customary bank rate of the State

404 The withdrawal of the proceedings in Argentina’s domestic courts concerning the dispute between ENJASA
and the authorities in the Province of Salta does not, however, have the effect that the legality of the revocation
of ENJASA’s license under domestic law would become res judicata in the present proceeding and could not be
revisited by the Tribunal as an incidental question in order to determine whether that revocation was lawful as a
matter of international law, or that the legality of the revocation of the License would have to be qualified as a
“legal event under Respondent’s domestic law” that could not be revisited by the Tribunal, as suggested by the
Dissent, paras. 3, 4, 91(iii), 100, 158-159, 206, 214, 233, 385, 390, 394, 407(1).

105

31

321

321.

40s

in whose territory the investment has been made; shall be effectively
realizable and freely transferable. Assessment and payment of compensation
shall be adequately provided for no later than at the time of expropriation.

(3) Where a Contracting Party expropriates the financial [Respondent] assets
of a company that, in accordance with the provisions of Article 1, paragraph
2 hereof, is deemed to be a company belonging to that Contracting Party, and
in which the investor of the other Contracting Party owns [Respondent}/has
Claimants] shares, the provisions set forth in paragraph 2 of this Article shall
be applied by the former so as to guarantee the appropriate compensation of
the investor.

9. As forwarded by Claimants, the claim for breach of Article 4 of the BIT arises from the
revocation of ENJASA’ exclusive 30-year license and the subsequent transfer of
ENJASA’s operations to third operators. As compared to the claim for breach of the fair
and equitable treatment standard in Article 2(1) of the BIT, which arises out the same set
of measures taken by the authorities in Salta, the claim for breach of Article 4 is the more
specific one. Article 4 not only requires an interference with a protected investment that
must meet a higher threshold and qualify as an “expropriation,” it also gives the host
State a right to expropriate a covered investment under specific circumstances, namely if
the expropriation serves a public purpose, is implemented in accordance with due process
of law, and provides for compensation. For this reason, claims under Article 4 of the BIT
have to be addressed before claims for breach of other provisions of the BIT, such as the

one on fair and equitable treatment in Article 2(1) of the BIT.

0. In respect of Article 4 of the BIT, Claimants claim that the revocation of ENJASA’s
license and the subsequent transfer of its operations to third operators gives rise to two
(in principle separate) causes of action. In the first place, and as their principal claim
under Article 4 of the BIT,*° Claimants claim that the measures in question destroyed
their indirect investment in ENJASA, through their shareholding in L&E, resulting in an
indirect expropriation contrary to Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT. Only as an alternative
claim do Claimants allege the measures in question to have resulted in an expropriation
of ENJASA’s assets contrary to Article 4(3) of the BIT, which would entitle Claimants,

they claim, as indirect shareholders in ENJASA to compensation.

Respondent, by contrast, claims that neither an indirect expropriation of Claimants’

indirect investment in ENJASA that would violate Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT has

On the claim for breach of Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT being Claimants’ principal claim, see Claimants’

Reply on the Merits, para. 644 (Request for Relief); Closing Statement, Transcript, Day 9, p. 64; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, paras. 456-459.

106

322.

323.

occurred, nor that the revocation of ENJASA’s license and the subsequent transfer of its
operations to new operators has resulted in an expropriation of ENJASA contrary to
Article 4(3) of the BIT. Instead, Respondent insists, as its principal argument on the
merits, that the revocation of ENJASA’s license had occurred in the lawful exercise of
ENREJA’s regulatory or police powers as provided for under the regulatory framework
in place in the Province of Salta. Such exercise of a host State’s regulatory and police
powers is recognized as lawful under international law and would not, Respondent
argues, qualify as an act of expropriation under Article 4 of the BIT. In addition,
Respondent submits, the fact that ENJASA could continue operating the Sheraton Hotel
in Salta and that Claimants had been offered to continue operating casinos in Salta
militated against the existence of an expropriation. Furthermore, Respondent argues that
Article 4(3) of the BIT limits the protection of shareholder-investors to claims for
compensation arising out of expropriations of “financial assets” of a locally incorporated
company, a condition ENJASA’s license did not fulfil, thus barring recourse of

Claimants as shareholder-investors under Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT.

Against the background of the Parties’ arguments, the Tribunal will, in the following,
first set out the legal framework to be applied to claims under Article 4 of the BIT. It will
start with Claimants’ principal claim for indirect expropriation under Article 4(1) and (2)
of the BIT, before turning to Claimants’ alternative claim for breach of Article 4(3) of
the BIT. The key issue that emerges from the legal framework thus expounded is whether
the revocation of ENJASA’s license amounted to expropriatory conduct in the sense of
Article 4(1) or whether it qualified as a regular exercise of the host State’s regulatory or
police power, that is, as a lawful administration of a sanction by ENREJA under Law
No. 7020, which does not qualify as an expropriation and does not require the payment

of compensation.
1. Breach of Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT
a) The Relevant Legal Principles
Before assessing whether the facts in the present proceeding resulted in a breach of
Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT, the Tribunal will clarify the relevant legal principles
governing the interpretation of this provision of the BIT. In order to do so, the Tribunal

will first clarify the qualification of Claimants’ claim as a claim for indirect expropriation

of their investment (see (1)). The Tribunal will then set out the legal test applicable under

107

Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT to determine whether Respondent’s conduct qualified as
an indirect expropriation and distinguish such conduct from the non-compensable
exercise of the host State’s regulatory and police powers (see (2)). Finally, the Tribunal
will address in more detail what limits the exercise of the host State’s police powers has
to comply with in case of the enforcement of pre-existing limitations to the rights an

investor enjoys under the host State’s domestic law (see (3)).

qd) Qualification of Claimants’ Claim as a Claim for Indirect
Expropriation

324. Article 4(2) of the BIT provides investments of investors in the territory of the other
Contracting Party with protection against expropriations that have not been made for a
public purpose, in accordance with due process of law, and against compensation.*°°
Expropriation, in this context, is defined in Article 4(1) of the BIT as encompassing both
nationalization and other measures having an equivalent effect. Article 4 therefore
protects not only against direct, but also indirect, de facto, or creeping expropriations of

covered investments.

325. The notion of “investments”, which are protected against expropriation under Article 4
of the BIT, in turn, encompasses not only direct investments of an investor from the other
Contracting Party, but also investments that are held through a holding company that was
incorporated in the host State, as in the present case. Indeed, the Tribunal has already
found in its Decision on Jurisdiction “that both Claimants’ direct shareholding in L&E
and their indirect shareholding in ENJASA qualify as ‘investments’ under Article 1(1)(b)

the BIT.”*°’ Claimants as shareholder-investors are therefore protected against

406 The Dissent (para. 406) posits that the lack of compensation does not in itself render an otherwise lawful

expropriation, that is, one implemented for a public purpose and in accordance with due process, unlawful,
especially when the issue of compensation is sub judice. The Parties’ submissions in the present case, however,
is not that the revocation of ENJASA’s license constitutes an otherwise lawful expropriation that only lacks the
payment of compensation. Instead, Claimants claim that the revocation of ENJASA’s license constitutes an
unlawful expropriation, which entitles them to the payment of damages under the principles on State
responsibility. Respondent, in turn, does not argue that the revocation of ENJASA’s license qualified as a lawful
expropriation either; Respondent’s argument is that no expropriation has occurred at all. The issue of
compensation for a lawful expropriation, in other words, is not sub judice in the present proceeding, nor was it
sub judice in any of the proceedings that had been pending in the courts of Salta.

4°7 Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 182. Since, for purposes of the analysis of whether Respondent’s conduct
complied with Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT, the protected investment consists of Claimants’ shareholdings in
L&E and ENJASA, it is irrelevant that Claimants themselves were not the owners or beneficiaries of ENJASA’s
license. Similarly, for determining whether Claimants’ shareholding was subject to an indirect expropriation, it is
irrelevant whether the revocation of the License qualified, or not, as a direct expropriation of ENJASA. The
question the Tribunal has to address under Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT is not whether the License was directly
expropriated, and whether the holder of that License, i.e., ENJASA, could claim for breach of Article 4 of the

108

326.

327.

328.

expropriations of their (direct and indirect) shareholdings in L&E and ENJASA under
Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT.

By contrast, the Tribunal has found that ENJASA’s assets themselves, including in
particular its exclusive operating license, do not qualify under Article 1(1) of the BIT as
Claimants’ investments.*°* This notwithstanding, Article 4(3) of the BIT provides
shareholder-investors in a company that has been established in the host State with a
cause of action in case of expropriations of assets/financial assets of the locally

incorporated company in which the investor holds shares.

In respect of the relationship between claims of shareholder-investors under Article 4(1)
and (2) of the BIT, on the one hand, and Article 4(3), on the other hand, the Tribunal
reiterates what it has explained in its Decision on Jurisdiction, namely that nothing in the
text of Article 4(3) of the BIT supports an argument to the effect that this provision would
exclude the protection of shareholder-investors under other standards of protection in
instances where assets/financial assets of a locally incorporated company have been
expropriated. Rather, as the Tribunal explained:

240 the formulation of Article 4(3) of the BIT suggests that that

provision was intended to grant shareholder-investors an additional cause

of action when a local company, in which a covered investor holds shares,
is expropriated.

 

241. This additional cause of action differs from a claim of shareholder-
investors under Article 4(2) of the BIT for an (indirect) expropriation of
their shareholding. Under Article 4(3) of the BIT, a claimant would only
have to show that assets/financial assets of the company were subject to
an expropriation, without the need to demonstrate any detrimental effect
on the value of the shareholding. By contrast, for a claim under Article
4(2) of the BIT, the shareholder-investor would need to show that the
interference of the host State with assets of the company had an effect on
the shareholding that was so severe that it qualifies as a “measure having
an equivalent effect” on that shareholding.*?

Whereas direct expropriations require the taking and transfer of title to the covered
investment from the investor to the host State or a third party, indirect or de facto

expropriations cover measures that have an equivalent effect to a direct expropriation,

BIT, but whether the revocation of ENJASA’s license constituted an indirect expropriation of Claimants’
shareholdings in L&E and ENJASA. Contra Dissent, paras. 91(vii), 109-111, 125-129.

4°8 Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 184.

49 Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 240-241.

109

but leave the title to the investment unaffected. *!°

329. It is this latter category which is the only relevant one in the present proceeding. As the
Tribunal equally already has stated in its Decision on Jurisdiction, it is clear that the
revocation of ENJASA’s license and subsequent events do not constitute a direct
expropriation of Claimants’ investment, as it is undisputed that Claimants continue to
own title to their shares in L&E and ENJASA. The issue is rather whether the revocation
of ENJASA’s license and the subsequent transfer of its business to new operators

constitute an indirect expropriation of Claimants’ investment in L&E and/or ENJASA.*!!

(2) Distinction between Indirect Expropriation and Non-
Compensable Exercises of the Host State’s Regulatory and
Police Powers

330. In the past, in determining whether a certain government measure qualified as an indirect
expropriation, several tribunals have considered principally, at times even solely, the

effects the measure had on the protected investment.*!? What tribunals have required in

410 For authority on the distinction between direct and indirect expropriation, see e.g. Metalclad Corporation v.
United Mexican States, (CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award (30 August 2000) para. 103 (Exhibit CL-011);
Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award (3 September 2001) para. 200 (Exhibit ALRA-
113); Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United Mexican States, \CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2, Award
(29 May 2003) paras. 113-114 (Exhibit CL-008); LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E
International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability (3 October 2006) para.
187 (Exhibit CL-003); Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Award (8 June 2009).
para. 355 (Exhibit ALRA-183); Philip Morris Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products S.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A.
v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7, Award (8 July 2016) para. 191 (Exhibit CL-178);
Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case
No. ARB/13/13, Award (27 September 2017) para. 822. For extensive discussion of the case law of investment
treaty tribunals on the notions of direct and indirect expropriation, see August Reinisch and Christoph Schreuer,

ional Protection of Inves s — The Substanti dards (Cambridge University Press 2020) 39-45,

 

51-69.

411 See Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 228 (stating that “[iJn the jurisprudence of investment treaty tribunals, it
has been held that such indirect expropriations can occur, inter alia, when host State measures, which directly
affect assets of the company, substantially and permanently deprive the shareholder-investor of her investment in
the shareholding in the company and effectively destroy the value of those shares. In such cases, shareholders can
bring claims based on (indirect) expropriation of their shareholding in the host State” and providing further
references to the case law invoked by Claimants)

422 See eg Compaiiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica, (CSID Case No. ARB/96/1,
Award (17 February 2000) para. 77 (Exhibit CL-004); Compaitid de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Award (20 August 2007) para. 7.5.20 (Exhibit
CL-032). Fora detailed discussion of arbitral case law endorsing the so-called (sole) effects-doctrine, see August
Reinisch and Christoph Schreuer, | Protection of The

(Cambridge University Press 2020) 149-155, The Dissent (i.a. paras. 92-93, 116-117, 120-124, 180-181, 234,
365-366, 375, 384, 387, 449) incorrectly claims that the Tribunal’s majority “absurdly” only focuses on the “sole
effect” of the revocation, without taking into account the regulatory powers of ENREJA to lawfully revoke the
License. However, as the Tribunal explains in the present section, it does not consider the effects of the revocation
of the License to be the sole criterion for the existence of an indirect expropriation, but also requires to factor in
an assessment of whether this revocation has been brought about as a lawful exercise of ENREJA’s regulatory
and police powers. If that had been the case, no indirect expropriation would have been occasioned, and no
compensation would be due, under Article 4 of the BIT.

 

110

application of this approach, as stated for example in Metalclad v. Mexico, is that the
interference of the host State’s measure with the investment “has the effect of depriving
the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be expected
economic benefit.”4!? Other tribunals have used similar formulations that make the
existence of an indirect expropriation dependent upon the permanent and substantial

deprivation of an investment’s capacity to be employed for economic use and benefit.*!*

331. However, looking only at the effect of a measure on the investment in question is too
limited. As confirmed by a large number of investment treaty tribunals, not only the
impact on the investment of the measures in question has to be examined, but also
whether the host State took those measures in the exercise of its police powers or its right
to regulate, which are, as numerous tribunals have emphasized, a recognized component
of State sovereignty, safeguarded under both customary international law and the law of
investment treaties.*!> As stated, for example, by the tribunal in Saluka v Czech Republic,
“[i]t is now established in international law that States are not liable to pay compensation
to a foreign investment when, in the normal exercise of their regulatory powers, they

adopt in a non-discriminatory manner bona fide regulations that are aimed at the general

413 Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award (30 August 2000)
para. 103 (Exhibit CL-011).

414 See e.g. Compaiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica, \CSID Case No. ARB/96/1
Award (17 February 2000) para. 78 (Exhibit CL-004); Pope & Talbot Inc. v. The Government of Canada,
UNCITRAL, Interim Award (26 June 2000) para. 102 (Exhibit ALRA-69); S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of
Canada, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Partial Award (13 November 2000) para. 283 (Exhibit CL-029); Ronald S. Lauder
v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award (3 September 2001) para. 200 (Exhibit ALRA-113); CME
Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (13 September 2001) paras. 591, 604 (Exhibit
CL-021); Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/99/6, Award (12 April 2002) para. 107 (Exhibit CL-044); Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United
Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award (29 May 2003) para. 115 (Exhibit CL-008); Generation
Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award (16 September 2003) para. 20.32 (Exhibit CL-087);
CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Award (12 May 2005) para.
262 (Exhibit CL-014); LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability (3 October 2006) para. 188 (Exhibit CL-003); Copper
Mesa Mining Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador, PCA No. 2012-2, Award (15 March 2016) para. 6.122 (Exhibit
CL-202); Crystallex International Corporation y. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/11/2, Award (4 April 2016) para. 708 (Exhibit CL-203). For further discussion of arbitral case law to
this effect, see also August Reinisch and Christoph Schreuer, Jnternational Protection of Investments — The
Substantive Standards (Cambridge University Press 2020) 112-155.

415 See e.g. Methanex Corporation v United States of America, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Final Award of the Tribunal
on Jurisdiction and Merits (3 August 2005) Part IV, Chapter D, para. 7 (Exhibit ALRA-77); Saluka Investments
BV. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (17 March 2006) paras. 255, 262 (Exhibit CL-018); Philip
Morris Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products S.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A. v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/10/7, Award (8 July 2016) paras. 295-301 (Exhibit CL-178). For further detailed discussion of
arbitral case law on this point, see August Reinisch and Christoph Schreuer, International Protection of
Investments — The Substantive Standards (Cambridge University Press 2020) 85-111.

111

welfare.”4!¢

332. The Tribunal agrees that due consideration must be given to the host State’s police
powers and its right to regulate in circumscribing the concept of indirect expropriation
under investment treaties, independently of whether the treaty text makes express
reference to such powers. Police powers and the right to regulate are recognized
components of a State’s sovereignty and firmly grounded in customary international
law.*!7 Consequently, the State’s police powers and its right to regulate are not abrogated
merely because a State has entered into treaty commitments that restrict its right to
expropriate covered investors and their investment and subject expropriations to certain
conditions. Rather, a State’s police powers and its right to regulate under customary
international law constitute “relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties” in the sense of Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT and have to be taken
into account in interpreting the provisions in a BIT on expropriation, such as Article 4(1)
and (2) of the BIT. This could only be otherwise if it were shown that the contracting
parties to the BIT had had a clear intention of dispensing with such a well-recognized
principle of customary international law,*!* which is not the case for the BIT applicable

to the present proceeding.

333. The State’s police and regulatory powers encompass the right of a State to subject
property owned by foreigners to regulation in the public interest and to enforce these
regulations against the foreign owner without giving rise to a duty to pay compensation.

This is true in particular for domestic regulations that already existed when the

416 Saluka Investments B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (17 March 2006) para. 255 (Exhibit
CL-018).

417 The host State’s police powers, which allow the taking of measures affecting a foreigner’s property rights
without compensation, have been recognized as part of customary international law long before modern
investment treaty arbitration, inter alia in the practice of pre-World War I claims commissions, by inter-war
arbitration tribunals, by the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal, and by commentators. See Bischoff Case,
German-Venezuelan Commission, Decision (1903) X UNRIAA 420; J. Parsons (Great Britain) v. United States,
Decision (30 November 1925) VI UNRIAA 165, 166; Kiigele v. Polish State, Upper Silesian Arbitral Tribunal,
Decision (5 February 1932) 6 Annual Digest (1931-1932) 69; Sedco, Inc. v. National Iranian Oil Company and
The Islamic Republic of Iran, Award (24 October 1985) 9 Iran-United States CTR 248, 275; Emanuel Too v.
Greater Modesto Insurance Associates and The United States of America, Award (29 December 1989) 23 Iran-
United States CTR 378, 387; Draft Convention on the International Responsibility of States for Injuries to Aliens,
Art 10(5) (1961) 55 AJIL 548, 562 (1961 Harvard Draft); American Law Institute, Restatement (Third) of the
Foreign Relations Law of the United States (1987) vol 1, § 712, comment (g). For a review of some of these
authorities, see also Philip Morris Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products S.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A. v. Oriental
Republic of Uruguay, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/7, Award (8 July 2016) paras. 290-301.

418 Cf Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy), Judgment (20 July 1989) [1989] ICI
Reports 15, 42, para. 50 (Exhibit ALRA-193) (stating that “the Chamber finds itself unable to accept that an
important principle of customary international law should be held to have been tacitly dispensed with, in the
absence of any words making clear an intention to do so”).

112

investment was made. Such regulation constitutes pre-existing limitations to the rights
acquired by a foreign investor. At the same time, it is also clear for the Tribunal that the
host State’s power to regulate is not unlimited, and regulatory measures and their
implementation, including the imposition of sanctions and the forfeiture or revocation of
rights granted under domestic law, are not per se carved out as a category from the
concept of indirect expropriation. Otherwise, merely by labelling measures as having
been taken in the exercise of the State’s police and regulatory powers as “sanctions” or
as “enforcement of pre-existing limitations” of an investor’s rights, such measures easily
could be misused and operate as disguised expropriations that would fall through the
safety net offered to foreign investors by the rules on expropriation in investment
treaties.*!? Authority under customary international law, which only exempts bona fide,
non-discriminatory measures from any duty of compensation, recognizes such
limitations on the host State’s police powers and its right to regulate as well.*?° While
the host State’s proper exercise of its police powers or of its right to regulate is a business
risk that has to be borne by an investor and does not lead to international responsibility,
the improper exercise of such powers constitutes a political risk that international

investment law regulates and sanctions.

334. Consequently, in the Tribunal’s view, in distinguishing between compensable indirect
expropriation and non-compensable exercises of a host State’s police powers or its right
to regulate regard has to be given both to the intensity of the interference of the measure
with the protected investment and to the reason and purpose for which the host State has
taken the measures in question. Under this approach, two elements must be fulfilled for

a government measure to qualify as an indirect expropriation.

419 See e.g, Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2,
Award (29 May 2003) para. 121 (Exhibit CL-008) (stating that there is “no principle stating that regulatory
administrative actions are per se excluded from the scope of the Agreement, even if they are beneficial to society
as a whole —such as environmental protection—, particularly if the negative economic impact of such actions on
the financial position of the investor is sufficient to neutralize in full the value, or economic or commercial use of
its investment without receiving any compensation whatsoever”); E/ Paso Energy International Company v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Award (31 October 2011) para. 234 (Exhibit CL-016) (stating
that the “Tribunal subscribes to the decisions which have refused to hold that a general regulation issued by a
State and interfering with the rights of foreign investors can never be considered expropriatory because it should
be analysed as an exercise of the State’s sovereign power or of its police powers — emphasis in the original); Pope
& Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Interim Award (26 June 2000) para. 99 (Exhibit ALRA-
69) (stating that excluding host State measures from the concept of indirect expropriation by subsuming them
under the State’s police powers merely “because the measures ... are cast in the form of regulations ... goes too
far”). The Dissent, paras. 69-73, 91-98, 109-114, 152-154, 176-182, 386-387, by contrast, seems to assume that
the imposition of sanctions per se falls under the concept of the host State’s police powers and is carved out from
scrutiny under the concept of indirect expropriation.

20 See the references cited supra note 417.

113

335. First, the measure in question must show a certain severity of interference and
permanence. To amount to a measure with equivalent effect to an expropriation, it is not
sufficient that the measure has occasioned a mere decrease of the value of the investment,
or that additional costs have been imposed on the investor. Rather, as required by a long
line of arbitral jurisprudence,*?! the measure in question must have affected the
investment in a way that the investor has been deprived permanently and substantially of
the continued use and economic benefits of his or her investment.

422

336. Second, as equally recognized by a long line of arbitral jurisprudence, *** the measure in

question must not be covered by the host State’s right to exercise its regulatory and police
powers, taking into account both the legal framework in place in the host State when the
investment was made and the host State’s power to regulate and change this legal
framework for the protection of public interests. In order to avoid abuse of the host State’s
regulatory powers, their exercise must be bona fide and in line with principles of
international investment law, such as good faith, non-discrimination, and the prohibition
of arbitrariness, *?’ and result in measures whose impact on investments is proportionate
to the interest(s) protected.*74 While recognized by modern investment treaty
jurisprudence, these limits to the exercise of a host State’s police powers also find their
basis in customary international law.*”> Alternatively, the exercise of the host State’s
police and regulatory powers, the use of which would otherwise be legitimate, can qualify

as an indirect expropriation if the host State has made assurances or entered special

421 For references, see supra para. 330.

422 For references, see supra paras. 331-333.

See eg Saluka Investments B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (17 March 2006) para. 255
(Exhibit CL-018); Methanex Corporation v United States, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Final Award of the Tribunal on
Jurisdiction and Merits (3 August 2005) Part IV, Chapter D, para. 7 (Exhibit ALRA-77). For further discussion
of these limits as developed in arbitral jurisprudence, see August Reinisch and Christoph Schreuer, International
Protection of Investments — The Substantive Standards (Cambridge University Press 2020) 104-111.

424 See eg Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United Mexican States, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2,
Award (29 May 2003) para. 122 (Exhibit CL-008); Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/O1/12, Award (14 July 2006) paras. 311-312 (AL RA- 141); LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and
LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability (3 October
2006) para. 195 (Exhibit CL-003); El Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/15, Award (31 October 2011) paras. 241, 243 (Exhibit CL-016); Deutsche Bank AG v. Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/2, Award (31 October 2012) para. 522 (Exhibit CL-
189); PL Holdings S.d.r.l. v. Republic of Poland, SCC Case No. V 2014/163, Partial Award (28 June 2017) paras.
390-391 (Exhibit CL-191). See further August Reinisch and Christoph Schreuer, International Protection of
Investments — The Substantive Standards (Cambridge University Press 2020) 168-170.

#5 See the authorities referenced supra note 417.

423,

 

114

commitments that the host State would refrain from such regulation. *”°

337. Under this framework, measures that do not pass the high threshold of a substantial and

permanent deprivation of the investment will not qualify as an expropriation,
independently of whether they have been adopted in good faith, are non-discriminatory
and proportionate, and respect due process.*?” Furthermore, in the absence of specific
commitments or assurances by the host State, both the introduction and administration
of new regulatory requirements under its domestic law and the administration of existing
regulatory requirements under domestic law will not qualify as an indirect expropriation
requiring compensation, provided the regulation in question and its implementation have
been made in good faith, are neither arbitrary nor discriminatory, and are otherwise
proportionate.

(3) Limitations on the Host State’s Exercise of Its Police
Powers

338. In the present case, no question arises as to whether changes to the regulatory framework

426

have been made as part of the host State’s right to regulate. What is at issue is the
implementation of the existing regulatory framework. The task of an investment treaty
tribunal in distinguishing between a non-compensable exercise of the host State’s police
powers and a compensable indirect expropriation in that context, has been circumscribed
by the tribunal in Quiborax v. Bolivia, in a case dealing with the cancellation of a mining

license, as follows:

The Tribunal must thus consider whether, in light of all the circumstances,
the Revocation Decree was a legitimate cancellation of the Claimants’
concessions in the exercise of Bolivia’s sovereign power to sanction
violations of Bolivian law and is therefore not a compensable taking or
whether it is a veritable taking disguised as the exercise of the State’s
police powers. This will depend on whether (i) the Revocation Decree is
based on actual violations of Bolivian law by the Claimants; (ii) whether
those violations of Bolivian law are sanctioned with the termination of the
concessions (whether by revocation, cancellation, annulment or

For this limitation on the host State’s regulatory and police powers, see eg Methanex Corporation v United

States, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Final Award of the Tribunal on Jurisdiction and Merits (3 August 2005) Part IV,
Chapter D, para. 7 (Exhibit ALRA-77).

47

Such measures may still violate other standards of treatment in investment treaties, such as fair and equitable

treatment or national treatment. Moreover, in certain circumstances, arguments concerning a partial expropriation
of an investment may become relevant.

115

otherwise), and (iii) whether the revocation was carried out in accordance
with due process. #?*

339. As this statement suggests, the question of whether the host State’s measures fall under
the host State’s police powers, and therefore do not qualify as a compensable indirect
expropriation, or qualify as an indirect expropriation that is merely disguised as the
exercise of the host State’s police power, is an issue that depends on the compliance of
the measures in question with both the host State’s domestic law and standards of
international law applicable under the BIT. While agreeing with the basic test
circumscribed by the Quiborax tribunal to distinguish between the non-compensable
exercise of the host State’s police powers and the concept of indirect expropriation when
the enforcement of pre-existing limitations of an investor’s rights under domestic law is
concemed, the Tribunal considers that certain concretizations to both prongs of the
Quiborax test — compliance with domestic law and compliance with international legal

standards — are called for.

340. First, in making the determination whether the administration and implementation of an
existing regulatory framework constitutes a lawful exercise of the host State’s regulatory
and supervisory powers, an investment treaty tribunal will regularly be faced with
allegations that the regulatory requirements under domestic law were not met. This could
be the case, for example, because of alleged mistakes in the factual basis for a decision
taken by the host State’s authorities or because of errors of those authorities in
interpreting domestic law, the violation of procedural rights under domestic law, errors
of form, or errors in the exercise of discretion granted to host State authorities. In
assessing these matters, the Tribunal is conscious of the fact that it has to leave the host
State’s authorities room for appreciation and thus exercise an appropriate degree of
deference. After all, the Tribunal’s mandate in the present proceeding is not to second-
guess the host State’s determinations under domestic law and review them de novo, as if
it was the primary decision-maker or a domestic (first-instance, appellate, or supreme)

court in the host State.*??

“28 Quiborax S.A. and Non Metallic Minerals S.A. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/2,
Award (16 September 2015) para. 207 (Exhibit CL-030).

“29 In this sense, for example, S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Partial Award
(13 November 2000) paras. 261, 263 (Exhibit ALRA-64); Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States,
UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Award (8 June 2009) paras. 779, 805 (Exhibit ALRA-183); Joseph Charles Lemire v.
Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability (14 January 2010) para. 283 (Exhibit
ALRA-303); Philip Morris Brand Sarl (Switzerland), Philip Morris Products S.A. (Switzerland) and Abal

116

341.

342.

343.

In the Tribunal’s view, the degree of deference due is a function of both the applicable
law and the cause of action before it. If a cause of action for breach of the host State’s
domestic law is brought, and the investment tribunal has competence to entertain such a
claim, it could be appropriate for the tribunal, which in such a case in effect substitutes
for a domestic court, to adopt the same degree of deference that the host State’s domestic
courts would adopt in reviewing the legality of host State action under domestic law. By
contrast, if a claim for breach of international law is brought before the investment
tribunal, as is the case in the present proceeding, the tribunal will have to adopt the degree
of deference that the applicable international law and the tribunal’s function as an
international adjudicatory body calls for. As the ICJ has stated in the ELSI case:
Compliance with municipal law and compliance with the provisions of a
treaty are different questions. What is a breach of a treaty may be lawful
in the municipal law and what is unlawful in the municipal law may be
wholly innocent of violation of a treaty provision. *°
Against this background, an investment treaty tribunal will regularly not be able to
review compliance of the host State with its own domestic law de novo, but will have to
limit itself to verifying whether the host State’s application of the domestic regulatory
framework, whether lawful or not under domestic law, resulted in breaches of the

international law limitations that fall on the host State under the BIT.

Second, the international law limitations on the host State’s exercise of its regulatory and
police powers when implementing pre-existing limitations to an investor’s rights under
domestic law, such as in the present proceeding, is not limited to due process violations,
which are mentioned expressly by the Quiborax tribunal. Instead, international law
requires, as explained above (see supra para. 338), that the host State’s implementation
of the existing regulatory framework under its police powers complies, in addition to due
process, with the principle of good faith, is neither arbitrary nor discriminatory, and is
otherwise proportionate. Focusing on these limitations of the host State’s implementation

of its regulatory framework to determine whether the host State’s police powers have

Hermanos S.A. (Uruguay) v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay, I\CSID Case No. ARB/10/7, Award (8 July 2016)
paras. 418, 430 (Exhibit CL-178); Koch Minerals Sarl and Koch Nitrogen International Sarl v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, I\CSID Case No. ARB/11/19, Award (30 October 2017) para. 7.20 (Exhibit ALRA-305);
Crystallex International Corporation v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case ARB(AF)/11/2, Award (4
April 2016) para. 583 (Exhibit CL-203). For further discussion on the need for deference in investment treaty
arbitration, see generally Caroline Henckels, Proportionality and Deference in Investor-State Arbitration —
Balancing Investment Protection and Regulatory Autonomy (Cambridge University Press 2015).

489 Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America y. Italy), Judgment (20 July 1989) [1989] ICJ
Reports 15, 51, para. 73 (Exhibit ALRA-193).

117

been exercised in a genuine manner, and therefore do not result in a compensable indirect
expropriation, or whether the measures qualify as an indirect expropriation disguised as
an exercise of the host State’s police powers, operationalize the degree of deference that
is due in respect of determinations made by host State authorities in interpreting and
applying domestic law and avoid that an investment treaty tribunal would review

compliance with domestic law de novo.**!

344. What is not necessary as a requirement for finding a violation of the international law

limits of the exercise of the host State’s police powers in implementing the existing
regulatory framework is the exhaustion of local remedies.**” The BIT expressly provides
for temporal limits to the need for an investor to have recourse before the administrative
and judicial jurisdictions of the host State before turning to international arbitration and
claim a violation of the BIT. Pursuant to Article 8(3) of the BIT, if no decision on the
merits is rendered within eighteen months by the domestic authorities, local remedies no

longer need to be pursued. As the Tribunal found in its Decision on Jurisdiction:

After all, the purpose of such a requirement [i.e., recourse to domestic
remedies for a period of 18 months under Art. 8(3)] is to give the courts
of the host State an opportunity, for a certain time, to remedy the alleged
grievance before an international tribunal assumes jurisdiction, thus
coordinating dispute settlement between national and international
jurisdiction. ... Consequently, if it is clear ... that the period the BIT
requires domestic recourses to be pursued has passed without the dispute
having been settled, the purpose of the domestic-remedies-first
requirement, cannot be achieved anymore.**

345. Requiring the exhaustion of local remedies as a prerequisite for the finding of a breach

of the substantive standards of treatment, in particular a finding that the host State has
not complied with the requirements for the legitimate exercise of its police powers, would
go against the clear wording of Article 8(3) of the BIT, which indicates that the
Contracting Parties to the BIT did not intend to maintain the requirement, which exists
as part of the law on diplomatic protection, to exhaust local remedies before having
recourse under international law. Consequently, the fact that ENJASA has — on the
instructions of the Tribunal and pursuant to Article 8(4) of the BIT — withdrawn its

domestic judicial remedies in the Province of Salta, does not preclude the Tribunal from

41 In this sense also Glamis Gold, Lid. v. United States of America, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Award (8 June 2009)

para. 617 (Exhibit ALRA-183).
*2 Contra Dissent, paras. 20-24, 91 (iv), 221, 302-306, 380(2), 390-391, 394, 407(7).

Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 318-319.

118

assessing whether the revocation of ENJASA’s license breached Respondent’s
obligations under the BIT and international law. Furthermore, the withdrawal of the
proceedings in Argentina’s domestic courts concerning the dispute between ENJASA
and the authorities of the Province of Salta does not have the effect of turning the legality
of the License’s revocation under domestic law into a matter of res judicata that could

not be revisited by the Tribunal as a matter of domestic law.**+

346. Instead, deference to the host State’s actions and determinations under domestic law is
built into the standards of treatment under the BIT and the international law limitations
to the host State’s police powers, in particular as far as the standard of arbitrariness under
international law is concerned, which the ICJ in the ELSI case defined as “not so much
something opposed to a rule of law, as something opposed to the rule of law. ... It is a

willful disregard of due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense
of juridical propriety.”4*°
347. Similar definitions of arbitrariness can also be found in investment treaty

436

jurisprudence. For example, the tribunal in Plama y. Bulgaria equated

unreasonableness with arbitrariness and explained that “[u]nreasonable or arbitrary
measures ... are those which are not founded in reason or fact but on caprice, prejudice
or personal preference.” **’ The tribunal in EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania elaborated

on arbitrariness as involving

a. a measure that inflicts damage on the investor without serving any
apparent legitimate purpose;

db. a measure that is not based on legal standards but on discretion,
prejudice or personal preference;

c. a measure taken for reasons that are different from those put
forward by the decision maker;

434 The Tribunal’s majority thus disagrees with the Dissent (i.a. paras. 3, 4, 91 (iii), 100, 158-159, 206, 214, 233,
385, 390, 394, 407(1)) that upon the withdrawal of the proceedings before the Courts of Salta, ENREJA’s decision
on the revocation of the License became final under Argentina law and could not be reviewed as the Tribunal is
empowered to apply Argentine law pursuant to Article 8(6) of the BIT. See also supra note 404.

435 Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America y. Italy), Judgment (20 July 1989) [1989] ICJ
Reports 15, 76, para. 128 (Exhibit ALRA-193).

436 For further discussion of the case law of i investment tribunals on the definition of arbitrariness, see August
Reinisch and Christoph Schreuer, | Protection of — The

(Cambridge University Press 2020) 439-441.

437 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award (27 August 2008)
para. 184 (Exhibit ALRA-36) (referring to Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award (3
September 2001) paras. 221, 222, 232 and Christoph H. Schreuer, ‘Fair and Equitable Treatment (FET):
Interaction with Other Standards’ (2007) 4(5) Transnational Dispute Management 8-9).

 

119

d. a measure taken in wilful disregard of due process and proper
procedure. 3*

348. As the above definitions show, not every violation of domestic law will ipso facto

349.

350.

351.

constitute arbitrary conduct under international law. Rather, arbitrariness requires a
qualitatively significant breach, an abuse of power, that imposes harm on a foreign
investor contrary to the rule of law. Indicators for arbitrariness in this sense can be, for
example, a manifest lack of competence of the host State’s authority for taking the
measure in question, bad faith applications of domestic law, or decisions that appear so

manifestly incorrect that they must be deemed to constitute an abuse of power.

As far as determining whether manifest errors in the interpretations of domestic law
constitute an abuse of power is concerned, the Tribunal considers the statement of the
ICJ in the Diallo case to offer helpful guidance.**? In that case, the ICJ stated:

[I]t is for each State, in the first instance, to interpret its own domestic law.

The Court does not, in principle, have the power to substitute its own

interpretation for that of the national authorities, especially when that

interpretation is given by the highest national courts. Exceptionally, where

a State puts forward a manifestly incorrect interpretation of its domestic

law, particularly for the purpose of gaining an advantage in a pending

case, it is for the Court to adopt what it finds to be the proper

interpretation. 4°
Similarly, in respect of determining whether mistakes made in the factual basis for a
decision taken by the host State’s authorities or whether the application of domestic law
to those facts constitute an abuse of power, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to focus
on the manifest character of errors as an indicator for the lack of good faith and

arbitrariness.

As far as the principle of proportionality is concerned, the Tribunal considers that this
principle is a recognized limitation on the exercise of the host State’s regulatory and
police powers so that host State measures that are disproportionate from the perspective
of international law cannot qualify as legitimate exercises of the host State’s police
powers that fall outside the concept of indirect expropriations. Such a limitation, albeit

without necessarily using the word proportionality, has been recognized already under

438 EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award (8 October 2009) para. 303.

439 Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v Democratic Republic of the Congo), Judgment (30 November
2010) (Exhibit ALRA-246).

440 Tid, para. 70 (internal citation omitted).

120

customary international law.*! Proportionality is also laid down as a principle of (public)
law in the domestic laws of a large number of countries, and in the practice of their
domestic courts, and is used and applied as a principle of international law in the practice
of numerous other international courts and tribunals, both within the investment treaty
context and beyond, thus confirming that proportionality qualifies as a general principle
of law in the sense of Article 38(1)(c) of the ICJ Statute whose purpose it is to reconcile
competing interests, such as investment protection, on the one hand, and environmental
protection, labor standards, human rights, or any other public interest, including the

442

prevention of money laundering, on the other hand. *** Proportionality requires that a host

State’s measures i) pursues a legitimate goal (public purpose); ii) is suitable to achieve

 

that goal; iii) is necessary to achieve that goal in the sense that less intrusive, but equally

feasible and effective measures do not exist; and iv) is proportionate stricto sensu, that
is, that the benefit for the public of the measure in question stands in an adequate and

acceptable relationship to the negative impact of the measure on the investment.

b) Application of the Legal Framework to the Facts of the Case

352. Having set out the legal framework on the interpretation and application of Article 4(1)
and (2) of the BIT, the Tribunal now addresses how this framework applies to the facts
of the case. Two issues are at the core of the analysis: (1) whether the termination of
ENJASA’s license has reached the threshold of a substantial and permanent deprivation
of Claimants’ shareholdings in L&E and/or ENJASA; and (2) whether, in the present
case, the measures imposed by the host State qualify as a regular exercise of the host

State’s regulatory and supervisory powers that falls outside the concept of (indirect)

441 For an early expression of the idea of the proportionality of the exercise of police powers, see Bischoff Case,
German-Venezuelan Commission, Decision (1903) X UNRIAA 420 (providing that State responsibility would
attach to lawful exercises of police powers, if they lasted “for an unreasonable length of time”).

4# For the use of proportionality analysis in domestic legal systems, see in particular Alec Stone Sweet and Jud
Mathews, ‘Proportionality Balancing and Global Constitutionalism’ (2008) 47 Columbia JTL 73; Aharon Barak,
Proportionality: Constitutional ve and Their Limitations (Cambridge University Press 2012) 175-210; Alec
Stone Sweet and Jud th lancing and Ce Ge LAC ive and
Global Approach (Oxford University Press 2019). For the use in international legal regimes, including
international investment law, see Alec Stone Sweet and Giacinto della Cananea, ‘Proportionality, General
Principles of Law, and Investor-State Arbitration: A Response to Jose Alvarez’ (2014) 46 NYU JILP 911; Gebhard
Biicheler, Proportionality in Investor-State Arbitration (Oxford University Press 2015); Benedict Kingsbury and
Stephan W. Schill, ‘Public Law Concepts to Balance Investors’ Rights with State Regulatory Actions in the Public
Interest: The Principle of Proportionality’ in Stephan W. Schill (ed), Jnternational Investment Law and
Comparative Public Law (Oxford University Press 2010) 75-106; Caroline Henckels, Proportionality and
Deference in Investor-State Arbitration (Cambridge University Press 2015); Thomas Cottier and others, ‘The
Principle of Proportionality i in International Law: Foundations and Variations’ (2017) 18 IWIT 628; Valentina
Vadi, I ble and Si ds of Review in Law and it
(Edward Elgar 2018) ‘54-128,

 

 

 

 

121

expropriation.

qd) Permanent and Substantial Deprivation of Claimants’
Investment

353. Although Claimants’ shareholding in and control over L&E, and indirectly ENJASA,

were unaffected by the revocation of ENJASA’s license, Claimants were unable to make
use of their investment in any meaningful way. ENJASA’s exclusive license, which
granted a monopoly for operating games of chance in the Province of Salta, was the heart
of its entire business operation, the irreplaceable organ that ensured the functioning and
survival of the entire body. Without it, ENJASA’s operations in the gaming sector
became impossible. What remained was an empty shell of assets, employees, and
goodwill, a body that was left to decompose economically. The revocation of ENJASA’s
license, which was confirmed by Resolution No. 315/13, was permanent and was
consolidated by the Province allowing new operators to step into ENJASA’s shoes.
Similarly, as Claimants’ Expert Rosen showed in his Second Report, 98.8% of the value
of L&E consisted of ENJASA’s license.**? The revocation of ENJASA’s license
therefore permanently and substantially deprived Claimants of their indirect investment
in ENJASA and their direct investment in L&E. Both companies were empty shells after
the revocation of ENJASA’s license.

354. Respondent questioned whether a permanent and substantial deprivation of Claimants’

443,
444

investment had occurred because Claimants could have applied for new licenses after
ENJASA’s license was revoked, but did not do so. In addition, Claimants were concretely
offered to continue operating casinos in the Province of Salta.** For the Tribunal, this
aspect does not affect the conclusion that Claimants have been permanently and
substantially deprived of their investment in L&E and/or ENJASA, as ENJASA’s
exclusive license for the remaining 17.5 years could not simply be replaced by new and
less favorable licenses that were still to be negotiated and did not have the same scope as
ENJASA’s operation and were not exclusive. The fact, therefore, that Claimants did not
apply for new licenses and refused to accept a possible offer to operate Casino Salta does
not affect the Tribunal’s conclusion that the revocation of ENJASA’s license
permanently and substantially deprived Claimants of their investment in L&E and

indirectly in ENJASA. If the License was unlawfully revoked, Claimants were not

Rosen II, para. 4.10.
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, paras. 488-489.

122

355.

356.

357.

44s

obliged to apply for new licenses under less favorable conditions or continue to operate
Casino Salta, while relinquishing all the other operations that formed part of ENJASA’s

exclusivity.

Equally irrelevant in this context is the circumstance that the exploitation of certain
assets, in particular the five-star hotel, remained under ENJASA’s control, and could be
monetized after the revocation of the License, first by renting the premises of Casino
Salta in the hotel to new operators and later selling the real estate and goodwill of the
hotel for USD 4.2 million.“*° These circumstances do not affect the conclusion that
ENJASA’s exclusive activities in the gaming business had permanently ended with the
revocation of the License. Whatever financial revenues ENJASA or Claimants could still
draw after the revocation of ENJASA’s license from their investments, including the
liquidation of individual assets that remained, are matters that concern the calculation of
compensation or damages, but do not affect the assessment whether a permanent and

substantial deprivation of Claimants’ investment has occurred in the first place.

The Tribunal consequently decides that the revocation of ENJASA’s license constitutes
a permanent and substantial deprivation of Claimants’ indirect investment in ENJASA

and of its direct investment in L&E.

(2) ENREJA’s Use of Its Regulatory Powers

In the Tribunal’s view, it is beyond question that the Province of Salta had the power to
regulate within its territory the operation of games of chance, including in particular
through imposing duties on operators, whether for the prevention of money laundering
or otherwise, as well as it had the power to administer and implement these regulations,
including the circumscribed sanctions in question, through regulatory authorities and
administrative procedures. All of this is undoubtedly part of the host State’s sovereignty
and its right to regulate. This is all the more so, considering that the regulation and
supervision of gambling operators is demanded by FATF recommendations in order to
combat money laundering.*#° Consequently, the administration of such regulations,

including the imposition of sanctions, even if resulting in the loss of an operating license,

Although the Parties agreed that the hotel had been a condition to acquire the License and operated at a loss or

was — at best — at break even, the Dissent (paras. 132-137) assumes that Claimants were not deprived of the
complete value of their investment because they continued to operate the hotel after the revocation of the License.
446 See 40 FATF Recommendations, Interpretative Note to Recommendations 5, 12 and 16 (20 June 2003) (Exhibit
ARA-031) and Interpretative Note to Recommendations 22 and 23 (February 2012) (Exhibit JM-05).

123

does not quality as (indirect) expropriations under provisions in international investment
treaties, such as Article 4 of the BIT, provided it is lawful also under international law,
that is, made in good faith, is not arbitrary or disproportionate, and respects due process.
If the revocation of the License was, in other words, a lawful sanction, it falls under the
host State’s police powers and does not constitute an indirect expropriation, whereas the
revocation of the License would qualify as an indirect expropriation if it was an unlawful

exercise of the host State’s police powers.

358. The Tribunal therefore does not question the legitimacy of the regulatory framework set
up in the Province of Salta under Law No. 7020, in particular its prohibition to hire
operators without ENREJA’s authorization and its rules to prevent money laundering.
The Tribunal also does not question the sanctions regime established by Law No. 7020,
including the possibility provided for in Article 13 of the Law to revoke operating
licenses in case of certain serious breaches of the regulatory framework. Similarly, for
the Tribunal there is no question that the duties imposed under ENREJA’s Resolutions
Nos. 26/00 and 90/12 on the modalities of making payments and on keeping records on
the identification of recipients of payments and prizes, are legitimate exercises of the host

State’s police powers.

359. What the Tribunal has to examine, however, is how the regulatory framework in place
was applied in the present case, and more specifically, whether ENREJA has properly
exercised its regulatory powers under that framework in revoking ENJASA’s license. As
set out in more detail above, the Tribunal’s task is not to review the legality of the
revocation of ENJASA’s license under domestic law in the same way the host State’s
administrative courts would. Instead, the Tribunal is limited to reviewing the legality
under international law of ENREJA’s exercise of its regulatory and supervisory powers,
including in particular whether the revocation of ENJASA’s license complied with the
principle of good faith, the prohibition of arbitrariness, the principle of proportionality,

and due process under international law. #4”

47 As clarified above (see supra para. 345), the withdrawal by ENJASA of its recourses for judicial review of the
legality of the revocation of its License before the courts of the Province of Salta does not have the effect that
Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13, and the revocation of ENJASA’s license they effectuate, become res
judicata and would have to be accepted as being lawful by the Tribunal.

124

360.

361.

362.

(a) Plan to Oust ENJASA from Operating in the Gaming
Sector
One reason why the revocation of ENJASA’s license could fail to qualify as a regular
exercise of ENREJA’s supervisory powers would be if that revocation was, as submitted
by Claimants, the end point of a larger plan of ENREJA and the Province of Salta to oust
ENJASA from the gaming business in Salta in order to grant licenses to local companies
at conditions that were more favorable to the Province than the fee collected from
ENJASA. Such a plan and its implementation would constitute an act of bad faith,
arbitrariness, and abuse of power that would be unlawful from the perspective of

international law.

To this end, Claimants allege that already in 2007 the Government of the Province of
Salta wanted to “get rid of the Austrians,” referring in this respect to the witness statement
of Mr. Anselmi, who recalled a suggestion from Governor Urtubey’s brother, Mr.
Facundo Urtubey, to this effect, and to take over ENJASA and keep Mr. Anselmi as
General Manager.*** Moreover, Claimants allege, the Government of Salta wanted to
eliminate the influence of Mr. Garamon, a supporter of the political rival of Governor
Urtubey, over ENJASA through his participation in Iberlux. The Province, so Claimants
argue, subsequently started to harass ENJASA by renegotiating the license fee, changing
regulatory requirements in respect of slot machines, and increasing controls of
ENJASA’s operations. These allegations, if true, would indeed suggest the conclusion
that the revocation of ENJASA’s license was not a case of regular exercise of the host

State’s regulatory powers, but rather a bad faith abuse of those powers.

However, the Tribunal does not find that Claimants have submitted conclusive evidence
of a long-term strategy as from 2007, when Governor Urtubey took office, to oust
ENJASA of its operations in the gaming sector in Salta. Claimants’ argument about
mounting harassment of ENJASA with the purpose of ousting them from the gaming
sector following the December 2007 change in political power in the Province of Salta
is of little avail. In this context, the Tribunal does not accept Claimants’ allegation that
the Acta Acuerdo of May 2008, which changed the fixed license fee into a dynamic fee
that depended on ENJASA’s profits, constituted harassment of ENJASA. To start with,
ENJASA has signed the Acta Acuerdo and therefore voluntarily accepted, without any

488 WS II Anselmi, para. 47 (Exhibit C-292); Mr. Tucek referred to this message. See Cross Examination Tucek,
Transcript, Day 2, p. 207.

125

363.

364.

365.

sign of duress, that the license fee would henceforth be calculated as a percentage of its

net profits.

Moreover, the Tribunal accepts Respondent’s explanation that the negotiated change in
the fee was to be explained against the background of Argentina’s 2001/2002 financial
and economic crisis and the measures introduced to tackle it, which included amongst
others the pesification of US dollar-denominated debt and a significant subsequent
devaluation of the Argentine Peso. The Tribunal also accepts that the introduction of the
dynamic license fee required a closer monitoring of ENJASA’s different operations,
which ENREJA implemented through additional technical requirements for slot
machines, registration of transactions, and increased surveillance and monitoring of
ENJASA’s activities. The additional work and investment these changes required on the
side of ENJASA cannot be considered as harassment, but were part of the

implementation of a reliable system for the calculation of the dynamic license fee.

More relevant for sustaining the allegation that ENJASA’s license was revoked for
purposes unrelated to the regular exercise of ENREJA’s regulatory powers appears to be
the letter of 23 November 2012 that Video Drome sent to ENREJA, in which Video
Drome suggested to take over some of ENJASA’s operations under conditions that would
be economically more favorable for the Province than the fee arrangement with
ENJASA.“” In this context, the Tribunal notes that the three formal investigations, which
led to the revocation of ENJASA’s license, started on 11 December 2013, that is, two
weeks after Video Drome’s letter. The Tribunal further notes that after the revocation of
ENJASA’s license, Video Drome, which appears to have been politically well-
connected, happened to receive licenses for a large part of ENJASA’s former gaming
operations, including Casino Golden Dreams, as well as another casino and several slot
machine halls.4°° Moreover, the Tribunal notes that, whereas ENJASA’s license fee
consisted of 15-16% of its net profits, the license fee the new operators had to pay
happened to be a 20% fee, which is exactly the fee Video Drome had suggested in its

letter.

The Tribunal further observes that the Government of the Province of Salta appeared
eager to endorse ENREJA’s Resolution No. 240/13. Less than 40 minutes after its

notification on 13 August 2013, Salta’s Minister of Economy informed the public in a

9 Letter of 23 November 2012 (Exhibit C-171).
450 Resolution No. 334/13 (Exhibit C-036); Resolution No. 339/13 (Exhibit C-041).

126

366.

367.

press conference of the revocation and declared that ENJASA “disappears from this
story” in spite of the possibility for ENJASA to request a suspension and reconsideration
of the revocation of the License.**! A day later, on 14 August 2013, the Governor of the
Province of Salta, in a press interview, considered it appropriate to stretch ENREJA’s
allegations about ENJASA’s hiring of operators, stating that ENJASA “has outsourced
100% of its operations.”45* The quick and outspoken comments from the Provincial
Government on an administrative decision that was not final and most probably would
be subject to administrative and judicial review, could be taken as an indication that
Resolution No. 240/13 was not so much a legal, but rather a political decision, which was

endorsed by the highest authorities of the Province.

The Minister’s statements could be understood to suggest that ENJASA’s exclusive
license was revoked in order to increase the Province’s benefits from the operation of
gaming operations by asking for license fees from new licensee that would be higher than
what ENJASA paid to the Province. At the press conference of 13 August 2013, the
Minister stated that: “If we negotiate with each manager, we may reach 20% ... an
additional amount between 20 and 25 million per year.”*5* The Minister then specified
the social projects on which the money could be spent. He also explained that before, in
2007, an increase in the license fee could only be obtained through negotiation “since
[UNIREN] was not aware of any breach of the company.” **4 He added that, at that time,
“we did not have much more since they were complying with a contract.”4°> The Minister
thus may be seen as confirming that the purpose of the revocation was to improve Salta’s
finances; where in the past this objective had to be achieved by negotiating amendments
to the contractual arrangements with ENJASA, the revocation of its License now allowed

for the same without negotiations.

The Tribunal further observes that, in 2011 and 2012, ENREJA had only imposed one
sanction upon ENJASA,*°° but that on 28 May 2013, a few months before the revocation
of ENJASA’s license, it imposed in Resolution No. 161/13 the maximum fine of ARS
200,000 for modifying prize limits without authorization in poker games, as well as the

maximum fine of ARS 500,000 for organizing an unauthorized jackpot because of an

451 Press Conference (Exhibit C-169).

452 Interview of 14 August 2013 (Exhibit C-212).
453 Press Conference, p. 4 (Exhibit C-169-ENG).
454 Ibid p. 2.

45 Ibid,

456 Resolution No. 178/ 12 (Exhibit C-166).

127

368.

369.

370.

alleged “recidivism,” even though identical infractions had not been committed by
ENJASA before.**” Furthermore, the Tribunal observes that the three investigations that
ultimately led to the revocation of ENJASA’s exclusive gaming license were all started

on 11 December 2012, in what appears to be a coordinated manner.

The imposition of the two maximum fines in May 2013 and the earlier coordinated
investigations that ultimately lead to the revocation of ENJASA’s license may reveal a
change in ENREJA’s policy towards ENJASA. However, whether this change in policy
was motivated by an intention to exclude ENJASA from the gaming sector in Salta and
transfer its operations to local companies on terms that were more lucrative for the
Province, cannot be established from the evidence submitted by Claimants. In particular,
the circumstantial evidence relied on by Claimants, such as the letter by Video Drome,
the statements of Salta’s Governor and the Minister of Economy, as well as the initiation
of coordinated investigations that ultimately led to the revocation of ENJASA’s license,
with the intervening imposition of maximum fines for recidivism, are insufficient, in the
Tribunal’s view, to draw an inferences as to the intentions of ENREJA and the Province
of Salta in issuing Resolution No. 240/13. The Tribunal will therefore not, on the basis
of this circumstantial evidence, speculate what ENREJA’s motives for issuing

Resolution No. 240/13 may have been.

Similarly, the Tribunal considers Claimants’ allegation that the revocation of the License
was a political plot to harm Mr. Garamon, a supporter of a political rival of Governor
Urtubey, as not sufficiently supported by evidence. *** Likewise, the Tribunal accepts that
the quick transition of ENJASA’s activities to different operators within one week after
Resolution No. 315/13 would be justified if the revocation of ENJASA’s license was a
lawful exercise of ENREJA’s regulatory and supervisory powers. After all, it was
necessary to ensure the continuance of games of chance operations in the Province and

to protect the employment of hundreds of employees.

Instead of speculating about ENREJA’s and the Province’s motives for revoking

ENJASA’s license, the Tribunal will focus on the facts and the law and assess on that

457 Resolution No. 161/13 (Exhibit C-154).

458 Mr. Tucek, Claimants’ witness, stated that in his dealings with ENREJA and the Province, he was told that Mr.
Garamon’s interests in ENJASA were an obstacle for further negotiations. The Tribunal observes that the
allegation that the revocation has been caused by political motives is only based upon Mr. Tucek’s testimony, but
is not proven otherwise. Moreover, as further developments have shown, the fact that Mr. Garamon was no longer
involved after Claimants had purchased all remaining shares in L&E from Iberlux did not lead to a reinstatement
of ENJASA’s license.

128

371.

372.

373.

basis whether the revocation of the License as such constituted a regular exercise of
ENREJA’s regulatory powers that complied with international law requirements, that is,
as elaborated above, whether it did not violate good faith, was neither arbitrary nor

discriminatory, complied with due process, or was proportionate.

(b) ENREJA’s Power to Revoke the License under Article 13

One aspect that would result in qualifying the revocation of ENJASA’s license as
arbitrary conduct contrary to the rule of law would be the lack of a legal basis on which
to base that revocation. Claimants indeed argue that Law No. 7020 did not vest ENREJA
with the power to revoke ENJASA’s license. They submit that Article 13 of Law No.
7020, which provides for this competence, was superseded by the new Article 41, which
was incorporated into Law No. 7020 by Law No. 7133 of 9 May 2001. Article 41
provides for specific administrative sanctions, but does not encompass the revocation of
a license for operating games of chance. In addition, Claimants submit that the License
vested the power of revocation in the Government of the Province of Salta, and not in
ENREJA.*? Respondent by contrast argues that Article 13 of Law No. 7020 was
applicable and provided the appropriate basis for ENREJA’s revocation of ENJASA’s

license in Resolution No. 240/13.4°°

The Tribunal observes a certain tension in the relationship between Article 13 of Law
No. 7020 and the provisions of Articles 40 and 41, which were introduced in 2001. Both
Article 13 and Articles 40 and 41 provide for sanctions in case of breaches of Law No.
7020 or of ENREJA’s resolutions. Under Article 13, the most severe sanction is
revocation of an operating license, whereas the most severe sanction under Article 41 of
Law No. 7020 is a closure for a maximum of 30 days of the specific operation or venue
where an infraction was committed. In addition, both Articles 13 and 40 of Law No. 7020
make it clear that infractions may also be prosecuted criminally. This overlap makes the
Tribunal wonder what the relationship is between Article 13 of Law No. 7020 and the
regime under Articles 40 and 41, which was introduced into that Law in 2001.

Respondent’s expert, Prof. Marcer, argued that Article 13 applied to licensees, while

46

Articles 40 and 41 applied to licensees and other actors.*°! The Tribunal, however, fails

459 Reply on the Merits, paras. 300-304; see supra paras. 176-177. See also Garcia Pullés IV, p. 46 (Exhibit C-
300); Transcript, Day 5, p. 18.

460 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 377-378; see supra paras. 254-256.

461 Marcer II, paras. 43-44.

129

to understand this distinction, which would imply that until 2001, illegal operators of
games of chance who did not have a license, could not be sanctioned under Law No.
7020. Besides, nothing in Article 13 indicates that its scope is restricted to licensees, and
that Article 41 would apply to non-licensees. Similarly, Prof. Marcer’s explanation that
Articles 40 and 41 would set up a special regime for “administrative” infractions while
Article 13 would allow to sanction “punishable” infractions, does not convince the
Tribunal either. *°? Pursuant to their wording, both Article 13 and Articles 40 and 41 apply
to breaches of Law No.7020 and of ENREJA’s resolutions.

374. The Tribunal observes, furthermore, that in the past ENREJA had relied on Articles 40

and 41 when imposing fines for ENJASA’s breaches of gaming regulations. For instance,
in Resolution No. 161/13, ENREJA explicitly indicated that the sanctions were taken
pursuant to Articles 40 et seq. of Law No. 7020.‘ By contrast, in Resolution No. 240/13,
ENREJA admitted that Article 40 as well as Article 13 conferred it competence to
sanction breaches, but relied on Article 13 in order to revoke ENJASA’s license, stating
that the distinction between the possible penalties the two provisions provided for, was
“imperceptible.”*°t ENREJA did so, however, without acknowledging that there is a
crucial difference between the revocation of an exclusive license, covering extensive
operations and various sites, for the remaining duration of the term of the License — here
17.5 years — on the basis of Article 13, and the inability to operate specific sites on the

basis of Articles 41 and 43, which cannot exceed the term of one year.

375. The Tribunal observes that Law No. 7133, while incorporating Articles 40 et seq. in Law

No. 7020, did not expressly abrogate Article 13 of the latter Law. Article 6 of Law No.
7133, which introduced Article 53 into Law No 7020 and which stated that “any other
rule contrary to the provisions set forth herein shall be abrogated,”*° did not apply to
Article 13, as this Article is not incompatible with Articles 40 et seq. and is part of the
very Law that Law No. 7133 amended. Besides, Law No. 7020, as published in the
Official Gazette of the Province of Salta after the 2001 amendment, still contains Article
13.4% The Tribunal therefore holds that there are no convincing legal arguments to limit

ENREJA’s competence to impose sanctions for the violation of the regulatory framework

Marcer II, para. 102.

463 Resolution 161/13, p. 4 (Exhibit C-154).
464 Resolution 240/13, p. 33 (Exhibit C-03 1).
465 Law No. 7133, Art 6 (Exhibit ARA-06).
466 See also Marcer II, paras. 106-108.

130

376.

377.

378.

established under Law No 7020 to those under Articles 40 et seg. and to deny ENREJA
the sanctioning powers under Article 13 of Law No. 7020, which include the competence

to revoke the License.*°”

The Tribunal also has taken note of Claimants’ argument that Article 6 of the License
only granted the Provincial Executive Branch the power to terminate the License in case
of breach.*** The Tribunal, however, observes that the present case concerns the
sanctioning by the regulatory authority, ENREJA, for breaches of the regulations and not
the termination of the License for breach of the contractual relationship between Licensee
and Licensor.*® Article 6 of the License can therefore not pre-empt ENREJA’s exercise
of supervisory and sanctioning powers under Article 13 of Law No. 7020.
() ENREJA’s Determinations of ENJASA’s Breaches of the
Regulatory Framework

Not only the lack of a legal basis, or the lack of competence of a domestic agency, for
imposing a sanction can lead to arbitrariness under international law. Arbitrariness can
also consist of an abuse of power. However, an investment treaty tribunal, which is not
assuming the function of a domestic administrative court, but is reviewing the
international legality of the administrative conduct in question, will not engage in
reviewing the application of domestic law de novo. In the exercise of due deference, and
taking into account that arbitrariness is more than a violation of a rule of law, but rather
of the rule of law,*” the Tribunal’s examination is limited to the issue of whether the
decisions in question appear so manifestly incorrect that they must be deemed to
constitute an abuse of power and thus constitute arbitrary conduct from the perspective

of international law.

Based on this standard of review, the Tribunal finds a number of errors ENREJA has
committed in the three investigations in Resolutions No. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12, and
which were subsequently used to justify the revocation of ENJASA’s license in
Resolution No. 240/13, that are so manifest that they must be considered to constitute an

abuse of power and arbitrariness under international law. These errors encompass: (i)

467 For the Dissent (i.e. paras. 140-143, 400-401) Arts. 13 and 41 have a clearly distinct scope of application, but
the Dissent joins the Tribunal’s majority in the conclusion that ENREJA was not prevented in principle to apply
Art. 13 and issue the sanctions mentioned therein.

468 Garcia Pullés IV, para. 28 (Exhibit C-300); Exhibit 1 to Decree 3616/99 (Exhibit C-048).

489 See also Mercer II, para. 105.

47 Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy), Judgment (20 July 1989) [1989] ICJ
Reports 15, 76, para. 128 (Exhibit ALRA-193).

131

379.

380.

manifestly incorrect interpretations of several legal rules that form part of the regulatory
framework; (ii) manifestly incorrect findings of fact; and/or (iii) combinations of both
types of errors in the application of the regulatory framework in Resolution No. 240/13.
Taken together, these errors lead the Tribunal to conclude that ENREJA, in revoking
ENJASA’s operating license, has abused its powers and acted arbitrarily under

international law.

(@) Allegations in Resolution No. 380/12

In respect of Resolution No. 380/12, in which ENREJA had charged ENJASA with
having breached anti-money laundering rules in its lottery operations and by making a
payment in respect of a prize won in a slot machine game, the Tribunal is unable to see
how ENREJA could plausibly conclude that the rules on anti-money laundering in
Resolution No. 26/00 (registration of the payment and of the identity of the winner in the
anti-money laundering book) were seriously breached when the payment and registration
of a prize of ARS 11,080 were delayed by some six weeks, justifying in combination
with other infractions the revocation of ENJASA’s license. Similarly, the Tribunal is
unable to see how ENREJA could plausibly consider that the same rules on anti-money
laundering were seriously breached when a prize of ARS 11,480 won on a slot machine
on 14 May 2012, which had not yet been paid out, was only registered in the anti-money
laundering book in full on 17 May 2012, after an inspection conducted by ENREJA on
16 May 2012, justifying in combination with other infractions the revocation of the
License. In both cases, the Tribunal concludes that ENREJA’s finding that ENJASA had
breached the regulatory framework on anti-money laundering in respect of these two
prizes appears manifestly unsupported in fact and law and must be considered to be

arbitrary from the perspective of international law.

By contrast, as concerns the other two instances investigated in Resolution No. 380/12,
that is (i) ENREJA’s charge that ENJASA failed properly to register in the anti-money
laundering book the payment of a prize of ARS 12,000 won on 30 January 2012, and (ii)
the erroneous registration in the anti-money laundering book of an expired prize of ARS
15,000 won on 2 March 2012, the Tribunal is satisfied that ENREJA has committed no
relevant errors in its finding of fact and in the interpretation of the regulatory framework.
These two instances were therefore not objectionable from the perspective of

international law.

132

381.

382.

383.

(ii) Allegations in Resolution No. 381/12

In respect of Resolution No. 381/12, which concerned alleged breaches of anti-money
laundering rules in live games, the Tribunal considers that ENREJA has based its
findings on ENJASA’s breaches on manifestly incorrect interpretations of said rules.
This holds true in respect of both the question of whether payments of prizes above ARS
10,000 had to be made by check prior to 1 May 2012 and the applicable statute of

limitations.

First, to the Tribunal, it is obvious that an express duty to make payments of prizes above
ARS 10,000 by check or international money transfer was only introduced in ENREJA’s
Resolution No. 90/12, which became effective as of 1 May 2012. Before that date, the
Tribunal is unable to see any legal basis in existing anti-money laundering legislation or
regulations for requiring ENJASA to make payment of prizes above ARS 10,000 by
check. In particular, the Tribunal cannot accept Respondent’s allegation that Law No.
7020 and Resolution No. 26/00, which both did not contain such a duty expressly, should
nevertheless, following a “comprehensive and harmonious interpretation” be read as
requiring the payment of prizes in excess of ARS 10,000 by check because otherwise
such payments would be “suspicious transactions” that needed to be denounced under

the anti-money laundering regulations in place.

As Respondent’s expert, Prof. Marcer, himself has admitted, Article 13 is a provision
that forms part of criminal administrative law.*7! Consequently, the basic principle in
criminal matters, “nu/lum crimen sine lege” should apply. As no legislative text clearly
obliged the payment by check of the prizes in question, the payment of such prizes in
cash alone cannot constitute a violation of the regulatory framework. This conclusion can
also not be changed in light of the fact that ENREJA had imposed, on various occasions,
sanctions on ENJASA for not paying prizes exceeding ARS 10,000 by check prior to the
entry into force of Resolution No. 90/12,4”? and that ENJASA had not only chosen not

4" Transcript, Day 5, p.170. See also Marcer II, paras. 29 (stating that “[f]acts must be analyzed in the light of the
principles of criminal law”), 43-45, 120-122; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 339; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, paras. 311-312.

4? Cf Dissent, para. 169 (mentioning that Resolution No. 240/13 lists for 2007-2008 at least 52 payments
exceeding ARS 10,000, which allegedly did not comply with the requirements for such payments under Law No.
7020 and Resolution No. 26/00). The Tribunal’s majority does not agree that imprecise provisions that carry
criminal or criminal-law-like sanctions can be retroactively “construed” or “concretized” merely through
subsequent administrative practice as the Dissent, para. 197 seems to suggest ENREJA was able to do, when it
imposed sanctions on ENJASA for having made payments above ARS 10,000 other than through check or
international money transfer in Resolutions Nos. 31/08, 32/08, 232/08, 104/10, 106/10, and 161/10.

133

384.

385.

386.

to contest those fines, but even accepted — through statements of its legal counsel at the
time — that it was required to make payments of prizes above ARS 10,000 by check or

international money transfer.*7?

Such acceptances — and statements by ENJASA’s then legal counsel — may have been
made in light of the relative insignificance of the fines involved and may have been
motivated by the desire not to cloud or burden the relations with ENREJA. Be that as it
may, a subsequent administrative practice, even if accepted by the subjects of the law,
cannot, in the Tribunal’s view, result in the creation of a primary norm that would impose
a legal obligation on ENJASA to the effect that future behaviour that is not forbidden by
the letter of the law would turn into a breach of the law that could be enforced through
sanctions, including through the revocation of ENJASA’s operating license.
Consequently, the charge in Resolution No. 381/12 that ENJASA had violated anti-
money laundering rules by not paying prizes above ARS 10,000 by check in August and
September 2011, lacks any justification in the applicable law and must be considered as

arbitrary under international law.

Second, it is also obvious to the Tribunal that ENREJA manifestly disregarded the
explicit one-year time-bar contained in Article 49 of Law No. 7020, as all alleged
infractions investigated under Resolution No. 381/12 had been committed more than one
year before the investigation started. In this context, the Tribunal does not follow
Respondent’s legal expert, Prof. Marcer, who argued that the explicit time bar contained
in Law No. 7020 would not apply to breaches of Article 5 of the same law, given that the
revocation of ENJASA’s license was based on Article 13, not on Article 40 of Law No.
7020. Instead, Prof. Marcer argued that sanctions imposed on the basis of Article 13 of
Law No. 7020 were covered by the 5-year statute of limitation under Argentina’s federal

criminal law.*”

However, there is simply nothing in Articles 5, 13, or 41 of Law No. 7020 that allows
such a conclusion. On the contrary, as convincingly explained, in the Tribunal’s view,
by Claimants’ experts, Prof. Garcia Pullés and Prof. Bianchi, under Argentine law, a
shorter time bar, or statute of limitations, contained in a provincial statute prevails in

respect of breaches of that statute over a longer time bar, or statute of limitations, under

4 See Letter from ENJASA to ENREJA of 30 August 2005 (Exhibit ARA-193); Letter from ENJASA to
ENREJA of 14 April 2010 (Exhibit RA-173); Request for Reconsideration of 20 May 2010, p. 90 (Exhibit ARA-
239); Respondent Post-Hearing Brief, paras, 156-160.

474 Marcer II, paras. 43-44.

134

federal law.*”> ENREJA could also not rely on ENJASA’s recidivism to get around the
applicable statute of limitations as there was no relevant prior unlawful disregard of anti-
money laundering rules in the conduct of live games, which is the subject-matter
Resolution No. 381/12 concerned. Consequently, the charge in Resolution No. 381/12
that ENJASA had violated anti-money laundering rules was also arbitrary from the
perspective of international law because ENREJA clearly and manifestly violated the

applicable statute of limitations.

387. Finally, in respect of the cash payments made to the two individuals in September 2011
in Casino Salta, the Tribunal observes that, because of the one-year statute of limitation,
these payments cannot be the subject matter of an investigation that started in December
2012. However, even if no time-bar excluded the investigation in question, the Tribunal
is not able to see which rule would have required ENJASA to make a payment by check
in the underlying scenario. It seems that the only basis for an investigation could have
been that ENREJA suspected the transactions in question to be part of a money
laundering scheme. After all, only a finding of money laundering could have led to
sanctions for breach of the regulatory framework in respect of these facts, but ENREJA
has not demonstrated in Resolution No. 240/13 in any way that and how this had been

the case.

(iii) Allegations in Resolution No. 384/12

388. In respect of Resolution No. 384/12, which charged ENJASA with hiring third operators
without ENREJA’s authorization in breach of Article 5(1) of Law No. 7020, the Tribunal
considers that ENREJA has equally acted arbitrarily from the perspective of international
law by basing its findings on either a manifestly incomprehensible interpretation of the
concept of “operator” in the sense of Article 5 of Law No. 7020, a manifestly incorrect

investigation into the facts, or a combination of both types of errors.

389. In the Tribunal’s view, ENREJA in a manifestly arbitrary manner considered Emsenor,
Prodec, and DEK, as well as Video Dome to be “operators” of games of chance in the
sense of Article 5 of Law No. 7020. While the term “operator” is an indeterminate legal
concept, which is not further defined either in Law No. 7020 or any other instrument

passed by ENREJA, the type of activities Emsenor, Prodec, and DEK, as well as Video

475 Garcia Pullés IV, paras. 48-63 (Exhibit C-028); Bianchi IV, paras. 159-171 (Exhibit C-301); Claimants’ Reply
on the Merits, para. 373.

135

Drome had engaged in, cannot, in the Tribunal’s view, plausibly be considered to qualify

as operating games of chance, which, as the experts of both Parties agree, requires

responsibility for, control over, and exploitation of games of chance:

476

As the factual record laid down in Resolution No. 240/13 indicates, the conclusion
that Emsenor was an operator of games of chance was based on a contract with
ENJASA in which the rent ENJASA paid to Emsenor for a slot machine hall in
Salvador Mazza was calculated as a percentage of the profits ENJASA made from
operating slot machines in the hall in question. The conclusion of such a rental
agreement, however, does not plausibly turn Emsenor into an operator of games of
chance.

Similarly, as the factual record laid down in Resolution No. 240/13 indicates,
Prodec and its predecessor, DEK, had supplied hardware and software to ENJASA
for jackpot systems and poker gaming tables for Casino Salta. This activity as well
cannot plausibly be considered to turn Prodec and DEK into operators of games of
chance.

Video Drome as well cannot plausibly be qualified as an operator of games of
chance just because it provided ENJASA with slot machines for several slot
machine halls against a fee that was dependent on the income generated from these

slot machines, as Resolution No. 240/13 assumes.

390. The Tribunal further considers that ENREJA in a manifestly arbitrary manner qualified

476

Mr. Navarrete, New Star, and Mr. Colloricchio as unauthorized operators of games of

chance. To the Tribunal it is clear, that these operators, and in the case of Mr. Colloricchio

his two predecessors from whom he had taken over the slot machine halls, had been

authorized to operate games of chance by BPAS, before ENJASA had been granted its

exclusive license.*”” While Respondent alleges that these authorisations had been

cancelled, both in law and in fact, once ENJASA received its exclusive license, no

contemporaneous document proves this allegation. On the contrary, in the Tribunal’s

view, ENREJA was aware of the continued activities of previously existing operators,

including Mr. Navarrete, Mr. Colloricchio, and New Star, and did not protest against

Transcript, Day 5, p. 84 (Garcia Pullés, stating that an operator is not the one “supplying the ship,” but the one

“steering the ship”); p. 113 (Bianchi, stating “the operator is the one who is responsible for the business, who runs
the business”); pp. 130, 197 (Marcer, stating that an operator is a person “who carries out any of the activities of
the license holder”, whose function is “to exploit”, “to operate”).

477 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 62, Claimants Memorial on the Merits, paras. 115-120; Claimants’ Reply,
paras. 84-109.

136

their continued operation.*”> ENREJA had been informed by ENJASA that the

9

previously existing operators contributed to ENJASA’s license fee*” and it was

informed of the roster of slot machines these individuals and entities operated.**”

391. In this context, it is also telling that Resolution No. 384/12 now qualified the above
entities and individuals as “operators” allegedly hired by ENJASA without ENREJA’s
authorization, while in earlier resolutions ENREJA had fined ENJASA as operator of the
very same sites for breaches investigated under Resolution No. 384/12.**! One would
assume that the alleged third operators should also have been sanctioned for operating
games of chance without license or authorization of ENREJA, but at the time only
ENJASA was sanctioned.*** This circumstance already puts into question ENREJA’s

thesis that these companies and persons were actual operators.

392. Independently of the legal status of these three “operators” under domestic law, it cannot
be plausibly considered that ENJASA had seriously breached its obligation under Article
5 of Law No. 7020 by hiring these “operators” without ENREJA’s authorization. Mr.
Navarrete, Mr. Colloricchio, and New Star had been authorized by BPAS and had been
operating gaming sites for many years, without ever being disturbed in these operations.
Between 1999, when ENJASA became the exclusive license holder, and 2012, that is,
for 13 years, these operators frequently had been controlled by ENREJA and their
activities had been ratified by ENREJA. After having known and accepted for such a
long time these three operators, ENREJA could not in good faith, without any warning
and without possibility to amend matters, take the most drastic sanction of revoking

ENJASA’s license.

393. In sum, of the seven allegedly unauthorized operators that ENJASA had hired, four were

478 For instance, ENREJA had received a copy of the contracts between ENJASA and Mr. Navarrete, respectively
Mr. Colloricchio, and never objected to their continuing gaming operations; Agreement to Conduct Games of
Chance of 29 September 2008 (Exhibit ARA-054). See Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 188-189.

49 Exhibits C-361, C-319, and C-363.

480 Exhibits C-303, C-397, and C-398.

481 Mr. Collorichio, as per Resolution No. 384/12, allegedly operated the site in Rosario de la Frontera
(Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 313), Mr. Navarrete the one in Salvador Mazza (Respondent Post-
Hearing Brief, para. 94), New Star allegedly operated slot machines in Salvador Guemes, Metan, and Rosario de
la Frontera (Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 327) and Video Drome slot machines at Casino Golden
Dreams, Metan, JV Gonzalez, and Rosario de la Frontera (Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 323,
referring to Letter Video Drome to ENREJA, 23 November 2012 (Exhibit C-171)), while Prodec and DEK
allegedly also operated at Casino Golden Dreams and Casino Salta (Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
324-326).

482 See e.g. Resolution No. 153/10 (Guemes); Resolution No. 129/10 (Salvador Mazza); Resolution No. 200/10
(Metan); Resolution No. 161/13 (Casino Salta); Resolutions Nos. 232/08, 46/10, 106/10, 104/10, 106/10, and
286/10 (Casino Golden Dreams).

137

394.

395.

396.

clearly not operating games of chance in the Province of Salta, but only rented the
premises, supplied hard- and software, or provided slot machines to ENJASA. The three
others had been authorized by BPAS to operate games of chance at one point in time
before ENJASA had been granted the License. Since ENREJA, at the very least, had
knowledge of this situation and tolerated it, if it had not even asked ENJASA to accept
the continuous operation of these and other previously existing operators, as Claimants
submit, it is a manifestly arbitrary application of Article 5 of Law No. 7020 to qualify
ENJASA as having breached its duty not to hire operators of games of chance without

ENREJA’s authorization.

In sum, in the Tribunal’s view, the investigations resulting from Resolution No. 384/12
clearly did not uncover any serious breaches that ENREJA relied upon in Resolution No.
240/13 to revoke ENJASA’s license.
(iv) Conclusion on Allegations Underlying Resolution No.
240/13

In examining the infractions ENREJA claimed ENJASA had committed in Resolutions
Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12, the Tribunal concludes that ENREJA’s findings on
these infractions in Resolution No. 240/13 were, to a predominant extent, based on
manifestly arbitrary determinations of fact and law. This included in particular
ENREJA’s interpretation of anti-money laundering rules, disregard for the applicable
statute of limitations, the legal qualifications of certain facts, and/or disregard of its own
long-time acceptance of certain facts. Taken together, these aspects show that ENREJA’s
overall findings on ENJASA’s breaches of the regulatory framework made in Resolution
No. 240/13 were arbitrary and not in accordance with the requirements of the rule of law

under international law.

ENREJA’s findings of breach in Resolution No. 240/13 that the Tribunal does not find
fault with are essentially limited to certain issues with the registration of payments of
prizes addressed in Resolution No. 380/12, namely the failure to properly register the
payment ofa prize of ARS 12,000 won on 30 January 2012 and the erroneous registration
of an expired prize of ARS 15,000 won on 2 March 2012. These breaches, however,
hardly could have justified a sanction as severe as revoking ENJASA’s exclusive
operating license (even if prior sanctions against ENJASA legitimately could be taken

into account as indications of ENJASA’s recidivism). The conclusion the Tribunal

138

397.

398.

399.

6

400.

therefore draws is that ENREJA’s determinations on many of ENJASA’s breaches of the
regulatory framework, and the consequences ENREJA attached to these determinations,

namely the revocation of ENJASA’s license, were arbitrary under international law.
(d)  Proportionality of Resolution No. 240/13

A further aspect militating against qualifying the revocation of ENJASA’s license as a
proper exercise of ENREJA’s regulatory and supervisory powers concerns the lack of
proportionality of the sanction imposed. In this context, the Tribunal notes that
proportionality is not only a requirement in order for the exercise of a host State’s
regulatory powers to be carved out from the concept of indirect expropriation under
international law (see supra paras. 336-337, 351); proportionality is also enshrined in the
host State’s domestic legal framework, both generally as a principle of administrative
law, but also specifically in the regulatory framework governing games of chance in the

Province of Salta.

Thus, Article 13 of Law No. 7020 explicitly requires that any sanction imposed by
ENREJA has to be proportionate to the infractions committed. It states:
The punishment above shall be applied taking into consideration due
proportionality between the penalties and the violation, notwithstanding
the criminal liability and misdemeanor liability.
Similarly, Article 48 of Law No. 7020 not only requests proportionality with “the gravity
of the offense,” but also more generally with
the damage caused upon the legal certainty, the morality and good
customs, the consequences suffered by the Provincial Government and/or
individuals, the social upheaval caused and the infringer’s records of
relapses.
The Tribunal has noted before that nearly all the alleged infractions, which were the basis
for the revocation of ENJASA’s license, were based on manifestly ill-conceived and
arbitrary interpretations and applications of the regulatory framework in place and can
therefore not serve as legitimate grounds for the imposition of sanctions on ENJASA.
First, many alleged breaches concerned an obligation that did not exist at the time,
namely to pay prizes over ARS 10,000 by check. Second, the allegation that ENJASA
had involved seven unauthorized operators was baseless: four of them were not operators,
but had rented out premises to ENJASA, had provided slot machines, or had supplied

software and hardware; the three others were previously authorized operators, which

139

401.

402.

403.

404,

were known and accepted by ENREJA. Finally, all alleged infractions, which had been
committed more than one year before ENREJA’s investigations started on 11 December

2012 were time-barred under Article 49 of Law No. 7020.

If one detracts the above alleged breaches of the regulatory framework, what remains for

ENREJA as a basis for imposing sanctions are the following minor breaches:

— The failure to properly register one payment of ARS 12,000 for a prize
won on 30 January 2012 in the lottery game “Témbola”; and

— The erroneous registration of a prize of ARS 15,000 won on 2 March 2012
in the lottery game “Toémbola”, which had already expired and was never

paid.

The Tribunal admits that these breaches could have been a valid ground for sanctions
under the regulatory framework. They do not, however, in the Tribunal’s view, indicate
any systematic disregard by ENJASA of the regulatory framework, including the rules
on the prohibition and prevention of money laundering. The Tribunal therefore considers
that the revocation of a 30-year exclusive license, that was still to run for 17.5 years,
covering many operations in different gaming sectors, constitutes a grossly
disproportionate sanction for such minor infractions, which cannot be considered as
complying with the international legal requirement of proportionality for a regular

exercise of ENREJA’s regulatory powers.

What is more, even if all allegations concerning ENJASA’s breaches of the regulatory
framework had been correct, that is, if ENJASA had illegally subcontracted certain of its
activities to third operators and breached rules for the prevention of anti-money
laundering as alleged by ENREJA, the Tribunal considers a revocation of ENJASA’s
license under the circumstances of the case to be a sanction that is disproportionate from
the perspective of international law. This is so because ENREJA, in a manifestly
erroneous manner, has failed to consider whether other equally effective measures had
been available to prevent money laundering in the gaming sector short of revoking
ENJASA’s license and re-allocating its operations to third operators, and has not
sufficiently taken into account the legitimate interests of ENJASA to continue
exploitation of its exclusive 30-year license for the remaining time in devising the

sanctions in Resolution No. 240/13.

In this context, the Tribunal notes that ENREJA had, as confirmed by several

140

405.

406.

witnesses,**? not even considered the suspension of the License as a means to ensure
future compliance of ENJASA with anti-money laundering rules, even though this would
have clearly been a milder sanction that could arguably have had the same effect of
ensuring compliance of ENJASA with the regulatory framework in place. Not
considering whether a milder sanction could have been equally effective to ensure
ENJASA’s compliance with the regulatory framework is a further indication that
ENREJA misused its discretion in sanctioning ENJASA’s conduct in an arbitrary
fashion. Furthermore, ENREJA’s complete disregard of ENJASA’s interest in
continuing the exploitation, and of the impact of a revocation on the company’s future
business as well as on its past investments, indicates, in the Tribunal’s view, that

ENREJA abused its discretion.

What also needs to be taken into account in the evaluation of the seriousness of some of
the infractions ENJASA allegedly had committed, is that ENJASA’s business involved
extensive operations and a large number of staff. With 328 employees, ENJASA operated
four casinos and 15 slot machine halls with a total of 1,376 slot machines. Its four lottery
operations involved the sale of 60,000 lottery tickets per day,*** employed 44 employees,
and relied upon 700 lottery agencies; each week there were 17 draws.**> With such host
of activities, it is inevitable that sometimes someone makes a mistake or that sometimes
some rules are not complied with by someone, without such mistakes or non-compliances
indicating or resulting in serious and systemically relevant breaches of the regulatory
framework by ENJASA. Besides, the risk that someone sometimes does not apply the
tules is the reason why ENJASA’s activities had to be monitored by ENREJA, which
had a full array of sanctions at its disposition to secure future compliance that fell short

of revoking ENJASA’s license.

The Tribunal also observes that urgency did not command the withdrawal of ENJASA’s
license. ENJASA did not have a bad record at the time the License was revoked: in the
two years before the investigations started that led up to the revocation of ENJASA’s
license ENJASA had only been sanctioned once for negligent conduct in the handling of

lottery drawings, which ENREJA admitted was merely imprudent, but not made in bad

483 See Ms. Cainelli, Transcript, Day 7, pp. 16-17; Mr. S. Sylvester, Transcript, Day 7, pp. 211-213.
484 WS I Anselmi, para. 41 (Exhibit C-018).
485 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 58.

141

407.

408.

409.

410.

faith.**° ENJASA was also not engaged in acute money laundering, so that ENJASA’s
license had to be urgently revoked in order to prevent further money laundering and

immediate harm.

The Tribunal finally observes that neither before the formal investigations, nor in the
eight months between the start of this investigation in December 2012 and the revocation
of the License, has ENREJA ever requested ENJASA to rectify the situation.**” For the
Tribunal, ENREJA’s disinterest in rectification is another sign of disproportionality
under international law: it indicates that ENJASA’s interests to continue operations for
more than 17 years was not taken into account in graduating the sanction to be imposed,

but that the interest of the Province was given unwavering priority.

In fact, compliance with anti-money laundering rules was clearly not a major
consideration for ENREJA during the eight months between the initiation of the three
investigations in December 2012 and the revocation of ENJASA’s license in August
2013. Had the prevention of money laundering been the primary concern for ENREJA,
the Tribunal would have expected ENREJA to take a more pro-active and expedited
approach to request ENJASA to remedy whatever was wrong, such as the involvement
of unauthorized operators whereby ENREJA could have issued a clear warning that, if
the conduct in question was not remedied, ENJASA’s license would be revoked. None
of this happened. ENREJA’s investigations were clearly geared towards stopping the
operations, rather than aiming at remediation and ensuring future compliance of

ENJASA with the regulatory framework in place.

Revocation was even more disproportionate as ENREJA had not notified ENJASA
concretely that future infringements could result in such revocation when sanctions were
imposed in 2011, 2012, and 2013.** The only references to revocation, mentioned by
Ms. Courel, one of ENREJA’s lawyers, dated from 2010 and were unrelated to the issues

under investigation in Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12.4%

Respondent has argued that nevertheless revocation was justified because of ENJASA’s
recidivism, given that ENREJA had already imposed the maximum possible fine in

Resolution No. 161/13 (dated 28 May 2013) and that sanctions did not deter ENJASA,

486 28 months between Resolution No. 200/10 of 27 July 2010 (Exhibit C-165) and 11 December 2012. See
Resolution No. 178/12 of 10 July 2012 (Exhibit C-166).

487 Claimants’ Memorial, para. 328.

488 See Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 256.

+89 See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 371-375; WS Courel, para. 36.

142

so that there was no other alternative than to revoke ENJASA’s license.”

411. The Tribunal is aware that Article 48 of Law No. 7020 allowed ENREJA to take into
consideration the “infringer’s record of relapses” to establish the fine to be imposed and
that Resolution No. 240/13 indicated that the penalty was inter alia determined by
ENJASA’s “background,” listing the sanctions imposed since 2005.**! The Tribunal is
also aware that ENREJA has sanctioned ENJASA for some twenty-one breaches of the
anti-money laundering regulations, established in sixteen investigations in the years
before ENJASA’s license was revoked. Moreover, the Tribunal notes that the sanctions
imposed by ENREJA in its investigations prior to August 2013 gradually increased
because of “recidivism” on the side of ENJASA as a graphic presented by Respondent

(see supra para. 260) demonstrates. *°

412. However, the Tribunal finds some inconsistency in ENREJA’s recourse to “recidivism”
when increasing fines. In Resolutions Nos. 286/09, 39/10, and 46/10, ENREJA made it
clear that the provision on “recidivism” would only be applied when the same type of
infringement had been committed before. On the other hand, in Resolution No. 161/13
of 28 May 2013, which increased sanctions to the maximum permissible under Law No.
7020 in case of “recidivism”, the original fine of ARS 100,000 for modifying prize limits
and organizing a jackpot without ENREJA’s authorization, was increased fivefold to
ARS 500,000 because of prior conduct that relate to infringements that seemed to have
nothing to do with the setting of prize limits and the conduct of live games.*” Resolution
No. 240/13, in turn, should not be able to take into account the violations mentioned in
Resolution No. 161/13 as an aggravating factor to justify the revocation of ENJASA’s
license, considering that Resolution No. 161/13 was unrelated to breaches concerning the
correct registration and form of payment of prizes or the use of unauthorized third

operators by ENJASA without ENREJA’s authorization, which is what Resolution No.

490 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 206-207.

49! Resolution No. 240/13, pp. 29-31.

4°? Tn this context, the Tribunal also notes that it is unimpressed by Claimants’ argument that these investigations
and sanctions were groundless as ENREJA had confirmed in April 2008 that ENJASA had fully complied with
its obligations in the Acta Acuerdo. This confirmation only recognized that ENJASA and its controlling
shareholder had correctly performed the capital increase and had respected the other terms of the Stock Purchase
Agreement of ENJASA’s shares; the Acta Acuerdo did not address whether ENJASA had complied with the anti-
money laundering regulations and could — of course — not cover compliance after 2008.

4°3 Resolution No. 161/13 (Exhibit C-154) justifies this increase inter alia by referring to Resolutions Nos. 128/10
(Exhibit C-158), 129/10 (Exhibit C-159) (both relating to differences between slot machines in operation and
those authorized), and 200/10 (Exhibit C-165) (concerning the opening of a gaming location without prior
authorization of ENREJA).

143

240/13 took issue with.

413. The timing of the extraordinary increase for “recidivism” in Resolution No. 161/13 on

28 May 2013 is also striking, coming well after 11 December 2012, when the three
investigations that ultimately resulted in the revocation of ENJASA’s license had been

initiated, and two months before the actual revocation of the License.

414. Furthermore, the Tribunal notes an inconsistency in the testimony of different witnesses

as to whether ENJASA’s “recidivism” was actually taken into account. Thus, at the
hearing, Mr. Sylvester, ENREJA’s main legal advisor, who examined the file and
recommended the revocation of ENJASA’s license, denied that previous infractions were
a motivating factor on the side of ENREJA and taken into account,**4 while Ms. Cainelli
testified that ENREJA took into account “ENJASA’s previous _history.”4
Unfortunately, Respondent has not submitted Mr. Sylvester’s legal opinion underlying
the revocation nor the minutes of the Board meeting where the revocation of ENJASA’s

license was decided. *”°

415. It is against this background that the Tribunal is not convinced that ENJASA’s

recidivism, even if it existed in the sense of the applicable domestic law, could have
justified, in compliance with the principle of proportionality under international law, a
sanction as severe as the revocation of ENJASA’s license in the circumstances at hand,
that is, without a clearer warning, and without having considered whether a suspension
of the License for a certain time could have been an equally effective means to bring
ENJASA back on the right track of complying with the regulations against money
laundering in place in the Province of Salta, which ENJASA had left according to
Resolution No. 240/13.

416. Finally, the Tribunal notes that other gaming jurisdictions, judging from their practices

as presented by expert testimony during the proceeding, would not have revoked an
operating license in similar circumstances. Claimants observed — and were not
contradicted by Respondent — that in other major gaming countries, the alleged
infractions — even if true — would not lead to a revocation of an operating license for

games of chance.*”” In this context, Claimants’ expert, Mr. Bourgeois, testified that he

44 Transcript, Day 7, p. 190.

Transcript, Day 6, p. 195.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 155.

497 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 326.

144

417.

418.

419.

did not know of any major gaming jurisdiction where the types of infractions ENJASA
was charged with, if established, would have resulted in the revocation of an operating
license.*°® Moreover, in other Argentine provinces, similar infractions had been

sanctioned by much milder penalties and not by the revocation of operating licenses.*”?

It is against this background that the Tribunal concludes that even if the allegations
underlying Resolutions Nos. 380/12, 381/12, and 384/12 had been true, and their legal
evaluation under domestic law accurate, a revocation of ENJASA’s license would not
have been proportionate under international law and would not have constituted a regular
exercise of ENREJA’s regulatory powers that would result in carving out the revocation
of ENJASA’s license as an implementation of pre-existing limitations of the investor’s

rights from the concept of indirect expropriation.

(e) Respect of Due Process

The internationally lawful exercise of regulatory powers not only requires that the
measures the host State takes are proportionate and non-arbitrary, but also that due
process under international law is respected. As has been held consistently in the
jurisprudence of investment treaty tribunals, (international) due process applies not only
to judicial proceedings, but also to administrative proceedings that implement the
regulatory framework in place in the host State, which is at issue in the present
proceeding.*”° Due process in this context requires, inter alia, that the administrative
proceedings respect the right to be heard of those affected and that remedies exist for the

review of the legality of the measures in question. *°!

Claimants claim that due process was violated in connection with the revocation of
ENJASA’s license because ENJASA was restricted in defending against ENREJA’s
allegations. Claimants allege that Respondent breached elementary procedural
guarantees by ENREJA, namely: (i) not warning ENJASA about the possible

consequences of the administrative inquiries; (ii) completely disregarding without any

4°8 Bourgeois Expert Report, p. 48 (Exhibit C-027).

4° Kusa Expert Report, pp. 22-24 (Exhibit C-302).

50 See eg Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award (30 April
2004) para. 98; International Thunderbird Gaming Corp. v. United Mexican States, UNCITRAL/NAFTA,
Arbitral Award (26 January 2006) para. 200. For a discussion of arbitral case law applying due process to
administrative proceedings, see August Reinisch and Christoph Schreuer, /nternational Protection of Investments
~— The Substantive Standards (Cambridge University Press 2020) 398-402.

5°! For a detailed discussion of the content given | to international due process in arbitral case law, see August
Reinisch and Christoph Schreuer, Protection of — The

(Cambridge University Press 2020) 420-427.

 

145

reasoning the factual justifications brought forward by ENJASA; (iii) failing to respect
ENJASA’s right to be heard, as ENREJA provided a justification for the sanction
imposed by Resolution No. 240/13, without analysing whether the conclusions were
legally or factually correct; (iv) depriving ENJASA of a fair opportunity to present its
defence, as ENJASA was unable to review the full file relating to the allegations made
by ENREJA and was not given adequate time to respond to the administrative inquiries;

and (v) revoking the License without adequate reasoning.°*°

420. Respondent by contrast submits that ENREJA followed a strict internal procedure with
regard to the investigations underlying Resolution No. 240/13 and that the revocation of

ENJASA’s license itself complied with ENJASA’s due process rights. °°?

42

. Certain of the issues that Claimants claim as violations of due process are matters the
Tribunal has already dealt with in a different context. Thus, the Tribunal has addressed
Claimants’ arguments about the lack of a warning by ENREJA about the possible
consequences of continued violations of the regulatory framework in the context of its
assessment of whether the revocation of ENJASA’s license was proportionate (see supra
paras. 397-417). Beyond that context, the Tribunal is not able to see how international
due process would require an administrative agency generally to give warnings to foreign
investors about, or provide them with general information on, what the consequences are,
or could be, under domestic law of an investor breaching domestic regulations. Arbitral
awards that may be read as requiring such a broad duty of assistance of the host State
vis-a-vis foreign investors, such as that of the tribunal in Tecmed v. Mexico,*** would
overstretch what international law requires of domestic administrative agencies in terms

of due process.

422. With respect to the alleged violation of ENJASA’s rights of defense flowing from
international due process, the Tribunal notes that ENJASA had the formal opportunity to

defend itself. Prof. Garcia Pullés, Claimants’ legal expert, admitted at the hearing that,

502 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, para. 328; Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras. 293-299; Claimants’
Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 394-400.

503 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 214-215

504 See Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United Mexican States, (CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2,
Award (29 May 2003) para. 154 (Exhibit CL-008) (stating in the context of fair and equitable treatment that the
host State is required “in light of the good faith principle established by international law, ... to act in a consistent
manner, free from ambiguity and totally transparently in its relations with the foreign investor, so that it may know
beforehand any and all rules and regulations that will govern its investments, as well as the goals of the relevant
policies and administrative practices or directives, to be able to plan its investment and comply with such
regulations.”).

 

146

once ENREJA had issued the formal notices of investigations in December 2012,
ENJASA had some time to answer to the charges and submit evidence.*°> Only as the
investigations became more concrete with the months, did ENREJA reject, on 18 June
2013, in a reasoned decision, a request for clarification that ENJASA had submitted in

respect of Resolution No. 384/12.°°°

423. Shortly thereafter, Resolution No. 240/13 revoked ENJASA’s license. ENJASA

criticized Resolution No. 240/13 because it allegedly distorted the facts and the law and
did not address, one by one, ENJASA’s extensive explanations. Claimants object that
ENREJA dismissed ENJASA’s explanations by merely considering them to be “unclear

and contradictory, revealing a disturbing anarchy in the management of the license.” *”

424. ENJASA thereafter was able to submit a detailed request for reconsideration against

425.

sos
506
so7
508
509
so

Resolution No. 240/13, but the decision to revoke ENJASA’s license was confirmed by
Resolution No. 315/13. For Claimants, Resolution No. 315/13 similarly misrepresented
ENJASA’s arguments. *°* However, for Respondent’s expert, Prof. Marcer, Resolution

No. 315/13 amply addressed ENJASA’s arguments:

By means of a lengthy resolution, i.e. Resolution 315-13, ENREJA
analyzed and addressed all the arguments stated in the appeal for review,
and denied the appeal. ...

No further analysis should be made in this regard given the abundant
evidence found in the administrative files, which should be finally
analyzed by the court; however, it may be concluded from the mere
confrontation of the court records and the administrative acts on review,
namely the resolution revoking the license and the resolution denying
the appeal for review, that said resolutions were supported by the
evidence on file.*”

n

ENJASA then appealed ENREJA’s resolutions before the First Instance Court of Salta,
but, while the case was pending, it withdrew this recourse as instructed by the Decision
on Jurisdiction in the present proceeding.*!? The withdrawal notwithstanding, the
possibility existed in principle for the judiciary of the Province of Salta to determine the
legality of the revocation of ENJASA’s license under domestic law. To which extent this

possibility for domestic recourse was effective, as required by international due process,

Transcript, Day 5, pp. 36-47; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 217-218.

Request for Access and Clarification, 11 June 2013 (Exhibit C-175); Resolution No. 182/13 (Exhibit C-194).
Resolution No. 240/13 (Exhibit C-031).

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 81.

Marcer I, paras. 60 and 70 (emphasis added).

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 472.

147

426.

427.

428.

is a matter that has not been made part of Claimants’ claim on the merits before this

Tribunal.

The Tribunal thus observes that, in these circumstances, it is unable to find a violation of
any international due process rights, as claimed by Claimants. ENJASA has been
afforded a reasonable opportunity to defend itself and to make submissions in the
administrative proceedings conducted by ENREJA. ENREJA has also granted access to
its files and gave reasons for why it rejected ENJASA’s request for clarification. Finally,
ENJASA was afforded access to the domestic courts in the Province of Salta to request
a review of the legality of the revocation of the License. International due process has
therefore been respected in the administrative proceedings leading up to the revocation
of ENJASA’s operating license and in access to domestic courts being granted for the

review of the legality of ENREJA’s measures.

@ Conclusion

Although the Tribunal has not found a breach of due process, its findings on arbitrariness
and the lack of proportionality are sufficient to conclude that ENREJA did not properly
use its regulatory, supervisory, and police powers when it decided, in Resolution No.
240/13, to revoke ENJASA’s exclusive license and when it upheld that revocation in
Resolution No. 315/13. The revocation of ENJASA’s license, which inappropriately
under international law ended what was left of ENJASA’s 30-year exclusive gaming
license, destroying both ENJASA’s business operations and Claimants’ investment in
ENJASA and L&E, cannot be considered as a regular exercise of ENREJA’s regulatory
and supervisory powers that would carve out Respondent’s conduct from the concept of
indirect expropriation under Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT. Consequently, the revocation
and the subsequent transfer of its operation to third operators qualify as an indirect
expropriation of Claimants’ shareholding in L&E and its indirect shareholding in

ENJASA.

The Tribunal further finds that this indirect expropriation was unlawful as the revocation
of ENJASA’s license did not comply with the requirements international law sets for an
internationally lawful exercise of the host State’s police power. Such a measure does not
fulfil the criteria Article 4(2) of the BIT sets up for a lawful expropriation, that is, the
existence of a public purpose, the implementation of an expropriation in accordance with

due process of law, and the payment of compensation.

148

429. The Tribunal therefore concludes that Respondent is liable for breach of Article 4(1) and
(2) of the BIT.

2. Claim for Breach of Article 4(3) of the BIT

430. Claimants also request the Tribunal to declare that “[t]he Argentine Republic has
breached Article 4(3) of the BIT by unlawfully expropriating the license and the gaming
operations of Claimants’ subsidiary.”*!' As explained above (see supra paras. 327),
Article 4(3) of the BIT allows a shareholder-investor an additional cause of action in case

the company in which the investor holds shares is affected by an expropriation.

431. Claimants consider their claim under Article 4(3) of the BIT (concerning a direct or
indirect expropriation of ENJASA’s assets) to be of an alternative nature to their claim
under Article 4(1) and (2) (concerning an indirect expropriation of their shareholdings in
L&E and/or ENJASA), as the claim for breach of Article 4(3) would duplicate large parts
of the claim for breach of Article 4(1) and (2).>!? Indeed, as an additional cause of action
for shareholder-investors, Article 4(3) of the BIT would not give rise to any additional
reparation or compensation because the factual matrix on which both claims rely overlap.
After all, the compensation Claimants claim under Article 4(3) of the BIT is a
consequence of the same measures that the Tribunal has found to have resulted in a

breach of Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT.*!?

432. Accordingly, it is not necessary for the Tribunal to make a formal finding on Claimants’
claim under Article 4(3) of the BIT. This claim is consumed by the Tribunal’s findings
on Respondent’s liability under Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT. Against this background,
it is also not necessary for the Tribunal to dwell in detail on the issue, which has divided
the Parties, as to whether or not ENJASA’s license qualifies as an “asset” or “financial
asset” for protection under Article 4(3) of the BIT in light of the different language used

by the Spanish and German versions of the BIT.*!*

511 Claimants Reply on the Merits, para. 644 (Request for Relief); Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 584
(Request for Relief).

512 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 456-459.

513 As presented by Claimants, the breach of Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT is the broader cause of action because
it covers, Claimants allege, additional heads of damages not covered by Article 4(3) of the BIT, namely costs
resulting from the liquidation of ENJASA in the amount of USD 2,753,882. See Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief,
para. 459.

514 It would seem, however, to the Tribunal that the German term “Vermégenswerte” and the Spanish term “activos
financieros” in Article 4(3) of the BIT can both be read as referring to “assets” in the sense of Article 1(1) of the
BIT. The additional term “financieros” in Article 4(3) would simply seem to indicate that the assets of a locally

 

149

433.

434,

435.

C. Fair and Equitable Treatment

Claimants also request the Tribunal to declare that Respondent has breached Article 2(1)
of the BIT by failing to accord their investment fair and equitable treatment. Article 2(1)
of the BIT, in the English translation agreed upon by the Parties, reads:
Each Contracting Party shall encourage, in its territory and to the
possible extent, the investments made by investors of the other
Contracting Party, admitting such investments in accordance with its
legislation and according at all times fair and equitable treatment.
The Parties have extensively argued in their submissions and at the hearing whether
Respondent, through the authorities of the Province of Salta, has respected the fair and
equitable treatment standard. They have, inter alia, discussed whether the fair and
equitable treatment standard enshrined in the BIT is different from the minimum standard
of treatment under customary international law, whether the authorities in Salta harassed
ENJASA and thereby breached fair and equitable treatment, whether ENREJA had
violated due process as required by fair and equitable treatment, and to which extent
Claimants were entitled to the protection of legitimate expectations under Article 2(1) of

the BIT.

The Tribunal notes that initially Claimants had argued that ENJASA was not only not
treated fairly and equitably in the process directly leading up to the revocation of the
License and in the confirmation of this revocation, but that ENREJA’s conduct was
permeated by a consistent pattern of bad faith and that ENREJA was visibly searching
for pretexts to impose fines also in the administrative proceedings conducted between
the year 2008 and May 2013.°'> However, Claimants ultimately limited their claim for
breach of fair and equitable treatment to the question of whether the revocation of
ENJASA’s license, and the administrative proceedings related to it, have been proper
under the BIT. In their Post-Hearing Brief, Claimants concluded their analysis of the
breach of Article 2(1) of the BIT by stating:

The revocation of the license falls short of the essential elements of fair
and equitable treatment. The Argentine Republic has thus breached Art.

incorporated company that were subject to expropriation have to have a financial value, without however
intending to limit the class of protected assets under Article 4(3) to “financial assets”, whatever that term may
mean. Both authentic versions of the BIT would therefore have the same meaning and cover ENJASA’s license
as an asset with financial value, without the need to have recourse to Article 33(4) of the VCLT to resolve a
difference in meaning between both treaty texts.

515 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 430-433.

150

2(1) of the BIT and is under an obligation to pay damages to
Claimants.*!°
436. Claimants have not submitted, however, any additional claims for damages or
compensation resulting from breach of Article 2(1) of the BIT other than those arising
from the revocation of ENJASA’s license.*!” In the Tribunal’s view, the claim for
compensation under Article 2(1) of the BIT therefore duplicates Claimants’ claim for

compensation for expropriation under Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT.

437. The Tribunal, in other words, is therefore not called upon to assess the lawfulness under
Article 2(1) of the BIT of any measure taken, or conduct engaged in, by the authorities
of the Province of Salta other than those already analyzed above under Article 4(1) and
(2) of the BIT. The Tribunal is also not called upon to decide whether the remedies that
a breach of Article 2(1) would give rise to differ from those that Claimants are entitled

to for breach of Article 4(1) and (2), which the Tribunal has already established.

438. Against this background, the Tribunal considers that it is not necessary to make a formal
finding on Claimants’ claim for breach of Article 2(1) of the BIT. Although the
Tribunal’s findings made in the context of its analysis of Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT
that the revocation of ENJASA’s license did not constitute a lawful exercise of the host
State’s regulatory and supervisory powers, but was arbitrary and disproportionate, and
constituted an abuse of ENREJA’s powers, would translate one-to-one into a breach of
the fair and equitable treatment standard contained in Article 2(1) of the BIT, this claim
is consumed by the Tribunal’s findings on Respondent’s liability under Article 4(1) and
(2) of the BIT. As a consequence, the Tribunal makes no formal finding as to a breach of

Article 2(1) of the BIT.

D. Conclusion on Respondent’s Liability

439. In summary, the Tribunal therefore finds that Respondent is internationally responsible
for breach of Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT because the revocation of ENJASA’s
operating license by ENREJA and the subsequent transfer of ENJASA’s business to new

operators constituted an unlawful expropriation of Claimants’ investment under the BIT.

516 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 454.

517 The overview of Claimants’ claim for damages considers the claim under Article 4(3) to be an alternative claim
for the claim under Article 4(1) and 2 of the BIT, but does not mention the relationship to the claim for breach of
fair and equitable treatment. See Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 456-459. In the discussion on quantum,
Claimants state that the claim for breach of fair and equitable treatment would entail the same standard for
calculating reparation. See Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 481.

151

VII. QUANTUM

A. Standard of Compensation

440. Asa consequence of the Tribunal’s finding that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT by unlawfully subjecting Claimants’ investment to
an indirect expropriation, Claimants are entitled to full reparation pursuant to the law on
State responsibility. As the Permanent Court of International Justice has held in a time-
honored statement on the consequences of a State’s conduct that breaches international

law:

The essential principle contained in the actual notion of an illegal act ... is
that reparation must, as far as possible, wipe-out all the consequences of the
illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all probability, have
existed if that act had not been committed. Restitution in kind, or, if this is
not possible, payment of a sum corresponding to the value which a restitution
in kind would bear; the award, if need be, of damages for loss sustained which
would not be covered by restitution in kind or payment in place of it — such
are the principles which should serve to determine the amount of
compensation due for an act contrary to international law.>!®

441,

This statement of principle reflects the state of customary international law, has been
applied in a consistent line of jurisprudence by international courts and tribunals, in the
field of foreign investment and beyond,*'? and is enshrined in Article 31(1) of the ILC
Articles. This provision stipulates that “[t]he responsible State is under an obligation to
make full reparation for the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act.” Since
restitution of Claimants to the status quo ante by reinstating ENJASA’s exclusive license
for the remaining term until 23 September 2029 is neither requested, nor suggested by
the Parties, nor is it materially possible, the only form of reparation in question in the

present proceeding is compensation in the sense of Article 36 of the ILC Articles.

518 Case concerning the Factory at Chorzéw (Claim for indemnity) (Germany y. Poland) (13 September 1928)
PCIJ Ser. A, No. 17 para. 47 (Exhibit CL-028).

519 See e.g. ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. Republic of Hungary, \CSID Case
No. ARB/03/16, Award (2 October 2006) paras. 480-494; Quiborax S.A. and Non Metallic Minerals S.A. v.
Plurinational State of Bolivia, (CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Award (16 September 2015) paras. 326-328 (Exhibit
CL-030); William Richard Clayton, Douglas Clayton, Daniel Clayton and Bilcon of Delaware, Inc v. Government
of Canada, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, PCA Case No 2009-04, Award on Damages (10 January 2019) para. 108. For
case law of other international courts and tribunals, see e.g. Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v
Uruguay), Judgment (20 April 2010) [2010] ICJ Reports 14, 103-104, para. 273; Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic
of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of the Congo), Judgment (30 November 2010) [2010] ICJ Report 639, 691,
para. 161; Certain Activities Carried Out by Nicaragua in the Border Area (Costa Rica v. Nicaragua)
(Compensation) Judgment (2 February 2018) [2018] ICJ Reports 15, 25-26, paras. 29-31; The M/V “Virginia G”
Case (Panama/Guinea-Bissau), Judgment (14 April 2014) [2014] ITLOS Reports 4, 116-188, paras. 428-433.

152

442.

443.

444,

Pursuant to paragraph | of that provision, Respondent “is under an obligation to
compensate for the damage caused”; pursuant to paragraph 2 of the same provision
“compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage including loss of profits
insofar as it is established.” Claimants, in other words, have to be put economically into
the position they would, in all probability, have been in but for the revocation of

ENJASA’s license.

Respondent’s duty to provide full reparation encompasses both compensation for the
value of the expropriated investment, that is, Claimants’ direct shareholding in L&E and
its indirect shareholding in ENJASA, as well as any consequential damages that were
caused as a result of the unlawful expropriation and that Claimants would not have
incurred but for Respondent’s unlawful conduct. In this context, the Tribunal observes
that there must be a proximate causal link between the violation of international law and
the injury caused to Claimants. Article 31(1) of the ILC Articles confirms that only “the
injury caused by the internationally wrongful act” has to be fully repaired. By contrast,
hypothetical, speculative as well as undetermined and remote damage cannot be
compensated. Moreover, the burden of proof in respect of causation and the amount of

damages lies with Claimants. °°

In the following, the Tribunal will first turn to the valuation of Claimants’ investment,
that is, their direct shareholding in L&E, and/or their indirect shareholding in ENJASA,
and make determinations on a number of contested aspects of valuation between the
Parties and their experts (B.). The Tribunal will then turn to Claimants’ claim for
consequential damages (C.). Finally, questions concerning the payment of interest will

be addressed (D.).

B. Valuation of Claimants’ Investment

Claimants and Respondent, as well as their respective quantum experts, Mr. Howard
Rosen and Dr. José P. Dapena, have extensively and in much detail argued the quantum

of the compensation due. They agree on certain issues concerning the valuation of

520 In this respect, the Tribunal agrees with Respondent’s position. See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, para. 633; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 509-511. See also Certain Activities Carried Out
by Nicaragua in the Border Area (Costa Rica v. Nicaragua) (Compensation) Judgment (2 February 2018) [2018]
ICJ Reports 15, 26, para. 32.

153

Claimants’ investment, namely the use of the discounted cash flow (“DCF”) method.*?!

This method requires the reconstruction of the lost cash flow over the years reduced by
a discount rate, reflecting the financial value of expected future cash flows over the years

from the valuation date until the end of ENJASA’s license.

445. The Tribunal agrees with the Parties that the DCF approach is the most appropriate
valuation methodology to establish the losses suffered by Claimants because of the
unlawful revocation of ENJASA’s license, which otherwise would still have continued
to be in force until 23 September 2029.*?? Even though ENJASA remained a going
concer for a few months after 13 August 2013, all of its activities finally had to be
wound down in November 2013 when ENREJA rejected ENJASA’s Request for
Reconsideration and the transfer of ENJASA’s gaming operations to third operators was
implemented. This brought ENJASA’s activities in the gaming sector in Salta and its
ability to generate cash flows to a halt and directly affected the profitability of Claimants’
entire investment, that is, their direct shareholding in L&E, and their indirect
shareholding in ENJASA. The capacity of ENJASA to generate future cash flows hinged
on the existence of ENJASA’s license. Conversely, essentially all of the value of

ENJASA, as well as of L&E, was in ENJASA’s license.

446. The Tribunal and the Parties also agree that the compensation due for Claimants’

shareholding in L&E and/or ENJASA has to be evaluated at the moment immediately

521 In spite of the Parties’ agreement to value the compensation on the basis of lost income and discounted cash
flow, the Dissent (i.a. paras. 338-347, 422, 426) considers compensation on the basis of the capital invested and
the value of assets more appropriate, inter alia because it considers the assessment of future profits and their
discounts to bring them to the level of the Valuation Date as too speculative. The Tribunal’s majority, by contrast,
follows the Parties’ joint approach to value Claimants’ investments at the Valuation Date on the basis of the
discounted cash flow, discussing and deciding various issues both sides considered relevant for determining the
relevant cash flows and the appropriate discount rate. It is against this background that the Tribunal also sees no
need to address in any further depth an issue the Dissent raises as a factor that would reduce compensation, which
has not been raised by either Party in the context of determining quantum. Contrary to the Dissent, paras. 31-32,
304, 380(6), 439-446, the Tribunal’s majority fails to see any indications for Claimants’ contribution to injury
pursuant to Article 39 of the ILC Articles, either in the form of contributory fault to Respondent’s internationally
wrongful conduct because ENJASA’s prior breaches of the regulatory framework may have contributed to the
revocation of its License, or as a violation of a duty to mitigate damages after the revocation has taken place
because Claimants did not accept the offer to continue operating Casino Salta and did not participate in the process
for applying for new operating licenses. As already stated above (see supra para. 354), after ENJASA’s license
was revoked, Claimants were not obliged to apply for new licenses under less favorable conditions or continue to
operate Casino Salta, while relinquishing all other operations that formed part of ENJASA’s former exclusivity.
522 Contrary to the Dissent, para. 427, in the view of the Tribunal’s majority, for purposes of determining future
cash flows, one has to assume that ENJASA’s license continues to exist until its original term in September 2029
and disregard the possibility that the License could be legitimately revoked because of some illegal future conduct
of ENJASA. The value of ENJASA and/or L&E at the Valuation Date is based on the assumption of future
compliance of ENJASA with the law, so that potential future illegal conduct of ENJASA cannot reduce its value
at the Valuation Date.

154

preceding the issuance of ENREJA’s Resolution No. 240/13, which revoked ENJASA’s
license and put the indirect expropriation of Claimants’ investment in motion.*?? For
Claimants, the valuation date should be 12 August 2013, which is the day immediately
preceding the day Resolution No. 240/13 was issued.**+ For Respondent, the valuation
date should be 13 August 2013 itself, but just before Resolution No. 240/13 was
issued.**> In the Tribunal’s view, the resulting difference of a few hours is immaterial for
purposes of valuation. The Tribunal will therefore adopt 13 August 2013 as the Valuation
Date in respect of Claimants’ investment, with the understanding that the projection of

cash flows is to be carried out on that day prior to the issuance of Resolution No. 240/13.

447. In the context of valuing Claimants’ investment, the Parties and their experts disagree,
however, on a range of issues. These include: 1) the valuation model to be used to
determine the value of Claimants’ 60% shareholding in L&E and/or ENJASA; 2) the
basis for projecting future cash flows, including the relevance of cash flows generated by
Cachi Valle from the Joint Venture with ENJASA relating to Casino Salta, cash flows
following the end of the Joint Venture Agreement between ENJASA and Video Drome
on 31 December 2013, and cash flows relating to the Sheraton Hotel in Salta; 3) the
determination of the applicable discount rate; and 4) the applicable exchange rate. After
setting out the respective positions of the Parties, the Tribunal will address these issues

in turn.

1. Claimants’ Approach
a) Valuation Model

448. Claimants observe that the “value of the investment” is the “fair value”, and not the “fair
market value.” Their expert, Mr. Rosen, distinguishes the “fair market value,” i.e., the
price in an arms-length transaction at which a hypothetical and willing buyer would buy
from a hypothetical and willing seller in an unrestricted market,*”° from the “fair value,”
which takes into account the respective advantages or disadvantages that the parties will

gain from the transaction, including specific synergies, such as those alleged to relate to

523 This is also reflected in Article 4(2) of the BIT which states that in case of lawful expropriation “compensation
shall be the value of the investment expropriated immediately before the expropriation ....”. The same date for
purposes of valuation must also apply in case of an unlawful expropriation, as in the present case.

524 Claimants Memorial on the Merits, paras. 456-457; Claimants Reply on the Merits, para. 597.

525 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, footnote 884.

Rosen Il, para. 11.20; Transcript, Day 8, p. 93.

 

526

155

Claimants’ debt/equity ratio.*?”

449. Claimants disagree with Dr. Dapena that the valuation of ENJASA’s operations is to be
based upon the free cash flow to equity holders that was lost from 13 August 2013 until
the end of ENJASA’s exclusive license on 23 September 2029. They observe that, while
a valuation based upon lost dividends as suggested by Dr. Dapena may be appropriate in
cases where the continuity of the business is only impaired,*** or where the shareholders

are not fully managing the company, *”?

it is not appropriate for valuing a company,
whose business is definitely destroyed and whose activities are stopped, as is the case in
the present circumstances where the revocation of the License ended ENJASA’s gaming

operations and lead to ENJASA and L&E being wound up.**°

450. Moreover, in the present case, Claimants as shareholders in ENJASA and L&E did not
only receive dividends, but also a yearly fee as compensation for the use of trademarks
and logos and shared know-how.**! To limit the analysis to dividends lost would

therefore not fully compensate Claimants’ loss.**?

Consequently, for Claimants, the
value of their investment is best established as a percentage of the value of L&E and
ENJASA as a whole, corresponding to their respective shareholding at the Valuation

Date.**

b) Relevant Cash Flow

451. To determine the cash flow related to Claimants’ investment in Argentina, that is, their
shareholding in L&E, Mr. Rosen determined the entirety of the cash flows that stem from
operations that are connected to ENJASA’s exclusive license. This License, Mr. Rosen

explained, constitutes almost the entire value (98.8%) of L&E.**4

452. In order to establish the cash flow related to ENJASA, Mr. Rosen offers two valuation
scenarios. In his Scenario One, he bases his forecasts, where possible, on actual figures,
excluding non-recurring costs and revenues. These include (i) ENJASA’s actual results

prior to the Valuation Date, and (ii) financial projections that were prepared by

527 Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, paras. 477, 484.

528 Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 500.

529 Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 502.

530 Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, paras. 494-499. The Sheraton Hotel Salta continued operations a few years
after this revocation, but was sold in 2017.

531 Rosen II, paras. 8.46-8.51.

532 Rosen, Transcript, Day 8, p. 219.

533 Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 456.

534 Rosen II, para. 4.10: Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 471.

156

453.

454.

455.

585 Rosen I, para. 9.22;

ENJASA’s management in the normal course of business (i.e., prior to the Valuation
Date), with adjustments where necessary.**> Mr. Rosen observes that his estimates of the
actual monthly results of ENJASA for 2013 tied well into ENJASA’s audited statements
for 2012 and 2013.°°

The forecasts of future cash flows, Mr. Rosen points out, are mainly based upon
ENJASA’s monthly results in 2013 and not upon projections founded upon
contemporaneous management decisions. Moreover, Mr. Rosen observes that forecasts
would be distorted if they were only based upon historical data and not take into account
management decisions.*’ Mr. Rosen therefore additionally considers management
projections, which were prepared in the normal course of business before Claimants or
ENJASA had knowledge of the revocation of ENJASA’s license; in Mr. Rosen’s view,
these projections would be inappropriate to ignore.*** For Claimants, the fact that these
forecasts were not audited, does not make them less credible as they are supported by
contemporaneous documents, such as historical purchase prices of slot machines and

agreements for salary increases. >*

However, in order to respond to criticism of Respondent’s expert, Dr. Dapena,
concerning the use of actual data from 2013, Mr. Rosen worked out an alternative
valuation, that is, his Scenario Two, in which he relied less on projections and was closer
to ENJASA’s historical data, in particular ENJASA’s 2012 audited financial statement.
However, Mr. Rosen considers his alternative Scenario Two valuation to be incorrect
and maintains that ENJASA’s contemporaneous projections must be taken into

account, *4°

For both scenarios, Mr. Rosen made certain adjustments to the future projected cash
flows. A first adjustment concerns the termination of the Joint Venture between ENJASA
and Video Drome, which was to take place, Claimants claim, on 31 December 2013.*4!

This termination, for Claimants, was certain by the Valuation Date, as ENJASA and

  

‘sen II, paras. 2.3, 5.7.

536 Rosen II, paras. 7.19-7.23.

537 Rosen II, paras. 5.9, 7.19.

538 Rosen II, paras. 5.9, 7.12-7.15.

53° Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, paras. 520-521.
54 Rosen II, Schedule 2, paras. A2.13-A2.14.

541 Rosen II, para. 7.8.

157

456.

457.

458.

Video Drome had already informed ENREJA of it*4* and ENREJA had accepted the
termination.** As a result of the termination of the Joint Venture, ENJASA would have
to acquire slot machines, but was going to keep the total income generated by all slot
machines formerly operated by Video Drome under the Joint Venture Agreement. On the
basis of the financial information of the Joint Venture, ENJASA’s projected cash flow
included the expenditures for the acquisition of slot machines as well as the increased
cash flow that would result from the termination of the Joint Venture with Video Drome

from January 2014 onwards. *“*

Mr. Rosen’s projected future cash flows of ENJASA also took account of a planned new
construction to house ENJASA’s headquarters and part of the Casino Golden Dreams. *4°
The implementation of these plans would have triggered non-recurring expenditures in a
“but for”-analysis, but also account for future savings for rent. Salary increases, agreed
for the end of 2013, were also taken into account in Mr. Rosen’s projections of future
cash flows as they would have had an impact on those future cash flows, a matter that is

not reflected in ENJASA’s historical financial statements. *4°

Furthermore, Mr. Rosen considers that for the valuation of Claimants’ investment the
cash flows from the Joint Venture between ENJASA and Cachi Valle concerning the
operation of Casino Salta had to be included entirely, that is, including the 30% of the
cash flows from the joint venture that are allocated to Cachi Valle. The reason for this is,
as Mr. Rosen explains, that Cachi Valle was a wholly owned subsidiary of L&E so that
Claimants would also be entitled to the share of profits received by Cachi Valle as
shareholders in L&E. In order to place Claimants back into the financial position they
would be in but for the breaches of the BIT by Respondent, the cash flows that would
have been generated through Cachi Valle have to be included in valuing Claimants’

investment in L&E.

By contrast, Mr. Rosen did not include ENJASA’s non-gaming related operations in his

projections of Claimants’ future cash flows, most importantly cash flows relating to the

52 Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 513; Note from ENJASA to ENREJA of 23 July 2012 (Exhibit ARA-
028); Letter from Video Drome to ENREJA of 23 November 2013 (Exhibit C-171); Hearing Transcript, Day 8,
pp. 184-189.

583 ENREJA’s Interlocutory Order of November 2012 (Exhibit ARA-055); Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para.

513.

54 Rosen II, para. 7.34; Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 515.
545 Rosen II, para. 7.8.
546 Rosen II, para. 7.54.

158

operation of the Sheraton Hotel in Salta.*4”7 Mr. Rosen explains that the non-gaming
operations had not been impacted by the revocation of ENJASA’s license and would
therefore not be affected in a “but for”-analysis. Moreover, the Hotel, Claimants argue,
has always been a “big loss.”*#* Audited financial statements, Claimants point out, show
that the hotel did not generate any profit, neither before, nor after the revocation of

ENJASA’s license. °°

459. In respect of Dr. Dapena’s determination of future cash flows, Claimants disagree with

how Respondent has allocated ENJASA’s expenses between the hotel and the gaming
operations on the basis of its 2014 statements. ENJASA’s 2014 financial statements,
Claimants point out, contain hindsight information that was not available at the Valuation
Date on 13 August 2013. Moreover, ENJASA’s actual monthly results for 2013, as well
as the notes to its 2012 audited financial statements, already provide a breakdown of
ENJASA’s expenses between the gaming and hotel operations. **° In addition, Mr. Rosen
observes that, in his valuation of ENJASA, Dr. Dapena erroneously did not include the
revenue ENJASA earned from the sale of food, beverages, and other products in its

casinos. **!

460. For Mr. Rosen, Dr. Dapena’s pro-ration of ENJASA’s forecasted cash flows for the

period 2013 to 2029 contains a technical error, resulting in both an understatement and
an overstatement of the forecasted cash flows in the relevant period.*°? In Mr. Rosen’s
view, Dr. Dapena should have carried forward its working capital adjustment beyond
2013, resulting in a mathematical inconsistency that materially understates the valuation
of ENJASA.**? Dr. Dapena should furthermore have maintained internal consistency in
his financial model and relied upon the most recent financial statements available. He
should thus not have relied on ENJASA’s balance sheet of 30 June 2013, but on
ENJASA’s balance sheet of 31 December 2013.°*+

461. Furthermore, for Mr. Rosen, Dr. Dapena inappropriately assumed that ENJASA would

repay all the bank debt that it held prior to the Valuation Date by the end of 2013. The

547 Rosen II, paras. 6.8-6.13.

548 Witness Schreiner, Transcript, Day 2, p. 161.
5 Mr. Rosen’s Opening Statement, Slide 80.
530 Rosen II, paras. 7.22-7.23, 8.7-8.11.

551 Rosen II, paras. 8.

  

Rosen II, paras. 8.18-8.22.
Rosen II, paras. 8.19-8.31.

584 Rosen II, paras. 8.32-8.36.

159

loan repayment schedule, however, showed that the debt would have only been fully
repaid by the middle of 2015 and ENJASA’s management had decided prior to the

Valuation Date to maintain a certain amount of financial debt.**>

462. Mr. Rosen further observes that Dr. Dapena erroneously assumed that the annual capital

expenditure between 2013 and 2029 would be consistent with the exceptionally high
expenditure incurred by ENJASA in 2012. For Mr. Rosen, Dr. Dapena thus materially
overstated the amount of ENJASA’s capital expenditures.**° Mr. Rosen also points out
that Dr. Dapena incorrectly deducted the Management Know How Fees that ENJASA
paid to CAI from ENJASA’s net operating profits, because, for Dr. Dapena, a buyer
could decide to discontinue the payment of these discretionary management fees after
the acquisition of ENJASA. For Mr. Rosen, these fees were, like dividends, a device to

transfer funds to CAI and should therefore not be deducted.*°”

©) Discount Rate

463. To establish the discounted cash flow, Mr. Rosen first determines the Risk-Free Rate,

i.e., the theoretical rate of return of an investment with zero risk, at 3.39%, which is based
on the United States 20-year treasury bond yield at the Valuation Date. Mr. Rosen in turn
rejects the risk-free rate used by Dr. Dapena, which is based on the average yield on
United States 10-year treasury bonds from the years 1962 to 2013 (see infra para. 499)
as inappropriate, as this risk rate is outdated to assess ENJASA’s expected cost of capital
for the years from 2013 to 2029.°°* On the basis of his own risk-free rate, Mr. Rosen then
estimates that the Equity Risk Premium, i.e., the excess return that an investment in stock

provides over a risk-free investment, would be 5.46%.

464. For the Industry Beta, which reflects the systematic risk that is similar for all businesses

in a specific industry, Mr. Rosen retained different Industry Betas for each of ENJASA’s
gaming operations, namely lotteries, slot machines, and live games. In allocating cash
flows, he relies on the breakdown of cash flows to these different business units in

ENJASA’s financial statements. °°?

465. Mr. Rosen considers this approach to be superior to that adopted by Respondent’s expert,

555

357
558
559

Rosen II, paras. 8.37-
Rosen II, paras. 8.41-8.44.
Rosen II, paras. 8.46-8.51.
Rosen II, paras. 9.12-9.19.
Rosen II, para, 7.21.

 

160

466.

467.

Dr. Dapena, who did not disaggregate cash flows for the different gaming operations of
ENJASA and used one single industry beta for ENJASA as a whole (see infra para. 501).
For Mr. Rosen, it would be incorrect to consider all activities of ENJASA to form part
of one single business unit in the gaming/hotel sector. ENJASA’s hotel and gaming
business operations were not horizontally integrated and did not operate in the same
industry segment. Only a small fraction of ENJASA’s gaming operation, namely the
operation of Casino Salta, which represented less than 5% of ENJASA’s net revenue in
2013, was somewhat integrated with the operation of the Hotel.* As a result, Mr. Rosen

insists on applying different discount rates for each of ENJASA’s gaming segments.

Moreover, for Mr. Rosen, Dr. Dapena fails to consider the different levels of risk
associated with ENJASA’s lottery operations versus its operation of slot machines and
live games. Mr. Rosen explains that prospective purchasers commonly view companies
that engage in different business areas as a collection of different cash flows with
different risks attached. With reference to a paper written by Professor Damodaran, Mr.
Rosen submits that it is considered preferable among valuation professionals to value
different business segments independently, when possible.**! For Mr. Rosen, ENJASA’s
lottery operations had a lower risk level; these operations existed independently of the
rest of ENJASA’s business and did neither require buildings to be leased or constructed
nor the acquisition, maintenance, and replacement of any capital assets, such as slot

machines and gaming tables, which were needed in the operation of live games. *

Moreover, Mr. Rosen initially opted for levered Betas, and for unlevered Betas in his
Second Report.** If levered, the expected cash flow to the equity holders is considered
and discounted at the cost of equity to provide the value of the equity; if unlevered, the
expected cash flow to the company is considered and discounted to provide the enterprise
value.*°+ However, for Mr. Rosen, “the levered and the unlevered approach should in
theory be the same as long as the approaches utilize consistent assumptions about the
level of financial leverage.”*° Therefore, under both approaches, Mr. Rosen concludes

that the relevant industry betas were respectively 1.10, 2.51, and 2.44 for lotteries, slot

560 Rosen II, paras. 9.20-9.24.

561 Rosen II, paras. 9.3-9.11.

52 Rosen II, paras. 9.10-9.11.

563 Rosen I, Schedule 3; Rosen II, para. 9.45.
564 Rosen II, paras. 9.40-9.41.

565 Rosen II, para. 9.44.

161

468.

469.

470.

471.

472.

machines, and live games.*%

The Adjusted Equity Risk Premium, i.e., the equity risk premium, multiplied by the
Industry Betas to reflect how much the stock in specific businesses will outperform risk-
free debt instruments, was estimated for ENJASA’s operation of lotteries, slot machines,

and live-games at 5.98%, 13.73%, and 13.32% respectively.

For Mr. Rosen, the Country Risk Premium, i.e., the additional premium to compensate
investors for the higher risk associated with investing in a foreign country, compared
with investing in their domestic market, was 6% for Argentina in August 2013. In this
context, Mr. Rosen also points out that he disagrees with Dr. Dapena’s approach to
determining the Country Risk Premium (see infra para. 505). For Mr. Rosen, the Country
Risk Premium should not be based upon the return rate of public bonds, but on
commercial profits. Moreover, the Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus (“EMBI+’”) used

by Dr. Dapena was too volatile to be a benchmark.*°”

Mr. Rosen used a debt/equity ratio of 75.20%/24.80% to calculate the Weighted Average
Capital Cost (“WACC’”). This ratio represented the actual debt/equity ratio of Casinos
Austria and should be used because the investment in L&E, and thus indirectly in
ENJASA, were made by Casinos Austria.*° Moreover, the actual debt/equity ratio came
close to the optimal capital structure for ENJASA and/or L&E, which involves a
debt/equity ratio of 75%/25%.*® As the cost of debt in his WACC valuation, Mr. Rosen
likewise focused on Casinos Austria and used the interest rate for which Casinos Austria
could borrow money on the Austrian market, i.e., 4.12% after taxes. He thus obtained a

WACC of 8% for the totality of ENJASA’s operations.°”°

With an assumed USD inflation rate of 2.30%, the discount rates obtained by Mr. Rosen

were between 5 and 7%, with an average of 6%.°”!

Mr. Rosen’s presentation at the hearing included his Slide 14, which reproduced the

above data per business unit, but also gave the over-the-board average for ENJASA:

566 Rosen I, Schedules 3; Rosen II, para. 9.70.

57 Rosen II, paras. 9.38-9.62.

568 Rosen II, para. 9.70.

56 Rosen II, paras. 9.25-9.37.

50 This is based on the WACC of 7%, 9 %, and 9%, for lotteries, slot machines, and live games operations
respectively.

57! Rosen II, para. 9.68.

162

473.

 

Rosen Report

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lotteries Slot Live Average
Operation | Machine Games
Beta Operation | Operation
Beta Beta
Risk Free Rate*” [A] 3.39% 3.39% 3.39% 3.39%
Equity Risk Premium*” [B] 5.46% 5.46% 5.46% 5.46%
Industry Beta 0.30 0.69 0.67 0.55
(Unlevered)
Industry Beta [C] 1.10 2.51 2.44 2.02
(Relevered)
Adjusted Equity Risk | [D]=[B]x] 5.98% 13.73% 13.32% 11.01%
Premium [C]
Country Premium [E] 6.00% 6.00% 6.00% 6.00%
Nominal Cost of [F]=[A+ | 15.37% | 23.12% 22.71% | 20.40%
Equity D+E]
Debt
Pre-tax Cost of Debt 4.70% 4.70% 4.70%
After-tax Nominal Cost [G] 4.12% 4.12% 4.12%
of Debt
Weighting
Debt [H] 75.20% 75.20% 75.20%
Equity []=[1- ] 24.80% 24.80% 24.80%
H]

WACC - Nominal, [J]=[Gx 7.00% 9.00% 9.00%
rounded H]+ [Fx J]
Less US Inflation —2.30% —2.30% —2.30%
Discount Rate 5.0% 7.0% 7.0%

 

NOTE: Internal footnotes added to the above Table by the Tribunal.

d) Exchange Rate

necessary as of the Valuation Date. For this purpose, Claimants’ expert, Mr. Rosen,

5? 20 Year T-Bill Yield Data as of 12 August 2013 from the US Treasury.
August 2013 ERP data sourced from Damodaran online.

573

163

Given that ENJASA conducted its operations in ARS, a conversion into USD is

 

provides two alternative approaches. In his Scenario One, Mr. Rosen makes use of the
official ARS-USD exchange rate at the Valuation Date, which is the rate ENJASA used
in its financial statements to convert ARS into USD.*” In his Scenario Two, Mr. Rosen
uses an exchange rate that was expected in August 2013 to apply for the next three years,

as forecasted by multiple banking institutions at the time.*”>

474. The rates used by Mr. Rosen rely on Claimants’ instructions. Claimants justify these rates

by pointing to the transfer-of-funds provision in Article 5(3) and (4) of the BIT, which
states:
(3) Transfers referred to in this Article shall be effected at the exchange rate
applicable on the date of transfer.

(4) The exchange rates shall be determined in accordance with the framework
of the respective bank system of the territory of each Contracting Party.

475. Claimants further point out that Article 5 of the BIT covers the transfer of funds in a non-

exhaustive list of situations, which includes the repayment of loans, liquidation, partial
sale of the investment, or compensation for lawful expropriation (see Article 5(1) of the
BIT). For Claimants, also the payment of damages arising out of a breach of the BIT
because of an unlawful expropriation should be covered by Article 5.°”° In Claimants’
view, it would be inconsistent with the principle of full compensation to apply an
exchange rate that is more favorable for Respondent for the payment of compensation
for unlawful expropriation than the rate applicable to the payment of compensation for

lawful expropriations.

476. In Claimants’ view, the exchange rate referred to in Article 5(4) of the BIT is the official

sma
375
316
si

exchange rate applicable on the Valuation Date. The Implied Argentine Peso Rate
(Contado con Liquidacion (“CCL”)) suggested by Respondent (see infra para. 516), by
contrast, is applied in the informal market to allow that “companies could import despite
the [Argentine] Central Bank’s failure to offer exchange alternatives so as not to
jeopardize its reserves.”*”’ Claimants are not impressed by Respondent’s argument that
investors would expect the use of the CCL rate, which best reflects the market’s
expectations about the devaluation of the ARS. Even if ENJASA had expected the use

of the unofficial CCL rate, Claimants as foreign investors legitimately expected the

Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 535.

Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 534; Rosen, Transcript, Day 8, pp. 95-96.
Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 528.

CEMA I, p. 32, footnote 53.

164

477. Applying the above to both the valuation of ENJASA’s gaming operations, and taking
into account the cash flows from the Joint Venture Agreement between ENJASA and
Cachi Valle, Mr. Rosen presents the following valuation of Claimants overall investment
in L&E as follows:>”
Fair Value of Gaming Operations
Scenario One Scenario Two
Discounted Cash Flows
Lotteries 21,949,376 17,037,367
Live Games 2,363,082 1,815,519
Slots 53,544,013 41,365,542
77,856,471 60,218,428
99.94% owned by L&E 77,809,757 60,182,297
Plus: Cachi Discounted Cash Flows 4,133,771 3,265,294
Total 81,943,528 63,447,591
60% owned by the Claimants at the Valuation Date 49,166,117 38,068,555
478. Depending on whether Scenarios One or Two are followed, for Claimants the value of
the indirect ownership of ENJASA and Cachi Valle through L&E on the basis of their
discounted cash flow was respectively USD 81,943,528 and USD 63,447,591. Taking
into account Claimants’ 60% shareholding at the Valuation Date, their loss of value
would be USD 49,166,117 and USD 38,068,555 respectively.
Sf) Alternative Valuation: The Market Approach
479. In addition to his evaluation of the value of Claimants’ investment in L&E based on a

application of the official exchange rate to be used in the banking system in Argentina.*”*

e) Overall Valuation of Claimants’ Investment

DCF method, Mr. Rosen also provided a market-based analysis in order to support the
outcome of his evaluations. Thus, in his Second Report, Mr. Rosen suggested a market-
based valuation to test the reasonableness of the outcome of his primary DCF valuation.

Among the transactions that occurred four years prior to the Valuation Date, Mr. Rosen

578 Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 533.
57 Rosen II, para. 4.7 and Schedules | to 17; Rosen Power Point Presentation, Slide 8.

165

480.

481.

identified a transaction involving a gaming company in Argentina, that he considered to
be sufficiently comparable to ENJASA.>*° The transaction concerned the acquisition in
June 2010 of all shares of Casino Magic Neuquén S.A. by a group of investors led by
Casino Club S.A. for approximately USD 40 million in cash.**! Casino Magic Neuquén
was a business of the same size and in the same sector as ENJASA, in the same country,
which equally operated on the basis of a gaming license provided by a local
government. **? Mr. Rosen concludes that this transaction would imply that ENJASA’s
value would be ARS 243.3 million, respectively USD 43.8 million at the official
exchange rate. This amount, Mr. Rosen concludes, is relatively supportive of his DCF
valuation of ENJASA and Cachi Valle. It is, however, not determinative of the value of
ENJASA at the Valuation Date, which is three years after the Casino Magic

transaction. **?

Mr. Rosen also considered the February 2007 transaction whereby CAIH purchased an
additional 55% interest in L&E from Iberlux and which predates the Valuation Date by
approximately 6.5 years. Mr. Rosen admits that ENJASA’s revenue has consistently been
increasing (in USD terms) between 2007 and the Valuation Date. However, as the 2007
L&E transaction was at arms’ length and concerns specifically ENJASA, Mr. Rosen
considers this transaction a valid reference point, whose valuation metrics support his
DCF valuation. On the basis of this transaction, ENJASA’s enterprise value would be

ARS 329.6 million, respectively USD 59.4 million at the official exchange rate. **+

Mr. Rosen, in turn, considers that the references Dr. Dapena makes to two market
transactions (see infra para. 521) contain errors and flaws.°** First, for Mr. Rosen, Dr.
Dapena’s reference to an “Enterprise Value (“EV”)/Earnings Before Interest, Taxes,
Depreciation, and Amortisation (“EBITDA”) multiple” for Argentina is irrelevant as
ENJASA was not an average company in comparison to the Argentine economy as a
whole. The multiple did not reflect the relevant elements that made ENJASA special,
such as the industry sector it was operating in and its monopoly in the gaming sector in

the Province of Salta.**° Moreover, Dr. Dapena incorrectly deducted ARS 74,246,488 in

580 Rosen II, paras. 5.25, 11.1-11.49.
581 Rosen II, paras. 11.29-11.30.

582 Rosen II, paras. 11.31-11.38.

583 Rosen II, para. 11.38.

584 Rosen II, paras. 11.39-11.49.

585 Rosen II, paras. 11.1-11.27.

586 Rosen II, paras. 11.6-11.16.

166

482.

483.

484,

485.

liabilities, while, for Mr. Rosen, only ARS 9.6 million should have been deducted. **’

Second, Mr. Rosen considers the acquisition of the 40% interest in L&E in November
2013, which Dr. Dapena relied on as a comparator to verify the value of ENJASA at the
Valuation Date, to be irrelevant as it took place after the revocation of ENJASA’s license.
The value of L&E (and by extension that of ENJASA) had dropped significantly with
the termination of ENJASA’s license, since the business was no longer able to conduct

its gaming and casino operations which represented its primary source of cash flow.***

2. Respondent’s Approach
a) Valuation Model

Considering that Claimants are only 60% shareholders of L&E and (indirectly) of
ENJASA and Cachi Valle, Respondent and their expert, Dr. Dapena, suggest adopting a
different model for determining the relevant cash flows. Taking into account that
ENJASA was not publicly listed, but had stable business operations and a 13-year record
of dividends, which were paid on a regular and audited basis, for Respondent, the most
appropriate method to value ENJASA is a Discounted Dividend Model.**? This model
predicts the price of a company’s stock on the theory that its price at the Valuation Date
is worth the sum of all of its future dividend payments, discounted back to the Valuation

Date.*?

Under the Discounted Dividend Model, Respondent’s expert, Dr. Dapena, ina first step,
estimated ENJASA’s income and capital increases as well as its operating expenses,
including amortisations, depreciations, reinvestment needs, and income tax for the
duration of the License, i.e., until 23 September 2029. In a second step, the projected
future dividends are discounted in order to arrive at their value at the Valuation Date on

13 August 2013.

b) Relevant Cash Flow

Based upon the historical data for the years 2010-2012,*°! Respondent’s expert projects

587 Rosen II, paras. 11.22-11.27.

588 Rosen II, paras. 11.17-11.21.

589 CEMA I, paras. 146-151; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 283.

59 See www.investopedia.com.

51 CEMA I, para. 170. As investments in 2012 included substantial non-recurring components, Dr. Dapena
maintained a level of maintenance capital expenditures in time, ic., in line with projected amortisation and
depreciation. See Dapena II, para. 166.

167

ENJASA’s cash revenues into the future (based upon an historical growth rate of 22.6%)
and expenses (based upon an average revenues/expenses ratio of 89.6%).*”? The surplus
cash flow thus obtained is the free cash flow to shareholders, paid either as dividends,
expected over the years until September 2029, or as ENJASA’s estimated residual value

in September 2029.°%

486. Because of the valuation model followed, Dr. Dapena’s valuation is not reduced by the
pro-rata proceeds from the sale of the hotel building and of Casino Salta. Indeed, the
applied “but for’-scenario, based upon dividends and residual value, implies that the

hotel and Casino Salta would not have been sold as long as ENJASA’s license lasted.

487. Respondent and Dr. Dapena criticize Mr. Rosen’s basis for his cash flow projections.
They point out that only damages that are certain can be compensated and compensation
of hypothetical and undetermined damage is excluded.** Respondent argues that
Claimants have based their valuation in Scenario One upon unreliable information, have
used a number of unreasonable assumptions and parameters, and have applied an

incorrect methodology.*>

488. Respondent does not agree with Mr. Rosen’s alternative Scenario Two valuation either,
which continues to make assumptions in relation to forecasted capital expenditure
(“CAPEX”), exchange rates, and discount rates and turned the alternative valuation into
another speculative projection.*” In brief, for Respondent, Mr. Rosen’s alternative
valuation in Scenario Two shows the same errors as his original valuation.**’ If he had
not made these assumptions, his alternative calculation would also be closer to Dr.

Dapena’s findings. >

489. Respondent points out that, for a company with a 13-year history, such as ENJASA,

58 CEMA I, para. 164.

5°3 See Respondent C-033, Excel sheet: Valuation Middle Rate. The residual value at the end of 2029 was
estimated to be ARS 33,080,780.

54 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 633; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
509-511.

595 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 645-646 and more into detail paras. 647-680.
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 280. For instance, the forecasted average CAPEX did exclude the 2012
CAPEX and only relied on the 2009, 2010, and 2011 CAPEX. The exchange rate and discount rates remained the
same as in the original valuation.

57 For Dr. Dapena, Mr. Rosen, for instance, underestimates the expenses associated with the gaming business
without support as well as the 8% discount rate while the actual cost of capital to the shareholder was around 22%.
The latter shows that Mr. Rosen incorrectly bases his alternative valuation on the same incorrect assumption of a
low rate of interest for a substantial share of non-existent debt. See Dapena II, para. 142.

598 Dapena II, para. 142.

596

168

business forecasts have to be based on audited accounting information.*°? Mr. Rosen’s
model of projected cash flows, by contrast, was only based on internal financial
projections that ENJASA’s management had prepared for Casinos Austria. These
internal projections were neither official nor audited, but mere speculations. °° Similarly,
the unaudited 2013 data that Mr. Rosen used as a starting point for his projections were

inappropriate; instead, 2012 must be used as the base year. °°!

490. Respondent also has the greatest objections to the significant leap in the forecasted

income flows that Mr. Rosen assumes for 2014. The 2014 numbers, in Respondent’s
view, are hypothetical and speculative; they have no correlation whatsoever with

ENJASA’s historical profit/loss as recorded until 2012 and cannot be verified.“

491. Dr. Dapena, for instance, observes that Mr. Rosen assumes profits from the termination

of the Joint Venture with Video Drome, although the termination at the end of 2013
remains uncertain. In the section entitled “Projections for Upcoming Fiscal Years” in
ENJASA’s financial report for 2012, which were drafted after Claimants’ alleged
evidence that termination was certain, its Board of Directors had not mentioned this

termination, nor the possibility of alleged additional income. °*

492. Moreover, Dr. Dapena points out that Mr. Rosen bases his assumption about the profits

yielded by the termination of the Joint Venture with Video Drome upon a mere,
unaudited spreadsheet, which cannot be checked, instead of upon the audited financial
statement of 31 December 2012, as Dr. Dapena did. The Joint Venture’s accounting
information, on which Mr. Rosen bases himself, was at the time disputed by ENJASA.°°5
In addition, from the revenues thus obtained, alleged unproven, non-recurring expenses

were incorrectly deducted. °°

493. Respondent furthermore observes that the increased 2014 projected results went beyond

399
600
01
602
03

the mere fact that the Joint Venture with Video Drome would have been discontinued

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 276.

Dapena II, paras. 40-41, 82.

Dapena II, para. 76.

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 284.

Dapena, Comments on the Rosen’s revised valuation model and adjustments to CEMA Valuation Model, 20

April 2020, paras. 63-68.

604
60s
606

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 289.
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 292-296.
Dapena, Comments on the Rosen’s revised valuation model and adjustments to CEMA Valuation Model, 20

April 2020, paras. 60-62.

169

494.

495.

496.

497.

and included other increases.°°” In this context, Dr. Dapena observes that, for instance,
because of Mr. Rosen’s unrealistic assumptions, the position “other casino revenues”
jumps 97% from 2013 to 2014, ie., from ARS 98 million to ARS 193 million, and
ENJASA’s EBITDA increased 1.5 times between 2012 and 2014.

Respondent further objects to Claimants’ disaggregating alleged cash flows by business
unit, while no cash flow for the hotel is examined. As no projected cash flow with regard
to the operation of the hotel was ever submitted, the allocation of the expenses of the
gaming operations, Respondent criticizes, cannot be checked. Dr. Dapena adds that Mr.
Rosen’s approach may underestimate the operating expenses of games of chance and
overestimate the operating expenses of the hotel.®’ The overvaluation of the lost cash
flow may result in an overestimation of the alleged damages.°!° Claimants may even be
implicitly allocating in their projections a substantial part of the total operating expenses
to the hotel, thus undervaluing the results of the hotel and undermining the assumption

that the hotel was not-profitable or was not at a break-even point.°!!

Dr. Dapena also objects to Mr. Rosen’s disaggregation of cash flows by business
operation (lotteries, slot machines, live games) because an investor should assess the
value of an exclusive license for games of chance as a whole, considering that the
different business segments (lotteries, slot machines, live games, hotel) were all part of

the same risk, which was covered by ENJASA’s exclusive license. °!

For Dr. Dapena, Mr. Rosen’s separate analysis of the different gaming activities prevents
consistency checks of the various expenses that are allocated to the different gaming
units. Furthermore, the disaggregated data have not been audited.°!? Separate data per
business unit cannot be obtained from audited sources, such as financial statements, as
has been acknowledged by Mr. Rosen.°!* For instance, in Dr. Dapena’s view, the

expenses related to lotteries in Mr. Rosen’s analysis, are clearly underestimated.°!>

Mr. Dapena also observes that Mr. Rosen’s reference to Professor Damodaran to justify

7 Transcript, Day 8, pp. 154-156; Dapena, Letter of 30 December 2019, para. 22.

608 Dapena II, paras. 41 and 59-66; Exhibit C-299_48; Transcript, Day 8, pp. 154-156.

9 Dapena II, paras. 2, 47-56; Response to Howard Rosen’s Memorandum, 28 May 2020, para. 97.
610 Dapena II, para. 69.

11 Dapena II, para, 85. Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 285.

612 Dapena II, para. 47.

613 Dapena, Letter of 30 December 2019, para. 22.

°l4 Transcript, Day 8, pp. 59-60.

615 Dapena II, para. 142.

170

a differentiation between business segments is out of context. When Professor
Damodaran states that “a disaggregated valuation should yield a better estimate of value
than an aggregated valuation,” he refers, Dr. Dapena points out, to multinational
companies with multiple businesses, not to various segments of the same business unit
in the same geographical location, as is the case with ENJASA.°'° For Dr. Dapena, a
differentiation would only be valid if (i) the cash flow associated with business segments
derived from different licenses or regions, (ii) the company wanted to sell separately one
of the segments (which it could not do), or (iii) the cash flow had a different risk profile
(which was not the case here, since they were all associated with ENJASA’s gaming

operations).°!”

©) Discount Rate

498. As for the discount rate, Dr. Dapena applied a rate of 18.3% and a discount factor that

increased from 0.79 in 2014 to 0.06 in 2029.°'* On this basis, Dr. Dapena arrived at a
discounted equity-value of ENJASA in August 2013 of ARS 104,244,982. Claimants in
turn, would be entitled to 60% or ARS 62,546,989.

499. In this context, Dr. Dapena does not agree with Mr. Rosen’s first step to determine the

 

discount rate: the selection of a Risk-Free Rate, i.e., the theoretical rate of return of an
investment with zero risk. Mr. Rosen uses a risk-free rate of 3.39%, which is based on
the United States 20-year treasury bond yield at the Valuation Date. Dr. Dapena suggests
instead a risk-free rate of 6.56%, which is based on the average yield on United States

10-year treasury bonds from the years 1962 to 2013.

500. Dr. Dapena has no comments on the selection of the Equity Risk Premium, i.e., the excess

return that an investment in stock provides over a risk-free investment. Both he and Mr.

Rosen thus estimated that the Equity Risk Premium would be 5.46%.

501. Dr. Dapena has, however, serious objections to Mr. Rosen’s selection of different

Industry Betas, which reflect the systemic risk that is similar for all businesses in a
specific industry, for ENJASA’s operations of lotteries, slot machines, and live games.

For Dr. Dapena, it is inappropriate to differentiate the discount rates of business segments

Dapena II, para. 48.

617 Dapena II, para. 50.

618 See ‘Valuation Model, Tab ‘Shareholders Return’ Exhibit CEMA-31. Respondent considered 20.3% the
appropriate nominal rate of expected return and assumed a 2% deduction to reflect US long-term inflation. See
CEMA I, paras. 176-177; Dapena II, para. 168.

171

that are part of the same corporate and legal vehicle so that no differentiation should be
made between different types of games of chance, considering that all segments were (i)
covered by the same license, (ii) associated with the same type of risk and geographical
area, and (iii) not intended to be commercialized or sold separately. The cash flow
generated by one segment serves as collateral for the cash flow generated by the other

segments, and they are related from a risk perspective. °!

502. As Dr. Dapena considered all of ENJASA’s activities to be part of the same

“gaming/hotel’ business for all of ENJASA’s activities, the ‘gaming/hotel’ Beta of 0.55
should be applied. °° Dr. Dapena observes that this global approach ties with the audited
financial statements, which did not differentiate between the expenses of the different

business units or segments.

503. Dr. Dapena furthermore objects to Claimants’ use of a relevered Industry Beta, which

considers the debt of companies within the specific industry. As Dr. Dapena focuses on
equity, he uses the unlevered beta, which does not consider the debts of the companies
within the sector, in order to remove the impact of debt and to neutralize the company’s

capital structure.

504. As Dr. Dapena disagrees with Mr. Rosen on the relevant Industry Beta, he also disagrees

with the Adjusted Equity Risk Premium, i.e., the equity risk premium, multiplied by the
levered Industry Beta, which in turn reflects how much the stock in a specific business
will outperform risk-free debt instruments. In the present case, Dr. Dapena estimated the
Adjusted Equity Risk to be 3% on the basis of the unlevered Beta for ENJASA’s

gaming/hotel operations as a whole.

505. Dr. Dapena also does not accept Mr. Rosen’s determination of the Country Risk

619
620
ei
2

Premium, i.e., the additional premium to compensate investors for the higher risk that is
associated with investing in a foreign country, as compared to investing in their domestic
market. Referring to the annual default spreads published by Professor Damodaran, Mr.
Rosen estimated the country risk for Argentina at the Valuation Date at only 6%.°7! For
Dr. Dapena it should be 10.7%, based on the EMBI+, which indicates the rate of return

for US dollar-denominated external debt instruments issued by Argentina. ©

Dapena II, para. 98.

Exhibit CEMA-33, Tab ‘Beta’.

Rosen I, paras. 10.19-10.23.

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 308.

172

506.

507.

508.

509.

All in all, however, Dr. Dapena’s suggested nominal cost of equity of 20.26% was not
much different from Mr. Rosen’s average nominal cost of equity of 20.40% (see supra

para. 472).

Dr. Dapena very strongly objects to how Mr. Rosen established the debt/equity ratio to
calculate the WACC. Rather than using Claimants’ debt/equity ratio (75.20%/24.80%),
the actual debt/equity ratio of ENJASA should be used.°” For Respondent, in order to
establish ENJASA’s value, Mr. Rosen cannot mix up the debt ratio of Casinos Austria in
its country of origin with ENJASA’s debt/equity ratio in Argentina. Claimants’ increase
in L&E’s shareholding in 2007 — and thus of their indirect participation in ENJASA —
cannot be considered as a loan, which would justify to retain Claimants’ debt/equity ratio
to establish ENJASA’s indebtedness. Whether Casinos Austria had acquired 60% of
L&E shares in 2007 with loaned money, Dr. Dapena submits, is irrelevant for ENJASA’s
cost of capital, as the acquisition of L&E shares is not a loan to ENJASA. The acquired
shares did not vest an interest-bearing debt on behalf of L&E, nor ENJASA, but only
gave rise to potential dividends.°* Claimants’ level of indebtedness in Austria was

therefore not relevant.

For Respondent, Claimants can also not apply a fictitious debt/equity ratio of 75%/25%
for ENJASA, instead of the actual ratio, based on the argument that the former would be
optimal from a financing point of view, or because ENJASA’s low debt/equity ratio and
its stable cash flow would allow it to increase its financial leverage and to maximize the
value of its enterprise and the return to its equity holders. Claimants are not entitled to
assume that Casinos Austria’s structure should equally apply to ENJASA in Argentina.
Besides, ENJASA was not planning to incur debts as it was not intending to make

substantial investments.

As Dr. Dapena does not accept that Claimants’ debt/equity ratio would be used, he does
not agree that Mr. Rosen used for the cost of debt in his WACC valuation the interest
rate for which Casinos Austria could borrow money on the Austrian market, i.e., 4.12%

after taxes. In fact, because of the restricted access to the debt market in Argentina,

©3 Dapena II, paras. 91, 94, 95, 100, 104, and 109. Dr. Dapena initially assumed a debt to equity ratio of 100%
equity (i.e., a debt-free situation), considering that ENJASA’s financial debt was paid off after the Valuation Date
and cash flows were stable and positive. Mr. Rosen objected that it was irrelevant that the debt was repaid after
the Valuation Date: what mattered was the situation at the Valuation Date. See Rosen II, paras. 9.25-9.37. For Mr.
Rosen, ENJASA’s debt/equity ratio, as presented by Dr. Dapena, was 6%/94%. See Exhibit C-026-64, ENJASA
Loan Payment Schedule; Rosen Presentation Slide 14.

4 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 303.

173

510.

S11.

512.

513.

514.

S15.

ENJASA’s cost of debt was 24%. °°> Furthermore, Dr. Dapena points out that Mr. Rosen
did not submit evidence that Argentine companies obtained financing in 2013 at the very

low rate suggested by Mr. Rosen. °°

As Dr. Dapena disagrees with the debt/equity ratio and the cost of debt that Mr. Rosen
uses to arrive at his WACC, he also disagrees with a WACC of 8% for the totality of
ENJASA’s operations.°?” Instead, for Dr. Dapena, the actual cost of capital for the

shareholders was above 20%. °°

On the US inflation rate, Dr. Dapena slightly disagrees with Mr. Rosen. For Dr. Dapena,

the rate is 2%, while for Mr. Rosen it is 2.30%.”

In brief, Respondent does not accept the discount rates of 5-7% submitted by Claimants.
In contrast, Dr. Dapena estimated the real cost of ENJASA’s equity at 18.3%. Discount
rates of 5-7%, Dr. Dapena points out, are below the return of Argentine sovereign bonds
at that time and are close to the interest rate of 6% that Mr. Rosen suggests.

Underestimating the discount rate increases the value of the alleged damages. °”

Respondent observes that Claimants would arrive at a discount rate of some 20% as
Respondent does, if in Mr. Rosen’s model ENJASA’s actual debt/equity ratio had been

followed. ©!

d) Exchange Rate

In respect of the applicable exchange rate, Respondent points out that the exchange rates
Mr. Rosen suggests for Claimants were not his personal choice, but followed the
instructions of counsel for Claimants. For Respondent, these rates are not valid
alternatives for converting ARS into USD.

The first suggestion, the official bank exchange rate, was, Respondent observes, in

practice not used in August 2013 because of the then existing foreign exchange

restrictions in Argentina. Respondent can also not accept Mr. Rosen’s second alternative

©5 See ENJASA’s Financial Statements as of 32 December 2012, Note 22 (CEMA 26); Dapena Response to
Howard Rosen’s Memorandum, paras. 49-50. The sovereign debt in dollars was approximately 13%. See
Respondent's Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 533; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 305-306.

©6 Dapena II, paras. 167-175.

©7 The same holds true for the WACC of 7%, 9%, and 9% for lotteries, slot machines, and live games respectively.
©8 Dapena II, para. 142.

© Rosen II, para. 9.68.

30 Dapena, II, para. 140.

© Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 309.

174

exchange rate, which was based upon expectations of analysts in August 2013 about the
development of the exchange rate for the three years to follow.°* This alternative rate is
only a future, hypothetical exchange rate, not the actual exchange rate in August 2013.
The two exchange rates Claimants suggested, Respondent submits, can therefore not be

used for a market valuation in August 2013.

516. Instead, Respondent and Dr. Dapena suggest to apply the CCL rate, which is the market

exchange rate used for converting cash amounts from ARS into USD in Argentina at the
Valuation Date, when exchange controls were in place.%? The CCL rate was, for
instance, the implied exchange rate between stock prices on the Buenos Aires and New

York Stock Exchanges.

e) Overall Valuation of Claimants’ Investment

517. Applying the CCL rate to the discounted cash flows determined through his Discounted

Dividend Model, Dr. Dapena arrives as a total value of the loss L&E suffered in respect
of its entire shareholding in ENJASA of USD 11,982,182. For Claimants’ 60%
shareholding in L&E this translates into a loss of USD 7,189,309. °*

518. Dr. Dapena also supplements his analysis with a much simpler calculation, which is

based upon the average dividends paid out during the 2010-2012 period and projecting
said value up to September 2029, again discounted at an annual discount rate of 18%.
With this calculation, the value of future dividends amounts to ARS 97.2 million of
which Claimants’ 60% participation equal ARS 58.3 million; converted to USD at the
CCL rate, this would result in USD 11.18 million for L&E as a whole and USD 6.7

million for Claimants 60% shareholding. °>

Sf) Alternative Valuation: The Market Approach

519. Respondent observes that Mr. Rosen did not consider a market approach to be decisive

— and that Dr. Dapena agreed with him. The specifics of each transaction, the time

difference, and the unsteadiness make it difficult to find comparable transactions. °° At

Rosen, Transcript, Day 8, pp. 95-96.

33 Transcript, Day 8, pp. 161-162.
64 Dapena, Comments on the Rosen’s revised valuation model and adjustments to CEMA Valuation Model, 20

April 2020, para. 29. For previous submissions, see Dapena II, para. 188; Respondent’s Valuation Sheet — CEMA
3

Dapena, Comments on the Rosen’s revised valuation model and adjustments to CEMA Valuation Model, 20

April 2020, paras. 30-32, 101-109.

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 342.

175

520.

521.

522.

523.

524.

most, a market-based valuation can serve as a secondary support of a DCF valuation.

In all events, for Dr. Dapena, the 2010 Casino Magic transaction and the 2007 L&E
transaction relied upon by Mr. Rosen (see supra paras. 479-480) are not comparable to
the hypothetical acquisition of ENJASA at the Valuation Date. Both transactions were
carried out at times when Argentina’s economic conditions were totally different. The
average market value of companies was considerably higher in 2007 and in 2010 than in
August 2013. The unstable economic context in Argentina makes Mr. Rosen’s market

approach irrelevant and inconsistent with economic reality.°°7

Apart from criticizing Mr. Rosen’s market-based analysis as irrelevant for determining
the value of Claimants’ investment, Respondent points out that Dr. Dapena refers to two
market-based elements to support the reasonableness of his own valuation of Claimants’
investment, i.e., the 2013 EV/EBITDA multiple and the 15 November 2013 acquisition
of Iberlux’ 40% interest in L&E by CAI.

The EV/EBITDA multiple is an indicator for calculating the value of an enterprise based
on a company’s EBITDA. For the entire Argentine economy in 2013, to which Dr.
Dapena refers, the EV/EBITDA multiple was 3.9. Based on this multiple, ENJASA’s
overall value would be, based on its EBITDA of ARS 36,925,084, ARS 144,377,078.
With ARS 38,846,286 cash added and ARS 74,246,488 liabilities deducted, ENJASA’s
value for shareholders would therefore be ARS 108,976,876 or, at the CCL rate, USD
12,526,078.°* Claimants’ 60% share would thus be worth ARS 65,386,126 or USD
7,515,646. The proceeds from the sale of the hotel building would need to be added on

top.

Furthermore, for the purchase of 40% of L&E’s shares in September 2013, i.e., one
month after the revocation of ENJASA’s license, Casinos Austria paid USD 2.82 million
and was committed to pay USD 1 million more if the gaming license was reinstated. For
Respondent, this transaction would imply that ENJASA’s whole stock package was
worth USD 9.55 million and that Claimants’ 60% shareholding thus had a value of USD

5.73 million.“

Both of these market-based factors, in the view of Respondent and her expert, Dr.

67 Dapena II, paras. 178-187.
638 CEMA I, paras. 188-194.
© Dapena II, para. 135.

© CEMA I, para. 184.

176

Dapena, support Dr. Dapena’s DCF approach based on his Discounted Dividend Model.

3. The Tribunal’s Analysis

525. Assessing the compensation due is not a pure mathematical addition of certainties, but

involves human appreciation. The commentary on Article 36 of the ILC Articles
confirms that the valuation of a going concern, as is the case here, involves human
discretion.™! This notwithstanding, the valuation of Claimants’ investment depends on
the different elements that are in controversy among the Parties and their experts.” The
Tribunal will therefore, in the following, address the points that have divided the Parties,
namely the valuation model to be used (a.), the determination of the relevant cash flows
(b.), as well as the discount rate (c.), and the exchange rate to be used (d.), and on that

basis arrive at a valuation of Claimants’ investment, that is, its 60% interest in L&E (e.).

a) Valuation Model

526. The first point in controversy between the Parties’ experts concerns the valuation model

itself. While Respondent’s expert, Dr. Dapena, focused on shareholder value and
compared the actual and hypothetical cash flow (dividends and value of non-amortized
assets in 2029) to the (ultimate) shareholders, Mr. Rosen, Claimants’ expert, focused on
the value of ENJASA/L&E, and compared the actual and hypothetical cash flow within

those companies.

527. The Tribunal observes that Respondent opted for the Discounted Dividend Model

because it considered ENJASA to be a mature business with regular distribution of
dividends with “a certain stability in the nominal growth of revenues as well as a certain
stability in expense and investment/revenue rations.”°* The Tribunal, however, notes
that, although ENJASA’s net revenues indeed steadily increased with some 23% per year
between 2009 and 2012, which is the base year used by Dr. Dapena for the projection of
future dividends, ENJASA’s net income followed a more bumpy course. Net profits, for
example, increased by approx. 150% between 2011 and 2012, and ENJASA’s net worth,
which had remained stable between 2009 and 2011, increased by 95% between 2011 and

4! Comment to Article 36 of the Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts,

with Commentaries, 2001, paras. 22 et seq.

For two issues not raised by either Party, which the Tribunal’s majority considers not to be relevant, unlike the

Dissent, see supra notes 521 and 522.

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 319.

#4 CEMA I, paras. 146, 156.

177

528.

529.

530.

2012.°° This throws some doubt on the relevance of the stability of dividends paid to
the controlling shareholder in the presence of fluctuating income and on whether the

dividends would stay stable as assumed by Dr. Dapena.

The Tribunal, moreover, agrees with Claimants that the dividends (indirectly) flowing
from ENJASA to Claimants do not offer an appropriate basis for ENJASA’s valuation
as Claimants, who are in control as majority shareholders of ENJASA via L&E, also had
other vehicles, such as license and managements fees, to benefit from their investment in
ENJASA. The Tribunal therefore considers that an informed valuation of ENJASA/L&E
on the basis of projected cash flows, as Claimants’ expert Dr. Rosen proposes, is the
more appropriate approach in the present situation. The projected cash flows have to be
construed on the basis of historical data and reliable projections, and subsequently be

discounted to the Valuation Date.

The Tribunal further notes that it fails to see any material differences from a legal
perspective in the calculation of compensation due under the principle of full reparation
that Dr. Rosen attaches to the difference between “fair value” v. “fair market value” of
Claimants’ interest in ENJASA/L&E. To the extent that Mr. Rosen suggests that under
the idea of “fair value” specific synergies for Claimants from the asset under valuation,
notable in respect of their own debt/equity value should be considered, the Tribunal will
comment on that specific issue below (see infra paras. 550-551). This specific issue,
however, has no influence on the approach to be taken for valuing Claimants’ investment
as such. The Tribunal therefore does not consider that the use of the concept of “fair
value” as compared to “fair market value” makes a difference in the approach to adopt
for determining the compensation due under the principle of full reparation for

internationally wrongful conduct of the respondent State.

b) The Relevant Cash Flow

In order to determine the value of Claimants’ investment, the Tribunal will establish the
relevant cash flow on the date ENJASA’s license was revoked, that is, on 13 August
2013, until the original term of the License, that is, 23 September 2029. In this context,
a number of issues are controversial among the Parties and their experts. These include:

(i) the basis for projecting ENJASA’s future cash flows; (ii) the relevance of cash flows

5 Net revenues increased from ARS 157,853,985 (2009) to ARS 290,970,962 (2012), net profits were ARS
9,578,130 (2009), ARS 11,794,744 (2010), ARS 9,126,930 (2011), and ARS 22,852,681 (2012). See CEMA I,
Tables | and 2.

178

531.

53

53

646

stemming from the Joint Venture between ENJASA and Video Drome after 31 December
2013; (iii) the relevance of the cash flows stemming from the hotel; (iv) adjustments
concerning the working capital of ENJASA; and (v) the relevance of the cash flows for
the benefit of Cachi Valle from the Joint Venture with ENJASA relating to the operation

of Casino Salta.

The first disagreement between the Parties and their experts concerns the basis for
projecting future cash flows of ENJASA. While Respondent’s expert, Dr. Dapena, relied
on ENJASA’s audited financial statements of 2012, Claimants’ expert, Mr. Rosen,
presented two scenarios. Mr. Rosen’s Scenario One relies on actual cash flows from
January to August 2013 and management projections from September 2012; his Scenario
Two relied more on historical data, in particular ENJASA’s 2012 audited financial
statement and was thus closer to the cash flow basis used by Dr. Dapena. In his Second
Report, Mr. Rosen adjusted certain of his projections, resulting in an overall lower
valuation of ENJASA, and reducing the difference between Scenarios One and Two to
the issue of which exchange should be applied to convert ARS into USD (see infra paras.
554-563).

2. In this context, the Tribunal starts out by noting that projections about future cash flows
require a basis in historical data and have to consistently follow the reasonable evolution
of historical data for the following years. Any deviation in projected cash flows from a
consistent evolution requires justification. Having reviewed the various reports of both
experts on the appropriate basis for making projections about ENJASA’s future cash
flows, the Tribunal accepts the basis on which Claimants’ expert, Mr. Rosen, made his
projections for ENJASA’s future cash flows. In the Tribunals view, it is appropriate to
use the actual results for the time from January to August 2013, even though these results
had not been audited at the Valuation Date, and complement them with projections for
the rest of the year that are based on historical data, including the audited data for 2012,

as done by Mr. Rosen.%°

3. Moreover, when looking at the cash flows used for the year 2013, the difference between
both experts is negligible. In the Tribunal’s view, it is therefore not material for purposes
of valuation, whether projections for 2013 are based only on ENJASA’s audited

statements for 2012 or whether they are based on actual results for the first seven months

See Dapena, II, paras. 59-66; Rosen II, Section 7.

179

and on projections for the rest of the year.

534. The real difference between the cash flow analysis of both experts starts in the year 2014.
This difference, however, is principally due to whether cash flows relating to income
generated by slot machines operated under the Joint Venture with Video Drome can be
included fully in the projections for ENJASA’s benefit, as done in Mr. Rosen’s analysis,
or whether such cash flows should be excluded as uncertain, as done in Dr. Dapena’s
analysis. That this is the relevant difference among the experts when it comes to the
relevant cash flows was convincingly explained by Mr. Rosen at the hearing, when
pointing out the differences in cash flow projections between his Second Report and the
Opinion of Dr. Dapena.’ This explanation was not seriously challenged by Respondent

and her expert, Dr. Dapena.

535. For this reason, the Tribunal is not convinced that the basis for Mr. Rosen’s projections
for the year 2013 is defective and would lead to inappropriate results. What is more
important, in the Tribunal’s view, is to address the relevance of specific items for the

projections on which the experts disagree.

536. The first such item concerns the relevance of future cash flows stemming from the
operation of slot machine halls that ENJASA still conducted at the Valuation Date under
a Joint Venture Agreement with Video Drome. In this respect, the Tribunal accepts
Claimants’ position that these cash flows have to be added starting from | January 2014.
Although the Joint Venture with Video Drome was not yet terminated in August 2013,
the agreement was going to terminate as per its terms by 31 December 2013.%%
Furthermore, ENREJA had already been informed about the termination of the Joint
Venture, both by ENJASA,? as well as by Video Drome.*° In addition, ENJASA had
already made calculations for investing into the slot machine halls operated by the Joint

Venture with Video Drome.®*! All of this indicates, in the Tribunal’s view, that it was

47 See Transcript, Day 8, pp. 215-216.

“48 As per its Clause 4, the Joint Venture Agreement between ENJASA and Video Drome of 19 October 2001
(Exhibit C-092) was originally concluded for 5 years. This term was prolonged until 31 December 2013 by a
Modification of the Joint Venture concluded by ENJASA and Video on 7 June 2006 (Exhibit C-093). The
Modification Agreement provided that the new term could be prolonged “if both parties so agreed” (ibid, p. 6).
 ENJASA had communicated the end of the Joint Venture with Video Drome to ENREJA and its intention to
replace the slot machines owned by Video Drome after the end of the Joint Venture in a letter of 23 July 2012.
See Exhibit ARA-028.

650 Video Drome had sent a letter to ENREJA on 23 November 2012 asking ENREJA to suspend the obligation
to exchange old slot machines against new ones given that the Joint Venture with ENJASA was ending in 12
months, that is, on 31 December 2013. See Exhibit C-171.

651 See Rosen I, paras. 9.29-9.32; Rosen II, para. 7.27 (relying on Exhibits C-026-39.1 and C-026-41, p. 2). See
also WS I Anselmi, para. 104.

180

sufficiently certain that ENJASA was going to seize the business opportunity that opened

because of the termination of the Joint Venture with Video Drome.

537. Furthermore, given the history of the relationship between ENJASA and Video Drome,
which appears to have soured over the years, and which involved Video Drome’s refusal
to upgrade slot machines to new technical requirements demanded by ENREJA, as well
as sharing the dynamic canon fee that ENJASA agreed to in relation to the Province in
the Acta Acuerdo,°™ the Tribunal considers that the likelihood of a renewal of that Joint
Venture was virtually non-existent. From an economic perspective, a willing buyer at the
Valuation Date in August 2013 would have taken the income stemming from the
operation of slot machines under the Joint Venture with Video Drome fully into account
in calculating the value of ENJASA and the amount of cash flow it could generate in the

future.

538. By contrast, it is immaterial, in the Tribunal’s view, that the termination of the Joint
Venture by 31 December 2013 was not mentioned in ENJASA’s 2012 financial forecast,
a circumstance Respondent points to. Not only is it unclear to the Tribunal to which
extent this circumstance would have had to be included in the financial statements of
ENJASA at all, such a failure would, in the Tribunal’s view, also be a negligible factor
for predicting future cash flows, considering the notifications of the termination of the
Joint Venture already sent by ENJASA and Video Drome to ENREJA prior to the
Valuation Date, as well as the past relationship between ENJASA and Video Drome.
Consequently, the Tribunal agrees with Claimants and their expert, Mr. Rosen, that cash
flows for slot machines so far operated under the Joint Venture with Video Drome are
appropriately to be included in the projections of future cash flows that ENJASA lost
because of the revocation of its License. In the Tribunal’s view, these future cash flows
are not speculative, but constitute part of the injury caused by Respondent’s

internationally wrongful act in the sense of Article 31(1) of the ILC Articles.

539. The Parties and their experts have also debated whether disaggregating ENJASA’s cash
flows into gaming-related and non-gaming related activities and disregarding the latter
for purposes of determining ENJASA’s value as of the Valuation Date was appropriate.
Non-gaming related activities concern mainly the treatment of income from the Sheraton

Hotel Salta which was operated by ENJASA. In the view of Claimants and their expert,

62 See supra paras. 143-144 (reference to Claimants’ argument on past disputes with Video Drome). See also

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras, 125-127.

181

540.

S41.

Mr. Rosen, the hotel should be excluded as it was not affected by the revocation of
ENJASA’s license and continued operating thereafter, albeit without generating any
profits. By contrast, Respondent and her expert, Dr. Dapena, submit that such a
disaggregation of cash flows could result in shifting expenses from gaming to non-
gaming activities and thus overstate the positive cash flows resulting from ENJASA’s

gaming-related activities.

In the Tribunal’s view, normally the entirety of cash flows should be included to
determine the value of a company that was subject to expropriation. In the present case,
however, both Parties found a common ground in the assumption that the hotel was
operating essentially at break-even and did therefore not affect the cash flow from
ENJASA’s gaming operations. The Tribunal agrees that there is a risk that disregarding
certain business units of a company, in particular when they are intertwined with cash-
flow-generating activities connected to one of the casinos operated by ENJASA, as is the
case with the hotel, can result in a distortion of cash flows. However, Respondent and
her expert, Dr. Dapena, have not submitted, beyond pointing generally to the existence
of such a risk, any reliable data that could have suggested that any such distortion had
occurred in the approach by Claimants’ expert, Mr. Rosen. The Tribunal therefore
accepts that the data on which Mr. Rosen projected ENJASA’s future cash flows does

not need to be adapted to take account of cash flows stemming from the hotel.

Furthermore, there is also disagreement among the Parties’ experts concerning the

 

treatment of ENJASA’s working capital, i.e., its short-term capital required to continue
its operations, and its impact on the company’s projected future cash flows. Increases in
working capital in a given year tie up more revenue in current assets and decrease the
available cash flow and vice versa.°°? In Dr. Dapena’s approach, the forecasted level of
working capital was based upon a stable percentage of average revenues from 2009 until
2012, which he considered the optimal balance, without any further adjustments. For
Mr. Rosen, on the contrary, the level of working capital needed to be adjusted
continuously after 2013 and decreased proportionally.°° As Mr. Rosen further
convincingly pointed out, Dr. Dapena’s analysis failed to reflect the impact of inflation

on working capital, leading to an undervaluation of cash flows. °° The Tribunal therefore

63 Rosen II, para, 8.23.
4 See Rosen II, paras. 8.24-8.27; Dapena II, para. 161; CEMA — 32, Excel Tab “Forec Financial Statements”.
65 Rosen II, para, 8.25.
66 Rosen II, para, 8.28.

182

542.

543.

544.

agrees with Mr. Rosen’s approach to consistently adapt the working capital level in

projecting ENJASA’s future cash flows.

Finally, the Parties do not agree on whether Cachi Valle, the subsidiary of L&E (99%)
and ENJASA (1%), which had a 30% share in a joint venture with ENJASA to exploit
Casino Salta, has to be included in the valuation. For Respondent, the revocation of the
License concerned ENJASA and did not affect Cachi Valle, whose lost profits and
expenses, Respondent claims, are unrelated to ENJASA’s license. Claimants, on the
other hand, include Cachi Valle in their valuation. This concerns both the determination
of the basis for calculating the loss of future cash flows and the relevance of post-

revocation expenses incurred by Cachi Valle (see infra paras. 568, 573).

In respect of the relevance of future cash flows of Cachi Valle stemming from the joint
venture with ENJASA, the Tribunal is of the view that these cash flows must be included
in the valuation of Claimants’ investment. As a 30% partner of the joint venture that
exploited Casino Salta, Cachi Valle was affected by the revocation of the License and
lost the respective cash flows. This cash flow, while essentially irrelevant to the valuation
of ENJASA, is relevant, however, for the valuation of L&E, considering that Cachi Valle
was essentially a wholly owned subsidiary of L&E. The Tribunal will therefore include,
in determining compensation for the financial impact of the revocation of ENJASA’s
license upon Claimants’ investment, the cash flows of Cachi Valle from the joint venture
with ENJASA relating to the Casino Salta. Claimants, in turn, are entitled to 60% of the
resulting value of Cachi Valle, given that they were 60% shareholders in L&E at the
Valuation Date. In the Tribunal’s view, the future cash flows concerning Cachi Valle
therefore constitute part of the injury caused to Claimants’ investment by Respondent’s

internationally wrongful act in the sense of Article 31(1) of the ILC Articles.

co) Discount Rate

A DCF analysis of ENJASA’s enterprise value requires the determination of its cost of
capital and to discount the estimated future cash flows to bring them to what their value
was on the Valuation Date, that is, on 13 August 2013. To determine the discount factor,
the Tribunal has to decide certain preliminary issues which are in parts in controversy,
and in parts agreed among the Parties and their experts. This involves determinations on:
(i) the risk free rate; (ii) the equity risk premium; (iii) the relevant industry beta(s); (iv)

the country risk premium; (v) the relevant debt/equity ratio; (vi) the interest rate

183

545.

546.

547.

548.

applicable to ENJASA’s debt; and (vii) the US inflation rate.

For the Risk Free Rate, the Tribunal adopts the factor 3.39%, as suggested by Claimants.
This rate is based on the US 20-year treasury bond yield in August 2013 and is preferred
to the average 6.56% yield for US 10-year bonds from 1962 to 2013, which was
suggested by Respondent. Indeed, to calculate a rate for the period of the next 16 years
from the Valuation Date, the coming 20 years are more relevant than the past 50 years,

especially as interest rates had decreased in recent times.
The Tribunal accepts an Equity Risk Premium of 5.46% on which the Parties agreed.

With regard to the Industry Betas, the Tribunal adopts the following approach. The
Parties did not agree on whether a DCF analysis should consider the Industry Beta for
“‘gaming/hotel’ for all of ENJASA’s activities, or apply specific Betas for lotteries, slot
machines, and live games. The Tribunal observes that slot machines, lotteries, and live
games represent 69% (slot machines), 28% (lotteries), and 3% (live games) of ENJASA’s
cash flow.°57 The systemic risk of these respective types of gaming operations is
different. It thus would be illogical to submit lotteries and slot machines to the Beta for
live gaming. The Tribunal accepts the specific Betas for ENJASA’s respective areas of
operation, which are submitted by Claimants’ expert on the basis of the average Betas in

similar operations. 8

For the Country Risk Premium at the Valuation Date, the Tribunal observes that
Claimants admit that a country risk in valuation analyses is usually based upon the default
spread, i.e., the EMBI+, which indicates the spread between Argentine government
bonds in USD and US treasury bonds. At the Valuation Date, the EMBI+ for Argentina
was 10.7%. However, as an exception, for Claimants, the EMBI+ should not be
applicable for countries in a default-like situation, such as Argentina around the
Valuation Date. The EMBI+ reflects inter alia the State’s financial position and concerns
bonds, acquired by the market, while in the present DCF analysis, the cash flow was to
be transferred between related commercial entities. Claimants therefore suggest a
country risk rate of 6%, based upon the annual default spreads published by Professor

Damodaran. °?

657 Exhibit C-299 — Summaries.
658 Exhibit C-299 — Control Sheet, lines 16-19.
69 Rosen II, paras. 9.48-9.62.

184

549. Inthe Tribunal’s view, both the EMBI+ as well as the country risk rate based on Professor

550.

S51.

Damodaran’s publication of annual default spreads are appropriate indicators of the
country risk from a valuation perspective. The Tribunal considers it more appropriate,
however, given the rather tumultuous and overall little predictable developments the
Argentine economy had taken during the decades before the Valuation Date, to rely on a
more conservative country risk premium than the one based on Professor Damodaran’s
publication. At the same time, the EMBI+ may not necessarily reflect the view a willing
buyer may have taken on the country risk premium at the Valuation Date. The Tribunal
therefore considers it appropriate to average the country risk premiums suggested by the
Parties’ experts and round it to half percent marks, and thus set it at 8.5% for purposes

of calculating the discount rate.

With regard to the debt/equity ratio of ENJASA, the Tribunal agrees with Claimants and
their expert, Mr. Rosen, that ENJASA’s debt, which existed at the Valuation Date, must
be taken into account for purposes of valuation. The Tribunal is not convinced, however,
that it should adopt either the debt/equity ratio of Casinos Austria of 75.20%/24.80% or
an optimal debt/equity ratio of 75%/25%, as suggested by Mr. Rosen. The consideration
that a much higher debt ratio would be optimal, can be no basis to establish ENJASA’s
actual cost of capital, which is the relevant consideration for valuation. Neither is the
debt/equity ratio of its (indirect) shareholder, Casinos Austria, relevant. The cash flow
within ENJASA, its debt/equity ratio and the cash flow to the shareholders are not
affected by whether Casinos Austria acquired these shares with own capital or loaned

funds.

Instead, in the Tribunal’s view, the actual debt/equity ratio of ENJASA on the Valuation
Date has to be adopted. In this respect, the Parties present two different figures for the
actual debt/equity ratio. Thus, Respondent’s expert, Dr. Dapena, states that the actual
debt/equity ratio of ENJASA for 2012 is 8.53%/91.47%;° while Claimants’ expert, Mr.
Rosen, states the actual debt/equity ratio of ENJASA to be 6%/94%.! In light of these
differences, the Tribunal will adopt, in favor of Respondent, the lower debt/equity ratio

of 6%/94%.

552. In respect of the US inflation rate, which is used to reduce the discount rate, the Tribunal

660 See Dapena II, paras. 91, 103.

1 See Rosen, Presentation, Slide 16. Possibly, the difference between the Parties’ experts results from the fact
that Dr. Dapena bases himself on 2012 numbers for ENJASA, whereas Mr. Rosen uses 2013 numbers as a basis.
for his cash flow calculations.

185

553.

554.

555.

556.

retains an inflation rate of 2%, as suggested by Dr. Dapena. The 2.30% inflation rate
proposed by Claimants is neither supported by the Forecasted Consumer Price Index nor
the Core Consumer Index from the second half of 2013 until 2015, which is published

by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, nor by the more recent inflation rates. °°

The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that a cash flow analysis also has to be applied to

the exploitation of Casino Salta by Cachi Valli, as Mr. Rosen did.°°

d) Exchange Rate

The Parties’ compensation calculations start from financial data expressed in ARS. Both
Parties, however, agree that the compensation has to be paid in USD and has to be
converted from ARS into USD at the currency exchange rate applicable on the Valuation
Date on 13 August 2013. The Parties, however, are not in agreement on what the

applicable exchange rate is.

The Tribunal notes, in this context, that Claimants’ expert, Mr. Rosen, admitted at the
hearing that most foreign exchange transactions at the Valuation Date adopted the CCL
rate and recognized that Dr. Dapena’s arguments in support of the use of the CCL rate
were not incorrect as a matter of economic expertise.“ The Parties’ disagreement
therefore boils down to the question of whether the BIT requires the use of the official
exchange rate, as argued by Claimants and as used by their expert, Mr. Rosen, or whether
arate that is in fact used in commercial transactions between market actors, as is the case
with the CCL rate used by Respondent’s expert, Dr. Dapena, reflects the requirements of

Article 5 of the BIT.

Article 5(1) of the BIT provides that “[e]Jach Contracting Party shall guarantee to
investors of the other Contracting Party the free transfer of payments related to an
investment, without undue delay and in freely convertible currency ...” This right applies,
inter alia, to “the proceeds from the liquidation or total or partial sale of the investment
[and] compensations due under Article 4, paragraph 2, of this Agreement” (Article
5(1)(e) and (f) of the BIT). The provision also applies, in the Tribunal’s view, to the

transfer of funds a covered investor is to receive in compensation for host State conduct

62 Rosen II, para. 9.68. In fact, the Forecasted Index for 2013-2015 is closer to 2.10%. See Exhibit C-026-53, p.
12. The inflation index from 2016-2020 is under 2%; see www.USinflationcalculator.com.

3 See Rosen II, para. 12.6 and C-299, Excel sheet, Schedules 2D and 15.

64 Transcript, Day 8, p. 222 (Mr. Rosen stated: “I appreciate Dr. Dapena’s point of view that the market place at
the exact valuation date is a consideration ... I don’t find fault in what he’s done; I’ve just taken a different point
of view.”).

186

557.

558.

559.

that is contrary to the obligations laid down in the BIT. Otherwise, compensations for
unlawful conduct, such as unlawful expropriations, would be treated worse in respect of
the transfer of funds, from the perspective of affected investors, than compensation for
lawful expropriations. Furthermore, the list of transactions in Article 5(1) to which an
investor’s right to free capital transfer applies is not a closed list, but merely illustrative:
it provides that the guarantee of the free transfer of payments applies “particularly but
not exclusively” to specifically listed items. Compensation for the host State’s unlawful
conduct can thus also be subsumed as falling under the right to free capital transfer under

Article 5 of the BIT.

However, while Article 5(1) of the BIT guarantees that the relevant transfers have to be
made “without undue delay and in freely convertible currency,” Article 5 does not
guarantee a specific exchange rate. In this respect, Article 5(3) of the BIT merely requires
that the exchange rate on the day of the transfer shall be relevant. Article 5(4) of the BIT
provides that “[t]he exchange rates shall be determined in accordance with the framework

of the respective bank system of the territory of each Contracting Party.”

By referring to the exchange rate being “determined in accordance with the framework
of the respective bank system of the territory of each Contracting Party,” Article 5(4) of
the BIT does not guarantee a right to transfers at an official exchange rate. While it
prohibits the use of an exchange rate that is less favorable for the investor than the rate
used by banks for commercial transactions, it does not positively authorize an investor
to invoke an official exchange rate that is more favorable to the investor than that which
banks apply to commercial transactions, for instance because of existing foreign

exchange restrictions.

In this context, the Tribunal also observes that, if Austria and Argentina had had the
intention of requiring that the official exchange rate be applied to convert compensation
for unlawful expropriation for purposes of the transfer of payments, they could have
stipulated so — as, for instance, Austria did in the bilateral investment treaty with the
Czech Republic one year before it concluded the BIT with Argentina.° Instead, the
Contracting Parties to the Argentina-Austria BIT limited the provision on capital transfer
to the rather vague reference to the exchange rate applicable in the banking system of the

respective countries.

665 BIT between Austria and the Czech Republic, signed 15 October 1990, Art. 5.

187

560.

S61.

562.

563.

Moreover, it was not argued that the foreign exchange restrictions that applied in
Argentina in August 2013, and that may have been responsible for a market-going rate
to diverge from the official exchange rate, were themselves in breach of Article 5 of the
BIT, with the consequence that the official exchange should be applied in order to absorb
the effects of unlawful exchange restrictions. Instead, what the BIT merely requires is
that the Tribunal select an exchange rate to convert the compensation due to Claimants
from ARS to USD that is “determined in accordance with the framework of the respective

bank system of the territory of each Contracting Party.”

The official exchange rate of 5.55 ARS/1 USD, which Claimants suggests to make use
of, was not in fact applied by commercial actors to business transactions or currency
conversions at the Valuation Date. °°’ Moreover, as Respondent correctly observes, at the
official exchange rate of ARS 5.55/1 USD, the USD was not “freely convertible
currency,” as Article 5(1) of the BIT provides. In brief, the official exchange rate of 5.55
ARS/I1 USD is not the rate which is established by the banks for commercial currency
conversions between commercial entities.°°* The official exchange rate is therefore not
the exchange rate commonly applied within the Argentine banking system for currency

conversions at the Valuation Date.

On the other hand, an ARS/USD rate of 7.23 on the basis of a three-year forecast by 19
reputable analysts made in August 2013, which is also suggested as an alternative to the
official exchange rate by Claimants and their expert, Mr. Rosen, cannot be considered
either. Indeed, the relevant rate should not be the average of the forecasted — and
therefore uncertain — interest rates of the next three years, but the actual rate as applicable

on the Valuation Date of 13 August 2013.

For the Tribunal, the exchange rate actually applicable to currency conversions therefore
is the CCL rate of ARS 8.7/1 USD suggested by Respondent and her expert, Dr. Dapena.
In August 2013, the use of this exchange rate was free, unrestricted, and completely
legal.67° In the Tribunal’s view, the CCL rate was the exchange rate commonly applied

within the Argentine banking system to “freely” convert ARS into USD in August 2013.

666 Rosen I, Schedules 2A to 2D.

67 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 315.
668 Tid,

669 Rosen I, para. 9.47.

6 Dapena, Transcript, Day 8, p. 169.

188

e) Value of Claimants’ Investment at the Valuation Date

564. Based on the determination of the various issues that were contested between the Parties’

experts, the Tribunal is now in a position to calculate the value of Claimants’ investment,
that is, its 60% direct shareholding in L&E. To do so, the Tribunal bases itself on the tool

provided by Claimants’ expert, Mr. Rosen, as part of his updated Control Sheet. °7!

565. According to that Control Sheet, and using the debt/equity structure that is more

favorable to Respondent (6%/94%), an averaged country risk premium of 8.5%, a USD
inflation rate of 2%, and the exchange rate proposed by Respondent of ARS 8.71/1 USD,
the value of Claimants’ 60% interest in L&E on the Valuation Date on 13 August 2013

is calculated as follows:

60% interest in participation in ENJASA USD 20,510,000
60% interest in participation in Cachi Valle USD 1,150,000
Total USD 21,660,000

C. Consequential Damages

566. Claimants do not only claim compensation for the loss of their investment in L&E, they

also claim for consequential damages, in particular costs for closing down ENJASA’s

62 Tn Claimants’ view, these costs are part of full reparation: had the License

operations.
not been revoked, they would not have been incurred. °7? Respondent, by contrast, rejects
the claim for consequential damages as unfounded. In Respondent’s view, the balance of
ENJASA’s expenses and income after the revocation of the License was positive, so that
no compensation for post-revocation expenses was due; any post-revocation expenses of
Cachi Valle, in turn, could not be included, as only Claimants’ investment in ENJASA

should be valued.°*

1. Claimants’ Position

567. Claimants’ claim for consequential damages includes the operating costs, overhead

on
om
on
14

expenses, and administrative cost for the period from 13 August to 19 November 2013,
i.e., from the revocation of the License by Resolution No. 240/13 until ENJASA’s

activities came to a definitive halt. Moreover, Claimants’ claim the additional costs, such

Rosen II, Schedule for Sensitivity Analysis (Exhibit C-299).

Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 459; Rosen II, paras. 1.4-1.5.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 542-546.
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 335-339.

189

as severance costs and restructuring fees, that were caused by the revocation of
ENJASA’s license and the consequential winding up of Claimants’ business in Salta.°”°
These costs were partially set off by income earned from the operation of the License
between 13 August and 19 November 2013, as well as by cash flows generated from the

liquidation of gaming-related assets after 19 November 2013.°”°

568. Mr. Rosen concluded in his Second Report that after the revocation of the License,

ENJASA and Cachi Valle incurred USD 2.8 Mio in losses, i.e., expenses above revenues.
In his calculations, although for ENJASA revenues would still surpass expenses by USD
235,000, the net costs for Cachi Valle for winding up its operations would have been at
USD 2.988.878.°”’ The basis for his calculations, Mr. Rosen states, are the audited
financial statements for 2013 and 2014 of ENJASA and Cachi Valle. 6”

569. Although Claimants owned only 60% of L&E when ENJASA’s license was revoked,

they deducted 100% of the relevant post-revocation expenses because, in their opinion,
their acquisition of the remaining 40% of L&E in November 2013 was also caused by
the revocation of ENJASA’s license.*”? Moreover, Mr. Rosen opines that if he were to
follow Dr. Dapena’s suggestion to only include 60% of the additional costs incurred after
November 2013, he would also include only 60% of the additional revenues and not
deduct USD 4.6 million net credit received from the transaction with Iberlux. The net
impact of doing as Dr. Dapena suggested would, in Mr. Rosen’s opinion, increase the

amount of consequential damages. °*°

570. Mr. Rosen did, however, not include in his valuation ARS 38 million of cash and short-

675
676

term investments as these amounts represent, he opines, redundant assets that were not
required for ENJASA’s gaming operations. ENJASA would have held the same amount

in cash and investments in both the “but for” and the actual scenarios. °*!

Exhibit C-299, Excel Sheet, Schedule 4, 4A, 4B, and 4C; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 540-546.

Rosen II, para. 13.1. The setoff with income still earned from the License does not contradict the valuation of

lost income from the License for the same period, which is the difference between a “but for”-income from 2013-
2019 minus the actual income between 13 August and 19 November 2013. See Rosen II, para. 13.3.

677
678

Rosen II, Schedule 4; Report, para. 4.7.
Rosen Hearing Presentation, Slides 44 and 45; Transcript, Day 8, p. 34; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para.

546.

679
680
681

Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 402.
Rosen II, paras. 13.1-13.18; Exhibit C-299, Excel Sheet, Schedule 4, notes 7-10.
Rosen II, paras. 13.9-13.10.

190

2. Respondent’s Position

571. Respondent rejects the claims for the compensation of additional post-revocation

expenses. In Dr. Dapena’s view, it is incompatible to add post-revocation expenses that
are based on the assumption that related costs are caused by the revocation of ENJASA’s
license, while calculating the value of Claimants’ investment in L&E and ENJASA on

the assumption that the gaming activities would continue. °**

572. Dr. Dapena further notes that there is no documentary support for the allegation that the

expenses after the revocation of ENJASA’s license actually were incurred, that they were
linked to the revocation and that they were actually paid. Mr. Rosen’s estimates, Dr.
Dapena points out, are based entirely on statements of ENJASA’s management. For
instance, Dr. Dapena points out that the “Additional Costs Net of Additional Revenues”
have been multiplied by seven between Mr. Rosen’s first report (USD 0.4 million) and

his second report (USD 2.8 million) without any documentary support. ?

573. Dr. Dapena also points out that, when ENJASA was liquidated, Claimants actually

recovered the net book value of its assets and that ENJASA did not lose any money; on
the contrary, ENJASA’s post-revocation income was above its costs in the amount of
USD 0.23 million.%* Dr. Dapena thus opines that, as ENJASA sustained no post-
revocation loss resulting from its liquidation, no compensation was due. The post-
revocation additional revenues offset the post-revocation expenses.°* Moreover,
expenses in the amount of USD 2.99 million claimed as consequential losses were related
to Cachi Valle, not to ENJASA. As Respondent considered Cachi Valle not to be affected

by the revocation of the License, these expenses should not be taken into account. **°

574. Furthermore, Respondent does not agree that, because Claimants had obtained 99.94%

682
683
8
85

of L&E’s shares in November 2013, they would also be entitled to deduct 99.94% of any
post-revocation expenses. In Respondent’s opinion, at most 60% of the post-revocation
expenses could be taken into account, corresponding to Claimants’ ownership share in

L&E at the time ENJASA’s license was revoked in August 2013.

Dapena Presentation, Slide 21, Transcript, Day 8, p. 163.

Dapena II, paras. 13 and 142. Compare Rosen I, Figure 1 and Rosen II, Figure 2.

Transcript, Day 8, pp. 165 and 223.

Dapena, Letter of 30 December 2019, para. 22, referring to Exhibit C-299, Report Schedules — Tab 1,

Summary, line 27.

686

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 334, 337-338.

191

575.

576.

577.

3. The Tribunal’s Analysis

As the Tribunal has already pointed out (see supra para. 442), Claimants’ entitlement to
full reparation for Respondent’s internationally unlawful conduct also encompasses
consequential damages that Claimants would not have incurred “but for” Respondent’s
unlawful conduct. This follows from Article 31 of the ILC Articles, which provides that
“any damage ... caused by the internationally wrongful act” has to be compensated. This
encompasses also consequential damage that occurred after the internationally wrongful

act occurred. °°

Against this background, Claimants would be entitled to compensation
for any additional costs caused by the revocation of ENJASA’s license and incurred by
Claimants after 13 August 2013, provided these costs were not included yet in the
valuation of Claimants’ investment at the Valuation Date. Furthermore, consequential
damages would not be limited to costs incurred by, or in relation to, ENJASA, but also
by, or in relation to, Cachi Valle, given that this company is a wholly owned subsidiary
of L&E and that Claimants’ shareholding in L&E was the investment wrongfully

expropriated by Respondent.

The Tribunal, however, is not convinced that any additional post-revocation costs
relating to L&E, ENJASA, or Cachi Valle have been successfully proven by Claimants.
What Claimants and their expert, Mr. Rosen, have failed to consider are the financial
benefits Claimants potentially received via ENJASA through the sale of the hotel for
ARS 20,590,902 and via Cachi Valle for the sale of the premises of Casino Salta for ARS
16,133,635, which both took place in 2017.°** Both of these transactions are not taken
appropriately into account by Mr. Rosen in valuing the post-revocation consequential

damages.

While it is true that both of these assets — that is, the real estate of Casino Salta and of
the hotel — would have survived the end of ENJASA’s license and could have been sold
in 2029, it is not appropriate to exclude the amounts received from the sales of these
assets in 2017 completely. Instead, what Claimants would have needed to show in order

to exclude both assets is that the value received in 2017 was smaller or equivalent to the

87 For support in prior jurisprudence, see eg Siemens AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8,
Award (6 February 2007) para. 352 (Exhibit CL-034); Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental
Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Award (5 October
2012) paras. 792-797 (Exhibit CL-022).

688 See Exhibit C-299-32, pp. 19 and 53 (ENJASA 2017 Financial Statement); Exhibit C-299-42, p. 21 (Cachi
Valle 2017 Financial Statement).

192

578.

579.

580.

value they would have likely received for a sale of both assets in 2029, taking into
account that the 2029 value must be discounted to a 2017 value. In other words,
Claimants would only be entitled to disregard the proceeds from the sale of the hotel and
of Casino Salta, if it was sufficiently certain that the money they received in 2017 for the
sale of both assets would have, when invested at a risk free rate, taking into account the
country risk, inflation, etc, resulted in an amount that was lower than, or at the most

equivalent to, the likely sales prizes they could have achieved in 2029.

Claimants have not shown that, under these assumptions, the sale of the hotel and of
Casino Salta in 2017 did not generate any profits because they realized value from both
transactions that they may not have realized in 2029, for example, because the real estate
value could have declined between 2017 and 2029 and/or the value of the assets
depreciated. The Tribunal could well envisage that Claimants were able to realize gains
from the 2017 sales of both assets that they would not have been able to realize from
sales in 2029. Since the Tribunal is not able to attribute a precise value to these financial
gains, given that Claimants have not met their burden of proof in this respect, the Tribunal
assumes, in favor of Respondent, that the value of financial gains covered the post-
revocation costs claimed by Claimants. Consequently, the Tribunal declines to award any

consequential damages to Claimants.

Against this background, it is also not necessary for the Tribunal to determine whether
Claimants are able, as submitted by Claimants, to claim for 100% of the post-revocation
expenses given that they had purchased 40% of shares of L&E from Iberlux in November
2013, or whether their claim would be limited, as submitted by Respondent, to 60% of
the expenses in question. In this context, the Tribunal observes that the price itself, which
was paid by Claimants to Iberlux in return for obtaining 40% of L&E, was not claimed
by Claimants as consequential damage and that, in the event Claimants were entitled to
claim 100% of the post-revocation expenses, they also would have to include 100% of
any profits they may have made from the sales of the hotel and of Casino Salta in the

computation.

D. Interest

1. The Parties’ Positions

The Parties also differ on questions relating to pre- and post-award interest. While they

193

581.

58:

58:

689

689

agree that interest is due as from the Valuation Date,®*’ they have different positions on

the applicable interest rate and on whether interest should be simple or compounded.

Claimants point out that Article 4(2) of the BIT specifically states that in the event an
investment is legally expropriated, “compensation shall be paid without undue delay and
shall bear interest until the date of payment, at the customer bank rate of the State in
whose territory the investment has been made.” However, Claimants maintain that this
provision does not apply to cases of unlawful expropriations. For Claimants, the rationale
for awarding interest is to put the investor in the position he or she would have been in
“but for” the breach of the BIT, by awarding a fair and reasonable amount for lost return
opportunities. For Claimants, an interest rate of 6% is reasonable from a legal as well as
an economic viewpoint. ©? Many awards, Claimants point out, have applied such a 6%
interest rate.°°! For Claimants, an interest rate of 6% also is reasonable and adequate,
considering inter alia the amount of inflation in Argentina. They thus instructed their

expert, Mr. Rosen, to apply an interest rate of 6%. °°”

2. Addressing a question from the Tribunal at the Hearing, Claimants’ expert rejected the
US inter-bank prime rate, because that rate is unrelated to investments, but applies to
low-risk bank loans; besides, it too is lower than the inflation rate. Whenever
investment tribunals have applied the prime rate, they have increased it by a margin of 2

to 4%, Claimants point out.°4

3. Claimants further observe that the current position of investment tribunals is to award
compound interest in connection with breaches of international law. Only compound
interest can put the investor in a situation as if the breach had never occurred. Whether
compound interest is allowed or not under Argentine law, Claimants argue, is irrelevant

for any compensation due under international law, as was confirmed by the Tribunal in

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras. 539-564; Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras.

700, 703.

690
691

Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, para. 550.
Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, paras. 555-556 (referring inter alia to S.8. Wimbledon, PCL (17 August 1923)

Series A No. 1, p. 32 (Exhibit CL-043); Tenaris S.A. and Talta - Trading e Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal Lda.
v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, CSID Case ARB/11/26, Award (29 January 2016) para. 587 (Exhibit CL-
255); Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Award (20 August 2007) para. 9.2.8 (Exhibit CL-032)).

692
693
694

Rosen I, para, 12.3.
Transcript, Day 8, pp. 44-46.
Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, paras, 564-567.

194

Quiborax v. Bolivia.©*

584. Respondent, by contrast, considers the 6% interest rate that Mr. Rosen was instructed to
apply by Claimants to be too high in the current market scenario.°” Also the prime rate
is, in Respondent’s opinion, too high.’ Instead, Respondent suggests to apply a short-
term, risk-free interest rate, such as the rate of six-month or one-year US treasury bills.
The average interest rate from 2014 until 2020 was 1.1% for a one-year treasury bill and

1% for a six-month one. 8

585. Moreover, for Respondent, the interest should not be compounded. Compound interest
should only apply when interest obtained is actively reinvested. Moreover, for interest
on compensation to be paid, Argentine rules and regulations provide for a simple interest

rate.°°? Simple interest moreover complies with US procedural guidelines. 7°

586. Claimants, in turn, consider the short-term risk free US treasury bond rate inappropriate,
as also was decided in L&E v. Argentina”! and PSEG v. Turkey." Indeed, Claimants
submit they would not have invested the compensation for unlawful expropriation in risk-
free bonds if received in 2013, but would have put it in their businesses with a greater
return. Besides, the yield on a one-year US treasury bill was in 2013 for instance 0.13%
and on a six-month bill 0.09%, while the US inflation rate at the valuation date was

2.3%, 73

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis

587.

x

Article 4(2) of the BIT indicates that compensation as part of a lawful expropriation will
“bear interest until the date of payment.” Although the BIT does not state that explicitly,

also for unlawful expropriation, compensation under the principle of full reparation for

 

65 Rosen Il, paras. 14.1-14.14; Quiborax S.A. and Non Metallic Minerals S.A. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Award (16 September 2015) paras. 520-524 (Exhibit CL-030). In Compaiia del
Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica, (CSID Case No. ARB/96/1, Award (17 February 2000)
para. 97 (Exhibit CL-004), quoted in Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 542, compound interest was
granted.

96 Rosen, Transcript, Day 8, p. 103; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, para. 558.

7 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, footnote 539.

68 CEMA 31, Valuation Model, Tab ‘T bills’; Dapena II, para. 201.

6° Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 700-705; Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras.
540-550.

700 Dapena II, paras. 197-211.

11 LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/02/1, Award (25 July 2007) paras. 55-56, 102-103 (Exhibit AR LA-140).

12 PSEG Global Inc. and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi v. Republic of Turkey, \CSID
Case No. ARB/02/5, Award (19 January 2007) para. 347 (Exhibit CL-243).

73 Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, paras. 558-563.

195

internationally unlawful conduct has to bear interest from the Valuation Date until the
date of payment. This is what follows from general international law concerning State

responsibility. As Article 38 of the ILC Articles provides:

Article 38
Interest

1. Interest on any principal sum due under this chapter shall be payable
when necessary in order to ensure full reparation. The interest rate and mode
of calculation shall be set so as to achieve that result.

2. Interest runs from the date when the principal sum should have been paid
until the date the obligation to pay is fulfilled.

588. In order to ensure full reparation of a private investor for breaches of a treaty protecting

his or her investment the computation of compensation requires that from the date the

 

expropriation occurred, i.e., the Valuation Date, until the day the award is rendered, pre-

award interests are added to the compensation, while from the date of the Award until
the date of actual payment, post-award interests have to be paid in addition. Without the

payment of interest, full reparation cannot be achieved as the investor would be deprived

of the time-value of the compensation due as of the Valuation Date.’

705

589. In the Tribunal’s view, which is shared by the Parties, "”° the same interest rate should be

granted for the pre-award as for the post-award period. The Parties disagree, however,
on the interest rate to be applied. Claimants suggest 6%; Respondent suggests 1%. The
Tribunal considers an interest rate of 6% on the USD too high, considering inter alia the
present decade of low inflation in the United States. The four ICSID awards cited by
Claimants, which granted 6% on the USD all cover the period of the late 1990s to the

early 2000s, when USD interest rates were substantially higher than in later times,

especially in the period from 2013 to 2021.7

590. On the other hand, for the Tribunal, the 1% interest rate suggested by Respondent, which

74 Although none of the Parties alleged that the payment of interest would lead to double recovery, the Dissent
(paras. 36 and 431) alleges that this is the case. However, future profits are discounted to the Valuation Date, as
from which date they bear interest until the date of payment. This excludes double discovery.

795 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 549 (expressly stating that the same rate should apply); Respondent Post-
Hearing Briefs, paras. 350-356 (treating interest as one issue without distinguishing pre- and post-award interest).
106 Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB 99/6,
Award (12 April 2002) para. 175 (Exhibit CL-044); Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award (30 August 2000) para. 122 (Exhibit CL-011); Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed,
S.A. v. United Mexican States, (CSID Case No. AR(AF)/00/2, Award (29 May 2003) para. 197 (Exhibit CL-08);
Compaiita de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB
/97/3, Award (20 August 2007) para. 9.2.8 (Exhibit CL-032).

196

is based upon the interest of one-year risk-free US treasury bonds, is too low in staying
below annual US inflation since 2013. Moreover, the Tribunal accepts that Claimants
would not have been likely to invest the compensation received in 1% risk-free US

government bonds, but in their own business.

591. The Tribunal observes that, in the context of applying the DCF method to valuing
Claimants’ investment, for Claimants considered 3.39% a reasonable risk-free rate, while
for Respondent that rate was 6.59% (see supra paras. 463, 499). Taking into account their
respective positions and the fact that Claimants could have invested the funds worldwide,
the Tribunal considers an annual interest rate of 4% to be fair and equitable and sufficient,
but also necessary, in order to ensure full reparation in the sense of Article 38 of the ILC

Articles.

592. Claimants have requested that the interest should be compounded annually, while
Respondent argued that interests should not be compounded. The BIT does not contain
an express provision on compound interests. The Tribunal, however, considers
compound interest to be consistent with economic reality and therefore necessary in the
sense of Article 38(1) of the ILC Articles in order to ensure full reparation of an investor
for breach of a treaty that aims at protecting his or her investment. ’°’ The Tribunal agrees

in this respect with what has been stated in Gemplus v. Mexico:

[I]t is the universal practice of banks and other loan providers in the world
market to provide monies at a cost amounting to or equivalent to compound
rates of interest and not simple interest. In addition ... it is current practice of
international tribunals (including ICSID) to award compound and not simple
interest. In the Tribunal’s opinion, there is now a form of ‘jurisprudence
constante’ where the presumption has shifted from the position a decade or
so ago with the result it would now be more appropriate to order compound
interest, unless shown to be inappropriate in favour of simple interest, rather
than vice-versa. 7°°

77 The Dissent (paras. 38 and 432) considers that the Tribunal’s majority is not entitled to grant compound
interests. However, the Tribunal’s majority is not convinced that the 1925 award in a State-to-State arbitration in
Affaire des biens britanniques au Maroc espagnol (1 May 1925) Il RIAA 615, 650-651, which dismissed
compound interest, is still relevant. Moreover, the 2001 ILC Articles on State Responsibility only considered the
exclusion of compound interests to be “the general view” at the time of its adoption. Since then, several investment
treaty tribunals have granted compound interest, which better compensates for the time-value of money and better
helps prevent delays of payment than simple interests does. Furthermore, for the grant of compound interest the
position under the host State’s domestic law is irrelevant, despite the reference in Article 8(6) of the BIT to
domestic law, as the interest in question here is granted under the international law governing State responsibility
as part of consequences of Respondent’s breach of the BIT.

78 Gemplus, S.A., SLP S.A., and Gemplus Industrial S.A. de C.V. v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No
ARB(AF)/04/3, Award (16 June 2010) para. 16-26.

 

 

197

593.

In sum, the Tribunal therefore decides that interest of 4% per annum, compounded
annually is due to Claimants on the amount owed by Respondent as compensation for
the unlawful expropriation of Claimants’ investment in Argentina as from the Valuation

Date of 13 August 2013.

VIII. Costs

594.

595.

596.

A. The Parties’ Positions

The Parties agreed to submit costs statements accompanied by affidavits signed by
counsel. The Parties further agreed that they would provide their costs statements in
different currencies and that they would use different breakdowns of their respective
costs, according to which (a) Claimants would use the categories “Arbitrators Fees and
Administrative Costs, Legal Fees and Expenses, Expert Fees and Expenses, Hearing
Costs, Travel Costs and Accommodation Costs”; and (b) Respondent would use the
categories “Personnel, Experts, Airplane Tickets, Hotels and Travel Expenses,

Translations, Stationery, Shipping, and Payments to ICSID”.

Claimants contend that they should be reimbursed for all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with the arbitration, including internal costs, as well as “appropriate interest
thereon”. ”°° Regarding the jurisdictional phase in particular, Claimants argue that since
they “were successful in the jurisdictional phase, they should be awarded all costs

incurred in the jurisdictional phase.” 7!°

In their costs statement, Claimants specify the costs incurred in connection with the
arbitration, including internal costs, that they claim to amount to the total sums of EUR

3,725,134.37 and USD 1,767,984.65, plus interest,”!! broken down as follows: 7!
i. Arbitrators Fees and Administrative Costs: USD 1,025,000.00
ii. Legal Fees and Expenses: EUR 2,556,246.71 and USD 228,178.50
iii. | Expert Fees and Expenses: EUR 991,913.17 and USD 514,806.15

iv. Hearing Costs, Travel Costs and Accommodation Costs: EUR 176,974.49.

79 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 584.

710 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 581-582.

7!! Claimants’ Costs Statement of 30 July 2021, referring in footnote 1 to Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, paras.
630-631; and Claimants’ Post Hearing Brief, paras. 549-550.

7!2 Claimants’ Costs Statement of 30 July 2021.

198

597. Respondent requests that the Tribunal order Claimants to pay for all costs and expenses

59}

°

arising from the arbitration, including internal costs.’!> According to Respondent, the
costs claimed by Claimants are disproportionate in two respects: first, as compared to the
amount of damages claimed, and second, as compared to the equivalent costs incurred
by Respondent. Respondent further considers that Claimants have included costs
corresponding to an expert in the amount of EUR 56,700.00 and a law firm in the amount
of EUR 4,667,40 that did not appear in the present proceeding or in the written record
submitted to the Tribunal. Finally, Respondent contends that certain items included by
Claimants under “travel costs” are not reasonable, namely costs incurred for travel for
the preparation of Claimants’ case. 7!
Respondent claims the total sum of USD 1,523,439.48 plus interest,’!5 broken down as
follows: 7!°

i. Personnel: USD 243,362.00

ii. Experts: USD 49,152.27

iii. Airplane Tickets, Hotels, Travel Expenses, Stationery: USD 203,470.06

iv. Translations: USD 17,598.93

v. Shipping: USD 9,856.22

vi. Payments to ICSID: USD 1,000,000.00.

B. The Tribunal’s Analysis

599. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention addresses the assessment and allocation of the

costs of an ICSID arbitration as follows:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those
expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such
decision shall form part of the award.

600. This provision, as is widely recognized in ICSID practice, gives the Tribunal discretion

713

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 357-358.

7'4 Respondent’s letter of 17 August 2021.

715

Respondent's letter of 17 August 2021, referring in footnote 8 to Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the

Merits, Section VI.F, Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, Section VI.E; and Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief,

section V.E.
716 Respondent’s Costs Statement of 30 July 2021.

199

601.

602.

603.

604.

to allocate all costs of the arbitration, including attorney’s fees and other costs, between

the Parties.

As both Parties have requested the Tribunal to order the other Party to bear the costs of
the proceeding, the Tribunal considers it appropriate to exercise that discretion so as to
require Respondent to pay the entire costs of the arbitration, including the lodging fee,
the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID’s administrative fees and direct expenses,
as well as those reasonable costs that Claimants have incurred in respect of the

proceeding.

The main consideration for the Tribunal in exercising its discretion in this way is that
Claimants have prevailed in respect of the preliminary objections raised by Respondent,
except, primarily, for the objection for lack of a prima facie case relating to the claim for
breach of the BIT’s national treatment provision, which was an issue that did not
materially affect the dispute and the time and cost spent by either Party or the Tribunal,
as well as on liability and — to a considerable degree — also on quantum. Awarding costs
for the arbitration and attorney fees and other expenses also ensures that Claimants
receive full reparation for the unlawful expropriation they suffered as a consequence of
the revocation of ENJASA’s license, as they would not have needed to incur any of the

costs necessary for the present proceeding without Respondent’s unlawful conduct.

The fees and expenses of the Tribunal and ICSID’s administrative fees and direct

expenses are as follows:

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte USD 314,878.00
Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill USD 376,300.39
Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez USD 526,318.56
ICSID’s administrative fees USD 264,000.00
Direct expenses USD 454,796.99
Total USD 1,936,293.94

The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties, with Claimants
having contributed USD 1,000,000.00 and Respondent USD 1,000,000.00. Therefore,
each Party has contributed USD 968,146.97 to the expended portion of the advances
made to ICSID. As a consequence of the Tribunal’s decision to allocate costs to

Respondent, Claimants are therefore entitled to the payment of USD 968,146.97 by

200

605.

606.

607.

Respondent.’!’ Claimants are also entitled to the payment of the lodging fee (USD
25,000.00) by Respondent. Accordingly, Respondent shall pay to Claimants USD
993,146.97 for the expended portion of Claimants’ advances to ICSID and the lodging
fee.

As for the costs that Claimants have incurred for the present proceeding in respect of
legal fees and expenses, expert fees and expenses, and costs for the hearing, travel and
accommodation, the Tribunal is aware that these costs represent some 10% of the amount
initially claimed and some 25% of the amount ultimately awarded. This notwithstanding,
the Tribunal is of the view that these costs are reasonable and therefore appropriately

allocated to Respondent.

In the Tribunal’s view, the costs do not appear excessive, neither in relation to the sum
claimed, nor in relation to the costs incurred and claimed by Respondent. As regards the
latter aspect, the Tribunal is aware that Claimants could not rely on the administrative
structure that Respondent has built up over the course of a large number of investment
cases, but had to retain specialized outside counsel to conduct the proceedings. Moreover,
the cost-structure of in-house counsel within a State’s administration is not comparable
to that of outside counsel. The Tribunal also acknowledges that the fees of Claimants’
experts and advisors were higher than those of Respondent’s experts, but considers these

fees not to be unreasonable, but within market level.

As for the costs of the expert in the amount of EUR 56,700 and fees for a law firm in the
amount of EUR 4,667,50 that have neither appeared before the Tribunal, nor have been
mentioned in the record, the Tribunal sees no reason to exclude those as costs incurred
by Claimants “in connection with the proceedings” in the sense of Article 61(2) of the
ICSID Convention. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention is not worded narrowly to
cover only costs for legal and expert advice that has been presented in written
submissions or in oral hearing to the Tribunal. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention
instead covers any “expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings.”
In the Tribunal’s view, this would also cover expenses for expert and legal advice
received in the preparation of the claim (or its defense) by law firms and experts other
than counsel of record in the present proceeding and experts that have either appeared

before the Tribunal or made written submissions. Since Respondent does not challenge

77 The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to
ICSID.

201

608.

609.

610.

that the costs in the amount of EUR 61,367,50 in question have actually been incurred

by Claimants, the Tribunal considers that these expenses have been reasonably incurred.

Finally, for the Tribunal, not only the travel expenses to attend the hearings may be
reimbursed as costs of the proceeding, but also those travel costs incurred to investigate
the facts and interview witnesses in preparation of the hearing. These expenses as well
are covered by the wording of Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention as “expenses

incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings.”

Consequently, the Tribunal awards Claimants the costs incurred in connection with the
proceedings, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal, and the charges for
the use of the facilities of the Centre in the total sums of EUR 3,725,134.37 and USD
1,736,131.62, broken down as follows:

i. Expended portion of Claimants’ advances to ICSID and

the lodging fee: USD 993,146.97
ii. Legal fees and expenses: EUR 2,556,246.71 and USD 228,178.50
iii. | Expert fees and expenses: EUR 991,913.17 and USD 514,806.15
iv. Hearing costs, travel costs and accommodation costs: EUR 176,974.49.

As far as the award of interest on costs is concerned, the Tribunal is of the view that,
even though Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention does not mention the payment of
interest on costs, these costs are part of the Award and should be covered by the interest
provision of the Award, if so requested by the Party in question. Full reparation of
Claimants in the sense of Article 38 of the ILC Articles requires, in the Tribunal’s view,
that interest is due also on the costs of the proceedings from the date the Award is
rendered. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention is no bar to an award of interest; this
provision only addresses the allocation of costs between the parties, but is silent as to
whether allocated costs are to accrue interest as from their allocation or not.’!* As for the

interest rate, the Tribunal adopts the same interest rate as that adopted for the amount of

7!8 Ordering the payment of interest on costs is also not unusual in ICSID practice. For a few recent examples, see
State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria, 1CSID Case No ARB/15/43, Award
(13 August 2019) para. 82; Bridgestone Licensing Services, Inc. and Bridgestone Americas, Inc. v. Republic of
Panama, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/34, Award (14 August 2020) para. 589; UP and C.D Holding Internationale
v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/35, Award (9 October 2018) para. 622. The Dissent (para. 447), by contrast,
is of the view that no interests are due on costs because Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention does not provide

so.

202

damages awarded, that is, 4% per annum compounded annually, with interests running

from the date of the Award until full payment thereof.

IX. DECISION

611. For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal decides, by majority, as follows:

()

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Respondent has breached Article 4(1) and (2) of the Argentina-Austria BIT by
subjecting Claimants to an unlawful expropriation.

The Tribunal makes no findings as to the claimed breaches by Respondent of
Articles 4(3) and 2(1) of the Argentina-Austria BIT, as any such breaches would
be consumed by the finding under (1).

Respondent is liable to pay compensation to Claimants in the amount of USD
21,660,000 plus interest at a rate of 4% per annum compounded annually from
13 August 2013 until full payment thereof.

Respondent shall pay to Claimants for the costs incurred in connection with the
proceedings, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal, and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre (i) USD 1,736,131.62 and (ii)
EUR 3,725,134.37, plus interest at a rate of 4% per annum compounded
annually on both (i) and (ii) from the date of the Award until full payment
thereof.

The Tribunal rejects all other claims.

612. Arbitrator Dr. Torres Bernardez appends a Dissenting Opinion to the Tribunal’s Award.

203

[signed]

 

Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez
Arbitrator Arbitrator
(subject to the attached Dissenting Opinion)

Date: 24 October 2021 Date:

Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte
President of the Tribunal

Date:

204

[signed]

 

Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez
Arbitrator Arbitrator
(subject to the attached Dissenting Opinion)

Date: Date: 25 October 2021

Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte
President of the Tribunal

Date:

205

 

Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez
Arbitrator Arbitrator
(subject to the attached Dissenting Opinion)

Date: Date:

[signed]

Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte
President of the Tribunal

Date: 27 October 2021

206

