INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

CASINOS AUSTRIA INTERNATIONAL GMBH AND CASINOS AUSTRIA
AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

Claimants

AND

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/14/32

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte, President
Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill, Arbitrator

Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 29 June 2018

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Casinos Austria Inte

GmbH and Casinos Austria
Aktiengesellschaft:

c/o Mr. Florian Haugeneder
Mr. Emmanuel Kaufman

Knoetzl Haugeneder Netal
Rechtsanwilte GmbH
Herrengasse |

1010 Vienna

Republic of Austria

L ing the Argentine Republi

c/o Dr. Bernardo Saravia Frias
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién

Dr. Ernesto Lucchelli
Subprocurador del Tesoro de la Nacién

Dr. Juan Pablo Lahitou
Subprocurador del Tesoro de la Nacién

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Posadas 1641

C1112ADC Buenos Aires

Argentine Republic

Il.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 4
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 9
REQUEST FOR RELIEF 14
1. Respondent. 14
2. Clai 14
. FACTS OF THE CASE 15
1. The Privatization of the Gaming Sector in the Province of Salta... eee 15
2. The Participation of Claimants in ENJASA o.oo ceeecee eee eeceeeeeteeeeeneneeeeeneneeees 18
3. The Revocation of ENJASA’s Exclusive License.........c.cccccseccesestesestesesteseeteseeteseeeseenes 23
4. Developments after the Revocation of ENJASA’s License ............ceeeeeeeee teens 24
ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES 28
1. Respondent 28

 

A. There is no claim for a prima facie violation of the BIT

 

 

 

 

 

 

(i) The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over claims that prima facie are not
objectively based on the BIT
(ii) None of the claims are based prima facie on the BIT ......... eee 29
(iii) ICSID arbitration is not the proper forum for this dispute
B. There is no consent to arbitrate because Claimants failed to accept Argentina’s offer to
arbitrate in the BIT 31
(i) Article 8 of the BIT contains compulsory jurisdictional requirements and is part
of Respondent’s offer to arbitrate
(ii) | Claimants did not accept the offer on the terms on which it was made............ 32
(iii) Claimants cannot rely on the most-favoured-nation (MFN) clause to perfect
consent 36
C. There is no jurisdiction ratione Materiae .......... cece ee eee tees eeeeeeteeeeeeeteeeees 38
(i) _ The License is not an investment protected under the BIT and Claimants are not

its holders 39

(ii) Claimants have no standing to bring an action in respect of the assets of

 

 

ENJASA 40
2. Clai 42
A. Prima facie claim for the violation of the BIT ...........ccccscccsesseseeseseetesteestesesteseanenees 42

 

(i) | The claims brought are treaty claims ......
(ii) |The forum selection clauses do not bar jurisdiction... cece 46
B. Respondent consented validly to the present proceedings under Article 8 of the
BIT 47
(i) | Compliance with the requirement for amicable consultations (Article 8(1) of the
BIT) 49

(ii) Compliance with requirement to submit the dispute to a domestic jurisdiction
(Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT) ........cececeeeeseeseesseseeeeseeseeseesessessssnseneeneeneenees 50

(iii) Claimants respected the sequence of procedural steps under Article 8 of the
BIT 51

(iv) Recourse to domestic courts as suggested by Respondent is either impossible or
futile 52

 

(v) | Article 8(4) of the BIT does not bar jurisdiction

(vi) First alternative: A dispute has now been pending in domestic courts for 18

 

months without decision on the merits............cccscceeeees

(vii) Second alternative: Jurisdiction based on the MEN clause in Article 3 of the

 

 

BIT 55
C. Jurisdiction ratione materiae 56
(i) Claimants’ investment in the Province of Salta ..........:cececseeeseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeee 56

(ii) Claimants’ activities qualify as an investment under Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention and under Article 1 of the BIT .........cccccccccesesceeeteseeteseeteseeeseenes s7

(iii) Article 4(3) of the BIT confirms the wide scope of protection............cccc 58

(iv) The dispute arises directly out of the investment... eee 59

VI. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 60

 

 

1. Existence of a Protected Investment

B. Existence of an “investment” under Article 25(1) ICSID Convention..............0 66

C. Existence of a “dispute arising directly out of an investment” under Article 25(1) ICSID

 

 

 

Convention 69

D. Conclusion 70

2. Existence of a Prima Facie Claim 70
A. The applicable test for determining the existence of a prima facie claim ................. 72
B. Characterization of the claims brought by Claimants as treaty claims........0.0.00.00 76
C. Prima facie breaches of the BIT...........cccccecsseseeeseesestesessesestesesteseseesestessatesesneneaeeneas 80
(i) Prima facie breach of Article 4 of the BIT... ceecesesceeeceseeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeereee 81

(ii) Prima facie breach of Article 2(1) of the BIT ..0.....ceeeceeceseseeeereeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 87

(iii) Prima facie breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT

 

D. The effect of the forum selection clauses .........

 

 

 

 

(i) Article 8.3 of the Bidding Terms and Conditions «0.0.0.0... eee 92

(ii) Article 13.1 of the Transfer Agreement ..0.....0....c cece eee ee ee eeneneneneeeeeteeees 93

E. Conclusion 94

3. Respondent’s Consent to Arbitrate 0.00.0... cece ceeneeeeeeeseeeeceeeeeseneeneseseseenenenenees 95

A. Source and existence of Respondent’s consent and nature of the pre-arbitral
requirements in Article 8 of the BIT... ceeeeeceeeeseeeeeeteeeeeneneeeseeeenenenes 97

B. Amicable consultations pursuant to Article 8(1) of the BIT... eee 102

C. Compliance with Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT oo... eee eeneneeeeeeeeeeeeees 105

(i) — The notion of dispute in Article 8 of the BIT... eee 106

(ii) Relevant domestic recourse in the sense of Article 8(2) of the BIT ............... 110

(iii) Compliance with the 18-months requirement in Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT... 114

D. Effect of Article 8(4) of the BIT ..........ceccceeeseeseesessneseseeseeseeseesessessssssseneeneeseesee 120

E. Conclusion 122

VII. COSTS 123
VIII.DECISION 124

 

INTRODUCTION

The present dispute arises out of the revocation, in 2013, of an exclusive 30-year license
granted, in 1999, to the Argentine company Entretenimientos y Juegos de Azar S.A.
(“ENJASA”) for the operation of gaming facilities and lottery activities in the Argentine
Province of Salta. ENJASA was established by the Government of the Province of Salta in
1999 as part of a process of privatizing the Province’s gaming and lottery sector and
developing tourism in the region. Following a public tender and various changes in the
ownership structure, ENJASA became majority owned and controlled by Claimants,
Casinos Austria International GmbH (“CAI”), a limited liability company established
under the laws of Austria, and Casinos Austria Aktiengesellschaft (“CASAG”), a share-

company established under the laws of Austria (jointly “Casinos” or “Claimants”).

Claimants contend that the revocation of ENJASA’s license, followed by the transfer of its
gaming and lottery operations and personnel to a number of new gaming operators
effectively destroyed their investment in Argentina. They invoke the violation of their
rights as foreign investors under the Argentina-Austria BIT, namely not to be expropriated
without compensation, to receive fair and equitable treatment, and to enjoy national
treatment,! and seek damages from the Argentine Republic (‘“Argentina” or

“Respondent’) for such breach.

The jurisdictional basis of the present proceedings rests on Article 25(1) of the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States
(ICSID Convention), which is in force between the Argentine Republic and the Republic

of Austria. Pursuant to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention,

[t]he jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency

of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another

See Memorial on the Merits, Section III, subsections 3-5. The Tribunal notes that Claimants’ allegations of
discriminatory treatment were brought as a claim for breach of national treatment (see Memorial on the Merits,
paras. 437-441). Moreover, a breach of the most-favoured-nation clause (see Request for Arbitration, para. 65)
was not repeated in the Memorial on the Merits, but was invoked with regard to the Tribunal’s Arbitral
jurisdiction. Claimants had also invoked a violation of the standard of full protection and security under the
Argentina-Austria BIT (see Request for Arbitration, para. 56), but they have not further pursued that claim.

 

Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the

Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent

unilaterally.

Claimants claim that the conditions of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention are fulfilled.

They also contend that, by initiating the present proceedings, they have accepted,

Respondent’s consent to this arbitration contained in Article 8 of the Argentina-Austria

BIT. Article 8 provides, in its two authentic languages, Spanish and German, as follows:

ARTIKEL &
Beilegung von Investitionsstreitigkeiten

 

(1) Jede Meinungsverschiedenheit aus Investitionen

 

 

 

zwischen einem Investor der einen
und der anderen Vertragspartei betreffend die von
diesem Abkommen  geregelten Angelegenheiten
wird, soweit wie méglich, durch freundschaftliche
Konsultationen zwischen den Streitparteien beige-
legt.

(2) Fiihren diese Konsultationen innerhalb von
sechs Monaten zu keiner Regelung, kann die Mei-
nungsverschiedenheit dem ustiindigen Verwal-
tungs- oder Gerichtsverfahren der Vertragspartei,
in deren Hoheitsgebiet die Investition getétigt
wurde, unterbreitet werden.

(3) Die Meinungsverschiedenheit kann einem

Schiedsgericht in folgenden Féillen unterbreitet

werden:

4) falls nach Ablauf einer Frist von 18 Monaten ab
ilung iiber die Einleitung des Verfe bei

den vorgenannten Behérden keine meritorische

Entscheidung getroffen wurde;

b) falls eine solche Entscheidung getroffen wurde,

aber die Meinungsverschiedenheit weiterbesteht. In

ARTICULO 8

de controversias relativas a_ las
inversiones
(1) Toda relativa a las ii

entre un inversor de una de las Partes Contratantes
y la otra Parte Contratante sobre las materias
regidas por el presente Convenio serd, en la
medida de lo posible, solucionada por consultas
amistosas entre las partes en la controversia.

 

(2) Si estas consultas no aportaran una solucién en
un plazo de seis meses, la controversia podra ser
sometida a la jurisdiccién administrativa o judicial
competente de la Parte Contratante en cuyo
territorio se realizé la inversion.

(3) La controversia podrdé ser sometida a un

tribunal arbitral en los casos siguientes:

a) cuando no haya una decision sobre el fondo,

luego de la expiracién de un plazo de dieciocho

meses contados a partir de la notificac
ibn del imic ante la

arriba citada;

 

b) cuando tal decision haya sido emitida pero la
controversia subsista. En tal caso, el recurso al
tribunal de arbiraje privard de efectos a las

 

 

diesem Fall werden die vorher auf
nationaler Ebene gefiillten Entscheidungen durch
die Anrufung des Schiedsgerichtes wirkungslos;

c) falls die beiden Streitparteien sich in diesem
Sinne geeinigt haben.

(4) Zu diesem Zweck gibt jede Vertragspartei nach
den i dieses A ihre vorhe-
rige und unwiderrufliche Zustimmung, wonach jede
Meinungsverschiedenheit diesem Schiedsverfahren
unterbreitet wird. Ab Einleitung eines Schiedsver-
fahrens ergreift jede Streitpartei alle gebotenen

Exhibit C-002.

con
anterioridad e en el dmbito nacional;

c) cuando las dos partes en la controversia lo
hayan ast convenido.

(4) Con este fin, cada Parte Contratante otorga, en
las condiciones del presente Convenio, su

i i ei para que
cada controversia sea sometida a este arbitraje. A
partir del comienzo de un procedimiento de
arbitraje, cada parte en la controversia tomard
todas las medidas requeridas para su desistimiento
de la instancia judicial en curso.

 

Mafnahmen, um sich von dem laufenden Gerichts-
verfahren zuriickzuziehen.

(5) Im Falle der Beantragung eines internationalen
Schiedsverfahrens kann die Meinungsverschieden-
heit nach Wahl des Investors vor eines der néchste-
hend genannten Schiedsorgane getragen werden:

- vor das Internationale Zentrum fiir die Beilegung
von Investitionsstreitigkeiten (ICSID), welches
durch die Konvention tiber die Beilegung von
Investitionsstreitigkeiten chen Staaten und
Staatsangehérigen anderer Staaten, die am 18.
Marz 1965 in zur i
aufgelegt wurde, geschaffen wurde, wenn jeder der
Vertragsparteien dieser beigetreten sein wird.
Solange diese Bedingung nicht erfiillt ist, stimmt
jede Vertragspartei zu, dap die Meinungsverschie-
denheit dem  Schiedsverfahren nach der
ergénzenden ICSID-Schiedsordnung unterbreitet
wird;

 

 

 

- vor ein ad-hoc-Schiedsgericht, das nach der
UNCITRAL-Schiedsordnung eingerichtet wird.

(6) Das Schiedsorgan entscheidet auf der
Grundlage der —_—-Rechtsordnung —_jener
Vertragspartei, die Streitpartei ist, einschlieBlich
der Regeln des internationalen Privatrechtes, der
Bestimmungen dieses. Abkommens, _ de
- s iber die
Investition geschlossener Abkommen, sowie der
einschlagigen Grundséitze des Volkerrechts.

g

 

(7) Der Schiedsspruch ist endgiiltig und bindend; er
wird nach innerstaatlichem Recht vollstreckt; jede
Vertragspartei stellt die Anerkennung und Durchse-
tzung des Schiedsspruches in Ubereinstimmung mit
ihren einschldigigen Rechtsvorschriften sicher.

(8) Die Vertragspartei, die Streitpartei ist, macht in
keinem Stadium des Vergleichs- oder Schiedsver-
fahrens oder der Durchsetzung eines Schieds-
spruchs als Einwand geltend, dap der Investor, der
die andere Streitpartei bildet, auf Grund einer
Garantie beziiglich aller oder Teile seiner Verluste
eine Entschéidigung erhalten habe.

 

(5) En caso de recurso al arbitraje internacional,
la controversia podrd ser llevada ante uno de los
6rganos de arbitraje designados a continuacién, a
elecci6n del inversor:

- al Centro Internacional de Arreglo de Diferencias
Relativas a Inversiones (C.1.A.D. creado por el
“Convenio sobre Arreglo de Diferencias relativas
a las inversiones entre Estados y nacionales de
otros Estados”, abierto a la firma en Washington,
el 18 de marzo de 1965, cuando cada Estado parte
en el presente Convenio haya adherido a aquél.
Mientras esta condicién no se cumpla, cada Parte
C da su imiento para que la
controversia sea sometida al arbitraje conforme
con el reglamento del mecanismo complementario
del C.LA.D.L.;

- aun tribunal de arbitraje “ad hoc”, establecido
de acuerdo con las reglas de arbitraje de la
Comision de las Naciones Unidas para el Derecho
Mercantil Internacional (C.N.U.D.M.I.).

 

    

(6) El 6rgano arbitral decidir en base al derecho
de la Parte Contratante que sea parte en la
controversia — incluidas las normas de derecho
internacional privado -, en base a las disposiciones
del presente Convenio y a los términos de
eventuales acuerdos especificos concluidos con
relacin a la inversién, como asi también segiin los
del derecho i Len la materia.

  

principios
(7) La sentencia sera definitiva y obligatoria y sera
ejecutada de conformidad con la legislacién
nacional; cada Parte Contratante garantiza el
reconocimiento y ejecucién de la sentencia arbitral
de conformidad con sus respectivas disposiciones
legales.

(8) En ninguna etapa del procedimiento de
conciliacién o de arbitraje o de la ejecucién de una
sentencia arbitral, la Parte Contratante, que sea
parte en una controversia, planteard excepciones,
por el hecho de que el inversor que sea parte
contraria en la controversia haya percibido, en
virtud de una garantia, una indemnizacién que
cubra total o parcialmente sus pérdidas.

The Parties were unable to agree on a translation of the German and Spanish original of
Article 8 of the BIT into English, just as they could not agree on the translation of other
provisions of the BIT,* or of key documents for the present case. Yet, at least with respect

to Article 8 of the BIT, in the Tribunal’s view, the differences between the Parties’s

Revised version of the translations of Exhibits C-001 and A RA-01.

respective translations are minor and make no difference in interpreting and applying that
provision in the case at hand. The Tribunal therefore sees no need to settle on one version
of the English translation. Instead it will use the English translation as far as agreed between
the Parties and note any differences, whenever necessary, by attributing the translation to
the respective Party in brackets. The translation of Article 8 of the BIT into English with

the Parties’ respective differences is as follows:
ARTICLE 8
Settlement of Investment Disputes
(1) Any dispute with regard to investments between an investor of one of the
Contracting Parties and the other Contracting Party concerning any subject matter
governed by this Agreement shall, as far as possible, be settled through amicable
consultations between the parties to the dispute.
(2) If the dispute cannot be settled through consultations within a term of six months,
the dispute may be submitted to the competent administrative or judicial jurisdiction of
the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made.

(3) The dispute may be submitted to an arbitral tribunal in any of the following cases:

a) where, after a period of eighteen months has elapsed from the date of notification of
the initiation of the proceeding before the afore-mentioned jurisdiction
Respondent}/authorities [Claimants], no decision was rendered on the merits;

b) where such decision has been rendered, but the parties are still in dispute
Respondent}/the dispute persists [Claimants]. In such case, recourse to the arbitral

tribunal shall render ineffective any decision previously adopted at the national level;
c) where the parties to the dispute have so agreed.

(4) To such effect, under the terms of this Agreement, each Contracting Party
irrevocably consents in advance to the submission of any dispute to arbitration. From

the commencement of an arbitration proceeding, each party to the dispute shall take all

the required measures to withdraw any [Respondent]/the [Claimants] pending judicial

proceedings.

(5) Whenever the dispute is referred to international arbitration, it may be submitted,

at the investor’s choice, either to:

- the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) established
under the “Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States,” opened for signature in Washington, on March 18, 1965,
when both Contracting Parties have acceded to said Convention. Until such time as this
requirement is met, each Contracting Party agrees to submit the dispute to arbitration

in accordance with the ICSID Additional Facility Rules;

- to an “ad hoc” arbitral tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the United

Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

(6) The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the laws of the
Contracting Party involved in the dispute, including its rules on conflict_of laws
Respondent}/private_ international law rules [Claimants], the provisions of this
Agreement, and the terms of any specific agreements concluded in relation to such an

investment, if any, as well as the applicable principles of international law.

(7) The award shall be final and binding and shall be enforced in accordance with the
national legislation; each Contracting Party undertakes to recognize and enforce the

award in accordance with its respective legal provisions.

(8) A Contracting Party which is a party to a dispute shall not, at any stage of a
conciliation or arbitration proceeding or enforcement of an award, raise objections
grounded on the fact that the investor who is the other party to the dispute has received

indemnity by virtue of a guarantee in respect of all or some of its losses.

Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the present tribunal. In her view, the jurisdictional
requirements under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and under the Argentina-
Austria BIT are not met. In Respondent’s view, Claimants have not demonstrated a prima
facie violation of the Argentina-Austria BIT, have not complied with the conditions of
Respondent’s consent under Article 8 of the BIT, and have not shown that the Tribunal has

jurisdiction ratione materiae under both the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

IL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 4 December 2014, ICSID received a request for arbitration from Casinos Austria
International GmbH and Casinos Austria Aktiengesellschaft against the Argentine
Republic (the “Request”).

On 18 December 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in
accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the
registration. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to
proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(c)
of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration

Proceedings (“Institution Rules’).

By correspondence of 3 December 2014, 29 December 2014, 13 January 2015, and 15
January 2015, the Parties agreed that the Tribunal would be comprised of three arbitrators;
one to be appointed by each Party and the third, presiding arbitrator, to be appointed by

agreement of the Parties.

By letter of 13 January 2015, Claimants appointed Prof. Dr. Stephan Schill, a national of
Germany, as an arbitrator in this case. Prof. Schill accepted his appointment on 26 January

2015.

By letter of 13 February 2015, Respondent appointed Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez, a
national of Spain, as arbitrator in this case. Dr. Torres Bernardez accepted his appointment

on 23 February 2015.

On 31 March 2015, Claimants informed the Secretary-General that the Parties had reached
an agreement to appoint Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte as President of the Tribunal.
Respondent confirmed the agreement on the same date. Prof. van Houtte accepted his

appointment on 3 April 2015.

On 6 April 2015, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), notified the Parties that
all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore
deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Giuliana Cané, ICSID Legal Counsel,

was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. Following Ms. Cané’s departure from

the Centre, on 15 January 2016, in accordance with ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulation 25, the Secretary-General appointed Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco, ICSID Legal

Counsel, as Secretary of the Tribunal.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 13(1) and 20(1), the Tribunal held a first
session and preliminary procedural consultation with the Parties on 5 June 2015 by

teleconference. The following persons were present at the session:

Members of the Tribunal:

Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte President

Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill Arbitrator

Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez Arbitrator
ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Giuliana Cané Secretary of the Tribunal, ICSID
Participating on behalf of the Claimants:

Ms. Claudia Dotter Casinos Austria AG

Mr. Andreas Schreiner Casinos Austria International GmbH

Mr. Florian Haugeneder Counsel

Mr. Emmanuel Kaufman Counsel

Participating on behalf of the Respondent:

Mr. Horacio P. Diez Subprocurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Carlos Mihanovich Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Mr. Sebastian Green Martinez Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

Following the first session, on 23 June 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1
recording the agreements of the Parties and the Tribunal’s decisions on procedural matters.
Procedural Order No. | provided, inter alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be
those in effect from 10 April 2006, that the procedural languages would be English and
Spanish, and that the place of proceeding would be Paris, France. Procedural Order No. 1

also set out the schedule of the proceedings included as Annex A to that order.

On 2 October 2015, Claimants submitted their Memorial on the Merits.

By communication of 29 January 2016, Respondent requested the Tribunal to order
Claimants to produce certain documents. On 4 February 2016, Claimants submitted

observations to Respondent’s request for production of documents, and Respondent filed

a response to Claimants’ observations on 5 February 2016. Having considered the Parties’

20.

21.

22.

23.

communications, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 on 11 February 2016 on

document production.

On 15 March 2016, Respondent submitted her Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and
Counter-Memorial on the Merits. It included a request to treat the objections to the
jurisdiction of the Centre and/or the competence of the Tribunal as a preliminary matter.
On 8 April 2016, Claimants presented observations in opposition to Respondent’s request

to bifurcate the proceeding.

Having considered the Parties’ observations, on 25 April 2016, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 3 ruling that Respondent’s objections would be heard as a
preliminary question. The Tribunal noted that “the objections to jurisdiction as submitted
by Respondent are largely separate from the merits of the dispute and, if successful, would
dispose of the case in its entirety.” Furthermore, the Tribunal noted that it had reached its
decision on bifurcation having considered “Respondent’s full arguments on jurisdiction
but not having seen Claimants’ response to these arguments,” and thus reserved the
possibility of “joining any objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre and/or the
competence of the Tribunal to the merits phase once it has received Claimants’ counter-

arguments on jurisdiction.”

On 26 July 2016, Claimants submitted their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.
On 11 October 2016, Respondent filed her Reply on Objections to Jurisdiction.
On 23 December 2016, Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

On 23 February 2017, the President of the Tribunal held a pre-hearing organizational
meeting with the Parties by teleconference. The following persons were present at the

conference:

On behalf of the Tribunal:

Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte President of the Tribunal
ICSD Secretariat:
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco Secretary of the Tribunal

Representing the Claimants:
Mr. Florian Haugeneder Counsel
Mr. Emmanuel Kaufman Counsel

24.

25.

Ms. Selma Tiric

Representing the Respondent:
Dra. Silvina Sandra Gonzalez Napolitano
Ms. Mariana Mabel Lozza
Mr. Tomas Braceras

Counsel

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

Following the pre-hearing organizational conference, on 13 March 2017, the Tribunal

issued Procedural Order No. 4 regarding the organization of the hearing.

A hearing on jurisdiction was held in Paris, France, from 23 to 25 March 2017 (the

“Hearing”). The following persons were present at the Hearing:

Tribunal:
Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte
Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill
Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco

For Claimants:
Mr. Florian Haugeneder
Mr. Emmanuel Kaufman
Ms. Selma Tiric
Mr. Tobias Schaffner
Ms. Jovana Lakic
Ms. Claudia Dotter
Mr. Dietmar Hoscher
Mr. Alexander Tucek
Mr. Andreas Schreiner
Prof. Fernando Garcia Pullés
Prof. Alberto B. Bianchi

For Respondent:
Dr. Carlos Francisco Balbin
Dra. Silvina Sandra Gonzalez Napolitano
Ms. Mariana Mabel Lozza
Mr. Tomas Braceras
Ms. Maria Soledad Romero Caporale
Ms. Alejandra Mackluf
Ms. Valeria Etchechoury
Ms. Belén Ibafiez
Mr. Nicolas Duhalde
Mr. Javier Hernan Wajntraub

President
Arbitrator
Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Counsel

Counsel

Counsel

Counsel

Counsel

Casinos Austria AG
Casinos Austria AG
Casinos Austria International GmbH
Witness

Expert Witness
Expert Witness

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Witness

26.

27.

28.

29.

Prof. Ismael Mata Expert Witness

During the Hearing, the following persons were examined:

Witness and expert testimony submitted by Claimants:

Mr. Andreas Schreiner Witness

Mr. Alexander Tucek Witness

Prof. Fernando Garcia Pullés Expert Witness

Prof. Alberto B. Bianchi Expert Witness
Witness and expert testimony submitted by Respondent:

Mr. Javier Hernan Wajntraub Witness

Prof. Ismael Mata Expert Witness

On 7 April 2017, Claimants submitted a request for leave to submit new documents.
Respondent opposed Claimants’ request on 21 April 2017 and, in case it should be granted,
requested and reserved in turn its right to request leave to submit responsive documents.
Having considered the Parties’ communications, on 5 May 2017, the Tribunal issued a
decision granting Claimants’ request to submit new documents, granting Respondent’s
request to submit one additional document and inviting Respondent to identify any other
responsive documents, which Respondent did on 23 May 2017. Claimants confirmed on
26 May 2017 that they did not object to the submission of the new responsive documents

identified by Respondent, which the Tribunal subsequently admitted on 16 June 2017.

On 23 and 24 May 2017, the Parties submitted their agreed corrections to the Hearing

Transcript.

On 23 June 2017, the Parties submitted simultaneous Post-Hearing Briefs. On the same
date, Claimants indicated that the Parties had agreed to submit revised translations of
certain exhibits on 10 July 2017. On that date, Claimants submitted courtesy revised
translations. On 12 July 2017, Respondent stated that, while the Parties had agreed on the
date the translations of certain exhibits would have to be submitted, they had been unable
to agree on the content of those translations. In their respective Post-Hearing Briefs, the
Parties thus relied on their own translations or corrections to the other Party’s translations.
Claimants confirmed, on 14 July 2017, that they had no further comments on the

translations of certain exhibits prepared by Respondent and observed that Claimants stood

Il.

30.

31.

by their own translations with regard to some other exhibits for which both Parties had

made their own translations.

REQUEST FOR RELIEF

1. Respondent

Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the present Tribunal based on three counts. They
comprise, as further detailed below: first, the lack of a prima facie violation of the
Argentina-Austria BIT; second, the lack of compliance by Claimants with the conditions
to Respondent’s consent under Article 8 of the BIT; and third, the lack of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction ratione materiae. Respondent therefore requests the Tribunal regarding this

phase of the proceeding:*

i. to declare that this dispute falls outside the jurisdiction of the
Centre and the competence of the Tribunal and that it is

inadmissible;

ii. to reject each and every one of the claims put forward by

Claimants; and

iii. to order Claimants to pay for all costs and expenses arising

from this arbitration proceeding.

2. Claimants

Claimants, in turn, counter these objections, by arguing, as detailed further below, that,
first, they have set out a prima facie claim for breach of the Argentina-Austria BIT; second,
that Respondent has validly consented to the present proceedings under Article 8 of the
BIT; and third, that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione materiae and should proceed to
analyze the claims on the merits. Regarding this phase of the proceeding, Claimants

therefore make the following request:>

i. The ICSID has jurisdiction and the Arbitral Tribunal

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 215; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 134.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 230; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 443.

14

IV.

32.

33.

34.

35.

7
8

competence over the dispute.

ii. Claimants’ claims are admissible and the Argentine

Republic’s objections are rejected.

iii. The Argentine Republic is ordered to pay to Claimants all
costs, expenses and fees (including internal costs) relating to
the jurisdictional phase of the arbitration and appropriate

interest thereon.

FACTS OF THE CASE

The facts of the case, to the extent they are relevant for questions of admissibility
jurisdiction, are largely uncontested. They are summarized in this section for the limited
purpose of the present Decision. This summary does not constitute an exhaustive account
of the facts, nor should it be taken as prejudging any issues of fact or law considered by

the Tribunal on the merits.

1. The Privatization of the Gaming Sector in the Province of Salta

Since the 1970s, gaming facilities and lottery activities in the Province of Salta, located in
the Northwestern part of Argentina, were operated directly by, or under the control of,
Banco de Préstamos y Asistencia Social (“BPAS”), an autonomous entity fully owned by

the Province of Salta.°

In December 1995, the Province of Salta passed the “Principles for the Restructuring of
BPAS” as part of its Law No. 6836. This Law foresaw the restructuring of BPAS, including

the possible privatization of BPAS’ gaming and lottery operations.”

On 7 September 1998, the Executive of the Province of Salta passed Decree No. 2126/98.°

This Decree created ENJASA, a company with limited liability under Argentine law.

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 10-14; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, paras. 134-135.

See Exhibit C-045.

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 19-24; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, paras. 137-139.

36.

37.

10

ENJASA’s single purpose was the management, commercialization and exploitation of
games of chance in the Province of Salta, which was formerly within the competence of
BPAS. ENJASA was to have a duration of 30 years. 90% of its shares of capital stock (so-
called Class A-shares) were to be offered to the public at large through a public offering;
the remaining 10% were marked for a joint ownership participation program for employees

of BPAS.

On 30 December 1998, Law No. 7020 of the Province of Salta entered into force. It
provides for the regulatory framework for the gaming and lottery sector in the Province.”
The Law creates the regulatory agency overseeing the gaming and lottery sector in the
Province of Salta, called Ente Regulador del Juego de Azar (“ENREJA”) (see Article 31).
The agency is tasked, inter alia, with regulating the conduct of operators of games of
chance, including by issuing operating rules and overseeing compliance with the laws and
regulations in force (see Articles 3, 32 and 33). The obligations encompass, amongst others,
the prohibition to hire operators without the authorization of ENREJA, the obligation to
ensure that operation and maintenance of gaming facilities comply with the law, and the
requirement to appoint an individual responsible for anti-money laundering measures (see
Article 5). ENREJA also disposes of disciplinary and sanctioning powers, which include
the issuance of warnings, the imposition of fines, disqualification, and the suspension and
revocation of operating licenses (Article 13). Licenses for the operation of games of
chance, however, were not issued by ENREJA itself, but remained under the responsibility

of the Executive of the Province of Salta (Article 4).

On 1 September 1999, the Executive of the Province of Salta passed Decree No. 3616/99.'°
This Decree conferred an exclusive license to ENJASA for the operation of games of
chance for a term of 30 years. The terms of the license provided that any breach of the
conditions of the license, of Law No. 7020, and of any regulation issued by ENREJA were
to be sanctioned with the penalties and sentencing provided for in Law No. 7020 (see

Article 5.1 of the License). Furthermore, the license specified its causes of extinction and

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 25-27; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, paras. 140-147.
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 28-30; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, paras. 148-157.

38.

39.

forfeiture (see Article 6 of the License). These included the lapse of the license term, non-
compliance with the payment of the license fee, non-compliance with the obligations
imposed under Article 5 of Law No. 7020, the exploitation of any game of chance without
prior authorization by ENREJA, the cession or transfer, in full or in parts, of the operations
covered by the license without prior authorization of the Executive, and the bankruptcy of

the licensee.

Equally on 1 September 1999, by Resolution No. 411/99, the Ministry of Production and
Employment of the Province of Salta approved the Terms and Conditions for the Call for
a National and International Public Tender to offer all Class A-shares of ENJASA for
sale.'' Participants in the tender needed to have at least ten years experience in the
operation of casinos and games of chance. Moreover, they had to submit a tourism
development investment plan that included the number of employees to be hired and the
amount of investments to be made, and they had to stipulate a yearly license fee to be paid

to the Province for the term of the license.
Article 8.3 of the Terms and Conditions contained the following clause: !?
8.3. JURISDICCION

8.3.1. Todos los interesados se someten a la jurisdicci6n de los Tribunales ordinarios

competentes de la Ciudad de Salta con renuncia a cualquier otra Jurisdicci6n.

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 31-34; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, paras. 158-162.

Exhibit C-030; Exhibit A RA 02. The Parties could not agree on a translation into English of this clause. Their
respective translations are as follows:

Claimants’ Translation

8.3. JURISDICTION

8.3.1. All interested parties shall submit themselves to
the jurisdiction of the competent ordinary Tribunals
of the City of Salta, waiving any other Jurisdiction.
8.3.2. The acquisition of these Bidding Terms and
Conditions entails the acceptance of this Jurisdiction
in all the documentation related to this Bidding
Process and the Transfer Agreement.

Respondent's Translation

8.3. JURISDICTION

8.3.1. All interested parties shall submit to the
jurisdiction of the competent ordinary courts of the
City of Salta, waiving any other Jurisdiction.

8.3.2. The acquisition of these Bidding Terms and
Conditions implies the acceptance of this Jurisdiction
with respect to any and all the documentation related
to this Bidding Process and the Stock Purchase
Agreement.

40.

Al.

42.

8.3.2. La adquisicién del presente importa la aceptaci6n de esta Jurisdicci6n en toda la

documentaci6n relacionada con esta Licitacién y el Contrato de Transferencia.

The only participant in the public tender was the Unién Transitoria de Empresas (“UTE”),
a joint venture under Argentine law consisting of Casinos Austria International Holding
GmbH (“CAIH”) with a 5% participation, Boldt Sociedad Anénima (“Boldt S.A.”) with a
5% participation, and Iberlux International Sociedad An6nima (“Iberlux Int. S.A.”) with
a 90% participation. The UTE’s bid included an offer on the license fee to be paid for the
30-year period (consisting initially of payments of USD 2,200,000 for the first three years
and USD 3,500,000 for the following 27 years) and a plan to invest USD 20,770,000 in
tourism development in the Province of Salta.'? This included the commitment to build a
five-star hotel as well as hoteling and gastronomy schools in the City of Salta and to
establish a fund for the promotion of tourism and culture in the Province. Following a
request by the Ministry of Production and Employment, the bid was then revised, resulting
in an offer with higher annual payments for the license of USD 2,500,000 per year for the

first three years, and USD 4,100,000 per year for the following 27 years.

On 31 January 2000, the tender was awarded to the UTE by Resolution 20/00 based on the

conditions of the revised offer. 4

2. The Participation of Claimants in ENJASA

On 15 February 2000, by Decree No. 419/00 the Executive of the Provice of Salta!>
approved the Transfer Agreement which transferred the tendered shares in ENJASA to the
UTE. The Transfer Agreement also extended the sanctions of Law No. 7020 to the buyer’s

breaches of the Transfer Agreement, the bid, or any other documentation that formed part

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 35-39. Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, paras. 163-167.

Memorial on the Merits, para. 40; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits,
para. 168.

Memorial on the Merits, para. 40; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits,
paras. 169-175.

43.

44.

of the tender (see Article 7.1.2 of the Transfer Agreement). Furthermore, Article 13 of the

Transfer Agreement provided:'®
ARTICULO DECIMO TERCERO: LEY APLICABLE Y JURISDICCION

13.1. Este contrato sera interpretado de conformidad con la Ley Argentina y regulado
por ella. A todos los efectos derivados del mismo las partes aceptan la jurisdiccién
exclusiva de los Tribunales Ordinarios de la Provincia de Salta, con renuncia a todo

otro fuero 0 jurisdiccién.

The UTE later requested that the shares be transferred to Leisure & Entertainment S.A.
(“L&E”), a stock corporation under Argentine law, formed by the members of the UTE in
accordance with their respective participation in the UTE (i.e., CATH with 5%, Boldt S.A.
with 5%, and Iberlux Int. S.A. with 90%). ENREJA authorized this transfer, and
consequently ownership of the Class A-shares of ENJASA was registered in the name of

L&E in the company register.!”

The remaining 10% of the shares in ENJASA continued to be held by the Province of Salta

in order to implement the planned joint ownership participation program for former BPAS

  

employees. However, on 19 October 2009, most of the beneficiaries of the joint ownership
participation program authorized the Government of Salta to sell these shares. On 4
November 2009, L&E and the Province of Salta entered into an agreement for the purchase
of these shares. Under this agreement and its successive amendments, L&E purchased
almost all of the remaining shares in ENJASA, with the exception of a minor participation
of 0.06% which remained with the Province of Salta under the joint ownership participation
program because some of the former employees of BPAS had not agreed to the sale of their

shares to L&E. '®

Exhibit A RA 11. The Parties agreed on the following translation of this clause: “ARTICLE XIII: GOVERNING
LAW AND JURISDICTION 13.1. This Agreement shall be construed and governed by the laws of Argentina.
To any effect derived therefrom, the parties submit themselves to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Ordinary Courts
of the province of Salta, waiving any other forum or jurisdiction.”

Memorial on the Merits, para. 50; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits,
para. 176.

Exhibit C-080. Memorial on the Merits, paras. 57-62; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, para. 177.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

19

20

21

At the end of 2009, a minor participation in ENJASA was transferred by L&E to Complejo
Monumento Giiemes Sociedad Anénima (“CMG”), a share-company with its seat in
Argentina owned by L&E (94.79%) and ENJASA (5.21 %). CMG currently holds a 0.51
shareholding in ENJASA.!°

As a result of the above transactions, L&E currently holds 99.94% of the shares in
ENJASA. The remaining 0.06% of the shares in ENJASA are still subject to the joint

ownership participation program.

The ownership structure of L&E also changed over the course of the years.” While
Claimants, or rather their predecessors within the Casinos Group, held 5% of the shares in
L&E from February 2000 to 2007, their participation increased to 60% in February 2007
as a result of purchasing 55% of L&E shares from Iberlux Int. S.A.

On 15 November 2013, CAI purchased the remaining 40% of the shares in L&E from
Tberlux Int. S.A.; CAI then transferred 2% of the shares in L&E to CATH, whose sole
shareholder is CASAG. Thus, at present, CAI directly holds 98% of L&E. CASAG in turn
indirectly holds 2% of L&E through its participation in CATH and the remaining 98%
through its participation in CAI. Consequently, CASAG indirectly controls 100% of L&E.
Through L&E, CAI and CASAG in turn indirectly hold 99.94% of ENJASA’s shares.

The current ownership structure in ENJASA therefore looks as follows:?!

Memorial on the Merits, para. 60, fn 85.
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 50-56.
See Exhibit C-017.

20

ENJASA's ownership structure (2014)

100%
a (austria)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Casinos Austia 98% 2% Casinos Austria
internacional International Holding GmbH
GmbH (Austria) (Austri

Lesure Enertainment S.A
(Salta, Argentina)
94.8% 999% — 0,00%
«J

Complejo Monumento Entretenimiontosy Juegos de
Guemes SA je 82% car SENS)
(Salta, Argentina) (Salta, Argentina)

aS
T5T%

 

 

 

 

 

 

50. Through this structure, significant investments were made in the gaming, lottery and

tourism sector in the Province of Salta. Claimants summarize these as follows:

The gaming and lottery business in the Province of Salta grew significantly as a result
of the privatisation and the influx of capital provided by Claimants. This can be shown
by a comparison between the situation before the privatisation and at the time of the
revocation. In February 2000, before the privatisation, there were two casinos
authorized to operate in Salta and 27 slot machine halls with 316 machines. None of
these were operated by ENJASA. Moreover, in 1999 ENJASA had 239 employees, as
evidenced by Article 1.1.1 of the Bidding Terms and Conditions. By the time of the
revocation of the licence in August 2013, ENJASA operated four casinos, 15 slot
machine halls and 14 lottery games, and in total 1,376 slot machines and 46 gaming
tables. ENJASA was also one of the most significant employers in the Province, which

crucially lacks domestic and foreign investment. When the licence was revoked,

21

51.

52.

ENJASA had 750 employees, 600 of whom were transferred by governmental decree

to other operators.””

Furthermore, in August 2005, ENJASA opened the Sheraton Hotel Salta, the first five-star
hotel in the region. Claimants claim that ENJASA invested more than USD 20,000,000 in
the construction of the hotel. Although the hotel allegedly never generated any profits, it
was part of the investment program that was promised to be undertaken as part of the
privatization process. In addition, ENJASA sponsored two schools, one for hotel trade and
one for gastronomy, and created the “ENJASA Foundation” for the promotion and research
of cultural, tourist, hotel and gourmet activities in the Province of Salta, equally in
fulfilment of the promises made in the course of the privatization of ENJASA.%
Respondent agrees that all obligations to invest in tourism undertaken under the Transfer

Agreement had been fulfilled.**

ENJASA also complied with its obligations to pay the license fee that was agreed with the
Province of Salta. This fee, which was originally agreed as a fixed fee in USD for the
entire license term, was renegotiated in 2008 at the request of the Province of Salta through
an agency created specifically for the review and renegotiation of public contracts and
licenses, called Unidad de Revisién y Renegociacién de Contratos y Licencias otorgadas
por la Administracién (“UNIREN”). The resulting agreement between ENJASA and
UNIREN of 7 May 2008 was ratified by the Government of Salta through Decree No.
3428/08.° As a consequence, the fee was changed from a fixed to a dynamic fee, which

was calculated as a percentage of the annual income of ENJASA.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 13. See for further detail on ENJASA’s gaming and lottery operations,
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 80-120.

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 121-133.
See Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 182.
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 134-137.

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 157-186; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, paras. 178-184.

22

53.

54.

55.

56.

3. The Revocation of ENJASA’s Exclusive License

On 11 December 2012, ENREJA opened three separate investigations into alleged
breaches of ENJASA of its obligations under the regulatory framework governing the
operations of games of chance.”’ One investigation related to compliance of ENJASA with
its obligations concerning anti-money laundering in the administration of a lottery game
(Resolution No. 380/12 of ENREJA), one to compliance with anti-money laundering rules
in the operation of one of ENJASA’s casinos (Resoution No. 381/12 of ENREJA), and one
to compliance with ENJASA’s obligation not to hire operators without ENREJA’s
authorization (Resolution No. 384/12 of ENREJA).

ENJASA responded to the investigations initiated through Resolutions Nos. 380/12 and
381/12 on 2 January 2013.78 Its response to the investigation under Resolution No. 384/12
followed on 28 June 2013.7

On 13 August 2013, in Resolution No. 240/13, ENREJA made a joint determination on all
three investigations.*° In all instances, ENREJA concluded, ENJASA had violated its
obligations under the regulatory framework in place. ENJASA had violated anti-money
laundering provisions and had breached the obligation not to hire operators without
ENREJA’s authorization. In light of previous instances of non-compliance with the
regulatory framework, ENREJA concluded that the appropriate sanction was the

revocation of ENJASA’s license.

Equally on 13 August 2013, by Decree No. 2348/13, the Governor of Salta ordered
ENREJA to prepare a transition plan to transfer ENJASA’s operations, including its

employees, to new operators.*!

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 228-236; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits, paras. 382-448.

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 242-287.
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 288-317.
See Exhibit C-031; See Memorial on the Merits, para. 31.

See Exhibit C-222; See Memorial on the Merits, paras. 318-319; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and
Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 478-480.

23

57.

58.

59.

4, Developments after the Revocation of ENJASA’s License

On 27 August 2013, a meeting took place between Mr. Tucek, the CEO of CAI, and
representatives of the Government of the Province of Salta. During this meeting, Claimants

assert:

[...] Mr Tucek was informed that the government of Salta believed that the level of
involvement of CAI and CASAG in ENJASA was not sufficient and that the

participation of Iberlux Int. S.A. in L&E was not considered a positive aspect.

The government of Salta was of the opinion that CAI’s and CASAG’s partner in L&E
was a strawman of Mr Romero, the former Governor of Salta, and political rival of Mr

Juan Manuel Urtubey.

Based on this information, Mr Tucek recommended to CAI’s management board to
increase CAI’s participation in L&E and, therefore, its indirect ownership share in

ENJASA.*

Following this meeting, the purchase by Claimants of the remaining 40% of the shares in

L&E from Iberlux Int. S.A. was concluded on 15 November 2013.*

On 28 August 2013, ENJASA filed a Recourse for Reconsideration against Resolution No.
240/13.*4 In this Recourse, ENJASA argued that Resolution No. 240/13 was unlawful and
should be revoked. ENJASA, inter alia, claimed that several of the investigated instances,
which were found to be in breach of the regulatory framework, had prescribed under the
statute of limitations; that ENJASA had not hired “operators” in the meaning of Law No.
7020, but merely contracted out certain services to third parties, or had engaged persons
that were allowed to operate games of chance under preexisting authorizations issued by
BPAS; and that ENJASA had not breached any anti-money laundering rules. ENJASA
further claimed that Resolution No. 240/13 was passed in breach of its right to be heard,

that the Resolution’s motivation was insufficient, was based on the retroactive application

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 334-336.
See supra para, 48.

Exhibit C-213. See Memorial on the Merits, paras. 329-330; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 466-470.

24

60.

61.

62.

63.

35

of certain regulatory rules, and constituted a disproportionate reaction to minor breaches
or simple human errors. ENJASA’s recourse also mentioned the reservation of any rights

arising under the Argentina-Austria BIT.

On 5 September 2013, ENJASA requested interim relief before the First Instance Court of
Salta, asking for the suspension of the implementation of Resolution No. 240/13 pending

its Recourse for Reconsideration.* This request was granted on 4 October 2013.*°

On 19 November 2013, ENREJA passed Resolution No. 315/13, dismissing ENJASA’s
Recourse for Reconsideration.*’ In it, ENREJA addressed the arguments brought by

ENJASA in its Recourse for Reconsideration and rejected them as unfounded.

On 20 November 2013, a meeting between Mr. Tucek and Mr. Schreiner of Casinos and
representatives of ENREJA and the Province of Salta took place. During this meeting the
modalities of transition of ENJASA’s operations to new operators were discussed.
Claimants claim that Mr. De Angelis, the Province’s Minister of Environment and
Sustainable Development, offered Claimants to continue operating one of the casinos,
“Casino Salta”, an offer Claimants claim to have declined because it was not economically
feasible.** Subsequently, the Province of Salta allegedly extended an offer to continue

operating one additional casino, an offer Claimants claim to have denied as well.

On 20 November 2013, by Decree No. 3330/13, the Government of the Province of Salta
approved the Temporary Plan for the exploitation of games of chance prepared by
ENREJA. *? The Plan established conditions for the issuance of new operator licenses. It

contained a list of 11 individuals and entities that were to receive such licenses, several of

Exhibit C-214; Exhibit A RA 77. See Memorial on the Merits, para. 331; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction

and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 481.

Exhibit C-215, Exhibit A RA 78. See Memorial on the Merits, para. 332; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction
and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 481

 

Exhibit C-032. See Memorial on the Merits, paras. 342-346; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, para. 471.

Memorial on the Merits, paras. 356-357.
Exhibit C-033. See Memorial on the Merits, paras. 347-350; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 490-492.

25

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

which ENJASA had contracted before to operate its gaming activities and which ENREJA
considered were hired by ENJASA without ENREJA’s authorization.

On 26 November 2013, ENJASA requested the extension of the interim relief granted by
the First Instance Court of Salta, pending an Action for Annulment of Resolutions Nos.
240/13 and 315/13 ENJASA had brought in the same court.*° The request for interim relief

was rejected on 23 December 2013.4!

On 28 and 29 November 2013, by Resolutions Nos. 332-339/13, ENREJA implemented
the Transition Plan in relation to several of the new operators and approved the transfer of
employees of ENJASA to those new operators.”

On 3 December 2013, ENJASA filed a Recourse for Revocation of Decree No. 3330/13.
This recourse was rejected as inadmissible by Decree No. 1002/16 on 12 July 2016.8

On 12 December 2013, ENJASA filed Recourses for Revocation of ENREJA’s
Resolutions Nos. 332-339/13. These recourses appear to be still undecided.**

On 30 December 2013, ENREJA passed Resolution No. 364/13, with which it
implemented the Transition Plan for Casino Salta, and approved the transfer of ENJASA’s
employees to a new operator.”

On 5 February 2014, ENJASA filed an Action for Annulment of Resolutions Nos. 240/13
and 315/13 and of Decrees Nos. 2348/13 and 330/13 with the First Instance Court of
Salta.*° In this recourse, ENJASA not only claimed that the revocation of its operating
license was contrary to domestic law; it also invoked breach of the Argentina-Austria

BIT.*” In particular, ENJASA argued that the Argentina-Austria BIT was applicable

See Exhibit A RA 153.

Exhibit C-288.

Exhibits C-034 through C-041. See Memorial on the Merits, paras. 351-353; Memorial on Objections to
Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 495.

See Exhibit C-289.

See Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 326.

Memorial on the Merits, para. 358; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits,
para. 497.

See Exhibit C-221. See Memorial on the Merits, para. 361; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, para. 472.

See Exhibit C-221, pp. 130-131.

26

70.

71.

72.

723.

74.

75.

48

49

50.

si

because ENJASA’s shares were indirectly owned by CAI, thus qualifying as an investment
in the sense of Article 1(1) of the BIT, which was owned by a covered investor in the sense
of Article 1(2)(b) of the BIT. Furthermore, ENJASA argued that the conduct of ENREJA
and of the Province of Salta was attributable under public international law to the Republic
of Argentina and resulted in an uncompensated expropriation contrary to Article 4 of the
BIT and in a breach of fair and equitable treatment contrary to Article 2(1) of the BIT. This

action is still pending.

On 30 April 2014, CAI sent a letter to Respondent, putting the latter officially on notice of
the dispute under the Argentina-Austria BIT, inviting her to conduct amicable
consultations, and accepting her offer to submit the dispute to arbitration under Article 8
of the Argentina-Austria BIT.**

On 29 May 2014, the Province of Salta issued Decree No. 1502/14, granting ten-year

licenses to the new operators as determined in Decree No. 3330/13.*?

On 24 June 2014, ENJASA filed a Recourse for Revocation of Decree No. 1502/14. This

recourse was dismissed on 12 July 2016.”

On 7 August 2014, CASAG requested Respondent to be joined into the amicable
consultations initiated by CAI and accepted Respondent’s offer to arbitrate under Article

8 of the Argentina-Austria BIT.*!

Until 21 October 2014, Claimants sent, in addition to its letters of 30 April and 7 August
2014, five further letters to Respondent and the Governor of the Province of Salta relating

to the present dispute.

In parallel to the letters sent to Respondent, Mr. Wajntraub, a lawyer representing the
Province of Salta, got in touch with Claimants on 22 October 2014 to discuss the dispute

relating to the revocation of ENJASA’s license. Following several email exchanges, a

See Exhibit C-008.

See Exhibit C-176. See Memorial on the Merits, para. 362; Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, para. 504.

See Exhibit C-289.

See Exhibit C-012.

27

76.

77.

78.

meeting between Mr Wajntraub and Claimants’ counsel took place in Vienna on 13 March

2015, without however reaching any conclusion regarding the dispute.

ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES

1. Respondent
Respondent contends that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction on the grounds that:

there is no prima facie claim for violation of the Argentina-Austria BIT, that Claimants
have not accepted the offer made by the Argentine Republic to submit disputes to
arbitration, and that Claimants are not the owners of the asset which they invoke as
investment and which was affected by the revocation—that is to say, ENJASA’s

licence.*?

A. There is no claim for a prima facie violation of the BIT
Respondent argues that there is no prima facie jurisdiction because none of the claims are
objectively capable of constituting breaches of the BIT. Instead, in Respondent’s view, the
essence of the dispute concerns the revocation of ENJASA’s license, which makes it into
a contractual, rather than a treaty claim, for which recourse must be had in contractual

forum rather than the one provided for under the Argentina-Austria BIT.*?

(i) The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over claims that prima facie are not
objectively based on the BIT

Respondent contends that Claimants’ claims are entirely based on the revocation of the

Licence to operate games of chance on the Province of Salta granted to ENJASA.™ For

Respondent, these claims, as argued, do not constitute claims under the BIT but are, in

essence, contractual claims that are only characterized by Claimants as BIT claims.*

Argentina disputes Claimants’ assertion that the Tribunal’s analysis at this stage should be

limited to considering whether the facts as presented are capable of constituting a breach

 

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 1.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 1.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 2-23.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 24-26.

28

79.

80.

of the BIT standards. To the contrary, in order to establish a prima facie connection with
the Treaty, Respondent considers Claimants’ legal characterization of their claims should
not be accepted as such and without analysis, but the claims need to be objectively
connected to concrete violations of the substantive standards of treatment laid down in the

BIT.*°

(ii) None of the claims are based prima facie on the BIT
According to Respondent, the direct and indirect expropriation claims, as well as the claims
concerning fair and equitable treatment and national treatment, are all based on a breach of
the Licence and its consequences, and therefore constitute contract claims (or claims
relating to the application of the regulatory framework governing the Licence). This is
confirmed by the terms of the Licence itself which governs, together with domestic law,

the consequences of a breach such that:

any claim involving actions by ENREJA, taken in accordance with the legal framework
of the Licence, constitutes a claim under the provisions of the Bidding Terms (insofar
as it regulates the exercise of the Licence) and the Licence itself (which sets forth

obligations of the Licensee and potential sanctions to be applied by ENREJA).>”

Such claims, in Respondent’s view, are not treaty claims. The distinction between contract
claims and treaty claims has long been recognized by arbitral tribunals with the conclusion
that contract claims by themselves do not sustain a claim for breach of an international

treaty.**

(iii) ICSID arbitration is not the proper forum for this dispute
Furthermore, since there is no prima facie violation of the BIT, Respondent also contends,
the proper forum for the present dispute are the courts of the Province of Salta, as provided

for in the forum selection clause of the Bidding Terms and Conditions and the Transfer

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 38; Reply on Jurisdiction,
paras. 17-20.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 29-34.

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 40-44; Reply on Jurisdiction,
paras. 21-28.

29

81.

82.

83.

Agreement. Because the Bidding Terms and Conditions contain rules regarding the
exercise of the Licence, and the claim concerns the exercise of the Licence, the proper

forum is the jurisdiction which covers the exercise of the Licence.*?

Respondent also clarifies that she does not argue that a forum selection clause in a contract
necessarily precludes an arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction for claims under a BIT. Instead,
what Respondent argues is that, since there are no claims for breach of the BIT, it is the
contractual forum, namely the courts of the Province of Salta, that is competent to hear the

present dispute.

In Respondent’s view, the fact that provincial courts have jurisdiction over the present
dispute is further confirmed by Claimants’ submission of a judicial claim to these very
courts in order to comply with Article 8 of the BIT. For Respondent, Claimants cannot “on
the one hand, [submit] a judicial claim to the province’s courts under the BIT and, on the
other hand, [argue] that the provincial forum is not appropriate to hear their claim under
the BIT.” In the same sense, Respondent argues, Claimants cannot expect to rely on the
legal framework applicable to the Licence to ascertain the existence of an investment, while

at the same time disregarding the forum selection clause included in the same provisions.°!

Finally, Respondent rejects Claimants’ argument that the dispute is beyond the scope
ratione personae of the forum selection clause in the Bidding Terms and Conditions and
the Transfer Agreement. According to Respondent, the clause is applicable to Claimants;

to argue otherwise is contrary to Argentine law.°?

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 45-50; Reply on Jurisdiction,
paras. 35-37; Respondent’ s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 27-34.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 38-40.

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 49; Reply on Jurisdiction,
paras. 41-44 (quote at para. 42).

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 45-48.

30

84.

85.

86.

B. There is no consent to arbitrate because Claimants failed to accept
Argentina's offer to arbitrate in the BIT

Respondent further contends that consent to arbitration under the BIT was never perfected

as Claimants failed to comply with the conditions for consent listed in Article 8 of the

BIT.

(i) Article 8 of the BIT contains compulsory jurisdictional requirements and is

part of Respondent's offer to arbitrate
In Respondent’s view, the unilateral consent given in the BIT constitutes an offer to
arbitrate subject to several conditions. An investor must accept this offer on the terms on
which it was made. This means that an investor must comply with these conditions in order
to perfect consent. An acceptance purportedly given under different or modified terms is

not capable of perfecting consent.”

In Respondent’s view, the compulsory nature of the conditions is “irrespective of whether
the investor believes them to be useful or convenient.”® In addition to being compulsory,
these conditions are cumulative and must be fulfilled in a certain order: first, there must be
an attempt to settle the dispute through negotiations with the State during a period of six
months; second, if the dispute is not resolved through negotiations, it must be submitted to
the domestic courts of the host State; third, if the dispute persists after 18 months, either
because no decision was rendered on the merits or because the parties are still in dispute
despite such decision having been rendered, the investor must withdraw the domestic claim

before bringing a claim to international arbitration.

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 51; Reply on Jurisdiction,
para. 49; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 36.

  

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 55-63; Reply on Jurisdiction,
paras. 50-54 and 57-59.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 55-56.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 60 and 62-67.

31

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

(ii) Claimants did not accept the offer on the terms on which it was made
Respondent contends that Claimants not only failed to comply with the conditions
individually, but they also failed to follow the sequence of the provisions by submitting the

dispute to domestic courts before engaging in amicable negotiations with the State.

a) Claimants failed to follow the order of the jurisdictional requirements

According to Respondent, even though Claimants purport to have submitted the dispute to
domestic courts months after they commenced amicable negotiations, the facts prove that
Claimants filed a complaint with the courts of the Province of Salta on 5 February 2014 —
almost three months before they notified the dispute and started negotiations on 30 April
2014.7 However, under Article 8 of the BIT, settlement negotiations of six months had to

precede recourse to domestic courts.

b) Claimants failed to meet the requirement of amicable negotiations for six months

Respondent further contends that the six-months period is not merely a cooling-off period,
but a period during which the parties must attempt to settle the dispute amicably as a

precondition for the submission of the dispute to the Argentine courts.

Respondent disputes Claimants’ contention that negotiations must only be attempted
whenever possible and contends that Claimants’ statement that negotiations would have
been ineffective is speculative and aimed at justifying Claimants’ failure to meet the

negotiation requirement.

Instead, what follows from witness testimony, in Respondent’s view, is that the Argentine
authorities were willing to engage in consultations and that it was Claimants who did not

intend to resolve the dispute through negotiations.

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 72-77; Reply on Jurisdiction,
paras. 68-73; Respondent’ s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 49.

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 79.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 80-84; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 66.

32

92.

93.

70

c) Claimants _failed_to_meet_the requirement_of submission _to_the competent
administrative or judicial jurisdiction for 18 months

Respondent also disputes Claimants’ allegations that under Article 8 of the BIT, resort to
domestic jurisdiction is not entirely unconditional; that there is no requirement to submit
to domestic jurisdiction when there are no competent administrative authorities or courts;
and that the term “dispute” is to be understood broadly, such that the action filed by
Claimants on 28 August 2013 complied with the requirements of Article 8(2) of the BIT.
On the contrary, Respondent contends that the submission to domestic jurisdiction is
mandatory and that Claimants’ reliance of the word “may” in Article 8(2) of the BIT is
deliberately taken out of context, that there were competent courts and administrative
authorities to address Claimants’ grievance, and that the term “dispute” submitted
domestically could not be different from that submitted to international arbitration.
Consequently, in Respondent’s view, Article 8 of the BIT does not permit unrestricted

access to ICSID jurisdiction.””

First, Respondent relies on the Wintershall case in support of its argument that an offer to
arbitrate given by a State can only be accepted by an investor in a way that meets all
conditions of the offer.’”! Respondent contends that the term “may” does not mean that
recourse to domestic courts is discretionary. To the contrary, a contextual reading of Article
8(2) of the BIT indicates that it does not contain options, but requires a mandatory
sequential recourse to local courts, as a second step after amicable consultations, prior to
submission of the dispute to international arbitration. The only circumstance in which
submission to domestic court proceedings would not be required is if the Parties had agreed
to disregard this step, which is not the case with the present dispute. Failing such
agreement, Respondent emphasizes, recourse to local courts constitutes a jurisdictional

requirement. Moreover, Respondent points out that international tribunals have found that

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 70-89; Reply on Jurisdiction,
paras. 85-87.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 88-89 (relying on Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/04/14, Award (8 December 2008), paras. 116-117 (AL RA 38).

33

94.

95.

n

B

”

the absence of imperative language does not equal the absence of a mandatory requirement

nor mean that the treaty language can be ignored.””

Second, Respondent contends that “there are numerous jurisdictional forums available to
which Claimants can resort to submit this dispute” at the domestic level in Argentina. In

particular, “it is clear that the courts of the Province of Salta [...] are the ‘competent’ forum

 

pursuant to Article 8(2) of the BIT,” as demonstrated by the fact that “the Bidding Terms,
the Agreement and the License explicitly stipulated that any dispute concerning the License
must be submitted to the courts of the Province of Salta” and by the fact that Claimants
themselves made use of those courts. According to Argentina, the courts of the Province
of Salta were not only competent to hear disputes concerning the License, but “also to
apply the BIT.” Respondent further disputes the argument that exhaustion of administrative
remedies would have been required to bring the relevant action before Argentine courts. It
points out that no exhaustion of administrative remedies is required when the judicial action
is intended to challenge a final act of individual scope that is “carried out by the Executive

Power or the higher authority of a decentralized entity.”7

Respondent also counters Claimants’ argument that the Request for Reconsideration that
ENJASA had submitted against ENREJA’s Resolution No. 240/13 qualified as a
submission of the dispute to an administrative jurisdiction in the sense of Article 8(2) of
the BIT, and that the subsequent dismissal of that recourse through ENREJA’s Resolution
No. 315/13 constituted a decision on the merits,’4 which allowed recourse to international
arbitration under Article 8(3)(b) of the BIT. In this respect, Respondent argues that what
Claimants filed was not a claim for breach of the BIT by the State, but a Request for
Reconsideration that concerned an unrelated claim between different parties and that could
not have possibly resolved the dispute under the BIT. Consequently, ENJASA’s
administrative recourses were insufficient to meet the BIT’s requirement to have recourse
to a domestic jurisdiction. ENJASA’s recourse against Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13

in the courts of Salta, in turn, did not meet the requirements under the BIT for prior

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 90-100.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 101-113; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 80, 82-86.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 88.

34

96.

97.

98.

submission to domestic courts, because that recourse was filed on 5 February 2014, which
is only 10 months before the dispute was submitted to ICSID arbitration — as opposed to

the 18 months required by Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT.”°

Respondent further rejects Claimants’ argument that prior submission of the dispute to
Argentine courts was not necessary, due to futility, because Argentine courts were
allegedly unable to resolve that dispute within the 18-months timeframe established in the
BIT. According to Respondent, this argument is refuted by the “numerous decisions
rendered by the Argentine courts in less than eighteen months, both final and interim, and
in both summary and ordinary proceedings.” Moreover, Respondent argues that Claimants
had at their disposal “numerous abbreviated means to have the dispute heard” in domestic
courts. In addition, there is no applicable “guarantee” in the BIT or elsewhere that the

dispute should be resolved within 18 months.”°

Third, Respondent argues that the dispute filed with domestic courts cannot be different
from that which is submitted to international arbitration, as this would defeat the purpose
of giving local courts an opportunity to resolve the dispute. Respondent contends that the
facts, cause of action, and the parties in the present proceedings and those before domestic
courts had to be the same; the term “dispute”, in Respondent’s view, could not be
interpreted broadly, as suggested by Claimants, to include just any dispute related to the
investment in question without identity of the parties and of the cause of action. Respondent
considers that the dispute submitted by ENJASA to local courts was different from the one
submitted to the present arbitration proceedings, and therefore failed to meet the
requirements of the BIT.””

d) Alternatively, if the request filed with local courts is considered compliant with the
terms of Article 8, Claimants still failed to withdraw from the pending judicial

proceeding
Respondent finally refers to Article 8(4) of the BIT, which requires disputing parties to

take all required measures to withdraw from any pending judicial proceedings. Respondent

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 114-119.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 120-124; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 97-99.

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 82-86; Reply on Jurisdiction,
paras. 126-133; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 69-79.

35

99.

100.

101.

contends that this is a requirement of the host State’s consent in the BIT. For Respondent,
it is significant that this requirement is included in few of its BITs and in only one of
Austria’s BITs, thus denoting its essential nature. Respondent notes that ENJASA
continues to pursue domestic court proceedings rather than having taken all required
measures to withdraw from such proceedings. In Respondent’s view, this is not only in
contravention of the express terms of Article 8(4), but also “irreconciliable with Article 26
of the ICSID Convention.” Claimants therefore have failed to accept the terms of

Argentina’s offer to arbitrate contained in Article 8 of the BIT.’

(iii) Claimants cannot rely on the most-favoured-nation (MFN) clause to

perfect consent
According to Respondent, Claimants having failed to accept the terms of the offer to
arbitrate in Article 8 of the BIT, their belated reliance on the MFN clause is untimely; in

addition, the clause does not apply to matters of jurisdiction.”

a) Reliance on the MEN clause is inadmissible because it is untimely

Respondent contends that, for the first time in their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction did
Claimants invoke the BIT’s MEN clause. According to Respondent, Claimants’ belated
submission is “contrary to the general legal principle establishing that no one may set
himself in contradiction to his own previous conduct (non concedit venire contra factum
proprium, estoppel),” which forms part of, or is recognized in, the Argentine legal system,
as well as contrary to “the principle of good faith, which is firmly established in

international law.”*° Claimants’ reliance on the MEN clause is therefore inadmissible.

Respondent further contends that Claimants’ belated invocation “seriously impairs the
Argentine Republic’s right of defence” as it makes the jurisdiction of the Centre “a moving

target” for Respondent to address.*!

 

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 138-144; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 101-105 (quote at id., para. 104).
Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 145; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 107-115.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 146-150; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 107.

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 151; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 108.

36

102.

103.

104.

b) The MEN clause does not apply to jurisdiction

According to Respondent, an MEN clause does not apply to matters of jurisdiction because
it is not an arbitration agreement and it is not part of the offer to arbitrate. For an MFN
clause to apply to issues of jurisdiction it is necessary that the relevant treaty records “the
clear and unequivocal intention of the State Parties” to consent to the use of the MFN clause

in this manner, an aspect that is not shown in the present treaty.*”

Previous treaties concluded separately by Argentina and Austria did not include the
requirement that the dispute be submitted to local courts for 18 months. Therefore, in
Respondent’s view, “‘at the time when the BIT was executed, it would have been impossible
for the parties to intend that the MEN clause be interpreted as sought by Claimants, since
such interpretation would have deprived the dispute settlement provision of any effect as
from the entry into force of the Treaty.”** In addition, the dispute settlement mechanisms
of the relevant treaties are incompatible, in that the Argentina-Austria BIT includes a
jurisdictional requirement to submit the dispute to the local courts, whereas the Argentina-
Denmark BIT contains a fork-in-the-road provision. There is also no evidence that the

treatment invoked through the MEN clause would be beneficial to the Claimants.**

Furthermore, Respondent counters Claimants’ reliance on the Maffezini case,*° arguing
that this decision should not be taken into account as good precedent, because both Spain
and Argentina had confirmed their position, resulting in an “‘authentic interpretation”, that
the MEN clause in question, contrary to the finding of the tribunal in that case, was
inapplicable to dispute settlement provisions.*° Similarly, other States had established

expressly in subsequent treaties the non-applicability of MFN clauses to dispute settlement

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 152; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 109.

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 153; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 110-112.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 113-115.

Mafezzini v. Kingdom of Spain, (CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Jurisdiction (25 January 2000) (AL RA
44).

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 154-156.

37

105.

106.

mechanisms “as a consequence of the decisions in which the MFN clause was wrongly

interpreted on the basis of Maffezini.”*”

Listing investment cases that have rejected this approach, Respondent contends that ICSID
cases that have accepted the applicability of the MFN clause to dispute settlement
provisions are in the minority. Respondent further refers to the Wintershall case,** where
the tribunal analysed this disparity of approaches and found that the tribunal in Maffezini,
proceeding on a presumption incorrectly derived from the Ambatielos case,*° incorrectly
decided that dispute resolution provisions fell within the scope of MEN provisions unless
there was clear evidence to the contrary.”’ Respondent finally observes that its approach is

also in line with the views of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on this issue.?!

Cc. There is no jurisdiction ratione materiae
Respondent does not deny that a shareholding may constitute an investment under the BIT,
but contends that Claimants have not put forward a claim concerning their rights as indirect
shareholders.*” In any event, the claim pertaining to the 40% stake acquired in L&E after
the revocation of the License, which is the event identified by Claimants as the starting
point of the dispute, is inadmissible as it would constitute an abuse of process.”
Respondent further contends that Claimants’ indirect shareholding does not transform them
into owners of ENJASA’s assets — in particular the License.*+ For Respondent, Claimants
incorrectly allege that ENJASA’s operating license was their investment (although in their
various submissions, Claimants have presented different versions of what constituted their
alleged investment). However, since the Licence was held by ENJASA and not by

Claimants, Respondent argues that Claimants did not own an investment protected under

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 157.

Winterschall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award (8 December 2008)
(AL RA 38).

Ambatielos (Greece v. United Kingdom), Judgment (19 May 1953), ICJ Reports 1953, p. 10 (AL RA 235).

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 158-166.

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 167.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 123.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 122; Hearing Transcript of 23 March 2017, pp. 108-109.
Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 123.

38

107.

108.

the ICSID Convention and the BIT.*° Respondent concludes that the revocation of the

License cannot be submitted as a breach under the BIT.

(i) The License is not an investment protected under the BIT and Claimants

are not its holders
Respondent first of all contends that the License does not constitute an investment
protected under the BIT, given that the BIT’s definition of investment only includes
concessions conferred by public law “to explore and exploit natural resources,” which the
License is not. In any case, Respondent argues, the issue “is not whether a Licence is an
investment according to the definition of Article 1(1) of the Argentina-Austria BIT, but
whether the License that constitutes the subject matter of their claim is an investment
owned by Claimants.” According to Respondent, Claimants have failed to establish an
ownership link between a protected investment and a protected investor under the Treaty.
This is true for all of ENJASA’s assets claimed to constitute investments.*° Under the BIT
and the ICSID Convention, such ownership by the claimant, who must be a national of a

State party to the treaties in question, is required to enjoy protection.

Respondent points to the fact that, for Claimants’ experts, the investment consisted of the
indirect shareholding in ENJASA, not of the License held by ENJASA.*” Under Argentine
law, the economic rights of the shareholders did not entail ownership of the corporate
assets: “[a] shareholder is the holder or owner of its shares, but this does not mean it is the
owner of the assets of the corporation.” Because the BIT required that the “contents and
scope of the rights relating to the various categories of assets [...] be determined by the
laws (...) of the Contracting Party,” Respondent concludes that it followed from the
limitations established by the Argentine Companies Act No. 19550 on the economic rights

of shareholders that Claimants, as ENJASA’s shareholders, did not own the License

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 169-173.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 174-177; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 120-121.

According to Argentina, the same follows from the fact that Claimants address the issue of the legality of the
investment merely with regard to the shareholding in L&E, but not with regard to the Licence. See Reply on
Jurisdiction, para. 185.

39

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

100

101

granted to ENJASA and, therefore, the License could not be Claimants’ investment under

the BIT.**

Respondent further contends that the above conclusion is confirmed by the BIT’s definition
of investor, by its provision on dispute settlement, and by the BIT’s standards of protection.
These provisions all make clear that “the only protected investments are those owned by
an investor that are affected by measures that allegedly breach the Argentina-Austria BIT,”
while excluding disputes “in relation to measures affecting assets that are not owned by

that investor or that do not constitute an investment.”°?

Respondent concludes from the above that Claimants’ claim before this Tribunal is
“invalid” because the dispute does not arise directly from an investment protected under

the ICSID Convention and the BIT of which Claimants are the owners. !°

(ii) Claimants have no standing to bring an action in respect of the assets of
ENJASA

Respondent further contends that the principle that shareholders may not bring an action

concerning the rights of the companies of which they are shareholders is a principle

recognized by international law.

In this context, Respondent relies on arbitration awards and ICJ judgments rendered to the
effect that shareholders are not entitled to bring an action in respect of the rights of the
companies in which they hold shares, regardless of whether the shareholding is direct or
indirect. Moreover, Respondent observes, the distinction between a company and its
shareholders is widely recognized by legal systems, and is also acknowledged by

Claimants. !°!

Respondent infers from the terminology used by Claimants, namely that it holds “direct

and indirect assets,” that Claimants are not the holders of the Licence, the casinos, the slot

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 178-181.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 182-185.

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 186.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 188-192; Respondent’ s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 123 (Phoenix Action, Lid. v. Czech

Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award (15 April 2009), paras. 142-144 (AL RA 152)).

40

114.

115.

102

103

104

105

machine halls, and the lottery operations, nor are they employers of the relevant employees.
As a consequence, Claimants cannot bring action regarding measures that may have
affected alleged investments related to them, but which they did not directly hold.'°? In
Respondent’s view, Claimants’ argument that the Licence is part of their operations, as
well as their reliance on CSOB v. Slovak Republic, are to no avail as CSOB directly owned

the operation in respect of which it submitted its claim.!"

Respondent also points to Article 4(3) of the BIT, which provides that a shareholder may
bring a claim concerning certain assets of the company in which it holds shares. According
to Respondent, however, this article establishes two requirements: (a) that the affected asset
of the company constitutes a “financial asset”, and (b) that the challenged measure qualifies

as an expropriation. !%

Regarding the first requirement, Respondent refers to a discrepancy between the Spanish
and German versions of the BIT, being the Treaty’s authentic languages. While the Spanish
version refers to “activos financieros’, the German version uses the term
“Vermégenswerte”. Claimants’ translation into English of the relevant part of the BIT
refers only to “assets” and not to “financial assets”, the scope of the latter term being more
limited. If Claimants were to hold that “assets” is an accurate translation of the German
text, in Respondent’s view, an interpretation under the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties would confirm that the narrower notion of “financial assets” best reconciles the
texts. Respondent also adds that this limitation “is no obstacle to the achievement of the
object and purpose of the BIT,” as established in the treaty’s Preamble.'®° Consequently,
in Respondent’s view, the protection of shareholders under the BIT is limited to situations
where “financial assets” of their company were expropriated. ENJASA’s license, however,

did not qualify as such a “financial asset”.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 193-195.

Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 196-197 (referring to Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. v. The Slovak Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisidiction (24 May 1999), para. 75 (AL
RA 153)).

Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 198; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 125-132.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 199-211.

4l

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

Regarding the second requirement, Respondent argues that even if one considered that
actions may be brought by shareholders in respect of company assets under Article 4(3) of
the BIT, this provision would limit those actions to claims for expropriation, and exclude
claims concerning the standards of fair and equitable treatment and national treatment from

the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. !°°

2. Claimants

Claimants counter all of Respondent’s objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. They argue
that they have made out a prima facie claim for the violation of the BIT, that Respondent
has validly consented to the present arbitration proceedings in Article 8 of the BIT, and

that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione materiae.

A. Prima facie claim for the violation of the BIT
Claimants claim that the revocation of its exclusive license was only superficially based on
alleged violations of anti-money laundering rules and the hiring of operators without
ENREJA’s authorization. Instead, they argue, the motive for the revocation was to oust
Claimants from the operation of gaming facilites and lottery activities in Salta in order to

distribute their business to new operators at conditions more favourable to the Province.

To make this case, Claimants allege that Resolution No. 240/13 was passed arbitrarily
following a letter sent to ENREJA by Videodrome S.A., a company which had leased slot
machines to ENJASA and which had been in a joint venture with ENJASA for the
installation and exploitation of slot machines in one casino in Salta since 2001. Claimants
contend, Videodrome S.A. suggested to ENREJA that it could operate gaming facilities in
Salta at more favorable conditions than ENJASA. Claimants claim that this letter
contributed to the decision to oust ENJASA from its position in the gaming sector in the

Province.

Moreover, Claimants argue that political rivalries in the Province of Salta played a role in
the revocation of ENJASA’s license. To this end, they claim that, during a meeting with

representatives of the Province of Salta on 27 August 2013, Mr. Tucek was informed that

106 Reply on Jurisdiction, paras. 212-213.

42

121.

122.

123.

the real reason behind the revocation of ENJASA’s license was the participation in L&E
of the Uruguayan company Iberlux Int. S.A., which was allegedly held by a strawman of
the former Governor of the Province of Salta, a political rival of the present Governor. For
Claimants, the purchase of the remaining 40% shares in L&E from Iberlux Int. S.A. in

November 2013 was a step towards reinstalling ENJASA exclusive license.

Claimants therefore claim that the revocation of the License was not a case of bona fide
enforcement of the laws in place in Salta, but “a coordinated action of ENREJA and the
government of Salta to create the impression that the revocation was justified and

urgent.”!07

In a nutshell, Claimants describe their claim as follows:

In 2013, the government of Salta took a series of orchestrated administrative measures
leading to the revocation of [ENJASA’s] gaming licence. The revocation of the licence
was based on fabricated breaches of the regulatory framework and of anti-money
laundering provisions, in total disregard of the actual facts and of ENJASA’s due
process rights. Following the revocation of the licence, some of ENJASA’s former
local business partners were awarded the rights to operate the gaming businesses
previously held by ENJASA under its exclusive licence. Most of ENJASA’s employees
were assigned to the new operators. The administrative proceedings initiated against
ENJASA by the provincial authorities were part of a concerted plan to take over the

Claimants’ investment without the payment of compensation.

As a consequence of the arbitrary and unlawful revocation of the license, ENJASA
could not any longer carry on its business. ENJASA’s operations were shut down and
its management was forced to wind up its remaining assets. The Claimants effectively

lost their investment. !°°

Against this background, Claimants argue that the claim brought in the present proceedings
meets the test for a prima facie claim. Under that test, Claimants argue that their claims

qualify as treaty claims that are subject to the jurisdiction of the present Tribunal. While

‘07 Memorial on the Merits, para. 320.

108 Request for Arbitration, paras. 9-10.

43

taking the revocation of ENJASA’s license as their starting point, Claimants consider their
claims to qualify as constituting treaty claims, not contract claims. Furthermore, Claimants
argue, the jurisdiction of the present Tribunal is also not barred by the forum selection
clauses that are contained in the Bidding Terms and Conditions and the Transfer

Agreement concluded with the Province of Salta during ENJASA’s privatization.

(i) The claims brought are treaty claims
124. Claimants argue that under the prima facie test applied in international dispute settlement,
including in investment treaty arbitration, the Tribunal must only ascertain, as stated in
SGS v. Philippines, whether “the facts as alleged by the Claimant and as appearing from
the initial pleadings fairly raise questions of breach of one or more provisions of the
BIT.” This test, Claimants continue, “is two pronged. First, it requires tribunals to base
their jurisdictional decision on the facts ‘as pleaded’ or ‘as alleged’ by the claimant. [...]
Second, it then requires the tribunal to determine whether the facts pleaded by the claimant
‘fairly raise questions of breach’ or ‘may constitute possible breaches of one or more
substantive treaty provisions.”!!° Hence, it is for Claimants to characterize their case and
to show that breach of the BIT based on the alleged facts in question is “reasonably
arguable on its face” or “sufficiently serious to proceed to a full hearing on the merits” or

that they have “a reasonable possibility as pleaded.” !"!

125. Under the test thus set out, Claimants are of the view that the facts they allege are capable
of resulting in a breach of the BIT, namely the prohibition of direct and indirect

expropriations without compensation in Article 4 of the BIT, the fair and equitable

109 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 68; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 66 (both quoting SGS Société Générale
de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdiction (29 January 2004), para. 157 (AL RA 25)). See also Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,
paras. 62-65.

110 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 68 (emphases in the original).

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 64 (quoting Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures (21 March
2007), para. 91 (CL-050), and Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Co. v. The Republic of Ecuador, PCA
Case No. 2009-23, UNCITRAL, Third Interim Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility (27 February 2012) Part
IV, p. 2, paras. 4.7, 4.8 (CL -052)).

  

44

126.

127.

128.

treatment standard in Article 2(1) of the BIT, and the national treatment standard in Article

3(1) of the BIT."!” In Claimants’ view, their claims therefore fulfill the prima facie test.!'3

Claimants also reject Respondent’s qualification of the alleged facts as constituting a
contract claim. First, they dispute Respondent’s qualification of the License granted to
ENJASA as a contract; instead they argue that the License was granted unilaterally by an
administrative act of the Executive Branch of the Province of Salta under public law.!!*
Second, rather than constituting an exercise of a contractual right by the Province, the
revocation of the License was, Claimants contend, an exercise of public authority by

ENREJA in the exercise of its statutory powers under Law No. 7020.!!°

Third, Claimants point out that they are not asking for relief under the License or any
(other) contractual arrangements, but consider that the facts alleged qualify as a breach of
the BIT. In particular, they argue that the License was not revoked for a legitimate public
purpose, but as a result of a “coordinated action of ENREJA and the Government of Salta”
through the use of “orchestrated administrative proceedings.”!'® For Claimants, these
administrative proceedings had the sole purpose of ousting ENJASA from the operation of
gaming facilities and lottery activities under its exclusive license and to redistribute
ENJASA operations to other operators under conditions more favorable for the Province
of Salta. In Claimants’ view, the revocation of ENJASA’s license through Resolution No.
240/13 was only a pretext; it was not based on legitimate grounds.” It was taken in breach
of domestic law and in violation of due process, of the principle of proportionality, and of

the prohibition to apply regulatory requirements retroactively.!'*

As a result of the revocation of ENJASA’s license and the subsequent transfer of its

operations to new operators, Claimants argue, their investment in Argentina was destroyed

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 66-88; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 74-78; Claimants’ Post-Hearing
Brief, para. 124-157.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 137, 145, 157 and 174.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 99-103.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 104-119; 158-173.
Memorial on the Merits, paras. 320 and 322.

See Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 85-95.

See Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 123.

45

129.

130.

131.

and their assets transferred to other operators.'!? Furthermore, none of the new operators
were subject to the same conditions that had been applied to ENJASA; the new operators
also did not have to participate in a comparable public tender; their operations were also
not subject to similar harassment and reviews of their compliance with anti-money
laudering regulations. Finally, the new operators were awarded new operating licenses
although some of them had been participants in what ENREJA had considered as an

unlawful hiring of operators by ENJASA.'2°

These facts, Claimants allege, constitute (1) a (direct and indirect) expropriation of their
investment without compensation in violation of Article 4 of the BIT, '21 (2) a breach of the
fair and equitable treatment standard, in particular its requirements of transparency,
stability and protection of legitimate expectations, procedural propriety and due process,

good faith, and freedom from coercion and harassment, '??

and (3) a breach of national
treatment in light of the more favorable treatment the new operators had received as

compared to ENJASA.!?3

(ii) The forum selection clauses do not bar jurisdiction
Claimants also counter Respondent’s argument that the forum selection clauses in favor of
the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the Province of Salta, contained in Article 8.3 of
the Bidding Terms and Conditions and in Article 13.1 of the Transfer Agreement,
constitute a bar to the jurisdiction of the present Tribunal. Claimants forward two

arguments in this respect. !74

First, Claimants point out that these forum selection clauses do not apply ratione personae

to the parties to the present proceedings. They only apply to disputes between the Province

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 120-122.

See Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 86-88.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 68-83; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 124-137.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 84-85; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 138-145.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 86-88; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 146-157.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 89-98; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 79-89; Claimants’ Post-Hearing
Brief, para. 189.

46

132.

133.

134.

126

12

12

129

of Salta and the UTE, that is, CAIH, Boldt S.A, and Iberlux Int. S.A., and Claimants as

their successors. '°

Second, Claimants argue that the forum selection clauses do not apply ratione materiae to
the dispute at hand because the dispute before the Tribunal “does not relate to the Bidding
Terms and Conditions, the performance of the licence and the transfer of ENJASA’s shares.
Rather, it relates to the Argentine Republic’s breaches of obligations under international
law and, in particular, the BIT.” !?6 To this end, Claimants point out that the revocation of
the License was a regulatory act which took place in the exercise of ENREJA’s police
powers. !?7 In Claimants’ view, the revocation of the License was therefore clearly not of a
contractual nature. Moreover, the reference in the Bidding Terms and Conditions and the
Transfer Agreement to the need for the licensee to comply with the obligations stipulated

in Law No. 7020 did not make the revocation of the License a contractual matter.

In addition, Claimants point out that the practice of arbitral tribunals in investment treaty
arbitrations confirms that “[a]s a general rule, a forum selection clause in a contract with
the host state does not bar the submission of claims pursuant to the dispute resolution clause
of an international investment protection treaty.”!?8 In this context, Claimants refer to

decisions by arbitral tribunals rendered against both Respondent and other States. '??

B. Respondent consented validly to the present proceedings under
Article 8 of the BIT

Claimants also contend that they validly accepted Respondent’s offer to arbitrate under

Article 8 of the BIT. To this effect, they argue that strict compliance with the various

procedural requirements of Article 8 “is not a condition for the validity of the Parties’

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 90; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 86.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 91.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 80-81.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 94-97.

Claimants make reference to CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.

ARB/O1/8, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (17 July 2003), para. 76 (AL RA 13); Compafiia
de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/3,
Decision on Annulment (3 July 2002), para. 101 (AL RA 22); and Camuzzi International S.A. v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/2, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (11 May 2005), para. 112 (CL-082),
as well as to a large number of tribunal decisions in cases against other respondents).

47

consent to arbitration.” '*° Instead, for Claimants, compliance with Article 8 of the BIT

raises merely questions of admissibility. '*!

135. For Claimants, the dispute arose with the passing of Resolution No. 240/13, not with
Resolution No. 315/13. In this light, Claimants argue that they complied with the
requirement to engage in amicable consultations under Article 8(1) of the BIT prior to
submitting the dispute to domestic administrative authorities under Article 8(2) of the BIT,
and that they obtained in those administrative proceedings a decision on the merits that
allowed them to access international arbitration pursuant to Article 8(3) of the BIT.
Claimants therefore contend that they did not violate the sequence of procedural steps
required under Article 8(1) through (3) of the BIT. Claimants add that recourse to any other
domestic remedy, as suggested by the Repondent, was either not possible or futile.
Claimants also argue that Article 8(4) of the BIT, which requires the withdrawal of
proceedings before domestic courts once the international arbitral tribunal is installed, does

not constitute a bar to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

136. In the alternative, Claimants point out that by now ENJASA’s judicial claim against
Resolution No. 315/13 had been pending undecidedly in the courts of Salta for more than
18 months. Moreover, the MEN clause in Article 3 of the BIT would grant them jurisdiction

anyway.

150 Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 91.

‘5! Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 194 (invoking Urbaser S.A. et al. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/07/26, Decision on Jurisdiction (19 December 2012), para. 192 (AL RA 41); Abaclat and Others v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility (4 August 2011),
paras. 582-583 (CL-131); Teinver S.A. et al. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on
Jurisdiction (21 December 2012), para. 135 (CL-137); TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/5, Award (19 December 2008), para. 112 (AL RA 158); Giovanni Alemanni and Others
v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/8, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility (17 November
2014), para. 317 (CL-149); Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/O1/13, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (6 August 2003), para. 184 (CL-009);
yyindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret ve Sanayi A.§. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29,
Decision on Jurisdiction (14 November 2005), paras. 99-100 (CL-013); Ethyl Corporation v. Canada,
UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction (24 June 1998), p. 42, para. 84 (CL-132)).

 

 

 
 

48

137.

138.

139.

140.

(i) Compliance with the requirement for amicable consultations (Article 8(1)

of the BIT)
Claimants first point out that Article 8(1) of the BIT only requires to engage in amicable
consultations “as far as possible”. This indicates that the BIT does not require

unconditional consultations. '*?

Claimants also consider that they complied with the consultation requirement under
different perspectives. Claimants contend that the meeting on 27 August 2013 between Mr.
Tucek of CAI and representatives of the Province of Salta, during which a solution to the
dispute was attempted, already qualified as a start of amicable consultations; it was
followed by further meetings between these parties.'*? Given that the conduct of the
Province of Salta was attributable to Respondent under international law, negotiations
conducted with the Province should be considered, Claimants argue, as negotiations

between Claimants and Respondent. '*+

Claimants further contend that CAI’s letter to the Argentine Republic of 30 April 2014,
followed by seven further letters sent to the Argentine Republic and the Governor of the

Province of Salta, also continued the consultations. !*>

Claimants also argue that their efforts at finding a negotiated solution of the dispute were
genuine.'*° Respondent’s arguments to the contrary, in particular in connection with the
correspondence and contact with Mr. Wajntraub, in Claimants’ view, did not show

otherwise, as Mr. Wajntraub allegedly had not engaged in constructive discussions.

 

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 107-123 (still relying on a slightly different translation of Article 8(1)
of the Argentina-Austria BIT into English which stated “whenever possible”); Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras.
95-108; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 196-252.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 223-233.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 239-242.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 235.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 238.

49

141.

142.

(ii) Compliance with requirement to submit the dispute to a domestic
jurisdiction (Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT)

Claimants further contend that they fulfilled their obligation under Article 8(2) of the BIT
to submit the dispute to the competent administrative or judicial jurisdiction.'*” They assert
that ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration of Resolution No. 240/13 was a recourse to
the competent administrative jurisdiction.'** In this context, Claimants point out that
“competent administrative jurisdiction” is a term which the BIT — unlike most other BITs
to which either Argentina or Austria are party — specifically mentions. Furthermore,
Claimants assert that the amicable consultations started before the dispute was submitted.
Yet, as they only were required under Article 8(2) of the BIT to conduct amicable
consultations “as far as possible” before submitting the dispute to the domestic authorities,
they were not required to consult for full six months given that the Recourse for
Reconsideration had to be introduced under domestic law within 15 days after the passing
of Resolution No. 240/13. In such circumstances, Claimants argue, the six-months

consultation period could not be viewed as a mandatory waiting period. '*°

Claimants further point out that in ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration the same
issues as those in the present arbitration were raised.'#° For Claimants, the dispute raised
in ENJASA’s adminstrative recourse was, for purposes of compliance with Article 8(2)
and (3) of the BIT, the same dispute as the one pending in the present arbitration. By
contrast, in Claimants’ view, if the scope of a dispute were construed “as narrow as
proposed by the Argentine Republic, [this] would mean that a resort to domestic
administrative jurisdiction could never, or only in exceptional circumstances, resolve an
investment dispute. This result would be contrary to the text, context and object and
purpose of Article 8 [of the] BIT.”!*! In other words, Article 8 of the BIT does not require,

Claimants contend, that a completely identical dispute, covering the same parties and the

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 132-136; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 109-126; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, paras. 253-288.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 113; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 264-272.

 

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 114.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 114-118; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 256-263.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 115.

50

143.

144.

145.

same causes of action as the one before the present Tribunal, had to be submitted to the
competent domestic administrative or judicial authorities. All that Article 8 of the BIT
required is that “the pleaded facts are substantially similar and concern the same protected
investment.” '*? In this context, Claimants refer to arbitral jurisprudence, including in
particular decisions on jurisdiction in Philip Morris v. Uruguay and Teinver v. Argentina,

to confirm their position. '*7

Claimants also point out that ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration already had referred

to the Argentina-Austria BIT. '##

Claimants further argue that they complied with Article 8(3) of the BIT, which allows to
proceed to international arbitration either if no decision on the merits has been reached
within 18 months, as stipulated in Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT, or once a decision on the
merits was rendered, but the dispute persists, as stipulated in Article 8(3)(b) of the BIT.

The latter, in Claimants’ view, happened with Resolution No. 315/13, '45

which they view
as a “decision on the merits” on ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration against
Resolution No. 240/13. The fact that Resolution No. 315/13 could still be appealed, in turn,
did not alter this situation. In this context, in Claimants’ opinion, Respondent confuses the
notion of a “decision on the merits,” as required by Article 8(3) of the BIT, and the notion

of a “final”, that is, an unappealable, decision. 146

(iii) Claimants respected the sequence of procedural steps under Article 8 of the
BIT

In response to Respondent’s argument that Article 8 of the BIT required that the different

procedural requirements (i.e., consultation, submission to domestic authorities, and finally

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 258.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 118 (citing Philip Morris Brands SARL et al. v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7, Decision on Jurisdiction (2 July 2013), paras. 105, 106, 110, 113 (CL-134); Teinver
S.A. etal. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Jurisdiction (21 December 2012), para.
132 (CL-137)); Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 260-262.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 136.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 137-138; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 130-139; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, paras. 289-294.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 130-132.

51

146.

147.

148.

147

148

149

international arbitration) be followed in sequence, Claimants submit that the deadlines
under Argentine domestic law had to be taken into account. Thus, if Article 8(2) of the BIT
required domestic recourses, such recourses must be understood to be had “in accordance
with the applicable time-limits and procedures under domestic law: if the domestic law and
procedures are not respected, any domestic remedy is futile.” '” Similarly, if domestic law
required the initiation of remedies within certain time limits, it would be non-sensical to
require that consultations under Article 8(1) be conducted beforehand for as a long as six

months, as stipulated in Article 8(2) of the BIT.

Claimants put the dilemma Respondent’s interpretation of Article 8 of the BIT creates as

follows:

Accepting, for the sake of argument, the Argentine Republic’s allegations, Claimants
could have never fulfilled both the requirement to engage in amicable consultations
and to resort to the domestic administrative authorities or courts. Had Claimants not
filed a recourse within 15 days from the revocation of the licence, all further domestic
remedies would have been barred. On the other hand, the compliance with the 15-days
deadline would, in the Argentine Republic’s view, “contaminate” amicable

consultations. The Argentine Republic construed a catch-22 situation. '*

All in all, Claimants argue that they have taken all procedural steps required under
Argentine law to contest the revocation of ENJASA’s license and to enforce their rights
under the BIT. If compliance with the domestic recourse requirement sits squarely with a
strict reading of Article 8 of the BIT, requiring compliance with the latter, in Claimants’

view, would constitute bad faith. 149

(iv) Recourse to domestic courts as suggested by Respondent is either impossible
or futile
In addition, and arguendo that the dispute as submitted to the present Tribunal had to be

fully identical in terms of the parties, the subject-matter and the causes of action to the

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 297.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 141.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 139-142.

52

dispute submitted to a domestic administrative or judicial jurisdiction, Claimants argue that
Argentina’s domestic legal system did not provide for any such recourse.'°° Claimants
instead argue that each of the domestic procedural options Respondent listed to this effect
was unable to grant the compensation Claimants are seeking for breach of the BIT through

the present arbitration.

149. Furthermore, even assuming that an Argentine court had jurisdiction to hear a damages
claim based on the breach of the Argentina-Austria BIT, Claimants point out that it would
be futile for them to pursue such a claim. Invoking the decisions on jurisdiction in Urbaser
v. Argentina and Abaclat v. Argentina, as well as a study prepared by the Treasury
Attorney-General Office of the Argentine Republic, Claimants argue that “there is no
realistic possibility of securing a court decision on damages claims within 18 months in the
Argentine Republic.”!*! To require Claimants nevertheless to pursue such remedies would
not meet the very purpose of the requirement in question, which is identical to the raison
d’étre of the requirement to exhaust local remedies, namely to give the local courts an

occasion to provide a remedy. '*?

(v) Article 8(4) of the BIT does not bar jurisdiction
150. Claimants also reject Respondent’s argument that Article 8(4) of the BIT, which requires
the withdrawal of domestic proceedings in case of recourse to international arbitration,
operates as a bar to the jurisdiction of the present Tribunal.'** In Claimants’ view, the
obligation to withdraw does not exist before commencing international arbitration
proceedings; on the contrary, the “initiation of arbitration proceedings is a prerequisite for

the obligation to take all measures to withdraw the pending judicial claim.” '** Furthermore,

‘50 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 143-165; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 159-195; Claimants’ Post-

Hearing Brief, paras. 330-386.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 196-205 (quote at para. 196) (citing Urbaser S.A. et al. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/07/26, Decision on Jurisdiction (19 December 2012), para. 192 (AL RA 41); and Abaclat
and Others v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility (4
August 2011), paras, 582-583 (CL-131)); Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 387-394; Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction, paras, 166-175.

 

 

 

‘2 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 387-389.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 144-158; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 401-408.
1s.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 150; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 402.

53

151.

159

any such obligation could only arise once the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal was
confirmed. Otherwise, given that a withdrawal of ENJASA’s domestic proceedings would
be with prejudice, Claimants would risk losing both their domestic recourse and their
recourse to international arbitration if the arbitral tribunal was to decline jurisdiction.!°°
This would be contrary to the stated purposes of the Argentina-Austria BIT to afford

protection to foreign investors. '*°

(vi) First alternative: A dispute has now been pending in domestic courts for 18

months without decision on the merits
In the first alternative, Claimants point out that even if the Tribunal were to find that
ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration against Resolution No. 240/13 did not comply
with Article 8(2) of the BIT, ENJASA subsequently submitted, on 5 February 2014, an
Action for Annulment against Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13 in the domestic courts
in Salta.'*” This Action, Claimants point out, has been pending without decision for more
than 18 months now. Relying on several arbitral decisions, for Claimants it is at the time
the Tribunal renders a decision on jurisdiction that any pre-arbitral procedural requirement
had to be fulfilled; the non-fulfilment of any such requirement at the time the arbitration
proceedings were started, by contrast, was not an obstacle to a positive finding of
jurisdicion.'** Cases relied upon by Respondent, which declined jurisdiction for non-
compliance with the requirement to litigate in domestic courts for 18 months, such as
Wintershall v. Argentina, Impregilo v. Argentina, Daimler v. Argentina, and ICS v.
Argentina, in turn, should be distinguished as in none of those cases had claimants, or their

local subsidiaries, actually initiated any domestic proceedings at all.'°? After all, in

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 151-157; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 403-406.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 152.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 140; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 395-400.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 141 (relying on Sergei Paushok, CJSC Golden East Company and CISC
Vostokneftegaz Company v. The Government of Mongolia, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction and Liability (28
April 2011), para. 220 (CL-151); Philip Morris Brands SARL et al. v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/10/7, Decision on Jurisdiction (2 July 2013), para. 144 (CL-134); Teinver S.A. et al. v. Argentine

 

Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Jurisdiction (21 December 2012), para. 135 (CL-137); and
Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award (24 July

2008), para. 343 (CL-031)).
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 141 (distinguishing Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID

Case No. ARB/04/14, Award (8 December 2008), paras. 8, 18.3, and 156 (AL RA 38); Impregilo S.p.A. v.

54

Claimants’ view, it would make little sense and be inefficient for the Tribunal to decline
jurisidiction on this ground since Claimants could immediately resubmit their case to

arbitration as the 18 months of litigating in domestic courts had now expired.

(vii) Second alternative: Jurisdiction based on the MFN clause in Article 3 of the

BIT
152. Should the Tribunal find any non-compliance with Article 8 of the BIT to bar jurisdiction,
Claimants invoke, in the second alternative, the MFN clause in Article 3 of the Argentina-
Austria BIT as a basis for jurisdiction. Under this clause, Claimants consider to be entitled
to the same favorable treatment in terms of dispute settlement as Danish investors under
the BIT between Argentina and Denmark. Under Article 9(2) of that treaty, no prior

recourse to local courts or administrative authorities for 18 months was necessary.'®

153. In response to Respondent's first objection regarding MEN treatment, Claimants argue that
their invocation of the MFN clause in the Argentina-Austria BIT was timely. It occurred,
they point out, in their first submission following Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction
(i.e., Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction), as required by Rule 31(3) of the

ICSID Arbitration Rules. '°!

154. Claimants further argue, in response to Respondent’s second objection regarding MFN
treatment, that the term “treatment” in Article 3 of the Argentina-Austria BIT was
sufficiently wide to ““encompas[s] any conduct of the host State that affects the investor’s
investment, which includes its access to dispute settlement.”! For Claimants, this

interpretation is confirmed by the fact that Article 3(2) of the BIT explicitly excluded from

Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Award (21 June 2011), paras. 13-48, 94 (AL RA 46); Daimler
Financial Services AG y. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O5/1, Award (22 August 2012), paras. 190-
191 (AL RA 96); and ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited (United Kingdom) v. Argentine Republic, PCA
Case No. 2010-9, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction (10 February 2012), para. 269 (AL RA 40)).
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 176-185; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras, 206-229; Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, paras. 412-442.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 216-221; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 414-421 (reyling on RosinvestCo
UK Lid. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V 079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction (October 2007), para. 53
(CL-156)).

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 224; Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 183; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief,
para. 429,

  

 

162

55

155.

156.

157.

MEN treatment benefits arising under a customs union, a common market, and similar
projects of regional economic integration, benefits in the area of taxation, regulations to
facilitate border traffic, and specific benefits for preferential financing granted under

Argentina’s BITs with Italy and Spain. '

Finally, Claimants point to the “prevailing practice” in investment treaty arbitration under
which “the most favoured treatment also applies to dispute settlement and, in particular, to
procedural obstacles (such as the requirement to resort to local courts or administrative
authorities for a fixed period of time).”! Contrary decisions were, in Claimants’ view,
99165

either “driven by the particularities of the case

BITs.!°°

or were based on differently worded

Cc. Jurisdiction ratione materiae
Claimants also counter Respondent’s third objection concerning the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
ratione materiae. They contend they had made an investment in Argentina both in the sense
of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and under Article 1 of the BIT. Claimants argue
that the BIT is not limited to the protection of their rights as shareholders in L&E or
ENJASA, but that the protection of the BIT extends to the assets of ENJASA, including
most importantly its exclusive license. Furthermore, Claimants consider the present dispute

to arise directly out of their investment in Argentina.

(i) Claimants’ investment in the Province of Salta
Claimants point out that they “were engaged in a complex investment operation” in
Argentina.!°’ This operation consisted of a variety of directly and indirectly held assets in
Argentina, including Claimants’ shares in L&E, their indirect ownership of ENJASA
(through L&E), as well as the rights held, and operations conducted, by ENJASA. The

latter included, most importantly, ENJASA exclusive license to operate games of chance

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 183; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 433-434,
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 181.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 436.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 430-431 (discussing Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award (22 August 2012), para. 224 (AL RA 96)).

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 6; similarly, Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 17.

56

in the Province of Salta, which was the basis for operating four casinos, fifteen slot machine

halls, and fourteen lottery games, with a total of approximately 750 employees. '*

158. Furthermore, Claimants point out that, in line with the investment plan that was part of the
public tender for acquiring ENJASA, they had invested more than USD 20 million in the
construction of a five-star hotel in Salta, sponsored two schools for hotel trade and
gastronomy, and established the ENJASA Foundation.'® The latter had as its objective,
inter alia, “the promotion and research of cultural, tourist, hotel and gourmet activities in
the province of Salta and the region to achieve its national [and] international

expansion.”!7°

159. It is these activities as a whole that Claimants present as their investment, in economic and

legal terms. Consequently, Respondent’s

attempt to separate the licence from the other assets belonging to Claimants’ investment
has no merit. ENJASA’s licence was an essential part of Claimants’ investment
operation, forming an organic unit. The investment operation was only possible on the
basis of the exclusive gaming and lottery licence granted to ENJASA by the Province
of Salta pursuant to Decree No. 2126/1999. The licence was the conditio sine qua non

of the investment. !7!

(ii) Claimants’ activities qualify as an investment under Article 25(1) of the

ICSID Convention and under Article 1 of the BIT
160. Their engagement in Argentina constitutes, Claimants argue, an investment in the sense of
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. It meets, Claimants explain, all of the so-called

Salini characteristics, including the need for a certain duration, regularity of profits and

168

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 30.

‘Memorial on the Merits, paras. 121-133; Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 30.
170 Memorial on the Merits, para. 132.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 34 (internal citation omitted). Similarly, Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief,
para. 16 (“The entire investment operation of Claimants in the Argentine Republic was inseparably connected to
ENJASA’s exclusive licence. Without ENJASA’s licence, the operation of gaming and lottery business was not
possible. The licence was the conditio sine qua non of ENJASA’s existence and operation.”).

s7

161.

162.

163.

164.

17

17

17

returns, the assumption of risk, the making of a substantial commitment, and a contribution

to the development of the host State.!””

Claimants further argue that several assets that formed part of their complex operation
qualify as investments under Article 1 of the BIT, such as their shareholdings and

participations in ENJASA and L&E.'?

In addition, Claimants consider that ENJASA’s license and “all assets constituting the
economic value of the shares of [ENJASA and L&E]” qualify as investments in the sense
of Article 1(1) of the BIT. '4 ENJASA’s license, Claimants argue, qualifies as an
investment pursuant to Article 1(1)(e) given that the BIT protected assets “in any sector of
the economy.”!”> Other assets of ENJASA and L&E were also protected under the BIT,
Claimants contend, as “[i]t follows from the broad definition of the term investment in the
BIT that the treaty not only protects shareholdings and any form of participation, but all

assets constituting the economic value of the shares.”!7°

The distinction Respondent attempts to make in this respect between the rights of the
company, and the rights of its shareholders, in Claimants’ view, is relevant only for the
protection of shareholders under customary international law, but had been superseded by
BITs.'”’ As consistently held by investment treaty tribunals, under BITs, “[s]hareholder
protection extends from the ownership of shares to an action that affects the economic
value of the shares because it affects the assets held by the corporation.” !”’ Consequently,
Claimants contend, their standing is not limited to bringing claims for breaches of their

shareholder rights.

(iii) Article 4(3) of the BIT confirms the wide scope of protection
Claimants further point out that Article 4(3) of the BIT specifically confirmed that the

protection of shareholders in locally incorporated companies extended beyond their

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 37; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 17-26.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras, 24-27; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 34-41.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 30.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 31-32.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 42.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 30-41; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 44-45.
Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, para. 30.

58

165.

166.

167.

168.

shareholding, and included assets held by the company. According to that provision,
Claimants argue, shareholders were protected against the direct and indirect expropriation

of assets held by a locally incorporated company.

As to the difference in the wording of the Spanish and German versions of the Argentina-
Austria BIT, Claimants argue that the use of the Spanish term “activos financieros” was
“in all likelihood, a translation mistake and the two authentic language versions, although
using a different term, both mean to protect all assets and not just financial assets.”!7° In

Claimants’ view:

the term “activos financieros” does not mean assets used in financial activities (such as
banking), but rather assets having a financial value and thus being part of an
investment. This interpretation is corroborated both by the immediate context of the
term, a provision granting (financial) compensation for expropriation, as well as by the
larger context of a treaty granting protection for any asset invested in any sector of the
economy. !®°

Also the object and purpose of the treaty, Claimants continue, suggested no reason to limit

Article 4(3) of the BIT to the protection of a narrow class of assets,!*!

in particular
considering that the German version of the BIT used the same term (“Vermégenswerte”)

in Article 1 of the BIT to refer to assets that qualify as protected “investments” in general.

Apart from that, Claimants point out, any question as to the precise scope of protection of

shareholders under the BIT concerned the merits of the dispute, not jurisdiction. '**

(iv) The dispute arises directly out of the investment
Finally, Claimants argue that the dispute arises directly out of their investment in
Argentina. Article 25 ICSID Convention required a relation between the dispute and the
investment; not a direct ownership of the investment.'** The relationship between dispute

and investment was met, as Claimants point out: the revocation of the License effectively

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 52. See extensively also Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 46-60.
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 53.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 54.

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 27 and 29; Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 57.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 57.

59

VI.

169.

170.

171.

destroyed Claimants’ entire investment in the gaming and lottery sector in the Province of

Salta.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

As provided for in Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention, “[t]he Tribunal shall be the
judge of its own competence.” It therefore falls upon it to assess whether the present dispute
is within the jurisdiction of the Centre as laid down in Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention and whether the jurisdictional requirements under the Argentina-Austria BIT
are met. In addition, the Tribunal will consider whether admissibility-related
considerations suggest rejecting Claimants’ claims, in whole or in part, at the present stage

of the proceedings.

The Tribunal will first address whether Claimants’ involvement in the gaming and lottery
sector in Salta qualifies as an “investment” in the sense of both Article 1 of the BIT and
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention (i.e., part of Respondent’s third objection that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae). It will then assess, as a matter of the
admissibility of the proceedings, whether Claimants have been able to show the existence
of a prima facie claim (i.e., Respondent’s first objection and remaining issues of her third
objection). Finally, the Tribunal will determine whether the Parties’ have validly consented
to the present proceedings under Article 8 of the Argentina-Austria BIT (i.e., Respondent’s

second objection).

As should be almost unnecessary to state, in interpreting the ICSID Convention and the
Argentina-Austria BIT, the Tribunal applies the rules on treaty interpretation laid down in
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which is binding upon both the Argentine
Republic and the Republic of Austria.'** These rules — and the interpretive canons flowing
from them — are well-known and do not need to be further expounded in the abstract. They
imply that the content of treaty rights and obligations are objectively ascertained by all
members of an international tribunal in full judicial independence and _ neutrality.

Specifically for investment treaties, this means that interpretation is not to be guided by

'84 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969) (CL-001).

60

interpretive presumptions in favor of either investors and their home States or of host
States, nor by teleological preferences about investor-State relations that are extrinsic to

the treaty commitments made in the present case. !*°

172. Furthermore, the Tribunal notes that, in its analysis of the governing law, it is not limited
to the arguments or sources invoked by the Parties, but is required, under the maxim iura
novit curia or, better, iura novit arbiter, to apply the law on its own motion. This approach
corresponds to the Tribunal’s public function as an adjudicatory body that is part of the
administration of international justice. It justifies reliance on arguments and authorities on
the governing law not submitted by the Parties, provided the latter are given an opportunity

to comment on arguments and legal theories that were either not addressed or could not

 

reasonably be anticipated.!*® It also justifies that the Tribunal treats Respondent’s

185 Although the Vienna Convention ties the interpretation of international treaties to objective criteria, namely the

principle of good faith and recourse to the text, context, and object and purpose of the treaty and, under certain
circumstances, its travaux préparatoires, its rules on treaty interpretation are far from always leading the
interpreter to only one possible and cogent solution. Instead, the Vienna Convention’s rules on treaty
interpretation often enough have the effect that reasonable arbitrators may reasonably disagree on the construction
of treaty provisions. These disagreements result from the vagaries and indeterminacies inherent to using language
to lay down rights and obligations in international treaties; they may relate to differences in pre-understanding or
in weighing the respective interpretive canons. Consequently, the majority of the Tribunal respects that the
senting arbitrator has come to different conclusions on the construction of the Argentina-Austria BIT based on
his understanding of the hermeneutic exercise at stake. However, to ascribe differences in construction to
“manifest reckless misinterpretations and erroneous application of the relevant pro 8,” to criticize that “the
motives of the Decision look like the plea of a party,” or to denote reasons given as “g¢ r
the Dissent does (see Dissent, paras. 191, 151, 163 and 143 respectively), in the majority’s view, fails to appreciate
the nuances and difficulties an hermeneutic enterprise, such as the interpretation of international treaties, entails.
See Lighthouse Corporation Pty Ltd And Lighthouse Corporation Ltd, IBC v. Democratic Republic of Timor-
Leste, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/2, Award (22 December 2017), para. 109 (“When applying the governing law,
the Tribunal is not bound by the arguments or sources invoked by the Parties. Under the maxim iura novit curia
— or, better, iwra novit arbiter — the Tribunal is required to apply the law of its own motion, provided always that
it gives the Parties’ an opportunity to comment if it intends to base its decision on a legal theory that was not
addressed and that the Parties could not reasonably anticipate.”) (citing to Daimler Financial Services A.G. v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Decision on Annulment (7 January 2015), para. 295 (“[...] an
arbitral tribunal is not limited to referring to or relying upon only the authorities cited by the parties. It can, sua
sponte, rely on other publicly available authorities, even if they have not been cited by the parties, provided that
the ie has been raised before the tribunal and the parties were provided an opportunity to address it”); Fisheries
Jurisdiction Case (Federal Republic of Germany v. Iceland), Merits, Judgment (25 July 1974), para. 18 (“Lilt
being the duty of the Court itself to ascertain and apply the relevant law in the given circumstances of the case,
the burden of establishing or proving rules of international law cannot be imposed upon any of the Parties, for the
law lies within the judicial knowledge of the Court”); Albert Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v. The
Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Award (23 April 2012), para. 141; Metal-Tech Ltd. v. Republic of Uzbekistan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/3, Award (4 October 2013), para. 287); similarly Mr. Jiirgen Wirtgen, Mr. Stefan
Wirtgen, Mrs. Gisela Wirtgen, JSW Solar (zwei) GmbH & Co. KG v. The Czech Republic, PCA Case No. 2014-
03, Final Award (11 October 2017), para. 179.

 

   

     

18

 
 

   

 

61

objections in a different order than they were raised and that the Tribunal requalifies
objections relating to the scope of protection of shareholder-investors under the BIT, in
accordance with its assessment of the requirements for jurisdiction and admissibility under

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and the Argentina-Austria BIT.

1. Existence of a Protected Investment

173. One aspect of Respondent’s objection that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae
concerns the question whether Claimants have made an investment in Argentina that is
protected under both the ICSID Convention and the Argentina-Austria BIT.'*’ This aspect
of Respondent’s objection has shifted over the course of the written and oral arguments,
posing certain difficulties in grasping which aspects of this objections are still upheld — or
have been dropped — during the Hearing on jurisdiction and/or in Respondent’s Post-
Hearing Brief. In light of these difficulties, and given that the Tribunal has to determine,
objectively and independently of a Party’s objection, its own jurisdiction, all possible
aspects of Respondent’s objections relating to the lack of a protected investment are

hereafter addressed.

174. Respondent’s objection that Claimants have not made a protected investment can be
understood: first, as an objection that Claimants have not made an “investment” in
Argentina in the sense of Article 1 of the Argentina-Austria BIT; second, that Claimants

have not made an “investment” in the sense of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention;'**

‘87 The other aspect of Respondent's third objection that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae because of

limits the BIT imposes for the protection of shareholder-investors, in the Tribunal’s view, does not, properly
understood, concern a question of jurisdiction ratione materiae, but concerns the scope of the substantive
protections the BIT grants to shareholder-investors. This is a question pertaining to the merits of the claim. At the
present stage of the any limi on the ive scope of is only relevant to the extent
it results in the lack of a prima facie claim. See infra Section V1.2.

Whether Claimants have made an “investment” in the sense of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and whether
their involvement in Argentina qualifie: in “investment” under Article 1 of the Argentina-Austria BIT, are
conceptually separate, even though in substance the notions of “investment” in both instruments will overlap to a
large extent. In addition, both concepts relate to two separate jurisdictional issues. The concept of “investment”
in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention constitutes one of the express jurisdictional elements under Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention. The concept of “investment” in the sense of Article | of the Argentina-Austria
BIT is relevant for determining the scope of Respondent's consent under Article 8 of the Argentina-Austria BIT
ratione materiae. See Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/Q7/20, Award (14 July 2010),
para. 108 (stating that “the Tribunal considers that the notion of investment, which is one of the conditions to be
satisfied for the Centre to have jurisdiction, cannot be defined simply through a reference to the parties’ consent,

   

 

18

  
 

  

 

 

62

175.

176.

177.

1

and third, as questioning whether the dispute before the Tribunal directly arises out of an

investment as required by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Claimants, in turn, have identified a number of different assets that, in their view, suggest
they have made an investment in Argentina that qualifies as such under both Article 1 of
the Argentina-Austria BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. These assets

encompass:

i. Claimants’ 60% shareholding in L&E and (through L&E) its
shareholding in ENJASA; 189

ii. the assets held and operations conducted by ENJASA with the
help of approx. 750 employees, which included 4 casinos, 15

slot machine halls, and 14 lottery operations; and
iii. the exclusive operating license of ENJASA.

Against this background, the Tribunal will first address to which extent Claimants have
made an “investment” in the sense of Article 1 of the Argentina-Austria BIT. It will then
analyze to which extent Claimants have made an “investment” in the sense of Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention and, finally, turn to whether the present dispute “arises directly

out of that investment.”

A. Existence of an “investment” under Article 1 of the Argentina-
Austria BIT

In the Tribunal’s view, Claimants’ (direct) 60% shareholding in L&E and its (indirect)
shareholding in ENJASA (via L&E) qualify as an investment in the sense of Article 1(1)(b)

which is a distinct condition for the Centre's jurisdiction. The Tribunal believes that an objective definition of the
notion of investment was contemplated within the framework of the ICSID Convention, since certain terms of
Article 25 would otherwise be devoid of any meaning.”). These differences notwithstanding, both aspects of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction are dealt with together in the Tribunal’s analysis for purpose of efficiency, because the
Parties did not always distinguish between both concepts of “investment” with the necessary conceptual clarity.

 

Claimants do not, by contrast, claim protection for the 40% share in L&E that they purchased on 18 November
2013, that is, subsequently to the revocation of ENJASA’s license through Resolution No. 240/13. No claim for:
damages or other breach of Respondent’s obligations relating to this 40% share has been submitted to this
Tribunal. See Reply on Jurisdiction, para. 189; Hearing Transcript of 23 March 2017, pp. 110, 112, 113;
Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 25-39. Consequently, there is also no need to address Respondent’s
argument that Claimants’ claim in this respect is abusive (see supra para. 106).

63

178.

179.

180.

181.

of the Argentina-Austria BIT. This provision states, again indicating differences between

the Parties concerning translation, as follows:

The term “investment” means any kind of asset invested or reinvested in any sector of
the economic activity, provided the investment has been made in accordance with the
laws and regulations of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment is
made, and, in particular, though not exclusively: [...] shares [Respondent]/any
shareholding [Claimants] and any other form of participation in companies [...].

As the wording of this provision makes clear, Claimants’ (direct) shareholding in L&E

qualifies as an “investment” under the Argentina-Austria BIT.

Similarly, Claimants’ indirect shareholding in ENJASA via L&E qualifies as an
“investment” under the Argentina-Austria BIT. This becomes clear from how the structure

of Claimants’ shareholding in ENJASA developed historically.

To recall: Claimants’ involvement in the gaming and lottery sector in Salta and in the two
Argentine companies, L&E and ENJASA, was triggered by the privatization of the gaming
and lottery sector in the Province of Salta. At the start of that process, Claimants’
predecessor in right (the joint venture between CATH, Boldt S.A., and Iberlux Int. S.A.)
received, in 1999, a controlling share in ENJASA, a company that was fully owned by the
Province of Salta, but whose only (significant) asset at that time was the exclusive 30-year
operating license for gaming and lottery activities in Salta. This controlling share was
received against the commitment to pay an annual license fee, to invest in a five-star hotel
in Salta, to sponsor schools for hotel trade and gastronomy, and to establish a foundation
for the promotion of cultural activities and the tourism industry in the Province Salta. In
the implementation of their investment in the gaming and lottery sector in Salta, the
participants in the joint venture then decided to establish L&E as a holding company to
hold the shares in ENJASA. The shareholder structure in L&E corresponded to the
respective participation of the members of the joint venture. Without the interposition of
L&E, the participants in the joint venture, and later Claimants as their successor, would

have been direct shareholders in ENJASA.

Against this background, the shareholding in ENJASA was not principally one of L&E’s

assets; rather L&E was a vehicle to hold the shares in ENJASA, which were themselves

64

182.

183.

184.

the principal investment in Argentina. Consequently, it is clear that the indirect
shareholding in ENJASA was an investment of Claimants in Argentina, which their
predecessors in right first held through the structure of a joint venture and thereafter via
the Argentina-incorporated holding company L&E. For this reason, there is no reason not
to consider Claimants’ indirect shareholding in ENJASA as falling under the notion of
“shares [...] in a company” that qualify as a protected investment in Argentina in the sense

of Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT.

Consequently, as also Respondent accepts, !°° both Claimants’ direct shareholding in L&E
and their indirect shareholding in ENJASA qualify as “investments” under Article 1(1)(b)
of the Argentina-Austria BIT.

What is debated between the Parties, by contrast, is to which extent assets of ENJASA, in
particular its operating license, qualify as Claimants’ “investment” under the Argentina-
Austria BIT independently of Claimants’ shareholding in L&E and ENJASA. The issue
here is not whether an operating license in the abstract could qualify as an asset, and hence
as an investment, in the sense of Article 1(1) of the BIT, as it is not sufficient, for the
purpose of determining the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, that the License may be characterized
as an asset and fall under the definition of investment in the BIT. Instead, as rightly pointed
out by Respondent, in order for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction, the License must qualify
as an “investment” that is owned by an Austrian “investor”, as only investments of
investors of the other Contracting Party are protected under the Argentina-Austria BIT,
whereas investments of nationals of the host State, or of nationals of a third State, are not.
The question therefore is whether ENJASA’s operating license can be considered as

Claimants’ “investment” in the sense of Article 1(1) of the BIT.

In the Tribunal’s view, this is not the case. Even though ENJASA’s operating license was
the only significant asset ENJASA held at the time of the privatization in 1999/2000, and
although it was, from an economic perspective, the reason why the bidders in the public
tender were willing to make economically significant promises in return for becoming

shareholders in ENJASA, the operating license as such was an asset that belonged, already

190 See Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 123 (stating that “the Argentine Republic does not deny that a

shareholding may constitute an investment under the terms of the BIT”).

65

185.

186.

191

at the time of the public tender, to ENJASA. Different from the role of L&E, which was
created subsequently as a vehicle to hold the shares in ENJASA, the participants in the
privatization process did not bid for the 30-year operating license and later created
ENJASA to hold that license. They participated in the bid in order to become shareholders
of ENJASA. Unlike Claimants’ shareholding in ENJASA, which is held indirectly through
L&E, ENJASA’s license, therefore cannot be considered as an “investment” that is held
indirectly by Claimants through their (indirect) participation in ENJASA. The same holds
true for other assets owned by ENJASA; these as well do not qualify as “investments” that
are indirectly held by Claimants through their participation in ENJASA. Consequently, for
the Tribunal, ENJASA’s operating license and its other assets do not qualify as protected

“investments” themselves in the sense of Article 1(1) of the Argentina-Austria BIT.

This does not mean, however, that interferences with ENJASA’s assets are irrelevant for
Claimants’ rights as shareholder-investors protected under the BIT. Yet, the question to
which extent Claimants enjoy protection as (indirect) shareholders against interferences
with ENJASA’s assets, such as the revocation of its operating license and subsequent
events, is, in principle, an issue for the merits of the case. At the present jurisdictional stage,
and despite Respondent’s formulation as part of its objection that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction ratione materiae, the issue (i.e., the scope of protection of Claimants as
shareholder-investors) is only relevant in order to assess whether Claimants have
successfully presented a prima facie claim. This issue is discussed in connection with

Respondent’s objection that Claimants have failed to present a prima facie claim.!°!

B. Existence of an “investment” under Article 25(1) ICSID Convention
In the Tribunal’s view, Claimants’ involvement in the operation of gaming and lottery
activities in Salta through their participation in L&E and, indirectly, in ENJASA also
qualifies as an “investment” in the sense of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. In the
absence of a definition of this notion in the ICSID Convention, the precise contours of this
notion are debated, both in the jurisprudence of investment tribunals and in scholarly

writing. Debate exists in particular as to the precise elements or criteria that should be used

See infra Section V1.2.

66

187.

188.

189.

19

19.

to delineate economic activities undertaken, or assets held, by foreign nationals that qualify
as an “investment” in the sense of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention from those that

do not.!°

The starting point of the analysis is regularly the so-called Salini test.'°? According to this
test, an “investment” in the sense of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is characterized
by the following elements: (1) the existence of a substantial contribution by the foreign
national, (2) a certain duration of the economic activity in question, (3) the assumption of
tisk by the foreign national, and (4) the contribution of the activity to the host State’s

development. !*4

The first three Salini criteria are broadly accepted in ICSID practice and doctrine. They
help to circumscribe the type of economic activity or asset protected as an “investment”
and delineate it from non-protected activities or assets in relation to the risk certain forms
of economic involvement abroad entail. The specific risk in question arises out of the fact
that certain long-term forms of economic involvement in a host State (which are termed
“foreign investment”) require foreign nationals to place their economic activities and assets
upfront under the sovereign authority of the host State in order to recoup economic returns
over time. It is the investment-specific risk stemming from the non-synallagmatic nature
of investor-State relations that the ICSID Convention aims, if not to minimize, at least to
make more manageable by providing a mechanism for settling disputes between investors

and host States.

In this context, the first three Salini criteria help to circumscribe the activities and assets of
foreign nationals in host States that the ICSID Convention considers not only in need of
protection against political risk, but also worthy of access to its specific dispute settlement
mechanism. These three Salini criteria thus exclude non-economic activity and the non-

commercial use of assets of foreign nationals from the concept of “investment”. They also

See Christoph Schreuer, Loretta Malintoppi, August Reinisch and Anthony Sinclar, The ICSID Convention: A
Commentary (2nd edn., Cambridge University Press 2009), Article 25, paras. 113-174.

The test is named after Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade SpA v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction (23 July 2001), paras. 50-58 (CL-075).

Sometimes, the regularity of profits and returns is listed as an additional element. See Fedax N.V. v. The Republic
of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (11 July 1997),
para. 43 (CL-076).

67

190.

exclude short-term economic activity, or assets used in that context, such as one-time sales
transactions that do not face investment-specific risk, from access to dispute settlement
under the ICSID Convention. And finally, these three Salini criteria may exclude wholly
insignificant activities and assets that, while having a commercial value, do not amount to

a significant contribution to the host State’s economic life.

Quite controversial, however, is whether the activity undertaken, or the asset held, by a
foreign national also must fulfil the fourth criterion, that is, to contribute positively to the
development of the host State. This criterion is put forward by some ICSID tribunals and
annulment committees as a necessary component in light of the ICSID Convention’ s object
and purpose to contribute to economic development, as expressed in its Preamble. !*° Other
ICSID tribunals and annulment committees object to the inclusion of this criterion, inter
alia, because they consider it either as superfluous, as conferring too much discretion on
arbitral tribunals and thus creating legal uncertainty, or as limiting access of foreign
nationals to ICSID arbitration in light of aspects that should be assessed as part of the
merits, rather than jurisdiction, such as whether investments that are harmful to the host
State’s development receive substantive protection.!° Again other ICSID tribunals
consider that the contribution to the host State’s development, while a necessary element

of the definition of “investment”, should generally be presumed. !%”

For purposes of establishing jurisdiction in the present case, the Tribunal does not need to
address this controversy, as it has no impact on the outcome of the present case. Instead, in
the present case, all of the Salini criteria are fulfilled, including that of contribution to the

host State’s development. Thus, Claimants’ shareholdings in L&E and, indirectly, in

See, for example, Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision
on the Application for Annulment of the Award (1 November 2006), paras. 27-41 (AL RA 151); Malaysian
Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Award on Jurisdiction (17 May 2007),
paras. 123 et seq.

Malaysian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia, (CSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Decision on the Application
for Annulment (16 April 2009), paras. 56 et seg. (CL-072); Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No.
ARB/O7/20, Award (14 July 2010), para. 111); SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. The Republic of
Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29, Award (10 February 2012), paras. 106-108; Deutsche Bank AG v.
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/2, Award (31 October 2012), para. 295;
Electrabel S.A. v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/19, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law
and Liability (30 November 2012), para. 5.43 (CL-020).

Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award (15 April 2009), paras. 84-85
(AL RA 152).

68

192.

194.

ENJASA, coupled with the undertakings made as part of the privatization process to invest
in the gaming, lottery, and tourism sector in Salta, constitute a substantial commitment of
resources by Claimants; this commitment has been made to achieve profits and returns for

a substantial duration; and it also entails the assumption of risk.

Furthermore, the operation of gaming and lottery activities in Salta also contributed to
development in the Provice of Salta. Not only did ENJASA employ, at the time its
operating license was revoked, approx. 750 employees; the privatization of the operating
and gaming industry in the Province also included the committment to build two schools,
one for hoteling, one for gastronomy, as well as a five-star hotel, and to establish a
foundation for the purpose of enhancing and promoting education and research in the
tourism and gastronomy sectors in Salta. In light of these aspects, Claimants’ involvement
in the gaming and lottery sector in Salta through their shareholding in L&E and, indirectly,
ENJASA also contributed positively to the development in the Province of Salta and, by

extension, the Republic of Argentina.

Consequently, Claimants’ shareholding in L&E and ENJASA also qualifies as an

“investment” in the sense of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Cc. Existence of a “dispute arising directly out of an investment” under
Article 25(1) ICSID Convention

Finally, there is no doubt, in the Tribunal’s view, that the present dispute, as required by
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, arises directly out of Claimants’ investment in
Argentina. The directness requirement in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention relates to
the connection the dispute has to have to the investment; it does not restrict jurisdiction to
claims arising out of direct investments. !°* The requirement is met, in the present case,
because Claimants’ claim that the revocation of ENJASA’s license, coupled with the

subsequent transfer of ENJASA’s operation and employees to new operators, is the cause

See Fedax N.V. v. The Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections:
to Jurisdiction (11 July 1997), para. 24 (CL-076) (“It is apparent that the term ‘directly’ relates in this Article to
the ‘dispute’ and not to the ‘investment.’ It follows that jurisdiction can exist even in respect of investments that
are not direct, so long as the dispute arises directly from such transaction.”); see also CMS Gas Transmission
Company y. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to
Jurisdiction (17 July 2003), paras. 26-27 (AL RA 13); Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Jurisdiction (22 February 2006), para. 73 (AL RA 32).

69

195.

196.

197.

of the alleged destruction of Claimants’ investment in the gaming and lottery sector in

Salta, that is, its (direct) shareholding in L&E and (its indirect shareholding) in ENJASA.

D. Conclusion
In light of the above, the Tribunal finds that Claimants have made, in the form of their
shareholding in L&E and, indirectly, in ENJASA, an investment in Argentina in the sense
of both Article 1(1) of the Argentina-Austria BIT and Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention. Furthermore, the present dispute arises directly out of Claimants’ investment
in Argentina, as required by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. By contrast, ENJASA
assets, including, but not limited to, its operating license, do not qualify as Claimants’

investment for purposes of determining the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Consequently, Respondent’s third objection that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione
materiae is hereby rejected insofar as it relates to the argument that Claimants have not
made an investment in Argentina that is protected under Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention and Article 1 of the Argentina-Austria BIT. The other aspect of Respondent’s
third objection related to limitations in the protection of shareholder-investors under the
Argentina-Austria BIT, is dealt with together with Respondent’s first objection in the

following section.

2. Existence of a Prima Facie Claim

The Tribunal now turns to Respondent’s objection that Claimants have not presented a
prima facie claim for breach of the BIT based on the facts they allege. This encompasses
both Respondent’s first objection, as well as the part of Respondent’s third objection
concerning the scope of protection of shareholder-investors under the BIT. In the
Tribunal’s view, both sets of issues raise questions that concern the scope of substantive
protections offered under the Argentina-Austria BIT to foreign investors and their

investment. !°°

199 See also footnote 187.

70

198.

199.

200.

200

As presented by Respondent, the underlying objection does not strictly relate to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal,” but rather concerns the admissibility of the claim(s) brought.
This notwithstanding, such an objection is a valid reason for an investment tribunal to
dismiss a case, in whole or in part, at the jurisdictional stage. Such dismissal would be
justified both by the principle of judicial economy and by the need to respect the rights and
interests of both parties, which is inherent in the idea of fair administration of international
justice. After all, it would be both inefficient (for the Tribunal and the Parties) and
prejudicial in law and in costs (to Respondent as well as Claimants) to proceed with a claim
to the merits, that clearly has no foundation in law, even though the Tribunal otherwise

may have jurisdiction over such claim.

Respondent’s first objection for lack of a prima facie claim has two prongs: first, that
Claimants’ claims arising in connection with the revocation of ENJASA’s license have to
be qualified as “contract claims” rather than “treaty claims”; and second, that the forum
selection clauses in favor of the First Instance Court of Salta in both the Bidding Terms
and Conditions and in the Transfer Agreement bar recourse to the present Tribunal for such
claims. As already stated, the remaining part of Respondent’s third objection equally raises
the question to which extent Claimants have presented a prima facie claim that the
revocation of ENJASA’s license and subsequent events have resulted in a breach of
Claimants rights as shareholder-investors in L&E and ENJASA under the Argentina-
Austria BIT.

After addressing the applicable test for determining the existence of a prima facie claim,
the Tribunal turns to the characterization of the claims brought by Claimants as treaty
claims. It then assesses to which extent Claimants have met the threshold to present prima
facie claims for breach of the Argentina-Austria BIT given the pleaded facts and
Claimants’ status as shareholder-investors. Finally, the effect of the forum selection clauses

on the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is addressed.

Respondent's objection could be read as relating to the subject-matter limitations of Respondent’s consent in
Article 8(1) of the BIT to “dispute[s]

 

.] concerning any subject matter governed by this Agreement,” a question

that is relevant as a jurisdictional criterion under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. Yet, Respondent's
objection is broader. Respondent is not merely arguing that the Tribunal is limited to assessing the legality of
Respondent's action under the BIT, as provided for in Article 8(1) of the BIT. Repondent’s argument is that the
case presented by Claimants does not prima facie give rise to a successful claim for breach of the BIT.

71

201.

202.

203.

A. The applicable test for determining the existence of a prima facie
claim

The test for determining the existence of a prima facie claim at the jurisdictional stage is
well-established in the practice of investment treaty tribunals. It follows the test applied by
international courts and tribunals more generally, in particular the ICJ. Based on this
jurisprudence, the Tribunal must be satisfied that the facts alleged by Claimants are
plausibly capable of constituting a breach of the law applicable to the dispute, that is, in

the present case, the Argentina-Austria BIT.

The ICJ elaborated the test to determine the existence of a prima facie claim in Ambatielos

as follows:

[...] itis not necessary for that Government [i.e., the Hellenic Government as claimant]
to show, for present purposes, that an alleged treaty violation has an unassailable legal
basis. [...] If the interpretation given by the Hellenic Government to any of the
provisions relied upon appears to be one of the possible interpretations that may be
placed upon it, though not necessarily the correct one, then the Ambatielos claim must
be considered, for the purposes of the present proceedings, to be a claim based on the

Treaty of 1886.

In other words, if it is made to appear that the Hellenic Government is relying upon an
arguable construction of the Treaty, that is to say, a construction which can be
defended, whether or not it ultimately prevails, then there are reasonable grounds for

concluding that its claim is based on the Treaty.7°!

Similarly, in Oil Platforms, the ICJ held that, in order to meet the prima facie claim, it

must ascertain whether the violations of the Treaty of 1955 pleaded by Iran do or do
not fall within the provisions of the Treaty and whether, as a consequence, the dispute
is one which the Court has jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain, pursuant [to that

Treaty].7°?

21 Ambatielos (Greece v. United Kingdom), Judgment (19 May 1953), ICJ Reports 1953, p. 18 (AL RA 235).

202

Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Preliminary Objection, Judgment (12
December 1996), ICJ Reports 1996, pp. 803, 810, para. 16 (AL RA 6).

72

204. Rosalyn Higgins, in her Separate Opinion in Oil Platforms, famously formulated the prima
facie test even more plastically as requiring that “[t]he Court should thus see if, on the facts

as alleged by [the Applicant], the [Respondent’s] actions complained of might violate the

Treaty articles”?

205. The same test has been applied consistently in investment treaty jurisprudence. As one of

the first cases to address it, the Tribunal in SGS v. Philippines held:

It is not enough that the Claimant raises an issue under one or more provisions of the
BIT which the Respondent disputes. To adapt the words of the International Court in
the Oil Platforms case, the Tribunal “must ascertain whether the violations of the [BIT]
pleaded by [SGS] do or do not fall within the provisions of the Treaty and whether, as
a consequence, the dispute is one which the [Tribunal] has jurisdiction ratione

materiae to entertain” pursuant to Article VIII(2) of the BIT.2*

206. Similar statements can be found in a host of other decisions by investment treaty

tribunals.

23 Qil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Preliminary Objection, Judgment (12
December 1996), Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins, ICJ Reports 1996, pp. 847, 856, para. 33 (AL RA 8).

24 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. The Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision on Objections
to Jurisdiction (29 January 2004), para. 26 (AL RA 25). (quoting Case concerning Oil Platforms (Iran v. USA),
ICJ, Judgment on Preliminary Objections (12 December 1996), para. 16 (AL RA 6)).

25 See Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Jordan, ICSD Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction
(9 November 2004), para. 151 (AL RA 9); Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, CSID Case No.
ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction (8 February 2005), paras. 118-119 (AL RA 36); Jan de Nul N.V. and
Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, (CSID Case No. ARB/04/13, Decision on Jurisdiction
(16 June 2006), paras. 69-71 (AL RA 10); Waguih Elie George Siag & Clorinda Vecchi v. Arab Republic of
Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Decision on Jurisdiction (11 April 2007), paras. 139-141 (AL RA 11);
Saipem y, People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and
Recommendation on Provisional Measures (21 March 2007), paras. 85-86 (AL RA 12); Encana Corporation v.
Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL Case, Partial Award on Jurisdiction (27 February 2004), para. 36 (AL RA 33);
CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Decision on Jurisdiction
(17 July 2003), para. 69 (AL RA 13); Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision
on Jurisdiction (8 December 2003), para. 76 (AL RA 14); Joy Mining Machinery Lid. v. Arab Republic of Egypt,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Decision on Jurisdiction (30 July 2004), para. 30 (AL RA 26); Impregilo S.p.A. v.
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, CSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (22 April 2005), para. 254
(AL RA 15); Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction (14 November 2005), para. 185 (AL RA 16); Mytilineos Holdings SA v. The
State Union of Serbia and Montenegro and the Republic of Serbia, UNCITRAL Case, Partial Award on
Jurisdiction (8 September 2006), para. 184 (AL RA 17); Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Jurisdiction (22 February 2006), para. 63 (AL RA 32); Total S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01, Decision on Jurisdiction (25 August 2006), para. 55 (AL RA

 

73

207. The task of the Tribunal under this test is therefore to determine whether the facts pleaded
by Claimants, if established to be true, could possibly result in a breach of the Argentina-
Austria BIT. This test has implications both for the treatment of questions of fact as well
as for questions of interpretation and application of the applicable law at the jurisdictional

stage.

208. As for the treatment of facts, the Tribunal must not, as part of its analysis under the prima
facie test at the jurisdictional stage, determine the veracity of the facts alleged by Claimants
or question them in light of factual allegations made by Respondent that would, if found to
be true, invalidate Claimants’ version of what indeed happened. This exercise of fact-
finding is a matter for the merits of the proceedings and requires not only full briefing by
both parties, but possibly also the taking of evidence by the Tribunal. What the Tribunal
must do instead at the jurisdictional stage under the prima facie test is to determine whether
the facts as pleaded by Claimants can plausibly result in a finding of breach of the
Argentina-Austria BIT, namely of its prohibition of expropriations without compensation,
of its obligations to extend fair and equitable treatment, and of its obligation to grant

national treatment, as invoked by Claimants.

209. This raises the question as to what the prima facie test implies for the Tribunal’s task in

dealing with competing propositions of the Parties as to the proper interpretation of the

 

applicable law and its application to the alleged facts. This issue is particularly salient in

18); Telenor Mobile Communications v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15, Award (13 September
2006), para. 34 (AL RA 43); Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v. The Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL
Case, Decision on Jurisdiction (30 April 2010), para. 185 (AL RA 19); KTAsia Investment Group B.V. v. Republic
of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/8, Award (17 October 2013), para. 91 (AL RA 20); Achmea v. The
Slovak Republic (II), PCA Case No. 2013/12, Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility (20 May 2014), paras.
206-218 (AL RA 21); Urbaser S.A. y Consorcio de Aguas Bilbao Bizkaia, Bilbao Biskaia Ur Partzuergoa v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/26, Decision on Jurisdiction (19 December 2012), para. 56 (AL
RA 41); SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/13,
Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (6 August 2003), paras. 144-145 (CL-009); Wena Hotels
Limited v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, in ICSID Reports,
Volume 6, p. 86 (CL-109); Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on
Jurisdiction (3 August 2004), para. 180 (CL-081); Telefénica S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/20, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (25 May 2006), para. 53 (CL-098); Quiborax
S.A. and Non-Metallic Minerals S.A. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, CSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on
Jurisdiction (27 September 2012), para. 54 (CL-074); Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Co. v. The
Republic of Ecuador, PCA Case No. 2009-23, UNCITRAL, Third Interim Award on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility (27 February 2012), paras. 4.7-4.8 (CL-052); Saipem S.p.A. v. The People's Republic of
Bangladesh, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional
Measures (21 March 2007), para. 141 (CL-050).

74

210.

211.

the face of legal indeterminacies and competing legal theories or lines of jurisprudence
relating to the applicable law, a phenomenon regularly occurring in investment arbitration.
In such a situation, an investment tribunal must steer a careful course. On the one hand, it
should take into account the right of both parties to fully present their case and their legal
arguments to the Tribunal, including arguments that are novel or go against the
predominant views and would hence contribute to the further development of the law. On
the other hand, the Tribunal should prevent frivolous, spurious, and legally clearly
unfounded cases, which would impose an illegitimate burden on the time and resources of

both Respondent and the Tribunal, from going forward to the merits.

In finding the right balance, an investment tribunal should not simply rubberstamp
Claimants’ legal qualification of their case on the merits, but make an independent
determination on the interpretation of the applicable law, here the Argentina-Austria
BIT.2° At the same time, the Tribunal’s independent determination should not, as
suggested in SGS v. Philippines “require the definitive interpretation of the treaty provision

which is relied on,”?°”

as this may cut short the Parties’ possibility of making a full
presentation of their case. Instead, the Tribunal’s determination of whether a prima facie
claim exists should be limited to ascertaining whether Claimants’ case relies on a plausible

interpretation of the applicable law.

In determining the plausibility of Claimants’ case, the Tribunal should take into account
existing legal indeterminacies and ambiguities, as well as competing legal theories or
competing lines of prior arbitral jurisprudence. Similarly, as part of establishing the
plausibility of Claimants’ case in law, room must be made for arguments that are novel or
that go against the predominant view on the applicable law. This is necessary in light of
the absence of a possibility for an appeal in investment arbitration, which could review
findings of law, resolve indeterminacies in the law authoritatively, and allow for the law’s

further development.

206 Similarly, Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Award on
Jurisdiction (6 August 2014), para. 30.

207

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v. The Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision on Objections
to Jurisdiction (29 January 2004), para. 157 (AL RA 25).

75

212.

213.

214.

The Tribunal should therefore limit its assessment of the applicable law in respect of the
merits, in the words of the Ambatielos case, to determining whether Claimants’ case
“rel[ies] upon an arguable construction of the Treaty, that is to say, a construction which
can be defended, whether or not it ultimately prevails.”?°* Only if, as stated in Mytilineos
v. Serbia, “the facts as pleaded are plainly incapable of supporting a finding of breach of
treaty, all or part [of] the claim might fall outside of the jurisdiction of the tribunal.”? In
such a case, there is no interest, neither for Claimants nor for the international community,
in proceeding with a case to the merits. By contrast, as long as the case fairly raises issues
relating to the interpretation and application of the substantive law in question, the claims
should proceed to the merits and allow the Parties to plead fully their respective arguments

on the interpretation and application of the applicable law.

Consequently, the Tribunal’s exercise at the present stage of the proceedings does not entail
a conclusive determination on the interpretation of the treaty provisions breach which is
invoked, nor does it require a conclusive legal qualification of the facts pleaded. Instead, it
is sufficient that a plausible argument can be made that a breach of the Argentina-Austria
BIT occurred in light of the alleged facts, even if the Tribunal ultimately were to adopt, in
its decision on the merits, a different legal interpretation of the applicable law, or apply the
law differently to the then determined facts of the case. In other words, under the prima
facie test, the ultimate legal qualification of the case at hand remains a question reserved
to the merits and will be determined conclusively only following a full briefing by both

Parties on the factual and legal issues at stake.

B. Characterization of the claims brought by Claimants as treaty
claims

The Parties in the present case do not differ substantially on the abstract legal test to be

applied to determine the existence of a prima facie claim; rather their differences lie in the

concrete characterization of the claims brought. For Respondent, Claimants merely label

their claims as treaty claims, whereas the “essential basis” of those claims, namely the

28 Ambatielos (Greece v. United Kingdom), Judgment (19 May 1953), ICJ Reports 1953, p. 18 (AL RA 235).

209

Mytilineos Holdings SA y. The State Union of Serbia and Montenegro and the Republic of Serbia, UNCITRAL
Case, Partial Award on Jurisdiction (8 September 2006), para. 184 (AL RA 17).

76

215.

216.

210

revocation of ENJASA’s license, in Respondent’s view, relates to a breach of contract.2!°
To this end, Respondent argues that the License conferred to ENJASA had to be seen as a

contractual arrangement”!

and that, in turn, the revocation of the License was equally a
contractual matter that fell outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction for treaty claims.?!?

Claimants, by contrast, stress that their claims had to be qualified as treaty claims.

In the Tribunal’s view, Respondent’s first objection relating to the lack of a prima facie
claim mischaracterizes the nature of Claimants’ claim before this Tribunal. In the present
proceedings, Claimants do not bring claims for breach of an agreement they are party to
with the Province of Salta, such as the Transfer Agreement or the contractual or quasi-
contractual arrangements to implement the privatization of the gaming and lottery sector
in Salta. Claimants also do not bring claims for the breach of ENJASA’s license under the

domestic law applicable to that License as such.

Rather, for Claimants, the revocation of ENJASA’s license, and its consequences on
Claimants’ investment in Argentina, is the trigger that results in the alleged breach of their
rights as foreign investors under the Argentina-Austria BIT. It is Claimants’ argument that
the revocation of the License did not take place in the normal exercise of ENREJA’s
regulatory powers, but formed part of a larger plan, an “orchestrated action” aimed at
ousting ENJASA, and by prolongation L&E and its shareholders, from their 30-year
monopoly in Salta’s gaming and lottery sector and redistributing its operations to other
operators. Claimants’ claim, in other words, is not limited to the question of whether the
revocation of ENJASA’s license was lawful, under domestic law or otherwise. Claimants
are also not bringing a claim on behalf of ENJASA. Instead, they claim that the revocation
of ENJASA’s license and subsequent events violated their own rights as (indirect) investors
in ENJASA under the Argentina-Austria BIT. Claimants thus frame their case as a treaty

claim, not as a contract claim.?!3

See Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Counter-Memorial on the Merits, paras. 28-39.
Respondent’ s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 5-19.
Respondent’ s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 20-26.

For the majority of the Tribunal, neither the need for an “investment” to have been made “in accordance with the
laws and regulations of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment is made” (Article 1(1) of the BIT),
nor the requirement that “[t]he contents and scope of the rights for the different categories of assets shall be

77

217.

218.

219.

214

In light of how Claimants frame their claim, it is irrelevant for present purposes whether
ENJASA’s license is to be qualified under Argentine law as a contractual or quasi-
contractual arrangement. After all, even if it were correct that the License had to be
qualified as a contractual or quasi-contractual arrangement, Claimants’ claim is not framed

as a breach of that License, but as part of the broader factual matrix just outlined.

Furthermore, even if Claimants’ claim was limited to the question whether the revocation
of ENJASA’s license — looked at in isolation — resulted in a breach of the Argentina-Austria
BIT, there would be a plausible claim that this revocation did not constitute the exercise of
a contractual right. Instead, there would be a plausible claim that by the very terms of
Resolution No. 240/13, the revocation was based on the authority conferred to ENREJA

under Law No. 7020. It concerned, as stated in Resolution No. 240/13,

a police activity of the government, understood as an “administrative” function which
is intended to protect the security, morality or public health [...], which, in the case

under analysis, seeks to secure the proper provision of a licensed activity.?!*

In addition, Claimants present a plausible argument that the revocation of ENJASA’s
license was not based upon the operation of the contractual termination clause in Article 6

of the Transfer Agreement. As stated in Resolution No. 240/13:

[T]he revocation of the license as a penalty shall not be confused with the right to
declare, automatically and by operation of law, the extinction and/or cancellation of
the license, provided for in Article 6 of Decree No. 3616/99, which power is vested in
the Executive Branch in six events: expiration of the license, breach of the payment of
the royalty, violation of the obligations imposed by Article 5 of Law No. 7020,

exploitation of any game of chance without ENREJA’s prior authorization and the total

determined by the laws and regulations of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment is made”
(Article 1(1) in fine of the BIT), nor the provision that “[t]he arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute with
reference to the laws of the Contracting Party involved in the dispute” (Article 8(6) of the BIT) excludes the
assessment of whether the acts of a regulatory authority, such as ENREJA, that affect a foreign investor or its
investment and are taken to implement domestic law and regulations, are in line with the substantive standards of
treatment in the Argentina-Austria BIT (contra Dissent, para. 218).

Exhibit C-031 p. 21 (emphases in the original).

 

78

or partial assignment and transfer of the powers granted in the license without prior

authorization of the Executive Branch.?'5

220. Against this background, there is a plausible claim that ENREJA qualified the revocation
of ENJASA’s license as a sanction in the sense of Article 13 of Law No. 7020 for alleged
breaches of ENJASA’s legal obligations under Article 5 of Law No. 7020 concerning anti-
money laundering provisions and the hiring of operators without ENREJA’s authorization.
This sanction, in ENREJA’s own words, could plausibly be said to be imposed in the

exercise of public authority, not as a matter of any contractual authorization.

221. Consequently, even if the present case was limited to the question of whether the revocation
of ENJASA’s license in and of itself constituted a breach of the Argentina-Austria BIT,
and even if the License was to be qualified under Argentine law as a contractual or quasi-
contractual instrument, there would still be a plausible claim that the revocation of that
License was an act of public power or puissance publique. This, in turn, would plausibly
allow to qualify a claim concerning the legality of the revocation of ENJASA’s license
under the BIT as a treaty claim, rather than a contract claim given that a well-established
line of jurisprudence of investment treaty tribunals distinguishes between contract claims
and treaty claims in cases relating to the termination of investor-State contracts based on
whether the termination constituted a commercial act any party to a contract, including a

private actor, could engage in, or whether the act in question constituted the exercise of

public authority that is to be measured against the standards of treatment in the BIT.*!®

25 Jd. at p. 31.

26 See, for example, CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Award
(12 May 2005), para. 299 (AL RA 101 / CL-014); Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, (CSID Case
No. ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (22 April 2005), para. 281 (AL RA 15); Consortium RFCC v. Royaume
du Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/6, Sentence Arbitrale (22 December 2003), para. 65; Bayindir Insaat
Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/29, Decision on
Jurisdiction (14 November 2005), para. 183 (AL RA 16 / CL-013); Salini Costruttori S.p.A and Italstrade S.p.A.
v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction (9 November 2004),
para. 155 (AL RA 9); Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Republic of Lithuania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/8, Award
(11 September 2007), para. 443 (AL RA 237 / CL-080); Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/O1/12, Award (14 July 2006), para. 315 (AL RA 141); cf. also SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A.
v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction
(29 January 2004), para. 161 (AL RA 25); Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3, Award (30 April 2004), para. 174 (AL RA 119).

 

 

79

222.

223.

224.

225.

Against this background, the Tribunal therefore concludes in respect of the first prong of
Respondent’s first objection, that the claims triggered by the revocation of ENJASA’s
license, as presented by Claimants in the present proceedings, do not constitute contract
claims, but relate to the breach of substantive standards granted under the Argentina-

Austria BIT and constitute treaty claims.

Cc. Prima facie breaches of the BIT
The Tribunal now turns to determining whether the factual matrix presented by Claimants
is prima facie able to result in a breach of the substantive rights under the Argentina-Austria
BIT, in particular its provisions on expropriation in Article 4 of the BIT, fair and equitable
treatment in Article 2(1) of the BIT, and national treatment in Article 3(1) of the BIT. It is
in this context that Respondent’s third objection insofar as it relates to the scope of
protection of shareholder-investors becomes relevant whereby the Tribunal must determine
to which extent Claimants as direct shareholders in L&E and indirect shareholders in
ENJASA enjoy protection under the substantive treaty standards contained in the
Argentina-Austria BIT and have a prima facie claim that their rights as shareholder-
investors under the treaty have been breached by the revocation of ENJASA’s license

through Resolution No. 240/13 and subsequent events.

In making this determination, the Tribunal therefore addresses not only aspects that are
part of Respondent’s first objection that Claimants have failed to show the existence of a
prima facie claim proper, but also those aspects of Respondent’s third objection that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione materiae which concern Respondent’s claim that, in
light of Respondent’s construction of Article 4(3) of the BIT, Claimants, as indirect
shareholders in ENJASA, are unable to bring claims relating to assets held by ENJASA, in
particular claims arising out of the revocation of ENJASA’s operating license unless the
revocation of the license resulted in an expropriation of “assets’/“financial assets” of

ENJASA.

The Tribunal will first turn to the question whether Claimants have been able to show a
prima facie breach of Article 4 of the BIT. In this context, the Tribunal will also address
Respondent’s argument on the impact of Article 4(3) of the BIT on claims by shareholder-

investors, both in respect of expropriation and other causes of action under the Argentina-

80

226.

227.

228.

Austria BIT. The Tribunal will then analyze whether Claimants have presented a prima
facie claim for breach of Article 2(1) of the BIT (fair and equitable treatment). Finally, it
will assess whether Claimants have presented a prima facie claim for breach of Article 3(1)

of the BIT (national treatment).

(i) Prima facie breach of Article 4 of the BIT
Article 4 of the BIT protects investments against uncompensated expropriations and
“measures having an equivalent effect;” Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT provides, as per the

translation agreed by the Parties, as follows:
ARTICLE 4

(1) The term “expropriation” includes both nationalization as well as any other measure

having an equivalent effect.

(2) The investments of investors of a Contracting Party shall not be expropriated in the
territory of the other Contracting Party except for a public purpose, in accordance with
due process of law and against compensation. Such compensation shall amount to the
value of the investment expropriated immediately before the expropriation or the
impending expropriation became public knowledge. Compensation shall be paid
without undue delay and shall bear interest until the date of payment, at the customary
bank rate of the State in whose territory the investment has been made; shall be
effectively realizable and freely transferable. Assessment and payment of
compensation shall be adequately provided for no later than at the time of
expropriation.

The question in the present context therefore is whether the revocation of ENJASA’s

license and subsequent events can be understood, in a prima facie plausible manner, to

result in an expropriation in the sense of Article 4(1) of the BIT of Claimants’ investment,

that is, their direct shareholding in L&E as well as their indirect shareholding in ENJASA.

Clearly, the revocation of ENJASA’s license and subsequent events do not constitute a
direct expropriation, which requires the taking and transfer of title, of Claimants’
investment. Claimants, as is undisputed between the Parties, continue to own title to their

shares in L&E and ENJASA. Yet, the notion of expropriation in Article 4(1) of the BIT

81

also encompasses “measures having an equivalent effect,” that is, so-called indirect or de
facto expropriations. In the jurisprudence of investment treaty tribunals, it has been held
that such indirect expropriations can occur, inter alia, when host State measures, which
directly affect assets of the company, substantially and permanently deprive the
shareholder-investor of her investment in the shareholding in the company and effectively

destroy the value of those shares. In such cases, shareholders can bring claims based on

(indirect) expropriation of their shareholding in the host State.?!7

229. Against this background, in the Tribunal’s view, Claimants have presented a prima facie
claim that the revocation of ENJASA’s operating license and subsequent events qualify as
an indirect expropriation — a “measure having an equivalent effect” — with respect to their
shareholding in L&E and ENJASA. After all, Claimants claim that without ENJASA’s
exclusive operating license, and taking into account the transfer of ENJASA operations to

new operators, their investment in Salta’s gaming and lottery sector, as well as the value

217 For examples, see only the cases invoked by Claimants to support their prima facie claim that an indirect
expropriation of their investment as shareholders has occurred through interference with assets of the company
in Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 32-36: CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/8, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (17 July 2003), paras. 59, 66-69 (AL RA
13); Azurix Corp v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on Jurisdiction (8 December
2003), paras. 69, 73 (AL RA 14); Azurix Corp v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on
the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic (1 September 2009), paras. 57-62, 76-80, 86-130 (CL-
095); Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision
on Jurisdiction (14 January 2004), paras. 35, 43-49, 58-60 (CL-051); Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets,
L.P. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim) (2 August
2004), paras. 17, 34-35 (CL-096); Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on
Jurisdiction (3 August 2004), paras. 125, 136-150 (CL-081); GAMI Investments, Inc. v. The Government of the
United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Final Award (15 November 2004), paras. 26-33 (CL-099); Camuzzi
International S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/2, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (11
May 2005), paras. 54-67 (CL-082); Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/02/16, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (11 May 2005), paras. 73-79 (CL-097); Continental Casualty
Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Jurisdiction (22 February 2006), para.
79 (AL RA 32); lurii Bogdanov et al. v. Republic of Moldova, SCC, Award (22 September 2005), para. 5.1 (CL-
102); Telefonica S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/20, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections
to Jurisdiction (25 May 2006), paras. 68-83 (CL-098); Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/04/1, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (25 August 2006), para. 74 (AL RA 18); RosInvestCo UK Ltd
v. The Russian Federation, SCC Arbitration No. V (079/2005), Final Award (12 September 2010), paras. 605-
609, 625 (CL-103); Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award.
(22 August 2012), paras. 82-93 (AL RA 96); Mr. Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, ICSID Case No.
ARB/11/23, Award (8 April 2013), para. 380 (CL-100); Yuri Bogdanov & Yulia Bogdanova v. The Republic of
Moldova, SCC Arbitration No. V (091/2012), Final Award (16 April 2013), paras. 167-168 (CL-101); ST-AD
GmbH vy. The Republic of Bulgaria, PCA Case No. 2011-06, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction (18 July 2013),
paras. 278-285 (CL-104); Hochtief AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31, Decision on Liability
(29 December 2014), paras. 150-181, 302-307 (AL RA 145).

   

82

230.

231.

of their shares in L&E and ENJASA, have been effectively destroyed.?!8 This satisfies, in
the Tribunal’s view, the threshold for presenting a prima facie claim that Claimants have
suffered an indirect expropriation of their investment in Argentina contrary to Article 4(1)

and (2) of the BIT.

Without prejudging the test ultimately applicable on the merits, it would seem, however,
that certain factors will play a role during the merits phase in determining whether a breach
of Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT has occurred. First, it would seem relevant to consider
whether the revocation of the License and subsequent acts have substantially and
permanently deprived Claimants of the economic benefits attached to their shareholding in
L&E and ENJASA. In this context, one issue would seem to be the influence of the
circumstance that the Sheraton Hotel Salta remained operative and under ENJASA’s
control after the revocation of ENJASA’s license on the determination of whether an
indirect expropriation of Claimants’ shareholding in L&E and ENJASA has occurred.
Similarly, the fact that Claimants were allegedly offered to continue operating certain parts
of their hitherto exclusive gaming and lottery operations would seem to be a factor for
consideration in determining the existence of an indirect expropriation, namely whether

Claimants’ investment has been effectively destroyed.

Second, it would seem relevant to consider to which extent the revocation of ENJASA’s
license constituted a regular exercise of the host State’s regulatory power. During the
merits phase, it would thus seem to be an issue whether the revocation of ENJASA’s license
constituted a regular exercise of ENREJA’s supervisory powers under Law No. 7020, as
argued by Respondent, or whether the revocation constituted an abuse of ENREJA’s

regulatory powers.

218 See Memorial on the Merits, para. 397 (“The revocation of ENJASA’s licence without the payment of any
compensation in itself destroyed the entirety of Claimants’ investment in Argentina. The subsequent transfer of
lease agreements and employment contracts to ENJASA’s competitors confirmed the definitive taking of the

investment, leaving Claimants without any economic basis

 

to continue their investment.”). Similarly, Counter-

Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 80 (“[...] by revoking ENJASA’s licence, the Argentine Republic prevented
Claimants from operating 46 gaming tables in four casinos, 1376 slot machines in 15 slot machine halls and from
operating and/or commercializing 14 lottery games. Thus, the revocation enacted in Resolution No. 240/13,
destroyed the commercial value of Claimants’ investment. There was thus an indirect expropriation of Claimants’
investment.” — (footnote omitted)).

83

232.

233.

234.

219

220

221

Apart from a prima facie breach of Articles 4(1) and (2) of the BIT, the Parties have also

debated the role and interpretation of Article 4(3) of the treaty. This article reads, in its

authentic German and Spanish versions, as follows:

ARTIKEL 4

Ll

(3) Enteignet eine ~—_—-Verrtragspartei die
Vermégenswerte einer Gesellschaft, die in

Anwendung von Artikel 1 Absatz 2 dieses
Abkommens als ihre eigene Gesellschaft anzusehen
ist, und an welcher der Investor der anderen
Vertragspartei Anteilsrechte besitzt, so wendet sie
die Bestimmungen des Absatzes 2 dieses Artikels
dergestalt an, daB die angemessene Entschiidigung
dieses Investors sichergestellt wird.

ARTICULO 4
[el

(3) Cuando una Parte Contratante expropie los
activos financieros de una sociedad que, conforme
con las disposiciones del Articulo 1, apartado 2 del
presente Convenio, sea considerada como sociedad
perteneciente a esa Parte Contratante y en la cual el
inversor de la otra Parte Contratante tuviera
derechos de participacién, aquella aplicard las
disposiciones del apartado 2 de este Articulo de
manera tal que la indemnizacién apropiada del

inversor resulte asegurada.
[1
As detailed above, the Parties debated the application of this provision to ENJASA’s

L.1

 

operating license in light of the potentially differing meanings of the German term
“Vermégenswerte” and the Spanish term “activos financieros” in the two authentic
versions of the BIT. While the German term “Vermégenswerte” would seem to cover
ENJASA’s license as an asset, as argued by Claimants,”!? the Spanish term “activos
financieros” might not, as argued by Respondent.””° Moreover, for Respondent, Article
4(3) of the BIT limits shareholder-investors, such as Claimants, to claims for expropriation
and excludes claims by shareholder-investors for breach of other treaty commitments, such

as fair and equitable treatment or national treatment.?7!

As a result of the differences in the authentic German and Spanish versions of Article 4(3)
of the BIT, the Parties have provided diverging translations of this provision into English.
Indicating the differences in the Parties’ translations, the English text of Article 4(3) of the

BIT is as follows:

Where a Contracting Party expropriates the financial [Respondent] assets of a company
that, in accordance with the provisions of Article 1, paragraph 2 hereof, is deemed to

be a company belonging to that Contracting Party, and in which the investor of the

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras. 46-60.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 199-211.
Reply on Jurisdiction, paras, 212-213.

84

235.

236.

237.

other Contracting Party owns [Respondent]/has [Claimants] shares, the provisions set
forth in paragraph 2 of this Article shall be applied by the former so as to guarantee the

appropriate compensation of the investor.

It is not necessary that the Tribunal comes to an ultimate conclusion on the interpretation
of Article 4(3) of the BIT at the present stage of the proceedings. Instead, it is sufficient
that Claimants have presented a prima facie plausible construction of Article 4(3) of the
BIT. Paraphrasing Ambatielos, “[i]f the interpretation [...] relied upon appears to be one
of the possible interpretations that may be placed upon it, though not necessarily the correct

one, then the [...] claim must” proceed to the merits.??>

In the Tribunal’s view, Claimants have made out a prima facie claim that the revocation of
ENJASA’s license resulted in an expropriation of one of ENJASA’s assets, entitling
Claimants as indirect shareholders in ENJASA under Article 4(3) of the BIT to
compensation. To start with, ENJASA qualifies, as required by Article 4(3), as an
Argentine company, as defined in Article 1(2) of the BIT.

In addition, Claimants have presented a plausible construction of Article 4(3) of the BIT
under which ENJASA’s operating license is protected as an “asset”. In this context, the
Tribunal is of the view, that it does not yet have to resolve the Parties’ controversy about
the proper interpretation of the notion of “asset” in Article 4(3) of the BIT in light of the
differing language used by the German and Spanish versions of the BIT
(“Vermégenswerte” versus “activos financieros”) under the applicable prima facie test.
What is sufficient, at the present stage of the proceedings, is that Claimants’ construction
plausibly covers ENJASA’s operating license as a protected “asset” in the sense of Article
4(3) of the BIT and that the revocation of that License and subsequent events can be
plausibly understood as having resulted in an expropriation of ENJASA. Claimants have
forwarded such a plausible construction of Article 4(3) of the BIT by arguing that,
according to Article 33(4) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, the meaning
of the German version of Article 4(3) of the BIT should be adopted as it best reconciles the

diverging texts.

22 Ambatielos (Greece v. United Kingdom), Judgment (19 May 1953), ICJ Reports 1953, p. 18 (AL RA 235).

85

238.

239.

240.

Furthermore, Claimants have alleged that the revocation of ENJASA’s operating license,
and the subsequent transfer of operations to new operators, destroyed ENJASA’s business
operation in the gaming and lottery sector in the Province of Salta. As pleaded, it is prima
facie plausible to consider the revocation of the License, and the subsequent transfer of
operations to new operators, as an act that results in an expropriation in the sense of Article
A(1) of the BIT of certain of ENJASA’s assets or ENJASA as a whole. Also in this context,
as the Tribunal has pointed out above, it would seem relevant to consider during the merits
stage of the proceedings to which extent the revocation of the License and subsequent
events have indeed resulted in a substantial and permanent deprivation of ENJASA’s assets
under the circumstances and whether the revocation of the License was, or was not, a
regular exercise of ENREJA’s regulatory powers pursuant to Law No. 7020. For purposes
of the present stage of the proceedings, however, Claimants have presented a prima facie
claim that ENJASA was faced with an expropriation, which in turn could entitle Claimants

as ENJASA’s indirect shareholder to compensation pursuant to Article 4(3) of the BIT.

All in all, with respect to Article 4 of the BIT, in the Tribunal’s view, Claimants have made
a prima facie claim that the revocation of ENJASA’s license and subsequent events
constituted an indirect expropriation of Claimants’ shareholding in L&E and ENJASA
contrary to Article 4(1) and (2) of the BIT. Furthermore, Claimants have presented a prima
facie claim that the revocation of ENJASA’s license and subsequent events constituted an
expropriation of certain of ENJASA’s assets or of ENJASA as a whole which could entitle

Claimants to compensation pursuant to Article 4(3) of the BIT.

As a final issue, the Tribunal must address Respondent’s argument that Article 4(3) of the
BIT limits the protection of shareholder-investors under the BIT in cases where the assets
of the company have been expropriated, to the exclusion of other standards of protection,
such as fair and equitable treatment under Article 2(1) of the BIT, or national treatment
under Article 3(1) of the BIT. In this respect, it bears noting that nothing in the text of
Article 4(3) of the BIT supports such argument, on a prima facie reading of that provision.
Instead, the formulation of Article 4(3) of the BIT prima facie suggests that that provision
was intended to grant shareholder-investors an additional cause of action when a local

company, in which a covered investor holds shares, is expropriated.

86

241. This additional cause of action differs from a claim of shareholder-investors under Article
4(2) of the BIT for an (indirect) expropriation of their shareholding. Under Article 4(3) of
the BIT, a claimant would only have to show that assets/financial assets of the company
were subject to an expropriation, without the need to demonstrate any detrimental effect
on the value of the shareholding. By contrast, for a claim under Article 4(2) of the BIT, the
shareholder-investor would need to show that the interference of the host State with assets
of the company had an effect on the shareholding that was so severe that it qualifies as a

“measure having an equivalent effect” on that shareholding.

(ii) Prima facie breach of Article 2(1) of the BIT
242. The Tribunal now turns to determining whether Claimants have presented a prima facie
claim for breach of Article 2(1) of the BIT. Given the circumstances of the revocation of
ENJASA’s license, a breach of Article 2(1) of the BIT, which, as per the English translation
agreed between the Paties, requires the Contracting States to “accor[d] at all times fair and
equitable treatment” appears prima facie plausible. Fair and equitable treatment has been
interpreted, inter alia, to protect covered investors and their investments against the
arbitrary exercise of public powers, as well as against harassment by public authorities, to
require public authorities to administer the applicable law in good faith, to entitle foreign
investors and their investments to due process, and to protect an investor’s legitimate

expectations.”

23. For examples, see only the cases invoked by Claimants to support their prima facie claim that they were not
accorded fair and equitable treatment in Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 84-85: El Paso Energy
International Company v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Award (31 October 2011), para. 348
(CL-016); Electrabel S.A. v. The Republic of Hungary, I1CSID Case No. ARB/O7/19, Decision on Jurisdiction,
Applicable Law and Liability (30 November 2012) part VIL, para. 7.75 (CL-020); CME Czech Republic B.V. (The
Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (13 September 2001), para. 611 (CL-021);
Saluka Investments B.V. (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (17 March 2006),
para. 309 (CL-018); Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award (27
August 2008), paras. 175, 176 (CL-118); Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/97/1, Award (30 August 2000), para. 99 (CL-011); Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. The
United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award (29 May 2003), para. 153 (CL-008); Waguih Elie
George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Award (1 June
2009), para. 450 (CL-024); Frontier Petroleum Services Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award
(12 November 2010), para. 300 (CL-025); Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8,
Award (6 February 2007), para. 308 (CL-034); Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award (30 April 2004), para. 98 (AL RA 119); Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, Partial
Award (19 August 2005), paras. 231-233 (AL RA 30); Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of

87

243. These rule of law-elements flowing from fair and equitable treatment have been found to
apply not only to action taken directly vis-a-vis the claimant-investor, but also to action the
host State has taken in relation to a company in which the investor is a shareholder. In such
situations, the shareholder-investor has been considered to have a right, and consequently

standing, under the fair and equitable treatment standard that the company in which she

has invested is treated in accordance with the above mentioned rule of law-elements.?”4

244. In light of the factual circumstances pleaded by Claimants, including that ENREJA’s
Resolution No. 240/13 was passed in breach of ENJASA’s right to be heard, was

insufficiently motivated, disproportionate, and based on the retroactive application of

Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award (24 July 2008), paras. 597-599 (CL-031); Joseph Charles Lemire
v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18, Award (28 March 2011), paras. 158, 159 (CL-090).

24 CMS Gas Transmission Company y. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Decision of the
Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (17 July 2003), paras. 59, 66-69 (AL RA 13); Azurix Corp v. The Argentine
Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on Jurisdiction (8 December 2003), paras. 69, 73 (AL RA 14);
Telefonica S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/20, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to
Jurisdiction (25 May 2006), para. 81 (CL-098); Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Jurisdiction (22 February 2006), para. 79 (AL RA 32); Azurix Corp v. The
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine
Republic (1 September 2009), paras. 57-62, 76-80, 86-130 (CL-095); Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets,
LP. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (14 January 2004), paras.
35, 43-49, 58-60 (CL-051); Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim) (2 August 2004), paras. 17, 34-35 (CL-096);
Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction (3 August 2004),
paras. 125, 136-150 (CL-081); GAMI Investments, Inc. v. The Government of the United Mexican States,
UNCITRAL, Final Award (15 November 2004), paras. 26-33 (CL-099); Camuzzi International S.A. v The
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/2, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (11 May 2005), paras.
54-67 (CL-082); Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision
on Objections to Jurisdiction (11 May 2005), paras. 73-79 (CL-097); lurii Bogdanov et al. v. Republic of
Moldova, SCC, Award (22 September 2005), para. 5.1 (CL-102); Total S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/04/01, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (25 August 2006), para. 74 (AL RA 18);
RosInvestCo UK Ltd v. The Russian Federation, SCC Arbitration No. V (079/2005), Final Award (12 September
2010), paras. 605-609, 625 (CL-103); Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/1, Award (22 August 2012), paras. 82-93 (AL RA 96); Mr. Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova,
ICSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award (8 April 2013), para. 380 (CL-100); Yuri Bogdanov & Yulia Bogdanova v.
The Republic of Moldova, SCC Arbitration No. V (091/2012), Final Award (16 April 2013), paras. 167-168 (CL-
101); ST-AD GmbH v. The Republic of Bulgaria, PCA Case No. 2011-06, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction
(18 July 2013), paras. 278-285 (CL-104); Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/07/31,
Decision on Liability (29 December 2014), paras. 150-181, 302-307 (AL RA 145); Bernhard von Pezold et al. v.
Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15, Award (28 July 2015), paras. 326 (CL-146); Técnicas
Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award (29 May
2003), paras, 152 ff (CL-008); Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1,
Award (30 August 2000), paras. 74 ff (CL-O11); LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E
International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability (3 October 2006),
paras. 100-139 (CL-003); BG Group Plc. v. The Republic of Argentina, UNCITRAL, Final Award (24 December
2007), paras. 289-310 (AL RA-75).

 

88

245.

246.

247.

225

certain regulatory rules, and constituted a sham proceeding that was motivated not by

legitimate policies but by local favouritism,””>

there is prima facie a plausible claim that
any or all of the above mentioned rule of law-elements of the fair and equitable treatment
standard were breached in relation to Claimants’ investment in the gaming and lottery
sector in Salta through the revocation of ENJASA’s operating license and subsequent acts.
Yet, without prejudging the test ultimately applicable on the merits, it would seem relevant
to consider, and for Claimants to show, to which extent deficiencies existed in ENREJA’s
revocation of ENJASA’s license as alleged by Claimants, or whether instead ENREJA’s
action was the regular exercise of its regulatory authority under Law No. 7020 that

conformed to the requirements of fair and equitable treatment.

(iii) Prima facie breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT
While claims for (direct and indirect) expropriation and breach of fair and equitable
treatment under the BIT have prima facie been demonstrated to be plausible, the Tribunal
considers that the invocation by Claimants of a breach of the national treatment provision
in Article 3(1) of the BIT has not been substantiated in a plausible manner, therefore failing

the prima facie test.

Article 3(1) of the BIT provides as follows in its authentic German and Spanish versions:

ARTIKEL 3

Behandlung von Investitionen

(1) Jede Vertragspartei behandelt Investoren der
anderen Vertragspartei und deren Investitionen
nicht weniger giinstig als ihre eigenen Investoren
und deren Investitionen oder Investoren dritter
Staaten und deren Investitionen.

[el

ARTICULO 3

Tratamiento de las inversiones

(1) Cada Parte Contratante otorgard a los inversores
de la otra Parte Contratante y a sus inversiones, un
tratamiento no menos favorable que el otorgado a
sus propios inversores y a sus inversiones 0 a los
inversores de terceros Estados y a sus inversiones.

[el

The Parties have provided slightly diverging translations into English of this provision. In
the Tribunal’s view, these differences, however, are irrelevant for interpreting Article 3(1)

of the BIT. This notwithstanding, the Parties’ respective translations are reproduced here

as follows:

Translation by Claimants

89

Translation by Respondent

See Memorial on the Merits, paras. 423-432; Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 84.

248.

249.

250.

224

227

228,

ARTICLE 3

Treatment of Investments

(1) Each Contracting Party shall treat investors of
the respective other Contracting Party and their
investments no less favourable than its own
investors and their investments or investors from
third countries and their investments.

 

ARTICLE 3

Treatment of Investments

(1) Each Contracting Party shall accord to investors
of the other Contracting Party and to their
investments treatment no less favourable than the
treatment it accords to its own investors and to their
investments or to the investors of any third State

and to their investments.

[ed

[el

Claimants allege that, after the revocation of its License, ENJASA’s operations have been
transferred to local operators without the same stringent requirements that ENJASA had to
meet at the time the gaming and lottery industry in Salta was privatized in 1999/2000.77°
Moreover, Claimants point out that operating licenses for gaming activities were granted,
at least in part, to those operators whose alleged hiring by ENJASA ENREJA had used as
a ground to revoke ENJASA’s license.?’ Claimants consider both of these factors to result

in a breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT.

The Tribunal, however, is unable to see how either one of these aspects, or both aspects
together, could plausibly result in a breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT. Article 3(1) prohibits
nationality-based discriminations between foreign investors and their investments, on the
one hand, and national investors and their investments, on the other. Such discrimination,
however, presupposes that foreign and national investors and their investments are affected
differently, de iure or de facto, either by the same government measure or by measures that

are sufficiently closely connected so as to result in a discriminatory treatment.?”

Yet, in the scenario pleaded by Claimants, the Tribunal is unable to detect any prima facie
discrimination of the type targetted by Article 3(1) of the BIT. First, in light of the above,
Article 3(1) of the BIT does not plausibly allow, for purposes of establishing discrimination
or differentiated treatment, a comparison of the conditions between the tender process in
1999/2000 and the award of new operating licenses in 2013/2014. Instead, governments

remain free to change the conditions for tendering public concessions or licenses for the

See Memorial on the Merits, para. 208; Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras. 87-88.
See Memorial on the Merits, para. 349.

See Andrew Newcombe and Lluis Paradell, Law and Practice of Investment Treaties: Standards of Protection
(WoltersKluwer 2009) 182-83 (CL-027).

90

251.

252.

operation of economic activities at different points in time as part of their regulatory powers
and their right to regulate. The purpose of non-discrimination provisions is to ensure equal
treatment as a precondition for fair competition at any given moment in time, not to freeze
market regulation over time. The latter, however, would be the case if operating licenses
in 2013/2014 in completely different economic, social, and political circumstances would
have to be awarded under the same conditions as in 1999/2000. For the same reason, that
is, the need to ensure flexibility in government regulation over time, the Tribunal does not
find that Article 3(1) of the BIT can plausibly be interpreted to be violated because the
Province of Salta decided to switch from a one-firm monopoly in the gaming and lottery

sector in 1999/2000 to a system with multiple operators in 2013/2014.

Second, for purposes of the analysis of Article 3(1) of the BIT it is irrelevant that the new
operators who were awarded a license in 2013/2014 had been in business relations with
ENJASA found to be illegal by ENREJA — which was one of the grounds ENREJA invoked
to justify the revocation of ENJASA’s exclusive license. Here again, the revocation of
ENJASA’s exclusive license and the award of new non-exclusive licenses to new operators
are separate scenarios. The revocation of ENJASA’s exclusive license itself cannot
plausibly be considered to have been discriminatory as Claimants do not allege that a
license benefitting an investor of another nationality was, in similar circumstances, not
revoked. Likewise, the award of the new licences to other operators cannot be plausibly
considered to have been discriminatory for Claimants as Claimants had not tendered for

these licenses.

In respect of the latter, it could have been a prima facie plausible claim that Respondent
breached Article 3(1) of the BIT if ENJASA had been allegedly prevented from
participating, at equal terms with the new operators, in the award of new licenses, or if,
because of foreign ownership, it had been treated differently in that process. Yet, this is not
Claimants’ claim. They do not argue that they could not have participated in 2013/2014 in
the award of new licenses at equal terms with national operators; instead, they claim that
the award of licenses to the new operators in 2013/2014 as such resulted in a nationality-
based discrimination of Claimants in contravention of Article 3(1) of the BIT. Such a claim,

however, cannot be made to be plausible in law. Consequently, the Tribunal finds that

91

253.

254.

255.

256.

Claimants have been unable to make a prima facie claim for breach of Article 3(1) of the

BIT.

In summary, the Tribunal has now determined that Claimants have presented plausible
claims that their rights as foreign shareholder-investors under Articles 4 and 2(1) of the
Argentina-Austria BIT prima facie have been breached. By contrast, the Tribunal has
found that Claimants have not presented a prima facie claim for breach of Article 3(1) of
the BIT. This finding responds both to aspects of Respondent’s first objection and to
Respondent’s third objection insofar as it relates to the scope of protection of shareholder-

investors.

D. The effect of the forum selection clauses

Finally, the Tribunal turns to Respondent’s argument — the second prong of Respondent’s
first objection — that the forum selection clauses in both the Bidding Terms and Conditions
and the Transfer Agreement affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. However, in the Tribunal’s
view, the forum selection clauses in these two instruments do not exclude the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.

First of all, both clauses do not extend ratione personae to the present dispute with
Respondent who is not herself party to the Transfer Agreement, nor was involved in the
privatization of ENJASA through the public tender in 1999/2000. More importantly,
however, both forum selection clauses do not encompass ratione materiae Claimants’
claims for breach of the BIT. This holds true with respect to both Article 8.3 of the Bidding

Terms and Conditions and Article 13.1 of the Transfer Agreement.

(i) Article 8.3 of the Bidding Terms and Conditions
Article 8.3 of the Bidding Terms and Conditions, the wording of which, including the
Parties diverging translations, is reproduced above,?”? provides that all participants in the
public tender process for the sale of Class A-shares of ENJASA by the Province of Salta
submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the ordinary courts of the Province of Salta. It applies

to all documents and instruments related to the public tender and the Transfer Agreement.

29 See supra para. 39.

92

257.

258.

259.

260.

However, the wording and context of Article 8.3 also make clear that the forum selection
clause only applies to disputes arising out of the public tender and its implementation, that
is, disputes of successful as well as unsuccessful bidders who participated in the tender
proceeding and who wish to complain, for example, about the conduct of those
proceedings. It concerns the submission of participants in the tender process to the
jurisdiction of the courts of the Province of Salta in respect of the public tender. By contrast,
Article 8.3 of the Bidding Terms and Condition cannot be read so as to cover disputes for
breach of the BIT arising in connection with the revocation of ENJASA’s license in 2013
and subsequent events, which is entirely unconnected to the privatization of ENJASA in
1999/2000. Such treaty disputes are beyond the remit ratione materiae of Article 8.3 of the

Bidding Terms and Condition.

(ii) Article 13.1 of the Transfer Agreement

230 contains a

Article 13.1 of the Agreement, the wording of which is reproduced above,
forum selection clause that provides for the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the
Province of Salta. Yet, this provision does not apply ratione materiae to disputes under the
BIT in connection with the revocation of ENJASA’s operating license and subsequent

events.

Instead, as becomes clear from its wording, Article 13.1 is limited to disputes arising out
of, and relating to the rights and obligations under, the Transfer Agreement. Sentence 2 of
Article 13.1 of the Transfer Agreement stipulates that the exclusive jurisdiction of the
courts of the Province of Salta applies to all effects derived from the present agreement
(“[...] todos los efectos derivados del mismo [ie este contrato]”). From the wording of this
forum selection clause, it is therefore clear that disputes under the BIT are not covered

ratione materiae.

What is more, neither the revocation of ENJASA’s license in 2013, nor subsequent events,
are effects derived from the Transfer Agreement. This is confirmed by Article 7.1.2 of the
Transfer Agreement, which deals with consequences arising out of a breach of the buyer’s

duties under the Agreement after the transfer has been effected. It stipulates that contractual

230 See supra para. 42.

93

consequences that may attach to the breach of the buyer’s obligations, are “without
prejudice to those [sections] determined by Law No. 7020, the Regulatory Decree or the
License.”*! This provision therefore makes clear that the consequences of a breach of the
Transfer Agreement, and by prolongation disputes arising therefrom, are independent from
sanctions both under the regulatory regime governing gaming in Salta and under the
License, and by prolongation disputes arising in that context. Consequently, disputes
arising in connection with public law sanctions cannot be regarded as disputes derived from
the Transfer Agreement and are thus not subject to the exclusive jurisdiction clause of

Article 13.1 of the Transfer Agreement.

261. Given the limited scope ratione materiae of both Article 8.3 of the Bidding Terms and
Conditions and Article 13.1 of the Transfer Agreement, it is also not necessary to address
the question to which extent contractual forum selection clauses are able to waive treaty
claims or recourse under the Argentina-Austria BIT. Neither forum selection clause applies
ratione materiae to the present dispute and, already for this reason, can have no effect on

the jurisdiction of the present Tribunal.

E. Conclusion
262. In light of the above, the Tribunal finds that Claimants have met the threshold of presenting
prima facie claims for breach of Article 4 of the BIT relating to expropriation, and for
breach of Article 2(1) of the BIT relating to fair and equitable treatment. Their claims as
presented qualify as treaty claims, not contract claims. They have also presented prima
facie claims that these treaty provisions were breached in relation to Claimants as
shareholder-investors in L&E and ENJASA. In particular, the Tribunal found that Article
4(3) of the Argentina-Austria BIT cannot be interpreted prima facie as limiting claims by

shareholder-investors to breaches of Article 4 of the BIT for expropriation. Moreover, as

 

231 Exhibit A RA 11: “Si realizada la transferencia de las acciones el Comprador incumpliere con alguna de las
obligaciones impuestas por este Contrato y/o el Pliego y/o demas documentacién integrante de la licitacién, se
aplicarén las siguientes sanciones sin perjuicio de las determinadas en la ley 7020, su Decreto Reglamentario y la
Licencia.” The Parties agreed on the following translation of this clause: “7. Tf once the transfer of shares has
been performed, the Purchaser failed to comply with any of the obligations arising from this Agreement and/or
from the Bidding Terms and Conditions and/or any other documents that form part of the Bidding Process, the
following penalties shall apply, notwithstanding those penalties set forth in Law No. 7020, its Regulatory Decree
and the License.”

 
    

   

   

94

263.

264.

265.

indicated above, the forum selection clauses in the Bidding Terms and Conditions as well
as the Transfer Agreement have a limited scope, which does not cover claims for breach of
the Argentina-Austria BIT arising out of the revocation of ENJASA’s license and
subsequent events. By contrast, Claimants have, in the Tribunal’s view, not been able to
present a prima facie claim for breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT relating to national
treatment. The Tribunal therefore rejects Respondent’s objection relating to a lack of a
prima facie claim insofar as it relates to claims for breach of Articles 2(1) and 4 of the BIT,

but upholds it with respect to Claimants’ claim for breach of Article 3(1) of the treaty.

3. Respondent’s Consent to Arbitrate

Finally, Respondent objects that she has not validly consented to arbitrate the present
dispute under Article 8 of the BIT. Her objection rests, at its core, on the view that
Claimants have not complied with the various and sequential requirements Article 8 of the
BIT sets out for Austrian investors to follow prior to submitting their claim to ICSID
arbitration. In Respondent’s view, Claimants have not, contrary to Article 8(2) of the BIT,
submitted the dispute now pending before this Tribunal to domestic courts after the
amicable consultations they initiated on 30 April 2014 (for CAI), respectively 7 August
2014 (for CASAG), and have not, contrary to Article 8(3) of the BIT, waited for the lapse
of 18 months while that dispute was pending in domestic courts, nor for a decision on the

merits of that dispute.

Furthermore, Respondent argues that any dispute submitted by ENJASA before domestic
courts in order to review the legality of the revocation of its operating license could not
fulfill the requirements under Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT as that dispute was not
identical, in terms of the parties and the causes of action, to the dispute pending before this
Tribunal. Moreover, Respondent argues that theses claims, even if they qualified as
domestic recourses under Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT, were not preceded by amicable

consultations for six months, as required by Article 8(1) and (2) of the BIT.

Instead, what Claimants should have done, according to Respondent, in order for this
Tribunal to have jurisdiction, is to bring a claim for breach of the BIT in Argentine courts
after initiating amicable consultations and waiting for six months, and only proceed to

international arbitration once that claim had been pending domestically for 18 months or

95

266.

267.

268.

269.

had not been granted on the merits. Respondent also contends that the necessary recourses
for breach of the BIT exist under Argentine law and that they are capable of leading to a

resolution of such a dispute within 18 months.

Furthermore, for Respondent the alleged breach of the BIT — and thus also the dispute to
which it led — arose only with the issuance by ENREJA of Resolution No. 315/13, not with
the issuance of Resolution No. 240/13. The latter, Respondent argues, was not a final
decision and therefore no dispute under the BIT could have existed yet. Consequently,
ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration against Resolution No. 240/13 could not be
considered as a submission of the dispute to “the competent administrative or judicial
jurisdiction” in the sense of Article 8(2) of the BIT. For Respondent, Resolution No. 315/13

was also not a “decision rendered” in the sense of Article 8(3)(b) of the BIT.

As a subsidiary argument, Respondent further points out that, even if ENJASA’s recourses
against Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13, in particular its Action for Annulment brought
in the First Instance Court of Salta on 5 February 2014, were considered to fulfill the
domestic remedy requirement under Article 8(2) of the BIT, Claimants’ initiation of the
present arbitration on 4 December 2014 would have been premature, as ENJASA’s
domestic recourse had not been pending for 18 months yet, nor had it resulted in a decision
on the merits. Finally, Respondent considers that, in all events, Article 8(4) of the BIT bars
this Tribunal’s jurisdiction as ENJASA’s claims against the revocation of its operating

license in domestic courts have not been withdrawn.

Claimants view the application of Article 8 of the BIT differently, as regards both that
provision’s abstract interpretation and its concrete application to the facts of the case. In
Claimants’ view, Article 8 of the BIT only provides, with its duty to engage in amicable
consultations and to submit the dispute to domestic courts or an administrative jurisdiction,
requirements that affect the admissibility of claims; it does not, by contrast, establish
jurisdictional conditions, or conditions precedent, of Respondent’s consent, which must be

fulfilled prior to the initiation of its claims before the Tribunal.

Furthermore, Claimants consider that ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration against
Resolution No. 240/13, which resulted in Resolution No. 315/13, fulfilled the requirement

in Article 8(2) of the BIT to have recourse to a domestic administrative jurisdiction. The

96

270.

271.

issuance of Resolution No. 315/13, in turn, constituted, in Claimants’ view, a decision on
the merits in the sense of Article 8(3)(b) of the BIT, which allowed it to submit the dispute
to international arbitration. These procedural steps, Claimants further point out, were
accompanied by various meetings with representatives of the Province of Salta in order to
discuss how ENJASA’s license could be reinstated. In Claimants’ view, the domestic
recourses ENJASA had submitted in the present case were the only available and pertinent
remedies within Argentina’s domestic legal order to address the grievance Claimants allege
to have suffered. Bringing claims for violation of the BIT against Respondent in her
domestic courts, as suggested by Respondent, in Claimants’ view, was not possible and in

any event futile within the 18 months-framework Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT establishes.

In addressing the present objection, the Tribunal will, first, address the source and existence
of Respondent’s consent and the nature of the pre-arbitral requirements contained in Article
8 of the BIT. It will then turn to the question of Claimants’ compliance with the requirement
to conduct amicable consultations for a certain duration in Article 8(1) and (2) of the BIT,
address Claimants’ compliance with Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT, and finally turn to the

arguments concerning Article 8(4) of the BIT.

A. Source and existence of Respondent's consent and nature of the pre-
arbitral requirements in Article 8 of the BIT

In dispute settlement proceedings under public international law, consent is the cornerstone

of, and conditio sine qua non for, the jurisdiction of an international court or tribunal. This

has been held consistently in the jurisprudence of the ICJ.?* Similarly, as a key element

for the jurisdiction of ICSID tribunals under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, the

consent of both parties to submit the dispute to the Centre is needed.”*? Whether, in the

See Monetary Gold Removed from Rome in 1943 (Italy v. France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and United States of America), Preliminary Objections, Judgment (15 June 1954), ICJ Reports 1954, pp.
19, 32 (AL RA 199); East Timor (Portugal v. Australia), Judgment (30 June 1995), ICJ Reports 1995, pp. 90,
104-105, para. 34 (AL RA 200); Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002)
(Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment (3 February 2006), ICJ
Reports 2006, pp. 6, 39-40, para. 88 (AL RA 39).

Daimler Chrysler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award (22 August
2012), para. 168 (AL RA 96); Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14,
Award (8 December 2008), para. 116 (AL RA 38). See also Report of the Executive Directors of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between

97

272.

273.

274.

present instance, consent has been given by Repondent and whether, together with
Claimants’ consent, it can be relied on by the Tribunal as a basis of jurisdiction, is a
question of interpreting Article 8 of the BIT pursuant to the rules on treaty interpretation

in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

In this context, it is important to note that Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention does not
require that the Parties’ consent is cast in the form of a contractual or contract-like
“arbitration agreement” or “agreement to arbitrate.”?** It is equally possible that parties
express their consent in the absence of privity, for example when the host State consents
in advance and in relation to a generally defined class of potential claimants in an
international investment treaty, and the claimant investor consents by bringing a concrete

claim for breach of that treaty.

In the latter scenario, analogies with contract-based arbitration and inter-State arbitration
on the basis of compromissory clauses in international treaties should be treated with
caution. Investment treaty arbitration is very different from contract-based arbitration, even
if both take place under the ICSID framework. It does not involve the assessment of
whether breach of an agreement concluded between the disputing parties has occurred, but
whether the respondent State abided by commitments made in an international treaty
concluded with the claimant investor’s home State. But investment treaty arbitration is also
different from inter-State arbitration because its disputes, while governed by public
international law, are resolved between investors and host States. Investment treaty
arbitration involves the review of legality under public international law of the host State’s
conduct initiated by an affected foreign investor. In terms of its function, it has therefore
been likened to mechanisms of judicial review found domestically in administrative or

constitutional courts or internationally in human rights courts.

These specificities of investment treaty arbitration also affect how investment treaty
tribunals should analyze pre-arbitration requirements contained in the investor-State

is not a

 

dispute settlement provisions of BITs. First, because its jurisdictional basi:

States and Nationals of Other States, 18 March 1965, para. 23 (AL RA 154) (providing that consent “is the

234

cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre”).
Contra Dissent, paras. 4, 10, 19, 39, 43-56, 61, 65, 80, 188, 189, 191, 202-205.

98

contract, an investment treaty tribunal should not ask whether Respondent’s offer to
arbitrate in the BIT was matched by Claimants’ acceptance, including compliance with any
strict pre-arbitration requirement, so as to result in a contractual “arbitration agreement.”
Instead, like in the context of dispute settlement under public international law, compliance
with pre-arbitration requirements in a BIT should be analyzed as a question concerning the

validity of the seisin of the Tribunal.?>

275. Yet, unlike in inter-State dispute settlement, where the ICJ has insisted, in certain cases,7*6
on the strict compliance with conditions of seisin under compromissory clauses, the
Tribunal considers that, unless pre-arbitration requirements are formulated clearly and
unmistakably as strict conditions to the validity of seisin, in investment treaty arbitration a
more flexible and less formalistic approach is warranted. Such less formalistic approach is
more in line with the object and purpose of investment treaties to promote and protect
foreign investment for the development of economic cooperation between States.
Moreover, investors — who are, unlike States, not subjects of public international law —
cannot be expected to be accustomed to the formalities of inter-State communication and
inter-State dispute settlement. Consequently, absent a clear and unmistakable formulation
to the contrary, investors should not be held to the formalities of public international law

dispute settlement with the same strictness as States.

276. These considerations also affect the interpretation of Article 8 of the Argentina-Austria
BIT. Article 8 of the BIT is the dispute settlement provision of a treaty, whose object and
purpose is to promote and protect foreign investment. It cannot be seen in a pure inter-State
context but is in fact addressed to investors, entitled to protection, and consequently has to

be interpreted in that light.” This does not mean that pre-arbitration requirements are

 

 

235 For this 1 approach see Application of the ional Ci ion on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Preliminary Objections, Judgment (1 April 2011), ICJ
Reports 2011, pp. 70, 121 et seg., paras. 122 et seq.

 

234

See Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic Republic of the Congo
v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment (3 February 2006), ICJ Reports 2006, pp. 6, 39-40, para.
88 (AL RA 39); Application of the ion on the El ion of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Preliminary Objections, Judgment (1 April 2011), ICJ Reports
2011, pp. 70, 125 et seq., paras. 132 et seq. For the alleged relevance of these cases, see Dissent, paras. 6, 33-37,
92-93, 186.

Similarly, Article 36(2) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which provides that a non-party

 

 

237

99

277.

278.

279.

234

optional. On the contrary, they remain, in principle, mandatory requirements. But — again,
unless the pre-arbitration requirements are formulated clearly and unmistakably to require
the same formalistic approach in assessing compliance with them — an investment treaty
tribunal should accord greater flexibility to the disputing parties than the ICJ accords to
conditions of seisin under compromissory clauses. It is against this background that the

Tribunal proceeds to analyzing Article 8 of the Argentina-Austria BIT.

In the Tribunal’s view, Respondent’s consent to arbitrate disputes under the BIT is
contained in the first sentence of Article 8(4) of the BIT, which provides, as per the English
translation agreed to by the Parties, that “under the terms of this Agreement, each
Contracting Party irrevocably consents in advance to the submission of any dispute to
arbitration.” This provision is a clear, certain and unequivocal manifestation of the consent
of both Argentina and Austria to arbitrations initiated by investors of the other Contracting
State. As stated in Article 8(4) of the BIT, this consent has been given “irrevocably” and

“in advance” at the time the treaty entered into force.

As per the wording of Article 8(4) of the BIT, the consent of the two Contracting Parties
to the BIT, therefore, does not only come into existence after any pre-arbitral requirements
contained in Article 8 of the BIT have been fulfilled by the investor prior to her submission
of the dispute to ICSID arbitration; instead, the two States’ consent to arbitrate has existed
all along since the time the Argentina-Austria BIT has entered into force. In light of the
clear wording of Article 8(4) of the BIT, there is no room here for the conclusion other
tribunals have reached on the basis of differently worded Argentine BITs, notably in JCS
v. Argentina, that prior to the fulfillment of pre-arbitral requirements contained in a BIT’s

investor-State dispute settlement clause, “[c]onsent is nonetheless not yet present.”?°*

The fact that consent to arbitrate disputes with an investor has been given in advance and

irrevocably in the relationship between the two Contracting States to the Argentina-Austria

beneficiary third State “shall comply with the conditions for its exercise provided for in the treaty or established
in conformity with the treaty,” can play no role in the current context. As invest
beneficiary third States under Article 36(2) of the Vienna Convention are not applicable to the relations between
host States and investors covered under the BIT.

ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. Argentine Republic, PCA Case No. 2010-9, Award in Jurisdiction
(10 February 2012), para. 262 (AL RA 40).

's are not States, the rules for

  

100

280.

281.

239

BIT at the time the BIT entered into force also affects the legal nature of the requirements
contained in Article 8 of the BIT. Since Respondent’s consent clearly already existed since
the time the BIT has entered into force, the pre-arbitral requirements laid down in Article
8 of the BIT, such as the need for amicable consultations in Article 8(1), or the need for
prior recourse to domestic remedies in Article 8(3), cannot be viewed as constituting
conditions precedent to the Respondent’s consent, non-compliance with which prior to
initiating the present arbitration would automatically and necessarily exclude the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, as held by other tribunals on the basis of differently worded
Argentine BITs.*° Instead, rather than affecting the existence of Respondent’s consent to
arbitrate, the pre-arbitral requirements in Article 8 of the BIT establish a procedure
Claimants have to follow before the Tribunal can exercise jurisdiction over the merits. This
procedure concerns the “how” and “when” of the Tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction, not

its “whether.”

In that sense, the pre-arbitral requirements in Article 8 of the BIT concern the validity of
Claimants’ seisin and do not go, as conditions precedent to Respondent’s consent, to the
question of jurisdiction. This does not mean, as stated above, that the pre-arbitral
requirements in Article 8 of the BIT are optional; they cannot be modified and their
sequence cannot be altered. On the contrary, they have to be complied with before the
Tribunal is able to proceed to analyzing the case on the merits. Yet, unless pre-arbitral
requirements are formulated clearly as conditions precedent for the respondent State’s
consent, they do not all necessarily need to be complied with prior to initiating the present
arbitration, but can also be fulfilled, as further detailed below, subsequent to that point in
time and until a decision on jurisdiction is taken. This is one way how excessive formalism,

which is inapposite in investment treaty arbitration, should be avoided.

That the pre-arbitral requirements set out in Articles 8(1)-(3) of the BIT do not constitute
conditions precedent to Respondent’s consent, also becomes clear from the wording of

Article 8(4) itself. While the Spanish version of that provision uses the term “condiciones”,

See Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award (22 August 2012),
para. 183 (AL RA 96); Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Award (21 June
2011), para. 94 (AL RA 46); Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14,
Award (8 December 2008), para. 160(2) (AL RA 38).

101

282.

283.

284.

a term that could lend itself to the view that the requirements in Article 8 conditioned
Respondent’s consent, the German version simply speaks of “Bestimmungen’’ (i.e.,
provisions), not “Bedingungen” (i.e., conditions), under which Respondent has given its
consent. As the more differentiated use of words in the German version thus makes clear,
the Contracting States to the BIT did not establish the pre-arbitral requirements in Article
8 of the BIT as conditions precedent to the existence of the host State’s consent to investor-
State arbitration, but rather as mandatory procedural steps investors have to take before a

claim can be decided by an international arbitral tribunal on the merits.

Against this general background, the Tribunal now turns to addressing what the pre-arbitral
requirements contained in Article 8(1), (2) and (3) of the Argentina-Austria BIT require of

Claimants and whether they have complied with them.

B. Amicable consultations pursuant to Article 8(1) of the BIT
Article 8(1) of the BIT provides, as per the agreed English translation of the Parties, as

follows:

Any dispute with regard to investments between an investor of one of the Contracting
Parties and the other Contracting Party concerning any subject matter governed by this
Agreement shall, as far as possible, be settled through amicable consultations between

the parties to the dispute.

This provision establishes an obligation that investor-State disputes under the Argentina-
Austria BIT be settled amicably. Yet, Article 8(1) of the BIT contains no more than a soft
or “best efforts” obligation incumbent on both parties to try to settle the dispute through
amicable consultations. As the wording of Article 8(1) of the BIT makes clear, this
obligation only exists, per the agreed translation of the Parties into English, “as far as
possible.” Consequently, if there are reasons why consultations are not possible at all (for
example because there is no willingness to find a negotiated settlement between the Parties,
or because the time-limits under domestic law for initiating the domestic recourses
provided for under Article 8(2) of the BIT do not permit for negotiations to be pursued) or
there are reasons why consultations cannot be pursued for full six months as envisaged by
Article 8(2) of the BIT (for example because the time-limits under domestic law for

initiating the domestic recourses provided for under Article 8(2) are shorter than six

102

285.

286.

287.

months), Article 8(1) of the BIT does not mandate the Parties to pursue negotiations,
depending on the circumstance, either at all or beyond the point in time when the domestic

remedies mentioned in Article 8(2) of the BIT have to be initiated.

Against this background, the Tribunal is of the view that Claimants have complied with
the requirement to conduct amicable consultations to settle the dispute pending before the
Tribunal. Already on 27 August 2013, and therefore before any formal steps were taken by
ENJASA to contest the validity of ENREJA’s Resolution No. 240/13, Mr. Tucek, the CEO
of CASAG, met with representatives of the Province of Salta and of ENREJA to discuss
what steps needed to be undertaken in order to reinstate ENJASA’s exclusive license.
Further meetings between representatives of Claimants and the Province of Salta
addressing the consequences of the revocation of ENJASA’s license took place after

ENJASA had submitted its Recourse for Reconsideration against Resolution No. 240/13.

Although the principal point at issue during these meetings was the reinstatement of
ENJASA’s license, agreement on this issue would have settled any dispute between
Claimants and Respondent under the BIT and avoided that the present proceedings be
brought. In addition, representatives of Claimants were already involved in these
negotiations, indicating that the issues at stake were not limited to the relationship between
ENJASA and ENREJA, or the Province of Salta, but already concerned the rights and
interests of the foreign shareholders in ENJASA. Finally, ENJASA’s Recourse for
Reconsideration against Resolution No. 240/13, even if only in the form of a reservation
of rights, expressly alluded to the breach of the Argentina-Austria BIT resulting from the
revocation of the License. All of this shows that the “dispute”, at the time, was not limited
to claims for breach of domestic law between ENJASA and ENREJA, or the Province of
Salta, but already concerned the rights of Claimants as foreign investors under the

Argentina-Austria BIT.

In that context, the Tribunal accepts that Article 8(1) of the BIT contains a broad
understanding of the “dispute” that must form the object of amicable consultations.

Differently from what is provided for under the inter-State dispute settlement provisions in

103

288.

289.

290.

240

Article 9 of the BIT,”*° Article 8(1) does not require that the dispute needs to relate
specifically to the interpretation and application of the BIT to the case at hand. Instead,
under Article 8(1) of the BIT, it is sufficient that the “dispute” be “with regard to
investments [...] concerning any subject matter governed by this Agreement.” This way of
framing the notion of “dispute”, in the Tribunal’s view, encompasses not only treaty claims
between the parties to the present proceedings, but any dispute that relates to how
investments protected under the treaty are treated by authorities of the host State. In the
present circumstances, the notion of “dispute” also covers negotiations concerning the
reinstatement of ENJASA’s license, even if at the time the breach of the BIT was not raised
as the principal argument. Such a controversy qualifies as a dispute “with regard to” a

covered investment and “concer[ns] any subject matter governed by this Agreement.”

Furthermore, while the meetings and consultations took place between representatives of
Claimants and of the Province of Salta, they fulfill, in the Tribunal’s view, the need for
Claimants to attempt the settlement of the dispute with Respondent, as the acts of the
Province of Salta are attributable under international law to the Argentine Republic
pursuant to Article 4(1) of the International Law Commission’s Articles on the

Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts.

The Tribunal also has no indication of fact to conclude that Claimants engaged in these
negotiations, which they initiated, without the genuine intention of trying to settle the
dispute arising out of the revocation of ENJASA’s license amicably. In the Tribunal’s view,
it cannot be required that Claimants furnish positive evidence of the existence of such

genuine intentions in the absence of clear indications suggesting their absence.

Finally, it needs to be noted that what is relevant in this context is not that, at the time,
Claimants deliberately and intentionally qualified or denominated their actions as
“amicable consultations” in the sense of Article 8(1) of the BIT; relevant is only that,
objectively an attempt at settling the dispute has been made prior to initiating the domestic

recourses mentioned in Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT. As the Tribunal has laid out

Article 9(1) of the BIT provides that “[a]ny dispute concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement
shall, whenever possible, be settled through diplomatic channels.”

104

291.

292.

293.

241

above,”*! substance, in this context, should be preferred over form. Amicable consultations
under Article 8(1) of the BIT do not require the same formalities as the use of “diplomatic
channels” by the BIT’s contracting States parties under Article 9(1) of the BIT as the first

step in their inter-State dispute settlement under the BIT.

Consequently, that Claimants have again initiated, what in their view at the time were
“amicable consultations” with the Argentine Republic through their letters of 30 April 2014
(in the name of CAI) and of 7 August 2014 (in the name of CASAG) is immaterial for
purposes of determining whether Claimants have complied with the pre-arbitration
requirements in Article 8 of the BIT before. The renewed initiation of consultations from
30 April 2014 onwards would not override or invalidate the fact that earlier amicable

consultations had taken place that fulfilled Article 8(1) of the BIT.

Against this background, the Tribunal is satisfied that Claimants have fulfilled the prior
consultation requirement provided for in Article 8(1) of the BIT with the meeting between
Mr. Tucek and representatives of the Privince of Salta of 27 August 2013 and its follow-
ups before ENJASA initiated its Action for Annulment against Resolutions Nos. 240/13
and 315/13.

Cc. Compliance with Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT
Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT provides, indicating slight, but immaterial differences in the

translations of the Parties, as follows:

(2) If the dispute cannot be settled through consultations within a term of six months,
the dispute may be submitted to the competent administrative or judicial jurisdiction

of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made.
(3) The dispute may be submitted to an arbitral tribunal in the following cases:

a) where, after a period of eighteen months has elapsed from the date of notification
of the initiation of the proceeding before the afore-mentioned jurisdiction

Respondent}/authorities [Claimants], no decision was rendered on the merits;

See supra paras. 275-276.

105

294.

295.

296.

b) where such decision has been rendered, but the parties are still in dispute
Respondent}/the dispute persists [Claimants]. In such case, recourse to the arbitral

tribunal shall render ineffective any decision previously adopted at the national level;
c) where the parties to the dispute have so agreed.

Thus, in addition to the need to engage in amicable consultations pursuant to Article 8(1)
of the BIT, Article 8(3) provides for conditions under which the dispute can be submitted
to an arbitral tribunal. Apart from the — presently not relevant — case of the parties’
agreement (Article 8(3)(c)), this can occur if the dispute has been submitted, either for 18
months without a decision on the merits (Article 8(3)(a)) or until such a decision is rendered
without resolving the dispute (Article 8(3)(b)), to one of the domestic jurisdictions or
authorities referred to in Article 8(2) of the BIT. Thus, before Claimants are able to proceed
to ICSID arbitration, they need to have obtained either a decision on the merits by a
domestic judicial or administrative jurisdiction or waited for such a decision for 18 months.
Furthermore, Article 8(2) of the BIT provides that the submission to the domestic
jurisdictions or authorities should be preceded by unsuccessful amicable consultations for

six months.

To determine whether these requirements have been fulfilled in the present case, the
Tribunal will first address the nature of the dispute that must have been submitted to a
domestic judicial or administrative jurisdiction. It then addresses whether any of the
domestic recourses initiated by ENJASA fulfills the requirement in Article 8(2) of the BIT
to have recourse to the “competent administrative or judicial jurisdiction.” Subsequently,
the Tribunal addresses whether Claimants have complied with the requirement in Article
8(3)(a) of the BIT that the dispute must have been pending for 18 months in a domestic

jurisdiction.

(i) The notion of dispute in Article 8 of the BIT
A first issue that must be addressed in this context by the Tribunal is whether the recourse
to a domestic jurisdiction required under Article 8(3) of the BIT must involve, as argued
by Respondent, a dispute identical to that submitted to ICSID arbitration, that is, a dispute
between identical parties and relating to an identical cause of action, namely a breach of

the BIT, or whether it is sufficient, as argued by Claimants, that the dispute in the domestic

106

297.

298.

242

243,

context involves substantially similar facts, without the need for identity between the
parties and causes of action. Only if Respondent’s position was the correct one, would it
be necessary for the Tribunal to determine the issue, which was highly contested between
the Parties and their experts, whether recourses of shareholder-investors for liability of the
federal State for breach of a BIT in case the complained of conduct originated from conduct
of one of the federated provinces are possible within Argentina’s domestic legal order or

not and whether they can result in a decision on the merits within 18 months.

In the Tribunal’s view, the notion of “dispute” for which recourse to domestic remedies
must be had pursuant to Article 8(3) of the BIT cannot be understood in the narrow terms
presented by Respondent. Instead, the notion of “dispute” under Article 8(3) of the BIT
must be understood, as already pointed out above in the context of Article 8(1) of the
BIT,” in a broad manner. What is relevant, in the Tribunal’s view, is not that the specific
cause of action, i.e., liability for damages for breach of the BIT, has been examined
domestically in proceedings between identical parties to the present arbitration, but that a
domestic jurisdiction had the opportunity to correct the complained about measure, thus
avoiding the need for formal international dispute settlement through investor-State
arbitration. This is all that is required in order to meet the object and purpose of a domestic-
remedies-first provision, such as Article 8(3) of the BIT, namely to provide domestic

institutions with an opportunity of self-correction."7

In the present case, exactly such an opportunity, which would have avoided the need for
formal recourse to investor-State arbitration was afforded in Argentina’s domestic legal
order when ENJASA challenged the legality of the revocation of its operating license, first
through its Recourse for Reconsideration against Resolution No. 240/13, and later through
its Action for Annulment against Resolution No. 315/13. Incidentally, also in this respect,
it bears noting that ENJASA’s Action for Annulment made the argument that the

revocation of the License constituted a breach of the Argentina-Austria BIT.2* ENJASA

See supra para. 287.

Cf. Teinver S.A. Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Jurisdiction (21 December 2012), para. 135 (CL-137); Philip Morris
Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products S.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A. v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/10/7, Decision on Jurisdiction (2 July 2013), para. 148 (CL-134).

See Exhibit C-221, pp. 130.-131.

107

Action for Annulment thus already vindicated the treaty claims pending before the
Tribunal, even though the domestic recourse was between different parties and involved a

different remedy.

299. That this reading of the notion of “dispute” in Article 8 of the BIT is the correct one also
follows from a look at the text of Article 8 of the BIT in toto. Thus. Article 8(2) of the BIT
provides that the “dispute” in question “may be submitted to the competent administrative
or judicial jurisdiction of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was
made.” In particular the fact that Article 8(2) of the BIT speaks of the possibility that the
“dispute” may be submitted to the competent “administrative jurisdiction” is a clear
indication that the contracting parties to the Argentina-Austria BIT did not understand the
notion of “dispute” in Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT to be limited to treaty claims between

the parties to the later international arbitration.

300. Indeed, it is uncommon that claims for breach of an international treaty are assigned to an
“administrative jurisdiction,” that is, administration-internal adjudicatory recourses
entertained by bodies or entities that are part of the executive, rather than the judiciary.74>
In fact, the Tribunal has not been pointed to the existence of such a mechanism in either
the Republic of Austria or the Republic of Argentina where claims for the breach of a BIT
between foreign investors and the host State could be resolved by an “administrative
jurisdiction.”

301. Article 8(4), second sentence of the BIT, in turn, confirms this broad understanding of
“dispute.” It requires that “[f]rom the commencement of an arbitration proceeding, each
party to the dispute shall take all the required measures to withdraw the pending judicial

proceedings.” As detailed further below, this obligation of the parties is not limited to

 

45 That this is the interpretation to be given to the notion of “administrative jurisdiction” becomes particularly clear
from the German version of Article 8(2) of the BIT, which speaks of “Verwaltungsverfahren” (i.e., proceedings
before administrative agencies or bodies) not “Verwaltungsgerichtsverfahren” (i.e., proceedings before
administrative courts). To the same effect, the German version of Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT speaks of “Behérden”
as the superordinate concept covering “the competent administrative or judicial jurisdiction,” not of “Gerichte”.
“Gerichte”, however, would have been the correct technical term, if what was intended by the use of the
contracting parties of the term “the competent administrative jurisdiction/authorities,” was a reference to
proceedings before an administrative court, rather than before an administrative entity or body that is part of the
executive, not the judiciary. The Spanish version of the BIT, in turn, uses the generic term “jurisdiccién”, which
can equally be used to refer to proceedings before administrative courts and administration-internal recourses.

 

 

 

 

108

302.

303.

withdrawing from domestic courts a pending treaty claim between the identical parties to
the present proceedings, but covers the broader set of proceedings that relates to the same
factual matrix as the present proceedings, whether between identical parties or between the
local subsidiary of foreign shareholder-investors and domestic authorities with separate

legal personality under domestic law from the respondent State.

Finally, the narrow reading of the notion of “dispute” supported by Respondent would have
the effect that shareholder-investors who wish to vindicate their rights as protected
investors under the BIT could only do so in an investor-State arbitration after two types of
domestic proceedings have been pursued: first, a recourse by the locally incorporated
company against the government’s conduct itself (as otherwise the effects of that act would
also become binding and un-appealable for the shareholder under domestic law); and
secondly, a recourse by the shareholder-investor before domestic courts for damages based
on an alleged breach of its rights under the BIT. Recourse to treaty-based arbitration, in
turn, would then only be open after the second type of proceedings had been pursued for
at least 18 months, or until a decision on the merits in those proceedings has been issued.
Such inefficiencies in the system of recourses under a BIT would not merely provide
domestic institutions with an opportunity of self-correction; they would unnecessarily
increase the length and costs of dispute settlement proceedings between foreign investors
and host States. That this is what the contracting parties to the BIT intended to do by
agreeing on a domestic-courts-first requirement in Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT is hard
to imagine and does not result in a good faith reading of Article 8(2) and (3) of the BIT

under the rules on treaty interpretation of the Vienna Convention.

Against this background, it is not surprising that investment treaty tribunals have often
adopted a broader notion of dispute to determining whether domestic-remedies-first
requirements in investment treaties have been complied with in cases involving investor-
State dispute settlement provisions similar to Article 8 of the Argentina-Austria BIT. Thus,

the tribunal in Teinver v. The Argentine Republic ruled that

109

304.

305.

306.

24

international legal remedies may apply “different law to different parties” than local
law remedies do, and this should not be a barrier to the fulfillment of any local court

remedy requirements.”

Similarly, the tribunal in Philip Morris v. Uruguay concluded that the

term “disputes”, as used in Article 10(2), is to be interpreted broadly as concerning the
subject matter and facts at issue and not as limited to particular legal claims, including
specifically BIT claims. The dispute before domestic courts under Article 10(2) does
not need to have the same legal basis or cause of action as the dispute brought in the
subsequent arbitration, provided that both disputes involve substantially similar facts

and relate to investments as this term is defined by the BIT.**7

Agreeing with these considerations, in the Tribunal’s view, the domestic recourses by
ENJASA against the revocation of its operating license fulfill the domestic-remedies-first
requirement contained in Article 8(3) of the BIT, even if the dispute pending before this
Tribunal is between different parties, namely a foreign shareholder of ENJASA and the
Republic of Argentina, and relates to the breach of the Argentina-Austria BIT, rather than
to the breach of domestic law. No other recourse between Claimants and Respondent for
breach of the BIT before a domestic jurisdiction was necessary to fulfill the requirement in
Article 8(3) to have recourse to domestic remedies first because Article 8(2) and (3) of the
BIT, in the Tribunal’s view, does not require that the domestic recourse be between the

same parties and concerning the identical cause of action and requested remedy.

(ii) Relevant domestic recourse in the sense of Article 8(2) of the BIT
The next question the Tribunal needs to address is which of the various domestic remedies
ENJASA made use of, if any, is the relevant one for determining whether Claimants can
have recourse to international arbitration pursuant to Article 8(3) of the BIT. In this context,
Article 8(3) of the BIT refers back to “the competent administrative or judicial jurisdiction

of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made” mentioned in Article

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Jurisdiction (21 December 2012), para. 133 (CL-137).

Philip Morris Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products $.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A. v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7, Decision on Jurisdiction (2 July 2013), para. 113 (CL-134).

110

307.

308.

8(2). Two amongst ENJASA’s domestic recourses have been the main focus of the Parties’
discussions: (i) ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration against Resolution No. 240/13
with ENREJA of 28 August 2013, which resulted in Resolution No. 315/13; and (ii)
ENJASA’s Action for Annulment against Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13 of 5

February 2014 before the First Instance Court of Salta.

Both of these recourses aimed at squashing ENREJA’s decision to revoke ENJASA’s
operating license. In case of success, they would have put ENJASA and Claimants back
into the status quo ante of operating in Salta’s gaming and lottery sector on the basis of an
exclusive license. Both of these recourses concerned, in the words of the tribunal in Philip

Morris v. Uruguay, “substantially similar facts” 748

as the dispute pending before the
Tribunal under the BIT and, for this reason, in principle fulfill the domestic-remedies-first

requirement established in Article 8(3) of the BIT.

Yet, the Tribunal does not consider that ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration against
Resolution No. 240/13 to ENREJA of 28 August 2013 was sufficient to fulfill the need to
submit the dispute to a domestic jurisidiction in the sense of Article 8(2) of the BIT.
Notably, Article 8(2) of the BIT does not require recourse to a domestic court before the
present Tribunal can exercise jurisdiction — submission to a “competent administrative
jurisdiction” is sufficient. Yet, the notion of “administrative jurisdiction” does not refer to
just any type of involvement of an administrative institution or agency in the resolution of
an investment dispute. Instead, the use of the idea of “jurisdiction” in Article 8(2) of the
BIT clarifies that the administrative agency in question has to make an independent
analysis of the legality of the host State’s conduct and decide in a binding manner on a
recourse by the person aggrieved in a way that is comparable to a court. Even if the result
is binding, without an independent analysis of the legality of government action, it is not
meaningful to speak of the existence of an administrative “jurisdiction” comparable to that

of a court.

28 Philip Morris Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products S.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A. v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7, Decision on Jurisdiction (2 July 2013), para. 113 (CL-134).

111

309.

310.

While the Tribunal is satisfied from the expert testimony given during the Hearing by
Professors Garcia Pulles, Bianchi and Mata”? that ENJASA’s Recourse for
Reconsideration was a proper remedy under domestic law in order to contest the legality
of the revocation of the License, the decision on that Recourse was taken by the same
agency that issued the measure in question, namely ENREJA. Although it may be possible
that an administrative jurisdiction in the sense of Article 8(2) of the BIT is organized as an
independent unit within the same executive agency whose acts are under review, the expert
testimony on the law in place in the Province of Salta did not establish positively that
ENREJA’s decision on ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration involved such an
independent analysis of the legality of ENREJA’s Resolution No. 240/13. On the contrary,
there were doubts as to the independence of ENREJA’s review of the legality of Resolution
No. 240/13 in response to ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration.” For this reason, the
Tribunal considers that ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration does not meet the
requirement that the dispute has been submitted to an “administrative jurisdiction” in the

sense of Article 8(2) of the BIT.

While ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration against Resolution No. 240/13 therefore
does not qualify as the submission of the dispute to a competent administrative jurisdiction,
ENJASA has also initiated, on 5 February 2014, an Action for Annulment of Resolutions
No. 240/13 and 315/13 with the First Instance Court of Salta. Unlike ENJASA’s Recourse
for Reconsideration, this action qualifies, in the Tribunal’s view, as a recourse to domestic
courts in the sense of Article 8(2) of the BIT. ENJASA’s Action for Annulment, which
involves the review of legality of the revocation of the License, involves, as termed by the
tribunal in Philip Morris v. Uruguay, “substantially similar facts” as the present dispute,
and, in case of success, would have done away, in principle, with the need to have recourse

to international arbitration before this Tribunal.

2 Exhibit C-273, para. 50, Exhibit C-274, para. 28, see also Hearing Transcript of 25 March 2017, pp. 496-500,

250

(Professor Mata), p. 564 (Professor Garcfa Pulles).

On the contrary, there was doubt as to the independence of the review of ENJASA’s Recourse for Reconsideration
within ENREJA. Professor Garcia Pulles stated in response to a question by one of the arbitrators whether in the
internal organization of ENREJA a decision on a Recourse for Reconsideration was taken by a different person
than the original decision, the following: “No. From the point of view of the body it is the same body. I cannot
say if the same people were involved when the two decisions were taken. It could have been the same people

because it is the same body.” See Hearing Transcript of 24 March 2017, p. 409.

112

311. Last, but not least, there is a question of timing, as Article 8(2) of the BIT stipulates that
the domestic remedies in question may be initiated in case the dispute cannot be settled
through amicable consultations within six months. However, ENJASA submitted its
Action for Annulment already on 5 February 2014 and therefore less than six months after

it had its first consultations with ENREJA and the Province of Salta on 27 August 2013.

312. Inthe Tribunal’s view, the term of six months mentioned in Article 8(2) of the BIT cannot
be read as a waiting period that has to be fully exhausted. Rather the term during which
negotiations should be pursued as provided for in Article 8(2) of the BIT cannot be read in
isolation. Instead, it has to be read and applied in connection with the requirement to make
use of domestic remedies before recourse to international arbitration, as provided for in
Article 8(3) of the BIT, and in light of any deadlines domestic law stipulates for the
domestic recourses in question. In this context, foreign investors, or their local subsidiaries,
as the case may be, can only be expected and required to engage in amicable consultations
as long as this is possible in light of existing deadlines under domestic law to initiate the
domestic recourses required under Article 8(3) of the BIT. Any other construction would
create a contradiction between the six-months consultation period laid down in Article 8(2)
of the BIT and the need to have recourse to domestic remedies in Article 8(3) of the BIT,
which need to respect requirements under domestic law in respect of form and timing in

order to be validly interposed.7*!

313. Given that the Recourse for Reconsideration against Resolution No. 240/13 had to be
submitted to ENREJA by 28 August 2013, that is, 15 days after Resolution No. 240/13 was
issued, and that subsequent to the issuance of Resolution No. 315/13 an Action for
Annulment had to be brought within a further delay provided for under domestic law in
order to challenge the revocation in the courts of Salta as required under Article 8(3) of the
BIT, the Tribunal finds that no breach of the period for amicable consultations laid down

in Article 8(2) of the BIT has occurred. Likewise, the sequence of the interposition of the

251 For this reason, the majority of the Tribunal also considers any parallel to the reasoning in Murphy Exploration

and Production Company International v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction (15 December 2010), paras. 140 et seg. (AL RA 204), which related to a “waiting period” under
Article V1(3)(a) of the Ecuador-United States BIT, inapposite. But see Dissent, paras. 29, 188.

113

314.

315.

various pre-arbitral requirements, that is, amicable consultation and recourse to domestic

remedies, has been respected and not side-stepped by Claimants.

(iii) Compliance with the 18-months requirement in Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT
Having determined that ENJASA’s Action for Annulment before the First Instance Court
of Salta was the relevant domestic remedy in the sense of Article 8(2) of the BIT, and
considering that no decision on the merits of that Action has been rendered, the Tribunal
must now address whether Claimants have complied with the requirement that their
domestic recourse is pending domestically for 18 months pursuant to Article 8(3)(a) of the

BIT.

Although by now 18 months have passed since 5 February 2014, when ENJASA submitted
its Action for Annulment of Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13 to the First Instance Court
of Salta, Claimants initiated the present arbitration on 4 December 2014, i.e., less than 18
months after ENJASA had recourse to the court in Salta. The question therefore arises
whether non-compliance with this 18-months requirement at the time of initiating the
ICSID arbitration make Claimants’ claims inadmissible under Article 8(3) of the BIT or
whether it is sufficient that the 18 months have passed when the Tribunal decides on its
jurisdiction and the admissibility of the claim. The wording of Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT
certainly does not mandate that the 18 months necessarily must have passed prior to
Claimants’ recourse to international arbitration, given that the Tribunal has decided that
this pre-arbitral requirement is not a condition precedent to Respondent’s consent. Article
8(3) of the BIT merely states that the dispute may be “submitted to an arbitral tribunal”
under the three circumstances mentioned. “Submission”, however, does not necessarily
have to refer to the time of the actual seisin of the arbitral tribunal. It can equally be
understood to refer to the time when the tribunal can actually exercise jurisdiction over the

claim and proceed to the merits.

316. That this is the understanding of Article 8(3) of the BIT is confirmed by the fact
that, under Article 8(3)(c) of the BIT, the dispute can be submitted to an international
arbitration “whenever the parties to the dispute have so agreed.” Given the consent-based
nature of jurisdiction of an investment-treaty tribunal, it would be sufficient for the tribunal

to base its jursidction on the parties’ agreement under Article 8(3)(c) of the BIT,

114

independently of whether that agreement was reached before or after the seisin of the
arbitral tribunal. Considering that questions of timing of the seisin are irrelevant for
purposes of Article 8(3)(c) of the BIT, they must also, mutatis mutandi, be irrelevant for

purposes of timing of the seisin under Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT.

A strict reading of comparable domestic litigation requirements under different Argentine
BITs may indeed be suggested based on the decisions by the tribunals in Wintershall v.
Argentina, Daimler v. Argentina, Impregilo v. Argentina, and ICS vy. Argentina.?>*
However, in none of these cases was the respective tribunal faced with the situation that
the respective claimant, or its local subsidiary, had actually initiated domestic proceedings,
but started investor-State arbitration under the BIT before 18 months had passed in the
domestic forum. Instead, in all of these cases, no domestic recourse at all had ever been
initiated.7* Consequently, the issue about subsequent compliance with the domestic-
remedies-first requirement was never considered in these cases. This notwithstanding, the
tribunal in Daimler Financial Services v. Argentina suggested that the subsequent
fulfilment of the 18-months requirement may have been sufficient when it answered the
question in the negative “whether the dispute has, at least in the interim, been litigated for

18 months before the Argentine domestic courts.” 7+

Be that as it may, in the Tribunal’s view, requiring that 18 months must have passed before
international arbitration is initiated is overly formalistic and not in line with the object and
purpose of a domestic-remedies-first requirement, such as that contained in Article 8(3) of
the BIT. After all, the purpose of such a requirement is to give the courts of the host State

an opportunity, for a certain time, to remedy the alleged grievance before an international

Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award (22 August 2012),
para. 183 (AL RA 96); Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Award (21 June
2011), para. 94 (AL RA 46); Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14,
Award (8 December 2008), para. 160(2) (AL RA 38); ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The
Argentine Republic, PCA Case No. 2010-9, Award in Jurisdiction (10 February 2012), para. 262 (AL RA 40).
Wintershall AG v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award (8 December 2008), paras. 7-11 (AL
RA 38); Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Award (21 June 2011), para. 90
(AL RA 46); ICS Inspection and Control Services v. Argentina, PCA Case No. 2010-9, Award on Jurisdiction
(10 February 2012), para. 246 (AL RA 40); Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No ARB/05/1, Award (22 August 2012), para. 191 (AL RA 96).

See Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No ARB/05/1, Award (22 August 2012),
para. 190,

115

319.

320.

321.

tribunal assumes jurisdiction, thus coordinating dispute settlement between national and
international jurisdictions. Nothing different is suggested by the wording of Article 8 of

the BIT.

Consequently, if it is clear, at the time the international arbitral tribunal decides on its
jurisdiction and on the admissibility of the claims, that the period the BIT required domestic
recourses to be pursued has passed without the dispute having been settled, the purpose of
the domestic-remedies-first requirement cannot be achieved anymore. To still insist on
strict compliance with it by dismissing the dispute in the present proceedings as
inadmissible, would be an exaggerated procedural formalism that is incompatible with the
fair administration of international justice in investment treaty disputes and the principle
of good faith, which govern the settlement of international disputes. After all, strict
insistence on the 18-months term before the present arbitration had been initiated by this
Tribunal, would not prevent Claimants to reinitiate an identical international arbitration
without facing obstacles to jurisdiction and admissibility in light of their non-compliance

with the 18-months requirement in Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT.

Moreover, the view that it is sufficient that domestic-remedies-first requirements, such as
that contained in Article 8(3) of the BIT, be fulfilled subsequently to the initiation of ICSID
arbitration, but before a decision on jurisdiction is taken, has even been accepted by a
number of investment treaty tribunals that qualified the domestic-remedies-first
requirement in the applicable treaty as going to the jurisdiction of the tribunal. If, however,
domestic-courts-first requirements that are found to be of a jurisdictional nature can be
complied with subsequently to the initiation of arbitration, but before a decision on
jurisdiction is taken, this must hold true a fortiori for domestic-courts-first requirements

such as those in Article 8(3) of the Argentina-Austria BIT.

Thus, the tribunal in TSA Spectrum v. Argentina concluded in a case where the claimant
had initiated ICSID arbitration before 18 months in domestic courts had passed without a

final decision, as required under the Argentina-Netherlands BIT, that

[...] despite the fact that ICSID proceedings were initiated prematurely, the Arbitral
Tribunal considers that it would be highly formalistic now to reject the case on the

ground of failure to observe the formalities in Article 10(3) of the BIT, since a rejection

116

322.

323.

255

256

257

258

on such ground would in no way prevent TSA from immediately instituting new ICSID

. 2
proceedings on the same matter.”°>

Similarly, in Teinver v. Argentina, the tribunal decided in respect of the claimant’s non-
compliance with a comparable domestic-courts-first clause in Article X(3) of the

Argentina-Spain BIT:

[...] while Claimants concede that the 18-month local court period had not lapsed at
the time they filed their Request for Arbitration, they are correct to note that 18 months
have subsequently passed, and the local suit remains pending. As such, the core
objective of this requirement, to give local courts the opportunity to consider the
disputed measures, has been met. To require Claimants to start over and re-file this
arbitration now that their 18 months have been met would be a waste of time and

resources.>°°

Likewise, the tribunal in Philip Morris v. Uruguay addressed a similar issue under Article
X(2) of the Switzerland-Uruguay BIT. The tribunal decided, basing itself on an analysis of
cases decided by the Permanent Court of International Justice and the ICJ, that it was
satisfied to proceed with the case, even though certain procedural preconditions to

jurisdiction had been met only after the initiation of the arbitration:?°’

The Tribunal notes that the ICJ’s decisions show that the rule that events subsequent to
the institution of legal proceedings are to be disregarded for jurisdictional purposes has
not prevented that Court from accepting jurisdiction where requirements for
jurisdiction that were not met at the time of instituting the proceedings were met
subsequently (at least where they occurred before the date on which a decision on

jurisdiction is to be taken).?**

TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/5, Award (19 December 2008),
para. 112 (AL RA 158).

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic, CSID
Case No. ARB/09/1, Decision on Jurisdiction (21 December 2012), para. 135 (CL-137) (footnote omitted).

Philip Morris Brands Sarl, Philip Morris Products 8.A. and Abal Hermanos S.A. v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7, Decision on Jurisdiction (2 July 2013), paras. 144-149 (CL-134).

Id., at para. 144 (footnote omitted).

117

324.

325.

326.

The tribunal in Philip Morris v. Uruguay therefore concluded that

it would be perfectly possible for the Claimants to commence these same proceedings
on the day after a decision by this Tribunal is handed down, a situation where dismissal

of the Claimants’ claims would merely multiply costs and procedures to no use.?°?

This jurisprudence also conforms to the approach both the Permanent Court of
International Justice and the ICJ have taken in a number of cases in respect of conditions
to the Court’s jurisdiction that were only fulfilled after the court had been seized. Thus, in

the Mavrommatis case, the Permanent Court held:

Even if the grounds on which the institution of proceedings was based were defective
for the reason stated, this would not be an adequate reason for the dismissal of the
applicant’s suit. The Court, whose jurisdiction is international, is not bound to attach
to matters of form the same degree of importance which they might possess in
municipal law. Even, therefore, if the application were premature because the Treaty
of Lausanne had not yet been ratified, this circumstance would now be covered by the

subsequent deposit of the necessary ratifications.?°°

Similarly, in Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia), the ICJ found repeatedly that the fact that Serbia had only
become a party to the Court’s Statute after the proceedings had been instituted did not
affect the Court’s jurisdiction for reasons related to judicial economy and the sound

administration of justice:

What matters is that, at the latest by the date when the Court decides on its jurisdiction,
the applicant must be entitled, if it so wishes, to bring fresh proceedings in which the
initially unmet condition would be fulfilled. In such a situation, it is not in the interests

of the sound administration of justice to compel the applicant to begin the proceedings

289 Jd., at para. 147.

260 Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions (Greece v. United Kingdom), Objection to the Jurisdiction of the Court,
Judgment No. 2 (30 August 1924) PCIJ Series A, No. 2, p. 34 (AL RA 162).

118

anew — or to initiate fresh proceedings — and it is preferable, except in special

circumstances, to conclude that the condition has, from that point on, been fulfilled.7°!

327. Only the case of Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation)*®? departs from this
consistent line of jurisprudence.”® In that case, the Court reasoned that the reference in
Article 22 of the International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial
Discrimination (CERD) to negotiations between the parties” established a condition
precedent to the Court’s jurisdiction.” Given that qualification, there was no need for the
Court to consider whether the negotiation requirement could have been fulfilled in parallel
or subsequently to seizing the Court. At the same time, there is also no indication that the
claimant in that case had made an attempt to fulfil the negotiation requirement subsequently
to initiating the case in question.”® This distinguishes the Racial Discrimination case from
both the Court’s earlier jurisprudence and the situation in the present case, where domestic

proceedings have now been pending for more than 18 months without a decision on the

261 Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia),
Preliminary Objections, Judgment (18 November 2008) ICJ Reports 2008, pp. 412, 441, para. 85. Similarly id.,
at pp. 442-443, paras. 87 and 89. See also Application of the C ion on the Prevention and Punis of
the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina y. Yugoslavia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment (11 July
1996), ICJ Reports 1996, pp. 595, 613-614, para. 26.

Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia
v. Russian Federation), Preliminary Objections, Judgment (1 April 2011), ICJ Reports 2011, p. 70.

Pointing out that departure and criticizing the Court for it: Application of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Preliminary Objections,
Judgment (1 April 2011), Joint Dissenting Opinion of President Owada, Judges Simma, Abraham and Donoghue
and Judge ad hoc Gaja, ICJ Reports 2011, pp. 142, 153-154, para. 35.

That Article provides:

Any dispute between two or more States Parties with respect to the interpretation or application of this
Convention, which is not settled by negotiation or by the procedures expressly provided for in this Convention,
shall, at the request of any of the parties to the dispute, be referred to the International Court of Justice for decision,
unless the disputants agree to another mode of settlement.

262

263

Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia
v. Russian Federation), Preliminary Objections, Judgment (1 April 2011), ICJ Reports 2011, pp. 70, 126, para.
136.

Similarly, in the Armed Activities case, there was neither an indication nor argument that the conditions under
Article 29 of the Convention on Discrimination against Women, including the attempt to initiate international
arbitration, had been met subsequent to the seisin of the Court. See Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo
(New Application: 2002) (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility,
Judgment (3 February 2006), ICJ Reports 2006, pp. 6, 39-41, paras. 88-93 (AL RA 39).

119

328.

329.

330.

331.

merits and where the Tribunal has found that the pre-arbitral requirements contained in

Article 8 of the BIT did not constitute conditions precedent to the Respondent’s consent.

In light of the above, the Tribunal concludes that ENJASA’s Action for Annulment of
Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13 complied with the need to have recourse to domestic
remedies under Article 8(3) of the BIT. This recourse has also been submitted after
amicable consultations had been initiated with the meeting of Mr. Tucek with
representatives of the Province of Salta of 27 August 2013 and pursued in subsequent
meetings. Since this recourse has now been pending for more than 18 months without a
decision on the merits, the Tribunal finds that it can exercise its jurisdiction in the present

case and proceed to the merits.

Dz. Effect of Article 8(4) of the BIT
Finally, the Tribunal must address Respondent’s argument that the fact that ENJASA has
not withdrawn its Action for Annulment of Resolutions Nos. 240/13 and 315/13, which is
pending before the First Instance Court of Salta, constitutes a bar to the Tribunal exercising
jurisdiction over the case under Article 8(4), second sentence of the BIT. This provision
stipulates, as per the English translation agreed between the Parties, that “[f]rom the
commencement of an arbitration proceeding, each party to the dispute shall take all the

required measures to withdraw the pending judicial proceedings.”

As becomes clear from its wording, Article 8(4) of the BIT establishes a duty for both
parties to take all required measures that the present “dispute” is not pending before the
Tribunal and in a domestic jurisdiction. The “dispute” in this context, as explained
before,” is a broad one and encompasses both the treaty claim pending before the Tribunal
as well as ENJASA’s recourses in domestic court, which already encompassed the claim
that ENREJA’s action breached the Argentina-Austria BIT. Under Article 8(4) of the BIT,
both of these proceedings cannot go forward in parallel, even if the parties to the respective

proceedings are different and the causes of action and requested remedies differ.

However, in the Tribunal’s view, Article 8(4) of the BIT cannot be read as requiring

Claimants to withdraw domestic proceedings already before initiating ICSID arbitration or

261 See supra para. 304.

120

332.

333.

334.

prior to receiving a decision on jurisdiction. This is clear from the wording and context of
Article 8(4) of the BIT. As per its wording, Article 8(4) of the BIT imposes an obligation
on both parties to take all required measures to withdraw the pending judicial proceedings;
but it does not formulate this obligation as affecting Respondent’s consent to international

arbitration nor as some other condition on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Although having to defend against two related claims, one in a domestic court, one in
international arbitration, is a burden for the host State, requiring Claimants to withdraw all
pending domestic proceedings prior to a decision on jurisdiction of this Tribunal would
impose an even greater burden on Claimants and risks bringing about a denial of justice.
After all, if Claimants were required to withdraw domestic proceedings prior to having
received a decision by the arbitral tribunal on jurisdiction, they would risk being left
without any remedy, both at the domestic and the international level, if the arbitral tribunal
decided to decline jurisdiction. Given that the domestic proceedings, once withdrawn,
could not be revived in order to address Claimants’ claims, this could result in a situation
where justice would in effect be denied. Consequently, the Tribunal finds that the
obligation in Article 8(4) of the BIT to withdraw any pending domestic proceeding only

arises once the present decision comes into effect.

In this context, the Tribunal takes note of Claimants’ undertaking that once a positive
decision on jurisdiction is rendered in the present arbitration, they will take all required
measures to withdraw any proceedings relating to the dispute pending in Argentine courts.
Yet, Article 8(4), second sentence of the BIT does not only impose an obligation on
Claimants. It imposes obligations on both Parties. The Tribunal accordingly finds that both
Parties have to take all required measures to withdraw the pending domestic proceedings

in order to comply with their obligation under Article 8(4), second sentence of the BIT.

Article 26, first sentence of the ICSID Convention, which provides that “[c]onsent of the
parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed
consent to such arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy,” does not suggest a
different conclusion or a different construction of Article 8(4) of the BIT. While Article 26
of the ICSID Convention provides for the exclusivity of ICSID arbitration to resolve the

dispute in question, the provision only has an effect on the proceedings pending in parallel

121

to the ICSID arbitration; Article 26 of the ICSID Convention does not stipulate that parallel
pendency in another forum has an effect on the jurisdiction or admissibility of the ICSID
arbitration. Instead, the parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration, and by prolongation the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, remain unaffected by the existence of parallel proceedings in
another forum.* Article 26 of the ICSID Convention does therefore not suggest a different
construction of Article 8(4) of the BIT from the one adopted by the Tribunal above. On the
contrary, the exclusivity rule of Article 26 of the ICSID Convention supports the Tribunal’ s
conclusion that the exclusivity of the ICSID arbitration should be achieved by withdrawing
the proceedings pending in parallel before Argentine courts as stipulated in Article 8(4) of

the BIT.

335. Article 8(4), second sentence of the BIT imposes an obligations of conduct, not result.
Consequently, both Parties have to take the measures that are in their power to bring about
the withdrawal of the proceedings concerning the present dispute that are pending in
Argentine courts. In the Tribunal’s view, they have to do so within two months from the
time the present Decision is issued, a timeframe the Tribunal considers reasonable in the
present circumstances. In order to monitor the Parties’ compliance with this obligation, the
Parties have to inform the Tribunal of the steps taken once the two-months timeframe

expires.

E. Conclusion
336. As aresult of the above, the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that Respondent has validly
consented to the jurisdiction of the Centre and the present arbitration under Article 8 of the
BIT at the time the BIT entered into force. It is at this time that both Contracting States to
the BIT, that is, the Republic of Austria and the Argentine Republic have declared their

consent to ICSID arbitration. This consent thus has existed since the entry into force of the

268 See Christoph Schreuer, Loretta Malintoppi, August Reinisch and Anthony Sinclar, The ICSID Convention: A
Commentary (2nd edn., Cambridge University Press 2009), Article 26, para. 2 (explaining that “once consent to
ICSID arbitration has been given, the parties have lost their right to seek relief in another forum, national or
international, and are restricted to pursuing their claim through ICSID. This principle operates from the moment
of valid consent. This exclusive remedy rule of Art. 26 is subject to modification by the parties. The phrase ‘unless
otherwise stated’ in the first sentence gives the parties the option to deviate from it by agreement.”).

    

 

122

337.

338.

339.

VII.

340.

BIT. Claimants, in turn, have consented to the jurisdiction of the Centre and the present

arbitration when they initiated the present claim against Respondent.

The pre-arbitral requirements equally laid down in Article 8 of the BIT, that is, the need to
attempt to settle the dispute through amicable consultations and to have recourse to
domestic remedies, do not constitute conditions precedent to Respondent’s consent, which
would need to be fulfilled at the time of initiating ICSID arbitration. They merely concern
criteria for the validity of the seisin of the Tribunal. The Tribunal found that it suffices that
these criteria are fulfilled at the time a decision on jurisdiction is taken. A contrary view
would be overly formalistic and would have the effect that, while the present Tribunal
would need to dismiss the present case, Claimants could immediately reinitiate the same
dispute in another ICSID arbitration proceeding. Such a situation would go against the

principle of fair administration of international justice.

Against this background, the Tribunal has found that Claimants have complied with the
requirement to first engage in amicable consultations pursuant to Article 8(1) of the BIT
and subsequently to submit the dispute to a domestic jurisdiction pursuant to Article 8(2)
and (3) of the BIT. Meanwhile, domestic recourses have been pending for more than 18
months without a decision, thus permitting the Tribunal to assume jurisdiction and assess

the pending claims on the merits pursuant to Article 8(3)(a) of the BIT.

Finally, the Tribunal finds that the pendency of the domestic court proceedings concerning
the review of the revocation of ENJASA’s license does not affect the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. This notwithstanding, once the present Decision has been issued, both Parties
are under an obligation to take all required measures that domestic proceedings relating to
the present dispute are withdrawn within two months and inform the Tribunal about the

steps taken.

COSTS

All Parties have requested the Tribunal to order costs and fees against the opposing Party.

The Tribunal reserves its decision on this question for subsequent determination.

123

Vill.

341.

DECISION

On the basis of the reasoning above, the Tribunal decides:

1

2

3

4

that it has jurisdiction over the present dispute insofar as Claimants’ claims for breach

of Articles 2(1) and 4(1)-(3) of the Argentina-Austria BIT are concerned;

that it has no jurisdiction over the present dispute insofar as claims for breach of Article

3(1) of the Argentina-Austria BIT are concerned;

that both Parties will within two months as from the issuance of this Decision take all
required measures to withdraw the domestic proceedings relating to the present dispute

and inform the Tribunal of their actions;

that a decision on costs is reserved for subsequent determination.

124

[ Signed ] [ Signed ]

 

Prof. Dr. Stephan W. Schill Dr. Santiago Torres Bernardez
Arbitrator Arbitrator
(Subject to the attached Dissenting Opinion
and Declaration of Dissent)

Date: 18 June 2018 Date: 20 June 2018

[ Signed ]

Prof. Dr. Hans van Houtte
President of the Tribunal

Date: 22 June 2018

125

