PCA CASE N° 2013-09

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION ARISING UNDER THE AGREEMENT

BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS AND THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA FOR THE PROMOTION AND

THE PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS ENTERING INTO FORCE JUNE 20, 2000

AND THE ARBITRATION RULES OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON
INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (1976)

- between -

CC/DEVAS (MAURITIUS) LTD.,
DEVAS EMPLOYEES MAURITIUS PRIVATE LIMITED, and
TELCOM DEVAS MAURITIUS LIMITED
(“Claimants”)
- and -

THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA

(“Respondent”)

Decision on the Respondent’s Challenge to the Hon. Marc Lalonde as Presiding
Arbitrator and Prof. Francisco Orrego Vicufia as Co-Arbitrator

By the Appointing Authority:

HE. Judge Peter Tomka
President, International Court of Justice

September 30, 2013

IL.

Decision on Challenge

INTRODUCTION

This challenge arises in an arbitration between Claimants CC/Devas (Mauritius) Ltd., Devas
Employees Mauritius Private Limited and Telcom Devas Mauritius Limited and Respondent
the Republic of India under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law 1976 (the “1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules”) pursuant to the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Mauritius and the Government of the
Republic of India for the Promotion and the Protection of Investments entering into force June
20, 2000 (the “‘Treaty”). According to Article 8(2)(d)(i) of the Treaty, the appointing authority
shall be the President, the Vice-President or the next senior Judge of the International Court of

Justice, who is not a national of either Contracting Party.

In this arbitration, the Claimants allege that the Respondent violated the Treaty by taking
measures affecting the Claimants’ investments in an Indian company, Devas Multimedia
Private Limited (“Devas”), which in 2005 entered into a contract with an Indian state entity
under the control of the Indian Space Research Organization, Antrix Corporation Limited
(“Antrix”).' According to the Claimants, pursuant to this agreement, Antrix agreed to lease
capacity in the S-Band, part of the electromagnetic spectrum, to Devas which would launch two
satellites to provide multimedia services to mobile users across India. The Claimants contend
that the Respondent endeavored to cancel the agreement in breach of its international

obligations under the Treaty.

This decision resolves a challenge brought by the Respondent to the appointment of the
Presiding Arbitrator, the Hon. Marc Lalonde, and the appointment of the arbitrator appointed
by the Claimants, Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, on the ground that the arbitrators served
together on two tribunals which took a position on a legal issue (the “essential security
interests” clause) expected to arise in the present proceedings. The Respondent finds further
grounds for challenging Professor Orrego Vicujia’s appointment in his participation on a third
tribunal that also took up the same issue and in an article authored by Professor Orrego Vicuiia
in which he discussed his view on the issue. The Respondent emphasizes that all three arbitral

decisions were later annulled or annulled in part.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Claimants appointed Professor Orrego Vicufia as co-arbitrator on July 3, 2012 and notified
the Respondent of his appointment in their Notice of Arbitration dated July 4, 2012.

' Notice of Arbitration, para. 1; Claimants’ Response, p. 4.

2

14,

Decision on Challenge

On December 26, 2012, the Respondent appointed the Hon. Shri Justice Anil Dev Singh as co-

arbitrator.

The two party-appointed arbitrators chose the Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C., to serve as
the third, presiding arbitrator pursuant to Article 7(1) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules. The Presiding Arbitrator notified the Parties by letter dated February 4, 2013, of his
acceptance of the appointment.

By e-mail dated May 11, 2013, the Respondent notified the Claimants and the Tribunal of its
intention to challenge the appointments of Professor Orrego Vicufia and the Hon. Marc
Lalonde.

The Respondent raised its challenge to the two members of the Tribunal at the First Procedural
Meeting held in The Hague on May 15, 2013.

By letter dated May 20, 2013, the Respondent requested that I decide its challenge in my role as
appointing authority (“Respondent’s Request”).

By e-mail dated May 21, 2013, the Claimants indicated that they would provide comments on
the Respondent’s Request by May 31, 2013.

By letter dated May 23, 2013, I invited comments from the Presiding Arbitrator and Professor

Orrego Vicuifia.

By letter dated May 31, 2013, the Claimants submitted their Response to the Respondent’s
Request.

By letter dated June 3, 2013, | informed the Parties as follows, seeking their comments, if any,
by June 10, 2013:

1. In June 2010, I was appointed by the Government of India as arbitrator to.
the seven-member Court of Arbitration under the 1960 Indus Waters Treaty
in the proceedings instituted by the Government of Pakistan. The Partial
Award in the case was rendered on February 18, 2013 (the text is available
on the PCA website).

2. The International Court of Justice is at present deliberating in the

Maritime Dispute case (Peru v. Chile) in which Professor Orrego Vicufia

has been chosen by Chile as Judge ad hoc.
By letter dated June 4, 2013, the Respondent commented on the Claimants’ May 31 Response
(“Respondent’s Reply”). By e-mail of the same date, the Respondent indicated it would not

raise any issue with respect to the June 3 disclosure.

? See Transcript of the First Procedural Meeting, pp. 5-40.

3

Decision on Challenge

15. By letter dated June 5, 2013, the Claimants commented on the Respondent’s comments of the
previous day (“Claimants’ Rebuttal”). By a second letter of the same date, the Claimants

indicated they would raise no issue on the June 3 disclosure.

16. By letters also dated June 5, 2013, Professor Orrego Vicufia and the Hon. Mare Lalonde

on the to their respective app

I. THE CHALLENGE TO THE HON. MARC LALONDE & PROF. ORREGO
VICUNA

Respondent's Comments

17. The Respondent challenges the appointments of the Hon. Marc Lalonde and Prof. Orrego
Vicufia on the basis of a “lack of the requisite impartiality under Article 10(1) of the 1976
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules due to an ‘issue conflict.’”"> The Respondent believes that
“strongly held and articulated positions by two of three arbitrators in this case on a
controversial legal standard of relevance here ‘give rise to justifiable doubts’ as to their

impartiality and constitute a valid reason for concern on the part of the Government of India”.

18. The controversial legal standard to which the Respondent refers is that of “essential security
interests” as found in Article 11(3) of the Treaty.’ In this arbitration, the Respondent intends to
argue that the governmental decisions the Claimants allege to be breaches of the Treaty were
made for reasons related to the State’s “essential security interests”. The Respondent’s
challenge is based on the fact that Professor Orrego Vicufia and the Hon. Marc Lalonde
participated in two cases together in which the legal interpretation of an essential security

interests provision arose.

19. The Resp identifies three i Centre for of Disputes
(“ICSID”) arbitrations chaired by Professor Orrego Vicujia in which the tribunals decided that

 

the essential security interests provision of the U.S.-Argentina bilateral investment treaty
incorporated the “state of necessity” defense under customary international law as reflected in
Article 25 of the i Law Ci ission Articles on P
Internationally Wrongful Acts.° The Hon. Marc Lalonde served as a co-arbitrator in two of

of States for

> Respondent’s Request, p. 1.
“ Respondent's Request, p. 5.

* Respondent’s Request, pp. 1-2. Article 11(3) states, in part: “The provisions of this Agreement shall not in any
way limit the right of either Contracting Party to apply prohibitions or restrictions of any kind or take
any other action which is directed to the protection of its essential security interests”.

© Respondent’s Request, p. 2. CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/OI/8); Sempra Energy International. v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16); Enron
4

20.

21.

22.

Decision on Challenge

those cases: Sempra v, Argentina and CMS v. Argentina. The Respondent further notes that
annulment committees were constituted to review the three arbitral awards rendered by the
tribunals in those cases. According to the Respondent, the annulment committees in the two
cases in which the arbitrators served together both concluded that the ruling on this legal point
by the original tribunals constituted manifest error, while the third award was annulled because

the original tribunal erred in its interpretation of the state of necessity defense.’

In light of the two arbitrators’ prior, shared rulings, the Respondent maintains that its challenge
should be upheld in the “interests of fundamental fairness” and to avoid that the Respondent is
placed at an “unfair disadvantage”.® The Respondent refers to an article stating that “to preserve
the appearance of impartiality, [an arbitrator’s having taken a clear position in a concurring or

dissenting opinion] should suffice to disqualify the arbitrator”.’

The Respondent asserts that its argument concerns “the legal standard to be applied” as
opposed to any relationship with the facts of the aforementioned cases in which the arbitrators
previously served.'° That legal standard, Respondent claims, is fundamental to other treaties
and has broad implications on which the two challenged arbitrators have already established

their views."

In respect of its challenge to Professor Orrego Vicufia, the Respondent further argues that his
“strong public declarations on the subject have included at least one clear writing in addition to
the three decisions in the aforementioned cases, a chapter in a book published in 2011 in which
he strongly defended his position”.'* In the Respondent’s view, Professor Orrego Vicufia’s
chapter demonstrates his sympathy toward a legal issue in this arbitration that would call into

question the fundamental fairness of the proceedings."*

 

Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3).

7 Respondent’s Request, p. 2.

® Respondent’s Request, pp. 3, 5.

° Respondent’s Request, p. 5, citing C, Mouawad, Issue Conflicts in Investment Treaty Arbitration, 5(4)

Transnational Dispute Management (July 2008), pp. 12-13.

'Respondent’s Request, p. 5.

"' Respondent's Reply, p. 7.

' Respondent's Request, p. 3, referring to the article Softening Necessity, published in LOOKING TO THE

FUTURE: ESSAYS ON INTERNATIONAL LAW IN HONOR OF W. MICHAEL REISMAN (M. Arsanjani et al.,
Martinus Nijhoff, Leiden, Boston 2011), pp. 741-751.

8 Respondent’s Request, p. 3.

23.

4Resp

Decision on Challenge

It is the Respondent’s position that its challenge is timely, despite the Claimants’ view that the
fifteen-day limitation under Article 11(1) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules expired by
the fifteenth day after each arbitrator’s appointment. The Respondent argues that the fifteen-day
limitation applies from the day on which the circumstances underlying the challenge became
known to the challenging party, emphasizing that actual knowledge is required.’* The
Respondent asserts that it “only became aware of the basis for the challenge . . . on May 11,

2013” three days after having retained new counsel.'*

The Respondent relies on a commentary on the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules stating that
Article 11(1) “requires that a party send notice of challenge within 15 days after the
circumstances underlying the challenge ‘became known to that party’”.'* The Respondent also
quotes from the commentary that “[t]he provision could have but notably does not include, the
phrase ‘should have known’ or ‘ought to have known’”.'” In support of its interpretation of
Article 11, the Respondent refers to a discussion in the Working Group charged with the
revision of the 1976 Rules. The Working Group considered the addition of a provision that
would grant the inting authority di: ion to dismiss a if the challenging party
“ought reasonably to have known the grounds for challenge at an earlier stage of the
procedure”. According to the Working Group’s Report, that language was rejected in part
because it was considered that it would create a standard of “imputed knowledge that would be
a novelty in the Rules”.'®

According to the Respondent, the Claimants’ argument that “ignorance of the law” does not
help a party evade the fifteen-day time limit is irrelevant here. The Respondent further contends
that one of the cases on which the Claimants rely, AWG y. Argentina, supports not Claimants’
position, but rather Respondent’s, because in that case the time period was said to have begun

from the date that the respondent knew of the arbitrator’s prior ruling."

ondent’s Reply, p. 2.

'5 Respondent's Request, p. 7.

‘© Respondent’s Request, p. 6, quoting from David D. Caron & Lee M. Caplan, THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION

"" Ibid.

8 Ibid.

RULES: A COMMENTARY (Oxford University Press 2013), p. 245.

, at footnote 260, p. 245.

'9 Respondent's Reply, p. 4.

26.

27.

Decision on Challenge

Finally, the Respondent maintains that the challenge is not untimely because the first memorial
had not yet been filed at the time the challenge was made and there would be little disruption to

the proceedings as a result.”

It is the Respondent’s position that its challenge carries additional weight, and is

unprecedented, on the basis that it involves two arbitrators implicated in the same way.”

Claimants’ Comments

28.

29.

The Claimants ask the appointing authority to reject the Respondent’s challenge in light of its

untimeliness, lack of merit, and unprecedented foundation.

Turning first to the question of timeliness, the Claimants maintain that Article 11(1) of the 1976
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules “does not excuse a party from the fifteen-day deadline by
claiming ignorance” of the legal issues at stake here and the decisions of prior tribunals on
those issues.” The Claimants argue that to allow the challenge at this stage would
inappropriately reward a party that does not retain counsel until the eleventh hour.” The
Claimants stress that the “security decision” at issue was known to be relevant since December

12, 2011—the date of a letter from the Claimants to the Respondent conceming the dispute.

On the merits of the challenge, the Claimants assert that the Respondent has not cited and
cannot cite any decision in which an arbitrator was removed on the basis of an issue conflict; all
challenge decisions addressing the question have rejected the issue conflict premise. In the
Claimants’ view, “the mere fact that an arbitrator has decided a particular legal issue in a past
case involving a different treaty and different parties, is simply not a proper basis for
challenging that arbitrator’s impartiality”.

According to the Claimants, to accept such a basis for a challenge would prove untenable for
the investor-state system. It cites a decision on a challenge in Universal Compression
International Holdings, S.L.U. v. Venezuela, in which the World Bank President, as Chairman
of the Administrative Council of ICSID, described how “the international investment

arbitration framework would cease to be viable if an arbitrator was disqualified simply for

2° Respondent’s Reply, p. 5.

2! Respondent’s Reply, p. 9.

Claimants’ Response, p. 2.

3 Claimants’ Response, p. 11.

>4 Claimants’ Response, p. 16.

5 Claimants’ Rebuttal, pp. 1-2.

32,

Decision on Challenge

having faced similar factual or legal issues in other arbitrations”.** Moreover, it creates a
slippery slope for counsel attempting to evade a deadline for bringing a challenge by not
advising one’s client of an appointed arbitrator's previous decisions until convenient to the

party’s legal strategy, as a stall tactic.””

Referring to certain arbitral challenge decisions, the Claimants further argue that having
rendered an opinion on an issue is not a basis for challenging impartiality as impartiality must
entail bias toward a party which the Respondent has not raised here. The Claimants
distinguish the Respondent’s cited commentary and assert to the contrary that the International
Bar Association Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration expressly
provide that no conflict or bias is created when an arbitrator has previously published a general
opinion concerning an issue arising in the arbitration.” In the Claimants’ view, the

Respondent’s theory would only support “tactical challenges to duly appointed arbitrators”.°°

Professor Orrego Vicufia’s Comments

33.

34.

Professor Orrego Vicuiia rejects the Respondent’s basis for its challenge. He stresses that the
questions involved in the cases to which the Respondent refers are unrelated to the provisions
of the Treaty in this case and that he remains unaware of the arguments on which the
Respondent intends to rely. Thus, in Professor Orrego Vicufia’s view, there is no possible

conflict of interest.

Further, Professor Orrego Vicujia maintains that the composition of a tribunal cannot be made
dependent on the views that a party may or may not make in the future.’’ The fact that the
Respondent announces it is “likely” that “the question of state of necessity” may be raised is

“not specific enough to justify a challenge”. He stresses that “the question concerning state of

26 Claimants’ Response, p. 4, citing Universal Compression Int’l Holdings, S.L.U. v. Venezuela, Decision on

Proposal to Disqualify, (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5), para. 84 [hereinafter Universal Compression].

27 Claimants’ Rebuttal, p. 3.

28 Claimants’ Response, pp. 12-13, citing AWG Group v. Argentina/Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de

Barcelona S.A. v. Argentina, Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral
Tribunal, para. 21; Tidewater Inc. v. Venezuela, Decision on Proposal to Disqualify, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/15), paras. 65-66; Urbaser S.A. v. Argentina, Decision on Proposal to Disqualify, (ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/26), para. 45; and, Universal Compression, para. 83.

Claimants’ Response, p. 14.

°° Claimants’ Response, p. 15.

3! Professor Orrego Vicufia’s Comments, p. 1.

® Professor Orrego Vicuiia’s Comments, p. 2.

35.

Decision on Challenge

necessity in the Argentina-United States Bilateral Investment Treaty ... [is] unrelated to the
provision of the India-Mauritius Bilateral Investment Treaty”. Likewise, in his view, there is
no resemblance between the factual situation as argued in the Argentinean cases and the

economic situation of India, as far as he is able to ascertain.

Professor Orrego Vicuiia reiterates his impartiality and denies that he has made any “strong
public declarations” on any relevant topic as the Respondent claims. Nothing in his 2011 book
chapter could be construed as a strong public declaration. In Professor Orrego Vicufia’s view, it
is for counsel to convince a tribunal as to an appropriate interpretation of treaty language in

each case.

The Hon. Marc Lalonde’s Comments

36.

38.

The Hon. Marc Lalonde makes three observations in respect of his view that the arguments
presented by the Respondent do not justify his withdrawal from the case. He notes, first, that
the Treaty as well as the facts at issue in the current case differ from those involved in the cases

to which the Respondent refers.

Second, Mr. Lalonde highlights that the decisions in the two Argentinean cases in which he was
involved were rendered “well before the decisions of the annulment committees” in those cases
or in the third case to which the Respondent refers; the decisions in the latter cases were
rendered in 2005 and 2007 respectively. On that point, he adds that the interpretation of the
state of necessity defense in relation to the U.S.-Argentina bilateral investment treaty has been

the subject of intense debate.*>

Third, should a question of essential security interests arise in this case, Mr. Lalonde maintains
that his intention is to “approach the matter with an open mind and to give it full
consideration”. He declares: “I would certainly not feel bound by the CMS or the Sempra

Awards which . . . referred to a different treaty and different facts”.

% Professor Orrego Vicufia’s Comments, p. 2.

» Professor Orrego Vicufia’s Comments, p. 2.

35 The Hon. Marc Lalonde’s Comments, p. 1.

Iv.

39.

41.

42.

43.

Decision on Challenge

ANALYSIS
Rules relevant to the challenge

It is common ground between the Parties that Articles 10 and 11 of the 1976 UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules set out the relevant provisions for the resolution of the Respondent’s

challenge.

Article 10(1) provides:

Any arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to
justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence.

Article 11(1) restricts the timing of any challenge under Article 10, stating:

A party who intends to challenge an arbitrator shall send notice of his
challenge within fifteen days after the appointment has been notified to the
challenging party or within fifteen days after the circumstances mentioned
in articles 9 and 10 became known to that party.

Timeliness of the challenge

The Parties disagree as to the date on which the limited fifteen-day period provided in Article
11(1) began here. The Parties’ disagreement turns on their respective definitions of which facts
constitute “circumstances . . . that give rise to justifiable doubts” as stated in Article 10(1) and

referenced in Article 11.

According to the Claimants, the fifteen-day period expired on July 20, 2012 in reference to any
challenge to Professor Orrego Vicufia’s appointment on the ground raised by the Respondent
because, in the Claimants’ view, all the facts forming the basis for the challenge were known to
the Respondent by July 4, 2012, the date of notification of Professor Orrego Vicufia’s
appointment.** In the Claimants’ view, the relevant facts are those relating to the nature of the
issues in the case (including the potential for an “essential security” issue to arise) and the
identity of the arbitrator.” Likewise, the fifteen-day period began on February 4, 2013 and
expired February 20, 2013 in reference to the present challenge to the appointment of the Hon.

Mare Lalonde for the same reason.**

The Respondent, on the other hand, argues that the fifteen-day period began no earlier than
May 11, 2013: the date on which it claims it first leamed of the facts giving rise to the

challenge, which are, in the Respondent’s view, the arbitrators’ past decisions and Professor

*6 Claimants’ Response, pp. 2, 11.

37 Claimants’ Response, p. 10.

3* Claimants’ Response, pp. 2, 11.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

Decision on Challenge

Orrego Vicufia’s 2011 book chapter. The Respondent notified the Tribunal and the Claimants

the same day of its intention to raise the challenge.

I agree with the Respondent that the pertinent circumstances constituting the basis for its
challenge as argued in the materials presented to me and triggering the fifteen-day period of
Article 11(1) are the facts that the two arbitrators served together on the CMS and Sempra
tribunals, that Professor Orrego Vicufia additionally chaired the Enron tribunal, and that all
three tribunals took a position on “essential security interest” in their awards (which were
subsequently annulled), Further, Professor Orrego Vicufia wrote an article in 2011, defending

the approach of these three tribunals.

The Claimants do not contest the Respondent's assertion that it learned of the arbitrators’ co-
participation in CMS and Sempra, Professor Orrego Vicufia’s chairmanship in Enron, and
Professor Orrego Vicufia’s later book chapter on May 11, 2013 — just three days after the
Respondent retained new co-counsel. Rather, the Claimants stress that the Respondent could
have known these facts at the time of the appointments of Professor Orrego Vicufia and the
Hon. Marc Lalonde and that the Respondent should not be rewarded for having retained an

experienced counsel at the eleventh hour.

In my view, the text of Article 11(1) is clear enough when it speaks of “the
circumstances .. . became known to the party”. According to one leading commentary on the
UNCITRAL Rules, Article 11 requires actual knowledge of the fact(s) invoked as a basis for
the challenge. Thus, the Parties agree that these facts, which I have found to be those relevant to
the timeliness evaluation, became known to the Respondent on May 11, 2013, at which point
the Respondent informed the Claimants about its forthcoming challenge, which was then
formally raised at the First Procedural Meeting of the Tribunal on May 15, 2013. The
Respondent’s Request is therefore timely pursuant to Article 11 of the 1976 UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules.

The Claimants maintain, theless, that the Resp ’s “actual k ig

of Article 11 creates an unworkable and risky standard. Under the Respondent’s interpretation,
counsel could wait to inform his or her client of circumstances giving rise to justifiable doubt at
any stage in the proceeding, permitting a party to present a challenge without regard to the

egregiousness of counsel’s strategic maneuver.”

In my view, the Respondent has not raised a frivolous challenge intended to subvert the object

and purpose of the fifteen-day limit. Moreover, the Claimants suffer no prejudice by my

® Claimants’ Rebuttal, p. 3.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

Decision on Challenge

entertaining the challenge at this stage nor would it pose any serious interruption to the

proceedings.

Having dismissed the Claimants’ objection to the timeliness of the challenge, I turn now to the

merits of the Respondent’s Request.

Merits of the challenge

The Respondent claims that circumstances give rise to justifiable doubts as to the impartiality,
and not the independence, of the Presiding Arbitrator and Professor Orrego Vicuiia, stating that
its “challenge is not based on a lack of independence or inappropriate action by either Professor

Orrego Vicufia or Mr. Lalonde, both of whom it holds in high esteem”.“°

The basis for the Respondent's doubts as to the arbitrators’ impartiality is what the Respondent
calls an “issue conflict”.*! By “issue conflict”, the Respondent refers to a pre-existing view held
by the arbitrators regarding an issue in dispute between the Parties. The Respondent considers
that previous statements attributable to the arbitrators reflect their pre-determined view and that
the arbitrators might have a “professional interest” in a particular result to avoid contradicting
their earlier decisions.”

The Respondent’s concern is that the two arbitrators “strongly held and articulated positions ”**

on the interpretation of the “essential security interests” provision together in two cases (CMS
and Sempra) and that Professor Orrego Vicufia again repeated that position in Enron and
defended it in a 2011 book chapter he authored. Of relevance in the three cases was Article XI

of the U.S.-Argentina bilateral investment treaty which provides:

This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party of measures
necessary for the maintenance of public order, the fulfillment of its
obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration of international
peace or security, or the protection of its own essential security interests.
(emphasis added)

The CMS, Sempra, and Enron tribunals analyzed the legal concept of “essential security
interests” in reference to customary international law on the state of necessity and were later
criticized, as the Respondent highlights, in respect of those analyses by subsequently appointed

annulment committees.

4 Respondent's Request, p. 5 (footnote omitted).

“" Respondent's Request, p. 1.

® Respondent's Request, pp. 1-2.

“ Respondent’s Request, pp. 1-2.

Decision on Challenge

54, The full text of Article 11(3) of the present Treaty (between India and Mauritius) states:

The provisions of this Agreement shall not in any way limit the right of
either Contracting Party to apply prohibitions or restrictions of any kind or
take any other action which is directed to the protection of its essential
security interests, or to the protection of public health or the prevention of
diseases in pests and animals or plants. (emphasis added)

55. The Respondent emphasizes that its concern is not related to the substance of the arbitrators’
previously stated views, but rather to the totality of the circumstances, including their service
together on two occasions, as well as the additional decision and chapter by Professor Orrego
Vicufia, from which it believes its doubts as to both arbitrators’ open-mindedness on the

standard for the application of an “essential security interests” provision are justifiable.

56. In response, the Claimants contend: first, that these circumstances do not give rise to justifiable
doubts within the meaning of Article 10 of the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules as the
prior decisions do not di iality toward either Party; second, that a

prior decision of law or other opinion on a legal issue cannot serve as a basis for a challenge
either under the Rules or in the context of the international investment arbitration framework
taken as a whole; and third, that granting the Respondent’s Request would be an unprecedented
outcome disqualifying an arbitrator for having rendered a decision on a point of law in an

unrelated arbitration with different facts, different parties, and a different treaty.

57. Before turning to my analysis in respect of each arbitrator, I note that the intention of the
Respondent to rely on the “essential security interests” provision in Article 11(3) of the Treaty
seems credible, not just a pretext to mount the present challenge. According to the Notice of
Arbitration, the Additional Solicitor-General of India recommended that the Government of
India could make a “policy” decision to reserve the S-Band to itself for national and military
purposes. Such decision, he opined, then could serve as basis for Antrix to terminate the
contract with Devas, the company in which the Claimants maintain to have made their
investment.* It is certain that the justification provided for the termination of the contract will
be one of the legal issues to be considered by the Tribunal should it reach the merits of the

dispute, including whether the Respondent can successfully rely on Article 11(3) of the Treaty.

58. [also note that the basis for the alleged conflict of interest in a challenge invoking an “issue
conflict” is a narrow one as it does not involve a typical situation of bias directly for or against
one of the parties. The conflict is based on a concern that an arbitrator will not approach an

issue impartially, but rather with a desire to conform to his or her own previously expressed

“ See Notice of Arbitration, pp. 3-4. See also Claimants’ Response, pp. 4-5 and Claimants’ letter of
December 12, 2011, addressed to the Prime Minister of India, inviting the Government to settle the
dispute pursuant to Article 8(1) of the Treaty (the letter was copied, among others, to the National
Security Advisor to the Prime Minister of India).

13

59.

Decision on Challenge

view. In this respect, as discussed by the Parties, some challenge decisions and commentators
have concluded that knowledge of the law or views expressed about the law are not per se
sources of conflict that require removal of an arbitrator; likewise, a prior decision in a common
area of law does not automatically support a view that an arbitrator may lack impartiality.*
Thus, to sustain any challenge brought on such a basis requires more than simply having
expressed any prior view; rather, I must find, on the basis of the prior view and any other
relevant circumstances, that there is an appearance of pre-judgment of an issue likely to be

relevant to the dispute on which the parties have a reasonable expectation of an open mind.

The fact that Professor Orrego Vicuiia in all three cases and the Hon. Marc Lalonde in two
cases adopted a consistent view on the concept of “essential security interests” is not surprising,
as those tribunals applied the same provision to similar facts, prior to the issuance of the first of
the three annulment decisions.“* Both arbitrators claim that they will approach the issue in the

pending case with an open mind.

(1) The challenge to the appointment of Professor Orrego Vicufia

60.

61.

62.

Professor Orrego Vicufia observes that each party bears the burden of convincing a tribunal of
the appropriate interpretation of a treaty and asserts that he has not made any pre-determination

as to the meaning of any provision in the present Treaty.

There is no doubt that the facts in the present case and the Argentinean cases are different. The
Respondent’s point is that “the issue giving rise to this challenge is neither treaty-specific nor
fact-specific”.*” The Respondent accepts that every case is fact-specific and does not contend
that the facts at issue in the Argentinean cases are relevant to this arbitration.** Rather, it
contends that as to the interpretation of “essential security interests”, Professor Orrego Vicufia

has a closed view.

I agree with Professor Orrego Vicufia that the Parties bear the burden of convincing the

Tribunal of an appropriate interpretation to be applied. It is not disputed that, should it reach the

*5 See supra note 26 and accompanying text.

“© The award in CMS was dispatched to the parties in that case on May 12, 2005, the award in Enron on May 22,

2007 and the one in Sempra on September 28, 2007. The first annulment decision, the one in CMS, was
issued on September 25, 2007. It could not have been taken into account by any of the three tribunals
as the last one of them, in Sempra, completed its work just a few days prior to its issuance. In fact, the
arbitrators in Sempra signed the award between September 9 and 18, 2007. The two other annulment
decisions were issued in 2010: in Sempra on June 29, and in Enron on July 30.

‘7 Respondent’s Reply quoted in Claimants’ Rebuttal at p. 2, para. 2.

4 Respondent's Request, p. 5, point 2.

63.

Decision on Challenge

merits of the Parties’ arguments, the Tribunal will face the issue of essential security interests,
In interpreting this legal concept, Professor Orrego Vicufia has assumed a consistent position in
three decisions. On a fourth occasion, he further affirmed that position in an academic article in
which he wrote:

While the interlinking of treaty and customary law requirements in respect

of necessity has been held to be a manifest error of law in the context of a

particular case [referring to the decision of the CMS annulment committee],

one may respectfully wonder whether the error of law might not lie with the

approach suggesting that a rather vague clause of a treaty might be able to
simply do away with the obligations established under the same treaty.

(..]

In this light the discussion about whether the availability of the defense

should first be examined under the treaty and, only if unsuccessful,

examined next under customary international law, appears to be somewhat

circular. If the treaty precludes the defense there is no second shot at it

under customary law. If it provides for an exception and this is not defined,

its examination under customary international law will be the first and only

shot supplementing the treaty vacuum. It is the two shots that would appear

to run counter to the strictness of the requirements of international law.
Moreover, in his comments on the challenge in the present case, he still refers to “the questions
concerning state of necessity in the Argentina-United States Bilateral Investment treaty which
were before several tribunals in which [he] sat as President”.
The standard to be applied here evaluates the objective reasonableness of the challenging
party’s concern.” In my view, being confronted with the same legal concept in this case arising
from the same language on which he has already pronounced on the four aforementioned
occasions could raise doubts for an objective observer as to Professor Orrego Vicuiia’s ability
to approach the question with an open mind. The later article in particular suggests that, despite
having reviewed the analyses of three different annulment committees, his view remained
unchanged. Would a reasonable observer believe that the Respondent has a chance to convince
him to change his mind on the same legal concept?" Professor Orrego Vicufia is certainly
entitled to his views, including to his academic freedom. But equally the Respondent is entitled
to have its arguments heard and ruled upon by arbitrators with an open mind. Here, the right of
the latter has to prevail. For this reason, I agree with the Respondent that Professor Orrego

Vicufia should withdraw from this arbitration.

* Professor Orrego Vicufia’s Comments, p. 1.

* David D. Caron and Lee M. Caplan, THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES: A COMMENTARY (Oxford

University Press 2013), p. 210.

5! Professor Orrego Vicufia states in his Comments on the challenge that “if counsel for the Respondent

convinces the Tribunal of given arguments on [“essential security interest”) or any other matter this
will be given due weight in the decision reached” (p. 2).

15

65.

Decision on Challenge

Having considered all the relevant factors, I sustain the Respondent’s Request to disqualify

Professor Orrego Vicufia from serving as an arbitrator in these proceedings.

(2) The challenge to the appointment of the Hon. Marc Lalonde

66.

67.

The circumstances presented by the Respondent as giving rise to justifiable doubts about the
Presiding Arbitrator’s impartiality are more limited. The Respondent argues that Mr. Lalonde’s
participation on the two panels with Professor Orrego Vicufia, both of which discussed the
“essential security interests” provision in their decisions, is sufficient to disqualify him from
participating on this Tribunal. I, however, find that Mr. Lalonde’s more limited
pronouncements on the relevant text are not sufficient to give rise to justifiable doubts

regarding his impartiality. Mr. Lalonde has not taken a position on the legal concept in issue

 

t to the decisi of the three 1 i and thus I can accept his
statement that “[his] intention is to approach the matter with an open mind and to give it full
consideration” and that “[he] would certainly not feel bound by the CMS or the Sempra
awards”. In my view, there is no appearance of his prejudgment on the issue of “essential

security interests” which will have to be considered by the Tribunal in the ongoing arbitration.

Therefore, I cannot sustain the Respondent’s Request to disqualify the Hon. Marc Lalonde from
serving as the Presiding Arbitrator in these proceedings.

The remainder of this page is left intentionally blank.

Decision on Challenge

Vv. DECISION

NOW THEREFORE, having considered the submissions of the Parties and the comments of
the challenged arbitrators, I

HEREBY SUSTAIN the challenge brought against the appointment of Professor Francisco
Orrego Vicufia by the Respondent in its Request of May 20, 2013, and

HEREBY DENY the challenge brought against the appointment of the Hon. Marc Lalonde
also brought by the Respondent in its Request of May 20, 2013.

Done at The Hague,

She Gul

Appointing Authority
ELE. Judge Peter Tomka
President, International Court of Justice

September 30, 2013

