I. JURISDICTIONAL AWARD
RENDERED IN 2003 IN SCC CASE 122/2001
II. FINAL AWARD
RENDERED IN 2004 IN SCC CASE 122/2001
II. SUPPLEMENTAL AWARD AND
INTERPRETATION
RENDERED IN 2004 IN SCC CASE 122/2001

 

Parties:

Claimant: Claimant-investor (New York, USA)
Respondent: Respondent—Kazakhstan (Republic of Kazakhstan)

Place of arbitration:
Stockholm, Sweden

Language of the proceedings:
English

Applicable law:

‘The Law of the Republic Kazakhstan on Foreign Investment, the Treaty
between the USA and the Republic of Kazakhstan Concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, and the norms of
international law

Arbitral Tribunal:

Chairman: Norway
Arbitrator: James H. Carter, USA
Arbitrator: Christer Séderlund, Sweden

Parties’ Counsel:

Claimant: Kaj Hobér, Hedvig Wallander and Henrik Carlberg,
Mannheimer Swartling Advokatbyra AB, Sweden

Respondent: John W. Barnum, Alexander Barsukov, Assel N. Tokusheva

and Dinara M. Jarmukhanova, McGuire Woods Kazakhstan LLP,
Kazakhstan

123

124 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

Amount in dispute:
EUR 178,892,338
Arbitration cost:
EUR 123,000
Summary

The government of Kazakhstan held 87.9 per cent shares of a Kazakh
Company (the Kazakh Company), which was the owner of an oil refinery
(the Refinery).

The Refinery was commissioned as a state enterprise in 1978. In 1994, it
‘was reorganized as an open joint-stock company established under the laws
of Kazakhstan.

On 7 May 1997, Claimant-investor and Respondent-Kazakhstan entered
into a concession agreement (the First agreement) for the transfer to
Claimant-investor of the right to possess use and manage Respondent-
Kazakhstan’s 87.9 per cent shares in the Kazakh company for a period of
five years.

On about 8 July 1997, Claimant-investor and Respondent-Kazakhstan
signed a new or revised concession agreement (the Agreement) to replace
the First Agreement.

Before the Agreement was signed, a financial analysis performed by a
consulting firm on 18 April 1997 made both parties fully aware of the
considerable debt that was payable by the Kazakh Company, including the
court action brought by a Kazakh company (Company X) which resulted in
a major court award against the Kazakh Company on 19 May 1997.

The Agreement contained a dispute settlement clause which, in brief,
established that certain disputes in connection with the Agreement
associated with any “foreign investment,” as defined, should be settled at
the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce in
Stockholm (the SCC), while all other disputes should be settled by court in
Kazakhstan with a right to appeal according to the legislation of
Kazakhstan.

[On] 1 September 1997, the operation of the Refinery was transferred to
a new Kazakh company on behalf of Claimant-investor (the New Kazakh
Company), [and] registered on 15 August 1997, under a lease agreement

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 125

(the Lease Agreement) between the Kazakh Company and the New Kazakh
Company.

During the operation of the Agreement, [and] by court actions, Company
X gained the right to attach and subsequently to take over the ownership of
the Refinery’s assets in satisfaction of its claims against the Kazakh
Company.

Further, the Office of the General Prosecutor of Kazakhstan (the
General Prosecutor) brought an action in a Kazakh city court of law (the
Kazakh City Court) and obtained a decision on 9 June 2000 under the Civil
Code of Kazakhstan that the Agreement be terminated.

The Kazakh City Court’s decision to terminate the Agreement was
affirmed by the Supreme Court in Kazakhstan on 18 July 2000.

Based on the decision of the Kazakh City Court, the Ministry of Finance
Committee for State Property and Privatization in Kazakhstan issued Order
No. 156 that the Agreement must be terminated.

On 18 December 2001, Claimant-investor submitted a Request for
Arbitration against Respondent-Kazakhstan to the SCC.

The arbitration procedures were in a first stage limited to five issues on
jurisdiction, as specified in the Respondent- Kazakhstan’s request for a
separate decision. A hearing on these jurisdictional issues was held, and a
decision on jurisdiction was made by the Arbitral Tribunal in 2003.

After exchange of further written briefs and a hearing on all remaining
issues, an arbitral award was rendered in 2004.

In April 2004, Claimant-investor submitted its request for a supplemental
award and interpretation.

I. Jurisdictional Award Rendered in
2003 in SCC Case 122/2001

 

Subject Matters:

(1) Applicable law to jurisdictional issues under the arbitration clause.
(2) Res judicata and collateral estoppel.

(3) Principle of Separability, Competence-Competence Doctrine.

(4) Act of State Doctrine.

(5) | Comity among states.

(6) Sovereign state, Issue of sovereign immunity.

126
™
8)

@)

STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

Definition of “foreign investor” under the Foreign Investment

Law of Kazakhstan.

Applicable law to jurisdictional issues under the Treaty between

the USA and the Republic of Kazakhstan Concerning the

Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment (19 May

1992) (“BIT”).

Definition of “National of another Contracting State” under the

eo between the USA and the Republic ip Kazakhstan
ing the Ei and Recip ion of

eos

(10) Burden of proof to establish “National of another Contracting

ee under ope Treaty between the USA and the Republic i
kk ing the E ig and
paraean of Toe

 

Findings:

()

2

8)

(4)

©)

The SCC Rules, supplemented by the Swedish Arbitration Act and
other pertinent Swedish law, being the law of the place of
arbitration expressly agreed by the parties (.e., /ex arbitn), applies
to arbitration on the basis of the parties’ arbitration clause.

Kazakh law on res judicata does not apply because the applicable
procedural law is the SCC rules and Swedish law.

Under Swedish law, res judicata operates only in respect of a cause
of action before a Swedish court of law where there is a prior
ruling in respect of the same cause of action rendered by a
Swedish court of law or by a foreign state court, the judgment of
which is enforceable in Sweden by operation of statute or treaty.
Under Swedish law, Kazakh court decisions to terminate the
agreement which contains the arbitration clause in dispute are not
binding upon the Arbitral Tribunal, and the Tribunal is
empowered to determine its own competence.

The Act of State Doctrine, as a U.S. procedural principle, does not
apply as the applicable procedural law is the SCC rules and
Swedish law. The nationality of the claimant party is not sufficient
to make U.S. procedural principles applicable, and the SCC Rules
or Swedish arbitration law do not have any provisions
corresponding to the Act of State Doctrine.

The concept of “comity” among states, in international law or
practice, has no applicability in arbitration.

Kazakhstan, as a sovereign state choosing to enter into a
commercial contract with a foreign party and obliging itself to
arbitration in case of certain disputes, should not be free to
disregard its contractual obligations.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 127

(7) Questions of direct or indirect ownership or control of the
investor need not be explored under the Foreign Investment Law
in Kazakhstan. Claimant qualified as an investor under the
Foreign Investment Law in Kazakhstan as it was defined as a
foreign juridical person.

The decisions of the Kazakh courts on whether the dispute is
associated with “foreign investment” under the Foreign
Investment Law are not binding on the Tribunal.

(8) The Arbitral Tribunal found that under a natural reading of the
U.S.Kazakhstan treaty, the SCC Rules as chosen by the parties
and the Swedish Arbitration Act apply to jurisdictional issues
under the Treaty.

(9) However, the ownership and control of Claimant-investor and
the question whether a company seeking protection is an “empty
shell” without any business activity within the territory of a Party
to the Treaty, must be taken into regard in the interpretation and
application of the Treaty.

(10) It is [a] procedural requirement that a claimant party, requesting
arbitration on the basis of the Treaty, provides [the] necessary
information and evidence concerning the circumstances of
ownership and control, directly or indirectly, over itself at all
relevant times, especially when reasonable doubt has been raised
as to the actual ownership of and control over the company
seeking protection.

The Position of the Parties
Claimant-investor
Claimant-investor’s Request for Arbitration is premised on three bases:

(a) Clause 9.2.1 of [the Agreement]

(b) Article 27.2 of the Law of the Republic Kazakhstan on Foreign
Investment, of 27 December 1994 as amended (the Foreign
Investment Law of Kazakhstan), and

(©) Article VI (3)(a) (iv) of the Treaty between the USA and the
Republic of Kazakhstan Concerning the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investment, of 19 May 1992 (the Treaty).

Respondent-Kazakhstan

Respondent-Kazakhstan asserts that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction under all of the bases.

128 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

Respondent-Kazakhstan requests that jurisdictional and related issues be
decided separately, and requests the Tribunal

(3) Deny that it has jurisdiction to hear this dispute either because:
(a) there is no Treaty jurisdiction since [Claimant-investor] is
not owned or controlled by a U.S. citizen; or
(b) there is no Foreign Investments Law jurisdiction since
[Claimant-investor] is no longer a foreign investor; or
(©) [Claimant-investor]’s claims are barred by res judicata and
collateral estoppel; or
(d) The agreement containing an arbitration clause has been
terminated and the arbitration clause cannot or should not
be revived to create jurisdiction; or
(e) [Respondent-Kazakhstan] is entitled to enforce its laws
against its own government agencies and persons doing
business with those agencies without interference by a
foreign tribunal.
(4) Deny [Claimant-investor]’s claims for damages in their entirety.
(5) Award Respondent its costs and expenses in this proceeding, ...
and charge [Claimant-investor] with the entire fees and costs of
the [SCC] and the Tribunal.

The Arbitral Tribunal

The first two bases of Claimant-investor’s Request for Arbitration make
reference to arbitration according to the Rules of the SCC (the SCC Rules);
in Claimant—investor’s view, the third gives it the option to choose such
arbitration.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers, and the parties agree, that arbitrations
on these different bases may be consolidated in one arbitral procedure.
However, the Tribunal considers that the conditions for invoking each of
the bases, as well as the scope of the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction under
each of them, must be considered separately.

At a preliminary meeting, the Arbitral Tribunal decided to resolve the
five issues specified in No. 3 of Respondent-Kazakhstan’s conclusions and
to make a separate jurisdictional award.

Other objections related to the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction have also
been raised, such as that the Agreement is invalid because it was signed by
unauthorized persons, and that [Claimant-investor] has waived its right to
arbitration by submitting to the jurisdiction of the Kazakh courts of law by

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 129

participating in actions before the courts initiated by the General
Prosecutor of Kazakhstan. However, all such other issues are to be decided
in connection with the merits of the case, if the arbitration is to continue.
The Tribunal also emphasizes that the question to be considered in [the
jurisdictional award] is the total dismissal of the arbitration case for lack of
jurisdiction, not the questions of the exact scope of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction under each of the three bases for jurisdiction asserted by
[Claimant—investor].

Jurisdictional Decision of the Arbitral Tribunal

(1) = Applicable Law to the Jurisdictional Issues
Under the Arbitration Clause

 

Introduction

Anticle 9 of the Agreement reads as follows:

9.1 If a certain matter is not covered by this Agreement, the Parties shall follow the
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan in effect, the provisions of international
treaties to which the Republic of Kazakhstan is a Party and the norms of
international law.

9.2 Ay dispute, discrepancy or claim arising in connection with this Agreement
shall be settled, to the extent possible, by means of negotiations and discussions
between the Parties. In the event that the Parties are unable to reach mutual
agreement through negotiations and discussions, the dispute shall be resolved as
follows, the law of the Republic of Kazakhstan being the governing law:

9.2.1 Any dispute between the Parties arising in connection with this
Aagreement which is associated with any ‘foreign investment” (as defined
in Clause 2.3 of this Agreement) shall be referred to the Arbitration
Institute of the International Chamber of Commerce in Stockholm and
be resolved in accordance swith the arbitration rules of the International
Chamber of Commerce in Stockholm. The place of arbitration shall be
Stockholm, and the English language shall be used throughout the
proceedings;

9.2.2 Any dispute not related to ‘foreign investments” (as defined in Clause
2.3 of this Agreement) shall be resolved in a Kazakh court having
Jurisdiction, and its decision may be appealed in accordance with the
‘legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

Clause 2.3 of the Agreement referred to in Clause 9.2.1 reads as follows:
23 The Parties agree that this Agreement provides for the making of ‘foreign

investments as defined in Chapter 1 of the Law of the Republic of Kaxakbstan
On Foreign Investment” dated 27 December 1997.

130 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

Law Applicable to the Jurisdictional Issues Under
the Arbitration Clause

The Arbitral Tribunal notes the general reference in Clause 9.2 to
Kazakh law as the governing law. The Tribunal also notes the specific
reference to Kazakh legislation and international law in Clause 7.1 of the
Agreement:

7.1 In the event of a failure to perform, or the improper performance of, their
obligations hereunder, the Parties shall be held liable in accordance with the
hegislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan and the provisions of international

mw

The Tribunal understands these provisions to the effect that the
contractual relationship between the parties is generally governed by
Kazakh law. Where the Agreement is silent and in need of interpretation,
the legislation of [Kazakhstan] at the relevant time, as well as the provisions
of international treaties to which [Kazakhstan] is a Party and the norms of
international law shall apply. The parties have not disputed this general
understanding.

 

[Claimant—investor] has ded, and [Respondent—Kazakhstan] has
not denied, that it is a general principle of Kazakh law that the literal
meaning of words is decisive, that treaties to which Kazakhstan is a Party
are part of Kazakh law and prevail over other Kazakh law and that treaties
are to be interpreted in accordance with the Vienna Convention of 23 May
1969.

Respondent-Kazakhstan’s Position

When it comes to laws and rules governing the procedures before the
Arbitral Tribunal, and the Tribunal’s competence, there is disagreement
between the parties. [Respondent-Kazakhstan] contends that in the
particular circumstances of this case Kazakh laws and rules apply to the
procedures before, and the competence of, the Tribunal. [Respondent—
Kazakhstan] also asserts the applicability of certain United States legal
principles, such as the so-called Act of State Doctrine, as well as certain
principles of international law such as comity among states. [Respondent-
Kazakhstan] has also referred to provisions of the European Convention
on International Commercial Arbitration of 1961, to which Kazakhstan is a
Party.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 131
Claimant-investor’s Position

[Claimant-investor] contends that only the procedural laws and rules of
Sweden, being the agreed place of the arbitration, shall apply, together with
the specifically and expressly agreed SCC Rules. However, the parties seem
to be in agreement that several of the procedural issues would have the
same solution whether subjected to Kazakh or Swedish law or to
international law principles.

Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal finds, in the case of arbitration on the basis of the
arbitration clause in the Agreement, that the SCC Rules shall apply,
supplemented by the Swedish Arbitration Act and other pertinent Swedish
law, being the law of the place of arbitration expressly agreed by the parties.
On the background of the specific provision on arbitration rules, and in
view of the generally accepted principle that the /ex arbitri shall govern the
arbitration process unless otherwise agreed, the Tribunal finds that the
reference to Kazakh law being generally applicable does not extend to the
laws and rules governing the arbitral process, and consequently that Kazakh

dural laws or principles are not applicable to an arbitration based on

the arbitration clause of the Agreement.

«+» [Respondent—Kazakhstan] contends that Clause 9.2.1 cannot serve as
a basis for this arbitration for a number of reasons, some of which are
interrelated:

(2) __ Res Judicata and Collateral Estoppel
Background

-. on 29 April 2000 the General Prosecutor brought an action in [the
Kazakh City Court] against [Claimant—investor] on behalf of [Respondent—
Kazakhstan], requesting in his Statement of Claim that the Agreement be
terminated. Reference was made to the Kazakh Civil Code of 27 December
1994 Art. 401, which reads in part:

Upon the demand of one of the parties a contract may be changed or dissolved by
decision of a court only: (1) in the event of a material violation of the contract by the
other party;
According to [Respondent-Kazakhstan], Section 3 of Article 55 of the
Kazakh Civil Procedure Code provides the General Prosecutor with the
right to file this claim with the courts of [Kazakhstan]. According to this
Section,

 

132. STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

[ihe Prosecutor shall have the right to petition to the court with a lawsuit, application
to protect the rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of citizens, rights and legitimate
interests of organizations, public or state interests.

According to [Respondent—Kazakhstan], The General Prosecutor’s
jurisdiction is also set forth in Article 83(1) of the Constitution of
[Kazakhstan], which provides:

The Prosecutor's Office, on behalf of the state, shall exercise the highest supervision over
exact and uniform application of law, the decrees of the President of the Republic of
Kazakhstan and other regulatory legal acts on the territory of the Republic, legality of
preliminary investigation, inquest and inspection, administrative and executive legal
procedure; and take measures for exposure and elimination of any violations of the law,
the independence of courts as well as the appeal of laws and other regulatory legal acts
contradicting the Constitution and laws of the Republic. The Procurator's office of the
Republic shall represent interest of the state in court as well as conduct criminal
prosecution in cases using procedures and within the limits, stipulated by law.” And
also according to Article 1(2) of the Law “On Prosecutor's Office,” pursuant to which
the “Prosecutor's Office shall take measures to reveal and eliminate any breaches of
tegality, protect laws and other legal acts that contradict the Constitution and laws of
the Republic, represent interests of the state in court...

The claim by the General Prosecutor for termination of the Agreement
was based on the alleged substantial damage sustained by Kazakhstan as a
result of alleged contractual breaches by [Claimant—investor] and the failure
of both [Claimant-investor] and [the committee supervising Respondent—
Kazakhstan’s interests in the Agreement], to fulfill their obligations.
However, these alleged contractual breaches and failures and the possible
res judicata effects of the courts’ findings are not subject of consideration in
the present decision.

[Claimant-investor] objected to [the Kazakh City Court] on the ground
that the dispute was to be determined by arbitration in Stockholm in
accordance with the arbitration clause in the Agreement, but the court on
29 May 2000 decided that the action for termination fell outside the scope
of the arbitration clause, and by decision of 6 June 2000, after considering
the merits of the General Prosecutor’s claim, decided that the Agreement
be terminated. Appeals by [Claimant-investor] to the appellate court and
further to the Supreme court were rejected, and with the Supreme Court’s
ruling of 18 August 2000 the decision to terminate the Agreement became
final.

Respondent-Kazakhstan’s Position

In its Brief in Support of Motion to Dismiss [Respondent-Kazakhstan]
states that “we use the term ‘res judicata’ here in a generic sense to include

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 133

both res judicata, also referred to as claim preclusion, and collateral estoppel,
or issue preclusion.”

[Respondent—Kazakhstan] claims that the arbitration on [the] basis of the
arbitration clause be dismissed for res judicata reasons. It refers to Articles
235 (4) and 247 of the Civil Procedure Code of [Kazakhstan], according to
which a final judgment on the merits bars further claims and issues raised
by the same parties based on the same cause of action:

Article 235 (4). “. .. upon the entry of a court judgment into legal force, the parties and
other persons participating in the action as well as their legal successors may not
relitigate same claim on the same basis, as well as challenge in a different lawsuit the
facts and legal relations established by the court.”

Article 247. “The court shall discontinue the proceeding when:

 

(2) there is a court judgment that came into legal force and was issued on the matter
between same parties, on same subject-matter and same grounds, or a ruling of a court
10 discontinue the proceeding because of renunciation of a suit by plaintiff, or amicable
agreement of the parties.”

[Respondent-Kazakhstan] further argues that the courts of other
jurisdictions, including the forum of this arbitration, Sweden, also recognize
the principle of res judicata. Res judicata is also recognized in, for example,
Switzerland, Austria, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, and Spain. In the
United States, res judicata and collateral estoppel are a complete bar to any
further proceedings on the same claims in any other forum.

In this context [Respondent—Kazakhstan] has also argued that the
Kazakhstani courts have established that the dispute submitted to
bitration by [Clai: ] is not an “i 2) ?? and

not passed by the arbitration clause d in the
Agreement.

 

Claimant-investor’s Position

[Claimant-investor] denies that rules of res judicata are applicable to this
case, for a number of reasons. First, Kazakh procedural law is not
applicable to this arbitration, ... Secondly, res judicata rules are not applicable
in the relationship between court decisions and arbitration, but only
regulate the relationship between decisions of courts of law within the same
state jurisdiction. Thirdly, under applicable Swedish law, decisions of
foreign courts are only binding for a Swedish court or a Swedish arbitral
tribunal to the extent such foreign court decisions are recognized and
enforceable in Sweden. That is not the case with any Kazakh court
decisions. Fourthly, there is in any event no res judicata effect since the issues

134. STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

decided in the Kazakh courts are not the same as the jurisdictional issues
now to be decided by this Tribunal.

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal finds, as will be seen from the conclusions above
concerning applicable procedural law, that Kazakh law on res judicata does
not apply in this arbitration. It is[,] therefore[,] not necessary to consider
whether or not Kazakh law on res judicata would have had the effect of
blocking the arbitration requested by [Claimant—investor].

Further, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that according to Swedish
jurisprudence res judicata operates only in respect of a cause of action before
a Swedish court of law where there is a prior ruling in respect of the same
cause of action rendered by a Swedish court of law or by a foreign state
court, the judgs of which is ble in Sweden by operation of
statute or treaty. However, if a court of law has been seized of an identical
cause of action pending or initiated before an Arbitral Tribunal, the issue of
res judicata will not arise but only the question whether the court was
competent or not.

In this last mentioned respect, the Swedish Arbitration Act of 1999...
Article 2, mandates the Swedish court of law at the place of arbitration, in
the present case Stockholm ..., to consider the jurisdiction of the Arbitral
Tribunal at the request of a party. A court decision by the appropriate
Swedish court of law finding that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks jurisdiction is
binding upon the Tribunal, which in such a case will have to terminate its
proceedings. Also, a party may bring a setting-aside action against any
award made by the arbitrators. But none of these interventions by the
courts of law has the effect of res judicata, i.e., the effect that the Arbitral
Tribunal is barred in advance from taking the arbitral dispute under
consideration and [rendering] its decisions.

[Respondent—Kazakhstan] has also referred to the fact that Kazakhstan
has acceded to the European Convention on International Commercial
Arbitration of 1961, claiming that the provisions of the Convention are
thereby part of Kazakh internal law and claiming that this gives Kazakh
courts the mandate to review the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. The
Arbitral Tribunal does not find it necessary to decide whether the
Convention gives a Party to the Convention, other than the State on which
territory the arbitration is to take place, the right to review the jurisdiction
of an arbitral tribunal subject to the Convention Rules. No such
Convention based right, if any, can be asserted vis-a-vis companies or

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 135

persons of a State which is not a Party to the Convention. Sweden, and: for
that matter the United States, are not Parties to the European Convention.

[Claimant-investor] has also denied any res judicata effect on the ground
[that] the claims and issues decided by the Kazakh courts are not the same
as those raised before the Arbitral Tribunal. [Claimant-investor] contends
that while the Kazakh court action and decision concerned the contractual
right to terminate the Agreement, the claims before the Arbitral Tribunal
are the contractual consequences of the allegedly unfounded termination of
the Agreement decreed by the Kazakh courts. [Respondent—Kazakhstan]
did not specifically address this issue. In view of its other findings that res
judicata is not a reason for dismissal{] the Arbitral Tribunal does not find
reason to consider whether this contention by [Claimant—investor] would
be an additional bar to res judicata effects.

In respect of [Respondent-Kazakhstan]’s that the Kazakk
courts have determined that the present dispute does not constitute an
“investment dispute” according to the terms of the Agreement{,] the
Tribunal finds that the present dispute is in fact an “investment dispute” in
the meaning of the Agreement for the following reason.

From [Claimant-investor]’s Request for Arbitration and Statement of
Claim it appears that [Claimant—investor] seeks indemnification for certain
alleged investments in acquisition of concession rights and certain capital
expenditure. The fact that alleges having made disbursements of funds, for
purposes which would qualify as investments in the meaning of the Foreign
Investment Law to which the Agreement refers in its Clause 2.3, is a
sufficient basis for the Tribunal to be vested with competence to adjudicate
these issues (whether [Claimant—investor] will be able to establish that there
were in fact investments made and that these are indemnifiable on one basis
or the other is obviously a matter which will be deferred to the examination
of the merits of the case).

The Arbitral Tribunal’s conclusion is that res judicata is not a bar to
jurisdiction under the arbitration clause.

(3) Principle of Separability, Competence-
Competence Doctrine

Respondent-Kazakhstan’s Position

[Respondent-Kazakhstan] further claims that since the Agreement has
been terminated by the Kazakh courts, the whole Agreement including its
arbitration clause is terminated. Therefore, the arbitration clause cannot be
invoked as a legal basis for arbitration.

136 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

[Respondent—Kazakhstan] admits that [Kazakhstan] recognizes the
principle of severability of an arbitration clause. Reference is made to
Regulation No. 5 of [Kazakhstan]’s Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and, more recently, to the definition of “Arbitration Clause” in the
Regulations of International Court of TUS Law Center adopted on 30
December 2001—both to the same effect that invalidation of an agreement
does not invalidate an arbitration clause therein. However, a distinction
must be made between invalidation and termination of an agreement, at
least where the agreement is terminated by a court rather than a party to the
contract. Termination falls outside the scope of the separarabilty principle
and leads to the extinction also of the arbitration clause. [Respondent—
Kazakhstan] has referred to recent rulings of the Kazakh Supreme Court
holding this, hereunder a decision of 27 January 1999 in a so-called
TWG/SSGPO case.

Claimant-investor’s Position

[Claimant—investor] contends that the courts’ decision to terminate the
Agreement has no legal effect in the present arbitration, since the
arbitration clause excludes the jurisdiction of Kazakh courts to consider the
validity or termination of the Agreement. The finding of the Kazakh courts
that they had jurisdiction to hear the case on termination is incorrect and
has no res judicata effect, as explored above. Also, Kazakh procedural law
has no application in the present case. Further, [Claimant-investor] argues
that in any event the scope of the Kazakh courts’ decision does not extend
to a termination of the arbitration clause. The principle of separability of
the arbitration clause, existing under both Swedish and Kazakh law,
establishes that the agreement to arbitrate is to be considered and evaluated
as a separate agreement. This principle is firmly established in numerous
countries and laid down in the UNCITRAL Model Law on Arbitration. The
contention that a distinction between invalidity and termination of an
agreement, or between a termination declared by a party or by a court, are
novelties without any substantiation.

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal refers to its finding above that Swedish law is
decisive for the legal effects to be attributed to the Kazakh courts’ decision
to terminate the Agreement. Under Swedish law there is no doubt that
these Kazakh court decisions are not binding upon the Arbitral Tribunal,
and that the Tribunal is empowered to determine its own competence. The
evidentiary effect attributable to Kazakh jurisprudence is of little[,] if any[,]
significance when the law such jurisprudence is alleged to clarify is without
application in the present case.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 137

The Arbitral Tribunal’s conclusion is that the Kazakh courts’ decision to
i the A is no bar to jurisdiction under the arbitrati

clause.
(4) __ Act of State Doctrine
Respondent-Kagakhstan’s Position

[Respondent—Kazakhstan] claims that the action of the General
Prosecutor and the decisions of the Kazakh courts to terminate the
Agreement are sovereign acts of [Kazakhstan] in enforcing Kazakh law
within its territory and should not be adjudicated by this Tribunal.
[Respondent-Kazakhstan] argues that such a complaint would be barred by
the Act of State doctrine in the United States, allegedly [Claimant—
investor]’s citizenship. [Respondent-Kazakhstan] admits that 9 U.S.C.
Section 15 enacted in 1988 provides that enforcement of arbitration
agreements and the confirmation of arbitration awards are enforceable in
the United States notwithstanding the Act of State doctrine, but asserts that
this is not the issue in the present arbitration, and refers to U.S. cases
supporting that the Act of State doctrine bars consideration of claims in
US. courts.

Claimant—investor’s Position

{Claimant—investor] argues the Act of State Doctrine is an American
judicial principle preventing U.S. courts from trying the legality of actions
of foreign states. The Act of State Doctrine is, however, a principle of U.S.
procedural law and does not bind courts, let alone arbitral tribunals, outside
the United States. Consequently, the Act of State Doctrine does not apply
to international commercial arbitrations. It has no relevance whatsoever to
the dispute before the Arbitral Tribunal. According to [Claimant-investor]
the Act of State doctrine does not even apply to arbitrations in the United
States. Reference is made to Chapter 1 § 15 of the United States Arbitration
Act, which stipulates that:

Enforcement of arbitral agreements, confirmation of arbitral awards, and execution
upon judgments based on orders confirming such awards shall not be refused on the
basis of the Act of State Doctrine.

The Tribunal’s Findings
The Arbitral Tribunal does not find that the U.S. procedural principle

referred to as the Act of State Doctrine is applicable in the present
arbitration. The nationality of [Claimant-investor] is obviously not

138 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

sufficient to make U.S. procedural principles applicable. The SCC Rules or
Swedish arbitration law do not contain any provisions corresponding to the
procedural principle asserted by [Respondent-Kazakhstan].

The Arbitral Tribunal, therefore, concludes that the Act of State
Doctrine, or the asserted nature of the General Prosecutor’s actions or the
decisions of the Kazakh courts, asserted to be sovereign acts of a State, do
not constitute bars to jurisdiction under the arbitration clause.

(5) _ Comity Among States

Respondent-Kazakhstan’s Position
[Respondent-Kazakhstan] also contends that “as a matter of
international comity this Tribunal should be hesitant to review the acts of
[Kazakhstan] in its sovereign and judicial capacity, acting to enforce its laws
against its own government agency, absent a blatant abuse of power, which
clearly is not this case.” The Tribunal “should at least give the sovereign,
non-commercial acts of [Kazakhstan] the deference that comity requires.”

Claimant-investor’s Position

[Claimant-investor] states that [Respondent-Kazakhstan]’s reference to
“comity” is as misplaced as the reference to the Act of State Doctrine.
Comity—comitas gentium—is a concept of public international law which
refers to non-binding rules of politeness, convenience and goodwill
observed by sovereign states in their mutual dealings. The Arbitral Tribunal
does not act in the interests of any State, nor does it exercise State authority
of any kind. The Arbitral Tribunal derives its authority from the arbitration
agreement entered into by [Claimant-investor] and [Respondent—
Kazakhstan]. There is no room for “comity” in such context.

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal must agree with [Claimant—investor] that the
concept of “comity” among states, in international law or practice, has no
applicability in arbitration. It has not been shown that such a legal principle
is part of any known laws or rules concerning international commercial
arbitration, including Swedish or Kazakh arbitration law.

The Arbitral Tribunal has no basis, in the arbitration agreement or in
applicable laws and rules, to exercise “hesitance” and abstain from decisions
otherwise following from the circumstances of the case, solely on the
ground that the breaches of contract alleged by [Claimant-investor] are the
acts of a sovereign state.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 139

The Arbitral Tribunal concludes that “comity” as asserted by
[Respondent-Kazakhstan] is no bar to or restriction of jurisdiction under
the arbitration clause.

(6) _ Sovereign State, Issue of Sovereign Immunity
Respondent-Kazakhstan’s Position

Under point (3) (e) of the conclusions in the Statement of Defence
[Respondent—Kazakhstan] stated as a fifth reason for the Tribunal to deny
jurisdiction that:

() the Republic of Kazakhstan is entitled to enforce its laws against its own government
agencies and persons doing business with those agencies without interference by a foreign
tribunal.

No further explanation or elaboration of this asserted “entitlement to
enforce its laws ... without interference by a foreign tribunal” was given in
the Statement of Defence, in the related Motion to Dismiss, in the
subsequent briefs or in the oral presentation at the hearing on.... At the
hearing ... the chairman assumed that this objection was concerned with
the arbitration clause, and asked [Respondent-Kazakhstan] whether it also
was an objection to Treaty and Investment Law, but obtained no response.

In the related Brief in Support of Motion to Dismiss [Respondent-
Kazakhstan] commences as follows:

[Respondent-Kazakhstan] moves the Tribunal to dismiss [Claimant-investor]’s
Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claims on the following grounds:

(1) The Arbitration Institute lacks jurisdiction under the Treaty and the Foreign
Investments Law because there is no U.S. or foreign investor involved.

(2) The claims and issues raised by [Claimant-investor] have already been decided
adversely to [Claimant—investor] by competent courts in Kazakhstan.

(3) The Concession Agreement with the arbitration clause was terminated by the
same courts before the Request for Arbitration was filed.

(4) Under these circumstances [the Arbitral Tribunal’s emphasis] it is not
appropriate for an international arbitration tribunal to adjudicate the propriety
of [Kazakhstan]’s enforcement of its laws against its own government agencies
and citizens.

The emphasized expression may suggest that the asserted
“entitlement”—or lack of appropriateness—is not made as an independent
objection to jurisdiction but rather is an alternative way of summing up one
or several of the objections dealt with under [(1)-(4)] above.

140 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

[Respondent-Kazakhstan] has not commented specifically on this fifth
objection.

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that it lacks any foundation to assert that
[Respondent—Kazakhstan], choosing to enter into a commercial contract
with a foreign party and obliging itself to arbitration in case of certain
disputes, should be free to disregard its contractual obligations. Kazakhstan,
both in its Foreign Investment Law and as Party to the Treaty, has
embraced and validated the concept of binding settlement of disputes by
arbitration. In the absence of any substantiation or even explanation of this
fifth objection, the Arbitral Tribunal concludes that these assertions are

founded and i no bar to jurisdiction under the arbi clause.

Conclusion as to Jurisdiction under the Arbitration Clause
Summing up the conclusions ... above, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that
the objections raised do not constitute any bar to the Arbitral Tribunal’s

jurisdiction under the arbitration clause.

(7) Definition of “Foreign Investor” Under the
Foreign Investment Law of Kazakt

 

Relevant Provisions of the Foreign Investment Law as
Quoted by the Arbitral Tribunal

The Foreign Investment Law contains, inéer alia, the following provisions:
Article 1. Principal Terms and Concepts

“Investments” are all types of property and intellectual valuables to be invested in
objects of entrepreneurial activity for the purpose of receiving revenue, including:

—any right to effectuate activity based on a license or in other form granted by a state
agency.

“Foreign investments” are investments effectuated in the form of participation in the
charter capital of juridical persons of the Republic Kazakhstan, and also the granting
of loans (or credits) to juridical persons of the Republic Kazakhstan with respect to
which foreign investors have the right to determine the decisions to be adopted by such
Juridical persons...

 

“Foreign investor” is:

INVESTMENT DISPUTES. 141
—foreign juridical persons;
—foreign citizens...

— foreign States;

 

“Foreign juridical person” is a juridical person (company, firm, enterprise,
organization, association, etc.) created in accordance with legislation of a foreign State
beyond the limits of the Republic Kazakhstan.

“Emponered State agency” is a State agency, which has the right to act in the name of
the Republic Kazakhstan within the framework, of its competence established by
legislative and normative legal acts.

“Investment Dispute” is any dispute between a foreign investor and the Republic
Kazakhstan in the person of empowered State agencies arising in connection with
Soreign investments, including a dispute connected with

—the actions of empowered State agencies violating the rights and interests of foreign
investors provided for by the present Law, other legislation of the Republic Kazakhstan,
or the applicable law;

—any agreement between the Republic Kazakhstan and a foreign investor;

Anticle 3. Sphere of Operation of Law

(1) Relations connected with foreign investments in the Republic Kazakhstan shall
be regulated by the present law, and also by other legislation of the Republic
Kazakhstan.

4) If other provisions have been established by an international treaty ratified by the
Republic Kazakhstan than those which have been provided for by the present
Law, the provisions of the international treaty shall apply.

Article 27. Settlement of Disputes

(1) Investment disputes shall be settled, whenever possible, by means of negotiations.

(2) If such disputes can not be settled by means of negotiations... then the dispute
at the choice of any of the parties thereof may be transferred for settlement when
there exists the written consent of the foreign investor:

(1) 10 judicial agencies of the Republic Kazakhstan;

142. STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

(2) in accordance with the agreed procedure for the settlement of disputes, including in
the contract or any other agreement between the parties to the dispute, to one of
the following arbitration agencies:

(a) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes . . .

(O) The Supplementary Organ of the Centre .. .

() arbitration organs founded in accordance with [the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules]. . .

(4) for arbitral consideration at the Arbitration Institute of the Chamber of
Commerce in Stockholm,

() the Arbitration Commission attached to the Chamber of Commerce and
Industry of the Republic Kazakhstan.

The Arbitral Tribunal’s Findings

Article 3 [of the Agreement] clearly stipulates that Kazakh law and
legislation shall generally govern legal relationships established under the
Law, with the modifications following from treaties to which Kazakhstan is
a party. However, [the Foreign Investment Law] grants the parties
considerable freedom to choose an arbitration agency, the place of
arbitration and the arbitration rules to govern the dispute. In the absence of
indications to the contrary, the natural interpretation is therefore that
insofar as a place of arbitration, and the applicable rules of arbitration are
chosen in accordance with the Foreign Investment Law, the chosen rules
and pertinent law at the chosen place of arbitration governs the arbitration,
with the parties’ national legal systems not being applicable.

It follows from these provisions [of the Foreign Investment Law] that,
for [Claimant-investor] to be entitled to demand arbitration according to
the SCC Rules under the Foreign Investment Law, several conditions must
be fulfilled:

(1) The dispute must be an investment dispute within the meaning of
the Foreign Investment Law, which implies that:

a) the dispute must involve a “foreign investor” within the
meaning of the Law, which includes a “foreign juridical
person,” being defined as a juridical person (company etc.)
created in accordance with legislation of a foreign State
beyond the limits of the Republic;

b) the dispute must be between the foreign investor and the
Republic Kazakhstan;

c) the dispute must be arising in connection with “foreign
investments,” which includes a dispute connected with,
among other alternatives, “any agreement between the
Republic and a foreign investor.”

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 143

(2) The parties have not been able to settle the dispute by
negotiations;

(3) There must exist a written consent of the foreign investor;

(4) The chosen procedure must be in accordance with the agreed
P dure for the settl of disputes, including an ag:
for settlement of disputes in the contract or any other agreement
between the parties to the dispute.

At first glance, all of these conditions appear to have been met:
[Claimant—investor] is a company created and existing under the laws of
New York, U.S.A.; the Agreement is between that foreign juridical person
and [Respondent—Kazakhstan]; [and] the dispute meets the requirements of
a “foreign investment.” The Tribunal is satisfied that serious attempts were
made to settle the dispute through negotiations, and the fact of [Claimant—
investor]’s initiating this arbitration is ample proof of [Claimant-investor]’s
consent to this procedure for settlement of the dispute between the parties.

 

Respondent-Kazakhstan’s Position

[Respondent—Kazakhstan] objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the
Foreign Investment Law principally on the ground that “[Claimant—
investor] is no longer a foreign investor,” ...

...[Respondent—Kazakh ] has elak d on this as
follows:

Ai stipulation of parties to a contract, including a governmental body like the
Department for State Property, to the effect that they are entitled to protection of a
particular law does not make it so. If the law is in fact not applicable to their contract,
Saying it is does not make it so. The parties to the Agreement could not have stipulated,
Sor example, that (Claimant-investor] was or is entitled to be regarded as a U.S.
national entitled to invoke the Treaty if, when the time came, the facts concerning
([Claimant-investor] did not support Treaty jurisdiction. The same must be true with
respect to the [Foreign Investment Law]. It was and is not up to [Claimant—investor]
to decide, even if a government Department agreed at the time, that it is now entitled to
be regarded by this Tribunal as a ‘foreign investor” under the [Foreign Investment
Law], or that the Agreement is now a foreign investment. [emphasized by Respondent-
Kazakhstan}

Moreover, what may have been true when the Agreement was executed in 1997 may
not be true today. If, for example, ownership and control of the New York company
called [Claimant-investor] had not only subsequently been acquired by [the Holding
Company, a holding company of the same name as Claimant-investor’s], but has also
(1) become a hollow U.S. shell without assets or activities in the United States, and (2)
become controlled by Kazakhstani nationals, by contract, payments, intimidation or
otherwise[.] [T]he [Foreign Investment Law] is no longer applicable, no matter what
[Claimant-investor] was in 1997 when it signed the Agreement.

144. STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

([Respondent-Kazakhstan] believes that the facts will show that [Mr. X] [alleged
president of Claimant-investor, Editor’s note] has long since lost control of [Claimant—
investors] even if [Mr. X,] and a group of investors [Mr. X] has refused to identify[,]
still nominally “own” [the Holding Company] and in turn [Claimantinvestor]. But
even if they, as [Mr. X] protests..., are genuinely non-Kazakhstani investors and
therefore might qualify as ‘foreign investors” under the [Foreign Investment Lan], we
also believe what [Mr. X) said in his message sent to us by the General Prosecutor,
that [Mr. X] is being controlled by others, not his non-Kagakhstani partners. ...

It would appear that (Mr. X] has now made a deal with Kazakhstani interests who
see[,] in the sad history of [Claimant-investor]’s dealings with [the Refinery,] an
opportunity to invoke all the protective language of the Treaty and the [Foreign
Investment Law] against condemnations and expropriations and discriminations. By
using an empty New York shell company owned nominally by foreigners, they hope to
have an international arbitration tribunal award damages for expropriation etc,
whereas the Agreement specifically provides that if the dispute is not related to foreign
investments, it “shall be resolved in a Kazakh court”. ...

In ion with the arbitration clause, [Respondent-Kazakhstan]
asserts that the Kazakh courts have ruled that the dispute before it was not
associated with “foreign investment” and, therefore, not within the scope
of the arbitration clause. [Respondent-Kazakhstan] appears to contend that
these court rulings are also binding with respect to the Foreign Investment
Law and exclude arbitration on the basis of the [Foreign Investment Law].

Claimant-investor’s Position

[Claimant-investor] denies that there is anything in the Foreign
Investment Law to support that the application of the law is excluded in
cases where a U.S. company is owned or controlled, directly or indirectly,
by other than USS. citizens or companies. The only requirement under [the
Foreign Investment Law] to qualify as a “foreign juridical person” is that
the company is created in accordance with legislation of a foreign State
beyond the limits of [Kazakhstan]. In any event, [Claimant—investor] is
owned 100 per cent by the [the Holding Company], but indirectly owned
and controlled by [Mr. X], an American citizen holding 51 per cent of the
shares in the [Holding Company]... The decisions of the Kazakh courts
with regard to “foreign investments” are not binding, for the same reasons
as set forth in connection with the arbitration clause.

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the questions of direct or indirect
ownership or control of [Claimant-investor] need to be explored in
connection with arbitration on the basis of the Treaty,... But [Respondent—
Kazakhstan] has offered no evidence, or even indication, that the Foreign

 

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 145

Investment Law is to be given such narrow interpretation as contended, or
that [the Foreign Investment Law] contains exceptions similar to Article I
(2) of the Treaty. By the clear wording of the [the Foreign Investment Law],
[Claimant-investor] qualifies as a “foreign investor” and the dispute before
this Arbitral Tribunal as an investment dispute under the Foreign
Investment Law.

For the same reasons as set forth in connection with the arbitration
clause[,] the decisions of the Kazakh courts constitute no bar to jurisdiction
under the Foreign Investment Law.

With regard to the argument [of Respondent-Kazakhstan] that the
parties are not capable of agreeing that the Foreign Investment Law is
applicable when on the facts of a case it is not, the Tribunal finds it
sufficient to refer to the [Foreign Investment Law}’s definition of “foreign
investments,” which clearly covers [Claimant—investor]’s contractual rights
in connection with [Respondent-Kazakhstan]’s shares in [the Kazakh
Company], and to the definition of an “investment dispute,” which includes
the alternative that “any agreement between [Kazakhstan] and a foreign
investor” in connection with foreign investments is covered. Whether or
not [Kazakhstan] is capable of extending the application of the Foreign
Investment Law through agreements with foreign investors, the present
Agreement is clearly within the framework of the [Foreign Investment
Law.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that [Respondent-Kazakhstan] has not
proven any bar to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the Foreign Investment
Law.

(8) Applicable Law to Jurisdictional Issues Under the
‘Treaty Between the USA and the Republic of
Kazakhstan Concerning the Encouragement
and Reciprocal Protection of Investment
(19 May 1992) (“BIT”)

Relevant Provisions of the Treaty
Articles Land VI of the treaty of 19 May 1992 between the USA and the

Republic of Kazakh Cc ig the E: and R
Protection of Investment read in part as follows:

 

146

)

(2)

@

2

4

8)

STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

Article T

For the purposes of this Treaty,

/a/ “investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one
Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies
of the other Party ....

/b/ “company of a Party means any kind of corporation, company ...
Legally constituted under the laws and regulations of a Party or a
political subdivision thereof

Jel “national” of a Party means a natural person who is a national of a
Party under its applicable law.

Each Party reserves the right to deny to any company the advantages of
this Treaty if nationals of any third country control such company and, in
the case of a company of the other Party, that company has no substantial
business activities in the territory of the other Party or is controlled by nationals
of a third country with which the denying Party does not maintain normal
economic relations.

Article VI

For the purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute between a

Party and a national or company of the other Party arising out of or relating to:

Ja] an investment agreement between the Party and such national or
607 i,

/b/ an investment authorization granted by that Party’s foreign investment
authority to such national or company; or

Js] an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with
respect to an investment.

In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should initially

seek a resolution through consultation and negotiation. If the dispute cannot be

settled amicably, the national or company concerned may choose to submit the

dispute for resolution:

iG) in accordance with the terms of para. 3.

(a) «+ [T]he national or company concerned may choose to consent in
writing to the submission of the dispute for settlement by binding
arbitration:

iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance with any other
arbitration rules, as may be mutually agreed between the parties to the
dispute.

(&) Once the national or company concerned has so consented, either party to
the dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance with the choice so
specified in the consent.

For purposes of an arbitration held under para. 3 of the Article, any company
Jegally constituted under the applicable laws and regulations of a Party or a

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 147

political subdivision thereof but that, immediately before the occurrence of the
event or events giving rise to the dispute, was an investment of nationals or
companies of the other Party, shall be treated as a national or company of
such other Party in accordance with Article 25 (2) (b) of the ICSID
Convention.

Article 25 (2) (b) of the ICSID Convention referred to in Article VI (8)
reads as follows:

“(2) National of another Contracting State’ means:

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of Contracting State other than the
State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person which had the nationality
of the Contracting State party to the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign
control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting
State for the purposes of this Convention.

The Tribunal’s Findings

With respect to arbitration based on the Provisions of the Treaty, the
Treaty does not contain express choice of law provisions corresponding to
Clause 9.2 of the Agreement or Article 3 of the Foreign Investment Law,
but does contain references to the predominance of the parties’ agreement
with regard to the rules of arbitration under the various alternatives.

s..., Article VI (3) (a) iv) provides:

(3)...[T]he national or company concerned may choose to consent in writing to the
submission of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration:

iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance with any other arbitration
rules, as may be mutually agreed between the parties to the dispute.

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that a natural reading of the Treaty leads to
the conclusion that, insofar as it is found that the parties have agreed to
arbitration in Stockholm in accordance with the SCC Rules, those rules of
arbitration are applicable, supplemented by the Swedish Arbitration Act
being the law of the chosen place of arbitration. There is no basis for
holding that Kazakh procedural law, or for that matter U.S. procedural law,
the procedural laws of the parties to the arbitration, is applicable.

148 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

(9) Definition of “National of Another Contracting State”
Under the Treaty Between the USA and the Republic
of Kazakhstan Concerning the Encouragement
and Reciprocal Protection of Investment

The Arbitral Tribunal’s Finding

It follows from the provisions [of the Treaty] that, for [Claimant-
investor] to be entitled to demand arbitration at [the SCC] in Stockholm
under the Treaty, several conditions must be fulfilled:

(1) The dispute must be an “investment dispute” within the meaning
of the Treaty, which implies that:
a) the dispute must be arising out of or relating to an
« hotivati

an
within the meaning of the Treaty, or an alleged breach of any
right conferred or created by the Treaty with respect to an

investment;
b) _ the dispute must be between a U.S. national or company and
[Kazakhstan];
(2) The parties have not been able to settle the dispute by
negotiations;

(3) The parties must have mutually agreed to submit the dispute to
this particular arbitration institution;

(4) [Kazakhstan] must not have exercised its right under Article I (2)
of the Treaty to deny to [Claimant-investor] the advantages of the
Treaty.

The Tribunal is satisfied that the requirements under (2) and (3) above
have been met, and there has been no contention that [Kazakhstan] has
exercised any right according to the Treaty Article I (2) (point 4 above) to
deny [Claimant-investor] the advantages of the Treaty.

[Claimant-investor] asserts Article VI (3) (a) (iv) of the Treaty as one
basis for this arbitration. [Respondent-Kazakhstan] denies on various
grounds that the Arbitral Tribunal has such jurisdiction. Some of
[Respondent—Kazakhstan]’s contentions are related to the ownership or
control, directly or indirectly, of [Claimant-investor], and the nationality of
the companies and persons involved. Other contentions are related to the
legal consequences of the decisions of the Kazakh courts of law concerning
the termination of the Agreement.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 149

Assertions as to the Ownership and Control
of [Claimant-investor]

The Arbitral Tribunal finds it practical first to give a description of the
asserted ownership and control of [Claimant-investor], as a general
background.

Much of the following is based on statements made by [Mr. X], president
of [Claimant-investor]. His statements have been objected to by
pondent—Kazakhstan], requesting that his testi be suk iated
by documentary evidence available to [Claimant-investor]. The Tribunal
comes back to this evidentiary issue below, but finds his assertions useful as
a background for the decisions to be made.

 

.-. [IJn 1986 [Mr. X, a national of the United States] became the [sole]
owner of an offshore company [the Offshore Company], ... [which] formed
a joint stock company in 1987 under the laws of New York state with the
name of [Claimant-investor] ... [Mr. X] asserts that [Claimant-investor] was
100 per cent owned by him, which presumably means that he was the sole
shareholder, when the First Agreement was signed on 7 March 1997.

The [First Agreement] required considerable payments into [the Kazakh
Company], which were financed by loans from a group headed by [Mr. Y].
In the Statement of Defence it is stated that [Mr. Y] was chairman of
{another Kazakh Company in another industry], and was believed to be a
Kazakh citizen. [Mr. X] in his testimony at the hearing stated that [Mr. Y] is
not a Kazakh but a Russian citizen. The financing group [headed by Mr. Y]
acquired 50 per cent of the shares in [Claimant—investor], whereby [Mr. X]
became a 50 per cent shareholder in the company. This transfer of shares
took place in May 1997, after the First Agreement but before the
Agreement was signed on or about 8 July 1997. [Mr. X] has not been able
or willing to give the names or nationalities of the shareholders who held 50
per cent of the shares in [Claimant—investor] from 1997 to 2000, beyond a
suggestion that there were “some westerners and some Russians, and
possibly some Kazakhs.”

In May 1998, [Claimant-investor] acquired two ... plants in ... New
financing was required, and [Mr. X] had to reduce his shareholding to 25
per cent. It has been suggested that the financing group [headed by Mr. Y]
all in all invested close to 100 million USD to [the Kazakh Company] as
loans, while [Mr. X] himself invested about 2 million USD.

After [Claimant-investor] entered into the Agreement all activities of
{Claimant-investor] other than operating the Refinery and executing the

150 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

Agreement ceased. Today, [Claimant-investor] has no other assets than the
claim against [Respondent—Kazakhstan] for breach of the Agreement.

After the Agreement was terminated by the Kazakh courts in 2000, part
of the group of investors decided that they did not wish to participate in an
arbitration against [Respondent-Kazakhstan], the reason given was that
they had, or intended to have, business with [Respondent-Kazakhstan].
After negotiations, this group of investors withdrew as shareholders in
[Claimant—investor] and formed a company, which took over the ownership
of the two ... plants from [Claimant-investor]. As a result of these
transactions [Mr. X] became 51 per cent shareholder in [Claimant-investor],
while the investors who remained held 49 per cent of the [Claimant-
investor] shares. It has not been further explained why or how [Mr. X]
acquired 51 per cent of the shares in [Claimant-investor], nor has it been
documented that he obtained this percentage of the shares.

On 16 February 1998 a Virgin Islands Company was formed, with the
name of ... {the Holding Company]. This company is said now to own all
the shares in [Claimant-investor], while [Mr. X] owns 51 per cent and the
remaining investor group 49 per cent of the shares in [the Holding
Company].

This 49 per cent shareholder group is represented by [Mr. Z], a Geneva
lawyer. [Ms. S] testified, with no denial from [Mr. X], that [Mr. P],
previously the president of [Claimant-investor], receives mail to [Claimant-
investor] and forwards all such mail to [Mr. Z], not to [Mr. X]. The group
represented by [Mr. Z] finances 100 per cent of the costs of the present
arbitration. (Mr. X] has entered into an oral agreement with the group that
he will receive one sixth of any proceeds of the arbitration (and again
become a 100 per cent shareholder of [Claimant-investor]) while the group
will keep five sixths of any proceeds of the arbitration.

Respondent-Kazakhstan’s Position

[Respondent-Kazakhstan] objects to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under
the Treaty principally on the ground that ‘there is no Treaty jurisdiction
since [Claimant—investor] is not owned or controlled by a U.S. citizen,’ ...

[Respondent-Kazakhstan] does not deny that [Claimant-investor] is
created and existing under the laws of the State of New York and as such is
a “company of a Party” within the meaning of the Treaty. Nor does
[Respondent—Kazakhstan] deny that [Mr. X], the president of [Claimant—
investor] and the asserted majority shareholder in [the Holding Company],

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 151

is a “national” of a Party to the Treaty. But [Respondent—Kazakhstan]
maintains that available information, including [Mr. X]’s statements in other
connections, and his oral testimony at the hearing..., indicates that
[Claimant-investor] directly or indirectly is controlled by others, possibly
Kazakh citizens, who are not protected by the Treaty. [Respondent—
Kazakhstan] contends that [Claimant—investor] must provide the Arbitral
Tribunal with evidence and precise information concerning the
shareholders’ nationality and the size of their shareholdings in and their
control, directly or indirectly, of the companies concerned. [Respondent-
Kazakhstan] also asserts that [Claimant—investor] is an “empty shell” with
no business activity in the United States.

Claimant-investor’s Position

[Claimant-investor] refers to the undisputed fact that [Claimant—
investor] is a U.S. company, and contends that [Claimant—investor] as such
is entitled to protection and to request arbitration under the Treaty. It is
well established, also in international law, that the corporate entity is
separate from juridical or physical persons who own or control the
company. The Treaty must be interpreted and applied on that basis.

(10) Burden of Proof to Establish “National of Another
Contracting State” Under the Treaty Between the
USA and the Republic of Kazakhstan Concerning
the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investment

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence that [Claimant—
investor] is created and existing under the laws of the State of New York
and as such is a “company of a Party” within the meaning of the Treaty,
and satisfied that [Mr. XJ, allegedly the president of [Claimant-investor] and
the majority shareholder in [the Holding Company], is a U.S. citizen and a
“national” of a Party within the meaning of the Treaty.

However, the Tribunal finds that the ownership and control of
[Claimant-investor], and the question whether a company seeking
protection is an “empty shell” without any business activity within the
territory of a Party, must be taken into regard in the interpretation and
application of the Treaty. Although not directly applicable, several
provisions of the Treaty take ownership and control into regard. The
definition of “investments” in Article I(1)(a) refers to investments “owned
or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other

152 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

Party;” the right to deny protection under the Treaty according to Article
1(2) is based on a Party finding that the company concerned “has no
substantial business activities in the territory of the other Party or is
controlled by nationals of a third country ...;” and Article VI (8) addresses
the situation where an investment changes nationality immediately before
the occurrence of the event or the events giving rise to the dispute.

In consequence hereof it must be a procedural requirement that a
Claimant party, requesting arbitration on the basis of the Treaty, provides
the necessary information and evidence concerning the circumstances of
ownership and control, directly or indirectly, over [Claimant—investor] at all
relevant times. This is especially the case when reasonable doubt has been
raised as to the actual ownership of and control over the company seeking
protection. In the present case, by [Mr. X]’s admission, the sole activity of
[Claimant-investor] since the termination of the Agreement by the Kazakh
courts, and the sole asset of [Claimant-investor], is the arbitration initiated
against [Respondent-Kazakhstan]. This activity is financed solely by a
group of shareholders allegedly owning 49 per cent of the shares in [the
Holding Company], and the economic outcome of the arbitration is fixed to
be shared with five sixths to the shareholder group and one sixth to [Mr.
XX]. This explanation places the burden of proof on [Claimant—investor] to
prove that [Mr. X] is in control of the decisions to be made in the
arbitration or generally in control, directly or indirectly, of [Claimant—
investor].

 

 

[Claimant-investor] has repeatedly been requested by [Respond
Kazakhstan] to provide further information and evidence concerning such
ownership and control, but has resisted, partly with the argument that the
shareholder group wishes to remain anonymous. The Tribunal cannot find
that such an argument can justify for instance that [Claimant—investor] does
not provide any evidence of [Mr. X]’s shareholdings in the group at various
times.

Under the circumstances, the Arbitral Tribunal does not find it necessary
to determine in further detail what ownership or control is necessary under
the Treaty to be entitled to demand under the Treaty. The Tribunal finds,
on the evidence before it, that [Claimant-investor] has not provided any
degree of probability, let alone proof, that U.S. citizens or companies have
any degree of control, directly or indirectly, over [Claimant-investor]. The
Arbitral Tribunal therefore concludes that it has not been established that
the Tribunal has jurisdiction on the basis of the Treaty.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 153
Other Issues Related to Treaty Jurisdiction

In its post-hearing brief [Respondent-Kazakhstan] has submitted new
arguments and evidence concerning Kazakh law of corporations, placing
weight on substance rather than form, and argues that this also throws light
on the correct interpretation of the Treaty. [Claimant—investor] objects, at
this late stage of the separate proceedings, to deal with new arguments and
evidence not included in the five defined issues ... The Tribunal accepts
this objection, and also notes that with the findings stated above it appears
at this stage that the Tribunal does not, in any event, have jurisdiction under
the Treaty.

Decision on Jurisdiction

The Arbitral Tribunal renders the following unanimous Decision on
Jurisdiction:

1. Tribunal’s jurisdiction considered in this decision, that it is vested with
jurisdiction to adjudicate the claims brought by [Claimant-investor] on the
basis of the arbitration clause in [the Agreement], ..., and on the basis of
the Foreign Investment Law of Republic Kazakhstan of 29 December 1994
with amendments, but not on the basis of the Treaty of 19 May 1992
between the USA and the Republic of Kazakhstan Concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment. ...

II. Final Award Rendered in 2004 in
SCC Case 122/2001

 

Subject Matters:

(1) Jurisdiction—Validity of the Agreement—Apparent authority,
Ratification by acceptance.

(2) Jurisdiction—Admission to jurisdiction of the Kazakh courts.

(3) Party to the arbitration agreement—Sovereign state and state
organ—whether the department designated in the Agreement or
the State is the contractual party.

(4) Effects of prior court decision on termination of the Agreement.

(5) Whether acts of the Prosecutor General, and the national courts,
either in its capacity of contractual party to the Agreement or
under norms of Kazakh law and customary international law
should be considered as acts attributable to Sovereign State.

(6) Loss of future profit based on contractual right of first refusal —
whether a contractual right of first refusal, expressly conditioned

154

1)

STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

upon the owner’s decision to sell and without specification c
purchase price to be paid, may give rise to a claim for damage
Concept of expropriation, “creeping” ot “covert” expropriati

Findings:

()

2

1)

@)

6)

©

The Agreement is not invalid for lack of authority, wher
person who signs the Agreement on behalf of the State, i
least, has apparent authority and where the Agreeme:
otherwise executed in a proper way to become binding 1
applicable statutory [law] of the state. In any event, the Agree
was ratified by acceptance by the agencies acting on behalf c
State.

Tf the cause of action sought by a private party before the S
courts is altogether different from the one pursued in
arbitration proceeding, this [does not] constitute [an] admissic
jurisdiction of the State’s courts by the private party.

Where an Agreement expressly states that a Department o
State shall have the right to represent the State in
negotiations and the right to execute the Agreement on beh:
the State, and where the State is the owner of the subject o
Agreement, the State is deemed [a] Party to the Agreement.
The State’s courts’ decisions to terminate the Agreement hav
binding effect in the arbitration. The courts’ decisions ma
afforded evidentiary effects in the arbitration proceedings.
Based on relevant facts of this case, the Tribunal does not
sufficient basis to conclude that the Prosecutor General, o1
courts making the decision to terminate the Agreement,
acting as contractual representatives of Kazakhstan in
contractual relationship.

Loss of a contractual right of first refusal, conditional upon
owner’s decision to sell and without specification on the pure
price to be paid, would normally not give rise to any dar
claim, subject to the exception that in reality there is certainty
very high degree of probability that the owner would decide tc
in the course of the contract period.

There is no claim for damages for violation of contractual rigt
first refusal, when the value of the subject matter and of a rigt
buy the subject matter is clearly nil.

The Foreign Investment Law in Kazakhstan and international
require that the expropriation is carried out by a public institu
or in the public interest, on a non-discriminatory basis, is sut
to due process of law and accompanied by prompt, adequate
effective compensation.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 155,

Attachment of assets of the subject matter of the investment
agreement by a state-owned company as creditor can not be
qualified as acts of state, when the existence of such debt is fully
apparent to the investor at the time of investment.

Compensation for an expropriation is the value of the
expropriated object at the time the expropriation is executed.

Position of the Parties

Claimant-investor

Claimant-investor, in its Statement of Claim, requests that the Arbitral
Tribunal order Respondent—Kazakhstan:

to pay to [Claimant—investor], as compensation for investments
made by [Claimant-investor], an amount of USD [about 116
million] together with interest thereon ...

to pay to [Claimant-investor], as penalty under the Agreement, an
amount of USD [about 3 million], together with interest thereon

to pay to [Claimant—investor], as compensation for lost future
profits an amount of approximately USD [about 100 million],
together with interest ...

[Claimant-investor] requests the Arbitral Tribunal to order
[Respondent- Kazakhstan] to compensate [Claimant-investor] for
its cost of arbitration ... and, as between the parties, alone bear
the compensation to the Arbitral Tribunal and to [the SCC]. ...

The calculation of the claim was later amended. In the closing statement
at the hearing the claim was calculated as follows:

Breach of the Agreement
Compensable Investments made USD [about 62 million]
Compensable Lost Profits USD [about 262 million}
Penalty ... USD {about 3 million}
Grand Total Compensation USD [about 327 million]

Breach of the Foreign Investment
Law and International Law
Compensable Lost Future Profits UsD 262 million|

156 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

[Claimant-investor] states that it does not wish to claim in total more
than initially claimed, USD [219 million] ... that the legal grounds are
alternative, ...

Respondent-Kagakhstan

Respondent-Kazakhstan requested the Arbitral Tribunal to ... (4) Deny
Claimant’s claims for damages in their entirety and dismiss the Request for
arbitration and Statement of Claim. ...

Respondent-Kazakhstan raised a counterclaim that ... the Tribunal
should ... either affirm the Kazakhstan Supreme Court’s termination of the
Agreement or terminate it itself, ...

Respondent-Kazakt has raised no
(1) Jurisdiction—Validity of the Agreement—Apparent

Authority, Ratification by Acceptance

 

The Validity of the Agreement

As will appear from the statement of [Respondent-Kazakhstan] at the
hearing ..., [Respondent-Kazakhstan] reserves the right to challenge the
arbitral award on the ground that the Agreement was invalid. This question
has a bearing both on the issue of jurisdiction based on the arbitration
clause and on the merits of the claims based on the Agreement.

No objections have been raised with regard to the validity of the First
Agreement. Nor is there any disagreement with regard to the Parties’
intention that the First Agreement should be replaced in its entirety by the
Agreement signed on 8 July 1997.

Respondent-Kazakhstan’s Position

[Respondent-Kazakhstan] has mainly argued that the Agreement is
invalid because it was signed on behalf of [Respondent-Kazakhstan] by an
unauthorized person, that an appropriate seal was not affixed to the
document, that the changes had not been approved by the Interagency
Committee, and that its contents were not in conformity with the applicable
Resolution of 23 May 1996 fof Kazakhstan]. But [Respondent—Kazakhstan]
also concedes that the Agreement was recognized as effective by
[Respondent-Kazakhstan] and that invalidity was not asserted when the
Prosecutor General brought the action in the Kazakh court with a request
for termination.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 157
Claimant-investor’s Position

[Claimant-investor] argues that the person who signed on behalf of
[Respondent—Kazakhstan] had actual authority, and in any event apparent
authority, which under Kazakh law is sufficient and binding upon the state.
[Claimant—investor] contends that the Agreement was an amendment to the
First Agreement, which was allowed in the First Agreement and therefore
did not need new approval by the Interagency Commission [of
Kazakhstan]. The 1996 Resolution is for that reason not applicable, and in
any event the Resolution is not mandatory.

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that the Agreement was signed by a person
who in the least had apparent authority to sign and was otherwise executed
in a proper way to become binding under Kazakh law. In any event, the
Agreement was ratified by the acceptance by the agencies acting in the
matter on behalf of [Respondent-Kazakhstan]. The Tribunal considers that
the Agreement was in the nature of an amendment to which the Resolution
of 23 May 1996 was not applicable, and for which the renewed approval of
the Interagency Commission, in view of the approved wording of the First
Agreement, was not necessary.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the Agreement was validly entered
into and binding upon the Parties. It follows that the arbitration, on the
basis of the arbitration clause, should not be dismissed on the basis of
invalidity of the clause.

(2)  Jurisdiction—Admission to Jurisdiction
of the Kazakh Courts

 

Respondent-Kazakhstan’s Position

IR dent-Kazakhstan] also ds that [Clai tor] has
admitted jurisdiction of the courts of Kazakhstan over disputes that arise
out of the Agreement, on the ground that [Claimant—investor] brought a
claim in Kazakh courts seeking the invalidation of a Governmental decree
not directly relevant to the present issues. In ... hearing it was also
suggested that [Claimant-investor] had submitted to Kazakh court
jurisdiction and abandoned the right to arbitration by answering in the
court action brought by the Prosecutor General seeking the termination of
the Agreement.

158 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1
The Tribunal’s Findings

As for the former of these arguments, the Arbitral Tribunal finds i
sufficient to remark that it is obvious that seeking invalidation of :
governmental decree constitutes an altogether different cause of action thar
the one pursued in this arbitration, and that it cannot be interpreted as at
admission of jurisdiction of the Kazakh courts or as having such effect fo
the present purposes. As for the latter of these arguments, [Claimant
investor] has proven that [Claimant-investor] limited its comments t
objections to the Kazakh courts’ jurisdiction, and expressly mad:
reservations against its limited pleadings being construed as submission t
the jurisdiction of the Kazakh courts.

With reference to the above, the Arbitral Tribunal concludes that it ha
jurisdiction to adjudge this case under the arbitration clause and the Foreigt
Investment Law.

(3) Party to the Arbitration Agreement—Sovereign
State and State Organ—Whether the Department
Designated in the Agreement or the Sate is the
Cc 1 Party

 

Whether Respondent-Kazakhstan is a Party to the Agreement
The preamble to the Agreement states as follows:

The Department for the Management of State Property and Assets of the Ministry of
Finance of the Republic of Kaxakbstan authorized by the Government of the Republic
of Kazakhstan (hereinafter referred to as the Department) ... as one party, and
[Claimant-investor] ... as the other party ... have concluded this Agreement as follows:

Clause 4 of the Agreement is termed “Rights and Obligations of the
Parties” and provides for “4.1 Rights of the Department,” “4.2 Rights anc
Guarantees of the Department” and, thereunder, contains a group o
provisions headed “The Department guarantees.” Also for instance, Claus
7.3 of the Agreement provides for the event of “the unilateral terminatior
of the Department.”

“The question has been raised whether the designated Department rathe:
that the Republic of Kazakhstan is the contract Party to the Agreement.”

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal finds it clear that it is the Republic of Kazakhstar
which is the contractual Party to the Agreement. The Agreement itsel

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 159

states expressly that the Department shall have the right fo represent the
Government of the Republic [the Tribunal’s Italics] in direct negotiations with
the Concessionaire and the right to execute the Agreement on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan [the Tribunal’s Italics]
[Respondent-Kazakhstan] was the owner of the shares in [the Kazakh
Company], which was the subject of the Agreement.

This finding also implies that [Kazakhstan] is [a] party to the Agreement
under international law, that the Department is a state organ, and that its
actions are actions of the Republic, under Kazakh and international law.

(4) Effects of Prior Court Decision on
Termination of the Agreement

 

The Power of Attorney

According to Clause 4.2.1 of the Agreement ... the Department on
behalf of the state undertakes to:

transfer to the Concessionaire the right to use and manage the entire state shareholding
of 87.9 % of PNPZ JSC and to cause the right to possess and manage PNPZ to be
transferred. The issue of a power of attorney by the Department to the Concessionaire
shall constitute the transfer of said rights.

The Factual Development

... the Committee for State Property and Privatization [of Kazakhstan]
by a letter of 16 March 2000, after the first Power of Attorney had expired
in February 2000, requested of [Claimant-investor] a number of
documents, for the purpose of considering the possibility of issuing a new
Power of Attorney as applied for by [Claimant—investor]. [Claimant—
investor] complied with the request by letter of 2 April 2000.

But on 27 April 2000, the Kazakh Prosecutor General’s Office [i.e., the
“Prosecutor General] filed a Statement of Claim in [the Kazakh City
Court], charging that both [Claimant-investor] and the Committee for State
Property and Privatization had failed in their duties under the Agreement.
Reference was made to Article 401 of the Civil Code of Kazakhstan stating
that in the event of a material breach of an agreement, it may be terminated
by a court decision. With further reference to a Presidential Edict on the
Prosecutor General’s Office and to Articles 28, 32 and 55 of the Civil
Procedural Code, the Prosecutor General applied for the Agreement [to] be
terminated.

160 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

[Claimant—investor] objected to the action for a number of reasons, inter
alia, on the ground that the Kazakh court did not have jurisdiction to
adjudicate disputes between the contracting parties concerning foreign
investments. Appeals against [the Kazakh City Court]’s decision to proceed
with the case were rejected, and [the Kazakh City Court] on 9 June 2000
ruled that the Agreement “should be terminated.” [Claimant—investor]’s
appeal against this decision was rejected by the Kazakh Supreme Court on
18 July 2000. :

{Claimant—investor] noted in a letter of 28 June 2000 to the Prime
Minister [of Kazakhstan] that, although [Claimant-investor] did not believe
that the Agreement was validly terminated, [the Kazakh City Court]’s
decision of 9 June 2000 had immediately led to the suspension of
[Claimant-investor] from the management of [the Kazakh Company].
[Claimant-investor] declared that it was no longer in a position to be
responsible for the enterprise under the existing circumstances, and
proposed that instructions be given to the relevant state authority and a
responsible entity be appointed to take over the Refinery. On 11 July 2000,
The Ministry of Finance Committee for State Property and Privatization
issued Order No. 156, based on [the Kazakh City Court] decision of 9 June
2000, that the Agreement must be terminated and the rights to possess and
use the state’s 87.9 per cent shareholding in [the Kazakh Company] must be
transferred to the Ministry of Energy, Industry and Trade. By acceptance
certificates issued on 13 July 2000 [the New Kazakh Company] handed
over to [the Kazakh Company] the assets leased under the Lease Agreement
of 1 September 1997.

The Legal Effects of the Termination Internally in Kazakhstan:
The Factual Effects

There is no dispute that the decision of [the Kazakh City Court],
affirmed by the Supreme Court [of Kazakhstan]’s decision of ... was legally
binding within the national legal system of Kazakhstan, whether or not the
Kazakh courts should have declined jurisdiction on a proper interpretation
of the arbitration clause of the Agreement. This meant, inter alia, that all
public institutions, including agents of the state, were bound to base their
further actions and exercise their duties on the legal fact that the Agreement
was terminated and no longer was in effect (except perhaps for winding-up
provisions in the Agreement).

Presumably, the decision was also res judicata for [Claimant—investor]
within the Kazakh legal system, with no opportunity to appeal. In any
event, it had the factual effect that all authorities and agencies would act on
the basis that the Agreement was terminated and had ceased to be in effect.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 161

[Claimant-investor] had, in the Tribunal’s view, no option other than to
accept the factual situation created by [the Kazakh City Court]’s decision ...
[Claimant-investor] in a letter of ... to the Prime Minister [of Kazakhstan]
noted that it was no longer in a position to be responsible for the enterprise
under the existing circumstances. In accordance with [Claimant-investor]’s
proposal, a responsible entity was appointed to take over the Refinery and
by acceptance certificates of ... [Claimant-investor] transferred back to
[Respondent—Kazakhstan] its rights under the Agreement.

The Arbitral Tribunal finds and concludes [the Tribunal’s italic] that the
immediate legal effect internally within Kazakhstan, and the factual effect
generally, of the courts’ decisions and the subsequent Department Order,
was the termination and cessation of the contractual relationship between
[Respondent—Kazakhstan] and [Claimant-investor].

The Legal Effect of the Termination in this Arbitration

‘As already concluded ... the decision of the Kazakh courts does not have
any binding effect in this arbitration. It does not have a res judicata effect to
prevent this Tribunal from considering all claims in this arbitration on their
merits, nor is this Tribunal bound to make its findings on the basis of the
decision of the Kazakh courts.

The Tribunal notes that [Claimant-investor] on the one side, denies that
the Kazakh courts had any jurisdiction under Clause 9 of the Agreement to
make a decision to terminate the Agreement, but on the other side it
accepts and contends that the Agreement was terminated by [the Kazakh
City Court] ... and, for instance, claims interest on its claims from that date
fof the decision by the Kazakh City Court] until payment. The Arbitral
Tribunal considers that it must deny any legal effect in this arbitration of
the Kazakh courts’ decision, and ona completely free basis decide wien
and how the Agi was d and the c I relati ip

ceased to exist.

However, the Kazakh courts’ decisions may be afforded evidentiary
effects, as for instance this Tribunal does when it relies on the statements of
the Kazakh courts as evidence of the transfer of ownership to [the Kazakh
Company]’s assets, to the extent described.

Also, the factual consequences and effects of the courts’ decisions and
the subsequent Department Order are matters to be taken into regard by
the Tribunal, but then as matters of fact, to be proven and be relied on as
such, to the extent they are relevant for the Tribunal’s conclusions.

162 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

(5) | Whether Acts of the Prosecutor General, and the National
Courts, Either in its Capacity of Contractual Party to the
Agreement or Under Norms of Kazakh law and Customaty
International Law Should be Considered as Acts
Attributable to Sovereign State

 

Did the Prosecutor General’s Action and the Subsequent Events Constitute a
Termination of the Agreement by Respondent-Kagakhstan?

--. Clause 8.2 of the Agreement states that the Agreement shall only
cease to be in effect for one of the following reasons:

© The expiry of the five year period, unless the Parties agree on an
extension;

¢ by mutual agreement of the Parties;

¢ if the Concessionaire fails to comply with its obligations to make
investments, and is given a 30 days’ written notice, but fails to
eliminate the reasons described as grounds for the termination
before the end of the 30 days’ period.

Nevertheless, Clause 7.2 and Clause 7.3 provides for two other
termination events:

7.2 In the event of the premature termination of this Agreement, the culpable party
must reinnburse the other Party for all the losses suffered by such Party as a result
of such termination. ...

7.3 In the event of the unilateral termination of this Agreement by the Department,
all the amounts invested by the Concessionaire [etc] ... must be fully refunded
within one month as of the date of the termination of the Agreement.

Several of the Claimant's claims are built on these clauses, and a first
question in relation to these claims is whether the Prosecutor General’s
action and the subsequent events constitute a termination of the
Agreement.

a) The first question is whether the Prosecutor General, or the
Kazakh courts, acted as an agent for or representatives of the Government
in its capacity of contractual Party to the Agreement.

Claimant-investor’s Position

[Claimant-investor] contends that the action of the Prosecutor General
and the termination by the Kazakh courts was, in fact and law, to be
considered as being executed by [Respondent—Kazakhstan] in its capacity of
Party to the Agreement. Representatives of the state must obviously have

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 163

prompted the Prosecutor General to initiate the termination procedure
before [the Kazakh City Court], as an alternative to denying [Claimant~
investor] an extension of the power of attorney {under the Agreement], or
as an al i to [R d K: Kt \]’s decl: of the
Agreement directly through i its appointed representatives in the contractual
relationship. Under international law, the Prosecutor General as well as the
Kazakh courts must be considered as organs of the state, the actions of
which are to be considered equal to actions directly by the state itself.

 

 

Respondent-Kaxakhstan’s Position

 

pondent—Kazakhstan] mainly ds that the P: General
acted on his own initiative, in performance of his duties under Kazakh law
to intervene when [Kazakhstan]’s interests are not properly taken care of.
The Prosecutor General is acting independently and not under instructions
by the state. His intervention and the courts’ decisions must be considered
an outside event for which [Respondent-Kazakhstan] is not responsible
under the Agreement.

The Tribunal’s Findings

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that there is no positive proof that
[Respondent-Kazakhstan] i d or otherwise prompted the P.
General to initiate the termination proceedings before [the Kazakh City
Court]. On the other hand, no explanation has been given why the
Prosecutor General commenced his actions at this time. It is undisputed
that the Department was in the process of considering whether to issue or
deny a new Power of Attorney, and that the Department evidently
considered a refusal of a Power of Attorney to be tantamount to the

ination of the Agi It is a P id that the
Prosecutor General initiated court proceedings exactly at this point in time.

 

 

The Tribunal also finds the role and functions of the Prosecutor General
unclear. [Respondent-Kazakhstan] maintains that [the Prosecutor General]
is independent, does not act under instructions, and performs functions
defined in the legislation. But [Respondent-Kazakhstan] also admits that
the Prosecutor General’s task is to protect the interests of the state, also in
purely commercial, contractual matters as in the present case. The
Prosecutor General’s application to the courts, and the courts’ decisions in
the case, are all directed at the termination of the contractual relationship.
In a number of the court cases submitted in this arbitration, including the
major court case brought by [Company X] against [the Kazakh Company], a
prosecutor general brought action on behalf of the claimants, apparently
acting as their representative. Nor is it a convincing argument that the

164 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

Prosecutor General brought complaints against both Parties to the
Agreement, both [Claimant-investor] and the Department (on behalf of the
state). The only complaint against the Department was that it did not act
efficiently to protect the state’s contractual interest, and hereunder did not
consider steps to terminate the Agreement. No measures or reactions were
asked for with regard to the state’s representatives in the contract, only the
termination of the Agreement. In the court’s decision no sanctions were
ordered against the Department. The Ministry of Finance was ordered to
pay ... about USD 14, which looks more like a court fee than a penalty or
fine.

All things considered, the Arbitral Tribunal does not find sufficient basis
to conclude that the Prosecutor General, or the courts making the decision
to terminate the Agreement, were acting as contractual representatives of
the State in the contractual relationship.

Whether the Prosecutor General, the Courts, and/or the Department Issuing Order to
Terminate the Agreement, May be Regarded as Organs of the State

b) ‘The next question hereunder is, whether the Prosecutor General,
the courts, and/or the Department issuing Order No. 156 terminating the
Agreement, may be regarded as organs of the state, the actions of which are
attributable to the state under the norms of the Foreign Investment Law
and customary international law.

The question in this connection is, whether the action of the Prosecutor
General—as being yet an embodiment of the sovereign state—may be
attributed to the state as a contracting party. Provided there is no collusion
or any other form of concerted action compromising the contractual [the
Tribunal’s Italics] instrumentality of the state the Tribunal is inclined to
answer the question in the negative.

Howeres in the present case the Arbitral cabal has to take into
that the D has made a p in
the Agreement as reflected in Clause 4.2.6, which provides as follows:

 

“The Department guarantees:

4.2.6 unconditional compliance with Chapter IL of the Law of the Republic of
Kazakhstan ‘On Foreign Investment’ dated 27 December 1994, during the entire

period of validity of the Agreement.”

This undertaking, which is in the nature of a guarantee, means that
[Respondent—Kazakhstan] in its capacity as a contracting party has to

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 165

inswer for obligations under international law undertaken in the Foreign
nvestment Law. [Respondent—Kazakhstan]as a contracting party—has,
herefore, by its guarantee concerning observation of international
ninimum standards extended its responsibility to what would apply for the
tates merely acting de jure gestionis in a commercial contractual relationship
vith an entrepreneur (whether domestic or foreign).

‘The Tribunal also notes that, on 11 July 2000, the Ministry of Finance
ommittee for State Property and Privatization issued Order No. 156, with
eference to [the Kazakh City Court]’s decision of 9 June 2000, ordered that
ae Agreement must be terminated and the rights to possess and use the
tate shareholding in [the Kazakh Company] must be transferred to the
east of Energy, Industy end Trade. _ The Committee was aware that
ie ion of the A to be
walid, but nevertheless affirmed the termination of the Agreement. This
Irder stands as a separate and independent legal act, executing the courts’
ecision to terminate. But it must be assumed that the Committee would
so have been empowered to reinstate [Claimant—investor] in its position
£ manager of the state shareholding and as operator of the Refinery, had it
yund reason to continue or renew the Agreement. Therefore, the
ommittee’s affirmation of the courts’ decision to terminate the Agreement
ands out as the ultimate decision, which sealed the end of the Agreement.

It is clear that the termination effected by the courts and affirmed by the
ommittee, did not follow the rules of the Agreement for a termination
scision. However, it is also clear, as set out above, that the actions of the
ate organs brought the Agreement to a definite end.

‘The Arbitral Tribunal therefore concludes [the Tribunal’s Italics] that [the
azakh City Court]’s decision, affirmed by the Supreme Court and by the
ommittee’s Order of 11 July 2000, constituted the ultimate termination of
e Agreement.

) Loss of Future Profit Based on Contractual Right of First
Refusal—Whether a Contractual Right of First Refusal,
Expressly Conditioned Upon the Owner’s Decision to
Sell and Without Specification on the Purchase Price
to be Paid, May Give Rise to a Claim for Damages

The Claim for Loss of Future Profits Based on the Agreement
The claim under the Agreement for compensable lost profits, USD ..., is

marily based on the alleged unjustified termination of the Agreement by
espondent-Kazakhstan] ..., which allegedly had as an effect that the right

166 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

of first refusal to buy [Respondent-Kazakhstan]’s shareholding in [the
Kazakh Company] was revoked. [Claimant-investor] asserts that this
resulted in a loss of future profits. For this, [Respondent-Kazakhstan] is
asserted to be liable under Clause 7.1 of the Agreement in conjunction with
Article 350 and Article 9 of the Civil Code. As set out above, Clause 7.1
reads as follows:

7.1 In the event of a failure to perform, or the improper performance of, their

obligation thereunder, the Parties shall be held liable in accordance with
hegislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan and the provisions of international
law.

a) A first question is whether a conditional right of this kind may give rise
toa claim for damages.

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that in the First Agreement, the clauses
relating to this claim had the following wording:

CLAUSE 4. RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE PARTIES

4.2 Obligations and guarantees of the Department
The Department undertakes to:

4.2.4 Give the Concessioner a priority right to buy out the state shareholding of AO
shares (or a portion thereof).

CLAUSE 12, SPECIAL CONDITIONS

12.3 Following revaluation of the authorized capital stock on the basis of results of an
independent auditing expert examination, the volume of the authorized capital
stock shall be changed and the shares value shall be fixed to be used as the base
Sor selling the shares to the Concessioner. The authorized capital stock shall be
changed within 6 months after the date when this Contract comes into force.

In the Agreement, the clauses were changed to read as follows:

CLAUSE 4. RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE PARTIES

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 167

4.2 Rights and guarantees of the Department

The Department undertakes to:

4.2.4 vest the Concessionaire with the right of first refusal in respect of the state
shareholding in [the Refinery] (or any pon thereof) if a decision is taken on the
sale (privatization) thereof...

CLAUSE 12. SPECIAL CONDITIONS

12.3 Following the charter fund having been re-evaluated based upon the results of an
independent audit examination, the amount of the charter capital shall be
changed. Such change shall be made within 6 months as of the effective date of
this Agreement.

The Tribunal notes that in the First Agreement [Claimant-investor] was
granted an unconditional right to buy the shares, although the clause is not
specific as to the time the right was to be exercised, and there was a specific
stipulation of the purchase price to be paid. The Agreement, in contrast,
only granted a right of first refusal, which was made expressly conditional
upon the owner’s decision whether to sell: “... if a decision is taken on the
sale ...”. The reference to the price to be paid was also removed, leaving
the question of the purchase right completely open, as is normal in the case
of a right to first refusal, where the price is normally determined by the
price a third party is willing to pay.

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that the loss of a conditional contractual right
of this uncertain nature and of uncertain value would normally not give rise
to any damage claim. The only conceivable exception would be if in reality
there is certainty, or a very high degree of probability, that the state would
decide to sell its shares in the course of the five-year contract period. In
view of this, after [Claimant-investor] had submitted its brief ...before the
hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal ... sent a letter to the Claimant stating, infer
alia, as follows:

3. For its claim for lost profits [Claimant-investor] appears to be referring to Clause
4.24 of the Agreement, stating that:

The Department undertakes to: ... vest the concessionaire with the right of first refusal
in respect of the shareholding in [the Refinery](or any part thereof) if a decision is taken
on the sale (privatisation) thereof.

Apart from a remark in ...[Claimant-investor’s] the Statement of Claim that “Tt was
[Claimant-investor]’s understanding that [Respondent- Kayakhstan]’s intention was to

168 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

privatise [the Kazakh Company] and to do so within a time period of approximately

18 months,” the Tribunal notes-without taking any position at this time on the
relevance thereof-that [Claimant-investor] cannot be found to have documented or
explained the further basis for its expectation that the option to buy the shares in [the
Kazakh Company] would materialize.

If this is relevant for [Claimant-investor]’s claim for lost profit, [Claimant-investor] is
invited to submit further documentation or explanation thereof not later than ....

[Claimant—investor] has chosen not to give any further explanation or

d i ing the prosp of [Respond Kazakh i)’

deciding to sell its shares or any part thereof.

Since it is common knowledge that the Kazakh state has carried through
a considerable number of sales of state enterprises to private owners, the
Tribunal also inquired at the hearing whether there were, or are, any policy
decisions or declarations that might throw light on the probability of the
sale of the state’s shares in [the Kazakh Company]. In response hereto,
[Respondent-Kazakhstan| [the Tribunal’s Italics] contended at the hearing that
there was a general policy for privatising. The Ministry of Energy [in
Kazakhstan] had designated several refineries and other energy properties
to be privatised, and they were privatised, sold. ... Those [refineries] were
sold by the Ministry of Energy through the State Property Committee. [The
Refinery] was never put on any list by the Ministry of Energy of properties
to be privatised. No evidence was adduced in support of these contentions,
[...] nor did [Claimant-investor] object to [Respondent—Kazakhstan]’s
contentions.

The Arbitral Tribunal must conclude that [Claimant-investor] has not
proved that there was any degree of certainty or even probability that
[Respondent-Kazakhstan] would decide to sell its shares in [the Kazakh
Company], or any part thereof, and therefore has not proved that it has a
damage claim on the basis of the conditional right to first refusal in respect
of the state shareholding in [the Kazakh Company] [...]. The claim must
therefore be rejected [the Tribunal’s Italics].

b) Another consideration leads to the same conclusion. A claim for
damages under Clause 7.1 of the Agreement or a claim under any other
provision of the Agreement must necessarily refer to damages inflicted by
the action resulting in the damage, in this case the damage caused by
[Respondent—Kazakhstan]’s termination of the Agreement .... By that time,
[the Kazakh Company] had definitely and permanently lost virtually all its
assets, and [the Kazakh Company] no longer had adequate assets to
produce Refinery profits over 20 years as calculated. The value of the
shares, and of a right to buy the shares, was clearly nil.

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 169

Also, for this reason [Claimant-investor]’s claims must be ryected [the
Tribunal’s Italics}.

(7) Concept of Expropriation, “Creeping” or
“Covert” Expropriation

 

The Claim for Loss of Profits Based on Expropriation Under the
Foreign Invstment Law

Introduction

[Claimant—investor] asserts that a number of measures taken by

dent—Kazakk | amount to and i a breach

of Article 7 of the Foreign Investment Law fof Kazakhstan], as well as

customary international law. Reference is also made to Article 8 of the
Foreign Investment Law.

[Chai investor] ds that [Respondent-Kazakhstan] is
responsible, pursuant to international law, see Article 4 of the International
Law Commission’s Draft Articles on State Responsibility, for actions taken
by its state organs, including the Prosecutor General and the Kazakh courts,
and officials of such organs. [Claimant~investor] also contends that
[Respondent-Kazakhstan] has breached Article 7 of the Foreign
Investment Law, as well as customary international law, when it—in its
capacity as contracting Party—took away [Claimant-investor]’s contractual
rights by unlawfully terminating the Agreement.

 

At the hearing, [Claimant-investor] listed the measures allegedly
amounting to expropriation as follows:

© — Mandatory deliveries of oil products to the state owned agricultural companies.

© The court proceedings between [Company X] and [the Kazakh Company] which
resulted in the transfer of ownership of a substantial part of the property of [the
Kazakh Company] to [Company X].

© The Refusal in the spring of 2000 to extend the Power of Attorney.

The proceedings initiated and pursued by the General Prosecutor resulting in the,

procedurally and materially unlawful termination of the Agreement.

© The subsequent re-transfer of the management of [the Kazakh Company] from
[Claimant-investor] to [Respondent-Kazakhstan].

.

With regard to the mandatory deliveries to the agricultural organizations,
the Arbitral Tribunal notes that according to the Government's Order No.
187 of 9 March 1998 instructions were issued for the provision of fuel
supplies to agricultural organisations. In this order various refineries — not
only [the Kazakh Company] — were ordered to supply oil among them.

170 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

However, the Order does not conclusively show that the Refinery was
saddled with more onerous terms than any other refinery instructed to
provide oil supplies to agricultural organisations. The Government's Order
does not therefore, without more, provide any substantiation that the
Refinery has been subjected to discriminatory treatment, which would
create liability under any foreign investment protection scheme.

Price Regulation | for Oil

Although they are not asserted in connection with the claim for
expropriation compensation, the Tribunal also notes that [Claimant-
investor] has asserted several measures that are said to be discriminatory,
among them a price regulation for oil. By an Order No. 210 of 22 July 1999
[of Kazakhstan] certain price limits were determined, KZT 1700 for
[refinery A, another refinery not related to this dispute], KZT 1800 for
[refinery B, another refinery not related to this dispute] and KZT 1680 for
[the New Kazakh Company]. It is stated [in the Order No. 210] that prices
are determined in “consideration for oil products storage periods.” Without
further explanation the Tribunal is at a loss in assessing whether the
reference to “storage periods” was a rational and non-discriminatory
parameter for fixing varying price levels. However, there is in any event no
price variation of any seemingly significant character and the Tribunal
cannot conclude that the price differences are of a discriminatory nature.

[Claimant-investor] contends that the compensation due for the alleged
expropriation is USD [262 million], equal to the compensation for lost
future profits claimed under the Agreement, ...

For an action, or a group of actions, to be classified as expropriation
under the Foreign Investment Law or customary international law, certain
criteria must be satisfied.

“Article 7 of the Foreign Investment Law reads as follows:
Aniicle 7. Guarantees Against Expropriation

1. Foreign investments may not be nationalized, expropriated, or subjected to other
measures having the same consequences as nationalization and expropriation
(hereinafter: ecxpropriation) it [the Tribunal’s note], except for instances when such
expropriation is effectuated in social interests in compliance with proper legal
order and is done without discrimination and with payment of prompt, adequate
and effective contributory compensation.

2. Contributory compensation must be equal to the fair market value of the
investment being expropriated at the moment when the expropriation thereof
became known to the investor.

3. Contributory compensation must include interest ...

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 171

This exception for certain measures, with special guarantees for
compensation to be paid, is in the Tribunal’s view fully in accordance with
the norms of customary international law. Neither the Foreign Investment
Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan nor any bilateral or multilateral
investment treaty seeks to proscribe the state’s right to expropriate the
assets of private individuals or entities. What the Foreign Investment Law
and international law requires is that such expropriation meets certain
criteria, i.e., that the expropriation isycarried out in the public interest, on a
non-discriminatory basis, is subject to due process of law and accompanied
by prompt, adequate and effective compensation. Other measures, having
the same consequences as nationalization or expropriation, fall outside the
scope of this exception for lawful expropriations, but are covered, in the
case of the Foreign Investment Law, by the state’s guarantee against taking
any such measures ...

The question is therefore whether the listed measures, separately or in
ion, meet the ditions to be idered as exprop under
Axrticle 7 of the Foreign Investment Law.

Mandatory Deliveries of Oil Products to the
Agricultural Sector

The Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that [the Kazakh Company] was under
public orders to deliver oil products to the agricultural sector at least in
1997 and 1998. The Tribunal is also satisfied that other entities were subject
to similar delivery orders, and there is no indication that [the Kazakh
Company] was subject to arbitrary or discriminatory treatment.

To a large extent payment for the deliveries was guaranteed by the
regional auth but [Cl t r plains that the
were not honored, nor did the state see to it that the deliveries were paid
for. To some extent [Claimant-—investor] ensured payment itself, by setting
off tax liabilities against its claims for mandatory deliveries of oil products.

 

[Claimant-investor] does not claim expropriation compensation for the
expropriation of oil products to the agricultural sector. In any event, the
quantities of delivered oil products and the value thereof have not been
documented in such a form and detail as to form basis for an award of such
compensation.

[Claimant-investor] rather appears to claim that the forced deliveries of
oil products without proper payment contributed to the worsening of [the
Kazakh Company}’s financial situation, which [...] as a result [...] the
company was unable to pay its creditors and lost all its assets due to the
creditors collecting on their claims. However, the Arbitral Tribunal finds

172. STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

that it is sufficiently clear from the evidence with regard to the deliveries to
the agricultural sector that the non-payment for some of these deliveries
was not in itself capable of causing the bad financial position and the
consequential loss of [the Kazakh Company]’s assets, and its contribution
to the final removal of [the Kazakh Company]’s assets must be considered
too insignificant to qualify the mandatory deliveries of oil products as part
of an expropriation of [the Kazakh Company]’s assets under the Foreign
Investment Law or international law. ,

The Court Proceedings Between [Company X] and [the Kazakh Company], Which
Resulted in the Transfer of Ownership of a Substantial Part of the Property of [the
Kazakh Company] to [Company X]

‘The court proceedings between [Company X] and [the Kazakh
Company] and the resulting transfer of ownership of a substantial part of
the property of [the Kazakh Company] to [Company X] are in evidence, ...

Another element of an expropriation concept is normally that the
property is acquired by a public institution, or in the public interest. In this
connection, [Claimant-investor] contends that the major part of the
Refinery’s assets were transferred to the ownership of (Company X], which
until the spring of 1999 was wholly owned by [Kazakhstan], and now is
operated by, and possibly owned by, a subsequently formed Kazakh
company, [Petrochemical Company]. According to [Claimant—investor]
[Petrochemical Company] is owned 51 per cent by [Company X] and 49 per
cent by the Kazakhstan Government. With the Kazakhstan Government
said to hold 30 per cent of the shares in [Company X], the Government is
purported to own beneficially 64.3 per cent of [Petrochemical Company]
through these shareholdings. [Claimant-investor] has also asserted, without
presenting any evidence, that this transfer of the Refinery’s assets from [the
Kazakh Company] to the new group emerged was the realization of a
“hidden scheme” [of Kazakhstan] to re-posses the Refinery, ...

[Respondent-Kazakhstan] denies the existence of any such “scheme”
and asserts that the unfortunate development was the result of appropriate
legal action undertaken by [the Kazakh Company|’s creditors for which
[Claimant—investor] is liable.

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that what ultimately caused [Claimant—
investor]’s loss of control and ability to manage the Refinery was the
attachment of most of its assets in debt collection proceedings pursued by
[Company X], which had decided to cash in on its claims which had existed
before the commencement of the management of the Refinery by
{Claimant-investor]. Such measures by [Company X] cannot be qualified as
acts of state even if there was any state ownership in [Company X].

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 173

Investment protection is not in place to safeguard a foreign investor from
the adverse effects of economic adversity, fully apparent at the time of
investment, facing entities. Neither does it provide any safeguards against
the vagaries of loss-making business operations generally.

‘The Tribunal notes that the confiscation or expropriation of property or
other rights may take the form of “creeping” or “covert” encroachment on
private assets, whereby the owner of the property or rights is exposed to
measures which make the enjoyment of the rights impossible or essentially
reduced and forces the owner to abandon his ownership or rights.

The Tribunal has considered the Government [of Kazakhstan]’s actions
and the developments in the present case in this perspective. In theory, the
government might have left the old debt in [the Kazakh Company] not
provided for, as an unexploded time bomb, only to explode it in the form
of a creditor action by its wholly owned company [Company X] and cash in
on [Claimant-investor]’s investments and the increase of the working
capital after they had been made in accordance with the Agreement. Or the
Government [of Kazakhstan] might conceivably have imposed on [the
Kazakh Company] mandatory deliveries to the agricultural sector, or might
have imposed a discriminatory VAT [value added tax], an excise tax, and
other measures listed by [(Claimant-investor], for the purpose of worsening
the financial position of [the Kazakh Company] and preparing for a
termination of the Agreement on account of [Claimant-investor]’s and [the
Kazakh Company]’s inability to perform obligations under the Agreement.
However, [Claimant-investor] has not shown, and the Tribunal has not
discovered, any evidence or indication that such motivation lies behind any
of the Government’s actions in connection with the Agreement. What is in
evidence is that both parties to the Agreement were fully aware, or ought to
have been aware, that (the Kazakh Company] as a separate legal entity was
in a very difficult financial position, but nevertheless they entered into a
commercial contract where both parties openly left considerable [the
Kazakh Company] debts and obligations not provided for, and thereby
openly took the risk that [the Kazakh Company] might go bankrupt or be
deprived of its assets and means of further activity. There is nothing in the
situation, or the evidence presented, to cause the Tribunal to conclude that
[Claimant-investor] has been exposed to any “creeping” or “covert”
expropriation. Both Parties have been exposed to the consequences of the
risks that they undertook when entering into the Agreement.

The conclusion [the Tribunal’s Italics] is therefore that a claim for
expropriation compensation on account of the creditors’ collecting on their
debt is unfounded.

174. STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

The Refusal in the Spring of 2000 to Extend the
Power of Attorney

It is in evidence that the Power of Attorney was not renewed when the
first Power of Attorney expired on 13 February 2000, ....

{Claimant-investor] has not explained how the failure to renew or extend
the Power of Attorney could amount to expropriation, either separately or
as a contributing factor in conjunction with the other circumstances listed
by [Claimant-investor].

...the Parties may at the time have labored under the conviction that a
renewal or extension was legally necessary, in the sense that without a
Power of Attorney the Agreement would cease to be in force. If that
[would] be the case, a refusal to renew or extend the Power of Attorney
would in effect amount to a termination of the Agreement. Be that as it
may, the fact of the matter is that the question of a new Power of Attorney
never came to the point of a definite refusal. No claims or legal arguments
have been based on the lapse of the first Power of Attorney or the failure to
renew or extend it after 13 February 2000.

Therefore, this factor cannot amount to, or contribute to, the alleged
existence of expropriation within the meaning of the Foreign Investment
Law or international law.

The Proceedings Initiated and Pursued by the General Prosecutor Resulting
in the Procedurally and Materially Unlawful
Termination of the Agreement

a) The first question hereunder is, what is considered to be the
object of this alleged expropriation. To judge from the calculation
of the claim, the object is the alleged expropriation of rights under
the Agreement, and in particular expropriation of [Claimant—
investor}’s right to first refusal in the event that [Respondent—
Kazakhstan] should decide to sell its shares in [the Kazakh
Company], or a part thereof.

b) The next question hereunder is whether the intrusion into the
contractual relationship of the Parties, by the Prosecutor General
and subsequently by the courts, is tantamount to expropriation.
‘As concluded ...above, the legal effect internally in Kazakhstan,
and the factual effect, of the actions by the Prosecutor General
and subsequently by the courts and [the Kazakh Committee for
State Property and Privatization], was that the Agreement, and
with it the right to first refusal, were terminated and that this was
an act of [Respondent-Kazakhstan]. It must therefore be

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 175

concluded that the actions here in question were tantamount to an
expropriation.

©) A farther question is, however, what losses were caused by this
expropriation, ...

It is a fact that the transfer of ownership of assets to [Company X] was
finalized already on 18 October 1999, i.e., prior to the General Prosecutor's
action. Whether or not the intention, of the Prosecutor General and the
courts was to deprive [Claimant—investor] of its right of first refusal, what is
due for compensation for an expropriation is the value of the expropriated
object at the time the expropriation is executed. As concluded above, the
value of the right to first refusal was undoubtedly reduced to nil at the time
the expropriation took place.

No expropriati on compensation is therefore due on account of the
Prosecutor General’s and the subsequent courts’ and the Committee’s
actions to terminate the Agreement.

The Subsequent Re-transfer of the Management of [the Kazakh Company] from
[Claimant-investor] to [Respondent-Kazakhstan]

‘As considered ...above, the re-transfer of the management of [the
Kazakh Company] from [Claimant-investor] to [Respondent-Kazakhstan]
was made by [Claimant—investor] subsequent to and in consequence of the
termination of the Agreement by the Kazakh courts.

[Claimant—investor] has not explained how this act, performed by, itself,
can an act of exprop or ibute to the i of

an expropti act in junction with other ci asserted by
[Claimant-investor].

The Arbitral Tribunal does not find that [Claimant~investor]’s
acceptance of the brea by formally making the transfer back to
[Respond an act of

The Cumulative Effect of the Circumstances Referred to as
Constituting an Expropriation

It follows from the separate analyses above of the circumstances referred
to by [Claimant—investor] that there is no legal basis for finding that the
cumulative effect of the circumstances referred to may lead to any different
conclusion. In particular, there is no legal basis for combining the results of
the creditors’ actions and the termination of the Agreement by the courts
(subsequently reiterated by the Committee) to conclude that there was an

176 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

expropriation or that there was damage suffered and on that basis to
conclude that expropriation compensation is due.

Conclusion

The Arbitral Tribunal concludes [the Tribunal’s Italics] that the claim for
expropriation compensation under the Foreign Investment Law and
customary international law shoul be rejected.

Arbitral Award
... the Arbitral Tribunal unanimously renders ...

1. The claims of [Claimant—investor], brought under the arbitration
clause of the Agreement ... are dismissed.

2. The claims of [Claimant—investor], brought under the arbitration
of the Foreign Investment Law of 27 December 1994 of the
Republic Kazakhstan, are dismissed.

3. arbitrators and the Arbitration Institute shall be entitled to fees
and compensation for expenses ...

a) Arbitrators’ fees:
b) Arbitrators’ expenses
c) The Arbitration Institute fee

4. As between the Parties, [Claimant-investor] shall be responsible
for 50 per cent and [Respondent—Kazakhstan] shall be responsible
for 50 per cent of the amounts due in this arbitration to the
arbitrators and the Arbitration Institute.

In relation to the arbitrators and the Arbitration Institute, the
Parties shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the
amounts due to the arbitrators and the Arbitration Institute.

III. Supplemental Award and Interpretation Rendered
in 2004 in SCC Case 12/2001

 

Subject Matters:

(1) Enforcement of the Tribunal’s decision on costs—whether the
Tribunal can issue award or order to enforce its decision on costs.
(2) Correction of the award based on miscalculation.
Findings:

(1) There is no requirement under the SCC Rules or Swedish law
applicable to the arbitration that the Arbitral Tribunal shall issue

INVESTMENT DISPUTES 177

any such award and order on its own accord to order one party to
pay its part of arbitration costs.

(2) The Arbitral Tribunal’s substantive finding on value is not a
miscalculation within the meaning of the SCC Rules.

(1) Enforcement of the Tribunal’s Decision on Costs

—Whether the Tribunal can Issue
Award or Order to Enforcetits Decision on Costs

Claimant-investor’s Position

Claimant-investor requests the Arbitral Tribunal to issue “an award and
order for [Respondent-Kazakhstan] to pay [R dent-Kazakhstan’s part

 

of arbitration fees and costs as decided in the final award], plus any legal
costs in enforcing the final award, in a form which can be turned into a

legal judgment.”
The Tribunal’s Findings

According to Article 37 (2) [of the SCC Rules}, “the Arbitral Tribunal
shall, if a party so requests, decide a question which should have been
decided in the Award but which has not been decided therein.”

The Tribunal notes that [Claimant—investor] made no request during the
arbitral proceedings that the Tribunal should issue an award ordering
[Respondent—Kazakhstan] to pay its part of the advances, or of the fees and
costs finally determined by the Arbitration Institute. Nor does it follow
from the SCC Rules or Swedish law applicable to this arbitration that the
Arbitral Tribunal shall issue any such award and order on its own accord.
There is no practice to support that an arbitration under the SCC Rules
should contain such an order. Consequently, the requested award and order
is not a matter that should have been decided in the award. The
consequence of the Tribunal’s determination that [Respondent-
Kazakhstan] is responsible for 50 per cent of the costs ... is for an
appropriate court to determine.

The request is therefore rejected.

(2) Correction of the Award Based
on Miscalculation

Claimant-investor’s Position

According to a 37 & [of the SCC Roles}, any obvious
shall b investor] asserts miscalculation,

 

178 STOCKHOLM INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION REVIEW 2005:1

but does not specify which calculation(s) it considers to be obvious
miscalculation(s).

The Tribunal’s Findings

‘The award contains only one calculation made by the Tribunal, namely
the conversion of the arbitrators’ expenses into EURO, ... The Tribunal
finds no obvious miscalculation thergin.

[Claimant-investor] refers to the Arbitral Tribunal’s finding concerning
the value of [the Kazakh Company] at a certain point in time, and asks for a
“recalculation” based on [Claimant-investor]’s contentions as to the value
of [the Kazakh Company]. The Tribunal’s finding in this respect is not a
miscalculation within the meaning of Article 37 (1), nor is it based on any
such calculation.

The Tribunal adds that [Claimant-investor] during the arbitral
proceedings presented several calculations of its alleged losses. [Claimant—
investor}’s calculations are accounted for in the [final award],
Obviously, [Claimant-investor]’s contentions, in the form of calculations,
may be refuted on substance but may not be the subject of re-calculation by
the Tribunal pursuant to Article 37 (1).

For the above reasons, the request for recalculation is rejected

