International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433 U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1534 Faxes: (202) 522-2615 / 522-2027
Web site: http://www.worldbank.org/icsid

CERTIFICATE

CDC Group ple
Vv.

Republic of the Seychelles

Annulment Proceeding
(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14)

 

I hereby certify that the attached document is a true copy of the Decision on the
Application for Annulment of the Republic of Seychelles signed by the Members of the
ad hoc Committee.

Roberto Dafiino
Secretary-General

Washington, D.C., June 29, 2005

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

CDC GROUP PLC
(CLAIMANT)

and

THE REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES
(RESPONDENT)

{ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14)

 

DECISION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE APPLICATION
FOR ANNULMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES

 

Members of the Committee
Judge Charles N. Brower, President
Mr. Michael Hwang, SC
Mr. David A.R. Williams, QC

Secretary of the Committee
Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Representing Claimant Representing Respondent
Mr. Stephen Jagusch Mr. A.F.T. Fernando,
Mr. Anthony Sinclair Attorney General of the
Allen & Overy Republic of Seychelles
One New Change Mr. Ronnie James Govinden
London EC4M 9QQ President’s Office
United Kingdom Department of Legal Affairs
PO Box 58
National House
Republic of Seychelles

Date of dispatch to the Parties: June 29, 2005

Il.

I.

IV.

-2-

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
THE AWARD.
A. Jurisdicti
B. The Arguments of the Parties ..........sssssscsssssessssssssescssnesesusscessssesssssneeeesssecesseeess
Cc The Preliminary Hearing
D. Analysi
E. Conclusion and Order
ANALYSIS

 

 

A. Article 52(1) Generally...
B. Article 52(1)(b) — Manifest ‘Excess ‘of Powers
Manifest excess of powers generally

 
 

 

 

   
  

 

2. Alleged failure to apply English law
c. Article 52(1)(d) — Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of
Procedure 24
1. Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure generally.24
2. Alleged lack of impartiality .... .
3. Alleged failure to answer the question put to the’ Tribunal 28
4. Alleged lack of deliberation............... 28
5. Alleged failure to follow rules of evidence. 29
6. Alleged untimely issuance of the Award
D. Article 52(1)(e) — Failure to State Reasons...
1. Failure to state reasons generally. +
2. Alleged errors in the Tribunal’s interpretation of clause 15(1) of
the 1993 Loan Agreement. se
3. Alleged instances of contradiction, inconsistency, consideration
of irrelevant matters and failure to consider relevant matter:
4. Alleged failure to state reasons with respect to costs........
COSTS

 

 

DECISION

 

I. INTRODUCTION

1, The Award which this annulment proceeding reviews arose out of two Loan
Agreements and two related sovereign Guarantees. The Respondent Republic of Seychelles
(“Republic”) agreed to guarantee timely performance of two loans Claimant CDC Group ple
(“CDC”) made to the Public Utilities Corporation (“PUC”), an entity organized in the
Republic responsible for, inter alia, the generation of electric power. PUC did not timely
perform its obligations to CDC, which then sought payment from the Republic under the
Guarantees. When the Republic in turn failed to satisfy its assumed obligations under the
Guarantees, CDC submitted a Request for Arbitration to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”). A Tribunal, consisting of a sole Arbitrator, Sir
Anthony Mason AC KBE, heard the case and rendered an Award in favor of CDC.' The
Republic now seeks annulment of that Award. under Article 52 of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID
Convention” or “Convention”). The present ad hoc Committee was constituted pursuant to
Article 52(3) of the Convention and has performed a number of functions assigned to it by
the Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules.” For the reasons set forth hereinafter, we
dismiss Republic of Seychelles’ Application for Annulment of Award submitted 30 March
2004.3

Il. | FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

2. CDC is a public company incorporated under the Companies Act 1985 in England
and Wales. It was founded in 1948 as the United Kingdom (“UK”) governmental
instrumentality for investing in developing countries. At the relevant times, CDC was wholly
owned by the UK Government, but acted on a day-to-day basis without Government

 

' Award in CDC Group ple v. Republic of the Seychelles, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/14 (17
Dec. 2003) (“Award”), available at http://ita.law.uvic.ca/otherinterinvestmentcases.htm.

? See, e.g., Decision on Whether or Not To Continue Stay and Order in CDC Group plc v.
Republic of the Seychelles, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/14 (14 July 2004) (“Decision”),
available at http://ita.law.uvic.ca/otherinterinvestmentcases.htm.

3 Application for Annulment of Award in CDC Group ple v. Republic of the Seychelles,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14 (30 March 2004) (“Application”).

-4-

instruction or operational involvement.* The Republic of Seychelles comprises an Indian
Ocean archipelago, with a population of approximately 80,000 people. Throughout this
arbitration, CDC has been represented by Mr. Stephen Jagusch and Mr. Anthony Sinclair of
Allen & Overy, while the Republic has been represented by the Attorney-General of the
Republic of Seychelles, Mr. A.F.T. Fernando, and his colleague Mr. Ronnie James Govinden.

3. The record discloses that CDC and the Republic had had some dealings prior to
negotiation of the two Loan Agreements and two Guarantees at issue in this case. No
specific details of that antecedent relationship were adduced before the Tribunal, however,
beyond the simple fact that CDC had been involved in a hotel project and at least one prior

power generation project in the Republic.

4. In 1990 and 1993, CDC and PUC negotiated the two Loan Agreements, the proceeds
of which were to finance improvements to the Republic’s electric power generation
infrastructure. Under the first agreement, dated 20 September 1990 and amended by letters
of 10 January 1991 and 3 July 1992 (collectively, the “1990 Loan Agreement”), PUC
borrowed £450,000. Pursuant to the second agreement, dated 5 February 1993 and amended
and rescheduled by an agreement dated 25 January 1996 (collectively, the “1993 Loan
Agreement”), PUC borrowed an additional £1,800,000. Both Loan Agreements were

ditioned on the Republic’s ag) to PUC’s performance thereof. This
resulted in the two Guarantees, executed roughly contemporaneously with the Loan
Agreements, the first dated 6 November 1990 (‘1990 Guarantee”) and the second dated 17
March 1993 (“1993 Guarantee”). Each Guarantee provided that any dispute arising under it
between the Parties be referred to ICSID for arbitration. At no point in the process of this
arbitration did the Republic contest its liability under the 1990 Guarantee. At issue therefore

was only its liability under the 1993 Guarantee.

5. The Republic applied the proceeds of the 1993 Loan Agreement, at least in part, to the
‘purchase of a gas turbine generator for its Victoria A power station from a company known
as EGT. The Republic admits that it had approached CDC with the idea of purchasing a gas
turbine generator. Both parties also agree, and the record clearly indicates, that that gas

turbine generator project was not successful. What has been contested are the reasons for the

“ Since the commencement of this arbitration CDC has been restructured. Actis Capital LLP
is the resulting entity owning the loans made by CDC to PUC and the Guarantees provided
by the Republic. Actis Capital is 40% owned by the UK Government.

-5-

project’s failure, specifically, whether the EGT generator was generally unsuited for PUC’s
needs, as the Republic contends, or whether the failure resulted from problems arising from

the manner of its use and maintenance, including the use of contaminated fuel, as CDC

contends.
6. Ultimately, PUC failed timely to repay the principal and interest due under the Loan
A in part, undoubtedly, because as a practical matter the probl with the project

 

prevented it from generating the cash with which PUC had expected to finance such
repayment. CDC thus demanded payment from the Republic under the Guarantees. When
the Republic did not comply with such demand CDC filed its Request for Arbitration in this
case (which also served as its Memorial before the Tribunal) on 22 August 2002 seeking an
Award against the Republic. On 19 December 2002, a Tribunal, consisting of a sole
Arbitrator, Sir Anthony Mason AC KBE, was constituted to hear the case. In its Counter-
Memorial, submitted on 17 March 2003, the Republic claimed (1) that ICSID lacked
jurisdiction over the dispute, and (2) that in any event its non-performance should be
excused, or, alternatively that the amount of damages awarded to CDC should be reduced,
because of CDC’s wrongful conduct in connection with its decision to grant the 1993 loan,
which resulted in substantial, but unspecified, financial losses on the part of the Republic.
The specific legal grounds upon which the Republic has relied have taken various forms
throughout the proceedings. Ultimately, however, the Republic alleged a misrepresentation,
arising from CDC’s approval of the 1993 loan, that the EGT gas turbine project was suitable
and viable for PUC’s needs at the Victoria A power station, and inequality of bargaining
power between the Republic and CDC at the time the 1993 Loan Agreement and Guarantee
were negotiated.’ It is the view of the Republic that CDC therefore should bear at least
partial responsibility for the Republic’s losses attributable to the project.

7. Following receipt of the Republic’s Counter-Memorial,® in which it had outlined the
defenses on which it relied at that time, CDC proposed, via letter dated 26 March 2003, that

ee
*Itis interesting to note that the Republic objects to the 1993 Guarantee based on inequality
of bargaining power (which includes. the element of unfairness) but has made no such
objection to the 1990 Gi which, in sub: is virtually identical to the 1993
Guarantee.

§ The Counter-Memorial failed to include written statements from any Republic witnesses,
except Mr. P.S.G. Morin, and to this extent did not comply with the Tribunal’s directions at
the first session of the Arbitral Tribunal, held in Sydney on February 10, 2003. See Minutes
of the first session of the Arbitral Tribunal in CDC Group ple v. Republic of Seychelles,

 

-6-

the Tribunal hold a special, preliminary hearing to test two legal issues in the case: first,
whether jurisdiction existed for ICSID to hear the parties’ dispute, and second, whether or not
any of the Republic’s then-claimed defenses, if proven, was capable of constituting a good
defense at law. CDC sought such a preliminary hearing in the hopes that if it were successful
on both points it would avoid the additional costs of responding more fully to the Republic’s
defenses. In a letter dated 31 March 2003, the Republic opposed CDC’s proposal, arguing
that such a departure from what it described as normal ICSID arbitration procedure was
unnecessary and inappropriate. CDC attempted to clarify its reasoning for the request in a
letter of 7 April 2003, citing Article 44 of the Convention, which allows the parties to consent
to any modification of the “typical” procedure. The Tribunal issued a Decision on 17 April
2003 in which it noted that the Republic had failed to submit all written witness statements
with its Counter-Memorial as it had been directed to do in the Minutes of the first session and
invited the Parties to provide additional argument on CDC’s proposal. The Tribunal also
pointed out that it could not render a decision on CDC’s proposal until CDC filed its Reply
Memorial outlining its response to the Republic’s legal contentions. Although it was CDC’s
right not to submit its Reply Memorial until such time as the Republic had submitted all
witness statements, which the Tribunal by its direction at the first session (and as reflected in
the Minutes) had required to be submitted with the Republic’s Counter-Memorial, CDC

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14 (10 March 2003) (“Minutes”). The Minutes state that “insofar
as a party intends to rely on witnesses ... those witnesses ... shall be identified in any relevant
pleading by that party and written statements ... shall-accompany such pleading.” Upon
receipt of the Counter-Memorial, CDC objected that the Republic had not lied
statements of all witnesses identified therein. The Republic responded by. way of letter dated
22 April 2003 with a request for “the indulgence of the Tribunal” in which it asked to be
given until 2 May 2003 to file witness statements of Mr. Graham Dilliway and Mrs. Danielle
Polson. The letter stated that the Republic no longer intended to rely on the evidence of Mr.
Francis Chang-Leng, who had been referred to in the Republic’s Counter-Memorial. The
Republic filed Mr. Dilliway’s witness statement on 29 April 2003. A statement from Mrs.
Polson was never filed. On 24 June 2003, the Republic requested permission to file the
witness statement of Mr. Chang-Leng. CDC objected to Mr. Chang-Leng’s witness
statement because it was filed three months after witness statements were due and two
months after CDC was informed that the Republic would not be relying on Mr. Chang-
Leng’s testimony, and it did not include any evidence upon which the Tribunal could base a
decision. Thus, with respect to witness statements, only one statement, that of Mr. Morin,
was filed in compliance with the Tribunal’s direction at the first session, which was recorded
in the Minutes. The witness statements of the additional two witnesses who gave oral
evidence at the preliminary hearing, Mr. Dilliway and Mr. Chang-Leng, were submitted more
than one and three months, respectively, after the deadline for their submission. The Tribunal
nevertheless, extending itself to accommodate the Republic, allowed those two witnesses to
testify at the preliminary hearing and considered their evidence.

 

-7-

nevertheless proceeded to prepare its Reply Memorial, which coincidentally was also
submitted on 17 April 2003.

8. In an attempt to comply with the Tribunal’s Decision of 17 April 2003, the Republic
submitted its Rejoinder Memorial on 13 May 2003 in which it developed the legal and
equitable bases for its defense and formally consented to the preliminary hearing CDC had
proposed: “The Respondent has no objection to a preliminary hearing ... on the two issues
raised by the Claimant in its letter dated 26th March 2003 and depending on the
determination to be made at such hearing proceeding to a hearing on the merits on a
subsequent date to be agreed by the parties and the Tribunal.” The Republic reiterated its
consent to the preliminary hearing in a letter of 26 May 2003.

9. With the consent of the Parties in hand, the Tribunal on 5 June 2003 issued a Second
Decision related to CDC’s proposal and (in paragraph (1)) ordered that
A preliminary hearing will be held to determine two questions, namely (i)
Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction based on Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention; and (ii) whether the defence pleaded by Respondent in its
counter-memorial pages 6-11 (inclusive) is capable of constituting a defence
in law to Claimant’s claim or otherwise is capable of providing a basis in law
for the Tribunal to order Respondent to pay Claimant.a reduced sum in
satisfaction of its claims.

The Tribunal further di: 1 the p ial 71 of the preliminary hearing, noting
that “in the event that Claimant succeeds on the two questions set out in para. (1) above, an
Award can be made in favour of Claimant.” The Tribunal also stated that only in the
situation where “Claimant succeeds on question (i) in para. (1) but fails on question (ii), [will
it be] necessary to fix a new date for the hearing on the merits.” The stated rationale behind
structuring the case in this way was the hope that the time and expense of a hearing on the
merits, which would likely have involved the “attendance of witnesses and the presentation
of documentary evidence,” might be avoided if legally unwarranted. Finally, the Tribunal
directed the Republic to provide the particulars of the legal and equitable principles “on
which it proposes to rely at the preliminary hearing both by way of defence and by way of
reduction of the amount to be awarded in satisfaction of Claimant’s claim.” Clarification was
necessary because “Respondent’s counter-memorial is so generally expressed that it does not
enable Claimant to know the legal basis of Respondent’s case on this point.” Clarification
came, finally, in the Republic’s Addendum to its Rejoinder Memorial, submitted 27 June
2003.

-8-

10. There then followed a discussion as to whether or not the preliminary hearing should
actually be a full hearing on the merits as the Republic expressed a desire to present
testimony from its witnesses at such.a preliminary hearing. By its letter of 10 July 2003 the
Republic wrote that the “questions of law ... is [sic] inextricably linked to the facts set out in
the Counter Memorial ... The Respondent suggests that at the commencement of the
Respondent’s case the testimony of the Respondent’s witnesses be taken before legal
arguments on the questions of law are heard.” To this the Tribunal responded by directing,
via letter from the Tribunal Secretary of 11 July 2003, that “If the Respondent contends that
the second question cannot be resolved without evidence, the Respondent should have
available to give evidence its witnesses who can deal with that aspect of the case ... Whether
the Respondent’s witnesses should give evidence before legal argument on the questions of

law begins is a matter to be decided at the hearing.”

11. Approximately five days before the hearing, the Republic withdrew its objections to
jurisdiction, leaving only the second legal question for resolution.’ Thus, after receiving
written argument (consisting of CDC’s Memorial, the Republic’s Counter-Memorial, CDC’s
Reply Memorial, and the Republic’s Rejoinder Memorial and Addendum thereto) and three
witness statements the Tribunal was prepared to hear whether or not one or more of the

Republic’s claimed defenses amounted to a good defense at law.

12. The preliminary hearing was held in London on 22-23 July 2003. At the outset of the
preliminary hearing, the Tribunal described its purpose: “We now have one question only for
decision, the jurisdiction question having disappeared.” As will be discussed again later in
this Decision, the Tribunal then turned to the question of whether or not the Tribunal needed
to receive oral testimony at the preliminary hearing: “The question arises as to how we
should go about disposing of [the sole remaining legal question], which relates to the
arguability of the respondent’s defence on the merits. The respondent wants to call evidence

in relation to that.” As noted above, the Tribunal Secretary’s letter of 11 July 2003

’ The Republic’s letter of 18 July 2003, which included this withdrawal, also addressed the
procedure to be used at the preliminary hearing. The Republic reiterated its claim that “its
Defence on the merits could best be understood only after the evidence of its witnesses is
placed before the Tribunal ....” The Republic then concluded its letter by stating that “The
Respondent wishes to place on record that the Respondent had not agreed for limiting the
hearing to the two questions of law referred to in the Tribunal’s decision of Sth June 2003,”
despite the fact that its letters of 13 May 2003 and 26 May 2003 had agreed to exactly that.
Later on 18 July 2003, however, the Republic submitted another letter in which it stated that
the aforementioned sentence was included as “a result of an oversight” and should be deleted.

-9-

specifically had reserved this decision for the preliminary hearing. Initially at that hearing,
the Tribunal wondered whether such testimony was necessary given the legal question at
issue and the fact that the Republic finally had, as of 24 June 2003, completed its submission
of comprehensive witness statements. The Republic reacted vigorously, arguing that it would
be unfair for the Tribunal not to hear the testimony of its witnesses, who had traveled all the
way from the Seychelles. The Tribunal ultimately agreed to receive the Republic’s oral
evidence at the preliminary hearing, which was given by Messrs. Morin, Chang-Leng and
Dilliway.

13. At the conclusion of the preliminary hearing, the Tribunal once again confirmed that
both Parties understood the purpose and potential consequences of such hearing. The
following segment of the transcript makes plain that both Parties did in fact understand that
the case potentially could be disposed of based on the evidence and argument presented at
that preliminary hearing:

Arbitrator: Now Mr. Fernando, you agree that in the event that I find that the

evidence does not support the defences that you have raised, then that will
lead to an award in favour of the claimant?

Mr. Fernando: Yes.

Arbitrator: So, both of you see that it is now a straightforward case of deciding

whether or not the evidence supports defences that are valid defences in law to

this claim?

Mr. Jagusch: Yes.®
14. Following the preliminary hearing and some post-hearing correspondence, the
Tribunal issued its Award on 17 December 2003, concluding that the Republic’s defenses did
not amount to good defenses at law and ordering that the Republic pay to CDC the amounts
owed under the Guarantees, including simple interest, as well as CDC’s and ICSID’s

expenses and costs.’

15. The Republic filed its Application for Annulment of Award (“Application”) on 30
March 2004 (within the time limit provided in the Convention) arguing that the Tribunal
manifestly had exceeded its powers, that it had seriously departed from a fundamental rule of

procedure, and that the Award failed to state the reasons on which it was based. Following

® Transcript of Preliminary Hearing in CDC Group ple v. Republic of Seychelles, ICSID Case
No. ARB/02/14 at 134-35 (23 July 2003).

° Award, supra note |, at 22-23.

-10-

registration of the Republic’s Application 30 April 2004 this ad hoc Committee was duly
constituted on 28 May 2004 with Judge Charles N. Brower as President of the Committee,
Mr. Michael Hwang SC and Mr. David A.R. Williams QC as Members of the Committee,
and Ms. Martina Polasek as Secretary of the Committee.!° Since constitution of the ad hoc
Committee, Ms. Polasek has been replaced as Secretary of the Committee by Mr. Ucheora

Onwuamaegbu.

16. On 14 July 2004 this Committee issued a Decision and Order on the question of
whether or not to continue the automatic stay of enforcement of the Tribunal’s Award that
had been in place pursuant to Article 52(5) of the Convention. Subsequently, after the
submission of argument and affidavits, the Committee decided, and accordingly ordered on
14 July 2004, that the stay be terminated because the Republic had not provided the required
security or a satisfactory explanation why such security should no longer be required.'!

17. The Republic submitted its Memorial on 28 July 2004. CDC submitted its Counter-
Memorial on 11 October 2004. The Republic submitted its Reply Memorial on 5 November
2004.

18. The hearing on the Republic’s Application was held on 17 and 18 January 2005 in

London.

I. . THE AWARD
A. Jurisdiction

19. As a preliminary matter, the Award considered the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the
dispute, concluding that jurisdiction existed because both of the Guarantees at issue in the
case included an arbitration clause requiring that the Parties submit to ICSID any dispute
arising under either Guarantee, both the UK and the Republic were Contracting States to the
ICSID Convention, and the conditions in Article 25(1) of the Convention were fulfilled.’ As .
previously noted, the Republic, which initially had contested jurisdiction, withdrew such

objection prior to the preliminary hearing.

 

"© Letter from Acting Secretary-General of ICSID in CDC Group ple v. Republic of the
Seychelles, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14 at 1 (28 May 2004).

" See generally Decision, supra note 2.

" Award, supra note 1, at 2 para. 4. °

-ll-

B. The Arguments of the Parties
20. The Award then turned to a discussion of the particulars of the dispute and the

Parties’ arguments on the merits. The Award noted with respect to CDC’s contentions that:

CDC claims that the Republic. is in breach of its obligations under the
Guarantees. CDC claims:

(i) Under the 1990 Guarantee, the Republic guaranteed to CDC punctual
payment of all principal monies and interest becoming due and payable by
Public Utilities Corporation (“PUC”), a statutory corporation incorporated in
the Republic of the Seychelles, to CDC under a Loan Agreement between
PUC and CDC dated September 20, 1990 (as amended by letters dated
January, 10 1991 [sic] and July 3, 1992) together the “1990 Loan Agreement.”
By that Agreement CDC agreed to lend £450,000 to PUC.

(ii) Under the 1993 Guarantee, the Republic guaranteed to CDC the due and
punctual payment of all principal monies and interest becoming due and
payable by PUC to CDC under a Loan Agreement between PUC and CDC
dated February 5, 1993 (as amended and re-scheduled by an amending and re-
scheduling Agreement dated January 25, 1996) (together the “1993 Loan
Agreement”). By the 1993 Loan agreement, CDC agreed to lend £1,800,000
to PUC.

(iii) PUC is in default of its obligations to CDC under the 1990 Loan
Agreement and the 1993 Loan Agreement (together the “Loan Agreements”)
in the manner specified in CDC’s letter to the Republic dated January 2, 2002
(to which was attached CDC’s letter to the Republic dated December 17, 2001
on the same subject).

(iv) The Republic has failed to meet CDC’s demands for the Republic to
honour the Republic’s obligations under the Guarantees. !

21. The Award also described the relief sought by CDC in its Request for Arbitration:

(i) an order that the Republic shall pay to CDC the sum of £2,103,379.32
being the total amount due and owing to CDC under the Guarantees as at 4
December 2001;

(ii) an order that. the Republic shall pay to CDC the further amounts due and
owing to CDC under the Loan Agreements (and, hence, the Guarantees) from
5 December 2001 to the date of the Award (as to which CDC will provide
calculations and such further evidence as is necessary, in the course of the
proceedings); :

(iii) an order that the Republic shall make payment to CDC of all legal and
other expenses incurred by CDC in connection with this arbitration, including
fees and expenses of its counsel and its solicitors, fees and expenses of the
Arbitral Tribunal and any other expenses howsoever incurred in connection
with this arbitration; and

 

'8 Td. at 3-4 paras. 7-10.

-12-

(iv) an order for such further or other relief as to the Arbitral Tribunal seem

just or appropriate."
22. The Award also recited the arguments made by the Republic in its defense. Primarily,
the Republic argued, with respect to the 1993 Guarantee, that “the poor performance and
ultimate abandonment of the 4MW gas turbine generator purchased under the 1993 Loan
Agreement” affected the Republic’s ability to perform its obligations under the 1993
Guarantee and had generally negative consequences for the Republic’s economy.'° (As noted
previously, the Republic’s Counter-Memorial did not contest liability under the .1990
Guarantee.) The Republic argued that its non-performance under the:1993 Guarantee was
excusable because CDC represented that it had “thoroughly appraised” the underlying
project, and the Republic therefore sought dismissal of “the claim on the ground that CDC
should bear its share of the responsibility for the failure of the project and the consequential
damage to the Seychelles economy.”!® The Republic had stated, in its Rejoinder Memorial,
that it “would be relying for its defence on the principles of equity, contractual fairness,
inequality of bargaining power, contributory negligence and the emerging jurisprudence in

relation to i ional trade and i: between d ped and developing countries.”
The Republic had not, however, in the opinion of the Tribunal, provided the “full and
detailed particulars” of the principles “on which it proposes to rely at the preliminary hearing
both by way of defence and by way of reduction of the amount to be awarded in satisfaction
of Claimant’s claim.” Accordingly, the Republic had submitted the Addendum to its
Rejoinder on June 27, 2003 (just three and a half weeks before the preliminary hearing),
wherein it alleged that its agreement to guarantee the loan was made in reliance on. “the
representation made by [CDC] to the [Republic] that [CDC had] made a thorough appraisal
of the project proposals in connection with the loan that was granted to PUC. [CDC] implied
that the 4 MW gas turbine generator being purchased from the loan would be suitable and
viable for PUC.”!” The Award noted at this point in its rehearsal of the Republic’s arguments
that this Addendum was the first time in the pleadings that the Republic had appeared to base
its defense on alleged misrepresentations by CDC on which CDC knew the Republic would
rely. Additionally, the Republic had alleged in its Rejoinder Memorial that its non-

 

‘4 Id. at 6-7 para. 20.

'S Td. at 7 para, 22.

‘6 Id at8 para. 24. . .

'T id. at 10 para. 33 (citing the Republic’s Addendum to its Rejoinder at para. 30).

-13-

performance should be excused because of inequality of bargaining power between it and

CDC.
Cc. The Preliminary Hearing

23. The Award next describes the 22-23 July 2003 preliminary hearing held in London.
The Republic called three witnesses (CDC called none). The Managing Director of PUC,
Mr. P.S.G. Morin, an electrical engineer, was the first witness.'® He testified that PUC paid
CDC £22,500, which he believed was for an analysis of the gas turbine project at Victoria A
power station, although he admitted under cross-examination that he had never seen an
appraisal of the project nor had he had any confirmation of his belief other than the granting
of the loan. He noted that neither he nor any of his colleagues at PUC had had any
experience dealing with gas turbine technology and that PUC had not hired independent
consultants to provide it with advice. He testified that he believed that CDC was PUC’s
“partner,” “assessor” and “adviser” in the project, and he stated that he thought that PUC and

CDC were unequal in their respective bargaining power.

24. The next to testify was Mr. Francis Chang-Leng, the Governor of the Central Bank of
the Republic.!® He stated that the Republic relied on the expertise of CDC in making its
determination with respect to the purchase of the gas turbine generator for Victoria A power
station. He also testified that he believed that CDC was the Republic’s “partner” in the
project, and as such he did not characterize the relationship between the Parties as an ordinary
one between a borrower and a lender. But for its belief that CDC considered the project
viable, the Republic, Mr. Chang-Leng stated, would not have proceeded with it. He
admitted, however, that he had not participated in the negotiations leading to the 1993 Loan

Agreement and Guarantee.

25. . The final witness was Mr. J.G. Dilliway, an expert in gas turbine power generation
not involved withthe case at the time the 1993 Loan Agreement and Guarantee were signed,
who testified that the type of turbine employed at the Victoria A power station was not suited

to the uses to which it was put.”

'8 fd. at 11-13 paras. 35-39.
'9 Td. at 13-14 paras, 40-41.
20 Id. at 14 para. 42.

-14-
D. Analysis

26. — After determining that the Parties had agreed that English law governed resolution of
the dispute, and noting as well that the Republic had failed to adduce any legal authority or
argument with respect to “the emerging jurisprudence in relation to international trade and
investments between developed and developing countries” despite its reference to such law in

its Rejoinder Memorial, the Award proceeded to its analysis of the merits of the case.

27. The Award first addressed the Republic’s contention that “there was an implied
representation by CDC to both PUC and the Republic arising from the appraisal which it
carried out of the Victoria A project that the project as well as the product (the EGT gas
turbine) was suitable and viable for PUC. It is not in dispute that CDC conducted an
appraisal.” As the Award described the Republic’s argument, the defense allegedly arose
from PUC’s application for the loan from CDC coupled with CDC’s appraisal and making of
the loan as well as the Republic’s payment of the £22,500 fee under clause 15(1) of the 1993
Loan Agreement. After noting that that clause imposes no duty on CDC to make an appraisal
for “the benefit of PUC or the Republic or at all,” the Award concluded that the sum of
£22,500 was, as is the “common practice of lenders,” to compensate CDC for the time and
expense incurred in deciding whether it would make the loan the Republic sought, and not as
payment for CDC to execute a study of the project as a whole to determine for the benefit of

PUC or the Republic whether or not it was suitable for PUC’s needs.”!

28. Given the absence of any duty to make an appraisal for the benefit of PUC or the
Republic, the absence of any evidence indicating that PUC or the Republic or any of their
officers received any such appraisal from CDC, and the absence of any credible evidence
indicating that CDC was aware of any reliance by the Republic on CDC’s decision to make
the requested loan, the Award determined that the Republic’s defense was not legally
sufficient, citing the principle of English law that a borrower cannot rely on the fact of a loan
(in the absence of a representation or the lender’s knowledge that the borrower is relying on

the loan decision) to recover from the lender on the ground that the use to which the loan

2 Td. at 16 para. 47. Clause 15(1) states that:

By way of recompense for the time spent and expenses incurred by CDC in
considering proposals for the Project and in negotiating the terms and
conditions of the Agreement, the Borrower shall within thirty days after the
date hereof or, if earlier, upon the making of the first advance by CDC

-15-

proceeds were to be (and were) put was not a good one.” The Award noted additionally that
two clauses of the 1993 Loan Agreement and the 1993 Guarantee, respectively, made the
Republic’s contention even more untenable: “[t]he obligations of the Borrower to pay ...
shall be in no way impaired or affected by reason of impossibility to carry out the Project or
any part thereof or for any other reason” and “[t]here are no representations ... with respect to
this guarantee and affecting the liability of the Government hereunder other than those
contained herein.”? There were, the Award. concluded, no express representations in the
Guarantee, and based on the aforementioned disclaimers, there could be no implied

representations.

29. The Award also rejected the Republic’s related argument that CDC owed a duty of
care to the Republic to make an accurate appraisal of the project,’* because there was no
evidence that CDC had made any representation to the Republic that could create such a duty
of care and, in fact, all evidence (such as the aforementioned clauses of the 1993 Loan
Agreement and the 1993 G ) indicated that CDC specifically di d making any
representations. As part of this analysis, the Tribunal concluded that the prior relationship
between CDC and the Republic and PUC as embodied in the 1990 Loan Agreement and

Guarantee was simply that of a lender and a borrower and hence that CDC was not acting as a

 

partner, assessor, or adviser. Therefore, the general principle stated above governed the

defense and precluded its use by the Republic.

30. Finally, the Award addressed the Republic’s argument that there was an inequality in
bargaining power between CDC and the Republic such that the Republic could be relieved of
its responsibility under the 1993 Guarantee.2> After observing that proof of unfairness is a
prerequisite to the application of this doctrine, the Award concluded that there was nothing

unfair about the 1993 Guarantee.

 

hereunder pay to CDC twenty-two thousand five hundred pounds sterling
(£22,500).

?? Id. at 17-18 paras, 51-54.

3 Id. at 18 para. 55 (quoting clause 17.8 of the 1993 Loan Agreement and clause 2.4 of the
1993 Guarantee).

*4 Td. at 19-20 paras. 56-57.
?5 Id. at 20 para. 59.

-16-

E. Conclusion and Order

31. The Award therefore concluded that “the defences raised by the Republic do not
amount to a good defence to CDC’s claim based on the Guarantees.”*° The principal
amounts as well as the rate of interest were not contested, so the Tribunal. ordered the
Republic to pay £1,771,096.75 in principal (in total for both Guarantees), £672,915.45 in
interest as of 25 August 2003, and £611 in interest daily after 25 August 2003. The Tribunal
also Awarded CDC £100,000 in reimbursement for legal fees and disbursements and $40,000
in reimbursement for fees and expenses of the Tribunal and ICSID paid by CDC.

IV. ANALYSIS

32. Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, which the Application of the Republic invokes,
allows for annulment of an ICSID Award as follows:
(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in
writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following
grounds:
(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;
(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;
(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;
(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure; or
(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

The Republic invokes (b), (d) and (e).2”

A. Article 52(1) Generally
33. As an initial matter, ad hoc Committees have taken the position that the Convention
should be “interpreted in accordance with the law of treaties.”** As such, the ordinary
meaning of its terms in their context and in light of its object and purpose provide the

touchstone for its interpretation.”

 

76 Td. at 21 para. 61.
27 Application, supra note 3, at 2-3.

?8 David D. Caron, Reputation and Reality in the ICSID Annulment Process: Understanding
the Distinction between Annulment and Appeal, 7 1CSID REV. 21; 33 (1992) (collecting
cases). [CDC’s Exhibit E-4]

?9 See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, January 27, 1980, art. 31, 1155 U.N.T.S.
331, available at http://www.un.org/law/ilc/texts/treaties.htm.

-17-

34. As the ordinary meaning of the terms of Article 52(1) indicates, the ICSID annulment
procedure is concerned with determining whether the underlying proceeding was
fundamentally fair: Article 52(1) looks not to the merits of the underlying dispute as such,
but rather is concerned with the fundamental integrity of the tribunal, whether basic
procedural guarantees were largely observed, whether the Tribunal exceeded the bounds of
the parties’ consent™®, and whether the Tribunal’s reasoning is both coherent and displayed.
To borrow Caron’s terminology, annulment is concerned with the “‘legitimacy’ of the
process of decision” rather than with the “substantive correctness of decision.”?! Because of

its focus on p di legitimacy, i is “an dinary remedy for unusual and

 

important cases,”?? That annulment is not the same thing as appeal is a principle
acknowledged, although applied unevenly, in the various decisions of ad hoc Committees.”
Additionally, the Convention specifically ‘recognizes this distinction by rejecting, in Article
53, any right to appeal.

35. Two early decisions of ad hoc Committees have been widely criticized for reviewing
the propriety of the underlying tribunals’ factual and legal determinations (and thus appearing
to exercise more of an appellate function).** Since those two Decisions, Kléckner > and

Amco Asia 17° ad hoc Committees consistently have taken’a much more restrictive view of

 

*° Decision of the ad hoc Committee in Maritime International Nominees Establishment v.
The Republic of Guinea, Case No. ARB/84/4) at para. 5.03 (2 December 1989), reprinted in
4 ICSID Rep. 79 (“MINE” or “MINE Decision”). [CDC’s Exhibit F-3]

3! Caron, Supra note 28, at p. 24. Appeal, on the other hand, is commonly concerned with
both the legitimacy of the process and the correctness of the decision.

2 CH. Schreuer, Three Generations of ICSID Annulment Proceedings in ANNULMENT OF
ICSID Awarps 17, 42 (Emmanuel Gaillard and Yas Banifatemi eds. 2004) (“Schreuer,
Three Generations”). [CDC’s Exhibit E-17]

33 Id. at 17 (collecting cases).

See, e.g., M.B. Feldman, The Annulment Proceedings and the Finality of ICSID Arbitral
Awards, 2 ICSID Rev. 85 (1987) [CDC’s Exhibit E-7]; D.A. Redfern, ICSID - Loosing its
Appeal?, 3 ARB. INT. 98 (1987) [CDC’s Exhibit E-14]; W.M. Reisman, The Breakdown of
the Control Mechanism in ICSID Arbitration, 1989 DUKE L.J. 739 [CDC’s Exhibit E-15]

* Decision of the ad hoc Committee in Kléckner Industrie-Anglagen GmbH et al. v. United
Republic of Cameroon and Societe Camerounaise des Engrais S.A., Case No. ARB/81/2 (3
May 1985), reprinted in 2 ICSID Rep. 95 (“Kléckner I” or “Klockner I Decision”). [CDC’s
Exhibit F-2]

*6 Decision of the ad hoc Committee in Amco Asia Corporation, Pan American Development
Ltd. and P.T. Amco Indonesia v. The Republic of Indonesia, Case No. ARB/81/1 (16 May

-18-

the role of the ad hoc Committee and the annulment process. The so-called “second” and
“third” generation annulment ‘decisions (MINE, Vivendi2” and Wena Hotels are the
published examples) have further crystallized the now apparently generally accepted
proposition that “annulment is not a remedy against an incorrect decision” alone.” Thus
there has been an evolution in the ICSID annulment case law and scholarship away from
Klockner I and Amco Asia I that has culminated, in our view correctly, in ad hoc Committees
reviewing arbitral proceedings only to the extent of ensuring their fundamental fairness,

eschewing any temptation to “second guess” their substantive result.“°
ig any temp’ gus

36. - This mechanism protecting against errors that threaten the fundamental fairness of the
arbitral process (but not against incorrect decisions) arises from the ICSID Convention’s
drafters’ desire that Awards be final and binding, which is an expression of “customary law
based on the concepts of pacta sunt servanda and res judicata,” and is in keeping with the
object and purpose of the Convention. Parties use ICSID arbitration (at least in part) because
they wish a more efficient way of resolving disputes than is possible in a national court
system with its various levels of trial and appeal, or even in non-ICSID Convention
arbitrations (which may be subject to national courts’ review under local laws and whose
enforcement may also be subject to defenses available under, for example, the New York

Convention”), Procedural protections are, however, all the more necessary in order to ensure

 

1986), reprinted in 1 ICSID Rep. 509 (“Amco Asia I” or “Amco Asia I Decision”). [CDC’s
Exhibit F-1]

37 Decision of the ad hoc Committee in Compaftiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal (formerly Compagnia Générale des Eaux) v. Argentine Republic, Case No.
ARB/97/3 (3 July 2002), reprinted in 6 ICSID D Rep. 340 (“Vivendi” or “Vivendi Decision”).
fepe’ s Exhibit F-4]

38 Decision of the ad hoc Committee in Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, Case
No. ARB/98/4 (5 February 2002), reprinted in 6 ICSID Rep. 129 (“Wena Hotels” or “Wena
Hotels Decision”). [CDC’s Exhibit F-5]
3° MINE, supra note 30, at para. 4.04.

40 Schreuer, Three Generations, supra note 32, at 17.

“| 4. Broches, Observations on the Finality of ICSID Awards, 6 ICSID Rev. 321, 324, 324-34
(1991) (discussing the debates surrounding adoption of the Convention). [CDC’s Exhibit E-
3]

* Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, June 10,
1958, available at http://www.kentlaw.edu/perritt/conflicts/nucmain.htm. It is interesting to
note that following the decisions in Amco Asia I and Kléckner J some commentators
predicted the obsolescence of the ICSID system precisely because the more searching review
in which those particular ad hoc Committees engaged indicated that awards might not be as

-19-

that the resulting award is truly an “award,” i.e., a result arrived at fairly, under due process

and with transparency, and hence in the basic justice of which parties will have faith.

37. Keeping the object and purpose of the Convention as well as these underlying policy
considerations in mind, we note that the ad hoc Committees operating during the last two
decades have considered that a Committee has discretion to determine not to annul an Award
even where a ground for annulment under Article 52(1) is found to exist? The Vivendi
Committee, for example, stated that an award should be annulled in whole or in part only if
annulment is “appropriate in the circumstances." We thus should “consider the significance

of the [alleged annullable] error relative to the legal rights of the parties.”*°

38. By our reckoning, the Republic has raised: at least 19 separate arguments for
annulment and has done so generally without specifically indicating in each case which
ground for annulment set forth in Article 52(1) it believes to be applicable. In the following
sections of this Decision, however, we set forth each of the Article 52(1) grounds invoked,
describing each one generally and then addressing the Republic’s particular contentions that
appear to relate to it. Where an argument made by the Republic can be analyzed under more
than one of the Article 52(1) grounds we have disposed of the argument primarily in one
section and have referred to it only briefly in any other applicable section, adding any such
additional analysis as may be necessary to understand its disposition under such other

section,

 

final and binding as was previously thought. See, e.g., Reisman, supra note 34, at 749, 785-
787, 804-805. But see Caron, supra note 28, at 22-23; Broches, supra note 41, at 376-77
(stating that despite the misconceptions of the K/éckner J Committee, “the ICSID annulment
process is ‘on track’ and will fulfil the limited purposes for which it was established”).

3 Schreuer, Three Generations, supra note 32, at 19 (“A good example for the movement
towards this more balanced approach is the position taken by ad hoc Committees on their
obligation or discretion to annul once they have found a ground for annulment. In Klockner
I, the ad hoc Committee had still held that a finding that there existed a ground for annulment
would have to automatically lead to the annulment of the award. Subsequent ad hoc
Committees have rejected this ‘hair trigger’ standard in favor of a ‘material violation’
approach. Wena and Vivendi contain further confirmation of this cautious attitude.”)

“4 Vivendi, supra note 37, at 358 para. 66 (citing C.H. SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION:
A COMMENTARY 1018-1023 (2001) (“SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION”), and
emphasizing MINE, supra note 30, at paras. 4.09-4.10).

“S Id.

-20-

B. Article 52(1)(b) — Manifest Excess of Powers

1. Manifest excess of powers generally

39. Article 52(1)(b) allows for annulment of an award where the Tribunal “manifestly
exceeded its powers.” That is, a tribunal (1) must do something in excess of its powers and
(2) that excess must be “manifest.” It is a dual requirement. The ad hoc Committee in MINE
noted that the requirement that the excess be manifest “necessarily limits an ad hoc

Committee’s freedom of appreciation as to whether the tribunal has exceeded its powers.”°

40. Common examples of such “excesses” are a Tribunal deciding questions not
submitted to it or refusing to decide questions properly before it.” Failure to apply the law
specified by the parties is also an excess of powers.“ Essentially, a Tribunal’s legitimate
exercise of power is tied to the consent of the parties, and so it exceeds its powers where it

acts in contravention of that consent (or without their consent, i.e., absent jurisdiction).

41. As interpreted by various ad hoc Committees, the term “manifest” means clear or
“self-evident.” Thus, even if a Tribunal exceeds its powers, the excess must be plain on its
face for annulment to be an available remedy. Any excess apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct,
if susceptible of argument “one way or the other,” is not manifest.°° As one commentator has
put it, “If the issue is debatable or requires examination of the materials on which the

tribunal’s decision is based, the tribunal’s determination is conclusive.”*!

42. This interpretation conforms with other interpretations of the, term “manifest” (or a
variation thereof) where it is employed elsewhere in the Convention. For example, Article
36(3) states, in pertinent part, that “The Secretary-General shall register the request [for
arbitration] unless he finds, on the basis of the information contained in the request, that the
dispute is manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre.” Schreuer has noted that, in
Article 36(3), the term “manifestly” means “easily recognizable.”*? He further observes that
“If the Secretary-General has doubts in the matter he will register the request.” Similarly,

46 MINE, supra note 30, at 85 para 4.06.

47 Schreuer, Three Generations, supra note 32, at 25-26.

“8 id. at 28-29.

*® Wena Hotels, supra note 38, at 135 para. 25.

50 Id.

5! Feldman, supra note 34, at 101.

°2 SCHREUER, THE ICSID CoNVENTION, supra note 44, at 462.

-21-

Article 57 provides, in pertinent part, that “A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal
the disqualification of any of its members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of
the qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14.” With respect to this article, the arbitral
tribunal in Amco Asia I held that “manifest” means “highly probable” and not simply
“possible.” These interpretations of the term “manifest” confirm that its use in the

Convention sets a high bar to the application of any provision so conditioned.

43. The Republic argues, with respect to this ground, that the Tribunal acted in excess of
its powers by failing to apply English law.** CDC contends that the Republic actually takes
issue with the Tribunal’s actual application of English law, which, even if truly erroneous, is .
not an appropriate basis for annulment.®* As the ad hoc Committee in MINE noted,
“Disregard of the applicable rules of law must be distinguished from erroneous application of

those rules which, even if manifestly unwarranted, furnishes no ground for annulment.”*°
2. Alleged failure to apply English law

44. The Republic cites a number of English judicial decisions that it contends the
Tribunal “ignores” in its Award: Hedley Byrne & Co. Lid. v. Heller & Partners Ltd, [1964]
AC 465°; Esso Petroleum Co. Ltd v. Mardon, [1976] QB 80158; and Howard Marine and
Dredging Co. Ltd v. A. Ogden & Sons (Excavations) Ltd, [1978] QB 574.° The Republic
also cites the Tribunal’s failure explicitly to cite the Misrepresentation Act 1967° as an

annullable error. It argues as well that the Tribunal improperly relied on an inapplicable

 

® Decision on Jurisdiction in Amco Asia Corporation, Pan American Development Ltd. and
P.T. Amco Indonesia v. The. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1 (25
September 1983), reprinted in 1 ICSID Rep. 389.

* The Republic also argues that that Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to
answer the question put to it. We consider this argument in part IV.C.4., infra, ultimately
determining that the Tribunal answered the appropriate question.

55 Annulment Counter-Memorial in CDC Group ple v. Republic of the Seychelles, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/02/14 at para. 147 (11 Oct. 2004) (“Counter-Memorial”).

%6 MINE, supra note 30, at 87 para. 5.04,

*" See Annulment Memorial in CDC Group ple v. Republic of the Seychelles, ICSID Case
No. ARB/02/14 at 10 para. 24 (28 July 2003) (“Memorial”).

58 [dat 40-41 para. 33.
°° Id. at 41-43 para. 34.
Id, at 50-51 para. 37.

-22-

English legal authority, National Commercial Bank (Jamaica) Ltd. v. Hew! Finally, the
Republic maintains that the Tribunal erred in failing to apply the equitable doctrine of
inequality of bargaining power, as described by Lord Denning in Lloyd’s Bank v. Bundy,
[1975] QB 326.7

45. | We cannot agree that the Tribunal improperly “ignored” the cases cited to it by the
Republic. Rather, it appears to us that the Tribunal’s citation to authority was consistent with
its legal determinations (1) that CDC made no representation to the Republic or PUC as was
alleged and (2) that CDC was unaware of any reliance by the Republic or PUC on its
approval of the 1993 loan. The Tribunal did not ignore the cases the Republic cited, but
simply found them inapplicable considering the facts as established by the Republic’s
evidence. The Tribunal then cited the relevant precedent, the case of Smith v. Bush, which
stands for the proposition that “a lender who makes an appraisal of the viability of a loan for
its own purposes as lender owes no duty of care to the borrower ... in relation to that
appraisal." Regardless of our opinion of the correctness of the Tribunal’s legal analysis,
however, our inquiry is limited to a determination of whether or not the Tribunal endeavored
to apply English law. That it did so is made plain by its explicit statement in the Award that
it did as well as by its repeated citation to relevant English legal authorities.- This same
analysis applies to the Republic’s contention with respect to the Misrepresentation Act 1967;
the Act is not applicable to this case given the Tribunal’s unreviewable determination that

there was no representation.

46. The Republic also takes issue with the Tribunal’s citation to, and reliance on, the
National Commercial Bank case, which the Republic likewise did not cite in its

submissions to the Tribunal.*° That case, however, seems to us to be entirely on point.

5! National Commercial Bank (Jamaica) Ltd. v. Hew, [2003] UKPC Appeal No. 65 of 2002,
30 June 2003 (“National Commercial Bank’).

® Id, at 52-54 para 39,

% Smith v. Eric S. Bush, [1988] QB 835, 851-52, aff'd [1990] 1 AC 831, 864. The Republic
also contends, in paragraph 36 of its Memorial, supra note 57, that the Tribunal’s citation of
the Smith v. Bush case amounts to a failure to state reasons. As we discuss in greater detail
below, this case seems perfectly applicable to the facts as found by the Tribunal for the
purposes of its legal determination. Thus, the case is not irrelevant, and the Tribunal’s
reliance on it does not lead to the Award being contradictory or absurd.

§ National Commercial Bank, supra note 61.

6s Memorial, supra note 57, at 44-48 para 35.

-23-

There, a bank provided an overdraft facility to a customer for use in a land development
project. When the customer defaulted on the obligation, he defended his non-performance by
stating that he relied on the bank’s granting of the loan in his land‘development decision-
making. The Privy Council held, however, that such reliance was not a defense to non-
performance absent the bank’s actual provision of advice or undertaking of an obligation to
give such advice. The Republic contends that the instant case is distinguishable because
“CDC granted the loan only after a thorough appraisal of the project proposals submitted to it
by PUC. Thus CDC assumed an obligation to advise as to the viability of the project and
failed to advise that it was not, as cited in the privy council case.” Given the Tribunal’s
determination based on all the evidence that there was nothing in the 1993 Loan Agreement
(particularly considering clause 15(1)) nor in the antecedent relationship between CDC and
PUC indicating that CDC had agreed to analyze the suitability of the project for PUC or to
become PUC’s partner, assessor, or adviser, this case would seem to be directly on point.
Again, however, such a determination is not the responsibility of this Committee. Our review
is limited to a determination of whether or not the Tribunal endeavored to apply English law
to its factual findings. As noted by the Wena Hotels Committee: “The Tribunal did not
consider that there was sufficient evidence to prove such a claim. It is therefore not a
question of the applicable law but of evidence, the evaluation of which relates to the merits of
the case and is not a matter for the ground of annulment related to .a purported excess of

power by the Tribunal.”®

47. As for the Republic’s contention that the Tribunal ignored principles of equity,” we
have no difficulty rejecting this argument, for it is plain on the face of the Award that the
Tribunal considered the applicability of equitable principles (and actually cited in paragraph
58 thereof the case upon which the Republic relies) before making the legal determination
that the 1993 Loan Agreement and Guarantee were not “unfair,” proof of which fact is
necessary to the establishment of a claim of inequality of bargaining power. Additionally,
the Tribunal determined that the Lloyd's Bank case was not the final word in English law on
the subject. It cited a more recent precedent, which observed that the proposition for which
the Lloyd's Bank case was cited has not been generally accepted. As we noted previously,

however, it is not the duty of this Committee to parse the meanings of English legal

6 Wena Hotels, supra note 38, at 139-140 para. 47.
oa Memorial, supra note 57, at 52-54 para. 39.

-24-
authorities. Rather, we are supposed to make a procedural review to determine whether or
not the Tribunal honored the intent of the parties to have their dispute decided under English
law. Clearly it did. :

Cc. Article 52(1)(d) — Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of
Procedure

1. Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure generally

48. The next basis for annulment raised by the Republic is Article 52(1)(d), which
provides that annulment may be appropriate where there has been a “serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure” in the underlying proceeding. As with the requirement that a
Tribunal’s “excess of power” be manifest, here the departure must be serious and it must be
from a fundamental rule of procedure. It is a dual requirement. Not just any departure from
any rule of procedure will support annulment. Prior ad hoc Committees have held that it is
the duty of the party seeking annulment to “identify the fundamental rule of procedure” and

to show that any departure from it “has been serious.”

49. A departure is serious where it is “substantial and [is] such as to deprive the party of
the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide.” In other words, “the
violation of such a rule must have caused the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different
from what it would have awarded had the rule been observed.” As for what rules of
procedure are fundamental, the drafters of the Convention refrained from attempting to
enumerate them, but the consensus seems to be that only rules of natural justice — rules
concerned with the essential fairness of the proceeding — are fundamental. Not all ICSID

Arbitration Rules are fundamental in this sense.” As the ad hoc Committee in Wena Hotels

68 MINE, supra note 30, at 85 para. 4.06.
© Wena Hotels, supra note 38, at 142 para. 56.
” Id. at 87 para. 5.05.

7! Wena Hotels, supra note 38, at 142 para. 58. Given this statement of the requirement that a
violation of a rule of fundamental procedure be serious it would seem that we might not in
fact have discretion to conclude that annulment is not appropriate where that requirement is
met. This is because, as we have already noted, our discretion with respect to annulment is
constrained by an investigation into the impact of an error on the legal rights of the parties.
Where, as is the case with Article 52(1)(d), prejudice is found as a necessary element of the
decision on the availability of annulment, an ad hoc Committee has, it seems, ipso facto
made the determination that the error significantly impacted the legal rights of the parties,
thus requiring annulment. See, supra, para. 37.

” MINE, supra note 30, at 87 para. 5.06.

-25-

 

stated, Article 52(1)(d) makes applicable to ICSID arbitrations the “minimal dards of
procedure to be respected as a matter of international law.” For example, “It is fundamental,
as a matter of procedure, that each party is given the right to be heard before an independent
and impartial tribunal. This includes the right to state its claim or its defence and to produce
all arguments and evidence in support of it.””> Other examples of such fundamental rules are

impartiality of the Tribunal and meaningful deliberation by the Tribunal.”

50. With respect to this ground for annulment, the Republic argues that the Tribunal
committed numerous errors seriously violating fundamental rules of procedure. It contends
that the Tribunal failed, in multiple situations, to apply English law (we have disposed of this
argument in the previous section, concluding that the sole Arbitrator did in fact apply English
law); that the Tribunal lacked impartiality”’; that the Tribunal failed to address questions put
to it by the parties as required by Article 48(3)"5; that there was an absence of real
deliberation because the Tribunal failed to consider relevant matters, instead considered
irrelevant matters, and because there was an alleged discrepancy in the Award’s reasoning
suggesting such an absence of deliberation”; that the Tribunal failed to follow rules of
evidence’’; and that the Tribunal failed to issue its Award within the time limit provided for
in ICSID Arbitration Rule 46.” CDC responds generally that the Republic was afforded a
“full and fair opportunity” to prove its case and maintains that the Tribunal did not depart at
all, much less seriously, from any fundamental rule of procedure.
2. Alleged lack of impartiality

51. We first consider the Republic’s very serious allegation that the sole Arbitrator lacked
impartiality. The Republic is of the opinion that the Tribunal evidenced a lack of impartiality
when it heard argument on whether or not testimonial evidence needed to be heard at the
preliminary hearing because “whether the witnesses should be called to testify on its behalf

 

™ Wena Hotels, supra note 38, at 142 para. 57.

™ Schreuer, Three Generations, supra note 32, at 29-32.
”5 Memorial, supra note 57, at 56-58 para. 41.

18 Id. at 29 para. 24,

7” Id. at 31 para. 25, 32 para. 26, 33 para. 27, 33 para. 28, 34 para. 29, 34-35 para. 30, and 35-
37 para. 31.

78 Id.at 5.
7 Id. at 54-56 para. 40.

-26-
before the Arbitrator was entirely for the Republic.”® It also cites a number of pages of the
transcript where, it contends, the Tribunal illustrated its partiality by interjecting “always in
favour of CDC or when the question is framed in a way which indicates that the Arbitrator is
expecting an answer favourable to CDC.”*! At the hearing before the Committee, the
Republic also stated that the very Award itself, when coupled with these other factors,

demonstrates the Tribunal’s partiality.

52. CDC responds that the Tribunal’s discussion of the necessity of adducing oral -
testimony at the preliminary hearing was reasonable given the’ terms of the pre-hearing ~
correspondence (see, supra, paragraph 10) and the fact that written witness statements had in

fact finally been submitted to the Tribunal before the preliminary hearing.” Additionally,

CDC states that the Tribunal’s questioning was completely appropriate and betrays not a lack

of impartiality, but only the involvement of a suitably engaged judge. Finally, CDC notes

that the sole Arbitrator is a respected former Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia and

that the Republic’s ipported allegations of professional mi duct should be treated as

being “prima facie implausible.”

53. As an initial matter, the Republic’s allegation appears vulnerable to the point that it

failed to challenge Sir Anthony’s alleged improper conduct at any time prior to the issuance

of the Award, even though all of the conduct to which objection now is made (excluding the

fact of the Award itself) occurred not later than during the preliminary hearing. It is arguable

that a timely objection or challenge under Article 57 of the Convention and ICSID

Arbitration Rule 9 would have been the appropriate remedy and that this complaint

effectively has been waived and is therefore simply inadmissible. This conclusion is

confirmed by Note B. to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 (last published in 1975 as part of

ICSID/4/Rev.1 (“ICSID Regulations And Rules”):

59 14. at 56-58 para. 41.
8 Id.

® Counter-Memorial, supra note 55, at 38-40 paras. 158-166. (quoting Kléckner J, supra note
35, at 130 para. 94),
53 Prefacing the texts of the various Regulations and Rules set forth therein this volume states
that

Though these [“explanatory Notes prepared by the Secretariat of the Centre”)

do not constitute part of the Rules and have no legal force, the Administrative

-27-

A proposal to disqualify an arbitrator must be filed promptly, and in any event

before the proceeding is declared closed (see Rule 38). Promptness must be

measured relative to the time when the proposing party first learns of the

grounds for possible disqualification. If it receives this information so late

that it can no longer make a proposal before the proceeding is declared closed,

its remedy is to request an annulment of the award pursuant to Article 52 of

the Convention (Rule 50).
In the absence of having challenged Sir Anthony on the basis now asserted at any time during
the 147 days that followed the conclusion of the preliminary hearing’on July 23, 2003 and
issuance of the Award on December 17, 2003 the Republic must be deemed to have waived
any such objection." Although the Republic claimed at the hearing before the Committee
that its allegation of lack of impartiality is based also on the totality of circumstances
including the Award itself, which contention, it necessarily suggests, escapes the potential bar
just discussed, the absence of any earlier objection to the alleged bias nevertheless gives rise

to questions regarding the bona fides of the objection.

54. Apart from these obstacles, we have closely reviewed the record of this case, from the
time Sir Anthony was appointed until the issuance of the Award, including the contents of the
Award itself, and state categorically that Sir Anthony’s conduct of the case was entirely
appropriate. Rather than evincing a lack of impartiality, the record unequivocally
demonstrates that Sir Anthony served as an unbiased, independent sole Arbitrator whose
conduct was entirely appropriate and designed to ensure that the case was vigorously argued

and rigorously decided.

55. As noted briefly above, the Republic points in particular to Sir Anthony’s conduct at
the beginning of the preliminary hearing when he discussed whether or not the oral testimony
of the Republic’s witnesses needed to be heard. The Republic believes that this discussion
demonstrates Sir Anthony’s bias against it. We frankly profess some astonishment at this
contention, as the facts clearly support the opposite conclusion. We note that 11 days before
the preliminary hearing, on 11 July 2003, Sir Anthony had expressly reserved for decision at
the outset of the preliminary hearing itself the question of whether or not the Republic’s
witnesses would need to be heard. Then, as noted in paragraph 12 above, when on the first

day of the preliminary hearing on 22 July 2003 the Republic first sought leave to call

 

Council considered that they might be useful to the parties to proceedings and
should therefore be published together with the texts of the Rules.
*™ The proceedings in fact were never formally closed prior to the issuance of the Award.
See, infra, paras. 62-65.

-28-

witnesses the Tribunal indeed did voice doubt as to whether such testimony was necessary.
The Republic nevertheless succeeded in persuading Sir Anthony to the Republic’s desired
position which, if anything, is strong evidence that Sir Anthony approached the issue (and the
case as a whole) with a fully open mind. He clearly was at pains to accommodate to the
maximum extent humanly possible the desires of a very small developing state, even though
the Respondent persistently had failed to comply with his directions, as recorded in the
Minutes, and later his Decision of 17 February 2003, regarding the filing of witness

statements.
3. Alleged failure to answer the question put to the Tribunal

56. | The Republic also argues that the Tribunal seriously violated a fundamental rule of
procedure by answering the wrong question, i.e., determining whether the 1993 Loan
Agreement obligated CDC to conduct an appraisal “for the benefit of PUC or the
Republic....”°* That is, the Republic contends that the only question the Tribunal should
have answered was whether CDC was obligated to conduct an appraisal. That fact alone, the

Republic believes, coupled with the loan decision, established CDC’s liability.*

57. The specific terminology used by the Republic in its Memorial cannot define the
question the Tribunal was obliged to answer. Rather, the Tribunal was required to answer a
legal question, or to put it another way, come to a conclusion about the Parties’ rights and
liabilities. In this case, the legal question for the Tribunal’s determination was whether or not
the Republic’s claimed defenses protected it from liability under the 1993 Guarantee. This
question necessarily entailed, under English law as the Tribunal understood it, the
determination, inter alia, of whether the Republic was entitled to rely on CDC’s loan
decision as a representation regarding the substance of the project it financed. The Tribunal

answered the question in the negative, thereby answering the proper legal question before it.
4. Alleged lack of deliberation

58. The Republic has made a multifaceted argument that there was a failure to deliberate
amounting to a serious violation of a fundamental rule of procedure.’ The Republic

premises this argument on the Tribunal’s alleged failure to consider relevant matters, alleged

55 Memorial, supra note 57, at 30 para. 24,
86 Id. at 30 para. 29.

87 It is a neat philosophical or metaphysical question as to whether a Sole Arbitrator can be
subject to an accusation of failure to “deliberate.”

-29-

actual consideration of irrelevant matters,®* and alleged discrepancies and inconsistencies in
the Award assertedly indicating a failure to deliberate.” These arguments are discussed in
the section of this Decision dealing with Article 52(1)(e), inasmuch as such alleged errors are
more commonly understood to implicate a Tribunal’s duty to state the reasons for its

decision.
5. Alleged failure to follow rules of evidence

59. The Republic complains that the Tribunal failed to follow rules of evidence, thereby
seriously departing from a fundamental rule of procedure. The Republic has provided no
authority for its position that any rules of evidence were fundamental or that the Tribunal’s
alleged violation thereof was serious. In any event, we are convinced that the Tribunal did

not, in fact, violate any rules of evidence to the prejudice of the Republic.

60. The Republic’s contention arises from the fact that CDC did not proffer testimony
from witnesses contradicting the testimony of the Republic’s witnesses. This failure, argues
the Republic, compelled the Tribunal to accept the Republic’s evidence as true. (The
Republic overlooks the fact that CDC did cross-examine the Republic’s witnesses and it also
presented non-testimonial evidence to the Tribunal.) The Republic again is insensitive to the
fact that a trier of fact may in such circumstances nonetheless find a party’s evidence not to

be credible.

61. Essentially, however, CDC was under no obligation to present evidence from its own
witnesses to contest the Republic’s evidence at the preliminary hearing held, since the agreed
object of that hearing, which was designated from its inception as a “preliminary” one, was
simply to determine whether the Republic was able to make out a prima facie case or whether
instead, on the Republic’s evidence and English law, there was “no case to answer.”. Only
had the Republic succeeded in persuading the Tribunal that it had put forward “a case to
answer” would the Tribunal have proceeded to a full evidentiary hearing as the parties had
agreed. Because the Republic did not make out a prima facie case, CDC was not required to

respond.

88 7g. at 29 para. 24, 31 para. 25.
® Id. at 33 para. 28.

-30-
6. Alleged untimely issuance of the Award

62. We turn finally (with respect to Article 52(1)(d)) to the Republic’s argument that the
Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure by its allegedly tardy
issuance of the Award. The Republic argued initially that the Award, issued by the Tribunal
on 17 December 2003, is a nullity because it was not issued within 60 days after the closure
of proceedings in the case (as provided, it contended, by ICSID Arbitration Rule 46), which it
maintains occurred at the end of the hearing on 23 July 2003 when the Tribunal stated “All
right, well, we will wrap it up.” The Republic admits, however, that correspondence of the
Parties and the Tribunal on the merits of the case continued well into October 2003. CDC
responds that the Tribunal did not violate Rule 46 because the version of those Rules that the
Parties agreed would apply in the case allows 120 days plus an additional 60 days (at the
election of the Tribunal) for issuance of the Award. The Republic later conceded the

applicability of the 120-day (plus 60 days) rule.*!

63. The record indicates that there was no post-hearing formal closure of proceedings in
this case. One reason might have been that to have done so following the preliminary hearing
and prior to issuance of the Award, thereby foreclosing further proceedings, would itself have
constituted a dispositive conclusion adverse to the Republic telegraphing the eventual Award.
In the circumstances the proceedings must be regarded as having been closed only upon

issuance of the Award, thereby eliminating this issue from further consideration.

64. Even accepting (for the purposes.of argument only), however, the Republic’s
contention that the proceedings were closed at the end of the hearing, the Award was still
timely issued. A total of 147 days passed from the conclusion of the preliminary hearing to
the Tribunal issuing its Award. In our view, its conduct thus would fall squarely within the
tule, which allows for 180 days in total for the issuance of an Award if the Tribunal is unable

to do so in 120 days.”

90 Counter-Memorial, supra note 55, at 50-52 paras. 209-219.

>! Reply to the Counter-Memorial in CDC Group ple v. Republic of the Seychelles, \CSID
Case No. ARB/02/14 at 14-15 para. 57 (5 November 2004) (“Reply”).

% ICSID Arbitration Rule 46 provides, in pertinent part, that “[t]he award (including any
individual or dissenting opinion) shall be drawn up and signed within 120 days after closure
of the proceeding. The Tribunal may, however, extend this period by a further 60 days if it
would otherwise be unable to draw up the award.” The Committee would not regard a

-31-

65. Even had the Tribunal erred in issuing the Award when it did, the Committee would
see no basis for annulling the Award as a result. Specifically, the Republic was unable to
communicate to the ad hoc Committee how it had been prejudiced by the allegedly
impermissible delay. Therefore, we must conclude that annulment on this ground could not

be appropriate.
D. Article 52(1)(e) — Failure to State Reasons
1. Failure to state reasons generally

66. Annulment under Article 52(1)(e) is permissible where a tribunal fails to state the
reasons on which its award is based. This ground for annulment has been a cause of great
concern to commentators since, unlike (b) and (d), it does not include any limiting terms such
as “manifest,” “serious” or “fundamental.” Early on, ad hoc Committees interpreted this
clause in such a way that it appeared to allow inquiry into the sufficiency or substance of the
reasons offered. In Kldckner I, for example, the ad hoc Committee stated that it was bound
to determine whether the reasons given by the Tribunal were “reasonably sustainable and
capable of providing a basis for the decision.”®? ‘Similarly, in Amco Asia I the ad hoc
Committee held that its duty was to determine whether there was a “reasonable connection
between the basis invoked by the tribunal and the conclusions reached by it.” As we have
already noted, however, both of these decisions have been criticized as too closely
resembling the work of appellate bodies and thus going beyond the ambit prescribed for ad
hoc Committees.*®

67. Later ad hoc Committees, beginning with the MINE Committee, have interpreted
Article 52(1)(e) more restrictively. The MINE Committee was of the view that this provision

of the Convention requires only that the reader of an award be able “to follow the reasoning

 

Tribunal’s failure expressly so to extend and to notify the parties of such extension as either a
serious departure or one from a rule of procedure of a fundamental character.

% Klockner I, supra note 35, at 139 para. 120.
% Amco Asia I, supra note 36, at 520 para. 43.

55 Schreuer observes that “The formal test of the presence of a statement of reasons blends
into a substantive test of adequacy and correctness and the distinction between annulment and
appeal (see paras. 8-12 supra) becomes blurred.” SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION,
supra note 44, at 990. While the Decisions referred to have more frequently been criticized
for wrongly basing annulment on excess of powers, some commentators have criticized their
formulation of the standard of review to be employed under Article 52(1)(e). See, e.g., id. at
992.

~32-

of the Tribunal on points of fact and law.” Investigation into “the adequacy of the reasoning
is not an appropriate standard of review ... because it almost inevitably draws an ad hoc
Committee into an examination of the substance of the tribunal’s decision, in disregard of the
exclusion of the remedy of appeal by Article 53 of the Convention.” Given this concern,
the MINE Committee determined that “the requirement is satisfied as long as the award
enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to
the conclusion, even if it made an error, of fact or of law.” The Committee did note,
however, that ‘the minimum requirement is in particular not satisfied by either contradictory

or frivolous reasons.”

68. The Vivendi Committee followed the lead of the Committee in MINE and interpreted
Article 52(1)(e) as allowing for annulment where there is “a failure to state any reasons with

respect to all or part of an award, not the failure to state correct or convincing reasons.”

69. Similarly, the Wena Hotels Committee stated that “[t]he ground for annulment of
Article 52(1)(e) does not allow any review of the challenged Award which would lead the ad

hoc Committee to reconsider whether the reasons underlying the Tribunal’s decisions were

appropriate or not, convincing or not,!00

70. It thus appears that the more recent practice among.ad hoc Committees is to apply
Article 52(1)(e) in such a manner that the Committee does not intrude into the legal and
factual decision-making of the Tribunal.'°! That is to say, Article 52(1)(e) requires that the

% MINE, supra note 30, at 88 para. 5.08.

57 Id. at 88 para. 5.09.

Id.

® Vivendi, supra note 37, at 358 para. 64.

'0 Wena Hotels, supra note 38, at 146 para. 79.

10 Some scholars have opined that some investigation into the Tribunal’s factual findings
may be appropriate where “the way in which the fact was found [] is at the centre of
criticism” or where “the fact itself [] needs a fresh determination in order to decide whether a
certain criticism is justified.” P. Mayer, To What Extent Can an Ad Hoc Committee Review
the Factual Findings of an Arbitral Tribunal? in ANNULMENT OF ICSID Awarps 243, 244
(Emmanuel Gaillard and Yas Banifatemi eds. 2004). An example of the latter situation is
where “a certain factual finding is so obviously wrong, considering the evidence adduced,
that it shows an obvious lack of impartiality, which would constitute a serious departure from
a fundamental rule of procedure.” Id. (citing Peter D. Trooboff, To What Extent May an Ad
Hoc Committee Review the Factual Findings of an Arbitral Tribunal Based on a Procedural
Error, in ANNULMENT OF ICSID AWARDS 251 (Emmanuel Gaillard and Yas Banifatemi eds.

-33-

Tribunal have stated reasons, and that such reasons be coherent, i.e., neither “contradictory”
nor “frivolous,” but does not provide us with the opportunity to opine on whether the
Tribunal’s analysis was correct or its reasoning persuasive. This conclusion is reinforced by
reference to three other provisions of the Convention: Article 49(2), Article 50, and, as noted
in the MINE decision, Article 53. As the Committee in Wena Hotels observed:

when the reasons stated in the award give rise to doubts about its meaning,

either party may request interpretation of the award under Article 50. In the

case where the Tribunal omitted to decide on a question or where the award

contains an error, either party may request the award be rectified, according

[to] Article 49(2). These remedies confirm the understanding that any

challenge as to the substance of reasons given in the award cannot be retained

as a ground for annulment under Article 52(1).!7
Similarly, Article 53 specifically disclaims the existence of a right to appeal in an ICSID case

and, therefore, can be read as necessarily limiting the permissible scope of review by an ad

hoc Committee in an annulment proceeding.

71. Later ad hoc Committees have also observed that the failure to answer all questions
put to the Tribunal, while perhaps a violation of Article 48(3), does not necessitate annulment
under Article 52(1)(e) unless “the failure to deal with a particular question rendered the

award unintelligible.”' This makes sense given the twin aims of finality and fairness.
72. In the instant case, the Republic argues that the Award merits annulment under

Article 52(1)(e) for a number of reasons, including that it ignores relevant matters, considers

irrelevant matters, is contradictory, and also arbitrary. The Republic also contends that the

 

2004)). An example of the former is where “the applicant claims that there was no arbitration
clause and that by declaring that it had jurisdiction, the tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers.” Mayer, supra at 244. Mayer concludes that a Committee “should timit its review
to the evidence which was already before the tribunal” and “‘should not too easily come to the
conclusion that the tribunal erred in its factual finding; it should use self-restraint.”. Jd. at
249. Trooboff notes that the “ICSID Convention does not permit a party to argue that its
claims have been ignored and that the grounds for annulment exist if the tribunal finds that
the evidence submitted does not as a matter of law support that claim or defense.” Trooboff,
supra at 265. Here the Republic is attempting to do exactly that, however, and therefore
should not be given “another opportunity to make the case it could have made but that the
tribunal found had not been made as a matter of law.” Id.

'2 Wena Hotels, supra note 38, at 146 para. 80.

103 SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION, supra note 44, at 1001 paras. 308-309 (citing MINE,
supra note 30, at 89 para. 5.13).

104 See, supra, note 77.

-34-

Tribunal failed adequately to state reasons for its decision on costs. CDC responds to each of
these contentions, concluding that the Republic’s application is “in substance an appeal as to
the substantive correctness of the Tribunal’s reasons (as opposed to an investigation into their
existence and sufficiency) ... However, Article 52(1)(e) does not provide the Republic, which
is merely a dissatisfied party, with a free opportunity to launch an appeal into the merits of
the Award,”!°°
2. Alleged errors in the Tribunal’s interpretation of clause 15(1) of
the 1993 Loan Agreement

73. The Republic contends that the Tribunal’s interpretation of clause 15(1) of the 1993
Loan Agreement dealing with payment of the £22,500 fee by the Republic to CDC “has taken
into consideration irrelevant matters and failed to take into consideration relevant matters and
[its] interpretation is so faulty that it does not come up to the standard of reasons that should
be set out in an Award as contemplated by Article 52(2) [sic] and 48(3) of the ICSID
Convention.”! Clause 15(1) of the 1993 Loan Agreement provides as follows:

By way of recompense for the time spent and expenses incurred by CDC in

considering proposals for the Project and in negotiating the terms and

conditions of this Agreement, the Borrower shall within thirty days after the

date hereof or, if earlier, upon the making of the first advance by CDC

hereunder pay to CDC twenty-two thousand five hundred pounds sterling

(£22,500).
The Republic points to the phrase “considering proposals for the Project” in the clause,
maintaining that it clearly creates the obligation on the part of CDC to conduct an appraisal of
the project upon which the Republic was entitled to rely. This position is contrary to the
Tribunal’s decision that the Agreement created no such obligation. The Republic
additionally objects to the Tribunal’s conclusion that CDC had no duty to perform an
appraisal of the project “for the benefit of PUC or the Republic,” arguing that the identity of
the beneficiary of the alleged obligation is irrelevant because the fact of the appraisal taken
together with the granting of the loan created an “implied representation that the project as
well as the product was suitable and viable for PUC.” Finally with respect to clause 15(1),
the Republic takes issue with the Tribunal’s determination that the charging of a fee for

expenses related to the loan was in keeping with the ordinary practice of lenders because, the

'5 Counter-Memorial, supra note 55, at 74 para. 323.

'96 Memorial, supra note 57, at 29 para. 24. This argument has been addresses as well in part
IV.B.2., supra, of this Decision.

-35-

Republic maintains, the fee was paid in consideration for the execution of an appraisal of the
project. Nowhere in its discussion of this clause does the Republic cite to any authority :
indicating that erroneous conduct of the kind alleged against the Tribunal necessitates

annulment of the Award.

74. CDC defends the Tribunal’s Award, stating that the Republic is attempting to take
issue with the Tribunal’s interpretation, based on the evidence, of this clause’s meaning, and
does so by reading paragraph 50 of the Award out of context.!°” The Tribunal considered all
relevant evidence, in CDC’s opinion, before coming to the conclusion that, despite the
Republic’s contention otherwise, clause 15(1) deals with payment for expenses related to the
loan transaction (and consideration of the project as a part of that loan transaction) and not for
an appraisal of the suitability of the project for PUC’s needs made for PUC’s or the
Republic’s benefit. This factual determination by the Tribunal is thus, according to CDC’s

submission, not subject to review under Article 52(1)(e).

_75. As noted above, Article 52(1)(e) simply requires that the Tribunal have stated its
reasons in such a fashion that the parties are able to follow the reasoning to its conclusion,
not that it state any particular reasons or that the reasons be convincing to the Committee.
Thus, even if this Committee were to disagree with the Tribunal’s legal conclusions, Article

52(1)(e) does not allow annulment on that basis alone.

76. | We can find nothing in the Award with respect to clause 15(1) of the 1993 Loan
Agreement that demonstrates a failure to state reasons such that annulment might be
permissible. The Tribunal weighed the evidence (including the self-interested testimony of
Mr. Morin and Mr. Chang-Leng) before making its determination. The reasons stated in the
Award are not “contradictory or frivolous.”

3. Alleged i of contradiction, i i '. ideration of
irrelevant matters and failure to consider relevant matters
71. The Republic objects to the Award’s statement, in paragraph 50, that “there is a
remarkable absence of evidence on the subject of CDC making an appraisal or feasibility
study of the project ....”"°8 The Republic contends that CDC admitted that it had appraised
the project, and that the. Tribunal ignored this evidence. With respect to this contention we

are of the opinion that the Republic fails to appreciate the distinction, made by the Tribunal,

107 Counter-Memorial, supra note 55, at 60-63 paras. 259-271.
108 Memorial, supra note 57, at 32, para. 26.

-36-

between an appraisal of the loan application (as a part of the loan-making decision process)
and an appraisal of the project (to determine whether or not the project was suitable or viable
for the needs of PUC and the Republic). In essence, the Tribunal decided that an appraisal of
the project (to. determine its viability and suitability for PUC’s needs or those of the
Republic) was a condition to the availability of the Republic’s proffered defense that CDC
represented that the project was, in fact, appropriate. Once this distinction is acknowledged
(as it must be, given the standard of review), it is plain that the Tribunal’s statements are
-consistent. The Tribunal did not ignore relevant evidence; it simply came to a conclusion,
with which the Republic disagrees, about what the evidence means. The Tribunal’s decision
in this regard is not reviewable by this Committee under Article 52(1)(e) (or Article 52(1)(d)

for that matter).

78. The Republic also contends that the Award’s statement, in paragraph 48, that “there is
{nothing] in the Clause [15(1)] or in the 1993 Loan Agreement to suggest that CDC was
assuming the role of adviser, assessor or partner” was “absurd” because the relationship
between the parties could only “be gathered from the antecedent relationship that existed”
between them.'? Thus the Tribunal considered irrelevant matters (the Loan Agreement) and
ignored relevant matters (the antecedent relationship). Again, the Republic cites no authority
for the proposition that such an alleged error necessitates annulment. CDC notes, with
respect to this ‘contention, that the Tribunal expressly did consider the antecedent relationship
between CDC, on the one hand, and PUC and the Republic on the other (to the extent that
any evidence of the relationship was in the record) as embodied in the 1990 Loan Agreement
and Guarantee before concluding, based on all the evidence (including the testimony of Mr.
Morin and Mr. Chang-Leng), that CDC was not an adviser, assessor, or partner in the

project.!!°

79. We are unable to comprehend how the Tribunal’s consideration of whether or not'the
1993 Loan Agreement created a particular relationship between CDC and PUC (as a part of
its inquiry into whether or not CDC was a partner, assessor, or adviser to PUC with respect to
the project) can be criticized as being an unreasoned decision. The Republic raised the issue
of the relationship between CDC and PUC, so it was reasonable (and necessary given the
requirement of Article 48(3)) for the Tribunal to consider whether that alleged relationship

1° Id. at 33 para. 27.
Ho Counter-Memorial, supra note 55, at 68 paras. 296-300.

-37-

was created by contract or by the prior interactions of the parties. Having considered all the
evidence, the Tribunal determined that the relationship between CDC and PUC and the
Republic was only that incident to a normal loan transaction. This conclusion does not
indicate a lack of deliberation and the Tribunal’s statement of reasons in respect to this issue

was easily comprehensible and therefore legally sufficient under Article 52(1)(e).

80. We turn now to the Republic’s allegation that the Award contradicted itself, in
" paragraph 57, by stating first that “[t]he Republic then relied upon that assumed favourable
assessment in proceeding with the project” and later that “the evidence does not establish ...
" that PUC or the Republic was relying on CDC’s appraisal for their own purposes.”! " epe
responds that any lack of clarity in this portion of the Award results not from a contradictory
statement but simply a “drafting oversight.”''? As CDC interprets the Award, the allegedly
contradictory portion of the Award should read as follows: “{T]he evidence does not
establish that such a representation was ever made or that CDC was aware that PUC or the
Republic was relying on CDC’s appraisal for their own purposes.” CDC’s position is that the
inclusion of the phrase “CDC was aware that” eliminates any potential contradiction and
makes the latter part of the paragraph consistent with the first sentence, which discusses the
situation where “the lender makes a representation to the borrower that the appraisal shows
that the proposed transaction is viable and suitable for the borrower or it appears that the
lender is aware that the borrower is relying on the vendor's appraisal for its own

purposes.”''3

81. We believe that the allegedly contradictory statements are in fact not so when read in
context. The first statement, at paragraph 51 of the Award, ie., that “The Republic then
relied upon that assumed favourable assessment,” refers to CDC's. own “favourable
assessment of the loan” recorded in the previous sentence, and not “of a project for the
benefit of the borrower” (paragraph 52) (emphasis added). Paragraph 57, then, in stating that
“the evidence does not establish ... that PUC or the Republic was relying on CDC’s approval
for their own purposes,” seen in this context, is a finding that the evidence before the
Tribunal did not, in its assessment thereof, support a conclusion that any such reliance was

justified in the sense of giving rise to a liability on the part of CDC. In construing awards, as

"' Memorial, supra note 57, at 33 para. 28.
'? fd. at 70-71 paras. 309-314.
‘3 Award, supra note 1, at para. 57 (emphasis added).

-38-

in construing statutes and legal instruments generally, one necessarily should construe the
language in issue, whenever possible, in a way that results in consistency, which seems

perfectly possible here.

82. Next, the Republic takes issue with the Award’s allegedly contradictory statements, in
paragraph 38, first that the Republic’s witness, Mr. Morin, “did not know whether CDC made
an appraisal or not,” and later that Mr. Morin testified that CDC “were conducting their own
assessment of the project” and that “if CDC had not done an appraisal of the project, PUC
would not have bought the turbine from EGT.”''* CDC responds that ‘the Tribunal’s
comments were not contradictory because Mr. Morin, in fact, testified initially that he
thought CDC would appraise the project because the 1993 Loan Agreement said they would
(although the Tribunal disagreed with Mr. Morin’s interpretation of the Loan Agreement) but
later admitted that he never received confirmation of this supposition nor saw an appraisal
prepared by CDC.

83. Throughout the Republic’s Memorial there seems to be some confusion about the
difference between evidence offered to the Tribunal and conclusions about that evidence
reached by the Tribunal after full consideration. We believe this to be one of those situations.
The Republic believes that the Award is inconsistent because it states that there was evidence
(Mr. Morin’s testimony) that CDC “were conducting their own assessment of the project” but
later also states that Mr. Morin did not know whether CDC conducted the assessment or not.
The Award is consistent; it was Mr. Morin’s testimony that was inconsistent. The Tribunal
simply and appropriately concluded based on all of the evidence (Mr. Morin’s testimony that
he thought CDC would appraise the project based on the 1993 Agreement, the fact that the
loan was granted, and his admission that he in fact never received any appraisal or knew of
the conclusions of any such appraisal) that Mr. Morin did not truly know whether or not CDC
had conducted an appraisal of the project. This conclusion is consistent with the evidence
and is therefore not an example of the Tribunal failing to state reasons (or failing to deliberate

or manifestly exceeding its powers).

84. | The Republic complains next that the Award contradicts itself, in paragraph 54, by
noting that “there was no evidence of CDC’s awareness of [the Republic’s] reliance,” given

Mr. Morin’s testimony that CDC knew of PUC’s reliance because PUC had always relied in

"4 Memorial, supra note 57, at 34 para. 29.

-39-

the past on CDC’s expertise.''® Also, the Republic contends that the Award erred in stating
that “[iJt was not suggested that it was other than a loan transaction,” when the Award
acknowledged testimony from Mr. Chang-Leng that he “regarded the relationship between
the Republic and CDC as one of partnership in relation to the two projects and as one to be
distinguished from the ordinary relationship between a borrower and a bank.” CDC responds
to these arguments by stating that the Tribunal did not ignore any evidence, but rather simply

came to a conclusion, based on all of the evidence, that was different from the Republic’s.

85. As noted above there is a distinction between evidence and findings of fact based on
that evidence. It appears that the Tribunal considered the self-interested testimony of Mr.
Morin and Mr. Chang-Leng (which latter, with respect to whether CDC knew of PUC’s
asserted reliance, was speculative and offered without personal knowledge) before
concluding that CDC was unaware of any reliance by PUC on its alleged appraisal of the
project and that the antecedent relationship between the Parties as embodied in the 1990 Loan
Agreement was consistent with that of an ordinary loan transaction. The Award is thus not

contradictory.

86. Finally, the Republic contends that because the “uncontroverted” evidence was that
CDC did know of the Republic’s reliance on its expertise, the Tribunal erred in not finding
the existence of a duty of care owed by cpc.""® Again, the Republic fails to recognize the
distinction between offering evidence and meeting the burden of proof.''? The only evidence
that CDC knew of the Republic’s reliance was the self-interested testimony of Mr. Morin.
Mr. Morin admittedly had no personal knowledge of the facts to which he testified, however.
After considering this fact as well as the relevant documentary evidence, the Tribunal _
determined that there was a failure of proof on this point and thus found, based on all of the
evidence, that CDC did not know of the Republic’s asserted reliance. The Tribunal did not

ignore relevant evidence. Rather, the Tribunal considered the evidence, came to a non-

NS Iq. at 34-35 para. 30.
"6 1. at 35-37 para. 31.

17 This distinction is discussed in BIN CHENG, GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW AS APPLIED BY
INTERNATIONAL COURTS AND TRIBUNALS 329 (1987):

Burden of proof, however closely related to duty to produce evidence, ...
implies something more. It means that a party having the burden of proof
must not only.bring evidence in support of his allegations, but must also
convince the Tribunal of their truth, lest they be disregarded for want or
insufficiency or proof.

-40-

contradictory conclusion with respect to that evidence, and logically stated the reasons for its

conclusion.
4, Alleged failure to state reasons with respect to costs

87. The Republic takes issue with what it regards as the Tribunal’s failure to state reasons
for its Award of costs to CDC. Here it must be said that quite commonly reasoned awards do
not extend their reasoning to the area of costs. It therefore may be doubted whether Article
52(1)(e) was intended to embrace such an issue. Assuming arguendo, that it does, however,
we reject the idea that annulment is either permissible or appropriate on this point. It is clear
from paragraph 63 of the Award that CDC was awarded about 80 percent of its demand over
the unparticularized objections of the Republic. Thus the Award in this respect “speaks for
itself.” Moreover, it would be impossible to conclude, based on all the circumstances, that
the result was affected by any failure to state reasons, in which event annulment, even if

permissible, would not be appropriate.
Vv. COSTS

88. CDC seeks to recover its costs and expenses, which total £83,345.61 (of which
£79,911.35 represents fees). While claiming costs itself, and denying any entitlement of
CDC to costs as a general matter, the Republic has not commented specifically on the amount
of costs claimed by CDC although it was given an opportunity to do so. This is perhaps not
surprising in light of the fact that its own request was for an award of £140,000 in costs (of
which £125,000 represents the claimed value of the time of the Attorney General and his
staff), or a sum 68 percent higher. Both parties claim also all of the costs of ICSID and the

Committee.

89. With respect to this request we find ourselves in a difficult position. On the one hand,
we are not insensitive to the fiscal circumstances of the Republic, which, as the Republic
itself has described them in these proceedings, can be summarized as impecunious. On the
other hand, however, we must be mindful of our determination, founded upon careful
consideration of all arguments advanced by the parties in this proceeding, that the Republic’s
case before this Committee was fundamentally lacking in merit. While we refrain from going
so far as to say that it was frivolous, we can state unequivocally that, taking into account the
presumption of finality in ICSID arbitration and the restrictive grounds of challenge available
in the annulment process, the Republic’s case was, to any reasonable and impartial observer,

most unlikely to succeed.

-41-

90. The ad hoc Committee in Vivendi decided that each of the parties should bear its own
costs and expenses and its own share of ICSID’s expenses because “the dispute raised ‘a set
of novel and complex issues not previously addressed in international arbitral precedent.’"""*
The Committee also observed that “both parties had prevailed to ‘some extent.” We are not
faced with the same or even remotely similar circumstances. We therefore are, in the end,
compelled to require that CDC receive the total amount of its claimed costs and expenses
(which the Committee does not find unreasonable in the circumstances) and that the Republic
bear the entirety of the costs of ICSID and the Committee, as well as its own costs and
expenses. :

VI. DECISION

91. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee DECIDES:

(1) _ The Tribunal committed no annullable errors in arriving at its Award and the
Republic’s Application therefore is dismissed.

(2) | The Republic shall pay to CDC, in addition to the amounts due under the
Award, EIGHTY-THREE THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED FORTY-FIVE
BRITISH POUNDS STERLING AND SIXTY-ONE PENCE (£83,345.61) for
CDC’s legal expenses and costs incurred in connection with this annulment
proceeding.

(3) The Republic shall bear the full costs and expenses incurred by ICSID in

connection with this annulment proceeding.

Brandy
Judge Charles N. Brower

\
President
kana pea Reh

4a
Mr. Michael Hwang, SC . Mr. David A.R. Williams, QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: 27 June 2005

 

8 Vivendi, supra note 37, at 45 para. 117.

