Date of dispatch to the parties: December 17, 2003

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

CDC GROUP PLC
(Claimant)

REPUBLIC OF THE SEYCHELLES
(Respondent)

Case No. ARB/02/14

AWARD

Tribunal
Sir Anthony Mason, AC KBE

Secretary of the Tribunal

Martina Polasek

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent
Mr. Stephen Jagusch Mr. Anthony Francis Tissa Fernando
Allen & Overy Attorney-General of the Republic of
One New Change the Seychelles
London EC4M 9QQ President’s Office
United Kingdom Department of Legal Affairs

PO Box 58

National House
Republic of the Seychelles

I

1.

THE PARTIES

Claimant CDC Group ple ("CDC") is a public company incorporated under the

Companies Act 1985 in England and Wales. At all material times CDC has been, and

continues to be, a national of the United Kingdom.

2.

I

3.

Respondent is the Republic of the Seychelles ("the Republic").
JURISDICTION

The dispute between the parties arises out of two agreements which are the

subject of these proceedings.

5.

(i) an agreement dated November 6, 1990 between CDC and the Government
of the Republic (the "1990 Guarantee"); and

(ii) an agreement dated March 17, 1993 between CDC and the Government of
the Republic (the "1993 Guarantee").

Each Guarantee contains the following provisions:

"6.1 The Government [defined as the Government of the Republic of the
Seychelles] and CDC hereby consent and agree to submit to the jurisdiction of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes all disputes between
them arising out of this Agreement for settlement by arbitration pursuant to the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and the
Nationals of Other States (hereinafter called 'The Convention’) and the parties
recognise that CDC is a 'National of another Contracting State’ for the purposes of
Article 25 of the Convention.

6.2 Arbitration proceedings following a submission under this Section shall, if
the appropriate arrangements can be made and agreements secured pursuant to
Article 63 of the Convention, be held in London, England.

6.3 The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes shall been
entitled to publish the award rendered by, as well as the minutes and other records
of, the arbitral tribunal constituted following any submission under this Section."

Both the United Kingdom (of which CDC is a national) and the Republic of the

Seychelles are Contracting States to the ICSID Convention. The ICSID Convention

entered into force in the United Kingdom on January 18, 1967 and in the Republic of the

Seychelles on April 19, 1978.

6.

As the Republic ultimately withdrew its objection to jurisdiction (see paras 19 and

34 below) and did not contest the Tribunal's jurisdiction at the oral hearing, I find that the

conditions in art. 25(1) of the ICSID Convention have been fulfilled and that the Tribunal

has jurisdiction to arbitrate this dispute.

Ill

7.

8.

THE DISPUTE

CDC claims that the Republic is in breach of its obligations under the Guarantees.

CDC claims:

@

(ii)

Under the 1990 Guarantee, the Republic guaranteed to CDC punctual
payment of all principal monies and interest becoming due and payable by
Public Utilities Corporation ("PUC"), a statutory corporation incorporated
in the Republic of the Seychelles, to CDC under a Loan Agreement
between PUC and CDC dated September 20, 1990 (as amended by letters
dated January, 10 1991 and July 3, 1992) together the "1990 Loan
Agreement". By that Agreement CDC agreed to lend £450,000 to PUC.

Under the 1993 Guarantee, the Republic guaranteed to CDC the due and
punctual payment of all principal monies and interest becoming due and
payable by PUC to CDC under a Loan Agreement between PUC and CDC
dated February 5, 1993 (as amended and re-scheduled by an amending and
re-scheduling Agreement dated January 25, 1996) (together the "1993
Loan Agreement"). By the 1993 Loan Agreement, CDC agreed to lend

£1,800,000 to PUC.

(iii) | PUC is in default of its obligations to CDC under the 1990 Loan
Agreement and the 1993 Loan Agreement (together the "Loan
Agreements") in the manner specified in CDC's letter to the Republic
dated January 2, 2002 (to which was attached CDC's letter to PUC dated
December 17, 2001 on the same subject).
(iv) |The Republic has failed to meet CDC's demands for the Republic to

honour the Republic's obligations under the Guarantees.

9. CDC claims that the total amount due and owing to CDC under the Loan

Agreements as at December 4, 2001 was £2,103,379.32.

10. CDC has sought resolution of the dispute and payment of its claims over a long

time.

IV PROCEDURAL HISTORY

11. CDC lodged with ICSID its request for arbitration dated August 22, 2002, as

supplemented by its letter of October 17, 2002, of its dispute with the Republic.

12. On November 7, 2002, pursuant to Art. 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement

of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States and Rules 6(1)(a)

and 7(a) of ICSID's Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration

proceedings, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the request in the Arbitration

Register. A certificate of registration was issued on the same day and the parties were

invited to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal.

13. Pursuant to Rule 2 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, CDC proposed and the

Republic agreed to the Secretary-General of ICSID appointing a Sole Arbitrator.

14. On December 19, 2002 I accepted appointment by the Secretary-General as Sole
Arbitrator. The Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted and the proceedings to
have begun on that day. The Secretary-General informed the parties on the same day that
Ms Martina Polasek, Counsel, ICSID would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.
15. The first session of the Tribunal was held, with the parties' agreement, in Sydney,
Australia, on February 10, 2003. The parties confirmed that they had no objection to the
proper constitution of the Tribunal. It was agreed that, in accordance with the contractual
provisions between the parties, the place of proceeding be London, without prejudice to
the Sole Arbitrator holding sessions with the parties at any other venue as may be
convenient, after consultation with the parties.
16. It was agreed that CDC's request for arbitration be treated as its Memorial on the
merits. The parties agreed on the following timetable:

(i) the Republic to file its Counter-Memorial on the merits and any objections

to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal by Monday, March 24, 2003.

(ii) CDC to file a Reply by Thursday, April 17, 2003; and

(iii) the Republic to file a Rejoinder by Thursday, May 15, 2003.
The parties agreed with the Sole Arbitrator's proposal that a hearing on the merits and
jurisdiction be held in London on July 22-23, 2003.
Vv CDC'S INVESTMENTS IN THE SEYCHELLES
17. CDC's activities are commercial in substance and nature. CDC's investments in
the Seychelles related to the expansion of the capacity of the Baie Ste Anne Power
Station on the Island of Praslin and the upgrading of Victoria A Power Station on the

Island of Mahé. These investments were made on a commercial basis.

18. CDC claims that each of the Loan Agreements and each of the Guarantees
amount to an "investment" within the meaning of Art. 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
which provides that

"[t]he jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment".

19. Although the Republic initially contested CDC's claim that the Loan Agreements
and Guarantees were "investments" within the meaning of Art. 25(1), the Republic
subsequently withdrew its objection to jurisdiction at the oral hearing which took place
on 22-23 July 2003.

VI RELIEF SOUGHT BY CDC

20. By its Request for Arbitration, CDC sought from the Arbitral Tribunal an award
including:

(i) an order that the Republic shall pay to CDC the sum of £2,103,379.32
being the total amount due and owing to CDC under the Guarantees as at 4
December 2001;

(ii) an order that the Republic shall pay to CDC the further amounts due and
owing to CDC under the Loan Agreements (and, hence, the Guarantees)
from 5 December 2001 to the date of the Award (as to which CDC will
provide calculations and such further evidence as is necessary, in the
course of the proceedings);

(iii) an order that the Republic shall make payment to CDC of all legal and
other expenses incurred by CDC in connection with this arbitration,

including fees and expenses of its counsel and its solicitors, fees and

expenses of ICSID, fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and any
other expenses howsoever incurred in connection with this arbitration; and

(iv) an order for such further or other relief as to the Arbitral Tribunal seem
just or appropriate.

VIL_ WRITTEN PROCEDURE AND EVENTS PRECEDING
ORAL HEARING

21. By its Counter-Memorial dated March 17, 2003, the Republic objected under
Rule 41 of the Arbitration Rules read with Art. 25 of the Convention that the legal
dispute, if any, between the parties was not one "arising directly out of an investment"
between CDC and the Republic, as the investments were with PUC and not the Republic
and the guarantees were not an investment within the meaning of Art. 25(1) of the
Convention.

22. By its Counter-Memorial, the Republic further pleaded that, by reason of the poor
performance and ultimate abandonment of the 4MW gas turbine generator purchased
under the 1993 Loan Agreement relating to the Victoria A Power Station in the Island of
Mahé, the capacity of PUC to supply electricity to its customers from 1994 to 1999 was
severely affected and resulted in widespread disruption to the economy and loss of
revenue to PUC and the Republic. The cost of the gas turbine generator and the cost of
its replacement by four mobile generator sets had a drastic effect on the Republic's
foreign exchange reserves and affected its ability to meet its commitment under the 1993
Guarantee. The Counter-Memorial did not contest the enforceability of the 1990 Loan
Agreement and Guarantee relating to the Baie Ste Anne project.

23. The Republic also pleaded that the project set out in Schedule 1 to the 1993 Loan

Agreement was "thoroughly appraised by" CDC and that the clause in the Guarantee

which makes the guarantee unconditional was "an unfair contract term in view of the
circumstances of the case and the emerging jurisprudence in relation to International
Trade and Investments between developed and developing countries”.!

24. The Republic therefore sought dismissal of the claim on the basis of its objection
to jurisdiction and, if not, dismissal of the claim on the ground that CDC should bear its
share of the responsibility for the failure of the project and the consequential damage to
the Seychelles economy.

25. By letter dated March 26, 2003, to the Tribunal, CDC's solicitors requested that
the Tribunal suspend the procedural calendar agreed on at the first session and instead
convene an early meeting of the parties to address the Republic's objection to jurisdiction
and the Republic's defence on the merits. According to CDC's solicitors, the objection to
jurisdiction was unarguable and the defence on the merits was without substance because
there was no contractual obligation which imposed any responsibility on CDC for the
success of the project. The facts pleaded by the Republic constituted no defence in law,
so CDC's solicitors contended.

26. By a Decision dated April 17, 2003, the Tribunal ruled that the Republic's
Counter-Memorial did not comply with the directions given by the Tribunal at its first
session in that it was not accompanied by written statements of witnesses and expert
reports on which the Republic intended to rely. The Tribunal ordered the Republic to
provide promptly such statements and reports.

27. By the Decision, the Tribunal also ruled that the parties should have a further
opportunity to address submissions on the question whether there should be a preliminary

hearing to determine the questions of law and gave the Republic an opportunity to present

' p. 4 of the Counter-Memorial

further submissions to show that why its defence on the merits was a good defence in
law.
28. By its Reply dated April 17, 2003, CDC submitted that the Republic's objection to
jurisdiction was misconceived and that the Republic's failure to comply with the
directions given at its first sessions prevented CDC from presenting a Reply that fully
complied with those directions. Nevertheless the CDC's Reply presented arguments why
the Republic's defence on the merits was not a good defence in law and contended that
CDC should not be required to present an answer on the facts to this defence when the
Republic failed to comply with the Tribunal's directions as to witness statements and
expert reports.
29. By its Rejoinder dated May 13, 2003, the Republic re-stated its objection to
jurisdiction and its defence on the merits. As to the defence on the merits, the Rejoinder
stated:
"The Respondent would be relying for its defence on the principles of equity,
contractual fairness, inequality of bargaining power, contributory negligence and
the emerging jurisprudence in relation to international trade and investments
between developed and developing countries."
30. As to CDC's request for a preliminary hearing, the Rejoinder stated:
"The Respondent has no objection to a preliminary hearing in London on the 22nd
and 23" of July 2003 on the two issues raised by the Claimant in its letter dated
26" March 2003 and depending on the determination to be made at such hearing
proceeding to a hearing on the merits on a subsequent date to be agreed by the
parties and the sole arbitrator."?
31. Having considered the pleadings and further correspondence between the parties

and the Tribunal, the Tribunal, on June 5, 2003, issued its Second Decision, directing that

a preliminary hearing be held in London on July 22-23, 2003 to determine the Republic's

> p. 4 of the Rejoinder

objection to jurisdiction and whether the Republic's defence on the merits is capable of
constituting a defence in law to CDC's claim or is otherwise capable of providing a basis
in law for the Tribunal to order the Republic to pay a reduced sum in satisfaction of
CDC's claims. The Tribunal stated that, if the parties wished to have both questions and
the hearing on the merits dealt with on July 22-23, 2003, the Tribunal was prepared to
deal with the matter on that basis.

32. By its Second Decision, the Tribunal directed the Republic to provide full and
detailed particulars of

the principles of equity, contractual fairness, inequality of bargaining,
contributory negligence and the emerging jurisprudence in relation to
international trade and investment between developed and developing countries’
on which it proposes to rely at the preliminary hearing both by way of defence
and by way of reduction of the amount to be awarded in satisfaction of Claimant's
claim."

33. By its Addendum to the Rejoinder, the Republic sought to provide the particulars
required in para. 30. The Addendum alleged that the Republic
"gave an unconditional guarantee to the Claimant in view of the representation
made by the Claimant to the Respondent that they made a thorough appraisal of
the project proposals in connection with the loan that was granted to PUC. It
implied that the 4 MW gas turbine generator being purchased from the loan would
be suitable and viable for PUC".*
This was the first specific mention in the pleadings of a case based on misrepresentation.
The Addendum went on to allege that the representation was an unambiguous
representation of fact which the Republic was intended to act upon and did act upon to its
detriment. The Addendum further alleged that CDC owed the Republic and PUC a duty

to take reasonable care that the representation was accurate knowing that the Republic

would act upon it in view of the fact that the knowledge of PUC and the Republic of this

 

* Id.
+p. 1 of the Addendum to the Rejoinder

type of generator was extremely limited. The Addendum also alleged that the facts gave
rise to a situation of inequality of bargaining power.

VII. THE ORAL HEARING

34. The oral hearing took place in London on July 22 and 23, 2003. The oral hearing
was confined to the second of the two questions of law, the Republic having indicated
that it wished to call witnesses to substantiate its defence on the merits. The Republic
had indicated shortly before the oral hearing that it withdrew its objection to jurisdiction.
The Republic called three witnesses. CDC called no witnesses as the question for
determination was whether the Republic's defence on the merits was capable of
constituting a good defence in law. CDC reserved its right to call witnesses at a hearing
on the merits, should such a hearing prove necessary.

35. The first witness was Mr Morin, an electrical engineer, who is the managing
director of PUC and had worked with PUC since 1973. He was a member of the PUC
negotiating team that dealt with CDC in relation to the 1993 Loan Agreement and
Guarantee. He was the only witness who participated in those negotiations. He gave
evidence that PUC requested CDC to fund the Victoria A power project involving the
installation of a gas turbine. In connection with that application, PUC prepared and
delivered to CDC an analysis of the project. Mr Morin said that a sum of £22,500, being
1.25% of the amount of the loan, was paid to CDC to make an analysis of the project.

36. According to Mr Morin, PUC and its engineers had no experience of gas turbine
generators. They did not engage expert consultants. CDC and its engineers had more
experience in power turbine technology than PUC. PUC relied on CDC as PUC did not

have the resources to engage independent consultants. Mr Morin said that if CDC had

not done an appraisal of the project, PUC would not have bought the turbine from EGT.
He described CDC variously as a "partner", "assessor" and "adviser" in relation to the
project. He also stated that PUC and CDC were unequal in bargaining power, CDC
being well resourced while PUC was under-resourced and desperately in need of
additional power generation to satisfy the growing demand for power in the Seychelles.
37. Mr Morin then stated that the gas plant never operated properly, that it was
plagued with numerous problems, that it was not used after 1999 and was replaced by
four small generator sets at substantial extra cost. The breakdown and the incapacity of
the plant had a very significant adverse impact on the tourist industry and was detrimental
to the Seychelles economy. When asked whether there was anything about the loan
which was unfair or unreasonable, leaving aside the problems with the turbine, Mr
Morin's answer was "No".

38. Mr Morin has never seen an appraisal of the project by CDC. No such appraisal
was produced by the Republic at the hearing, nor has anyone seen a copy of a CDC
appraisal of the project in PUC files. In fact, Mr Morin did not know whether CDC made
an appraisal or not. In cross-examination, Mr Morin was asked

.. are you saying one of them" [officers of CDC] said to one of you that they
were appraising the project in terms of its suitability or viability, or did they
merely tell [you] that they were conducting their own assessment of the project?"

His answer was
"They were conducting their own assessment of the project."

He was then asked

"Other than to subsequently grant the loan, was there any indication from CDC as
to the outcome of its own assessment of the project?"

His answer was "No" but he went on to say that the contract stated that they were going
to carry out an appraisal of viability (which it did not) and that PUC thought that CDC
would have told us if they considered the project was not viable. He referred to the
earlier relationship of partner and adviser assumed by CDC.

39. Mr Morin said that he was not aware that PUC had ever made a claim against
CDC in connection with the project before CDC made its request for arbitration. He also
said that PUC had not taken action against EGT, the supplier of the gas turbine, on
account of the expense involved. It seems that PUC had decided on a gas turbine, though
not an EGT turbine, before PUC sought finance from CDC. Mr Morin stated in re-
examination that CDC had "not directly" ever represented to PUC the quality and
suitability of the turbine. He was not aware that it had ever been asked to do so.

40. The Republic's second witness was Mr Francis Chang-Leng, Governor of the
Central Bank of the Seychelles and the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Finance.
He has been working for the Ministry since 1991. He gave evidence of other earlier
projects in which the Republic and CDC had been involved, including the Reef Hotel in
which they were partners. He said that the Republic relied on CDC's appraisal of the
Baie St Anne and the Victoria A projects. He regarded the relationship between the
Republic and CDC as one of partnership in relation to the two projects and as one to be
distinguished from the ordinary relationship between a borrower and a bank. Like Mr
Morin, Mr Chang-Leng relied on the fact that CDC had appraised the Victoria A project
and would not have proceeded with it but for CDC's appraisal. He gave evidence of the
loss suffered by PUC and the Republic in consequence of the flawed performance of the

gas turbine.

Al. In cross-examination, Mr Chang-Leng admitted that he had no involvement in the
negotiation of the 1992 Loan Agreement with CDC and that he was relying on the
antecedent general relationship between the parties in expecting CDC to carry out due
diligence on the project and an appraisal for viability.

42. The Republic's third witness was Mr JG Dilliway, an engineer with experience as
a specialist power consultant. Mr Dilliway considered that a gas turbine, particularly a
liquid fuel gas turbine of the type supplied by EGT, was unsuitable for the Seychelles. It
was an unproven type of turbine when supplied and it required clean quality fuel and
back up which PUC was not in a provision to provide. He was surprised that CDC had
made a favourable appraisal. Had he been in CDC's position, he would not have
approved the loan because he would have regarded the project as "high risk" because the
turbine was "first off" and the implementation of the project involved difficulties. Mr
Dilliway had discussions with PUC and EGT from 1996 onwards in an endeavour to
resolve difficulties when PUC complained that the turbine was poorly designed and
deficient and EGT complained that the problems were due to poor fuel and inadequate
maintenance. There was substance, he thought, in the complaints made by each party.
He was, however, in no doubt that the EGT turbine was not the right equipment for the
Seychelles.

Ix THE APPLICABLE LAW

43. Clause 7.8 of the Amending and Rescheduling Agreement provides:

"This Agreement and its performance shall be governed by and construed in all
respects in accordance with the laws of England ..."

Although the Republic made reference in its Rejoinder to

"the emerging jurisprudence in relation to international trade and investments
between developed and developing countries",

no argument based in such jurisprudence was presented to the Tribunal. The submissions
presented by the parties proceeded on the footing that CDC's claim was to be resolved in
accordance with English law.

x THE REPUBLIC'S CASE THAT CDC REPRESENTED THAT THE
PROJECT WAS VIABLE AND SUITABLE

44. The Republic's first submission is that there was an implied representation by

CDC to both PUC and the Republic arising from the appraisal which it carried out of the

Victoria A project that the project as well as the product (the EGT gas turbine) was

suitable and viable for PUC. It is not in dispute that CDC conducted an appraisal. The

Republic says that CDC was paid £22,500 for doing so in accordance with cl. 15(1) of the

1993 Loan Agreement.

45. According to counsel for the Republic, the implied representation arises from the

following circumstances:

qd) that the making of the loan application by PUC to CDC, accompanied by PUC's
analysis of the project;

(2) the making of an appraisal by CDC;

(3) the charging of a fee under cl. 15(1);

(4) the approval by CDC of the loan; and

(5) the inference to be drawn from the communication of that approval that the
appraisal was that the project was suitable and viable for PUC.

46. Clause 15(1) appears under the heading "SECTION 15 - NEGOTIATION FEE"

and is in these terms:

"15.1 By way of recompense for the time spent and expenses incurred by CDC
in considering proposals for the Project and in negotiating the terms and
conditions of the Agreement, the Borrower shall within thirty days after
the date hereof or, if earlier, upon the making of the first advance by CDC
hereunder pay to CDC twenty-two thousand five hundred pounds sterling
(£22,500).”

47. Clause 15(1) makes no mention of CDC making an appraisal of the project. The
clause imposes no obligation on CDC to make an appraisal for the benefit of PUC or the
Republic or at all. The absence of such an obligation indicates that an appraisal, if it was
to be made, was to be for the benefit of CDC so as to enable it to determine whether the
loan proposal was a viable transaction from its perspective, not to determine whether the
project was suitable and viable for PUC. As appears from cl. 15(1), the sum of £22,500
was payable for time spent and expenses incurred by CDC in considering the proposals
and in negotiating the terms and conditions of the 1993 Loan Agreement; in other words,
to compensate CDC for the time and expense incurred in deciding whether it would make
the loan which the Republic sought. The heading to the clause, in describing the charge
as "Negotiation Fee", makes this clear. In this respect, the clause is consistent with the
common practice of lenders in charging for time spent and expenses incurred in
connection with the investigation and processing of applications for loans.

48. Whether an appraisal was to be made was a matter for CDC to determine in its
own interests. There is nothing in cl. 15(1) to suggest that the fee was charged for giving
advice to PUC, let alone the Republic, or for giving advice on which either of them could
rely. Nor is there anything in the clause or in the 1993 Loan Agreement to suggest that

CDC was assuming the role of adviser, assessor or partner in relation to the loan or the

Victoria A Power Station Project.

49. Nor is there any evidence that PUC or the Republic ever requested CDC to make
an appraisal for their benefit or to enable PUC to decide whether it should proceed with
the Victoria A project or to give advice in relation to the project. Likewise there is no
evidence that CDC represented to PUC or the Republic that CDC would make an
appraisal of the project for their benefit.

50. Indeed, there is a remarkable absence of evidence on the subject of CDC making
an appraisal or feasibility study of the project. There is no evidence that CDC delivered
to the Republic a copy of such an appraisal or study or communicated the contents of an
appraisal or study to the Republic. Absent evidence of this kind, there is no foundation
for the implied representation on which the Republic relies.

51. The Republic has assumed, no doubt justifiably, that, in the ordinary course of
considering the application for the loan, CDC made its own favourable assessment of the
loan. The Republic then relied upon that assumed favourable assessment in proceeding
with the project, purchasing the gas turbine and entering into the Loan Agreement and the
Guarantee. But reliance without more does not establish that CDC made a representation
of the kind alleged by the Republic.

52. There is a fundamental difference between a lender making an appraisal or study
of a project for its own purpose in deciding whether it will make a loan and making an
appraisal or study of a project for the benefit of the borrower. Indeed, it would be
unusual for a lender to make an appraisal or study for the benefit of the borrower.

53. The point was well made by Lord Millett in National Commercial Bank
(Jamaica) Ltd v Hew [2003] UKPC Appeal No. 65 of 2002, 30 June 2003. His Lordship

said (at para. 22):

"There is a useful illustration of the truism that the viability of a
transaction may depend on the vantage point from which it is viewed;
what is a viable loan may not be a viable borrowing. This is one reason
why a borrower is not entitled to rely on the fact that the lender has chosen
to lend him the money as evidence, still less as advice, that the lender
thinks that the purpose for which the borrower intends to use it is sound."
54. Although it was pleaded that CDC was aware that the Republic was relying upon
its appraisal of the project, there was no evidence of CDC's awareness of that reliance or
of any communication by PUC to CDC that PUC was relying on such an appraisal. And,
accepting that a relationship of partner, associate, adviser existed at an earlier time
between CDC and the Republic, the immediately antecedent transaction between the
parties was the 1990 Loan Agreement and Guarantee. It was not suggested that it was
other than a loan transaction.
55. Finally, on this point, it is necessary to refer to cl. 17.8 of the 1993 Loan
Agreement and cl. 2.4 of the 1993 Guarantee. Clause 17.8 provides:
"The obligations of the Borrower to pay punctually all moneys from time
to time falling due by it in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement are absolute and shall be in no way impaired or affected by
reason of any failure or delay on the part of CDC to assert or enforce any
of its rights or by reason of failure of the purpose of this Agreement or of
impossibility to carry out the Project or any part thereof or for any other
reason."
Clause 2.4 provides:
"There are no representations, collateral agreements or conditions with
respect to this guarantee and affecting the liability of the Government
hereunder other than those contained herein."
Clause 17.8 makes it clear that PUC's obligations under the Loan Agreement to carry out

its terms are absolute while cl. 2.4 undermines the basis on which the Republic seeks to

establish an implied representation. A provision such as cl. 2.4 may be ineffective to

exclude an express representation but its operation in excluding an implied
representation, derived in part from provisions in the 1993 Loan Agreement and
Guarantee, seems to be fair and reasonable.

xi THE REPUBLIC'S CASE THAT CDC OWED A DUTY OF CARE TO
THE REPUBLIC AND WAS IN BREACH OF THAT DUTY OF CARE

56. On the same facts, the Republic submits that CDC owed a duty of care to PUC
and the Republic to make an accurate appraisal of the project and that CDC was in breach
of its duty of care because its appraisal was negligently made. CDC's first answer to this
submission is that a lender who makes an appraisal of the viability of a loan for its own
purposes as lender owes no duty of care to the borrower to make in relation to that
appraisal. Mr Jagusch for CDC points to Lord Griffiths’ citation of passages from the
judgment of Kerr LJ in Smith v Bush as support for this proposition (see Smith v Bush
[1988] QB 835 at 851-852; affd. [1990] 1 AC 831 at 864). So much may be
acknowledged.

57. The position may, however, well be different where the lender makes a
representation to the borrower that the appraisal shows that the proposed transaction is
viable and suitable for the borrower or it appears that the lender is aware that the
borrower is relying on the vendor's appraisal for its own purposes. As pointed out earlier
in these reasons, the evidence does not establish that such a representation was ever made
or that PUC or the Republic was relying on CDC's appraisal for their own purposes. The
other matters called in aid by the Republic alleged antecedent relationship between the
parties (CDC being a partner, adviser or assessor) and the imbalance between the parties’
resources and expertise are insufficient to generate a duty of care on the part of CDC in

the light of the relationship established by the 1993 Loan Agreement, in the absence of a

case, based on evidence, that CDC made a representation, express or implied, that the
project was viable and suitable for the Republic's purposes as distinct from making an
appraisal for CDC's own purposes.

XII_ THE REPUBLIC'S CASE THAT THERE WAS AN INEQUALITY OF
BARGAINING POWER

58. The Republic seeks to bring the case within the concept of "inequality of
bargaining power", as formulated by Lord Denning MR in Lloyds Bank v Lundy [1975] 1
QB 326 at 339. Lord Denning stated that English law gives relief to a person who,
"without independent advice enters into a contract upon terms which are
very unfair or transfers property for a consideration which is grossly
inadequate, when his bargaining power is grievously impaired by reason
of his own needs or desires, pressures brought to bear on him by or for the
benefit of the other".
59. In National Westminster Bank Pic v Morgan [1985] AC 686 at 708, Lord
Denning's general proposition was disapproved. In any event, neither the Loan
Agreement nor the Guarantee fall within this statement of principle. There is nothing
unfair in the terms of the Loan Agreement or the Guarantee. The Republic suggests that
the provision for an "unconditional" guarantee was unfair. In the light of the provisions
of the 1993 Loan Agreement, the Guarantee and the evidence, the unconditional
guarantee was an appropriate commercial term for the protection of the lender. There is
no suggestion of pressure brought to bear by CDC for its own benefit. The initiative for
the transaction came from the Republic which wanted funding for the gas turbine which it
wished to buy for the project. CDC was accommodating the Republic's wishes or
commercial terms. On the evidence, CDC was not seeking to induce the Republic to

enter into an improvident transaction for CDC's benefit.

20

60. In any event, neither CDC nor the Republic has sought at any time to rescind the
1993 Loan Agreement and the Guarantee on the ground of inequality of bargaining
power or on any other ground. Indeed, PUC and the Republic entered into the 1996 re-
scheduling Agreement with CDC after PUC and the Republic were well aware of the
problems with the gas turbine.

XIII CONCLUSION

6l. For the foregoing reasons, the defences raised by the Republic do not amount to a
good defence to CDC's claim based on the Guarantees. There should, accordingly, be
orders that the Republic do pay to CDC principal and interest owing under the
Guarantees. It is not contested that the amount of principal due and owing under the
Guarantees is £1,771,096.75 (being £157,588.81 under the 1990 Loan Agreement and
£1,613,507.94 under the 1993 Loan Agreement) and that interest is payable under the
Loan Agreements at the rate of 9% per annum. The Agreements also provide that interest
shall accrue from day to day and shall be payable at half-yearly intervals on February 15
and August 25 each year and that interest due for any period of less than a year shall be
computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.

XIV INTEREST CALCULATION

62. CDC asserts, without contradiction by the Republic, that from August 25, 2003

the amounts owing by the Republic are as follows:

Or ding amounts (£) Principal (£) Interest (£) Premium (£) Total (£)

 

1990 Loan/Guarantee 157,588.81 56,946.30 - 214,535.11
1993 Loan Guarantee 1,613.507.94 615,969.15 2,689.18 2.232,166.27
Total 1,771,096.75 672,915.45 2,869.18 2.446.701.38

 

21

From August 25, 2003 interest continues to accrue at the daily rates of £53.63 per
day and £557.37 per day on the 1990 Loan Agreement and Guarantee and the 1993 Loan
Agreement and Guarantee respectively, making a total of £611.00 per day.

XV COSTS
63. CDC seeks indemnity costs in the sum of £124,295.15. The Republic disputes
this amount on the ground that it is excessive. Pursuant to Art. 61(2) of the ICSID

Convention, I assess the costs to be paid by the Republic to CDC in the sum of £100,000.

AWARD

In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal makes the following award:

qd) an order that the Republic shall pay to CDC the sum of £1,771,096.75 being the
total amount of principal due and owing to CDC under the Guarantees;

(2) an order that the Republic shall pay to CDC the sum of £672,915.45 being interest
due and owing to CDC under the Guarantees until August 25, 2003;

(3) an order that the Republic shall pay interest to CDC from August 25, 2003 down
to the date of this award at the daily rate of £611;

(4) a declaration that the Republic is and remains liable to pay interest to CDC on the
terms stated in Section 5 of each of the 1990 Loan Agreement and the 1993 Loan
Agreement until the date of payment of the principal amounts due thereunder;

(5) an order that the Republic shall make payment to CDC of £100,000 representing

legal fees and disbursements incurred by CDC in relation to these proceedings; and

22

(6) an order that the Republic shall make payment to CDC of
US$40, 000 in reimbursement of the fees and expenses of the Tribunal
and of the Centre which have been paid by CDC.

DATED the 17th day of December 2003.

[Signed]

co Sir Anthony Mason, AC KBE
Sole Arbitrator

23

 

