In the matter of the Energy Charter Treaty
And in the matter of an arbitration seated in Stockholm, Sweden

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158)

 

 

CEF Energia B.V.
v.
The Italian Republic
Award

Tribunal
Prof. Dr, Klaus Sachs Mr. Klaus Reichert, S.C. Prof. Giorgio Sacerdoti
CMS Hasche Sigle Brick Court Chambers Via Monte Napoleone 20
Nymphenberger Str. 12 7-8 Essex Street 20121 Milan
D-80335 Munich London WC2R 3LD Italy
Germany United Kingdom

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award I

Table of Contents
Definitions (pp. 3-4)
Introduction (p. 4)
Procedural History (pp. 5-11)
Prayers for Relief advanced by the Parties — Sequence of Issues (pp. 12-14)
Jurisdiction — Intra EU (pp. 15-38)

(A) Facts — (B) Merits & Liability (inch concomitant Jurisdiction &
Admissibility) (pp. 38-113)

Damages & Interest (pp. 113-120)
General (pp. 121)
Costs (pp. 121-123)

Award (pp. 123-126)

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award

Definitions

1. This award uses the following definitions (and further definitions are

noted as necessary in the body of the Award):

AAEG: Authority for Electrical Energy and Gas (Autorita per VEnergia
Elettrica e il Gasj

Claimant: CEF Energia B.V., Hoogoorddreef 15, 1101 BA, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands

Respondent: Repubblica Italiana, Awocatura Generale dello Stato, Via dei
Portoghesi n. 12, 00186 Roma, Italy

Parties: Collectively Claimant and Respondent

SCC Rules: The Rules of Arbitration of the Arbitration Institute of the

Stockholm Chamber of Commerce in force as from 2010

SCC: The Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
Tribunal: Prof. Dr. Klaus Sachs, appointed by Claimant (he submitted his
confirmation of appointment to the SCC on 11 November 2015), Prof.
Giorgio Sacerdoti, appointed by Respondent (he submitted his confirmation
of appointment to the SCC on 12 February 2016), and Mr. Klaus Reichert,
S.C., appointed by Messrs. Sachs and Sacerdoti as Presiding Arbitrator (he
submitted his confirmation of appointment to the SCC on 1 April 2016)
ECT. the Energy Charter Treaty

CJEU Court of Justice of the European Union

Achmea: Judgment, dated 6 March 2018, of the CJEU in Case C 284/16,

Slowakische Republik (Slovak Republic) v Achmea BV

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 3

Commission: the European Commission

Commission‘s Communication: the Communication from the Commission

to the European Parliament and the Council: Protection of intra-EU
investment (COM(2018) 547/2) of 19 July 2018

Blusuny Blusun S.A., Jean-Pierre Lecorcier and Michael Stein v. Italian
Republic, 1CSID Case No. APB/14/3, Award, 27 December 2016

GSE:

Gestore dei Servizi Energetici GSE S.p.A.

ENEA: Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and

Sustainable Economic Development

PV: Photovoltaic (electricity producers)

Introduction

2.

Incentive schemes put in place by Respondent to encourage
investment in renewable energy supply lie at the heart of this
arbitration. Claimant owns, in whole or in majority part, three Italian
companies which operate photovoltaic plants in Italy, and alleges that
certain changes Respondent made (directly and indirectly) to such
incentive schemes engaged international responsibility as a matter of
the ECT. Claimant further alleges that such international
responsibility gives rise to the right on its part to compensation with
the object of putting it into the position its investments would have
been in had the changes to the incentive schemes not taken place.
Apart from jurisdictional objections, Respondent also argues that the
measures it took do not engage international responsibility on its part,
and, further, Claimant’s investments remained profitable
notwithstanding the changes which were made to the incentive
schemes. The Tribunal, if it has the jurisdiction to do so, resolves

these disputes by this award.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 4

Procedural Histor

The following paragraphs set out the main steps which have occurred
in this arbitration. This is not intended to be a comprehensive account

of every occurrence in this arbitration.

On 20 November 2015, Claimant filed its Request for Arbitration
(“RfA”) stating, at paragraph 2 thereof, that it was doing so pursuant
to Article 26(4)(c) of the ECT and Article 2 of the SCC Rules.

On 18 January 2016, Respondent filed its Answer (“Answer”).

On 26 January 2016, Claimant wrote a letter in reply to Respondent's

Answer.

On 6 April 2016, the SCC referred this case to the Tribunal.

Following consultation with the Parties the Tribunal issued Procedural
Order No. 1 on 14 June 2016 which, amongst other matters,

established a timetable for the case.

On 14 October 2016, Claimant filed its Statement of Claim (“SoC”)
together with accompanying exhibits, a witness statement of Scott
Lawrence, expert reports from Antonio D’ Atena, Richard Edwards,

and a joint expert report from Drs. Boaz Moselle and Dora Grunwald.

On 9 January 2017, the Commission applied for leave to intervene as
a non-disputing party. Following invitations to comment on this
application, Claimant filed its response on 24 January 2017 and

Respondent filed its position on | February 2017.

On 24 March 2017, Respondent filed its Statement of Defence
(“SoD”) with accompanying exhibits, witness statements from Luca
Miraglia and Daniele Bacchiocchi, an expert opinion of Giacomo
Rojas Elgueta, an economic report of GRIF, and a financial report of
GRIF.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 5

12. On 31 March 2017, Claimant filed its objections to Respondent’s

requests for bifurcation and suspension.

13. On7 April 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2. which

made the following rulings:

Bifurcation and Suspension

14, Taking into account its present appreciation of the
case, noting that this is a question of procedure, the
Tribunal rules on bifurcation and suspension in the
following paragraph.

15. Having considered the parties’ respective submissions,
the Tribunal refuses the Respondent’s requests for
bifurcation and/or suspension. The Tribunal will
consider all matters raised in this arbitration at the one
time in accordance with the procedural calendar as
established in Procedural Order No. 1.

 

 

16. The parties are to note that the Tribunal’s decision is
one of procedure, taking into account the present
circumstances of the case, and is not to be viewed or
construed in any way by either side as indicating any
position on any determinative matter or issue.

EU Commission Application

17. Taking into account its present appreciation of the
case, noting that this is a question of procedure, the
Tribunal rules on the EU Commission Application in
the following paragraph.

18. Having considered the parties’ respective submissions,
the Tribunal permits the participation of the EU
Commission on the following basis:

0) The participation of the EU
Commission in this arbitration is
limited to one written submission
(attaching only legal authorities, and
no evidentiary materials) with no
oral presentation or attendance at
the hearing;

(ii) The EU Commission’s written

submission is to be submitted to the
Tribunal, for subsequent circulation

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 6

20.

21.

22,

to the parties, by no later than I June
2017;

(in) The parties may make such written
observations on the EU
Commission’s filing as they see fit
thereafter in their _ respective

substantive submissions due,
respectively, on 26 July 2017 and 15
November 2017;

(iv) The EU Commission will have no
access to the evidentiary record in
this case; and

(vy) — The Tribunal will inform the EU
Commission of its decision
immediately after this Procedural
Order is issued to the parties, but
only to the extent of what has been
decided.
The Commission filed its written submission on 1 June 2017
(“Commission Submissions”), Claimant made written observations on

3 August 2017.

On 3 August 2017, Claimant filed its Reply (“Reply”) together with
accompanying exhibits, a second witness statement of Scott
Lawrence, a second expert reports from Richard Edwards, and a
second joint expert report from Drs, Boaz Moselle and Dora

Grunwald.

On 20 November 2017, Respondent filed its Rejoinder (“Rejoinder”)
with accompanying exhibits, second witness statements from Luca
Miraglia and Daniele Bacchiocchi, a second expert opinion of

Giacomo Rojas Elgueta, and a second report of GRIF.

On 15 December 2017, Claimant indicated that it intended to cross-
examine Mr. Daniele Bacchiocchi, Mr. Luca Miraglia, Professor
Giacomo Rojas Elgueta, Professors Cesare Pozzi, Giuseppe Melis,

Umberto Monarca, Ernesto Cassetta, and Davide Quaglione of GRIF

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 7

23. On 18 December 2017, Respondent indicated that it intended to cross-
examine Mr. Scott Lawrence, Mr. Richard Edwards, Dr. Boaz
Moselle and Dr. Dora Grunwald of FTI, and Prof. Antonio D'Atena.

24. On 9 February 2018, the Parties indicated to the Tribunal that they

had agreed to add fourteen documents to the record of the case.

25. Following correspondence with, and assistance of the Tribunal, and
having agreed to dispense with the necessity of a pre-hearing
conference call, on 13 February 2018 the Parties agreed their hearing

schedule.

26. On 19, 20, 21, and 22 February 2018, the hearing took place in Paris
in accordance with the agreed hearing schedule. The Parties submitted
both opening and closing PowerPoint presentations. Each day the

| Parties confirmed, by email, the list of their participants. Finally, on
21 February 2018, the Tribunal gave the Parties a list of questions for

| the purposes of the following day’s oral closing submissions.

 

27. At the conclusion of the hearing the following exchange took place!:

7THE PRESIDENT: Now, here's a question that I personally
8 like to ask. We established = and you very kindly

9 established between yourselves = the timetable for this
10 case in Procedural Order No. 1.1 just want to have it

11 confirmed that the parties followed that timetable, with
12 the various adjustments along the way; but the timetable
13 of proceedings that you established, that you followed
14 it, and we've got here today in accordance with that

15 timetable.

16 MR SMITH: So confirmed from the Claimant.

17 MR AIELLO: The same for us

' 28. On 25 February 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties as follows:

The Tribunal again thanks Counsel and the Parties for their kind
co-operation, efficiency, and courtesy during our hearing.

' Transcript, Day 4, p. 239

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 8

31.

32.

33.

Having considered the matter, the Tribunal invites the following
written observations:

(a) on the consequences, if any, of the outcome of the
forthcoming ECJ judgment [Achmea] - we suggest that this be
done and exchanged within 14 days of the judgment.

(b) At the same time as the Claimant makes its observations on
the forthcoming ECJjudgment, it should also set out its position on
the passages of the Clifford Chance Due Diligence Report which
were relied upon during the closing submissions of the Respondent.

Upon receipt of these written observations, the Tribunal may issue
further invitations (depending on their contents).

On 21 March 2018, the Parties submitted their post-hearing briefs.
On 23 March 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties as follows:

The Tribunal has reviewed the recent submissions and, first, refers
to paragraph 10 of the brief of the Respondent, in particular:

The consequence of that incompatibility with EU law is that
the offer for arbitration becomes inapplicable.

We invite the Respondent to elaborate on this submission,
including on how and when this happened.

Secondly, upon receipt of this further elaboration from the
Respondent, we would then invite the parties to reply generally to
the submission of the other.

On 6 April 2014, the Parties indicated to the Tribunal that they had

agreed a timetable for the subsequence submissions as follows:

- Respondent shall articulate on its sentence "the consequences of
that incompatibility with EU law is that..", as requested, by
Friday 13 April.

- Both Parties shall then reply generally to the submission of the
other by Friday 4 May.

On 13 April 2018, the Respondent filed its further Note on the

consequences of Achmea.

On 4 May 2018, the Parties filed their respective further submissions.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158)- Award 9

34,

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

On 1 June 2018, the Claimant applied to have admitted to the record
of this arbitration the award rendered on 16 May 2018 in Masdar
Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Spain (“Masdar”) along with a
proposal that each side be permitted to make a submission on that
award. The claim in Masdar was brought against Spain pursuant to
the ECT.

On 15 June 2018, the Parties confirmed that they had agreed to
simultaneous submissions on Masdar to be filed on 6 July 2018. The
Parties also confirmed that they would file costs submissions on 6
July 2018 with a subsequent opportunity for comment on 13 July
2018.

On 26 June 2018, the SCC extended the deadline for rendering this
award to 28 September 2018.

On 6 July 2018, the Claimant filed its costs submissions. On the same
day, the Parties each filed submissions on Masdar with the SCC for

subsequent exchange.

On 11 July 2018, the Tribunal indicated to the Parties that the cut-off
date for any further observations on or provision of new awards (if

arising) for the record of this arbitration was 20 July 2018.

On 20 July 2018, the Parties each submitted comments on the awards
Antin Infrastructures et alt. y. Kingdom of Spain (15 June
2018 )“Antin’) and Antaris GmbH & Michael Goede v The Czech
Republic (2 May 201$)AAntaris" ).

On 24 July 2018, the Respondent applied to introduce to the record of
this arbitration the Commission’ s Communication on the protection of
intra-EU investments of 19 July 2018. This was followed on 26 July
2018, by Claimant’s objection to the Respondent’s application,

On 29 July 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties as follows:

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 10

The EU communication is admitted to the record.

The Tribunal understands the record of this arbitration to
be now closed and complete.
42. On3 August 2018, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal to request
permission to submit press articles concerning a putative sale by the

Claimant of certain of its investments.
43. On7 August 2018, the Tribunal wrote to the Parties as follows:

The Respondent's letter suggests that there may be matters which
might be required to be brought to our attention concerning the
quantum of the claims.

We have considered the matter and we do not wish to have such
press reports on the evidential record of the case. Our preference
is that we ask the parties to now liaise on this putative issue,
without copying us, and if, in that process it emerges that there are
matters which we do need to see then we ask that these be brought
to our attention as soon as possible. Please note that the Tribunal
has deliberated, the award is in preparation, and, therefore, what
we are now proposing is not a reopening of the case but confined
only to the possibility of something of importance for the purposes
of the quantum of the claims being brought to our attention.

44. On 10 September 2018, the Respondent applied to reopen the

proceedings pursuant to Article 34 of the SCC Rules.

45. On 19 September 2018, the Claimant submitted its opposition to the

Respondent's application to reopen the proceedings.

46. On 21 September 2018, the SCC extended the deadline for rendering
this award to 28 December 2018.

47. On 10 October 2018, the Respondent submitted its reply to the

Claimant’ s opposition to the application to reopen the proceedings.

48. By Procedural Order-No. 3 of 15 October 2018, the Tribunal refused

the Respondent’s application to reopen the proceedings.

49. On 17 December 2018, the SCC extended the deadline for rendering
this award to 21 January 2019.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award ul

Prayers for Relief advanced by the Parties - Sequence of Issues
50. The Tribunal now records the Prayers for Relief, in their latest
iteration, advanced by the Parties in this case.

51. At paragraph 446 of the Reply the following relief is sought:

* adeclaration that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over this dispute;

* a declaration that Italy has violated the Energy Charter Treaty
and international law with respect to Claimant's investments;

* compensation to Claimant for all damages it has suffered, as set
forth in Claimant’s submissions and as may be further developed
and quantified in the course of this proceeding;

«all costs of this proceeding, including (but not limited to)
Claimant’s attorneys’ fees and expenses, the fees and expenses of

Claimant’s experts, and the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and
the SCC;

« pre-award and post-award compound interest at the highest
lawful rate from the Date of Assessment until Italy’s full and final
satisfaction of the Award; and

+ any other relief the Tribunal deems just and proper.

52. At paragraphs 480-483 of the Rejoinder the following relief is sought:

480. In the light of the above, the Respondent reiterates its requests
to the Tribunal to:

- Decline jurisdiction to decide, as the ECT does not cover intra-
EU disputes.

- Alternatively, decline jurisdiction over the totality of claims,
since:

- Some of the attacked measures are exempted under Article 21
ECT,

- No amicable solution has been attempted for some further
measures; and

- the exclusivity forum choice contained in the GSE Conventions
bans this Tribunal from judging under the umbrella clause.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 12

- Ina further alternative, decline admissibility of protection of the
Claimant's alleged interests since these are barred from seeking
relief as they did not seek amicable solution for a number of
claims.

481, Should the Tribunal consider to have jurisdiction over the
case and that claims are either totally or partially admissible,
declare on the merits that

- the Respondent did not violate Article 10(1) ECT, first and
second sentence, since it did not fail to grant fair and equitable
treatment to the Claimant’s investment.

- the Respondent did not violate Article 10(1) ECT, fourth
sentence, either, since it always adopted reasonable and non-
discriminatory measures to affect Claimant’s investment.

- Article 10(1) ECT, last sentence (the so-called “umbrella
clause”) does not apply in the case at stake, or, alternatively, that
the Respondent did not violate it neither through statutory or
regulatory measures, nor the GSE Conventions.

- Consequently, declare that no compensation is due.

482. In the unfortunate event that the Tribunal were to recognize
legitimacy to one of the Claimant’s griefs:

- Declare that damages were not adequately proved.

- In addition, declare that both the methods for calculation and
calculation itself of damages proposed by the Claimant are
inappropriate and erroneous.

- Order the Claimant to pay the expenses incurred by the Italian
Republic in connection with these proceedings, including
professional fees and disbursements, and to pay the fees and
expenses of the Members of the Tribunal and the charges for the
use of the facilities of the SSC, in accordance with Articles 43 and
44 of SCC 2010 Arbitration Rules.

483. The Respondent reserves the right to amend and modify its
evaluations on relief and to refine its position in the course of the
arbitration.

53. It is immediately apparent from the respective Prayers for Relief
advanced by the Parties that a threshold issue of jurisdiction arises in

this case, namely, whether or not the ECT can give rise to an “intra-

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 13

EU” arbitration. By the phrase “intra-EU” arbitration the Tribunal
means the issue as to whether the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because
either Article 26 ECT is inapplicable to disputes between an investor
from a EU member State and another EU member State, or because
EU law subsequent to the ECT has deprived tribunals established
under Article 26 ECT from their jurisdiction to hear such disputes. If
the answer to that threshold issue is that the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction then there is no need for further analysis and the case
ends. Thus, the Tribunal will analyze that issue first. It is
uncontroversial to say that this issue does not require an examination
of the underlying facts of this case, but rather it is a matter of legal
analysis as to whether or not on 20 November 2015 (the date of die
RfA) there was a valid offer on the part of Respondent to arbitrate

disputes arising from the ECT.

54. If, on the other hand, the “intra EU” issue is resolved against
Respondent, then there would also remain for analysis the other
jurisdictional and admissibility objections advanced by it. These are
articulated, in outline, in Respondent’s alternative jurisdictional
prayers for relief recorded -above. In the Tribunal’s view, given their
nature they fall for consideration not isolated from the facts but as part

of the overall analysis of the merits of the case,

55. Thus, if the Tribunal goes beyond the threshold issue of “intra-EU”
jurisdiction, it will engage in an analysis of the facts, the merits on
liability (at which time Respondent’s other jurisdictional and
admissibility objections will be analyzed), and, ultimately, if

necessary, the merits on quantum.

56. The Tribunal considers, in its procedural appreciation of the file of

this case, to be the most efficient way to arrange this award.

SCO Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 14

 

Introduction — the relevant provision in the ECT

The Tribunal, first, notes the following provision in the ECT Gn

relevant extract):

Article 26 Settlement of Disputes between an Investor and a
Contracting Party:

(1) Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of
another Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the latter in
the Area of the former, which concern an alleged breach of an
obligation of the former under Part III shall, if possible, be settled
amicably.

(2) If such disputes cannot be settled according to the provisions of
paragraph (1) within a period of three months from the date on
which either party to the dispute requested amicable settlement, the
Investor party to the dispute may choose to submit it for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting
Party to the dispute;

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute
settlement procedure; or

(c) in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article.

(3) (a) Subject only to subparagraphs (b) and (c), each
Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to the
submission of a dispute to international arbitration or conciliation
in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

 

(b) (i) The Contacting Parties listed in Annex ID do not give such
unconditional consent where the Investor has previously submitted
the dispute under subparagraph (2) (a) or (b).

(c) A Contracting Party listed in Annex IA does not give such
unconditional consent with respect to a dispute arising under the
last sentence of Article 10(1).

(4) In the event that an Investor chooses to submit the dispute for
resolution under subparagraph (2)(c), the Investor shall further
provide its consent in writing for the dispute to be submitted to:

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 15

(c) an arbitral proceeding under the Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce. ...

(6) A tribunal established under paragraph (4) shall decide the
issues in dispute in accordance with this Treaty and applicable
rules and principles of international law.

58. The overarching question concerning jurisdiction is whether or not, on
the date of the RfA (20 November 2015), Article 26 of the ECT was
in force as regards Respondent. Claimant says yes, and Respondent
says no (as indeed does the Commission). If it was in force as regards
Respondent, the RfA consummated an international agreement to
arbitrate by which the Tribunal was established to decide the issues in
dispute. If it was not in force on that date, the case comes to an end as
the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction. The Tribunal now proceeds

to resolve that issue.

59. By way of introductory observation to the intra-EU jurisdictional
analysis, the Tribunal will arrange this issue broadly into two parts.
First, there is the position advocated by Respondent (and also
advocated by the Commission) from the outset to the effect, in
general, that as a matter of treaty interpretation the ECT was not
intended to cover intra-EU disputes (namely, a dispute between an
investor from a member state and another member state); or, treaties
between member states subsequent to the ECT have had the effect of
superseding it. This is the main thrust of Respondent’s (and the
Commission’s) position on jurisdiction. Secondly, a narrower
question, but one to which great importance was attached by
Respondent, took centre-stage after the hearing, namely the

consequences, if any, of Achmea.

Jurisdiction challenge pre-Achmea

60. Prior to Achmea Respondent's jurisdictional objection was articulated

thus in summaiy (para. 10, SoD):

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 16

«the ECT does not cover intra-European Union (“EU”,
or the “Union”) disputes: this was not the intention of the
signing parties, nor such interpretation would be
compatible with a combined reading of the ECT and the EU
Treaties as currently in force. Lack of jurisdiction under
this ground would require dismissal of the dispute in its
entirety.

61. The views, in broadly similar terms, but to an identical outcome,
contained in the Commission Submissions were summarised as

follows (para. 8):

This brief is organised into four sections, After the present
introduction (Section L), the Commission will show, first,
that the interpretation of Article 26 ECT leads to the
conclusion that the offer for entering into arbitration made
by Italy is limited to investors from contracting parties
other than EU Member States and did not create any
international obligations between EU Member States inter
se (Section 2.). It will, then, second, set out that if Article 26
ECT were to be interpreted in the opposite manner, i.e. as
entailing an offer also to EU investors, that that would
constitute a violation of the Treaty on Functioning of
European Union (“TFEU”) and that there would be
conflict between two international treaties which both are
part of the law applicable by your Tribunal, namely the
ECT and the TFEU. Said conflict would have to be
resolved, in any case, in favour of the TFEU, either via
interpretation on the basis of context (“harmonious
interpretation” or “systemic integration") or via. the
applicable rules of conflict of laws (Section 3.) On the basis
of these assessments, the Commission will, finally, suggest
a course of action to your Tribunal that involves three
options for proceeding with the present dispute: First,
declare that your Tribunal lacks the competence to hear the
case. Second, suspend the proceeding pending the
preliminary ruling of the ECJ in Achmea v Slovakia, which
is expected to decide on the compatibility of intra-EU
Investor-State Dispute Settlement (“ISDS”) with Union law
Third and finally, should your Tribunal consider that it is
competent to hear the case, which would make it necessary
to analyse the compliance of Italy’s measures with State aid
rules, in particular for assessing whether the claimants had
legitimate expectations, find a solution that respects the

 

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 17

exclusive competence of the Commission in that regard,
(Section 4.).

62. In passing the Tribunal notes that the second of the proposals
suggested by the Commission has been overtaken by events, namely
that the CJEU has rendered its decision in Achmea, However, as
discussed below the CJEU did not decide, as a matter of EU Law, on
the compatibility of intra-EU Investor-State Dispute Settlement
("ISDS”) with Union law, rather the outcome of that case was
narrowly articulated by that court, and specific to its circumstances.
Awaiting the outcome of Achmea would not have been of any

assistance.

63. In the Rejoinder, and during the course of the hearing, Respondent
placed particular emphasis on the award in Blusun as regards the
merits of the case. However, Claimant also invoked Blusun in the
Reply in support of its case as regards jurisdiction. While many other
tribunals have opined on the intra-EU “issue”, considering that
Respondent has particularly approbated Blusun in this case, the
Tribunal, therefore, sets out the pertinent part of the reasoning in
relation to intra-EU jurisdiction and the ECT as articulated by that
tribunal:

B. EU Law and the inter se issue

(a) Admissibility of the inter se argument
277, seve

(b) The applicable law

278. The Parties in effect agree that the applicable law in
determining this issue is international law, and specifically
the relevant provisions of the VCLT. The Tribunal agrees,
but would observe that this does not exclude any relevant
rule of EU law, which would fall to be applied either as
part of international law or as part of the law of Italy, The
Tribunal evidently cannot exercise the special jurisdictional

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 18

powers vested in the European courts, but it can and where
relevant should apply European law as such.

(c) The original scope of the ECT

279, As a matter of international law, the first question is
whether the ECT applied to relations inter se of EU
Member States as at the date of its conclusion (December
1994) in accordance with Articles 31-33 of the VCLT.

280. On Us face there is nothing in the text of the ECT that
carves out or excludes issues arising between EU Member
States. (1) The preamble to the ECT records that it intends
to place the commitments contained in [the European
Energy Charter] on a secure and binding international
legal basis. This implies that the scope of the (non-binding)
European Energy Charter of 17 December 1991 was
replicated in binding form in the ECT. There is no
indication of any inter se exclusion in the Charter, which
refers to a ‘new desire for a European-wide and global co-
operation based on mutual respect and confidenceand
further refers to the ‘support from the European
Community, particularly through completion of its internal
energy market’ (Preamble, paras. 6, 14). The EC and
Euratom were signatories to the Charter. This was of
course before the Treaty of Maastricht, let alone the Lisbon
Treaty, (2) Article 1(2) of the ECT defines 'Contracting
Party’ as ‘a state or Regional Economic Integration
Organization which has consented to be bound by this
Treaty and for which the Treaty is in force. EU Member
States and the EU are all Contracting Parties. Prima facie
at least, a treaty applies equally between its parties. It
would take an express provision or very clear
understanding between the negotiating parties to achieve
any other result. Thus when Great Britain was asserting
‘the diplomatic unity of the British Empire’, it was argued
from time to time that multilateral treaties to which the
Dominions were separately parties had no inter se
application. The inter se doctrine was not however
accepted, being unsupported by express provision or clear
understanding to the contrary. (3) There is no express
provision (or ‘disconnection clauseto adopt recent
parlance) in the ECT. (4) While the Respondent and the EC
relied on the travaux preparatoires to justify reading in a
disconnection clause, this is not permissible in a context in
which the terms of the treaty are clear. In any case, the
travaux preparatoires seem to point against implying a
disconnection clause: one was proposed during the course

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 19

of the Energy Charter Treaty negotiations, but was
rejected.

281. Neither is there anything in the text to support the
EC’s argument that the ECT did not give rise to inter se
obligations because the EU Member States were not
competent to enter into such obligations. The mere fact that
the EU is party to the ECT does not mean that the EU
Member States did not have competence to enter into inter
se obligations in the Treaty. Instead, the ECT seems to
contemplate that there would be overlapping competences.
The term ‘regional economic integration organizations (or
REIO) is defined in Article 1(3) of the ECT to mean an
‘organization constituted by states to which they have
transferred competence over certain matters a number of
which are governed by the ECT, including the authority to
take decisions binding on them in respect of those matters.
The Area of the REIO is also defined by Article 1(10) with
reference to EU law. But nothing in Article 1, nor any other
provision in the ECT, suggests that the EU Member States
had then transferred exclusive competence for all matters of
investment and dispute resolution to the EU.

282, The EC argues that the ‘Member States .. . are ...
presumed to be aware of the rules governing the
distribution of competences in a supranational organisation
they have themselves created.’ But if the Member States
thought they did not have competence over the inter se
obligations in the ECT, this would have been made explicit
by including a declaration of competence to set out the
internal division of competence between the EC and its
Member States, as has been done in many other treaties
with mixed membership. Nothing in the text of the ECT
supports the implication of such a declaration of
competence.

283. Pursuant to Article 6 of the VCLT, every State
possesses capacity to conclude treaties and is bound by
those obligations pursuant to the principle of pacta sunt
servanda. No limitation on the competence of the EU
Member States was communicated at the time that the ECT
was signed. Article 46 of the VCLT provides that a State
may not invoke provisions of its internal law regarding
competence to conclude treaties to invalidate a treaty
unless it was a manifest violation of a rule of fundamental
importance. While EU law operates on both an internal and
international plane, a similar principle must apply. Even if,
as a matter of EC law, the EC has exclusive competence
over matters of internal investment, the fact is that Member

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 20

States to the EU signed the ECT without qualification or
reservation. The inter se obligations in the ECT are not
somehow invalid or inapplicable because of an allocation
of competence that the EC says can be inferred from a set
of EU laws and regulations dealing with investment. The
more likely explanation, consistent with the text of the ECT,
is that, at the time the ECT was signed, the competence was
a shared one.

284. The EC relied on its competence argument to argue
that there was also no diversity of territory among the
investors and the host State as required by Article 26, since
both are part of the same ‘Contracting Party’ for its
purposes. It is not necessary for the Tribunal to deal with
this argument, since it has held that the European Member
States remain ‘Contracting Parties’ and that the ECT does
create inter se obligations for European Member States.

(d) Subsequent -modification of the ECT as to inter se
matters

285. The Respondent and the EC also argue that, even if the
ECT had originally concerned inter se matters, this was
modified by the fact that the Member States of the EU
subsequently entered into other agreements that covered
both the investment and dispute resolution aspects of the
ECT. The EC states that subsequent EU treaties, such as
the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Treaty of Nice, and the Treaty
of Lisbon, implicitly repealed the earlier ECT under the lex
posterior rule in Article 30 of the VCLT, whereby
‘successive treaties relating to the same subject-matter’ will
prevail over the earlier to the extent that the treaties are not
compatible,

286. Turning first to the substantive investment obligations,
it is not clear how these are incompatible with the
investment rights protected under European law. The EC
points to the rules establishing the European internal
market, with free movement of goods, persons, services and
capital, It states that discriminatory measures or
expropriation are not permitted under European law. But
these obligations are arguably broader than those in the
ECT, and are complementary to them. There is no
discrimination unless the same benefits are not accorded to
other EU States, but there is nothing in the ECT that
requires such a result. Were a national of a European State
not party to the ECT to bring international arbitration
proceedings against a European host State that was a party
to the ECT and had breached investment obligations

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 21

protected under it, that host State would have to determine
whether it could, consistent with its EU obligations, decline
to consent to such jurisdiction. Nothing in the ECT would
prevent the host State from extending its protections beyond
those States that are party to it, if this were required to
meet these obligations. As the tribunal found in Electrabel
vy. Hungary, EU law can be presumed not to conflict or
otherwise be inconsistent with the ECT.

287. The only example the EC pointed to where an
inconsistency might arise between EU and investment law
was the award in Micula v. Romania. In Micula, however,
the tribunal concluded that EU law was not applicable to
the dispute, as Romania had not yet acceded to the EU at
the time the impugned measures were taken (although the
EC appears to have taken the view that EU rules on state
aid did apply during the accession negotiations). Any
conflict thus arose not out of incompatibility of the relevant
BIT with EU law, but out of a disagreement on whether EU
rules applied prior to accession. After the Micula award
was issued, the EC notified Romania that it would be in
breach of the EU rules on state aid if it complied with its
obligation under the award to pay damages to the investors
for a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard. In
that context, any conflict related to the implications of
enforcement, not to direct contradictions between the
substantive rules themselves. This was also the conclusion
of both the Micula tribunal and the Micula ad hoc
committee.

288. The Respondent and the EC also argue that the dispute
resolution clause, Article 26 of the ECT, is itself
incompatible with Article 344 of the TFEU, which provides
that Member States undertake not to submit a dispute
concerning the interpretation or application of the Treaties
to any method of settlement other than those provided for
therein.’

289. In the view of the Tribunal, there is no such
incompatibility. The dispute before this Tribunal is not an
inter-State dispute. It is a dispute, in the words of Article
26, ‘between a Contracting Party and an Investor of
another Contracting Party’. It is not necessary for this
Tribunal to decide whether Article 27, which concerns
interstate disputes, would be incompatible with Article 344
of the TFEU. Even if there were such an inconsistency, this
would not also void Article 26, since the later Treaty will
supersede the earlier one only to the extent of any
incompatibility. To find otherwise would disadvantage

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 22

investors, who have no ability under European law to
protect their investment by suing the host State directly for
breaches of the ECT. Neither does anything in European
law expressly preclude investor-State arbitration under the
ECT and the ICSID Convention.

290. As noted (paragraph 260(e) above), the Claimants
also relied on the combined effect of the lex specialis and
lex posterior presumptions, the ECT being both more
specific than the EU legal order and subsequent to it.
Having concluded that there is no incompatibility between
the TFEU and the ECT, the Tribunal does not need to
address this argument.

291. For these reasons, the Tribunal holds that the inter se
obligations in the ECT have not subsequently been modified
or superseded by later European law.

(e) The state of the authorities

292. The inlra-EU issue has been canvassed in greater or
lesser depth by previous investment tribunals, which have
reached practically common conclusions.

302. Despite the fact that the EC has intervened in many
other intra~EU arbitrations, as far as has been publicly
reported, no tribunal yet has upheld this objection to
jurisdiction.

303. Overall the effect of these decisions is a unanimous
rejection of the intra-EU objection to jurisdiction, The
tribunal in each case has found that the relevant BIT or the
ECT was intended to bring about binding obligations
between EU Member States. The tribunals found no
contradiction between the substantive provisions of EU law
and the substantive or dispute resolution provisions of the
BITs. No such system for investor- State arbitration exists
in EU law, and it would be incorrect to characterise such
disputes as inter-State disputes such that Article 267 of the
TFEU could be said to preclude jurisdiction, These
conclusions support those adopted by the Tribunal in this
case.

64. Having considered the matter, the Tribunal adopts the reasoning in

Blusun in full, The reasoning is comprehensive and unimpeachable.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 23

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

The Tribunal does not consider it necessary to add or subtract in any

way from the Blusun reasoning,

The Tribunal extrapolates the following points from Blusun for the

purposes of its present jurisdictional analysis.

First, the interpretation argument advanced by Respondent (and by the
Commission) which is referenced as the ‘disconnection clause’, in
shorthand parlance, does not stand up to scrutiny when the ECT is
interpreted (as the Blusun tribunal did) in an entirely regular and

ordinary manner according to the provisions of the VCLT.

Secondly, nothing in EU law subsequent to the ECT has the effect of

superseding (insofar as Respondent is concerned) the latter.

By way of completeness the Tribunal also now addresses two further

points on jurisdiction raised by Respondent,

Respondent submits that the rules on state aid, a concept forming part
of EU law, lead to the conclusion that compliance with any award
might transgress such rules at an enforcement stage. Therefore, such
potential transgression (which might arise as a matter of EU law)

denudes the Tribunal now of ECT jurisdiction.

This state aid point was considered, and then dismissed by the tribunal

in Blusun. The Tribunal agrees.

Effectively Respondent’s position is that because there might be some
enforcement issue in the future, deriving from an aspect of EU law
(state aid, it must be recalled, itself was the product of the sovereign
choices of member states, and, in particular for this issue, something
which Respondent itself created through its membership of the EU),
then this must denude the Tribunal of its jurisdiction as a matter of an

entirely separate treaty (the ECT),

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 24

72.

73.

Achmea

74.

75.

The Tribunal does not see how such a proposition can have the far-
reaching effect on jurisdiction which Respondent suggests. If the
Tribunal were to accede to such a proposition then it would give
support to a sovereign state being able to avoid an international
promise to arbitrate disputes with a two-fold argument which relies on
rules which such sovereign itself created and simply foreshadows
putative future issues with enforcement. The Tribunal cannot give

succour to this position, and it is dismissed.

Next, Respondent drew upon Case C-459/03 Commission v Ireland
[2006] ECR 1-4635, generally referred to as the MOXPlant Case. The
Tribunal understands this position on the part of Respondent to be
supportive of the main thrust of its case on Achmea, rather than
providing a separate jurisdictional argument. As discussed below,
Achmea, when analysed in detail, does not provide the Respondent (or
the Commission) with legal support for the outcome sought, thus, the
MOX Plant Case does not fill that gap. The Tribunal does understand
that the MOX Plant Case is, in of itself, utilised as the legal

proposition for bringing intra-EU treaty arbitration to an end.

As the jurisdictional arguments in this arbitration evolved, particularly
in the aftermath of the healing, Achmea has moved centre-stage in
terms of the importance and significance attached to it by Respondent

(and the Commission).

The Commission’s Communication is now quoted, in pertinent part,

to illustrate the foregoing point, with emphasis added.

In the recent preliminary ruling concerning the Achmea
case, the Court of Justice confirmed that investor-State
arbitration clauses in intra-EU BITs are unlawful. (p. 2)

The Achmea judgment and its consequences

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 25

In the Achmea judgment the Court of Justice ruled that the
investor-to-State arbitration clauses laid down in intra-EU
BITs undermine the system of legal remedies provided for
in the EU Treaties and thus jeopardise the autonomy,
effectiveness, primacy and direct effect of Union law and
the principle of mutual trust between the Member States.
Recourse to such clauses undermines the preliminary ruling
procedure provided for in Article 267 TFEU, and is not
compatible with the principle of sincere cooperation. This
implies that all investor-State arbitration clauses in intra-
EU BITS are inapplicable and that any arbitration
tribunal established on the basis of such clauses lacks
jurisdiction due to the absence of a valid arbitration
agreement. As a consequence, national courts are under the
obligation to annul any arbitral award rendered on that
basis and to refuse to enforce it. Member States that are
parties to pending cases, in whatever capacity, must also
draw all necessary consequences from the Achmea
judgment. Moreover, pursuant to the principle of legal
certainty, they are bound to formally terminate their intra-
EU BITs.

The Achmea judgment is also relevant for the investor-
State arbitration mechanism established in Article 26 of
the Energy Charter Treaty as regards intra-EU relations.
This provision, if interpreted correctly, does not provide
for an investor-State arbitration clause applicable between
investors from a Member States of the EU and another
Member States of the EU. Given the primacy of Union
law, that clause, if interpreted as applying intra-EU, is
incompatible with EU primary law and thus inapplicable.
Indeed, the reasoning of the Court in Achmea applies
equally to the intra-EU application of such a clause which,
just like the clauses of intra-EU BITs, opens the possibility
of submitting those disputes to a body which is not part of
the judicial system of the EU. The fact that the EU is also a
party to the Energy Charter Treaty does not affect this
conclusion: the participation of the EU in that Treaty has
only created rights and obligations between the EU and
third countries and has not affected the relations between
the EU Member States. (pp. 3-4)

76. Approximately one month before the Commission’s Communication,
the tribunal in Masdar arrived at a quite different conclusion as that
sought by the Respondent (and the Commission). The Tribunal notes

the following passages from that award:

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 26

678. Upon consideration of the Parties’ respective
submissions and upon analysis, the Tribunal has concluded
that the Achmea Judgment has no bearing upon the present
case.

679. The Achmea Judgment is of limited application — first,
and specifically, to the Agreement on encouragement and
reciprocal protection of investment between the Kingdom of
the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic and, second, in a more general perspective, to any
“provision in an international agreement concluded
between Member States, such as Article 8 of the Agreement
on encouragement and reciprocal protection between the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak
Federative Republic.” The ECT is not such a treaty. Thus,
the Achmea Judgment does not take into consideration, and
thus it cannot be applied to, multilateral treaties, such as
the ECT, to which the EU itself is a party.

680. The conclusion of the Tribunal is in line with the
Opinion of Advocate General Wathelet delivered on 19
September 2017 in Achmea. The Advocate General stated
that Achmea was: “the first opportunity [for the CJEUJ to
express its views on the thorny question of the compatibility
of BITs concluded bettveen member States and in
particular of the investor-State dispute settlement (TSDS‘)
mechanisms established by those BITs." (Emphasis added).
Thus, it is dear that Achmea pertains only to BITs
concluded between EU Member States — as the wording of
question No. (1) referred by the Bundesgerichtshof to the
CJEU likewise confirms: “Does Article 344 TFEUpreclude
the application of a provision in a bilateral investment
protection agreement between Member States of the
European Union (a so called intra-EU BIT) [...].”
(Emphasis added).

681. With specific reference to the ECT, the Advocate
General made the following statement:

“That multilateral treaty on investment in the field
of energy [the ECT] operates even between Member
States, since it was concluded not as an agreement
between the Union and its Member States, of the one
part, and third countries, of the other part, but as an
ordinary multilateral treaty in which all the
Contracting Parties participate on an equal footing.
In that sense, the material provisions for the
protection of investments provided for in that
Treaty and the ISDS mechanism also operate
between Member States, I note that if no EU

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 27

institution and no Member State sought an opinion
from the Court on the compatibility of that treaty
with the EU and FEU Treaties, that is because
none of them had the slightest suspicion that it
might be incompatible." (Emphasis added).

682. Had the CJEU seen it necessary to address the
distinction drawn by the Advocate General between the
ISDS provisions of the ECT and the investment protection
mechanisms to be found in bilateral investment treaties
made between Member States within the ambit of its ruling,
it had the opportunity to do so. In fact, the Tribunal notes
that the CJEU did not address this part of the Advocate
General’s Opinion, much less depart from, or reject, it. The
Achmea Judgment is simply silent on the subject of the
ECT. The Tribunal respectfully adopts the Advocate
General’s reasoning on this matter, and it relies in
particular upon the observation in the final sentence cited
above from his Opinion.

683. For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the
Achmea Judgment has no bearing upon its determination of
the matters in issue in this arbitration and it denies
Respondent’s Application.

77. Unsurprisingly, Claimant adopts the reasoning in Masdar in support
of its position on jurisdiction. On the other hand, Respondent severely
criticizes the tribunal in Masdar for the cursory manner (in its view)
by which Achmea was analysed, and the conclusion reached in that
regard. Respondent’s heading in its submissions on Masdar leaves no

room for doubt in that regard, with emphasis added:

The Masdar award failed to engage with the Achmea

judgment and used an easy cop out strategy
78. In light of die diametrically-opposed views of the Parties the Tribunal
considers it appropriate to examine what it is Achmea decides, and,

importantly, what it does not decide.

79. First, briefly as to the context of Achmea; a dispute arose between
Achmea B.V., a Dutch company, and the Slovak Republic due to
certain governmental changes in the market for private health

insurance. An UNCITRAL tribunal was constituted pursuant to

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 28

Article 8 of the Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal
protection of investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands
and the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic (“the Achmea BIT”).
Frankfurt am Main, Germany, was chosen as the legal seat of that
UNCITRAL tribunal and the arbitral proceedings. The Slovak
Republic raised an objection of lack of jurisdiction, namely, that, as a
result of its accession to the European Union, recourse to an arbitral
tribunal provided for in Article 8(2) of the Achmea BIT was
incompatible with EU law. Achmea B.V. was awarded damages in the
principal amount of EUR 22.1 million by that UNCITRAL Tribunal.
The Slovak Republic brought an action to set aside that arbitral award
before the German courts, ultimately arriving on appeal at the

Bundesgerichtshof.

80. The Bundesgerichtshof decided to stay the appeal before it and ask

the following questions of the CJEU for a preliminary ruling:

(1) Does Article 344 TFEU preclude the application of a
provision in a bilateral investment protection agreement
between Member States of the European Union (a so-called
intra-EU BIT) under which an investor of a Contracting
State, in the event of a dispute concerning investments in
the other Contracting State, may bring proceedings against
the latter State before an arbitral tribunal where the
investment protection agreement was concluded before one
of the Contracting States acceded to the European Union
but the arbitral proceedings are not to be brought until
after that date?

If Question 1 is to be answered in the negative:

(2) Does Article 261 TFEU preclude the application of
such a provision?

If Questions I and 2 are to be answered in the negative:
(3) Does the first paragraph of Article 18 TFEU

preclude the application of such a provision under the
circumstances described in Question ]?

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 29

81. The Tribunal notes that the first question, in particular, was posed in
wide terms by the Bundesgerichtshof and is not confined to the
Achmea BIT.

82. Rather than answering the widely-drawn question 1 posed by the
Bundesgerichtshof, the CJEU combined questions | and 2, but also
added a qualifying phrase (emphasis added):

31. By its first and second questions, which should be
taken together, the referring court essentially asks whether
Articles 267 and 344 TFEU must be interpreted as
precluding a provision in an international agreement
concluded between Member States, such as Article 8 of the
BIT, under which an investor from one of those Member
States may, in the event of a dispute concerning investments
in the other Member State, bring proceedings against the
latter Member State before an arbitral tribunal whose
jurisdiction that Member State has undertaken to accept.

83. The CJEU then set out a number of general considerations found in

EU law which are now quoted in full:

32. In order to answer those questions, it should be
recalled that, according to settled case-law of the Court, an
international agreement cannot affect the allocation of
powers fixed by the Treaties or, consequently, the autonomy
of the EU legal system, observance of which is ensured by
the Court. That principle is enshrined in particular in
Article 344 TFEU, under which the Member States
undertake not to submit a dispute concerning the
interpretation or application of the Treaties to any method
of settlement other than those provided for in the Treaties
(Opinion 2/13 (Accession of the EU to the ECHR) of 18
December 2014, EU:C:2014:2454, paragraph 201 and the
case-law cited).

 

33 Also according to settled case-law of the Court, the
autonomy of EU law with respect both to the law of the
Member States and to international law is justified by the
essential characteristics of the EU and its law, relating in
particular to the constitutional structure of the EU and the
very nature of that law, EU law is characterised by the fact
that it stems from an independent source of law, the
Treaties, by its primacy over the Jaws of the Member States,

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 30

and by the direct effect of a whole series of provisions
which are applicable to their nationals and to the Member
States themselves. Those characteristics have given rise to
a structured network of principles, rules and mutually
interdependent legal relations binding the EU and its
Member States reciprocally and binding its Member States
to each other (see, to that effect, Opinion 2/13 (Accession of
the EU to the ECHR) of 18 December 2014,
EU:C:2014:2454, paragraphs 165 to 167 and the case-law
cited).

34 — EU law is thus based on the fundamental premiss that
each Member State shares with all the other Member
States, and recognises that they share with it, a set of
common values on which the EU is founded, as stated in
Article 2 TEU, That premiss implies and justifies the
existence of mutual trust between the Member States that
those values will be recognised, and therefore that the law
of the EU that implements them will be respected. It is
precisely in that context that the Member States are
obliged, by reason inter alia of the principle of sincere
cooperation set out in the first subparagraph of Article 4(3)
TEU, to ensure in their respective territories the
application of and respect for EU law, and to take for those
purposes any appropriate measure, whether general or
particular, to ensure fulfilment of the obligations arising
out of the Treaties or resulting from the acts of the
institutions of the EU (Opinion 2/13 (Accession of the EU
to the ECHR) of 18 December 2014, EU:C:2014:2454,
paragraphs 168 and 173 and the case-law cited).

35 In order to ensure that the specific characteristics
and the autonomy of the EU legal order are preserved, the
Treaties have established a judicial system intended to
ensure consistency and uniformity in the interpretation of
EU law (Opinion 2/13 (Accession of the EU to the ECHR)
of 18 December 2014, EU:C:2014:2454, paragraph 174).

36 — In that context, in accordance with Article 19 TEU, it
is for the national courts and tribunals and the Court of
Justice to ensure the full application of EU law in all
Member States and to ensure judicial protection of the
rights of individuals under that law (see, to that effect,
Opinion 1/09 (Agreement creating a unified patent
litigation system) of 8 March 2011, EU:C:2011:123,
paragraph 68; Opinion 2/13 (Accession of the EU to the
ECHR) of 18 December 2014, EU;C:2014:2454, paragraph
175; and judgment of 27 February 2018, Associagao

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 31

84.

85.

Sindical dos Juizes Portugueses, C -64/16, EU:C:2018;117,
paragraph 33).

37 In particular, the judicial system as thus conceived
has as its keystone the preliminary ruling procedure
provided for in Article 267 TFEU, which, by setting up a
dialogue between one court and another, specifically
between the Court of Justice and the courts and tribunals of
the Member States, has the object of securing uniform
interpretation of EU law, thereby serving to ensure its
consistency, its full effect and its autonomy as well as,
ultimately, the particular nature of the law established by
the Treaties (Opinion 2/13 (Accession of the EU to the
ECHR) of 18 December 2014, EU:C:2014:2454, paragraph
176 and the case-law cited),

38 The first and second questions referred for a
preliminary ruling must be answered in the light of those
considerations.

The Tribunal notes that, having set out a number of general
considerations (which are of general application in EU law), the
CJEU then discusses the precise circumstances of the Achmea BIT.
This analysis of the Achmea BIT is particularly important as it
informs the exact rationale for the answers given by the CJEU to the
Bundesgreichtshof,

The CJEU, first, sought to ascertain whether the disputes which a
tribunal established according to Article 8 of the Achmea BIT might
be called on to resolve are liable to relate to the interpretation_or

application of EU law (emphasis added, and this is language

 

particularly relied upon by Respondent), In that regard it refers to
Article 8(6) of the Achmea BIT (emphasis added):

6. The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the
law, taking into account in particular though not
exclusively:

- the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned;

- the provisions of this Agreement, and other relevant
agreements between the Contracting Parties;

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 32

— the provisions of special agreements relating to the
investment;
- the general principles of international law.

86. This precise language led the CJEU to the conclusion that a tribunal
established pursuant to Article 8 of the Achmea BIT may, in two
respects, be called on to interpret or, indeed, to apply EU law,
particularly the provisions concerning the fundamental freedoms,

including freedom of establishment and free movement of capital.

87. The Tribunal notes that the use of the word “shall” in the introductory
paragraph of Article 8(6) of the Achmea BIT compels the conclusion
that any such tribunal was inevitably going to decide a dispute
according to EU law, amongst others. The two emphasised sub-
paragraphs recorded just above are not options, but part of the matters

to which such a tribunal would mandatorily be taking into account,

88. The CJEU, secondly, analysed whether a tribunal established pursuant
to Article 8 of the Achmea BIT was a court or tribunal within the
meaning of Article 267 of the TFEU. The answer was readily found,

namely, that it was not such a court or tribunal.

89. Thirdly, the CJEU analysed the extent of judicial review available at
the seat, namely, Frankfurt am Main. It noted that paragraph 1059(2)
of the Code of Civil Procedure (part of Germany’s lex arbitri)
provides only for limited review, concerning in particular the validity
of the arbitration agreement under the applicable law and the
consistency with public policy of the recognition or enforcement of
the arbitral award. Specifically, in relation to commercial arbitration,
the CJEU has held that the requirements of efficient arbitration
proceedings justify the limited review of arbitral awards by courts of
EU Member States, “provided that the fundamental provisions of
EU law can be examined in the course of that review and, if

necessary, be the subject of a reference to the Court for a

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 33

preliminary ruling” (the Tribunal’s emphasis, and arising from the
landmark 1999 decision of the CJEU in what is routinely referred to

as Eco Swiss).

90. However, the CJEU found (for reasons which do not readily emerge
from its reasoning) that the circumstances of Article 8 of the Achmea
BIT do not permit a similar review of awards which attach to
commercial arbitrations (in the manner mandated by Eco Swiss). The
Tribunal infers from this, in the specific instance of dispute between
Achmea B.Y. and the Slovak Republic, that even if the German courts
could examine the arbitral award of 7 December 2012 in light of
fundamental provisions of EU law (which they can do due to Eco
Swiss), that was not a satisfactory (for the CJEU) answer to the

reformulated questions.

91. The CJEU then articulated its conclusion, which is now recorded in
full:

56. Consequently, having regard to all _ the
characteristics of the arbitral tribunal mentioned in Article
8 of the BIT and set out in paragraphs 39 to 55 above, it
must be considered that, by concluding the BIT, the
Member States parties to it established a mechanism for
settling disputes between an investor and a Member State
which could prevent those disputes from being resolved ina
manner that ensures the full effectiveness of EU law, even
though they might concern the interpretation or application
of that law.

92. The Tribunal makes two observations which arise from this
conclusion of the CJEU. The reasoning stems entirely from the
specific circumstances of the Achmea BIT, and is not based on any
other BIT or a wider ISDS enquiry (particularly, not the ECT); and,
secondly, the recourse which might be had against the arbitral award
of 7 December 2012 before the German courts, which includes (as a
matter of Eco Swiss) an examination in light of fundamental

principles of EU law, is, in the view of the CJEU, insufficient to

SCO Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 34

93.

94,

95.

96.

ensure the full effectiveness of EU law, and, further, could prevent
such full effectiveness. It is unclear from the reasoning of the CJEU
as to why this is the case, but, given that Achmea does not address the

ECT, the Tribunal does not dwell any further on this point.

The further conclusion which the CJEU then draws is as follows:

Article 8 of the BIT is such as to call into question not only
the principle of mutual trust between the Member States but
also the preservation of the particular nature of the law
established by the Treaties, ensured by the preliminary
ruling procedure provided for in Article 267 TFEU, and is
not therefore compatible with the principle of sincere
cooperation referred to in paragraph 34 above... In those
circumstances, Article 8 of the BIT has an adverse effect on
the autonomy ofEU law.

Having reached these conclusions, the CJEU answers the question

which it reformulated (as recorded above) from the questions posed

by the Bundesgerichtshof in the following manner:

Consequently, the answer to Questions I and 2 is that
Articles 267 and 344 TFEU must be interpreted as
precluding a provision in an international agreement
concluded between Member States, such as Article 8 of the
BIT, under which an investor from one of those Member
States may, in the event of a dispute concerning investments
in the other Member State, bring proceedings against the
latter Member State before an arbitral tribunal whose
jurisdiction that Member State has undertaken to accept.

The Tribunal notes that the predicate word for the answer given by the
CJEU to the question it posed itself is “consequently” which, thus,
plainly draws on the preceding analysis of Article 8 of the Achmea
BIT, and not (as question | posed by the Bundesgerichtshof sought) a

wider discussion of ISDS clauses in BITs.

Considering Achmea, thus, in full, the Tribunal draws a number of

conclusions as follows:

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 35

(a) the answer given by the CJEU is confined, on a full, rather than
selective analysis of the whole judgment, to the specific context of
Article 8 of the Achmea BIT only;

(b) the question, of wider application to ISDS clauses, posed by the
Bundesgerichtshof was not answered so, therefore, no view can be
inferred as to the compatibility of such clauses with EU law insofar as
the opinion of the CJEU is concerned. Had the CJEU wished to
answer the widely-drawn questions posed by the Bundesgerichtshof,

then presumably it would have done so;

(c) the mandatory requirement in Article 8(6) of the Achmea BIT for
a tribunal constituted under that treaty to decide a dispute according,
amongst others, to (i) “the law in force of the Contracting Party
concerned” and (ii) “the provisions of this Agreement, and other
relevant agreements between the Contracting Parties” was the treaty

language which transgressed EU law;

(d) the CJEU does not go so far as to say that the Slovak Republic or
the Kingdom of the Netherlands are barred from offering to enter into
arbitration agreements. Rather, the Tribunal understands the position
to be more correctly that the objection by Respondent (and the
Commission) forming of what it says is the gravamen of Achmea is to
the extent of the authority given to such a tribunal to decide a dispute,
amongst others, according to the two EU law aspects already noted
above. Put another way, it appears that EU member states may bring
such arbitral tribunals into being, but, according to the position
adopted by Respondent and the Commission, they are not allowed by
EU law to authorise such arbitral tribunals to interpret or apply such

law; and

(e) the CJEU does not make any comment on, nor does it gainsay the
authority of that UNCITRAL tribunal to rule according to the general

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 36

principles of international law. Its sole concern revolves around the
two parts of Article 8(6) of the Achmea BIT which it says engage the

application or interpretation of EU law.

97. Drawing upon the foregoing conclusions from Achmea for the
purposes of this case, the Tribunal agrees with the tribunal in Masdar
that the judgment is, in of itself, of limited application (only, insofar
as EU law is concerned, to the Achmea BIT) and, further, of no
application as such to the ECT. Respondent’s criticism of the
approach taken by the tribunal in Masdar appears to the Tribunal as
unwarranted in view of the CJBU’s answers to its own reformulated

questions.

98. In light of the above reasoning and conclusions concerning the lack of
direct impact of Achmea as undermining the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal, the Tribunal is not convinced that its conclusions should be
modified because of the position taken by the Commission in its
Communication (quoted above at para. 75). The Tribunal considers
that a proper reading of the Achmea does not lead to the conclusion
that “[T]he Achmea judgment is also relevant for the investor-State
arbitration mechanism established in Article 26 of the ECT as regards
intra-EU relations”. Nor is the Tribunal convinced for the reasons
stated above that “[T]his provision, interpreted correctly does not
provide for an investor-State arbitration clause applicable between
investors from a Member State of the EU and another Member State
of the EU”

99. The Tribunal restates that it is called, in this dispute, to resolve the
alleged breach by Respondent of Art. 10(1) ECT on the basis of
principles of public international law relevant to the interpretation and
application in the present case of the ECT, a multilateral treaty in
force and applicable also between The Netherlands and Respondent.

The Tribunal is therefore unable to read Achmea as supporting the

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 37

Commission’s view (with all due respect to the Commission’s role
within the EU, the Communication is not an authoritative statement of
EU law) that [Gjiven the primacy of Union law, that clause [Article
26, ECT], if interpreted as applying intra-EU, is incompatible with

EU primary law and thus inapplicable.”

100. In conclusion, therefore, the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction

based on Achmea are dismissed.
Intra-EUjurisdiction conclusion

101. Thus, the Tribunal dismisses the jurisdictional objections raised by the

Respondent as regards what might he termed the intra-EU issue.

102. There are other jurisdictional and/or admissibility issues raised by
Respondent but these are dealt with below in connection with the

merits,

(A) Facts - (B) Merits & Liability inci. concomitant Jurisdiction &

 

 

Section A - Facts
Introduction

103. This part of the award is arranged as follows. First, the Tribunal will
set out its understanding of the historical context of promotion of
renewable energy production in Italy. Next, there will be a description
of each of the five Conto Energia Decrees which were implemented
by Respondent. This will be followed by an outline of the three Italian
companies which Claimant purchased (in whole or in majority part)
which operate photovoltaic plants and the agreements concerning the
incentives for then respective output. Thereafter, the Tribunal records
the facts surrounding the measures taken by Respondent of which
Claimant makes complaint. These are all matters which the Tribunal

considers, in light of the submissions received from the Parties, to be

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 38

104.

factually uncontroversial. The Tribunal has been assisted,
considerably, by the Parties in this regard in the manner that they have
not engaged in needless factual disputes, but rather have dwelt upon
the more important issues as to whether or not the measures taken by
Respondent engage international responsibility as a matter of the
ECT.

For the avoidance of doubt, the summary of facts (i.e. the historical
context, the five Conto Energia Decrees, and the outline of the three
Italian companies purchased by Claimant) which follows should not
be taken as setting out material anterior findings. The summary of
facts has the purpose of putting into broad context for the reader the
background to this case. Analysis of material issues which might, or
might not, be a trigger for the disposition of claims follow in a later

part of this Award.

Historical Context

105.

106.

10

™

From the early 1980s onwards Respondent has promoted and
encouraged the development and use of renewable energy sources.
Given that Italy is a country blessed with abundant sunshine for much
of the year, photovoltaic generation of electricity was clearly of

considerable importance.

In particular, Respondent’s Law No. 9 of January 9, 1991, simplified
the authorization procedure for the production of energy from
renewable sources. Regional governments were required to develop

plans prioritizing the production of energy from renewable sources.

In 1992, Respondent established the first fixed feed-in tariff for
renewable energy production through its CIP6/92 regulation. That
regulation allowed renewable energy producers to produce electricity
from renewable sources without any capacity limit and established a

remuneration procedure based on kilowatt-hours of electricity

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 39

produced. The CIP6/92 regulation also provided some certainty to
investors because it obligated ENEL S.p.A., Respondent's electricity
company, to buy all electricity produced from renewable energy
sources. By 1997, 16% of Italy’s electricity was being produced from

renewable energy sources.

108.

e

Respondent continued to encourage investments in its developing
renewable energy sector by enacting Legislative Decree No. 79 on
March 16, 1999, Known as the Bersani Decree, that act encouraged
electricity production from renewable energy sources by prioritizing
their access to the grid. The Bersani Decree also obligated generators
and importers of electricity from non-renewable sources beyond a
certain threshold to inject a portion of electricity from renewable
sources into the grid. To satisfy that obligation, the non-renewable
generators or importers could purchase a corresponding amount of
renewable energy from other producers, or from the GSE, or they

could purchase “green certificates” from third parties.

Developments leading to the "Conto Energia” Decrees

109. On 27 September 2001, the European Parliament and the Council
enacted Directive 2001/77/EC, promoting electricity produced from
renewable energy sources in the internal electricity market. That
directive set national targets for each member state for renewable
energy production in light of the EU’s stated objective of having
22.1% of total Community electricity consumption generated from
renewable energy sources by 2010. Respondent was expected to
produce 25% of its total electricity consumption from renewable
energy sources by 2010. That directive was subsequently replaced by
Directive 2009/28/EC, which aimed to achieve a 20% share of energy
from renewable sources in the Community’s gross final consumption
of energy by 2020. It required that EU member states report on

planned or existing measures put in place to meet those targets. It also

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 40

required EU member states to adopt indicative targets for the
following 10 years. For Respondent, the target was for 17% of overall

energy consumption to come from renewable energy sources by 2020.

110. In light of the fact that the cost of producing electricity from
renewable sources was substantially higher than the cost of producing
electricity from fossil fuels, in order to meet its target, Respondent
considered it fit to implement measures and above-market incentives
that would further develop and encourage investments in its
renewable energy sector. Thus, on 29 December 2003, Respondent
enacted Legislative Decree No. 387, the goal of which was to
“promote a greater contribution from renewable energy sources to the
production of electricity in the Italian and European markets.” Article
7 thereof, which addressed solar power, stated that Respondent would
implement incentive tariffs to encourage investments in photovoltaic
facilities. Accordingly, from 2005 to 2012, Respondent enacted
incentive schemes for photovoltaic plants known as Conto Energia
Decrees. The Tribunal now records Article 7 of Legislative Decree
No. 387:

Article 7 - Specific provisions for photovoltaic energy

1. Within six months from the date of entry into force of this
decree, the Minister of Productive Activities, in
consultation with the Minister of Environment and
Protection of Natural Resources, in consultation with the
Joint Conference, shall adopt one or more decrees which
define the criteria to encourage the production of electiicity
from solar sources.

2. The criteria referred to in paragraph 1, which shall
impose no new cost to the state budget and shall be in
compliance with Community legislation currently in force,
shall:

a) establish the requirements of the subjects that may
benefit from incentives;

b) establish the minimum technical requirements of the

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 41

111.

The Conto

Conto 1

112.

eligible components and systems;

c) establish the conditions for the accumulation of the new
incentives with other incentives;

d) establish the modalities for determining the scope of
incentives. For electricity produced by photovoltaic
conversion of solar energy, provide a specific incentive
rate, decreasing amount and duration as to ensure fair
remuneration of each investment and operating costs;

e) establish a target for the nominal power to be installed;

f) agree also with the upper limit of the cumulative electric
power of all plants that can receive the incentive;

g) may include the use of green certificates allocated to the
Manager of the grid in Article I] paragraph 3, second
sentence of the legislative decree 16 March 1999 n. 79.

Since Legislative Decree No. 387 did not allow the costs of
incentives to be borne by the State (as provided for in Art.7(2), quoted
just above) — a constant feature also of all later enactments in respect
of PV incentivized tariffs, those costs were passed on to electricity
consumers through electricity bills, as Claimant has explained and
acknowledged. The Authority for Electrical Energy and Gas
(“AEEG”) collects those fees from electricity consumers to cover the
incentive tariff costs. The GSE is the state-owned company
responsible for paying the incentive tariffs to electricity producers

under the Conto Energia decrees.

 

ergia Decrees

 

Respondent implemented its first incentive tariff programme for
electricity generated by photovoltaic sources on 28 July 2005. The
programme was designed for relatively small facilities, under 1 MW
in capacity, and it highlighted the possibility of individuals and
families, as well as businesses and traditional energy companies, to

become producers in Italy’s electricity system.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 42

113.

114,

115.

Conto I provided that qualifying photovoltaic plants had the right
(“diritto”) to receive a specific incentive tariff for a twenty-year
period. The tariff rate was paid to the producer per kilowatt-hour of
electricity it produced, on top of whatever sale price the producer also
obtained for its electricity. Conto I established tariff rates for eligible
plants authorized in 2005 and 2006 on the basis of the facility’s
nominal capacity: 0.445€/kWh for plants between 1 kW and 20 kW;
0.460€/kWh for plants between 20 kW and 50 kW; and 0.490€/kWh
for plants between 50 kW and 1 MW. The rates offered to eligible
facilities after 2006 were slightly lower.

Conto / required anyone who wished to develop a solar facility and
benefit from the incentives to submit a request for the incentive tariff,
along with a commitment to obtain the necessary authorizations for
the construction and operation of the plant. Once provisionally
authorized to benefit from the programme, the investor then had six to
twelve months (depending on the plant’s capacity) to commence
construction of the facility and twelve to twenty-four months to
complete construction and connect the facility to the grid. Failure to
meet those deadlines would result in loss of the right to the incentive
tariffs.

Confirmation of the right to the incentive tariffs under Conto I was
established by a formal letter from the GSE, which communicated the
specific tariff rate that it agreed to pay for a twenty-year period to the
company or person that held the project rights to a photovoltaic plant
(ie., the “soggetto responsabile”). This is reflected in Ait. 7.7 of
Conto /.

Within 90 days following the deadlines provided for
transmission of the applications under paragraph 1, the
implementing body (soggetto attuatore) shall communicate
the outcome under paragraphs 4 and 5 to the plant
operators (soggetti responsabili) who sent the application
under paragraph 1. The implementing body shall also

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 43

notify entitled operators, on the basis of the provisions
under paragraph 5, article 5 and article 6 (2), of the
amount of the incentive tariff actually awarded for a period
of twenty years commencing from the date of operation of
the plant.

116. The letter served as the basis for a contract that the producer and the
GSE would subsequently execute. In outline, such a contract indicated
that it was effective as of the date on which the producer connected
the plant to the grid and that it would terminate twenty years later.
Amendments to the contract could only be made in writing by mutual

agreement between the producer and the GSE.

117. Some of the pertinent provisions of a sample Conto J contract are now

recorded by the Tribunal:

Article 1
Purpose of the agreement

This agreement concerns the recognition by GSE to the
Producer of the contribution due to electricity generated
by solar power through photovoltaic conversion and
incentivizedpursuant to Legislative Decree 387/03, art. 7
of MAP decrees dated 28/07/2005 and 06/02/2006,
A.E.E.G. resolution no. 188/05 as subsequent amended
and modified by resolution 40/06 and A.E.E.G. resolution
no. 28/06.

Article 2
Effective date and value of the incentive

For a period of twenty years as of 08/04/2009, the
incentive tariff to be recognized to the photovoltaic plant
concerned under this agreement is equal to 0.46 €/kWh.

Article 3
Incentives payment methods

The payment of the incentive tariffs shall be made by GSE
according to the measures defined in art. 3-bis of A.E.E.G.
resolution no, 40/06 and in conformity with the payment

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 44

methods regulated by such resolution. With respect to art. 3
bis ofA.E.E.G. resolution no. 40/06, GIOVA SOLAR SRL is
the party responsible for the survey, registration and
communication to GSE of the measurements on the
incentivized photovoltaic energy. GSE provides for the
payment of the incentive tariffs with value date as of the last
day of the month following the one in which the “Payment
Date" measurements are received. In the event the
“Payment Date" falls on a holiday, the payment is
arranged with value date as of the following business day.

GSE shall arrange for the payment of the incentive tariffs by
crediting the amounts to the bank account specified by the
Producer in the "data registration form for the purpose of
incentive tariffs payment”, mentioned in the introductory
section of this agreement.

Article 8
Effective date and duration of the agreement

This agreement is effective from 08/04/2009 and shall
expire on 07/04/2029. This contract is deemed as legally
terminated and having ceased to produce effects for the
Parties should the Producer be faulty on the prohibitions
and forfeitures defined in art. 10 of Law 575/1965 as
subsequent amended and modified.

Article 9
Jurisdiction

For any dispute arising out of or in any way connected to
the interpretation of this Agreement and the documents
referred to therein, the Parties agree on the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Court of Rome.

Article 10
Formalization of the agreement

This Agreement is signed in two original copies; the
Producer and GSE shall separately send their duly signed
originals, Any modification to the agreement must occur in
writing.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 45

Conto II

118.

119.

120.

121.

On 19 February 2007, the Ministry of Economic Development of
Respondent enacted a second Conto Energia (“Conto IF) with a
stated goal of implementing a simplified, stable, and durable system
to access the photovoltaic incentives. One of the recitals to Conto II

makes this intention explicit:

It being held that it is necessary to introduce corrections to
the mechanism introducing a_ simplified stem for
accessing incentives, which is both stable and lasting

 

Conto II changed Conto I in two principal respects.

First, it eliminated the preliminary authorization phase that previously
existed and instead required electricity producers to request the
benefit of the incentive tariff upon the facility’s entry into operation.
This simplified the enrolment process and avoided the problem of
investors being granted capacity that was never realized. It also meant
that investors bore the development and construction risks of their
investments, because the tariff rates decreased progressively over time
and the rate granted to a given facility was established only when the

facility entered into operation.

Secondly, Conto 1] increased the capacity thresholds for receiving
incentive tariffs to include plants over 1 MW and to an aggregate
installed capacity of 1,200 MW. It also established a variety of tariff
rates that were based on sophisticated technical criteria of a given
plant, including a facility’s nominal capacity and other characteristics
such as the plant’s size and whether it was partially or totally
integrated. As with Conto I, the Conto II rates were paid to producers
per kilowatt hour of electricity produced, regardless of the sale price

of the electricity that the producers also received. The Conto II tariffs

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 46

were slightly lower than those offered in Conto I. Conto II expressly
stated, at Art. 6(1), that “/TJhe tariff identified ..... is awarded for a
period of twenty years commencing from the date of entry into
operation of the plant and shall remain constant in current currency

for the entire twenty year period.”

122. The tariff rates established in Conto IJ were available to eligible
plants entering into operation in 2007 and 2008, with slightly reduced
tariffs available to facilities entering into operation after 2008. The
Conto IT tariffs were available until the aggregate installed capacity of
photovoltaic plants in Italy reached 1,200 MW, although facilities that
connected to the grid within fourteen months of the date on which

Italy reached the 1,200 MW threshold would also receive the tariffs.

123. In line with Respondent’s goal of making photovoltaic investments
more competitive until the technology matured and their costs
decreased, Conto II stated that the Ministry of Economic
Development would issue a subsequent decree revising the incentive
tariffs for photovoltaic plants connected to the grid after 2010, taking
into account energy products and component price trends as well as
technological monitoring from the ENEA. In practice, through the
Salva Alcoa decree (Law Decree 8 July 2010, n. 105), Respondent
later extended the Conto II incentive tariffs to plants entering into

operation after 2010.

124. The implementation of Conto 1] was furthered through the
“Implementation of the Decree of the Minister of Economic
Development, in consultation with the Minister for the Environment,
Land and Sea February 19, 2007, for the purpose of promoting the
production of electricity using photovoltaic plants” by the AEEG,

quoted in relevant part:

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 47

125.

Conto II]

126.

Article 8.1

The incentive rate is recognized to the parties responsible
allowed under Article 5 for twenty years from:

a)The date of entry into the facility, for photovoltaic
systems that became operational after the date of entry into
force of this measure;

b) The first day of the month following that in which they
completed the actions needed for eligibility to tariffs, and in
any case not before the first day of the month following the
date of entry into force of this regulation, for photovoltaic
systems came into operation in the period between 1
October 2005 and the date of entry into force of this
provision and which comply with the provisions Article 4,
paragraph 7 of the Ministerial Decree of 19 February
2007.

Article 5.2 thereof states that tariff amount is specified by
GSE in the communication on the admission to the support
regime; therefore, if we combine Article 5.2 with Article 8
the result is that the tariff amount as accorded by GSE is
fixed for 20 years.
A Conto I] contract was, in broad terms (save for the amount of the
incentive and the relevant dates) the same as that set out above for
Conto I.

Respondent’s Ministry of Economic Development enacted reduced
tariffs (in comparison with Conto 1) in a third Conto Energia {“Conto
ITP) on 6 August 2010. As with the previous two Conto Energias,
Conto 111 granted qualifying photovoltaic plants the right (diritto) to
receive a specific incentive tariff that would remain constant for a 20-
year period starting from the date of the plant’s connection to the grid.
Conto 111 established a range of tariffs for various facilities entering
into operation from 2011 through 2013 and provided that the Ministry
of Economic Development would issue a subsequent decree
establishing the rates for incentive tariffs offered to plants connected
to the grid after 2013. The Conto III tariffs were available until the
aggregate installed capacity of photovoltaic plants admitted to the

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 48

programme reached 3,000 MW. Plants that were connected to the grid
within 14 months of the date on which Italy reached the 3,000 MW

threshold would also receive the Conto III tariffs.

127. The implementation of Conto IIT was furthered through the
“Deliberation implementing Ministerial Decree of 6 August 2010 (Third

Energy Bill)”, by AEEG, quoted in relevant part:

Article 11
The incentive rate and the increase if any are approved (...)

a) for twenty years from the date of entry into the facility, for
photovoltaic systems for which the Responsible Party's
submission to the GSE request on schedule in Article 4,
paragraph 1, of the ministerial decree of August 6, 2010;

b) for twenty years, minus the period between the date of entry
into operation of the plant and the date of sending
communication to the GSE, for photovoltaic plants for which
the Responsible Party has submitted to GSE a request later
than expected from Article 4, paragraph 1, of the ministerial
decree of August 6, 2010.

128. A Conto III contract was, in broad terms (save for the amount of the
incentive and the relevant dates) the same as that set out above for
Contos I & Il. By way of example, Art. 2 of a Conto III contract
stated:

The incentive tariff constant in current currency, to be
recognised to the photovoltaic plant concerned under this
Agreement, is equal to 0.3030 Euro/kWh, a_ value
recognised by GSE and notified to the Soggetto
Rest bile with the c ication on the admission to

The Romani Decree

129. In order to implement Directive 2009/28/EC Respondent passed Law
96/2010 ("Principles and guiding criteria for the implementation of
Directive 2009/28 [and other Directives]”), which provided for the

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 49

issuance of implementing Legislative Decrees, such as the “Romani
Decree” No. 28/2011 of 3 March 2011. Among its guiding principles,
Article 17 of Law 96/2010 (“Measures for conforming the national
legal system to the Community’s legislation on energy and recovery
of garbage”) stated at para.1(h) that “in preparing the implementing
legislative decrees,..the Government shall follow...also the following
guiding guidelines:...(h) adjusting and strengthening the incentive
system of renewable energy sources and of energy saving, without

new or additional burdens for the public finance...”

130. The Romani Decree sought thus to balance several competing factors
relevant to the photovoltaic market. On one hand, Respondent wanted
to maintain (i) equitable remuneration for investors, given that
photovoltaic facilities still needed above-market incentives to
compete with traditional electricity producers, and (ii) the confidence
of investors by ensuring a constant rate of incentives throughout a
fixed time period equal to the average useful life of a facility,
reinforced through a contract with the GSE. On the other hand,
Respondent wanted to adjust the tariffs to account for cost reductions
in photovoltaic technology and to reduce costs of electricity for
consumers. The Romani Decree contemplated gradual regulatory
monitoring and controls, while “safeguarding investments already

made.”

131. The Tribunal notes, in particular, that Article 24(d), which is recorded
below, of the Romani Decree provides for private law agreements for
the assignment of applicable incentives. As noted already, each of
Contos I, II, and IT] required formal contracts as the consummation of

the arrangements for incentives.
132, The Romani Decree altered the mechanics of Conto III by limiting the
availability of the Conto III tariffs to photovoltaic plants that were

connected to the grid by 31 May 2011 (instead of by 31 December

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 50

2013, as originally contemplated). Plants connected after that date
would receive different incentive tariffs, to he established in a future
decree. Furthermore, the Romani Decree introduced limitations on the
eligibility of plants receiving incentive tariffs, based on their size,

organization, and zoning of land.

133. The Tribunal now records aspects of the Romani Decree (with

emphasis added):

Art. 23 - General principles

1, This Section provides for the new regulation of support
regime dedicated to RES based energy and energy
efficiency through the reorganization and improvement of
current support mechanisms. The new rules provide for a
general framework aimed at promoting renewable sources
energy generation and energy efficiency to the extent
adequate to reach the targets set forth in art. 3 hereof, by
setting criteria and tools that promote effectiveness,
efficiency, streamlining and overtime stability of the
support regimes as well as pursue the harmonization with
other tools designed for alike purposes together with the
reduction of support costs charged to end-users.

2. Gradual intervention to safeguard investments made
and proportionality to the targets are further general
principles of the reorganization and improvement of
support regime reform, as well as flexibility of support
regimes’ structure, in order to take into account market
dynamics and technology evolution of renewables and
energy efficiency.

 

Art, 24 Incentive mechanisms

I. The production of electricity from plants using renewable
sources that enter into operation after December 31, 2012,
will be promoted through the instruments and according to
the general criteria set out in paragraph 2 and the specific
criteria set out in paragraphs 3 and 4. The safeguard of
non-incentivized plants is ensured through the mechanisms
under art. 8 hereof

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 51

Conto IV

134.

135.

2. The production of electricity by the plants referred to in
paragraph I is supported on the basis of the following
general criteria:

a) the incentive has the purpose of ensuring a fair
remuneration of the investment and operating costs;

b) the period one is entitled to receive the incentive all
through is equal to the average conventional lifecycle of
specific kind of plant, and starts from the date of entry into
operation thereof;

c) the incentive remains constant throughout the support
period to which one is entitled under the law and may take
into consideration the economic value of energy
produced;

d) the incentives are assigned by way of private law
agreements between the GSE and the plant owner
(soggetto responsahile), based on a sample agreement
approved by the Authority of Electricity and Gas within 3
months as of the entry into force of the first of the decrees
as per para 5 herein.

On 5 May 2011, Respondent’s Ministry of Economic Development
enacted Conto IV as a matter of the Romani Decree requirement that it
issue revised incentive tariffs for facilities connected to the grid after
31 May 2011. The rates established in Conto IV were based, amongst
others, the goal of progressively decreasing tariffs to achieve a
gradual alignment with the actual cost of the technology, while

maintaining stability and certainty in the market.

In particular, Conto TV noted that, in light of the evolution of
photovoltaic technology, “grid parity” would be achieved within a
few years. “Grid parity” occurs when photovoltaic plants can generate
power at an equal or lower cost than the price of purchasing power
from the electricity grid. In Respondent’s view, once producers
achieved grid parity, it would no longer be necessary to incentivize

the development of new facilities. At the same time, Conto IV

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 52

confirmed the importance of additional incentive tariffs to ensure an

increase of installed capacity in the immediate future.

136.

a

As with the previous Conto Energia decrees, Conto IV provided that
those producers that connected qualifying photovoltaic plants to the
grid between 31 May 2011, and 31 December 2016, had the right
(diritto) to receive a specific incentive tariff, which would remain
constant, for a twenty-year period starting from the date of the plant’s
connection to the grid. Respondent established different values for
Conto IV incentive tariffs for each month of 2011, each semester of
2012, and the first semester of 2013 on the basis of a plant’s nominal
capacity and other technical characteristics. It also established a
registry for applicants so that Respondent could monitor enrolment
during each month or semester. Conto TV stated that a reduced tariff,
to be determined at a later date, would apply to new plants connected

to the grid beginning in the second semester of 2013.

137. Nevertheless, once Respondent granted a tariff value to a facility,
according to the text of Conto TV, the incentive granted would remain
constant for twenty years, as was the case with the previous Conto

arrangements,

138. Conto IV also included new measures to moderate the growth of the
total cost of the incentive tariff system for photovoltaic facilities,
noting that the total cost would likely reach €3.5 billion euros per
annum by 2011, Those measures included limits on the amount of
incentive tariffs granted to new facilities per semester, beyond which
the incentive tariffs would no longer be available for new facilities
during that semester. Respondent also proposed an overall cap on the
total photovoltaic capacity that could benefit from incentive tariffs
and a corresponding cost threshold: Conto TV established a national
objective for cumulative nominal installed photovoltaic capacity of 23

GW, which would correspond to a total annual cost of €6-7 billion for

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 53

all of the Canto Energia incentive tariffs. Respondent’s Ministry of
Economic Development was entitled, though not obligated, to revise
the incentive tariffs for future plants when Italy reached the €6 billion
threshold, “favouring in any event the further development of the

sector.”

139. As with the three previous Conto Energia decrees, under Conto IV,
the GSE entered into contracts with producers whose plants benefited
from the incentive tariffs, which confirmed the tariff rate granted to
the facilities. The contracts were to remain in force for the same

twenty-year period stated in the Conto itself.

14

S

The Tribunal now records the part of Conto IV setting out access to

the incentive tariffs:
Article 10

Transmission of documentation on operational date of the
plant and access to incentive tariffs

1. Within fifteen calendar days of the operational date of
the plant the plant operator (soggetto responsabile) is
under an obligation to send GSE a request for the pertinent
incentive tariff, complete with all documentation provided
under annex 3-C. Failure to comply with the deadlines
under this paragraph involves inadmissibility of the
incentive tariffs for the period between the operational date
and the date of communication to GSE, without prejudice to
entitlement to the applicable tariff at the operational date.

2. For the purposes of paragraph I, the grid managers are
under an obligation to connect the plants to the electricity
1 grid within the terms established by the Authority for
electricity and gas resolution no. ARG/elt 99/08 as
subsequently amended.

i 3. Following verification of compliance with the provisions
of this decree, GSE will establish and guarantee payment of

| the tariff owed to the plant operator (soggetto responsabile)

| within one hundred and twenty days of the date of receipt of
the application, excluding times imputable to the plant
operator.

 

I SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 54

Conto V

141.

142.

4. Transfer of a photovoltaic plant, or of the building or
property unit on which the plant is located together with the
plant itself, must be notified to GSE within 30 days of the
date of registration of the transfer.

5. The period of entitlement to the incentive tariffs under
this decree is considered net of any suspensions due to
problems connected to grid safety or following catastrophic
events recognised as such by the competent authorities.

By early 2012, Respondent approached the €6 billion threshold for its
incentive tariffs program anticipated in Conto IV. Respondent also
determined that as of year-end 2011, renewable electricity production
capacity was 94 TWh per year, only 6 TWh short of its 2020 target of
100 TWh. Therefore, Respondent considered that it was well on its
way to meeting its EU targets. Thus, in accordance with the Conto IV
provision that it could issue new tariffs once Respondent met the €6
billion cost threshold, on 5 July 2012, its Ministry of Economic
Development enacted the fifth and final Conto Energia. Conto V
stated that it would enter into force 45 days after the AEEG issued a
resolution announcing that the total cost of the incentive tariffs had
reached €6 billion. The AEEG issued that resolution on 12 July 2012,

and Conto V entered into force on 27 August 2012.

In Conto V, Respondent noted that technological progress and
economies of scale had contributed to a rapid decrease in the cost of
photovoltaic plants, and that this decrease had caused a similarly rapid
increase in the number of plants being built and connected to the grid.
Respondent concluded that it would need an additional €700 million
per year of incentive tariffs to make photovoltaic technology
competitive, but that, thereafter, new producers would no longer

require incentive tariffs.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 55

143.

144,

145.

146.

Conto V provided two different incentive regimes based on the
photovoltaic plants’ capacity: (i) it awarded plants up to 1 MW an
“all-inclusive tariff’ (that is, including both the price of the electricity
and the value of the incentive with a further specific tariff for any
self-consumed quantity of energy), and (ii) it awarded plants
exceeding 1 MW an amount equal to the difference (if positive)
between the all-inclusive tariff mentioned above and the market price
(“prezzo zonale orario") of electricity plus the revenues deriving
from the sale of the energy to the market (“Veriergia prodotta resta
nella disponibilita del produttore”). Therefore, the value of the
incentive component varied depending on the market price (/.e. if the

price of electricity rose, the incentive value decreased and vice versa).

Additionally, regardless of a plant’s capacity, Conto V provided a
bonus tariff on the electricity the operator produced and consumed,
which would constitute revenue in addition to the savings that the
producer had from generating its own electricity. Conto V also
simplified access to the incentive tariffs for plants that Respondent
deemed to be under-developed (¢.g., concentrated photovoltaic
systems and plants with innovative characteristics) or whose
development needed to be further incentivized given their cost (e.g.,
very small rooftop plants). Plants falling outside these categories
could access the Conto V incentives by applying to a registry that was
capped in phases corresponding to the total cost of the incentive
program. Specifically, the cap for the first registry was €140 million
euros, the cap for the second registry was €120 million, and so on,

until requests for Conto Vtariffs reached €700 million.
Conto V ceased to apply on 6 July 2013. Thus, after 6 July 2013, no
incentive tariffs were available to any new photovoltaic plant installed

and connected to the Italian electricity grid.

One other aspect of Conto V is recorded later in this Award

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 56

concerning imposition of administrative fees.

147. The Tribunal now sets out a number of provisions in Conto V:

Article 5
(Incentive Tariffs)

4. The tariff is awarded for a period of twenty years
commencing from the entry into operation of the plant and
shall remain constant in current currency for the entire
support period. This entitlement period is considered net of
any suspensions due to problems connected to grid safety
or following catastrophic events recognised as such by the
competent authorities.

Article 6
(Application for and disbursement of incentive tariffs)

1. Within fifteen calendar days as of the entiy into
operatoin date of the plant, uploaded by the grid manager
onto GAUDI, the plant operator (soggetto responsabile) is
under an obligation to send GSE a request for the relevant
incentive tariff by submitting a declaration in lieu of
affidavit pursuant to article 47 of DPR 445, 2000, including
information under annex 3-B. Failure to comply with the
deadlines under this paragraph involves loss of the
incentive tariffs for the period between the operational date
and the date of communication to GSE, without prejudice to
entitlement to the applicable tariff at the operational date.

2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the grid managers are
under an obligation to connect the plants to the electricity
grid within the terms established by the Authority for
electricity and gas resolution no, ARG/elt 99/08 as
subsequently amended and to register the date of the
connection with GAUDI within the deadlines established
therein.

3. Following verification of compliance with the provisions
of this decree, GSE will guarantee payment of the tariff
owed to the plant operator (soggetto responsabile) within
ninety days of receipt of the application under paragraph 1,
excluding times imputable to the plant operator or to other
parties consulted by GSE in application of law no. 183, 12
November 2011, or operators involved in the process for
uploading and validating data in GAUDI Prior to the date
on which GAUDI is fully operational and interoperational
with the portal for the management of incentives,
established by the Authority for electricity and gas, GSE

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 57

will adopt transitional solutions for the acquisition of data
already present in GAUDI directly frofn the parties
applying for incentives, providing prior information to the
Authority for electricity and gas and the Ministry for
economic development.

148. The Tribunal notes that the sample (submitted as an exhibit by
Claimant) of a Conto V contract with the GSE has the following

provision, with emphasis added:

Article 17
Modifying agreements and referral

17.1 Any modifying or supplementary agreements on the
content of the present Agreement subsequent to the date on
which the agreement signed by GSE is made available must
be agreed in writing, under the penalty of nullity,

17.2 For anything not expressly defined in the present
Agreement, the Parties expressly defer to the provisions in
the Ministerial Decree on 5 July 2012, to the decisions
referenced in the present Agreement and their subsequent
modifications and supplements, to the rules on the subject
of connections of plants to the grid and measurement of
electricity, to the other legislation of the sector and, where
applicable, to the provisions of the Civil Code.

17.3 GSE retains the right to unilaterally modify the
clauses of the present Agreement which, as a result of any
legislative and regulatory amendments, are in contrast
with the existing framework. These modifications shall be
communicated by GSE to the Soggetto Responsabile
through the electronic portal, notwithstanding the
possibility for the Soggetto Responsabile to withdraw from
the present contractual relationship in conformity with the
provisions of Article 13 above.

17.4 The Parties are aware that any statement rendered in
the context of the present Agreement and/or in the context
of the activities/obligations connected to its application are
made pursuant to Presidential Decree of the Republic
445/00.

17.5 The introduction forms a substantial and essential part
of the agreement.

149. In contrast, the corresponding provision of a sample Conto IV contract

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 58

with the GSE states as follows:

Article 15
Modifying agreements and referral

Any modifying or supplementary agreements on the content
of the present Agreement subsequent to the date on which
the agreement signed by GSE is made available must be
agreed in writing, under the penalty of nullity.

The Parties are aware that any declaration deriving from
the present Agreement andor in the context of the
activities/obligations connected to its application is made
pursuant to Presidential Decree of the Republic 445/00.

The introduction forms an integral and essential part of the
Agreement.

150. It readily emerges from this comparison that with the Conto V
arrangements, Respondent changed the term of the GSE contracts to
allow for unilateral changes brought about by legislation. Mutual
agreement to changes was no longer essential in order for certain

changes to become applicable.

Claimant|s Investments

Megasol

151. In January 2010, Claimant acquired Sunholding S.r.1. (“Sunholding”).
Sunholding owned Megasol S.r.l., a company that held all project
rights to a photovoltaic plant of approximately 13 MW located in
Montalto di Castro in the Lazio region (“Megasol”). The Megasol
photovoltaic plant was connected to the grid in May 2011 and
received an incentive tariff of CD once Conto II, as
confirmed by a GSE Agreement dated 2 November 2011. Claimant’s
acquisition of Sunholding, therefore, pre-dated the relevant GSE

Agreement.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 59

152. The tariff recognition letter dated 12 October 2011 provided as

follows.

RE: Communication on the incentive tariff for the section N
= 244595,01 having a capacity of pursuant to
interministerial decree 19 February 2007.

With reference to the photovoltaic plant named MEGASOL
FV, we hereby communicate the admission to the incentive

im under isterial Decree 19 February 200K equal to

The tariff will be recognized for a twenty-year period as of
the date of entry into operation of the plant: 03/05/2011;
the tariff is constant, in current currency for all the twenty-
year period.

 
  

The plant operator [soggetto responsabile] data are the
following:

kind of subject: legal entity

name: MEGASOL S.R.L

fiscal code/VAT code: 06324730966

address: VIA GUIDO D’AREZZO, 15 20145 Comune di
MILANO (MI)

The value of the incentive tariff has been determined based
on the documentation sent together with the tariffs
application form as of 15/06/2011, as well as on plant's
features listed below:

Plant ID number: 244595,01

Capacity of the photovoltaic plant: ame

Kind of intervention: NEW BUILDING

Plant location: LOC.QUARTUCCIO, SN 01014 Comune di
MONTALTO DI CASTRO (VT)

The energy generated by the plant matches the amount of
energy injected into the grid: YES

Building integrated plant pursuant to art. 2, para I, let. bl),
b2), b3) of MD 19 February 2007: [Non-integrated -
category bl]

For the payment of the incentive tariff, the plant operator
[soggetto responsabile ] is required to:

I. access the section "Agreements" of the web portal
dedicated to incentive tariff request

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 60

https://applicazioni.gse.it) (through the username and
password already received;

2. select the plant interested by the relevant agieement
through the search function (it will be possible to fill in the
data on the legal representative, or bank details of the plant
operator if such info have not been provided when filing the
incentive tariff request application),

3. after clicking on the button "Details" it will be possible
to look at the draft of the agreement governing the
contractual relationship on the incentive payment for the
plant previously selected;

4. in case of discrepancies or should the applicant be
willing to submit comments as per art. 10 of Law 7 August
1990, 241 please select the “NO” option and click on
“Validate”: a form for notifications will appear. Only after
GSE notice on data amendments having been made or on
the outcome of the reassessment, it will be possible to
proceed with the acceptance declaration (point 5 below).

5. To accept the text of the agreement please select the
“YES” button and click on the “Confirm” button. Please
print and sing the Acceptance declaration and attach a
copy of the ID of the plant operator (lacking thereof will
prevent GSE from executing the agreement), The relevant
documentation shall be sent to:

Gestore dei Servizi Energetici - GSE S.p.A.

Viale M. Pilsudski 92
00197 - Roma

Please specify on the envelop "PV plants incentivation —
Incentive tariff agreement Acceptance declaration - plant
reference n. 244595,01".

6. The GSE, after executing the agreement, will make
available on the web portal, section "Agreements” the
electronic version of the agreement digitally signed by the
legal representative of GSE.

With Kind Regards.
Photovoltaic Department Representative

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 61

153. Certain of the terms of the Megasol GSE Agreement dated 2

November 2011 are set out in the following paragraphs.

154. The heading of the Megasol GSE Agreement is as follows:

AGREEMENT ON PHOTOVOLTAIC TARIFFS

AGREEMENT NO. — 108F25553007. =ON THE
RECOGNITION OF INCENTIVE TARIFFS FOR THE
PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITY FROM
PHOTOVOLTAIC PLANTS PURSUANT TO
MINISTERIAL DECREE DATED 19/02/2007 [which is
Conto IK AND RESOLUTION NO. 90/07 OF THE
AUTHORITY FOR ELECTRICITY AND GAS [which is
quoted, in part, at para. above]

 

155. The pertinent (in the Tribunal’s appreciation) clauses of the Megasol

GSE Agreement are as follows:

Article 1
Purpose of the Agreement

This agreement concerns the recognition by GSE to the
Producer of the contribution owed to electricity produced
by solar power through photovoltaic conversion and
incentivised pursuant to Legislative Decree 387/03 of the
Ministerial Decree dated 19/02/2007 and [AEEG]
resolution no. 90/07.

Article 2
Effective date and value of the incentive

For a period of twenty years starting from 03/05/2011, the
incentive tariff to be granted to the photovoltaic plant under
this Agreement is equal oi is constant in
current currency.

Article 8
Effectiveness and duration of the Agreement

This Agreement is effective as of 22/12/2010 and expires on

21/12/2030. This Agreement is deemed as legally
terminated and ceases to produce effects for the Parties

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 62

Phenix

should the Producer incur in one of the cases of [incentive
tariff] forfeiture defined in art. 10 of Lnv 575/1965 and
subsequent modifications and integrations, as well as upon
the occurrence of the situation provided for in art. 10,
paragraph 3 of AEEG resolution no. 90/07.

Article 9
Jurisdiction

For any dispute arising out of or in any way connected to
the interpretation and execution of this Agreement and the
documents referred to therein, the Parties agree on the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Forum of Rome.

Article 10
Formalisation of the agreement

For the purposes of formalising this Agreement, the
Producer is required to print through the electronic portal
the related Declaration of Acceptance and send it to GSE
duly signed, attaching a photocopy of a valid identification
document. This Agreement is executed at the time that GSE
proceeds with the acceptance of the aforementioned
Declaration, making available on its electionic portal the
copy for the Producer, signed by its legal representative.
Subsequent to the activation of this Agreement, any
agreements modifying or integrating the content of this
Agreement must be agreed upon in writing otherwise being
null and void. The Parties acknowledge that any
declaration made under this Agreement is rendered
pursuant to the Decree of the President of the Republic
(D.P.R.) 445/00.

156. In December 2010, Claimant acquired a 70% controlling stake in

Phenix S.r.l. (“Phenix’’), a company that held all project rights to a
photovoltaic plant of approximately 24 MW located in Canino in the
Lazio region (“Sugarella”), The Sugarella photovoltaic plant was
connected to the grid in April 2011 and was entitled to an incentive
tariff of eee under Conto III, as confirmed by a GSE
Agreement dated 23 November 2011. Claimant’s acquisition of that

70% controlling stake in Phenix, therefore, pre-dated the relevant

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 63

GSE Agreement.

157. The tariff recognition letter dated 17 November 2011 provided as

follows.

RE: Communication on the incentive tariff pursuant to
ministerial decree 6 August 2010, concerning _ the
hotovoltaic plant named SUGARELLA, capacity
located in STRADA VICINALE DI SAN PIEROTTO,
SNC 01011 Municipality of CANINO (VT) site LA
SUGARELLA, ID number N = 506827.

With reference: to the photovoltaic plant hereunder, we
hereby communicate the admission to the incentive tari
under Ministerial Decree 6 August 2010 equal to

The incentive tariff will be recognizedfor a period of twenty
years as of the date of entry into operation of the plant:
28/04/2011; the tariff is constant, in current currency, all
through the 20-year period, Such period is calculated net of
plant stop due to grid stability issues or natural disasters
qualified as such by the competent authorities. These events
shall be notified through the web portal section “Post
agreement execution notices — Out of order’.

The data of the plant operator (soggetto responsabile)
(hereinafter SR) are the following:

name: PHENIXRENEWABLES S.R.L.

fiscal code/VAT code: 06367010961

address: VIA DELLA ROTONDA , 36 00186 Commie di
ROMA (RM)

The value of the incentive tariff has been determined
according to the documentation filed together with the
request for tariffs concession on 19/07/2011, as well as on
the basis of the following specific information:

  

type of plant: Photovoltaic
Power: HH

Plant operator (Soggetto Responsabile): legal entity
Kind of intervention: NEW CONSTRUCTION

Plant site category: OTHER

Category of plant: OTHER PV PLANT

Energy sale regime: OF F-TAKE

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 64

In order to activate the payment of tariffs, the plant owner
[Soggetto ResponsabileJ is invited to:

J. login on the web portal https://applicazioni.gse.it)
(dedicated to incentives through the ID and password
previously assigned and access section “Agreements” by
clicking on "Terzo Conto Energia";

2. select the plant concerned through the search function;

3. click on the button "Details" and look at the draft of the
agreement regulating the contractual relationship on tariffs
payment relating to the selected plant;

4. should any (records) discrepancies be detected, select the
button "before signing the agreement some data on the
plant owner [Soggetto ResponsabileJ must be corrected by
GSE” and click on the “Proceed” button. By this way, a
notice on discrepancies or errors will be activated; only
after GSE notice to SR on the corrections having been
made, tit will be possible to go on with sending the
acceptance declaration of the agreement (point 5 below);

5, to accept the agreement click on "I declare I have read
and accept in full all provisions regulating this agreement”
and click on the “Proceed” button. Print and sign the
Acceptance declaration and attach thereto a copy of SR ID
in force (lacking thereof will prevent GSE from executing
the agreement), upload the document. Once the uploading
is completedjust click on the button "Send agreement”;

6. the GSE, after executing the agreement, will make
available, in the section “Agreements” on the web portal,
the document in electronic format digitally signed by the
legal representative of the GSE.

 

The above is without prejudice to the right of GSE to carry
out subsequent controls through documents and/or on-site
inspections, as well as adopt annulment or revocation
measures concerning the incentive tariffs admission letter,
thereby asking back for the amounts already paid, if,
\ according to art. 23 and 43 of Legislative decree 28/2011,
the occurrence of circumstances preventing tariffs payment
is ascertained, even if such conditions emerged during the
| examination of a plant different from the one at issue.

 

With Kind Regards.

I SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 65

Conto Energia Unit Representative

158. Certain of the terms of the Phenix GSE Agreement dated 23

November 2011 are set out in the following paragraphs.
159. The heading of the Phenix GSE Agreement is as follows:

AGREEMENT NO. IO8F25553007 ON THE
RECOGNITION OF INCENTIVE TARIFFS FOR THE
PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITY FROM
PHOTOVOLTAIC PLANTS PURSUANT TO
MINISTERIAL DECREE DATED 19/02/2007 [which is
Conto II] AND RESOLUTION NO. 90/07 OF THE
AUTHORITY FOR ELECTRICITY AND GAS [which is
quoted, in part, at para. ..... above]

160. The pertinent (in the Tribunal’s appreciation) clauses of the Phenix

GSE Agreement are as follows:

Article L
Purpose of the Agreement

This Agreement concerns the recognition to the Soggetto
Responsabile by GSE, of the incentive tariff related to the
electricity produced through photovoltaic conversion from
solar power by the plant mentioned in the introduction,
incentivised pursuant to art. 7 of Legislative Decree 387/03
of the Ministerial Decree dated 6 August 2010 and AEEG
resolution ARG/elt 181.10

Article 2

Effective date and value of the incentive

The incentive tariff to be granted to the photovoltaic plant
under this Agreement, which is constant in current
currency, is equal | EEE a value recognised
by GSE and disclosed to the Soggetto Responsabile with the

communication of admission to the incentive tariffs,

 

Article 10
Effective date and duration of the Agreement

This Agreement is effective from 28/04/2011 and expires on
27/04/2031.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 66

Article 13
Jurisdiction

For any dispute arising out of or in any way connected to
the interpretation and execution of this Agreement and the
documents referred to therein, the Parties agree on the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Forum of Rome.

Article 14
Formalisation of the Agreement

For the purposes of formalising the Agreement, the
Soggetto Responsabile is required to print the relevant
Declaration of Acceptance and send it to GSE through the
online portal duly signed, together with a copy of a valid
identification document. This Agreement is formalised at
the time that GSE proceeds with the acceptance of the
aforementioned Declaration, providing a copy of the
agreement on its electronic portal, signed by its legal
representative.

Article 15
Amendments and other

Any agreements modifying or integrating the content of this
Agreement subsequent to the date on which the agreement
signed by GSE is made available must be agreed upon in
writing, otherwise being null and void. The Parties
acknowledge that any declaration under this Agreement in
connection with the activities/obligations related to the
performance thereof is made pursuant to the Decree of the
President of the Republic (D.P.R.) 445/00. The introduction
forms an integral and essential part of this Agreement.

Enersol

161. On30 March 20122, Claimant acquired Enersol S.r.L, a company that

held all project rights to a multi-section photovoltaic plant of

? Para. 160 of the SoC contains a chart with the dates of acquisitions by Claimant. The date of
acquisition of Enersol is stated to be 30 March 2012. This is accepted by Respondent on slide 62
of its Opening Presentation at the hearing. Thus, as it is common case between the Parties, the
Tribunal finds that the date of acquisition of Enersol by Claimant is 30 March 2012.

 

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 67

approximately 48 MW located in Canaro in the Veneto region
(‘Enersol’”). The Enersol photovoltaic plant was partitioned in seven
sections. Section 1 of the plant was connected to the grid in April
2011, and was entitled to an incentive tariff of EBA uncer
Conto III, as confirmed by a GSE Agreement dated 2 November
2011. Sections 2 and 3 of the plant were connected to the grid in July
2011, and were entitled to an incentive tariff of EB vce:
Conto IV, as confirmed by two separate GSE Agreements (one per
Section) dated 2 March 2012. Sections 4 to 7 of the plant were
connected to the grid in August 2011, and were entitled to an
incentive tariff of ame. under Conto IV, as confirmed by four
separate GSE Agreements (one per Section) dated 11 January 2012
(for Sections 5 and 7), 6 February 2012 (for Section 4), and 2 March
2012 (for Section 6). Thus, Claimant’s acquisition of Enersol,

therefore, post-dated the relevant GSE Agreements.

162. The tariff recognition letters, with the subsequent GSE Agreements,

in connection with Enersol are each recorded in turn.
Letter — Enersol Section 1 -— 11 October 2011

RE: Communication on the incentive tariff pursuant to ministerial
decree 6 August 2010, concerning the photovoltaic plant named
FOTOVOLTAICO ENERSOL, capacity QED located in
VIA VITTORIO EMANUELE , s.n. 45034 Municipality of
CANARO (RO) site SALINE, ID number N = 512446.01.

With reference to the photovoltaic plant hereunder, we hereby
communicate the admission to they ive tariff under Ministerial
Decree 6 August 2010 equal “anes

The incentive tariff will be recognized for a period of twenty years
as of the date of entry into operation of the plant: 28/04/2011; the
tariff is constant, in current currency, all through the 20-year
period, Such period is calculated net of plant stop due to grid
stability issues or natural disasters qualified as such by the
competent authorities. These events shall be notified through the

web portal section “Post agreement execution notices — Out of
order".

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 68

The data of the plant operator (soggetto responsabile) (hereinafter
SR) are the following:

name: ENERSOL S.R.L.

fiscal code/VAT code: 01381190295

address: VIA VITTORIO VENETO, 137 45100 Comune di
ROVIGO (RO)

The value of the incentive tariff has been determined according to
the documentation filed together with the request for tariffs
concession on 17/06/2011, as well as on the basis of the following
specific information:

type of plant; Photovoltaic

Power:

Plant operator (Soggetto Responsabile): legal entity

Kind of intervention: NEW CONSTRUCTION

Plant site category: OTHER

Category of plant: OTHER PV PLANT

Energy sale regime: OF F-TAKE

Eligible for incentive tariff increase: NO

In order to activate the payment of tariffs, the plant owner
[Soggetto Responsabile ] is invited to:

1. login on the web portal https://applicazioni.gse.it) (dedicated to
incentives through the ID and password previously assigned and
access section “Agreements” by clicking on "Terzo Conto
Energia";

2. select the plant concerned through the search function;

3. dick on the button "Details" and look at the draft of the
agreement regulating the contractual relationship on tariffs
payment relating to the selected plant;

4. should any (records) discrepancies be detected, select the button
"before signing the agreement some data on the plant owner
[Soggetto Responsabile] must be corrected by GSE” and click on
the “Proceed” button. By this way, a notice on discrepancies or
errors will be activated; only after GSE notice to SR on the
corrections having been made, tit will be possible to go on with
sending the acceptance declaration of the agreement (point 5
below);

5. to accept the agreement click on "I declare I have read and
accept in full all provisions regulating this agreement” and click
on the “Proceed” button. Print and sign the Acceptance
declaration and attach thereto a copy of SR ID in force (lacking
thereof will prevent GSE from executing the agreement), upload
the document. Once the uploading is completed just click on the
button “Send agreement”;

6. the GSE, after executing the agreement, will make available, in
the section “Agreements” on the web portal, the document in
electronic format digitally signed by the legal representative of the

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) = Award 69

GSE.

GSE Agreement for Enersol Section 1 (T03N25531907) 31
October 2011
(relevant extract)

Purpose of the Agreement

This Agreement concerns the recognition to the Soggetio
Responsabile by GSE, of the incentive tariff related to the
electricity produced through photovoltaic conversion from solar
power by the plant mentioned in the introduction, incentivised
pursuant to art. 7 of Legislative Decree 387/03 of the Ministerial
Decree dated 6 August 2010 and AEEG resolution ARG/elt 181.10

Article 2
Effective date and value of the incentive
The incentive tariff to be granted to the photovoltaic plant under
thisAgreement pn vhich is constant in current currency, is equal to
jaerenee a value recognised by GSE and disclosed to the
Soggetto Responsabile with the communication of admission to the
incentive tariffs.

 
 

Article 10
Effective date and duration of the Agreement
This Agreement is effective from 28/04/2011 and expires on
27/04/2031.

Article 15
Amendments and other
Any agreements modifying or integrating the content of this
Agreement subsequent to the date on which the agreement signed
by GSE is made available must be agreed upon in writing,
otherwise being null and void.

Letters — Enersol Sections 2 & 3 — 20 February 2012

RE: Communication on the incentive tariff pursuant to MD 5 May
2011 concerning the photovoltaic plant named FOTOVOLTAICO
ENERSOL with a capacity of (MMMM located in VIA
VITTORIO EMANUELE, s.n. 45034 Municipality of CANARO
(RO) site of SALINE, plant ID number N = 512446.02. [512446.03
in the context of Enersol Section 3]

With reference to the photovoltaic plant mentioned above, we

hereby communicate the admission to the incentive tariff under
Ministerial Decree 5 May 2011, equal te

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 70

The tariff will he recognizedfor a twenty-year period as of the date
of entry into operation of the plant: 31/07/2011; the tariff is
constant in current currency for all the twenty year period. This
timeframe is calculated net of any plant stops due to problems
concerning grid safeguard or following natural disaster
considered as such by the competent authorities. These events shall
be communicated through the relevant web portal section.

The identification data of the plant owner (Soggetto Responsabile)
are the following:

name: ENERSOL S.R_L.

fiscal code/VAT code: 01381190295

address: VIA VITTORIO VENETO, 137 45100 Comune di
ROVIGO (RO)

The value of the incentive tariff has been determined according to
the documentation sent together with the application for the
incentive tariffs dated 05/08/2011, and on the basis of the
followingfeatures:

Kind of plant: Big Photovoltaic Plant

Nominal capacity:

Soggetto Responsabile: legal entity

Kind of intervention: NEW CONSTRUCTION

Site nature: agricultural area

Kind of facility installed: OTHER PV PLANT

Energy sale regime: Off-take

Additional tariff increase: -

In order to activate the payment of tariffs, the plant owner
[Soggetto Responsabile] is invited to:

1. login on the web portal (https:-/applicazionigse.it) dedicated to
incentives through the ID and password previously assigned and
access section “Agreements” by clicking on "Quarto Conto
Energia";

2. select the plant concerned through the search function;

3. click on the button "Details" and look at the draft of the
agreement regulating the contractual relationship on tariffs
payment relating to the selected plant;

4. should any (records) discrepancies be detected, select the button
"before signing the agreement some data on the plant owner
[Soggetto Responsabile] must be corrected by GSE” and click on
the “Proceed” button. By this way, a notice on discrepancies or
errors will be activated; only after GSE notice to SR on the
corrections having been made, tit will be possible to go on with
sending the acceptance declaration of the agreement (point 5
below);

5. to accept the agreement click on "I declare I have read and
accept in full all provisions regulating this agreement” and click
on the “Proceed” button. Print and sign the Acceptance

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 71

declaration and attach thereto a copy of SR ID in force (lacking
thereof will prevent GSE from executing the agreement), upload
the document. Once the uploading is completed just click on the
button “Send agreement”;

6. the GSE, after executing the agreement, will make available, in
the section “Agreements” on the web portal, the document in
electronic format digitally signed by the legal representative of the
GSE.

The above is without prejudice to the right of GSE to carry out
subsequent controls through documents and/or on-site inspections,
as well as adopt annulment or revocation measures concerning the
incentive tariffs admission letter, thereby asking back for the
amounts already paid, if the lack of the elements necessary for
granting incentives is ascertained.

The GSE also verifies the occurring of any circumstances
preventing incentives payments and adopt all consequent measures
of revocation or exclusions in accordance with arts. 23 and 43 of
legislative decree 28/2011.

GSE Agreements for Enersol Sections 2 & 3 (T03N236118107 &
T03N236188307 respectively) 2 March 2012
(relevant extract)

Article 1
Purpose of the Agreement

This Agreement regards the recognition to the Soggetto
Responsabile by GSE of the incentive tariff related to the electricity
produced through photovoltaic conversion from solar sources from
the plant mentioned in the introduction, incentivised pursuant to
art. 7 of Legislative Decree 387/03 of the Ministerial Decree dated
5 May 2011.

Article 2
Value of the incentive
The incentive tariff; constant in regular instalments in current
currency, to be recognised to the photovoltaic plant under this
Agreement, is equal to a value recognised by
GSE and notified to the Soggetto Responsabile with the
communication on admission to the incentive tariff.

Article 10
Effective date and duration of the Agreement
The present Agreement is effective from 31/07/2011 and expires on
30/07/2031.

Article 15

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 72

Modifying agreements and referral
Any modifying or supplementary agreements on the content of the
present Agreement subsequent to the date on which the agreement
signed by GSE is made available must be agreed in writing, under
the penalty of nullity.

Letters — Enersol Sections 4 (15 December 2012), 5, 6, & 7 (each on
16 December 2012)

RE; Communication on the incentive tariff pursuant to MD 5 May
2011 concerning the photovoltaic plant named FOTOVOLTAICO
ENERSOL, with a capacity of aaa: located in VIA
VITTORIO EMANUELE, 5.n. 45034 Municipality of CANARO
(RO) site of SALINE, plant ID number N = 512446.04. [512446.05
in the context of Enersol Section 5; 512446.06 in the context of
Enersol Section 6; and 512446.07 in the context of Enersol Section
7]

With reference to the photovoltaic plant mentioned above, we
hereby communicate the admission to thsi ive_tariff under
Ministerial Decree 5 May 2011, equal to eee

The tariff will be recognized for a twenty-year period as of the date
of entry into operation of the plant: 31/08/2011; the tariff is
constant in current currency for all the twenty year period. This
timeframe is calculated net of any plant stops due to problems
concerning grid safeguard or following natural disaster

considered as such by the competent authorities. These events shall
be communicated through the relevant web portal section.

The identification data of the plant owner (Soggetto Responsabile)
are the following:

name: ENERSOL S.R.L.

fiscal code/VAT code: 01381190295

address: VIA VITTORIO VENETO, 137 45100 Comune di
ROVIGO (RO)

The value of the incentive tariff has been determined according to
the documentation sent together with the application for the
incentive tariffs dated 13/09/2011, and on the basis of the
following features:

Kind of plant: Big PhotovglMc Plant

Nominal capacity: ‘a.

Soggetto Responsabile: legal entity

Kind of intervention: NEW CONSTRUCTION

Site nature: agricultural area

Kind of facility installed: OTHER PV PLANT

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 73

Energy sale regime: Off-take
Additional tariff increase: NO

In order to activate the payment of tariffs, the plant owner
[Soggetto ResponsabileJ is invited to:

1. login on the web portal (https://applicazioni.gse.it) dedicated to
incentives through the ID and password previously assigned and
access section “Agreements” by clicking on "Quarto Conto
Energia";

2. select the plant concerned through the search function;

3. click on the button "Details" and look at the draft of the
agreement regulating the contractual relationship on_ tariffs
payment relating to the selected plant;

4. should any (records) discrepancies be detected, select the button
"before signing the agreement some data on the plant owner
[Soggetto ResponsabileJ must be corrected by GSE" and click on
the “Proceed” button. By this way, a notice on discrepancies or
errors will be activated; only after GSE notice to SR on the
corrections having been made, tit will be possible to go on with
sending the acceptance declaration of the agreement (point 5
below);

5. to accept the agreement click on "I declare I have read and
accept in full all provisions regulating this agreement” and click
on the "Proceed" button, Print and sing the Acceptance
declaration and attach thereto a copy of SR ID in force (lacking
thereof will prevent GSE from executing the agreement), upload
the document. Once the uploading is completed just click on the
button "Send agreement”;

6. the GSE, after executing the agreement, will make available, in
the section “Agreements” on the web portal, the document in
electronic format digitally signed by the legal representative of the
GSE.

The above is without prejudice to the right of GSE to carry out
subsequent controls through documents and/or on-site inspections,
as well as adopt annulment or revocation measures concerning the
incentive tariffs admission letter, thereby asking back for the
amounts already paid, if the lack of the elements necessary for
granting incentives is ascertained.

The GSE also verifies the occurring of any circumstrances
preventing incentives payments and adopt all consequent measures
of revocation or exclusions in accordance with arts. 23

GSE Agreements for Enersol Sections 4, 5, 6, & 7
(respectively: TO3N2229769107 of 16 February
2012; T03N229798007 of 11 January 2012; T03N229798207 of 2
March 2012; T03N229798307 of 11 January 2012)

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 74

(relevant extract)

Article 1
Object of the Agreement
This Agreement concerns the recognition to the Producer [Enersol
S.r.L] by the GSE of the incentive tariff related to the electricity
produced through photovoltaic conversion from solar power by the
plant mentioned in the introduction, incentivizedpursuant to art 7
of Legislative Decree No. 387/03, Ministerial Decree 5 May 2011.

Article 2
Value of the Incentives
The incentive tariff constant in regular instalments in the
applicable currency to be recognized to_the photovoltaic plant
under this Agreement, is equal to a value
recognized by GSE and disclosed to the Producer [Enersol S.r.L ]
with the communication on the admission to the incentive tariff.

Article 10
Date and Duration of the Agreement
The present Agreement is effective from 31 August 2011 and
expires on 30 August 2031.

Measures taken by Respondent

 

163. The Tribunal starts its analysis first with the Spalmaincentivi measure
taken by Respondent, which Claimant alleges to have transgressed —
in breach of Article 10(1) ECT - its legitimate expectations as to the
stability of the legal and economic regime of the PV electricity
production in Italy Into which it invested. The Tribunal will then
describe the other measures. This order of analysis is justified by the
fact that the Spalmaincentivi was the preponderant cause of the
reduction to Claimant’s revenues from its investments. Temporally,
however, the Spalmaincentivi was not the first measure by which
Respondent sought to “scale back’, as Claimant describes
Respondent’s policy in this respect, the incentives it had given to PV

electricity production in the furtherance of its policy objectives,
Spalmaincentivi

164. Spalmaincentivi (or “incentive spreading”) is the journalistic,

colloquial name of the provisions of Article 26 of Law Decree

SCO Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 75

165.

166.

91/2014 of 24 June 2014, which was subsequently converted with
substantial relevant changes into Law 116/2014 of 11 August 2014.
As all such decrees addressing urgent issues, which under the Italian
Constitution, Governments may enact with force of a law, Law
Decree 91/2014 had to be converted by Parliament within 60 days
into a law, possibly with amendments, as happened for Law Decree
91/2014, in case it would lose any effect. The shortened name of the
Decree is “Decreto Competitivita” (“Competitiveness Decree”). It
included a range of measures to bolster Italy’s competitiveness,
including among others, as mentioned in its full title, measures for the
“imitation of the costs burden on electricity tariffs”, which are found
in Article 26. This purpose was considered so important that, as the
Parties have recalled, Article 26 measures have been also labelled

with the term “taglia-bollette” (tariff bill-cut).

The original text of Article 26 provided only, among other measures
included in the Law Decree, to reduce the burden for electricity
consumers due to advantages granted to various electricity users and
producers (among the latter, notably PV producers) that the benefits
of the incentive tariffs would be spread over 24 years instead of the 20
years provided in the various Conto Energia, According to Claimant
this entailed a reduction of 17%-25% depending on the residual

period of operation of a given PV plant.

As a result of the parliamentary debate, in which parliamentarians of
parties favourable to the industry were active in proposing
modifications that would diminish the negative impact of the original
Spahnaincentivi on PV producers, the conversion Law 116/2014
(effective 1" January 2015) offered producers the choice between
three options: (A) a 17-25% tariff cut (as originally provided in the
Law Decree), paid over 24 years instead of originally promised 20

years; (B) a tariff reduction from 2015-2019, with a promise of

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 16

Administrat

167.

168.

169.

SCC Arbitrati

increased tariffs in remaining years; and (C) (which applied in default
of a choice by a producer) straight 6-8% cut over 20 years, depending
on the installed capacity of the plant concerned. Further, another
aspect of Spalmaincentivi was that payment of 100% of the incentive
within 60 days was changed to 90% with the 10% balance paid the

subsequent year.
‘ive fees and imbalance costs

First, as regards administrative fees, article 10.4 of Conto V provided
that, as of 1 January 2013, all photovoltaic producers benefiting from
incentive tariffs under any Conto were required to pay an annual
administrative fee corresponding to € 0.0005 per kWh of incentivized
energy, to cover the GSE’s management, verification, and control

expenses.

Secondly, as regards imbalance costs, on 5 July 2012, the AEEG
passed Resolution 281/2012/R/EFR (“Resolution 281”), which
required renewable energy producers to pay imbalance costs as of 1
January 2013. The GSE, with approval of the AEEG, implemented
the method by which those costs would apply to renewable energy
producers at the end of 2012 with Resolution 493/2012/R/EFR
(Resolution 493”),

Resolution 281 and Resolution 493 were challenged before the Italian
administrative courts. On 9 June 2014, the Consiglio di Stato found
in favour of the producers and held that the AEEG’s resolutions were
unlawful. In particular, the Consiglio di Stato indicated that the
resolutions were discriminatory because they regulated programmable
and non-programmable sources of energy in the same manner, and
therefore failed to differentiate amongst different types of renewable
energy sources. As a result of that judgment, in many cases, the GSE
reimbursed the sums that renewable energy producers had already

paid under Resolution 281 and Resolution 493.

ion V (2015/158) - Award 7

170. On 23 October 2014, the AEEG issued Resolution No.
522/2014/R/EEL (“Resolution 522”) that, once again, imposed
imbalance costs on renewable energy producers. Although certain
producers challenged Resolution before the Italian courts on grounds
that it should be null and void as in contrast with the principles of the
previous court ruling, renewable energy producers have been paying

these imbalance costs since 1 January 2015.
Robin Hood tax

171. In 2008, Respondent enacted a windfall profits tax on the profits of
oil, gas, and other traditional energy companies, colloquially known
in an amalgam of English popular legend and modem economic

factors as the “Robin Hood” tax.

172. Under the heading of “Oil and gas sectors” in Law-Decree No.
112/2008 of June 25, 2008, Respondent provided that, as a result of
the country’s economic situation and the social impact of the increase
in energy prices, it would increase the corporate income tax rate of
companies with an annual gross income of over € 25 million by 5.5

percentage points, from 27.5% to 33%.

173. In July 2009, Respondent increased the corporate income tax rate of
companies subject to the Robin Hood tax to 34%. Respondent
explicitly excluded producers of renewable energy from the Robin
Hood tax because they had not benefited from the then price spikes in

traditional energy sources.

174, In August 2011, Respondent broadened the scope of the Robin Hood
tax by extending it to all energy producers, including renewable
energy producers, with a gross annual income of over €10 million and
taxable income of over €1 million. In the law decree’s preamble it

was noted the urgency of adopting financial stabilization measures

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 78

175.

176.

177.

was to guarantee the stability of Italy in the midst of an international
economic crisis and unstable markets. Respondent also increased the
corporate income tax rate of companies subject to the Robin Hood tax

from 34% to 38%, which applied to fiscal years 2011 through 2013.

In June 2013, Respondent extended the scope of the Robin Hood tax
by reducing the applicable income thresholds to gross annual income
over €3 million and taxable income over € 300,000. This resulted in
the application of the Robin Hood tax to Claimant’s photovoltaic

plants.

A constitutional challenge to the application of the Robin Hood tax to
the renewable energy sector was brought and on 11 February 2015,
the Italian Constitutional Court ruled the extension of the Robin Hood
tax to renewable energy producers to be unconstitutional. The Court

also ruled that its decision would not have retroactive effect.

On 28 April 2015, Respondent confirmed that renewable energy
producers were required to pay the Robin Hood tax for the 2014 fiscal

year,

IMU/TASI charges

178.

In December 2013, Respondent classified photovoltaic plants as
immovable property, thereby subjecting them to increased IMU and
TASI charges. Respondent changed this in the 2016 Budget Law,
reducing IMU and TASI charges by about 90%. Respondent has not
refunded IMU and TASI charges paid in 2014 and 2015.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 79

Section B - Merits — Liability (incl. concomittant Jurisdiction & Admissibility)

Introduction

179. Claimant says that the matters discussed in the foregoing section of

this award (Spalmaincentivi, Administrative fees and imbalance costs,
the Robin Hood tax, and the IMU/TASI charges) give rise to ECT
claims in respect of each of its three investments, namely, Megasol,
Phenix, and Enersol. Claimant summarised each head of claim, in its

Opening Presentation at the hearing, as follows:

- Italy failed to fulfill the obligations it entered into with respect
to CEF’s investments, which were crystallized in Tariff
Confirmation Letters and Contracts.
Italy violated CEF’s legitimate expectations of receiving
precisely the tariffs granted to its PVplants through the Conto
Energia Decrees, Tariff Recognition Letters, and Contracts
when Italy amended those tariffs through the enactment of
various measures, including the Spalmaincentivi
If Italy’s case is to be believed, then it failed to provide a
transparent legal framework, since under Italy's case, the
Conto Energia Decrees, Tariff Recognition Letters, and
Contracts did not mean what they plainly said.
- Italy's measures reducing the Conto Energia tariffs
unreasonably impaired CEF’s investments.

180. In summary, these are: (a) Umbrella Clause claims; (b) FET claims;

181.

(c) Failure to provide transparent legal framework claims; and (d)

Unreasonable impairment claims.

Respondent denies all liability, and, additionally, raises the exception
found in Article 21 of the ECT in respect of a number of the measures
(this summary is taken from its Opening Presentation at the hearing):
(a) Robin Hood Tax; (b) Qualification of assets for fiscal and
cadastral purposes; (c) Imbalance charges; and (d) Administrative

fees,

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award. 80

182. The Tribunal, in its procedural appreciation of the materials before it,
arranges its analysis as follows: 1. FET claims; 2. Umbrella Clause
claims; 3. Failure to provide transparent legal framework claims; and

4. Unreasonable impairment claims.
FET claims

183. The Tribunal, first, records the basic contours of what constitutes fair
and equitable treatment. Article 10(1) of the ECT provides as follows,

in part:

Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of
this Treaty, encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and
transparent conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to
make Investments in its Area. Such conditions shall include a
commitment to accord at all times to Investments of Investors of
other Contracting Parties fair and equitable treatment.

184. The Parties are in agreement with one another that protection of
legitimate expectation comes within the ambit of Article 10(1) of the
ECT, though as to what precisely such protection exactly means (from
the plethora of prior awards cited to the Tribunal) is an area of
contention. The briefings which the Tribunal received from the Parties
on 20 July 2018 (commenting, inter alia, on Antons) encapsulated
such contention; but most particularly these briefings showed that
each advocated a view that, regardless of how one articulates the
protection of legitimate expectation, the outcome was going to be

their favour.

185. In this respect the Tribunal finds it useful to recall and quote the
summary made by the tribunal in Antaris of the protection that the
FET standard grants to covered foreign investors by clauses such as
Art. 100.) ECT. The Tribunal considers that the summary of the
Antaris award quoted hereunder is by and large a correct description

of the import of the FET standard as found in Article 10 (1) ECT in

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 81

the light of the abundant case law that has developed on the issue. In
referring to such summary the Tribunal is, in any case, mindful that
principles have to be adapted to the specificity of each case and that in
this field previous awards and decisions may properly be looked at as
useful (restatements of the law but do not represent binding
precedents. The relevant recapitulation in Antaris is as follows

(footnotes omitted):

360. As is usual in these cases; the Parties have adduced many
published awards (in this case more than 50) on the interpretation
or application of the FET ("fair and equitable treatment”)
standard, and the FPS ("full protection and security”) and non-
impairment standards. Most of them are well-known, and, although
formulations of the principles differ in detail, it is only necessary to
summarize the present state of international law and practice in
these general propositions (several of which overlap with each
other):

(1) There will be a breach of the FET standard where legal and
business stability or the legal framework has been altered in such a
way as to frustrate legitimate and reasonable expectations or
guarantees of stability.

(2) A claim based on legitimate expectation must proceed from an
identification of the origin of the expectation alleged, so that its
scope can be formulated with precision.

(3) A claimant must establish that (a) clear and explicit (or
implicit) representations were made by or attributable to the state
in order to induce the investment, (b) such representations were
reasonably relied upon by the Claimants, and (c) these
representations were subsequently repudiated by the state.

(4) An expectation may arise from what are construed as specific
guarantees in legislation.

(5) A specific representation may make a difference to the
assessment of the investor’s knowledge and of the reasonableness
and legitimacy of its expectation, but is not indispensable to
establish a claim based on legitimate expectation which is
advanced under the FET standard.

(6) Provisions of general legislation applicable to a plurality of

persons or a category of persons, do not create legitimate
expectations that there will be no change in the law; and given the

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) ~ Award 82

State‘s regulatory powers, in order to rely on legitimate
expectations the investor should inquire in advance regarding the
prospects of a change in the regulatory framework in light of the
then prevailing or reasonably to be expected changes in the
economic and social conditions of the host State.

(7) An expectation may be engendered by changes to general
legislation, but, at least in the absence of a stabilization clause,
they are not prevented by the fair and equitable treatment standard
if they do not exceed the exercise of the host State’s normal
regulatory power in the pursuance of a public interest and do not
modify the regulatory framework relied upon by the investor at the
time of its investment outside the acceptable margin of change.

(8) The requirements of legitimate expectations and legal stability
as manifestations of the FET standard do not affect the State’s
rights to exercise its sovereign authority to legislate and to adapt
its legal system to changing circumstances.

(9) The host State is not required to elevate the interests of the
investor above all other considerations, and the application of the
FET standard allows for a balancing or weighing exercise by the
State and the determination of a breach of the FET standard must
be made in the light of the high measure of deference which
international law generally extends to the right of national
authorities to regulate matters within their own borders.

(10) Except where specific promises or representations are made
by the State to the investor, the latter may not rely on an investment
treaty as a kind of insurance policy against the risk of any changes
in the host State's legal and economic framework Such
expectation would be neither legitimate nor reasonable.

(11) Protection from arbitrary or unreasonable behaviour is
subsumed under the FET standard.

(12) It will also fall within the obligation not to impair investments
by “unreasonable ... measures” (Article 10(1), ECT) or "arbitrary
... measures (Article 2(2), Czech Republic/Germany BIT).

(13) The investor is entitled to expect that the State will not act ina

way which is manifestly inconsistent or unreasonable (i.e.
unrelated to some rational policy).

186. Respondent also, at para. 473 of SoD, makes the point that the

protection under the FET standard may only concern those

expectations of the investors that existed at the time when they made

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 83

the investment. It is with this important temporal point that the

Tribunal will begin its analysis of the FET claims.

187. As already noted above (paras. 152 and 153), both the tariff
recognition letter and the GSE Agreement in respect of Megasol post-
dated Claimant’s investment: Also, as already noted above (paras. 157
and 158), both the tariff recognition letter and the GSE Agreement in
respect of Phenix post-dated Claimant’s investment. Further, neither
plant had been, at the time of the investments, connected to the grid.
Thus, at the time Claimant invested in both Megasol and Phenix, at
the very best it can be said that its intention was to complete plants
which would, at a point in the future, be connected to the grid, and be
compliant with the necessary requirements under the applicable
Conto. Thereafter, appropriate applications would need to be made
(and the requirements of the applicable Conto to be satisfied), a reply

in the positive received, and then a GSE Agreement consummated.

188. Claimant, in reality, at the time of the making of both the Megasol
and Phenix investments still had a number of steps to take before it
knew for certain that the hoped-for incentives were actually awarded
to it, It enjoyed no guarantee of success at the time of investment, and

nothing in any of Respondent’s Contos could infer that a party in
Claimant’s position as of such dates was inevitably going to be
awarded the incentives. The fact that Claimant did indeed, at a later

time, succeed in all respects for both Megasol and Phenix does not

 

assist it as of the dates upon which it made those investments. What is
decisive is that as of those dates the protection of Claimant’s

investment rights had not yet crystallised.
189. As a consequence, the Tribunal finds that Claimant cannot assert an

FET claim by way of protection of legitimate expectation for both

Megasol and Phenix insofar as it might allege that the changes to the

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 84

later-awarded incentives engage international responsibility on the

part of Respondent.

190. Conversely, no such difficulty arises in respect of Enersol. As noted
above in footnote 2, it is common case that the date of Claimant’s
investment was 30 March 2012, which clearly post-dates the
connections to the grid, the tariff recognition letters, and the GSE
Agreements. Thus, as of 30 March 2012, Claimant’s investment in

Enersol enjoyed crystallised rights to incentives as described above.

191.

Thus, the Tribunal will now analyse whether Respondent’s actions
transgressed the protection of legitimate expectation by the ECT
insofar as Enersol is concerned. This is a two-stage process as a
matter of international law: first, what is the origin and scope,
precisely, of the legitimate expectation; secondly, how exactly has
such legitimate expectation (if first established as a matter of
international law) have been transgressed, if at all, in a manner

prohibited by international law.

192. Before embarking into the analysis of whether or not there was a
breach of any legitimate expectation attached to Claimant’s
investment in Enersol, the Tribunal must address threshold points

raised by Respondent.

193. As noted in para. 181 above, Respondent raises Article 21 of the ECT

in four respects. Article 21 of the ECT provides as follows:

ARTICLE 21
TAXATION

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Article, nothing in this
Treaty shall create rights or impose obligations with respect to
Taxation Measures of the Contracting Parties. In the event of any
inconsistency between this Article and any other provision of the
Treaty, this Article shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 85

(2) Article 7(3) shall apply to Taxation Measures other than those
on income or on capital, except that such provision shall not apply

to:

(a) an advantage accorded by a Contracting Party pursuant
to the tax provisions of any convention, agreement or
arrangement described in subparagraph (7)(ajii); or

(b) any Taxation Measure aimed at ensuring the effective
collection of taxes, except where the measure of a
Contracting Party arbitrarily discriminates against Energy
Materials and Products originating in, or destined for the
Area of another Contracting Party or arbitrarily restricts
benefits accorded under Article 7(3).

(3) Article 10(2) and (7) shall apply to Taxation Measures of the
Contracting Parties other than those on income or on capital,
except that such provisions shall not apply to:

(a) impose most favoured nation obligations with respect to
advantages accorded by a Contracting Party pursuant to
the tax provisions of any convention, agreement or
arrangement described in subparagraph (7)(a)(ii) or
resulting from membership of any Regional Economic
Integration Organization; or

(b) any Taxation Measure aimed at ensuring the effective
collection of taxes, except where the measure arbitrarily
discriminates against an Investor of another Contracting
Party or arbitrarily restricts benefits accorded under the
Investment provisions of this Treaty.

    

(4) Article 29(2) to (8) shall apply to Taxation Measures other than
those on income or on capital.

(5)

(a) Article 13 shall apply to taxes.

(b) Whenever an issue arises under Article 13, to the extent
it pertains to whether a tax constitutes an expropriation or
whether a tax alleged to constitute an expropriation is
discriminatory, the following provisions shall apply:

(i) The Investor or the Contracting Party alleging
expropriation shall refer the issue of whether the tax
is an expropriation or whether the tax is
discriminatory to the relevant Competent Tax
Authority. Failing such referral by the Investor or
the Contracting Party, bodies called upon to settle
disputes pursuant to Article 26(2)(c) or 27(2) shall
make a referral to the relevant Competent Tax
Authorities;

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 86

(ii) The Competent Tea Authorities shall, within a
period of six months of such referral, strive to
resolve the issues so referred Where non-
discrimination issues are concerned the Competent
Tax Authorities shall apply the non-discrimination
provisions of the relevant tax convention or, if there
is no non-discrimination provision in the relevant
tax convention applicable to the tax or no such tax
convention is in force between the Contracting
Parties concerned, they shall apply the non-
discrimination principles under the Model Tax
Convention on Income and Capital of the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development;

(Hi) Bodies called upon to settle disputes pursuant
to Article 26(2)(c) or 27(2) may take into account
any conclusions arrived at by the Competent Tax
Authorities regarding whether the tax is an
expropriation. Such bodies shall take into account
any conclusions arrived at within the six-month
period prescribed in subparagraph (b)ii) by the
Competent Tax Authorities regarding whether the
tax is discriminatory. Such bodies may also take into
account any conclusions arrived at by the
Competent Tax Authorities after the expiry of the
six-month period;

(iv) Under no circumstances shall involvement of
the Competent Tax Authorities, beyond the end of
the six-month period referred to in subparagraph
(b)(ii), lead to a delay of proceedings under Articles
26 and 27.
(6) For the avoidance of doubt, Article 14 shall not limit the right
of a Contracting Party to impose or collect a tax by withholding or
other means.

(7) For the purposes of this Article:
(a) The term "Taxation Measure" includes:
(i) any provision relating to taxes of the domestic
law of the Contracting Party or of a political

subdivision thereof or a local authority therein; and

“ (ii) any provision relating to taxes of any convention
for the avoidance of double taxation or of any other

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 87

international agreement or arrangement by which
the Contracting Party is bound.

(b) There shall be regarded as taxes on income or on
capital all taxes imposed on total income, on total capital
or on elements of income or of capital, including taxes on
gains from the alienation of property, taxes on estates,
inheritances and gifts, or substantially similar taxes, taxes
on the total amounts of wages or salaries paid by
enterprises, as well as taxes on capital appreciation.

(c) A "Competent Tax Authority" means the competent
authority pursuant to a double taxation agreement in force
between the Contracting Parties or, when no such
agreement is in force, the minister or ministry responsible
for taxes or their authorized representatives.

(d) For the avoidance of doubt, the terms "tax provisions"
and "taxes" do not include customs duties.

194, Respondent says that certain of the actions it took of which Claimant
makes complaint, are captured by Article 21 of the ECT. In such
circumstances, if Respondent is correct, the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction to decide whether or not those actions engaged
international responsibility as a matter of the ECT. These arguments

are now examined in turn.

195.

a

As regards administrative fees, these arose as follows. Article 10.4 of
Conto V provided that, as of 1 January 2013, all photovoltaic
producers benefiting from incentive tariffs under any Conto were
required to pay an annual administrative fee corresponding to €
0.0005 per kWh of incentivized energy, to cover the GSE’s
management, verification, and control expenses. Are these

administrative fees a Taxation Measure, or are they not?

196. As Respondent points out at para. 147 of the SoD, the definition in
Article 21(7) of the ECT is very wide, and includes any provision
relating to taxes of the domestic law of the Contracting Party or of a

political subdivision thereof or a local authority therein. Respondent

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 88

then develops its argument as to what is tax provision in the domestic

law of Italy at paras. 149-151 of the SoD:

149. In Italy, fiscal measures (tributi) can be broadly divided into
three categories: imposta (tax), tassa (fee) and contiibuto
(contribution), although it is not the name of the measure to
actually make it a fiscal measure (as further explained). In general
terms, a (administrative, judicial or industrial) fee is paid as
consideration for a given service rendered by a public body. In this
case, the service provided is in principle requested by the citizen. A
tax corresponds to the wealth that is drawn from the citizens in
relation to the production of income for the provision of general
services provided by the State; therefore, this is not related to any
Specific service but based on the contributive capacity (“capacita
contributiva") of the person. Finally, a contribution (or "onere
sociale”: social burden) is the compulsory levy from certain
individuals, to the fact that they derive a benefit, directly or
indirectly, by certain public services, even without having
requested these.

 

150. In the absence of legislative measures to help defining when a
Specific measure is to be considered a fiscal measure (tributo), we
need to be guided by case law, in particular by the Italian
Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court has slated
repeatedly that, irrespective of the name given to the measure, the
features that qualify a disbursement as of fiscal nature are: 1)
dutifulness of the withdrawal, 2) absence of exact reciprocity
between the parties, and 3) connection of the withdrawal to the
public spending by linking this to an economically significant
prerequisite,

151. In addition, the Italian Constitution imposes that tributes be
established by law. All taxes, fees and contributions under Italian
law thus satisfy the above conditions under Article 21(7) and
consequently are “Taxation Measures” under the ECT.

197. Claimant’s Reply (para. 109) counters by referencing the official

Italian language version of the ECT which only includes “imposte” in
Article 21(7), rather than the wider definition advocated by
Respondent encompassing “tassa” and “contributo”. Claimant also
invokes a number of awards stated to be in its favour (Murphy
Exploration & Production Company - International v the Republic of
Ecuador, Partial Final Award, 6 May 2016; Occidental Petroleum

Corporation, Occidental Exploration and Production Company v The

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 89

 

19)

199,

8.

Ss

Republic of Ecuador, CSTD Case No. ARB/06/11, Award, 5 October
2012; and Yukos Universal Ltd. y Russian Federation, Award, 18 My
2014).

The Tribunal finds Claimant’s argument as to the Italian language
version of the ECT to be unavailing. If it were upheld, then the
different official language versions of Article 21(7) (as demonstrated
in para. 120 of the Rejoinder) would give rise to radically differing
results. The definition contained in Article 21(7), whether in Italian,
or any other official language, is widely drawn. The Tribunal does
not, therefore, have any reason to consider that definition, insofar as it
applies to Italy, as being anything other than that articulated by the
Italian Constitutional Court: J) dutifulness of the withdrawal, 2)
absence of exact reciprocity between the parties, and 3) connection of
the withdrawal to the public spending by linking this to an

economically significant prerequisite.

Thus, the Tribunal considers the administrative fees to be a Taxation
measure. They clearly fall within the definition articulated by the
Italian Constitutional Court. The Tribunal accepts the submission of
Respondent at para. 149 of the SoD that the widely-drawn meaning of
a taxation measure in Italy (tributi) encompasses fees such as the
administrative fees imposed on all photovoltaic operators by means of
Conto V. These were consideration for a given service rendered by a
public body and while such administrative fees might only be directed
towards photovoltaic operators and not the public at large, this does
not detract from their essential nature: they are imposed by
Respondent (or an emanation thereof) in order to fund a service
rendered in support of such photovoltaic operators. The Tribunal finds
further support for its conclusion from the example given by
Respondent concerning municipal garbage taxes. Although they are in
principle fees for service rendered, Italian jurisprudence considers

them to be taxes because they are charged on all home owners or

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 90

tenants to whom the service is provided irrespective of a precise
correspondence between: snch service and its utilization by an

individual owner or tenant,

200. In such circumstances, Claimant’s claims concerning administrative

fees are captured by Article 21 of the ECT.

201.

Secondly, as regards imbalance costs, Respondent says, at para.
132(b) of the Rejoinder:

Imbalance charges in turn relate to the dispatching of energy and
are an instrument to cope with shocks of the dispatching system.
Transmission and dispatching of energy is reserved to the State
and granted in concession to Terna. Relevant legislation defines
“dispatching” as the activity aimed at providing instructions for
the use and the coordinated operation of production plants, the
fransmission grid and auxiliary services. Terna has a monopoly
over such activities. In the case of transmission and dispatching
activities, Terna has the duty to grant non-discriminatory access to
all operators and be neutral and unbiased in offering the service.
However, this does not interfere with the possibility that a specific
charge be paid by way offee, The fiscal nature of such measures is
recognize by the Claimant in the first place: “[p Jolicymakers have
the choice either of charging imbalance costs to renewable
producers or passing them on to consumers” (§173 of Statement of
Claim). It states further “Italy had socialized the imbalance costs,
meaning that the entire energy forecast was conducted at the
national system level and the costs were passed on to
endconsumers via the electricity bill.” (§ 175 of Statement of
Claim). Passing these costs on to consumers means to impose a
general fee to final users for the implementation of the mechanism
of energy reserves by Terna, indeed to “socialize” the costs of the
public service. Charging them to the generality of energy
producers means to equally impose a fee, to “socialize” the costs
by putting a burden on producers instead of final user. What
changes is the general category of persons charged with the fee,
not its nature.

 

 

202. The Tribunal considers the imbalance costs to be a Taxation measure.
They clearly fall within the definition articulated by the Italian
Constitutional Court and the analysis conducted above in connection
with administrative fees applies mutatis mutandis, Whether or not the

current imbalance fees are illegal as a matter of Italian law is a

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 91

municipal matter.

203. In such circumstances, Claimant’s claims concerning imbalance costs
are captured by Article 21 of the ECT.

204. The Robin Hood tax clearly falls within the definition articulated by
the Italian Constitutional Court, and is, therefore, a Taxation measure.
While it might well be the subject of bewilderment to Claimant that
taxes which have been held by the municipal courts to be
unconstitutional have not been reimbursed, that is still in the domain

of a Taxation measure.

205. In such circumstances, Claimant’s claims concerning the Robin Hood

tax are captured by Article 21 of the ECT.

206. Finally, in this regard, the Tribunal also readily appreciates the IMU

| and TASI charges to be Taxation measures. Classifying photovoltaic

 

plants as immovable property, thereby subjecting them to increased
IMU and TASI charges, falls directly within the definition articulated
by the Italian Constitutional Court. As with the Robin Hood tax, the
non-refund of such charges paid in 2014 and 2015 may well be
considered by Claimant to be irreconcilable with the 2016 Budget
Law, but that is a matter of municipal law inextricably bound up with

domestic fiscal measures.

207. In such circumstances, Claimant’s claims concerning the IMU and

TASI charges are captured by Article 21 of the ECT.

208. In conclusion, and taking into account all of the foregoing, Claimant's
FET claim reposes on what was its legitimate expectation as on 30
March 2012 in respect of the Enersol investment, and, whether,
Spalmaincentivi transgressed the protection of such, if any, legitimate
expectation. The Tribunal will now proceed to assess that FET claim

according to the following approach: first, what is the origin and

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 92

scope, precisely, of the legitimate expectation; secondly, how exactly
has such legitimate expectation (if first established as a matter of
international law) been transgressed in a manner prohibited by

international law.

The origin and scope of Claimant’s legitimate expectation as regards Enersol

209. As on 30 March 2012, when Claimant bought Enersol, what can be
objectively identified as unquestionably in place and explicitly known

to it?

210. First, seven sections of the photovoltaic plant had already been

connected to the national electricity grid.

211. Secondly, seven tariff recognition letters had been issued by an
emanation of Respondent. These letters stated (as already recorded

above):

The incentive tariff will be recognized for a period of twenty years
as of the date of entry into operation of the plant: 28/04/2011; the
tariff is constant, in current currency, all through the 20-year
period. [Section 1]

The tariff will be recognized for a twenty-year period as of the date
of entry into operation of the plant: 31/07/2011; the tariff is
constant in current currency for all the twenty year period.
[Sections 2 & 3]

The tariff will be recognized for a twenty-year period as of the date

of entry into operation of the plant: 31/08/2011; the tariff is

constant in current currency for all the twenty year period.
[Sections 4, 5, 6, & 7]

212. These letters did not simply state that the tariffs were recognised, but

expressly say that in order to obtain such tariffs, the relevant GSE

agreements needed to be printed and signed. This was an express and

unmistakeable invitation on the part of an emanation of Respondent to

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 93

213.

214.

216.

sign the relevant GSE agreements as an essential prerequisite to the

obtaining of the incentives.

Thirdly, seven GSE Agreements had been concluded between
investments of Claimant and an emanation of Respondent. By way of
example, as already recorded above, these GSE Agreements had the

following language (example is taken from Sections 2 and 3):

The incentive tariff, constant in regular instalments in current
currency, to be recognised to the photovoltaic plant under this
Agreement, is equal to a value recognised by
GSE and notified to the Soggetto Responsabile with the
communication on admission to the incentive tariff

The present Agreement is effective from 31/07/2011 and expires on
30/07/2031.

Arry modifying or supplementary agreements on the content of the
present Agreement subsequent to the date on which the agreement
signed by GSE is made available must be agreed in writing, under
the penalty of nullity.
The language found in the sample GSE contract pursuant to Conto V,
which expressly puts on notice any photovoltaic producer of the
potential for unilateral changes brought about by legislation, is not
present in any of the seven GSE Agreements applicable to Enersol.
All of the GSE Agreements to which Enersol was a party had the
express language that the only way change could be brought about to

contractual terms was by way of mutual agreement in writing.

. Fourthly, four Contos and the Romani Decree had been passed into

law by Respondent. These, in varying respects, were the domestic

legal background to the incentive schemes.

For the moment, the Tribunal does not take account of the plethora of
advertising material (whether apparently issued by emanations of

Respondent, or through promotional material issued by, amongst

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 94

others, law firms) which Claimant relies upon in its submissions as
indicating reliance on the putative constancy of the incentive schemes.
Much of this material might well he described as puffery, and the
Tribunal prefers, at this stage, to analyse the four matters discussed
just above for the purposes of Claimant’s legitimate expectation as on
30 March 2012.

217. Looking at the four matters described above (in no particular order:
(a) the four Contos and Romani Decree; (b) the tariff recognition
letters; (c) the connections to the national grid; and (d) the GSE
Agreements), a party in the shoes of Claimant would be left in no
doubt but that it was to receive incentives, in constant currency, for a
twenty year period, and all pursuant to private law contracts (as this
was understood to be the state of Italian law at the time of the making
by Claimant of its Enersol investments — indeed the Romani Decree
could not have been clearer in that respect to any reasonable reader)
which could not be amended save by mutual agreement. This was
clearly based on the consistent legal policy of Respondent as
manifested in the four Contos and the Romani Decree. No reading, no
matter how indulgent, could lead anyone to consider anything other
than a clear promise of twenty years of constant currency incentives
pursuant to a private law contract. This is not a black letter reading, or
the Tribunal holding Respondent hostage to blinkered pedantry
(which would be unbecoming the dignity of a sovereign state), rather,
it is the product of a careful, good faith reading of all of Respondent’s

unambiguous acts as set out above.

218. The critical question readily emerges from all of the foregoing is
whether Claimant enjoyed a legitimate expectation protected by
Article 10(1) of the ECT in respect of its Enersol investment as of 30
March 2012?

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 95

 

219. Drawing upon the principles articulated by the tribunal hxAntaris, the

220.

221.

Tribunal now ascertains whether a key predicate for a claim based on
legitimate expectation is present in this case. As that tribunal
described, [AJ claim based on legitimate expectation must proceed
from an identification of the origin of the expectation alleged, so that
its scope can be formulated with precision, it is readily apparent to the
Tribunal that both the origin and scope of the expectation of Claimant
in respect of Enersol as on 30 March 2012 is precisely identifiable:
Enersol was to receive incentives, in constant currency for a twenty-

year period.

It is also important to differentiate the situation of Claimant as on 30
March 2012 in respect of Enersol with that of the claimant in Blusun.
That claimant was, unlike Claimant and its investment in Enersol, still
at a preliminary stage of its attempts to invest in the Italian
photovoltaic market. That led to it falling at the first legal hurdle for
causation as a matter of Article 10(1) of the ECT before that tribunal
which found (para. 386) that:

[T]o conclude, in the Tribunal’s view, the Project ran a significant
risk of incurring legal or administrative difficulties, even if these
could be (and in the event largely were) overcome. Its success was
by no means certain.

This finding of the Blusun tribunal echoes part of the summary,
already quoted above, of the tribunal in Antaris, but now quoted again

in specific illustration of these points:

(6) Provisions of general legislation applicable to a plurality of
persons or a category of persons, do not create legitimate
expectations that there will be no change in the law; and given the
State’s regulatory powers, in order to rely on legitimate
expectations the investor should inquire in advance regarding the
prospects of a change in the regulatory framework in light of the
then prevailing or reasonably to be expected changes in the
economic and social conditions of the host State.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 96

 

(7) An expectation may be engendered by changes to general
legislation, but, at least in the absence of a stabilization clause,
they are not prevented by the fair and equitable treatment standard
if they do not exceed the exercise of the host State's normal
regulatory power in the pursuance of a public interest and do not
modify the regulatory framework relied upon by the investor at the
time of its investment outside the acceptable margin of change.

(8) The requirements of legitimate expectations and legal stability
as manifestations of the FET standard do not affect the State's
rights to exercise its sovereign authority to legislate and to adapt
its legal system to changing circumstances.

(9) The host State is not required to elevate the interests of the
investor above all other considerations, and the application of the
FET standard allows for a balancing or weighing exercise by the
State and the determination of a breach of the FET standard must
be made in the light of the high measure of deference which
international law generally extends to the right of national
authorities to regulate matters within their own borders.

(10) Except where specific promises or representations are made
by the State to the investor, the latter may not rely on an investment
treaty as a kind of insurance policy against the risk of any changes
in the host State’s legal and economic framework Such
expectation would be neither legitimate nor reasonable.

222. The foregoing. five points made by the tribunal in Anraris do not

22)

wo

present Respondent with an answer to the position of Claimant in
respect of Enersol as of 30 March 2012. Claimant’s expectation as of
that date was not simply (as was, essentially, the ease with the Blusun
claimant) relying on a general, erga omnes, promise found in law to
putative photovoltaic producers. Quite the contrary, by 30 March
2012, Claimant’s expectation was both specific as to what it was to
receive by way of incentives and their exact duration, and precise in

its origin (namely, from explicit acts of Respondent),

The next question is, according to the tribunal in Antaris, is whether
such representations were reasonably relied upon by the Claimants.
This is a matter which, at the very end of the hearing, included a new
point being raised by Respondent in connection with a due diligence

report prepared for Claimant’s financiers by Clifford Chance.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 97

224. Claimant, prior to consummating its investment in Enersol on 30
March 2012 undertook due diligence via the law firm of Ashurst. A
Legal Due Diligence Report authored by that firm of 18 March 2012
is relied upon in Claimant’s SoC. That Legal Due Diligence Report
explicitly references the GSE Agreements (section 5 thereof). Further,
the Tribunal has been shown by Claimant a set of slides prepared by
Glennmont Partners (which is understood to be the controller of
Claimant) entitled Serenissima which describes (p. 5) explicitly the

volume and price arrangements for the Enersol investment.

225. The Tribunal readily, therefore, sees that Claimant relied on the
circumstances of Enersol (described above) when deciding whether or
not to invest. All of the matters set out in both the Legal Due
Diligence Report and the Serenissima presentation carefully record
the circumstances of Enersol and, therefore, reliance can well be

understood to have been reasonable.

226. However, at the end of the hearing there was a ripple in the lagoon by
reason of reliance, first raised in oral closing argument by
Respondent, on a passage in an exhibit of Claimant, the due diligence

report issued by Clifford Chance.

227. Respondent’s point, which arose in oral closing argument at the
hearing (and cannot be found anywhere in Respondent’s memorials),
was as follows. In a due diligence report prepared for Claimant’s

financiers by Clifford Chance, the following is stated:

7.4 Changes in applicable legislation

In Italy, alternative energy incentive programmes are highly
regulated and constantly evolving at the local, national and EU
level. If amendments were made to the current legislation setting
out the eligibility requirements for admission to, and the incentives
available under, Conto Energia, any photovoltaic plant that is not

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 98

yet admitted to Conto Energia at the time such legislative
amendments become effective may have to comply with the then-
applicable requirements and be eligible only for the then-available
incentives.

You should be aware that Italian law does not prohibit the
enactment of laws with retro-active effect; although no laws with
retroactive effect have been issued in the field of energy law in
Italy in the past.

Once the grant of the incentives is secured by the execution of the
agreement with the GSE, the risk of a retroactive change in
incentives can be reasonably deemed low.

228. The Clifford Chance due diligence report was included as an exhibit
to Claimant’s SoC, and, therefore, was entirely known to Respondent
from that moment onwards. Nonetheless, it was only at the oral
closing stage at the hearing that considerable emphasis was laid upon
this section by Respondent as support for the proposition that
Claimant was on notice that there was a risk of retrospective changes
to granted incentives. As described in the procedural history section
of this Award, the Tribunal thereafter received post-hearing

submissions in that regard. These will now be analysed.

229. With specific reference to Claimant’s FET claim, it argues in its post-

hearing brief as follows:

 

6. .. First, considered objectively, the language Italy cites
would not warn an investor that Italy could legally retroactively
revoke the rights it had guaranteed under its regulatory
framework, in the GSE Tariff Confirmation Letters, and in the
GSE’s Contracts with the individual plant owners without
providing compensation. In fact, Clifford Chance expressly
recognized that a completedfacility that had enrolled in the regime
had rights that undeveloped projects did not have: "any
Photovoltaic plant that is not yet admitted to the Conto Energia at
the time of such legislative amendments become effective may have
to comply with the then-applicable requirements and be eligible
only for the then-available incentives.” That sentence clearly
refers to prospective, not retroactive changes to the regulatory
regime.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 99

7. On the other hand, the final two sentences do reference
retroactive changes, but do not lead to Italy’s proposed
conclusion. While Clifford Chance does state that Italian law
technically does not prohibit retroactive changes, it also states that
“no laws with retroactive effect have been issued in the field of
energy law in Italy in the past. Further, Clifford Chance never
suggested that retroactive changes stripping investors of their
rights without compensation are permitted. Indeed, Clifford
Chance acknowledged that “[ojnce the grant of the incentives is
secured by the execution of the agreement with the GSE, the risk of
retroactive change in incentives can be reasonably deemed low.”
Thus, after reviewing the Clifford Chance report, CEF still had a
reasonable expectation that Italy would not modify its legal regime
retroactively without compensating investors, and invested in
Project Enersol on the basis of that expectation. That is
particularly the case in light of all the additional evidence
regarding CEF’s legitimate expectations in relation to its
investments generally and Project Enersol in particular, such as
the GSE Contracts setting forth the specific tariffs that project
would receive.

230. The Tribunal does not appreciate from any of the briefings which
followed thereafter that Respondent gainsayed the foregoing position
of Claimant. That does not mean, inevitably, that the Tribunal accepts
what Claimant submits. It will make its own independent assessment

of the consequences, if any, of what Clifford Chance says.

231.

First, it is clear that Clifford Chance indicates that the risk of
retrospective legislation in the energy sector is very low indeed; so
low that it opines that it has never occurred in the past. Thus, as of 30
March 2012, Claimant is explicitly aware of the fact that no
retrospective change in the law in the energy sector had ever occurred,

up to that time, in Italy.

232.

nv

Secondly, Clifford Chance makes a clear distinction between
investors which have not yet secured a precise incentive, and those
that have consummated a GSE agreement, with the former plainly at
greater risk of not getting what they might have expected at the time
they commenced their works in the event of a change of the law.

Those that have consummated a GSE agreement are, in Clifford

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 100

Chance’s words, facing, reasonably, a low risk of retrospective
change. That firm does not go any further in developing this point,
possibly due to the fact that such an event (at that time) had never

occurred in Italy in the energy sector.

233. The Tribunal, in its assessment of the international law standard of
legitimate expectation, finds it difficult to see how a two-sentence
articulation of a low-risk hypothetical (which had never occurred in
the energy sector up to that moment) could comprehensively
eviscerate the collective and explicitly-stated consequences of all of
the four matters described at paras. 210-215 above for the purposes of
what was Claimant’s legitimate expectation on 30 March 2012. While
later events (as discussed below concerning the judgment of the
Constitutional Court) bore out Clifford Chance’s opinion, the precise
content of the legitimate expectation is measured against the
conditions pertaining at the date of investment. The strictness of this
temporal rule inures to Respondent’ s favour in respect of Megasol and

Phenix.

234. In summary, the Tribunal is now in a position to answer the key
question posed above at para. 218 above with “yes”: did Claimant
enjoy a legitimate expectation within the meaning of Article 10(1) of
the ECT in respect of its Enersol investment as of 30 March 2012?
The answer is yes, and the precise scope of that legitimate expectation
is that Enersol was to receive incentives, in constant currency for a
twenty-year period. However, that legitimate expectation does not, in
the Tribunal’s estimation, extend to one further aspect of Claimant’s
claim, namely, the change, brought about by Spalmainincentivi
whereby payment of 100% of the incentive within 60 days was
changed to 90% with the 10% balance paid the subsequent year. The
Tribunal considers that Claimant has not asserted (save for a passing

criticism in para. 208 of the SoC, which the Tribunal finds to be

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 101

 

insufficient) or proven that organs of Respondent offered explicit or
implicit promises or guarantees that change of the type encompassed
by the payment term change would not be made. Thus, even though
Claimant considered this measure unfavorable to their investments, it

has not argued or alleged any ground for an FET claim.

Has Claimant’s legitimate expectation been transgressed in a manner prohibited
by the ECT?

235,

236.

This question, which is at the heart of the issue of liability, can be
formulated as follows: whether, in June / August 2014, when
Respondent enacted the Law Decree No. 91/2014 converted into Law
116/2014, colloquially known “Spalmaincentivi”, by which Conto
Energia tariffs previously granted to existing PV plants were reduced
in order to lessen the burden of electricity bills to consumers, did it
breach the protection of Claimant’s legitimate expectation as a matter
of Article 10(1) of the ECT? By reference to the third of the three-step
test postulated at para. 360(3) of the award in Antaris, the present
question is refined further, namely, did the Spalmaincentivi breach the
representations of Respondent which led to the legitimate

expectations of Claimant in respect of Enersoll

The existence of a breach is not the automatic consequence of a
finding that subsequent measures taken by the host state are in
contrast with the legal regime and “assurances” of stability on which
the foreign investor relied when it made its investment. To follow
again Antaris, the reasons and justification of the state’s action must
also be evaluated, “in the light of the then prevailing or reasonably to
be expected changes in the economic and social conditions of the host
State” (Antaris, para, 360(6)). This entails evaluating whether the
subsequent action by the State “at least in the absence of a
stabilization clause,...do not exceed the exercise of host State’s

normal regulatory power in pursuance of a public interest and do not

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 102

modify the regulatory framework relied upon by the investor at the
time of its investment outside the acceptable margin of change."
{Antaris para. 360(7)) This means that the quantitative negative
impact on the investment’s value and profitability must be taken into
account. Finally, (Antaris para. 360(9) “The host State is not required
to elevate the interests of the investor above all other considerations,
and the application of the FET standard allows for a balancing or
weighing exercise by the State and the determination of a breach of
the FET standard must be made in the light of the high measure of
deference which international law generally extends to the right of
national authorities to regulate matters within their own borders”
{Antaris para. 360 (9).

237. As concerns the first element of the comparative analysis, consisting
in “balancing and weighing” the expectations of the Claimant as a
foreign investor protected by Article 10(1) ECT, with the right of
Respondent as host State to adapt its regulatory framework to
changing circumstances, the Tribunal has already duly highlighted the
key and specific elements of Claimant’s rights and expectation and
their sources. As stated above at para. 222, “Claimant’s expectation
was both specific as to what it was to receive by way of incentives
and their exact duration, and precise in its origin (namely, from
explicit acts of Respondent)”. Specifically, as said above in para. 217
Claimant’s expectation was based on “a clear promise of twenty years

of constant currency incentives pursuant to a private law contract”.

238. On the other hand, looking at the actions by Italy which negatively
affected the legitimate expectation of Claimant and their reasons, the
Tribunal recalls that as an effect of the modifications of the original
Law Decree 91/2014 when it was converted into Law 116/2014 the
options of a cut in tariffs were offered to the PV operators. They all

resulted in a photovoltaic producer not receiving the originally-

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 103

promised incentivised tariff for twenty years, Even the least damaging
option (Option C), added in the conversion Law 116/2014 (the default
option chosen by Claimant in respect of Enersol,) providing for a
tariff cut of 6-8% for the residual years up to the end of the 20-year
contractual period, resulted in the amount of the tariff obtained by
Enersol being less than the one originally granted on which Claimant

had relied in making its investment.

239, As to the reasons for the issuance of the Spalmaincentivi the Tribunal
has taken note that the Decree Law and accompanying official
documents, spell out the reasons for reducing the incentives provided
to the PV operators through the various Conto Energia. The rationale
was that of reducing the burden of electricity bill to the consumers,
especially small and medium enterprises, in order to stimulate
economic growth and competitiveness. The Tribunal has also taken
note that the tariff cut was not the only measure taken to this end as

concerns electricity tariffs in the Decree Law 91/2014.

240. The Tribunal is at pains to also observe that Respondent’s three
Spalmaincentivi options are not, in of themselves, an unreasonable
measure. The sustainability of the incentive system for PV producers
and other valuable objective of general interests were at stake, and it
can readily be appreciated that the dignity which attaches to
sovereigns must be given deference, though that is not infinite when
balanced against a combination of international obligations freely
assumed and, further, fact-specific circumstances of the extent of

commitments given to investors.

241.

The Tribunal does not consider that the reasons adduced by the
Respondent to justify the cut of the tariff granted for a 20-year period

to the Claimant’s investment in Enersol and the fact that the cut was

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 104

not of such a magnitude as to render the investment unprofitable, but
allowed it (arguendoj to still generate a fair return can prevail over
the legitimate expectations of Claimant that it is entitled to benefit of

the originally granted and agreed incentivized tariff

242. The Tribunal finds support for this conclusion in the words of El Paso
Energy International Company y. Argentine Republic, that the FET is
linked to the objective reasonable legitimate expectations of the
investors and that these have to be evaluated considering all
circumstances. As discussed already in this award, there are specific
circumstances attaching themselves to Claimant’s investment in
Enersol (a) the relevant Contos and Romani Decree; (b) the tariff
recognition letters; (c) the connections to the national grid; and (d) the
GSE Agreements. None of these could give any reasonable observer
the slightest doubt but that Respondent had committed itself vis a vis
Enersol to constant currency tariffs over a twenty year period. The
contrast in the apparent (at the time of the Enersol investment)
immutability and commitment of Respondent to the constancy of the
tariffs with its later position can particularly be noted from the fact
that a GSE contract under the Conto V regime clearly puts the
photovoltaic producer on notice of the risk of unilateral changes to

such terms.

243. It is readily apparent to the Tribunal that the greater the level of
engagement as between a sovereign and an investor, such as here
through Respondent’s undertaking to maintain a specific incentivized
tariff for 20 years, ultimately resulting in legitimate expectations
which are clear in both scope and origin, the more rigorous the
scrutiny must be of acts which, even if reasonable, cut across those

legitimate expectations. It is an inherent aspect and quality attaching

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 105

to the dignity of a sovereign that promises made and obligations

accrued by it are respectfully and carefully upheld and vindicated.

244. Having taken all of the foregoing into account, the Tribunal concludes
that the three Spalmaincentivi options are, therefore, a breach by
Respondent of Article 10(1) ECT in respect of Claimant’s legitimate
expectation concerning its investment in Enersol. Claimant was, as a
matter of the Spalmaincentivi options, faced with three choices none
of which would lead to the vindication or upholding of the legitimate

expectation it had in respect of Enersol as on 30 March 2012.

245. Prior to making its final conclusion in respect of Claimant’s FET
claim as regards Enersol, the Tribunal also notes that Respondent
argued at some length that its measures did not result in Claimant’s
investments becoming unprofitable. That may very well be the case,
but this, in the Tribunal’s view, does not provide an answer to
Claimant’s FET case in respect of Enersol. This is best encapsulated
by a provision in the Romani Decree, namely, that the incentive has
the purpose of ensuring a fair remuneration of the investment and
operating costs. This is an entirely appropriate policy aim so that the
incentives which Respondent grants to PV producers does not turn
into a one-sided financial bonanza at the expense of the public purse.
However, the decision as to what is a fair remuneration, while in the
hands of Respondent, is made at the time the level of a particular
incentive is set for a particular producer. There is no indication of any
kind whatsoever in the first four Contos, the Romani Decree, the tariff
recognition letters, and the GSE Agreements that, once an incentive
rate is offered, and then accepted into a consummated contract, it
would be subject to the vagaries of whatever might later be deemed to

be a fair remuneration for the remaining lifetime of the arrangement.

246. In conclusion, and taking all of the foregoing into account, the

Tribunal holds and finds that Law Decree No. 91/2014, or

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 306

247.

Spalmaincentivi, Respondent breached the ECT protection of
Claimant’s legitimate expectation in respect of the latter’s investment
in Enersol. The consequences of this breach will be discussed later in

this Award.

The above conclusions that the Respondent has breached the FET
standard of Article 10(1) ECT by having breached the protection of
the legitimate expectations of Claimant that the incentivized tariff
would not be cut by a provision such as Spalmaincentivi reflects the
views of a majority of the Tribunal (comprising Mr. Reichert and
Prof. Dr. Sachs). Prof. Sacerdoti disagrees on those conclusions for
the following reasons: “I believe that the weighing and balancing
exercise between the expectations of Claimant in the stability of the
20-year tariff, on the one hand, and the right of Italy to change it in
special circumstances in the public interest, as was done through the
Spalmaincentivi, should lead to the conclusion that Respondent has
not thereby breached Article 10(1) ECT. As to the expectations of the
Claimant in the stability of the tariff granted to Enersol, I recognize
they were properly based on a series of general and specific
provisions (including the GSE Agreements) that made it reasonable to
believe that the 20-year tariff incentive would not be subject to
change. On the other hand, Claimant should have been aware that
under Italian law (on which the due diligence reports it had obtained
exclusively focused) the possibility that the State could unilaterally
modify the tariff in special circumstances, for pressing reasons of
public interest, provided that the negative impact would be modest,
could not be ruled out. This is exactly what the Constitutional Court
held in its judgment 16/2017 in relation to the Spalmaincentivi: “The
analysis of the rationale and of the content of the challenged
provision [Article 26 of Law 116/2014] leads to exclude that the latter
impacted on the long-term relationship - resulting from the
agreements concluded with [GSE] - in an unreasonable, arbitrary

and unpredictable way, so as to harm...the invoked principle

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 107

[legitimate expectations]. Indeed the regulatory change at hand is
justified by a public interest, in terms of a fair balancing of the
opposed interests at stake, which is meant to combine the policy of
support to the production of energy from renewable sources with a
better sustainability of the respective costs borne by the end
consumers of electricity energy” (at para. 8.2). As to the tariff cut put
in place by the Spalmaincentivi, the evidence shows in my opinion
that it was a reasonable measure, taken in a transparent way, aimed at
pursuing a legitimate public interest - both looking at its aims and at
the economic context - and that, finally, due care was taken to protect
the interests of the investors (which by the way were predominantly
Italians). This is because (a) the burden of the consumers’ electricity
bills reducing measures (“Taglia-bollette”) was spread among various
categories, among which that of the beneficiaries of the PV
incentivized tariffs was but one, and (b) the negative impact was
limited a: also due to the modification in the final Law
116/2014 of the initially harsher reduction. The cut has not affected
the profitability of the investment (for which there is a market, cf
para. 42 above), as certified by the fact that the damages that the
Tribunal finds and awards to Claimant in respect of Enersol are just

@o the enterprise value iia determined by

Claimant’s quantum expert.”

 

248. Article 10(1) of the ECT provides as follows, in relevant part:

Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligations it has
entered into with an Investor or an Investment of an Investor of any
other Contracting Party,

249. Claimant advances, either additionally or alternatively to its FET
claims, umbrella clause claims against Respondent which repose on
the GSE Agreements in respect of all of its investments, Megasol,

Phenix, and Enersol. It argues that each of the GSE Agreements

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 108

(while subject to Italian law and jurisdiction) do not admit of (as of
now) any other reading or interpretation save an obligation on the part
of Respondent to pay incentives, in constant currency, for twenty

years, with no possibility of amendment save by mutual consent.

250. At the centre of Respondent's defence to these umbrella clause claims
is Decision No. 16/2017 of the Italian Constitutional Court and its
position that the GSE Agreements were, in fact, found by such

Decision to be “accessory”.

251. Respondent’s SoD, footnote 109, submits as follows (emphasis
added):

Contracts concluded by public administrations can be divided into
three broad categories. The first consists of the so-called
“ordinary contracts”, and are contracts that do not undergo
modifications for the fact that one of the parties is a public
authority, The parties act on a strictly equal footing. The second
category consists of the so-called “special contracts”, because
contracts (private) law generally governs them, but, alongside the
provisions of the civil code, other specific rules apply, which
normally ascribe special powers to the government. Besides these
specific provisions, however, also these. contracts follow the
general principles of private law. The third category comprises
contracts with a “public subject matter”, or “contracts of public
law”. Unlike the previous ones, these are connected to public
measures, of which they are a necessary complement. Their scope
is circumscribed by the public act and only exist in connection with
such public act and the exercise of the public power. In turn,
“contracts of public law” are usually divided into three further
categories: “accessory contracts” to public measures, “auxiliary
contracts” to public measures, and contracts “substituting” public
measures, “Accessory contracts” are generally recognized as
bearing distinctive features. As_a_seneral definition, it can be
stated that “accessory” are those contracts governing_reciprocal
duties of parties that arise from a public_measures. To a phase of
authoritative exercise of public powers, it follows one built under
the scheme of a contractual relationship: whereas the authoritative
exercise of power establishes the legal situation, the contractual
instrument regulates its operation. Even assuming that, because of
these two sides, such a contract is “mixed” in nature, this would in
fact mean that the management of the executive aspects of the
relationship are regulated by private law, whereas the contract

 

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 109

 

keeps a public nature. In particular, t) ould not change the fact
that the particular nature of the subject matter of the contract
(public interest), and its object (the of this interest),
leave _intact_a_ position of supremacy_by the public _power that
would make_it_possible_for the latter to unilaterally modify its
conditions by modifying the authoritative act.

 

 

  

 

252. The case before the Italian Constitutional Court concerned
Spalmaincentivi. Various photovoltaic producers sought to have die
changes to the tariff regime struck down. In particular, those parties
alleged that their incentives were recognized by private law

agreements.

253. The Italian Constitutional Court, when considering the relevant GSE

contracts described them as follows:

This is even truer if one considers that the agreements
reached with GSE cannot be qualified as contracts meant to
determine the exclusive profit of the operator, with terms
and conditions blocked at the initial conditions, for twenty
years, even if technological changes may change
profoundly. They are instead regulatory instruments, aimed
at reaching the objecting of incentivizing certain sources of
energy in equilibrium with other sources of renewable
energy, and with the minimum sacrifice for the users who
ultimately bear the economic burden.

Setting aside the fact that such “contracts” are accessory
to the provisions granting the incentives, one should recall
the principle ~ which has been repeatedly stated by this
court — that there cannot be a violation of the freedom of
economic initiative when the general limited that have been
put aim at promoting social welfare, as established by
article 41, para, 2, of the Constitution, provided that the
measures are not arbitrary and the intervention of the
legislature does not pursue its aim through measures which
are clearly incongruous... Both these requirements, as
already said, have been complied by the provisions
reducing and rescheduling the incentives.

254. The Tribunal is, therefore, compelled to the conclusion that the

obligations which Respondent entered into with Claimant’s

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 110

Investments (i.e. Megasol, Phenix, and Enersol) were, as a matter of
Italian law subject to unilateral modification by Respondent. The GSE
Agreements are all subject to Italian law, and the awards which
Claimant cite do not have the effect of overriding a choice of
governing law made by the parties thereto. The obligations of
Respondent which it owed to Claimant’s Investments were delineated
by Italian law, which (when revealed by the Italian Constitutional
Court to be accessory in nature) allowed it to unilaterally modify such

obligations.

255. In such circumstances, the Tribunal dismisses Claimant’s Umbrella
Clause claims as argued for by it and summarised in its Opening
Presentation at the hearing (“Italy failed to fulfill the obligations it
entered into with respect to CEF’s investments, which were
crystallized in Tariff Confirmation Letters and Contracts” ). Bearing
in mind the alternative prayer for relief advanced by Respondent
(“Article 10(1) ECT, last sentence (the so-called “umbrella clause”)
does not apply in the case at stake, or, alternatively, that the
Respondent did not violate it neither through statutoiy or regulatory
measures, nor the GSE Conventions”), the Tribunal considers the
latter proposition to be well-founded. In particular, apart from the fact
that the “obligations” are municipal matters, subject to Italian law, the
Tribunal does not consider the measures implemented by Respondent
to transgress the ECT requirement by a signatory state to
observe “any obligations it has entered into with an Investor or an
Investment of an Investor of any other Contracting Party”, The
measures, of which Claimant makes complaint, were addressed to all
PV producers and were, in the Tribunal's assessment, compliant with
Italian law (as emerged from the decision of the Italian Constitutional
Court).

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award Il

Failure_to_provide_transparent_legal__ framework claims_- Unreasonable

impairment claims

256.

For convenience, the Tribunal considers these two claims together.

257. The Tribunal now records, in relevant part, Article 10(1) of the ECT:

258.

259.

Each Contracting Party shall, in accordance with the provisions of
this Treaty, encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and
transparent conditions for Investors of other Contracting Parties to
make Investments in its Area.

 

Such Investments shall also enjoy the most constant protection and
security and no Contracting Party shall in any way impair by
unreasonable or discriminatory measures their management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal.
By way of introductory comment, and consistent with its findings
earlier in this award, none of the Taxation measures can be taken into
account by the Tribunal when deciding whether either of these claims
are successfully made by Claimant. Thus, only Spalmaincentivi can

be considered by the Tribunal in its analysis.

In light of the earlier discussion of Spalmaincentivi and, in particular,
the Tribunal’s observations that the rationale for the measure was
reasonable (which was not, in the specific circumstances of this case,
an answer to the legitimate expectation claims), it would be entirely
inconsistent to now fmd unreasonable impairment or a failure to

provide a transparent legal framework.

Conclusion on Section B

260. It is useful at this point to summarise the conclusions which the

Tribunal has reached on Section B (Merits & Liability (incl.
concomitant Jurisdiction & Admissibility) Claimant has succeeded in
establishing that, by Spalmaincentivi, Respondent breached, as a

matter of Article 10(1) of the ECT, the FET protection it owed to

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 112

Claimant’s legitimate expectation in respect of the latter’s investment
in Enersol All other allegations made by Claimant of breach by
Respondent of Article 10(1) of the ECT are dismissed, either as a
matter of substance, or as falling without the ambit of the ECT as

Taxation measures.

261.

The Tribunal will now proceed, in the next section, consider what is

the consequence of the established breach of the ECT by Respondent.

Damages & Interest

262. As a starting point, Claimant sets out its legal position as follows in
the SoC:

286. To determine the compensation that Italy owes to CEF, the
Tribunal should in the first instance look to any lex specialis in the
ECT and, in the absence of any lex specialis, to the rules of
customary international law. The only lex specialis standard of
compensation found in the ECT is in Article IS, which sets out the
conditions that Italy must satisfy in order to lawfully expropriate
investments held by protected investors in Italy. The ECT does not
expressly provide a standard of compensation for violations of the
ECT, and thus the customary international law principle of full
compensation fills the lacuna.

287. The principle of full compensation was first established by the
Permanent Court of International Justice in the seminal 1928 case
of Chorzow Factory between Germany and Poland, which arose
from Poland’s unlawful seizure of a factory owned by a German
national. According to the Permanent Court of International
Justice:

It follows that the compensation due to the German
Government is not necessarily limited to the value of the
undertaking at the moment of dispossession, plus interest to
the day of payment. This limitation would only be
admissible if the Polish Government had had the right to
expropriate. ... [SJuch a limitation might result in placing
Germany and the interests protected by the Geneva
Convention, on behalf of which interests the German
Government is acting, in a situation more unfavourable
than that in which Germany and these interests would have
been if Poland had respected the said Convention. Such a

 

 

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 113

consequence would not only be unjust, but also and above
all incompatible with the aim of [the Convention].

The essential principle contained in the actual notion of an
illegal act — a principle which seems to be established by
international practice and in particular by the decisions of
arbitral tribunals = is that reparation must, as far as
possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act
and re-establish the situation which would, in all
probability, have existed if that act had not been
committed. Restitution in kind, or, if this is not possible,
payment of a sum corresponding to the value which a
restitution in kind would bear; the award, if need be, of
damages for loss sustained which would not be covered by
restitution in kind or payment in place of it — such are the
principles which should serve to determine the amount of
compensation due for an act contrary to international law.

263. In the SoD, Respondent’s position is as follows, and seeks to
differentiate the present case Rom that contemplated by the Chorzow

Factory case:

680. In the case at stake, the Tribunal should necessarily consider
the general and regulatory character of Italian measures, the
absence of any fraudulent intent whatsoever, the fundamental
public purpose characterizing each of the measures, Accordingly,
it should equitably reduce the amount of compensation (if any)
from the full value of damages.

681. This conclusion is supported by case law. As quoted by the
Clamant itself in the Azurix Annulment Decision the Committee
stated that “for breaches of BIT obligations other than the
expropriation clause, the Tribunal has a discretion in determining
the approach to damagesSince no expropriation is claimed by
the Claimant, the Tribunal should employ its discretion precisely
to take into account the reasons expressed above. Incidentally,
such declaration of discretionary power is linked, in the Azurix
case, to sustain that a tribunal is not compelled to use the ' fair
market value“ in non-expropriation cases.

682. In sum, Italy preliminarily contends that in the event that the
Tribunal were to award a compensation (quod non, as argued sub
V.2), the amount of such a compensation be in any case reduced by
considering the arguments exposed in this Section.

 

264. At para. 418 of the Reply, Claimant disputes Respondent’ s position:
Claimant does not request the full fair market value of their

investments as damages in this case. They request the diminution
in the fair market value of their investments caused by Italy’s

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 114

illegal measures. The fact that the diminution in value is not total -
ie,, it was around 26% — properly limits damages to the amount of
the diminution; it does not mean that the injury was insignificant
or that damages should be denied altogether on the ground that
the injuiy was not substantial enough to award a higher level of
damages that the Claimant does not seek.

265. The Tribunal does not see a reason to depart from the long-established
principles articulated in the Chorzow Factory case. The way in which
Claimant presents its case, as set out just above, is consistent with
those principles and it seeks compensation to “re-establish the
situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that act had

not been committed”.

266. The purpose of the protections found in the ECT are not, in the
Tribunal’s appreciation, designed to simply preserve profitability of
an investment. Indeed if an investment continued to be profitable, but
less so, following measures which transgressed the protections
contained in the ECT, then Respondent’s position would logically

result in, potentially, no compensation being awarded. Thus, such an

 

investor would be left with a lesser profit than would have been the
case had the measures in breach of the ECT not been deployed. Such

a scenario would denude the ECT protections of practical application.

267. The Chorzow Factory principles do not operate to reward an investor,
or to make its investments more profitable than they would have been
had the offending measures not been implemented. Rather, the
purpose of Chorzow Factory is to “re-establish the situation which
would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been
committed”. Specifically, the Tribunal considers the analysis is must
now make is what the position would have been in respect of the
Claimant’s investment in Enersol had the Spalmaincentivi not been

implemented.

26

~

As to the amounts claimed by Claimant, in a Memorandum dated 21

February 2018, Mr Edwards set out his calculation of the loss suffered

SCC Arbitration V (201S/158) - Award us

in respect of Enersol as being EUR 10,300,000.00 (such loss
assuming Robin Hood Tax, IMU/TASI, Administrative Fees and
Imbalance Costs fall outside of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction — which is
the case as found earlier in this Award), excluding interest. Thus,
EUR 10,300,000.00 is Claimant’s remaining claim for compensation
given that the Tribunal has not found the Respondent liable for any

breach of the ECT in respect of either Megasol or Phenix.

269. Mr Edwards presents his calculations on the following basis, namely a
comparison of the value of the Enersol investment as on 1 January
2015 just prior to the implementation of the Spalmaincentivi, with the
value on the same date immediately after such implementation, He
says (p. 4 of his presentation to the Tribunal dated 21 February 2018,
which was a summary of his previously-expressed opinions for the
purposes of the hearing) that 1 January 2015 is the date the most
significant change was implemented. He describes his approach as
follows (p. 5 of his presentation to the Tribunal dated 21 February
2018):

My assessment of the Claimant’s loss is the difference between the
value of its investments on the Date of Assessment as they actually
were (the Actual Position) and as they would have been had the
Principal Regulatory Changes not been made (the Counterfactual
Position).

270. As regards the “Actual Position” and “Counterfactual Position”, Mr
Edwards states the following as his methodology for valuation

respectively (p. 5 of his presentation to the Tribunal dated 21
February 2018):

Market value of investments including impact of Principal
Regulatory Changes on 1 January 2015 - Market value of
investments absent impact of Principal Regulatory Changes on 1
January 2015 - DCF method used to value investments

271.

Respondent’s Expert, GRIF, puts its position in the Rejoinder Report

as follows:

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 116

3. On use of the DCF method and calculations in the First FTI
Financial Report Offering this as a supposed weakness, the FTF
RII and the FTI-FRIT repeatedly emphasise that our first two
reports (GRIF Economic Report and GRIF Financial Report) do
not criticise the DCF method or contest the approach used in the
FTI Financial Report to calculate the Opposing Party’s alleged
losses.

An effective summary of the Opposing Party's position in this
regard appears in the Claimant's Reply (paragraph 437): “In
summary, GRIF’s entire quantum analysis simply parrots Italy’s
argument on liability, disguised in the language of a quantum
s. GRIF offers no opinion on the losses attributable to the
Claims as pleaded, or indeed any criticism of FTI's calculation of
those losses. Accordingly, the Tribunal should accept FTI’s
quantum analysis entirely.”

 

That aside, it is clear that the Opposing Party’s experts did not
understand or else speciously ignored the terms of the issue in the
case at hand, so our work completely escapes them. Our criticism
of the FTI Financial Report’s approach goes much deeper, as it
contests its very foundation and thus the data arising from this
these assumptions. In summary, and for purposes of clarity:

 

- We did not dispute the FTI Financial Report's calculations, but
rather its basic assumptions and, as a consequence, the resulting
data used to make these calculations.

- We identified the correct essential elements needed to
reconstruct the objective and reasonable expectations of
investors at the time the investments were made.

« We showed that when the correct essential elements are used,
the measures adopted by the Italian Government caused no
losses to the Opposing Party. a a discussion about

Le luding the one
proposed in the FTI Financial Report. Finally, it makes even less
sense to deepen potential mistakes in the calculation method
proposed in the FTI Financial Report.

 

272. The Tribunal’s appreciation of the position of GRIF is, therefore, that
it does not dispute the calculations made by Mr Edwards, but rather
approaches the issue of compensation upon a different premise. The
following conclusion of GRIF later in the Rejoinder Expert Report

encapsulates its position:

SCC Arbitration V {2015/158) - Award. 117

Considering average Italian production, the intervention through
the “Spalmaincentivi" decree reduces feed-in tariffs to an extent
much less than proportional to the increases in productivity that
the plants are reporting, with the overall result that consumer
expense is reduced without in any way negatively influencing the
economic and financial plans of the plants built. In fack investors
continue to realise profits well beyond their expectations.

273. GRIF’s presentation (dated 22 February 2018) to the Tribunal at the

hearing states the following, at p. 25:

In the specific case, what happened is simply a little adjustment in
order to keep a fair profit having taken into account that incentives
were based on underestimated value of the solar radiation, with a
consequent over incentive on the revenues side. The 8%
adjustment reduces the extra-profits realised by PV plants of CEF
Energy, but they are still realising more profits than those
expected when the investments were made

21A, Later in the same presentation (p. 27), in a similar vein, which echoes

the Respondent’s case on liability:

Italy did not impair CEF investments because Italy intervened
after a period of over-incentive to restore the efficient level of the
stream of revenues.

275. The Tribunal prefers the methodology of Mr Edwards, namely, Ms
adoption of DCF. Quite apart from the fact that the DCF method is
well-established and accepted by investment arbitration tribunals over
many years for the purposes of calculation of compensation, the
approach of GRIF would be inconsistent with the even longer-
established Chorzow Factory principle. The latter requires an
assessment of the position as if the act, found to be a breach of the
international obligation in question, had not occurred. GRIF’s
approach would, taken to its logical conclusion, would result in
ascertaining whether the investor was nonetheless making a “fair”
profit notwithstanding the measure found to be in breach, and,
therefore, such “fair” be sufficient compensation. That is not the

established principle found in Chorzow Factory.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 118

276. Returning to the amount claimed in respect of Enersol, as noted
above, Mr Edwards presented his calculation of the ‘actual —v-
counterfactual’ position in a Memorandum dated 21 February 2018
with the assumption (which was made upon the invitation of the
Tribunal during the course of the hearing) that the Robin Hood Tax,
IMU/TASI, Administrative Fees and Imbalance Costs fell outside of
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Mr Edwards’ calculations in this respect
are referenced to the spreadsheet (marked Appendix 5.1b) which

accompanied his reply report.

277. The Tribunal does not understand GRIF to gainsay Mr Edwards’
calculations (as discussed above, GRIF’s position was to approach the
underlying methodology differently, rather than to dispute the
correctness of his calculations pursuant to the DCF method).
Nonetheless, the Tribunal will now examine Mr Edwards’

calculations as contained in the spreadsheet (marked Appendix 5.1b).

278. Within Mr Edwards’ spreadsheet there is a sheet which is entitled
“Key assumptions”. There are seven assumptions listed with a
“Yes/No” option adjacent. Changing these assumptions from Yes to

No has a consequence for calculations elsewhere in the spreadsheet.

279. The Tribunal can immediately see, from the list of Key assumptions
that the fust four (Robin Hood tax, IMU/TASI, Administrative Fee,
and Imbalance costs) must be set to “No” in order for consistency

with earlier findings in this award.

280. The next Key Assumption is “Loss from IT Decrease”. This is set, by
Mr Edwards to Yes. The Tribunal agrees, as this is the issue discussed

above.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 119

281.

282.

284,

285.

The next Key Assumption is “Loss from IT Payment Term Change”
which Mr Edwards has set to Yes. In light of what the Tribunal has
already decided at para. 234 above, it, therefore, is setting this Key
assumption to No.

The final Key assumption (‘Include negative free cash flow”) is
already set to No by Mr Edwards and is not, therefore changed by the
Tribunal.

3. Having set the Key assumptions in a manner consistent with the

Tribunal’s findings, the amount of the claim in respect of Enersol
emerges from the calculations on the sheet entitled “Summary tables”,
namely, EUR 9,600,000.00.

To summarise, the Tribunal holds, insofar as it has the jurisdiction to
do so, that the ‘actual —v- counterfactual’ position as of 1 January
2015 in respect of the Claimant’s investment in Enersol results in an
amount of EUR 9,600,000.00 by which such investment has been

lessened by the Spamalincentivi.

Turning to interest, Claimant seeks pre- and post-Award compound
interest from the Tribunal at, according to para. 305 of the SoC,
“based on international commercial rates”. While Claimant’s
calculation, as presented by Mr Edwards, alternate between
Respondent’s cost of debt and Claimant’s cost of debt, the Tribunal
prefers to award interest at the following rate: annually, LIBOR plus
2%. Compound interest, therefore, at a rate of LIBOR plus 2%,
annually, on EUR 9,600,000.00 from 1 January 2015, until payment
in full.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 120

General

286. The Tribunal records that it has taken note of, and considered, all
submissions and evidence put before it. It has referred in this award to
those parts of the submissions and evidence it has considered
necessary for the explanation of its reasoning; however, all
submissions and evidence were taken account of, whether expressly
referred to or not, in the formulation and articulation of the reasons

and conclusions in this award.

Costs

287. First, pursuant to Article 43 of the SCC Rules, the “Costs of the
Arbitration” are: (i) the Fees of the Tribunal; (ii) the Administrative
Fee; and (iii) the expenses of the Tribunal and the SCC. The Parties
are jointly and severally liable to pay the Costs of the Arbitration.

288, On 20 December 2018, the SCC determined the Costs of the

Arbitration as follows:

Klaus Reichert
Fee EUR 210,625.00 plus any VAT

Klaus Michael Sachs

Fee EUR 126,375.00 plus any VAT
Expenses EUR 2,173.00 plus any VAT
Per diem allowance EUR 4,000.00

Giorgio Sacerdoti
Fee EUR 126,375.00 plus any VAT

Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
Administrative fee EUR 39,800.00 plus any VAT

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 121

Expenses/reimbursement EUR 7,928.07 plus any VAT of

the Tribunal’s costs in the course of the proceedings

289. Claimant has prevailed in this arbitration in a number of respects: (a)
the “intra EU” jurisdiction issue, which has occupied a very
considerable part of the written argument before the Tribunal, both
before, and then, in particular, afterwards with extensive submissions
on Achmea; and (b) its FET claim in respect of Enersol resulting in an
award of EUR 9,600,000.00 plus interest. On the other hand, a
number of Claimant’s claims did not succeed in their entirety
(Megasol and Phenix), and aspects of the Enersol claim were captured
by Article 21 of the ECT. Placing all of these factors together does
still, in the Tribunal’s estimation, mean that Claimant was the
prevailing party but the attenuated measure of its overall success will
be appropriately taken into account in the amount of costs awarded

against Respondent.

290. As regards allocation of liability as between the Parties for the Costs
of the Arbitration, with the background of the matters set out in para.
289 above in mind, the Tribunal considers that an amount of EUR
100,000.00 (excluding VAT) to be paid by Respondent to Claimant is

 

appropriate.

291,

| of the SCC Rules), the amounts sought are as follows:

Secondly, turning to the costs incurred by Claimant (as per Article 44

Legal Fees
King & Spalding, EUR 1,153,017.00
Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe, EUR 500,000.00

Expert Fees & Expenses
FTI Consulting, EUR 571,700.32

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 122

Prof. Antonio D’ Atena, EUR 30,628.50

Claimant’s Costs & Expenses, EUR 114,780.51

292. The total sought by Claimant in respect of the costs incurred by it is
EUR 2,370,126.33.

293. With the background of the matters set out in para. 289 above in
mind, the Tribunal considers that an amount of EUR 900,000.00
(excluding VAT) to be paid by Respondent to Claimant is

appropriate.

294. The claim for interest on such costs is dismissed,

Award

For the foregoing reasons, and subject to para. 247 above, the Tribunal finds,
holds, declares, and awards as follows, insofar as it has the jurisdiction to do so as
set out in this Award:

1, The Tribunal has jurisdiction over all claims of Claimant except insofar as
those are captured by Article 21 of the ECT, namely those concerning the
following measures of Respondent impugned by Claimant: (a) Robin Hood
Tax; (b) Qualification of assets for fiscal and cadastral purposes; (c)

Imbalance charges; and (d) Administrative fees.

2. The Tribunal rejects, as unfounded as a matter of the merits, all claims of
Claimant against Respondent’s measures impugned by Claimant as being in
breach of Article 10(1) of the ECT, except the claim that Respondent
breached Article 10(1) of the ECT through the application of Spalmaincentivi

to the incentivized tariffs in respect of Claimant’s investments in Enersol

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 123

which is found to be in breach of Article 10(1) of the ECT, which claim the
Tribunal upholds.

3. As a consequence of the breach found and held against Respondent, the
Tribunal finds that Respondent caused damage to Claimant in the amount of
EUR 9,600,000.00 (Euro nine million, sis hundred thousand) and the
Tribunal orders Respondent to pay such amount to Claimant as
compensation, together with compound interest (compounded annually)
from 1 January 2015 at LIBOR plus 2% thereon until full and final

satisfaction of the Award.

4. The Parties are jointly and severally liable to pay the Costs of the

Arbitration. The Costs of the Arbitration have been set as follows:

Klaus Reichert
Fee EUR 210,625.00 plus any VAT

Klaus Michael Sachs

Fee EUR 126,375.00 plus any VAT
Expenses EUR 2,173.00 plus any VAT
Per diem allowance EUR 4,000.00

Giorgio Sacerdoti
Fee EUR 126,375.00 plus any VAT

Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
Administrative fee EUR 39,800.00 plus any VAT

Expenses/reimbursement EUR 7,928.07 plus any VAT

of the Tribunal’s costs in the course of the proceedings

As between the Parties Respondent is liable, and ordered to pay Claimant
EUR 100,090.00 (excluding VAT).

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 124

5. Respondent is ordered to pay EUR 900,000.00 (excluding VAT) to

Claimant in respect of costs.

6. All other extant claims within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal are

dismissed.
A party may bring an action against the award regarding the decision on the fee(s)

of the arbitrator(s) within three months from the date when the party received the

award. This action should be brought before the Stockholm District Court.

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158) - Award 125

Place of Arbitration: Stockholm, Sweden

Date: 16 sanuary 2019

Prof. Dr. Klaus Sachs:

Prof. Giorgio Sacerdoti: — ark
Mr. Klaus Reichert, S.C.: (bedaant

 

SCC Arbitration V (2015/158)- Award

126

