INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
CEMEX CarRACAS INVESTMENTS B.V. AND
CEMEX Caracas II INVESTMENTS B.V.
(CLAIMANTS)

AND

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID CasE No. ARB/08/15)

 

DECISION ON THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUEST
FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES

 

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President
Professor Georges Abi-Saab, Arbitrator
Mr. Robert B. von Mehren, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small

On behalf of the Claimants

CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and
CEMEX Caracas II Investments B.V.

c/o Mr. Barry H. Garfinkel,

Mr. Marco E. Schnabl,

Mr. Timothy G. Nelson and

Ms. Julie Bédard

Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Four Times Square

New York, N.Y. 10036-6522

Date: March 3, 2010

On behalf of the Respondent

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
c/o Mr. George Kahale, III,
Mr. Mark H. O’ Donoghue,
Ms. Miriam K. Harwood,
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue
New York, N.Y. 10178, U.S.A.
and
c/o Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
Torre Chapultepec
Ruben Dario 281, Piso 9
Col. Bosque de Chapultepec
11580 México, D.F., Mexico

I. Procedural Background

1. On 16 October 2008, Cemex Caracas Investments B.V. and Cemex Caracas II
Investments B.V., companies incorporated in the Netherlands, filed with the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) a Request for
Arbitration against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. On 30 October 2008, the Centre
registered the Request.

2. Claimants are represented in this proceeding by the law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate,
Meagher & Flom LLP in New York, New York. Since 29 January 2009 Respondent is
represented in this proceeding by the law firm of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP in
New York, New York and Mexico City.

3. No agreement having been reached between the parties on the method of constituting
the Tribunal, and more than sixty days having elapsed since the registration of the Request for
Arbitration, by letter of 31 December 2008 Claimants invoked Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention.

4, By the same letter Claimants reiterated their appointment, as arbitrator, of
Mr. Robert B. von Mehren, a U.S. national, whose appointment had initially been included in
the Request for Arbitration.

5. By letter of 20 February 2009 Respondent appointed
Professor Georges Abi-Saab, a national of Egypt.

6. The Tribunal not having been constituted within 90 days since the registration of the
Request for Arbitration, by letter of 21 May 2009, Claimants requested the appointment of the
third, presiding, arbitrator by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council, as provided
for in Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

7. On 19 June 2009, the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council appointed
Judge Gilbert Guillaume, a national of France, as the President of the Tribunal.

8. All of the arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Tribunal was
constituted on 6 July 2009.

9. On 20 July 2009, having consulted with the parties and the Centre, the Tribunal fixed
the first session to be held on 16 November 2009, at the Paris offices of the World Bank. On
the same day, the parties were invited to confer and advise the Tribunal, by no later than 16
October 2009, of any points of the session’s provisional Agenda on which they are able to
reach agreement. The parties were also invited to notify the Tribunal of any other items that
they would like to see included in the Agenda.

10. On 1 September 2009, Claimants filed a request for provisional measures. After an
exchange of communications between the parties, the Tribunal, by letter of
30 September 2009, from the Centre, informed the parties that their respective positions on
the request for provisional measures would be heard during the first session. On 26 October
2009, Respondent filed a reply to the Claimants’ request for provisional measures.

ll. On 26 October 2009, Respondent proposed the disqualification of
Mr. von Mehren. On 2 November 2009, Claimants filed observations to the Respondent’s
proposed for disqualification.

12. On 6 November 2009, President Guillaume and Professor Abi-Saab, acting under
Article 58 of the ICSID Convention, dismissed the proposal for the disqualification of Mr.
von Mehren made by the Respondent.

13. On 16 November 2009, the Tribunal held a first session and a hearing on provisional
measures at the World Bank’s Offices in Paris.

14. On 22 December 2009, Claimants sent to the Tribunal a communication in relation to
their request for provisional measures. On 5 January 2010, Respondent filed observations to
that letter. On 15 January 2010, Claimants sent to the Tribunal another letter.

IL. Parties’ Positions
A. Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures
15. In their request for provisional measures dated 1 September 2009, the Claimants,

CEMEX Caracas I and CEMEX Caracas II, first state that they are both incorporated in the
Netherlands, which at all relevant times has been a Contracting State to the ICSID
Convention and a party to the A on the Encc and Reciprocal P: ion of
Investments between the Netherlands and Venezuela signed on 22 October 1991 (the “BIT”).
They add that CEMEX Caracas I, owns 100% of CEMEX Caracas II, which, in turn,
indirectly holds 75.7% of shares in CEMEX Venezuela through its wholly owned subsidiary

 

Vencement Investments (““Vencement”) a Cayman Island company.”!
16. Claimants submit that they have been deprived of their rights of ownership over
CEMEX Venezuela, Venezuela’s largest and premier cement company. They contend that
this expropriation occurred between May and August 2008 in breach of the BIT, as well as of
customary international law. In their request for arbitration dated 16 October 2008, Claimants
accordingly ask for a declaration noting those breaches and an order that “Respondent restore
to Claimants their shares in, and complete and exclusive control of, CEMEX Venezuela.” In
the alternative, they request “an order that Respondent pay Claimants full compensation with
respect to Respondent’s breaches of the Treaty and international law . . . .”°

17. In their Request for Provisional Measures, Claimants then submit that between 2004
and 2008 CEMEX Venezuela owned and used three cement-carriers registered in Venezuela,
the Corregidora, the Marianela and the Edalan. On 29 April 2008, “CEMEX Venezuela
executed an Irrevocable Trust Administration Agreement by which it conveyed title to the
Vessels to Banco Interacciones S.A., a Mexican financial institution.”* Under the trust
instrument, Sunbulk Shipping, N.V. (“Sunbulk”) “would immediately assume all of the
Vessels’ operational costs with an option to formally obtain legal title to the Vessels.”*On 9
August 2008, Sunbulk exercised its option to purchase such title. It “paid Vencement

'Request for Provisional Measures § 6.
Request for Arbitration § 118.
>Request for Provisional Measures $17.
4Tbidem § 17.

US$49,974,012 and Vencement, in turn, cancelled a debt in the same amount which CEMEX
Venezuela owed Vencement. On August 26, 2008, Sunbulk obtained provisional registration
of the Vessels in Panama subject to the cancellation of the Venezuelan flags.”*

18. In the meantime, CEMEX Caracas’s investment in CEMEX Venezuela had been
expropriated. Thereafter, the Attorney-General of Venezuela, on 12 September 2008,
“demanded from the Venezuelan Maritime Court of First Instance in Caracas . . . a preventive
embargo on the Vessels and a prohibition on alienation and encumbrance in favor of
”® On 15 September 2008, the Caracas Court granted the Attorney-General’s
request for ex parte relief, imposing such measures. However, it required that Venezuela files
a formal claim to perfect its ownership claims over the Vessels within ten days, failing which
the preventive embargo and the prohibition on alienation and encumbrance would be
suspended. According to Claimants, this was only done on 16 March 2009, without this new
claim being further prosecuted.

Venezuela.

19. On 20 March 2009, Venezuela petitioned the Panamanian Supreme Court to enforce
the “Caracas Court’s order and/or issue its own order arresting the Vessels in favour of
Venezuela.”” One day later, on 21 March, Venezuela petitioned the First Maritime Court of
Panama to issue an order of seizure over the vessels and a prohibition of alienation and
encumbrance in favour of Venezuela. On 24 March 2009, that Court issued such a
prohibition and deferred to the Supreme Court the question whether an order of seizure was
warranted. On 4 June 2009, the Supreme Court ordered the Panamanian Maritime Court to
seize the vessels pending its decision on Venezuela’s petition. As a consequence, the
“Edalan” was arrested in the Panamanian port of Cristobal en Colon. It was only released in
June 2009, upon posting of a bond by Sunbulk.

20. After having thus summarized the facts, Claimants submit that “Venezuela should be
enjoined from further action that will increase the Claimants’ damages and thus aggravate this
dispute.”*

21. They contend that “the Tribunal Has Wide Power to Order Provisional measures at
Any Stage, Including Prior to a Ruling on Jurisdiction.”” They add that “the Tribunal’s
Powers Include the Power to Restrain Any Acts by Venezuela that Might Aggravate this
Dispute or Make it Less Capable of Solution.”'°

22. Claimants further submit that provisional relief is warranted in the instant case.
According to them, the Tribunal possesses prima facie jurisdiction over the dispute.
Moreover, Venezuela’s efforts to seize the Vessels, unless enjoined, will severely aggravate
the dispute and increase the Claimants’ damages. More precisely, Claimants contend that
“The windfall CEMEX Venezuela seeks by the return of the Vessels would . . . increase the
Claimants’ right to demand compensation in these proceedings by the full amount of the debt

*Ibidem § 19.
“Ibidem § 21.
"Ibidem § 29.
‘Ibidem page 13.
*Ibidem page 13.
'°Ibidem page 14.

that Vencement cancelled in its books when the Vessels were transferred to the benefit of
CEMEX Venezuela.”"!

23. For those reasons, Claimants request from the Tribunal:

“(i) An order requiring Venezuela to immediately cease any further efforts

to seize the former assets of CEMEX Venezuela, including the Vessels;”

“(ii) An order that Venezuela cease any litigation, whether in Panama,
Venezuela, or elsewhere, having as its object the seizure of the Vessels or

any money equivalent thereof, including but not limited to:

(1) the proceedings before the Caracas Court;
(2) the proceedings before the Panama Supreme Court; and

(3) and the proceedings before the Panama Maritime Court;

“(iii) An order that Venezuela cease all efforts to enlist the assistance of
other governments in seizing the Vessels or any bond or security thereof;
and

(iv)An order enjoining Venezuela from taking any action further

prejudicing, aggravating the dispute before this Tribunal, or rendering this

sold

dispute more difficult of solution.

B. Respondent’s Memorial in Opposition to the Claimants’ Request

24. In its memorial dated 26 October 2009, Respondent opposes Claimants’ request for
provisional measures. It first provides the Tribunal with a brief history of relevant facts
intended to complete the Claimants’ statements with respect to the CEMEX ownership of
CEMEX Venezuela (“CemVen”), the purported sale of the Vessels, CEMEX’s purchase of
CemVen’s foreign subsidiaries, the Nationalization Law, continued negotiations between
CEMEX and Venezuela, how CEMEX attempted to cancel the Venezuelan flags and
provisionally reflagged the vessels in Panama, as well as CemVen and Venezuela’s actions in
Panama.

25. Respondent adds in particular that “according to Claimants, Sunbulk mortgaged the
Vessels in favour of Vencement on December 16, 2008.” It adds that “on September 9,

"'Ihidem § 45.
"Thidem § 50.
'Venezuela’s Memorial of 26 October 2009, § 44.

2009, Vencement filed a complaint in the Second Maritime Tribunal of Panama for execution
on the naval mortgage over the Vessels for a purported debt of US $ 38,364,398.

26. Respondent submits that under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules, provisional measures “must be based upon circumstances of

»'5 They “must relate to the preservation
16

necessity and urgency to avoid an irreparable harm.
of the requesting party’s rights and to the subject matter of the case before the tribunal . . .
According to the Respondent, Claimants “largely ignore these legal criteria and rely solely on
the general principle of non-aggravation as the justification for its requested measures. At the
same time, they admit that the only harm to Claimants (as opposed to Sunbulk) is purely
financial in nature.”'’ Moreover “the principle of non-aggravation” . . . does not supplant the

requirements of necessity, urgency and irreparable or non-compensable harm.”'*

27. The Respondent stresses that “provisional measures may only be granted to preserve
the rights of a party.”'’ It adds that “the rights for which Claimants seek protection here are,
first and foremost, the supposed ownership rights to the Vessels held by Sunbulk, a CEMEX
subsidiary which is not party to this proceeding.””” According to the Respondent, Claimants
attempt to remedy this gap “by converting Sunbulk’s loss of the Vessels — if the Republic’s
legal efforts are successful — into an indirect “increase in damages” that will be suffered by
Claimants if Vencement “likely” returns the purchase price of US $ 49,974,012 to Sunbulk
and is left with, “at most”, a reinstated debt from CemVen that will be left unpaid.””!
Respondent points out that the request for arbitration makes no mention of the dispute
between Venezuela over the ownership of the vessels, and, accordingly, the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction over Sunbulk and the Vessels. “[T]he ‘right’ that the Claimants seek to protect . . .
is entirely collateral to the dispute . . . and cannot provide the basis for the grant of provisional

measures.

28. Moreover, Respondent submits that Claimants have failed to meet their burden of
showing that the inter-company transactions occurred as they allege, in particular with respect
to the alleged loan of Vencement to Sunbulk. Even assuming the existence of such a loan,
“there is no reason to believe that Vencement would have any difficulty in obtaining
repayment of the loan from Sunbulk if Vencement’s lien were to be set aside.””* The alleged
harm to Claimants either does not exist or is hypothetical and speculative.”

29. Finally, according to the Respondent, the alleged harm to Claimants is purely

financial and can be compensated by monetary damages.

'SIhidem § 56.
'STbidem § 58.
'Ibidem § 59.
"Ibidem § 61.
'SIhidem § 62.
'Thidem § 68.
"Tbidem § 71.
*"Tbidem § 72.
2 Tbidem §§ 72-73.
Tbidem § 80.
*Tbidem § 81.

30. For those reasons, “(i) Claimants’ request for provisional measures should be denied
and (ii) Respondent should be awarded the costs of and associated with its opposition thereto,
including its legal and administrative fees and expenses and the fees and expenses of the

Tribunal.””

Cc. Hearing and Post-Hearing Correspondence

31. At the hearing of 16 November 2009, the Claimants present a chronology of events.
They recall that “Venezuela intends to challenge the Centre’s overall jurisdiction over this
dispute,””® but stress that this could not strip the Tribunal of its power to grant provisional
measures. They contend that those measures would cause no prejudice to Venezuela. They
submit that the “multiple harms threatened here are distinct, severe, and indeed irreparable,
and will make this dispute much more difficult of solution.””’ They contest the submission of
Venezuela according to which there is an absolute bar to provisional relief whenever the
threatened harm can be quantified in monetary terms. They note that this may be the case in
the Anglo-Saxon system, but they contend that this is not so in international law under the
jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice, the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal and
ICSID arbitral tribunals. They add that the requested relief does not prejudice the substance

of the dispute.

32. At the hearing, Respondent stresses that the nationalizations were decided by

Venezuela in the exercise of its sovereignty in order to defend its vital national interests and

 

that private corporations had the possibility of challenging the taken in Vi |

Courts. It adds that minority shareholders of CEMEX Venezuela challenged the trust
agreement in those Courts. Respondent confirms that it does not challenge prima facie
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. It reiterates and develops the arguments already presented in
writing in opposition to the request for provisional measures. It stresses in particular that
provisional measures cannot be ordered to preserve the rights of a third party not
encompassed within the scope of the request for arbitration. Respondent analysed in more
detail ICSID’s jurisprudence relating to urgency and necessity, especially in case of

irreparable damage.

33. In their post-hearing letter of 22 December 2009, Claimants drew the Tribunal’s

attention to a decision rendered on 30 November 2009 by the Venezuelan Second

STbidem § 86.
Transcript p.96.
"Transcript p.103.

Administrative Court. They submit that this decision “dispels any doubt that Respondent is
severely aggravating the dispute before this Tribunal by using once again national courts,
including its own courts, to adjudicate not only the seizure of the Vessels but also the overall
legality of the seizure of Cemex Venezuela,” contrary to Article 26 of the ICSID Convention.
They request that the Tribunal include these proceedings in the National Courts proceedings

to be enjoined by their application.

34, In its letter of 5 January 2010, Respondent contends that the decision of 30 November
2009 did not comment on the question of the Vessels’ ownership. It submits that, even if that
decision “were to adjudicate the ownership of the Vessels (which [it] does not do), [it] would
have no different effect than a decision of the Caracas Maritime Court as far as the Claimants
are concerned.” “[R]ecovery of the Vessels by the Republic and CemVen would either be a
financial wash as far as Claimants are concerned or readily compensable by money damages.”
Moreover, it is submitted that the request for provisional measures relating to CemVen’s
nationalization, based on Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, must be denied, in the absence
of any new facts of consequence and of any “effort to set forth... the legal standards

applicable under” that Article.

35. In their letter of 15 January 2010, Claimants bring to the attention of the Tribunal

recent developments of the proceedings in the Panamanian Courts.

II. — The Tribunal’s Decision

36. The present case was brought under the ICSID Convention and the Agreement on the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Netherlands and
Venezuela signed on 22 October 1991 and entered into force on 1 November 1993. The
Parties have not questioned the Tribunal’s authority to recommend provisional measures even
though its jurisdiction is being challenged. The Tribunal will therefore decide upon the
request for provisional measures without dealing at this stage with the objection to

jurisdiction of the Respondent.

A- Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Applicable Law

37. The authority of the Tribunal to recommend provisional measures is governed by

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, which provides:

Article 47

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it
considers that the circumstances so require, recommend any
provisional measures which should be taken to preserve the
respective rights of either party.

38. This provision has been elaborated on in Arbitration Rule 39:

Rule 39
Provisional Measures

qd) At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party
may request that provisional measures for the preservation of its
rights be recommended by the Tribunal. The request shall specify the
rights to the preserved, the measures the recommendation of which is
requested, and the circumstances that require such measures.

(2) The Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a
request made pursuant to paragraph (1).

(3) The Tribunal may also recommend provisional measures
on its own initiative or recommend measures other than those
specified in a request. It may at any time modify or revoke its
recommendations.

(4) The Tribunal shall only recommend provisional measures,
or modify or revoke its recommendation, after giving each party an
opportunity of presenting its observations.

(5) If a party makes a request pursuant to paragraph (1)
before the constitution of the Tribunal, the Secretary-General shall,
on the application of either party, fix time limits for the parties to
present observations on the request, so that the request and
observations may be considered by the Tribunal promptly upon its
constitution.

(6) Nothing in this Rule shall prevent the parties, provided
that they have so stipulated in the agreement recording their consent,
from requesting any judicial or other authority to order provisional
measures, prior to or after the institution of the proceeding, for the
preservation of their respective rights and interests.

39. As recalled by the ICSID Arbitral Tribunal in Pey Casado v. Chile, Article 47 of the
Convention “is not an innovation in the history of international jurisdiction; it is directly
inspired by Article 41 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, hence the particular

9928

importance that can be accorded to the judgments given in the past by that Court”™ in that

matter.

*8Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation yv. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/2), Decision on Provisional Measures of 25 September 2001, § 2. See also Christoph H.
Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2nd ed. 2009), p. 759.

40. In a number of cases, the International Court of Justice decided that its power “to
indicate provisional measures under Article 41 of the Statute has as its object to preserve the
respective rights of each party to the proceedings “pending the final decision,” providing that
such measures are justified to prevent irreparable prejudice to the rights which are the subject

of the dispute.” Thus, that power “can be exercised only if there is an urgent necessity to

prevent irreparable prejudice to such rights, before the Court has given its final decision.””

4l. ICSID Tribunals have taken the same approach in the interpretation and application
of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. In a number of cases, they stated that “provisional
measures are extraordinary measures which should not be recommended lightly.”*” They
unanimously judged that those measures could only be granted to protect the rights of either

party in case of urgency and necessity.*!

42. The requirement of necessity implies an assessment of the risk of damage which
provisional measures are intended to avert. In the present case, the parties diverge on the kind

of risk justifying such measures.

43. As recalled above, irreparable prejudice is always required by the International Court

of Justice for provisional measures (see §40 above).

44, Traditionally, ICSID Arbitral Tribunals also base their decision on the criteria of
irreparable harm or damage. As noted by Professor Schreuer, “ICSID Arbitration Practice

shows that Tribunals will only grant provisional measures if they are found to be necessary,

9932

urgent and required in order to avoid irreparable harm. Thus, in Plama v. Bulgaria, the

Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentine v. Uruguay), Order of 23 January 2007, ICJ Reports
2007, p. 11, §§ 31-32. See also Passage through the Great Belt (Finland v. Denmark), Order of 29
July 1991, ICJ Reports 1991 p. 17, §23; Certain Criminal Proceedings in France (Republic of the
Congo v. France), Order of 17 June 2003, ICJ Reports 2003 p. 107, §22.

“Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Order of 28 October
1999; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24), Order of 6
September 2005, §38; Phoenix Action Ltd v. Czech Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5), Order of 6
April 2007 §33; Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production
Company v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11), Order of 17 August 2007; See also
Sergei Paushok v. Mongolia, 2 September 2008, § 39 for a case of arbitration under the UNCITRAL
Rules.

*'Among the decisions already quoted in the preceeding paragraph, see Plama v. Bulgaria, §39;
Phoenix v. Czech Republic, §33; Occidental Petroleum v. Ecuador, § 59. See also Burlington
Resources Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Petroecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5),
Order of 29 June 2009, §51; City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Petroecuador (1CSID
Case No. ARB/06/21), §54; Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Ecuador and Petroecuador (ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/6), Order of 8 May 2009, §43.

*°Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2nd ed. 2009), p.776.

Tribunal stated that provisional measures must be necessary to “avoid the occurence of
irreparable harm or damage.”** In Phoenix v. Czech Republic, the Tribunal referred to “the
action of a party capable of causing or of threatening to cause irreparable prejudice to the
rights involved.”** In Occidental v. Ecuador, the Tribunal decided that “the circumstances
under which provisional measures are required under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention are
those in which the measures are necessary to preserve a party’s right and when the need is

urgent in order to avoid irreparable harm.”*°

45. Recently, however, two ICSID Tribunals made use of different formulas. In the
Burlington v. Ecuador case, the Tribunal found appropriate “in the circumstances of the case,
to adopt the standard of harm not adequately reparable by the award of damages, to use the
words of the UNCITRAL Model Law.”*° In the Perenco v. Ecuador case, the Tribunal
recognized that “many of the authorities express the test in terms of “irreparable loss,” but

added that article 47 does not lay down such a test and did not retain it.”

46. In the opinion of this Tribunal, the standards retained in those two last cases do not

differ in substance from the standard of “irreparable damage” generally used.

47. In this respect, the Tribunal first observes that the International Court of Justice often
granted provisional measures to avoid irreparable harm, although damages could be awarded

in order to compensate the alleged prejudice.**

This has been done in particular when the
health or life of people and sometimes their properties were in jeopardy. Thus, in the Nuclear
Tests cases opposing Australia and New Zealand to France, it was contended that the
population of the Claimant States would suffer from the radioactive fall out of the French
atmospheric tests. The Court considered that, if established, the effects of the tests could not
be reversed by any monetary compensation and ordered provisional measures.” Similarly, in
the case of the United States Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Teheran, the Court stated that
“continuation of the situation the subject of the present request exposes the human beings

concerned to privation, hardship, anguish and even danger to life and health and thus a serious

*plama v. Bulgaria, $38.

“Phoenix v. Czech Republic, §33.

“Occidental Petroleum v. Ecuador, §59.

**Burlington v. Ecuador, §82.

*’Perenco v. Ecuador and Petroecuador, § 43.

**The Permanent Court of International Justice adopted the same approach in the Sino-Belgian Treaty
case, Order of 8 January 1927 ( PCIJ, Reports, series A, n° 8).

* Nuclear Tests (Australia v. France), Order of 22 June 1973, ICJ Reports 1973 p. 105, §30.

possibility of irreparable harm.”“° Provisional measures were indicated on that ground. For
comparable reasons, provisional measures were granted in cases of armed conflicts creating
5 . _ . dl . a
risks of irreparable prejudice to persons or properties,” as well as in cases of imminent

execution of individuals condemned to death.”

48. By contrast, in the Aegean Sea case, the Court considered that the breach by Turkey
of the alleged rights of Greece through seismic exploration of the disputed continental shelf
was “capable of reparation by appropriate means.” For that reason, the Court dismissed the

wos 43
Greek request for provisional measures.

49. Thus the International Court of Justice, when applying the test of “irreparable

prejudice,” makes in fact a distinction between:

(a) Actions which should be restrained, because their effects, though capable
of financial compensation, are such that compensation cannot fully remedy

the damage suffered;

(b) and actions which may well prove to have infringed a right and caused
harm, but in respect to which it will be sufficient to award damages, without

taking provisional measures.

50. The same distinction can be drawn from an analysis of ICSID case law, both in cases
where tribunals used the criteria of irreparable damage and in cases where they had recourse

to other criteria.

51. Looking into the first category of cases, the Tribunal notes that in Occidental,
Claimants were asserting that they had a right to be restored in their oil concession and, on
that basis, requested provisional measures to protect that right. The Tribunal decided that

Claimants had not establish “a strongly arguable case that there exists” such a right and

“United States Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Teheran, Order of 15 December 1979, ICJ Reports
1979, p. 20, §42.

“Frontier dispute (Burkina-Faso v. Republic of Mali), Order of 10 January 1986, ICJ Reports 1986,
p.10 §21; Application of the convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
Order of 8 April 1993, ICJ Reports 1993, p.22 §45; Land and Maritime Boundary (Cameroon v.
Nigeria), Order of 15 March 1996, ICJ Reports 1996, p. 22, §38.

“La Grand (Germany v. United States ofAmerica), Order of 3 March 1999, ICJ Reports 1999, p.15,
§24; Avena and others (Mexico v. United States of America), Order of 5 February 2003, ICJ Reports
2003, p.91, §55.

8 4egean Sea Continental Shelf (Greece v. Turkey), Order of 11 September 1976, ICJ Reports p. 11,
$33.

 

dismissed the corresponding request for provisional measures on that ground. It added that
any prejudice suffered as a result of the termination of the contract, “if subsequently found
illegal by the tribunal, can be readily compensated by a monetary award.” On that distinct

ground, it also dismissed the requested measures.“

§2. In Plama v. Bulgaria, the decision observes that “[w]hat Claimant is seeking in this
arbitration are monetary damages for breaches of Respondent’s obligations under the Energy
Charter Treaty. Whatever the outcome of the . . . . proceedings . . . in Bulgaria is, Claimant’s
right to pursue its claims for damages in the arbitration and the Arbitral Tribunal’s ability to
decide these claims will not be affected. The Tribunal accepts Respondent’s argument that
harm is not irreparable if it can be compensated for by damages, which is the case in the

present arbitration and which, moreover, is the only remedy Claimant seeks.”*°

53. In Burlington v. Ecuador, the Tribunal stressed that “[u]nlike Occidental, this case is
not one of only ‘more damages’. . . . The risk here is the destruction of an ongoing
investment and its revenue-producing potential which benefits both the investor and the
State.“ Asa consequence, the Tribunal ordered the establishment of an escrow account,

where the funds which were the subject of the dispute could be held, pending the final award.

54, In Perenco v. Ecuador, the Tribunal recognized that provisional measures “will not
be necessary when a party can be adequately compensated by an award of damages if it
successfully vindicates its rights when the case is finally decided.” But it apprehended that
the Claimant would suffer “extensive seizure of its oil production or other assets,” and that its
“business would be crippled, if not destroyed.”*’ It therefore established an escrow account

for the same purpose as in Burlington.

55. Thus, ICSID Tribunals, when considering government actions which may well prove

to have infringed a right and caused harm, make a distinction between:

(a) situations where the alleged prejudice can be readily compensated by

awarding damages;

“Occidental Petroleum v. Ecuador §§ 86, 92.

4SPlama v. Bulgaria, § 46.

‘Burlington v. Ecuador, § 83.
*’Perenco v. Ecuador, §§ 43, 53, 60.

 

(b) and those where there is a serious risk of destruction of a going concern

that constitutes the investment.

In the first category of cases, provisional measures were denied because of the
absence of an “irreparable harm.” In the second category of cases they were granted, the
tribunals using other standards -- although they could have based their decision on the fact
that, the destruction of the ongoing concern that constituted the investment, would have

created an “irreparable harm.”

56. In the light of the preceding analysis, the Tribunal sees no reason not to retain the
generally accepted standard of “irreparable harm” as criterion for the “necessity” required by
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. It is on that basis that it will examine the request for

provisional measures in the present case.

B- Claimant’s Submissions Relating to the Seizure of Vessels and Other Assets

of CEMEX Venezuela

57. The Claimants submit that from May to August 2008 they have been deprived by the
Respondent of their rights of ownership over CEMEX Venezuela. They recall that, before
that expropriation, CEMEX Venezuela had in April 2008 sold three cement carriers it
previously owned and that those carriers are presently the property of Sunbulk, a Mexican
company, which registered them in Panama. They add that the Respondent has brought
actions both in Panamanian and Venezuelan Courts to obtain the seizure of those vessels.
They contend that, “if Venezuela succeeds in its ex post facto efforts to unwind the transfer of
the Vessels to Sunbulk and return title to CEMEX Venezuela, then all consideration
previously furnished by Sunbulk for the Vessels will obviously need to be refunded which
will leave the loss of these Vessels to be borne by Vencement and, therefore, by Cemex
Caracas, Vencement’s direct shareholder”;** “this will burden Claimants with an additional
loss of almost $50 millions beyond what is currently being claimed in the arbitration.” On
those grounds, the Claimants request that the Tribunal issue orders requiring Venezuela, inter
alia, to cease any further efforts to seize the vessels or any other former assets of CEMEX
Venezuela, in particular through litigation in Panama, Venezuela or elsewhere (for more

details see §§ 15—23, above).

(a) Seizure of Vessels and Irreparable Harm

“Request for Provisional Measures $45.
Letter of 10 September 2009 forwarding the request for provisional measures.

58. The Tribunal observes that this request for provisional measures is based on the fact
that Venezuela’s efforts to seize the Vessels or other former assets will, if they succeed,

“increase the Claimants’ damages”

to be awarded by the Tribunal. According to the
Claimants themselves, the only consequence for them of those seizures would be a financial
loss. Such a loss could be readily compensated by a damages award. Thus, the alleged harm
is not “irreparable” and there is neither necessity, nor urgency to grant the requested

provisional measures.

(b) Seizure of Vessels and Aggravation of the Dispute
59. The Claimants, however, request the same measures on another ground. They submit
that Venezuela’s action “that increases damages by an eight-figure sum is conduct that

Sl

aggravates the dispute. They add that the dispute is also being aggravated by actions
brought by Venezuela in its own Administrative Courts, in order to “adjudicate the legality of
the Respondent’s efforts to seize... the Vessels... .”*? The Claimants conclude that those
facts warrant the issuance of provisional measures to avoid the seizure of the vessels and of

other assets.

60. The International Court of Justice and ICSID Tribunals have on several occasions
issued provisional measures directing the parties not to take any actions which could

aggravate or extend the dispute or render more difficult their settlement.**

61. However, the measures requested by the Claimants to avoid the seizure of the Vessels
or of other former assets of CEMEX Venezuela do not meet the requirements of urgency and
necessity of Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. They could not be granted for these reasons
(see paragraph 57 above). The so-called principle of non-aggravation cannot supplant the
requirements of Article 47. The measures relating to the Vessels cannot be granted on the

basis of the principle of non-aggravation alone.
C- Other Claimants’ Submissions

(a) Aggravation of the Dispute in General

**Request for Provisional Measures p.18.

*'Request for Provisional Measures §47.

Letter of 22 December 2009, p.1.

*For the International Court of Justice, see the long list provided in Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay
(Argentina v. Uruguay), Order of 23 January 2007, ICJ Reports, 2007, p. 16, $49. For ICSID
Tribunals, see the case law listed in Burlington, §§ 63-64; see also Perenco §§ 55-57.

62. In their request for provisional measures, the Claimants also ask the Tribunal, in more
general terms, to enjoin Venezuela from taking any action further prejudicing, aggravating the

dispute before this Tribunal, or rendering this dispute more difficult of solution.

63. This request raises the question whether, under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, a
tribunal has an independent power to recommend provisional measures relating to a dispute.
In other words, when, in the opinion of a Tribunal, there is no urgency or necessity to adopt
provisional measures directed at the preservation of the rights of the parties, is it still possible
for it to recommend other provisional measures in order to avoid the aggravation or extension

of the dispute?

64. This question has recently been examined by the International Court of Justice in the
Pulp Mills case. The Court recalled that it “has on several occasions issued provisional
measures directing the parties not to take any actions which could aggravate or extend the
dispute or render more difficult its settlement.” It also observed that “in those cases,
provisional measures other than measures directing the parties not to take actions to aggravate
or extend the dispute or to render more difficult its settlement were also indicated.” Then the
Court noted that: “it has not found that at present there is an imminent risk of irreparable
prejudice to the rights of Uruguay in dispute.” In the absence of provisional measures
indicated on that basis, the Court decided it had no power to indicate provisional measures

relating to the “aggravation or extension of the dispute.”**

65. This Tribunal sees no reason to take a different position. It recalls that Article 47 of
the ICSID Convention does give ICSID Arbitral Tribunals power to recommend measures
directed at the preservation of the rights of the parties. In exercising this power, ICSID
Tribunals may recommend measures in order to avoid the aggravation or extension of the
dispute. But those “non-aggravation” measures are ancillary measures which cannot be

recommended in the absence of measures of a purely protective or preservative kind.
66. For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that it must dismiss the request of the
Claimants relating, in very general terms and without any further specification, to the “non-

aggravation” of the dispute.

(b) Article 26 of the ICSID Convention

“Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay), Order of 23 January 2007, ICJ Reports p.
16, § 49.

67. Finally, in a letter sent on 22 December 2009, after the hearing, the Claimants drew
the attention of the Tribunal to a decision issued by a Venezuelan Administrative Court on
30 November 2009 on the request of the Attorney General of Venezuela. They contend that
those administrative proceedings are an obvious attempt “to adjudicate not only the seizure of

the Vessels[**] but also the overall legality of the seizure of Cemex Venezuela,” “an issue
expressly reserved to this Tribunal by Article 26” of the ICSID Convention.*® For that reason
they “request that the ‘administrative’ proceedings be included in the national courts

proceedings sought to be enjoined by” [their] application.”*”

68. Article 26 of the ICSID Convention provides that “[c]onsent of the parties to
arbitration under this Convention shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such

arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy.”

69. The exclusive jurisdiction of ICSID Arbitral Tribunals under Article 26 is certainly
susceptible of protection by way of provisional measures*. However, it remains to be seen
whether Claimants establish that the continuation of the proceedings in the Venezuelan

Administrative Court meets the requirements necessary for recommending such measures.

70. In this respect, the Tribunal notes that the Claimants are only stating very briefly in
their letter of 22 December 2009 that this is so, without developing in any way their argument
through an analysis of the relevant facts and of the applicable international and Venezuelan
Law. Hence, for the purpose of the present review, the Tribunal cannot but hold that the
Claimants have not establish a prima facie case of breach of Article 26 of the ICSID

Convention justifying provisional measures.

71. The Tribunal adds that, in any event, the decisions which may be taken by the
Venezuelan Administrative Courts, as well as by any other domestic Court, can neither bind
this Tribunal, nor prevail over the decision which it may take if it finds that it has jurisdiction

over the matter.

72. Lastly, the Tribunal makes no order here regarding the costs of and arising from the

Claimants’ request for provisional measures.

*5Question dealt with in paragraphs 59-61 above.

*6Claimants’ Letter of 22 December 2009, pp. 1- 4.

*"Ibidem, p. 5.

*8Mine v. Guinea, 6 January 1998, 4 ICSID Reports 77; CSOB v. Slovakia, Procedural Order no 4 of 11
January 1999 quoted in the Decision on Jurisdiction of 24 May 1999; Procedural Order no 5, 1° March
2000, Burlington v, Ecuador § 57.

73. For those reasons:
(a) The Claimants’ request for provisional measures is rejected.

(b) The decision on the costs of the procedure relating to the request for

provisional measures is reserved to a later stage of this arbitration.

[signature] [signature]

Professor Georges Abi-Saab Mr. Robert B. von Mehren

[signature]
Judge Gilbert Guillaume

President

