INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
CEMENTOWNIA “NOWA HUTA” S.A.
Claimant
v.

REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/06/2

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal:

Professor Pierre Tercier, President
Honourable Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C., Arbitrator
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms. Martina Polasek

For Claimant:

Mr. Biser Biserov

Chairman of the Managing Board
Cementownia “Nowa Huta” S.A.
Krakow, Poland

For Respondent:

Ms. Lucy Reed

Mr. D. Brian King

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
New York, NY, United States
and

Mr. Jan Paulsson

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
Paris, France

and

Mr. Aydin Cosar

Ms. Arzu Cosar

Ms. Utku Cosar

Cosar Avukatlik Biirosu
Istanbul, Turkey

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: September 17, 2009

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

Page No.
B) SUMMARY OF FACTS 1
b) The Parties and Certain Companies Concerned...........csecsesseseeseseeseseetsseeteseseseeeseenees 1
II. Factual Background 1
IIL. The Arbitral Proceedings 6
B. LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS 26
I. Generally 26
1. The Proceedings and the Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal 26

 
 
   

2. The Basis for the Arbitration Proceedings
3. Final Positions of the Parties and Structure of the Award...

II. Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections Arising from Cementownia’s Role as Investor ..29

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b) The Issue 29
2. The Burden of Proof 32
3. The Transfer of the Shares 33
b) General Considerations 34
b) The Date of the Transaction 36
c) The Circumstances of the Transaction 37
b) Cementownia’s Financial S 38
b) Other Evidence. 40
4. Conclusion 42
III. Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections to Claimant’s Standing... cscs 42
b) The Issue 42
2. The Parties’ Positions 43
a) The Respondent’s Position 43
b) The Claimant’s Position 43

3. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision 44
IV. Declaratory and Financial Consequences .........c.cscseeseseeseseeseseeeseetseeeeseeesseeeeseseeseeeeseenees 47
1. Declaratory Consequences 47
a) The Issue 47
b) The Parties’ Positions 47
b) The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision 47
2. Financial Consequences 48
a) The Issue 48

 

b) The Parties’ Positions 48

3. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

4. Conclusion

 

 

V. Cost!

 

1. The Issue

2. The Parties’ Position

 

3. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision
C. AWARD

 

1
b) SUMMARY OF FACTS

The following summary of facts does not purport to be exhaustive. When necessary, Part B of
this Award will include further discussion of issues of fact of particular importance to points of
decision.

b) The Parties and Certain Companies Concerned

The Claimant, Cementownia “Nowa Huta” A.S. (“the Claimant” or “Cementownia”), with
its seat at Ul. Cementowa 2, 31-983, Krakow, is a joint stock company existing and
organized under the laws of Poland. It is registered, as of August 28, 2003, in the national
court register under KRS 000169321. Its initial capital was 20 130 044 PLN (Exhibit C-1).

The Respondent is the Republic of Turkey (“the Respondent” or “Turkey”).

The present arbitration is in connection with the measures taken by the Republic of Turkey
against Cukurova Elektrik A.S. (“CEAS”) and Kepez Elektrik Tiirk A.S. (“Kepez”), both
companies incorporated under the laws of Turkey, shares of which the Claimant claims to
have acquired on May 30, 2003. The Respondent contests this ownership. The Arbitral
Tribunal will therefore rule only on this jurisdictional issue in the present Award.

According to the information given by the Respondent, under somewhat similar
circumstances, other companies alleging ownership in CEAS and Kepez in May-June 2003
have also launched arbitration proceedings against it. In particular, Libananco Holdings
Co. Ltd, a Cypriot investment firm, and Europe Cement Investment Trade S.A., a Polish
firm, have filed parallel requests for arbitration under the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”)
against the Republic of Turkey claiming damages for the alleged expropriation of their
investments.

II. Factual Background

5.

CEAS is a Turkish company with its seat in Adana. It has been registered in the Adana
Trade Register since December 24, 1952. It was founded as a vertically integrated electric
utility and as a joint stock company open for private ownership for the purpose of the
construction and operation of power plants and related facilities financed by World Bank

' The following abbreviations are used in the present document:

 

 

- Claim. 15 April 2008: Claimant’s Memorial of April 15, 2008

- Resp. 9 Feb. 2009: Respondent’s Memorial on jurisdiction of February 9,
2009

- Exh. C-[ ]: Exhibits to the Claimant’s submissions

- Exh. R-[ ]: Exhibits to the Respondent’s submi ns

- Exh. CLA. Exhibits to the Claimant’s Legal Authorities

- Exh. RLA- [...] Exhibits to the Respondent’s Legal Authorities

-PONo. [...] The Arbitral Tribunal’s Procedural Order No.

loans. At the time of its establishment, the Turkish government controlled approximately
35% of CEAS’s shares through state entities and companies. Today, CEAS is active in
electricity services, electric power distribution, electricity transmission and sale (Claim. 15
April 2008, para. 15).

Kepez is a Turkish hydroelectric company with its seat in Antalya. It was founded in
1953 as a vertically integrated electric utility and as a joint stock company. When Kepez
was established, the Turkish government controlled approximately 40% of its shares
through state entities and companies (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 16).

- Both companies are registered under the laws of Turkey. Their businesses have been
based on Concession Agreements concluded with the Turkish Ministry of Energy and
Natural Resources (“the Ministry”) (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 3 and Resp. 9 Feb.
2009, no. 17) as follows:

in 1953, CEAS was granted a concession for the generation, transmission, distribution
and marketing of electricity in three regions in south central Turkey; and

- in 1956, Kepez was granted an equivalent concession for the region of Antalya and
south central Turkey (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 18).

 

In 1970, it was decided that all electricity industry activities in Turkey were to be
concentrated into the newly created state-owned and state-run Turkish Electricity
Company. Exceptionally, CEAS and Kepez continued their activities pursuant to the
Concession Agreements (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 20).

 

In 1984, a new law, entitled “Law 3096: Law Entrusting of Institutions other than
Turkish Electricity Authority with Generation, Transmission, Distribution and Trading of
Electricity” was enacted with the objective of liberalizing the Turkish energy sector
(Claim. 15 April 2008, no. 21). Since this law permitted private parties to enter into
“authorization agreements” with the government, CEAS and Kepez applied for
conversion of the Concession Agreements into authorization agreements (Resp. 9 Feb.
2009, para. 23). These new agreements were concluded in 1988 (idem).

In 1992, Turkey decided to privatize its remaining 11.25% shares in CEAS and 25.39%
in Kepez by offering them to national and foreign investors in a bidding process.
According to the Claimant, the winner of both these tenders was Rumeli Elektrik Yatirim
A.S., owned by members of the Turkish Uzan family through their holding company,
Rumeli Holding. The purchase price for the shares in CEAS was approximately USD 81
million and for the shares in Kepez approximately USD 33 million (Claim. 15 April
2008, para. 30; witness statement of Kemal Uzan, para. 2).

On March 9, 1998, CEAS and Kepez entered into new Concession Agreements with the
Ministry which granted them concession rights for the generation, transmission,
distribution and marketing of electricity (“the 1998 Concession Agreements”) (Claim. 15
April 2008, para. 27; Exh. C-8 and 9). These Agreements provided that facilities used in
performing the concessions would remain State property and revert to the State when the
concessions ended (Art. 20[a]; Exh. R-83 and 84).

2

 

On February 20, 2001, a new Electricity Market Law (“Law 4628”) was enacted,
consistent with the then-existing EU Directive 96/92 (Exh. C-13). The entire transmission
network would be operated by a State-owned company: the Turkish Electricity
Transmission Joint Stock Company (“TEIAS”) (Exh. R-94). Vertically integrated
companies, including CEAS and Kepez, would no longer be able to engage in
transmission, which would be entrusted to TEIAS (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, para. 30).

After its enactment, Law 4628 became a matter of dispute in Turkish court proceedings.
Various members of the Turkish Parliament challenged this law on the grounds that it
violated the articles in the Turkish Constitution safeguarding the rule of law, the freedom
to conclude agreements and the protection of private property. The following text of
provisional Article 4 of Law 4628 was annulled by the Constitutional Court: “4n
agreement concluded by a company shall be deemed to have been nullified if the
company has failed to complete transfer of a power generating and distribution plant
owned by the government by June, 2001.” (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 36; Exh. C-14).

 

Pursuant to an implementing regulation that took effect on November 28, 2002,
companies in CEAS’s and Kepez’s category were directed to transfer transmission
facilities to TEIAS by December 31, 2002 (Exh. R-98, Art. 4).

On December 30, 2002, CEAS and Kepez sent letters to the Energy Market Regulatory
Authority contesting the above-mentioned Regulation (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 46;
Exh. R-102 and 103). In their letters, CEAS and Kepez stated the following:

 

- It would be illegal to force CEAS and Kepez to waive their concessions;

- The 1998 Concession Agreements would have been reviewed and approved by the
Danistay (the Turkish Council of State) before being signed;

- The administration would not be entitled to remove unilaterally the signed
Concession Agreements and would thereby infringe CEAS and Kepez’s legal and
financial rights;

- CEAS and Kepez would have made large infrastructure investments for generation,
transmission and distribution of electricity within the concession areas with their own

capital and in reliance upon concession terms until year 2058;

- There would be no need for any intervention by the State since CEAS and Kepez had
fulfilled all their duties;

- Law 4628 and the implementing Regulation would violate the Turkish Constitution;

- The request for transfer of transmission lines and facilities based on the above-
mentioned Regulation would be illegal because no compensation would be provided;

- The State would not follow the correct procedure for amending the Concession
Agreements since the correct procedure would require a review and approval by the

Danistay and the consent of the parties.

3

On February 10, 2003, the Ministry stated in two similar letters to CEAS and Kepez,
respectively, that it considered that the companies had violated their legal obligations by
not transferring their transmission facilities and rights to TEIAS before December 31,
2002. A new deadline of February 28, 2003 was fixed to transfer such assets to TEIAS.
The Ministry warned the companies that the 1998 Concession Agreements were
otherwise subject to termination (Exh. R-108 and 109).

In February, March and April 2003, letters between the Ministry and CEAS and Kepez,
respectively, were exchanged (Exh. C-23, 24 and 29; R-110-113). These letters contained
inter alia the following arguments:

- In its letter of February 10, 2003, CEAS objected to any transfer of its transmission
operations and challenged the legality of the actions requested. It also argued that the
administration must abide by the principle of pacta sunt servanda and that it expected
to be compensated for any transfer of its transmission operations to TEIAS. CEAS
concluded that it looked forward to discussing this matter with the Ministry (Exh. C-
23);

- In its answer of February 27, 2003 the Ministry referred to the framework of Law
4628 and the Regulations issued under that law as the legal basis for its actions. It
stated inter alia that “it is beyond discussion that the ownership of the transmission
facilities that are under your possession belongs to the public”. As regards the
invitation for discussion the Ministry stated that: “The fact that your party has
previously been invited twice to a meeting is a clear indication that our Ministry is
open to a dialog which may be needed for transfer procedures. However, by not
attending these meetings you yourself have closed this dialog which we wanted to
establish.” (Exh. C-27);

- In its letter of March 20, 2003, Kepez stated that it would not accept any one-sided
process that would cause harm to its shareholders, but that it was open to any meeting
(Exh. C- 24);

- In its letter of April 7, 2003, CEAS stated that it expected to receive a written
financial offer for the transfer of the transmission facilities and that it was ready to
participate in the meetings (Exh. C-29).

The events in Turkey just recounted all predated the event which the Claimant asserts
gives it the right to seek access to international jurisdiction. According to the Claimant,
on May 30, 2003, Cementownia acquired from Mr. Kemal Uzan 12.23% of the total
share capital in CEAS and 10.74% of the total share capital in Kepez (Claim. 15 April
2008, para. 268; Exh. C-60 and 61; witness statement of Kemal Uzan, para. 33).

The Claimant further asserts that the transaction was carried out during a telephone call
between Mr. Kemal Uzan and the chairman of Cementownia’s Management Board, Mr.
Jerzy Ciepiela. Mr. Uzan allegedly signed the related share purchase agreements in
Istanbul on May 30, 2003 and Mr. Ciepiela allegedly signed the agreements in Krakow
(Exh. C-60). Immediately in connection with the transfer of the shares, the share

certificates representing the transferred bearer shares are said to have been handed over to
Cementownia. According to Mr. Uzan, trusted employees of the Rumeli Group
personally transported the shares to Cementownia’s bank deposits in Krakow and Vienna
(witness statement of Kemal Uzan, para. 33). Since this alleged transaction goes to the
heart of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the Arbitral Tribunal will focus upon it in its legal
considerations (see below paras. 116 et seq.).

The claimed sale and purchase of the shares on May 30, 2003 assumes pivotal
importance because of the fact that on June 12, 2003, twelve days after the Claimant says
it_acquired interests in CEAS and Kepez, the 1998 Concession Agreements were
terminated by the Respondent, in breach, it is argued, of the Respondent’s obligations
under the ECT.

According to the Claimant, the facilities of CEAS and Kepez were raided and seized by
armed police forces (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 54). During the seizure, all ledgers,
records, files, papers, correspondence and other documents belonging to CEAS and
Kepez were confiscated along with all of CEAS’s and Kepez’s other assets. No more
access to the companies’ premises was allowed (Claim. 15 April 2008, paras. 55-58).
According to the Claimant, during these raids and seizures, CEAS and Kepez
representatives were presented with letters dated June 11, 2003 terminating the 1998
Concession Agreements with immediate effect (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 59).

According to the Respondent, the terminations of the agreements were due to CEAS’s
and Kepez’s ongoing breaches of the Concession Agreements and their refusal to transfer
transmission facilities in compliance with the Electricity Market Law (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009,
paras. 32-36). In connection with the terminations, the Ministry repossessed the
concession facilities, based upon the companies’ multiple uncured breaches. According to
the Respondent, this action was consistent with the terms of the 1998 Concession
Agreements and the operational assets’ status as State property (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, para.
37).

On February 12, 2004, Mr. Slawomir Szurman and Mr. Jadwiga Szyfko, on behalf of
AdAc Sp. Z 0.0, submitted as independent certified auditors their opinion and report from
an audit of Cementownia’s 2003 financial statements. Thereafter, the auditors issued
them to the Claimant’s General Shareholders’ Meeting and the Supervisory Board of the
Claimant. The following persons signed the report: Mr. Jadwiga Szyfko (Chief
Accountant), Mr. Mustafa Diizgiince (President of the Management Board), Mr. Jerzy
Ciepiela (the chairman of the Management Board who, it was asserted, had agreed the
share purchase agreements with Mr. Kemal Uzan) and Mr. Hiiseyin Sahin (another
Member of the Management Board). No mention was made in Cementownia’s 2003
financial statements of any purchase of shares in the CEAS and Kepez companies (Exh.
C-70).

On January 1, 2005, the new Turkish lira was introduced. In connection therewith the
Turkish Parliament introduced, by Law 5274, new provisions in the commercial code
which facilitated and, under certain circumstances, mandated, the replacement of old lira
share certificates with new lira share certificates. According to the Claimant, the Boards

5

20.

21.

22.

of Directors of CEAS and Kepez passed resolutions to the effect that all shareholders in
CEAS and Kepez should surrender their old share certificates. In return, they would
receive new share certificates with the nominal value printed in the new Turkish lira
(Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 270; Exh. C-62 and 63; witness statement of Kemal Uzan,
para. 35). Also, according to the Claimant, Cementownia returned its old share
certificates to CEAS and Kepez. In return, Cementownia received new share certificates
with their nominal value in the new currency (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 271; Exh. C-
66).

On January 25, 2005, Ms. Janina Martinek, on behalf of the Accounting Centre of the
Association of Accountants in Poland, submitted an opinion and report on
Cementownia’s 2004 financial statements. As was the case for the 2003 statements, no
mention of any purchase of CEAS and Kepez shares was made in the 2004 financial
statements (Exh. C-71).

On June 19, 2006, Mr. Badanie Sprawozdan Finansowych and Mr. Jadwiga Szyfko, on
behalf of Mr. Wladyslaw Licak, submitted their opinion and report from the audit of
Cementownia’s financial statements for 2005. That report states as follows: “3.3.9 In
2003, the Company purchased from Mr Kemal Uzan from Istanbul shares in 16 foreign
companies for the total amount of PLN 315,505,975.00. Pursuant to the agreements
concluded, the payment for the shares purchased is due within two years after
2009.01.10” (Exh. C-72). CEAS and Kepez were two of the sixteen foreign companies in
which Cementownia is stated to have purchased shareholding interests.

 

On March 28, 2007 and on April 5, 2007, according to the Respondent, Cementownia
sold its factories in Poland, its right to the land where the factories were located, and the
appurtenant equipment and materials to two other Uzan-controlled companies, i.e., Polski
Cement Holding S.A. and Polska Energetyka Holding S.A. (Respondent’s Request for an
Order for the Posting of Security for Costs of December 18, 2007, p. 7; Exh. R-9 and R-
10).

 

To this date, according to the Claimant, Turkey is still in possession and control of all the
assets of CEAS and Kepez, and the facilities that used to belong to CEAS and Kepez are
operated by inter alia the state-owned company TEIAS under the coordination of the
Ministry (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 62).

III. The Arbitral Proceedings

23.

24.

On April 19, 2006, the first parallel proceeding was registered at the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”). The Cypriot firm
Libananco Holdings Co. Ltd., claiming ownership in the companies CEAS and Kepez,
filed a request for arbitration against the Republic of Turkey alleging that the latter had
expropriated the two companies. The case is still pending.

On September 28, 2006, the Claimant, represented by Prof. Dr. Kaj Hobér, Mr. Jakob
Ragnwaldh and Dr. Nils Eliasson of the law firm Mannheimer Swartling Advokatbyra

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

(Sweden), filed a Request for Arbitration before the Centre whereby it proposed that
(Request for Arbitration, p. 14):

“(T]he Tribunal consists of three arbitrators, one appointed by each party. The
arbitrators so appointed will jointly appoint the third arbitrator who shall be the
Presiding Arbitrator.”

In its Request, the Claimant addressed the preliminary indication of the relief sought
(Request for Arbitration, p. 13):

“(i) Order the State to pay to Cementownia an amount of USD 4,648,157,411
together with interest at a rate to be determined later; and

(ii) Order the State to compensate Cementownia for its cost of arbitration in an
amount to be specified later together with interest thereon and, as between the
parties, alone to bear the compensation to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the
Secretariat of the Centre.”

On November 16, 2006, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for
Arbitration on the basis of the Additional Facility clause contained in Article 26 of the
ECT.

 

On January 24, 2007, the Claimant was informed of the appointment of Mr. Jan Paulsson,
Ms. Lucy Reed, Mr. Brian King of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer and Mr. Arzu Cosar
and Ms. Utku Cosar of Cosar Avukatlik Biirosu (Turkey) as Respondent’s Counsel.

On January 31, 2007, the Claimant requested that the Arbitral Tribunal in this case be
constituted in accordance with Article 9 of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules.
Accordingly, the Claimant appointed Mr. Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C. as arbitrator.
The Respondent subsequently appointed Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C. on February
14, 2007. Both arbitrators accepted their respective appointments.

On February 21, 2007, the Respondent invoked Article 6(4) of the Arbitration
(Additional Facility) Rules requesting ICSID to appoint the arbitrator not yet appointed.
On May 7, 2007, after consultations with the Parties, the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council appointed Prof. Pierre Tercier as the third presiding arbitrator,
and he accepted the appointment on May 8, 2007.

On March 6, 2007, the Centre registered the request for arbitration submitted by the
Polish firm Europe Cement Investment and Trade S.A against the Republic of Turkey in
the second parallel proceeding concerning the purported expropriation of CEAS and
Kepez. On August 13, 2009, that arbitral tribunal rendered its award dismissing the
claimant’s claim in its entirety for lack of jurisdiction (Europe Cement Investment &
Trade S.A. v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/2).

 

On May 11, 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted in accordance with Article 13(1)
of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules of the Centre. In its letter to the Parties, the
Centre informed them that Prof. Tercier had acted as President in another ICSID case in

31.

32.

33.

which the Respondent’s Counsel, Mr. Jan Paulsson, served as co-arbitrator. No objection
to this fact was raised by any of the Parties.

On May 23, 2007, the Centre requested each Party to pay an amount of USD 75,000 to
defray the costs of the proceeding. Both Parties made their advance payments.

On August 23, 2007, the first session of the Arbitral Tribunal was held in Paris to decide
various procedural matters. The Claimant was represented by Prof. Dr. Kaj Hobér, Mr.
Jakob Ragnwaldh and Dr. Nils Eliasson of Mannheimer Swartling Advokatbyra. The
Respondent was represented by Mr. Jan Paulsson, Ms. Lucy Reed and Mr. Brian King of
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, Mr. Arzu Cosar and Ms. Utku Cosar of Cosar Avukatlik
Biirosu, and Mr. Sami Demirbilek, Mr. Mustafa Cetin and Mr. Pelin Gudulluoglu of the
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources (Republic of Turkey).

The Parties confirmed their agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted on
May 11, 2007 in accordance with the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules, and
that they had no objection to the appointment of any of its members. As regards the
applicable arbitration rules, it was agreed that the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules
in effect as of April 10, 2006 apply to the proceedings. In addition to the relevant
provisions of the Arbitration Rules on the production of evidence, they agreed that the
IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial Arbitration would
apply.

The Arbitral Tribunal decided also on fees and expenses, advance payments, records of
hearings, means of communication, decisions of the Tribunal, procedural language, place
of arbitration, and written and oral procedures. With regard to the procedural timetable, it
was agreed that there would first be a proceeding on liability as follows:

- Claimant’s Memorial on or before March 1, 2008;

- Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on or before September 8, 2008;

- Claimant’s Reply on or before December 19, 2008;

- Respondent’s Rejoinder on or before April 17, 2009;

- Hearing in September 2009.

Furthermore, the following issues were discussed and agreed: the production of evidence,
the dates and the organization of subsequent sessions, and the publication of decisions
and the Award (Minutes of the first session of the Arbitral Tribunal of August 23, 2007).
On December 18, 2007, the Claimant made a request for provisional measures, whereby

it requested that the Arbitral Tribunal (Claimant’s Request for provisional measures of
December 18, 2007, para. 6):

 

“Orders the Republic to preserve and take no adverse step in relation to the
Documents and to procure that any entity under its control (including, but not

8

34.

35.

limited to, the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, the Energy Market
Regulatory Authority, the Turkish Electricity Distribution Co. Inc. (“TEDAS”),
the Electricity Generation Co. Inc. (“EUAS”), the Turkish Electricity
Transmission Co. Inc. (“TEIAS”), and the Turkish Electricity Trading and
Contracting Co. Inc. (“TETAS”)) preserves and takes no adverse steps in relation
to the Documents.”

On the same _day, the Respondent submitted three requests (the “18 December 2007
Applications”):

- a first Request (incorporating a Redfern List) for the production of the following
documents:

°

share certificates in CEAS and Kepez;

purchase agreements or other contracts;

o loan agreements and documents evidencing any security or collateral for the
financing of Cementownia’s acquisition of the shares in CEAS and Kepez;
records of transport and delivery of the original share certificates to Cementownia;
and

o Cementownia’s tax returns for 2003-2006.

°

°

- aRequest for an order for the posting of security for costs whereby it inter alia sought
(Respondent’s Request for an Order for the Posting of Security for Costs of
December 18, 2007, para. 5.1):

“[A] binding order from the Tribunal pursuant to Additional Facility Rule 46 that
CNH provide security adequate to ensure the payment of an eventual award of
costs incurred by the Republic in this arbitration. The Republic asks that CNH be
required to provide such security within 14 days of the date of the Tribunal’s
order, in the amount of US$ 5 million and in the form of an irrevocable letter of
credit or bank guarantee from a first-class international bank, to remain in place
until any monetary award against CNH has been paid”; and

- a Request for the suspension of the proceedings whereby it requested, inter alia
(Respondent’s Request for suspension of the proceedings of December 18, 2007, p.
3):

“[T]o suspend the proceedings in this arbitration until the Claimant has proven
that it legitimately owns the CEAS and Kepez stock percentage it claims.”

On December 30, 2007, the Claimant replied to the Respondent’s requests, opposing
them in their entirety. It also sought an extension of time to file its Memorial. On January
10, 2008, the Respondent replied to the Claimant’s response and to the Claimant’s
request for provisional measures. It opposed the Claimant’s request for an extension of
time and requested that a hearing should be convened at the Tribunal’s earliest
convenience. On January 21, 2008, the Claimant presented its observations to the
Respondent’s response to the Claimant’s request for provisional measures. It reiterated its
request for provisional measures dated December 18, 2007. On January 24, 2008, the

 

 

36.

37.

38.

39.

Respondent replied to these observations and asked the Arbitral Tribunal to dismiss the
Claimant’s request with costs.

On January 25, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 1, whereby
it decided:

“1. As the case stands, the Respondent’s request for production of documents is
denied;

2. As the case stands, the Respondent's request for suspension of the proceedings
is denied. The Respondent is at liberty to renew its request after receipt of the
Memorial;

3. As the case stands, the Respondent’s request to hold a hearing before this
Tribunal and to hold a joint meeting with the other two ICSID Tribunals is
denied;

4. As the case stands, the Respondent's request for the posting of security for
costs is denied. It is at liberty to renew the request after receipt of the Memorial;

5. The Arbitral Tribunal takes note of the Respondent’s commitment not to
destroy the documentation in its control. With respect to the request for the
production of documents, the Claimant is at liberty to renew the request with
greater precision at a later stage if judged necessary and the Respondent will be
given the opportunity to respond to any such request;

6. The Claimant's request for an extension of time is granted until April 1, 2008.
The Arbitral Tribunal will adapt the time schedule agreed upon after consultation
with the Parties. “

On February 6, 2008, the Claimant noted the Respondent’s undertaking confirmed by the
Arbitral Tribunal in its Procedural Order No. 1. It also reserved the right to renew its
request for provisional measures.

 

On March 13, 2008, the Claimant alleged that the Claimant’s legal representatives and
witnesses had been under surveillance by the Respondent, that telephone lines had been
tapped and that threats had been received. It requested the Arbitral Tribunal to order
several provisional measures in order to discontinue the alleged surveillance.

On March 14, 2008 the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 2, whereby it
decided:

 

“I. The Respondent is directed to respond fully and with appropriate evidence to
the Claimant’s letter and request of March 13, 2008 by March 20, 2008;

2. Acting on the basis that the Claimant’s allegations appear to be credible,
without having yet received any evidence from the Respondent that might
contradict the allegations or put them into doubt, the Republic of Turkey is
directed to immediately discontinue until further notice all forms of surveillance
or interference of communications directed at Cementownia and its legal
counsels;

40.

Al.

42.

43.

3. Acting on the basis that the Claimant's allegations appear to be credible,
without having yet received any evidence from the Respondent that might
contradict the allegations or put them into doubt, the Republic of Turkey is
directed to conserve copies of all e-mails or other electronic messages and
recordings of all telephone calls within its possession related to this pending
arbitration.”

On March 20, 2008, the Respondent sent to the Arbitral Tribunal a copy of a letter filed
in connection with Europe Cement Investment and Trade S.A. v. Republic of Turkey.
According to the Respondent, the Claimant’s representatives and related persons were
under surveillance for other purposes (i.e., criminal investigations) than for the purpose
of obtaining information about the ongoing arbitral proceedings.

 

On March 26, 2008, the Respondent invited the Arbitral Tribunal to set a deadline for the
Claimant to submit a reply to the Respondent’s letter dated March 20, 2008. It also asked
the Arbitral Tribunal to lift the provisional directives imposed in Procedural Order No. 2
and to confirm the Claimant’s deadline for submitting its Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Liability.

 

On March 28, 2008 the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 3, whereby it
decided:

 

“I. The Claimant is instructed to file its reply to the Respondent's response of
March 20, 2008 by Tuesday, April 1, 2008;

2. The Respondent is instructed to file any comments that it may have on the
Claimant's reply by Friday, April 4, 2008;

3. In view of the Claimant’s application of 13 March 2008 and the time taken to
address the issues raised therein, the time limit for submitting the Claimant’s
Memorial is extended until Tuesday, April 15, 2008;

4. The Respondent's other requests of March 20, 2008 are, for the time being, set
aside pending the further submissions of the parties as contemplated in
paragraph I above; and

5. With the exception of the amendments made herein to the Arbitral Tribunal’s
Procedural Orders Nos. 1 and 2, the Tribunal’s directions and orders are for the
time being maintained, including the date of May 26, 2008 for a hearing on preliminary
issues.”

On April 1, 2008, the Claimant replied to the Respondent’s letter dated March 20, 2008.
On April 2, 2008, the Respondent submitted English translations of the Claimant’s
exhibits contained in its reply dated April 1, 2008. On April 7, 2008, the Respondent filed
a rejoinder with exhibits, responding to the Claimant’s reply of April 1, 2008 regarding
the Claimant’s application of March 13, 2008. On April 9, 2008, the Respondent
forwarded to the Arbitral Tribunal its rejoinder filed in Europe Cement Investment &
Trade S.A. v. Republic of Turkey.

44.

On April 10, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 4, whereby it

decided:

“I. In accordance with item 3 of the Arbitral Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 3,
the Tribunal maintains the time limit of April 15, 2008 for submitting the
Claimant’s Memorial. As noted by the Tribunal at its first meeting with the
parties, the Memorial should include all evidence relied upon, including witness
statements and expert reports. In the Tribunal’s view, the Claimant has had ample
time to prepare its Memorial and it must file it in accordance with the schedule
which has already been adjusted at its request;

2. Given the circumstances raised in the Claimant's letter of March 13, 2008
which have itated the subseq exch of. issic it will be open
to the Claimant to apply to the Arbitral Tribunal for leave to submit additional
witness statements and/or expert reports thereafter. This must be done on a timely
basis, and must not disrupt the conduct of the proceeding, in particular, the
preparation and filing of the Counter-Memorial. The Respondent will be given an
opportunity to comment on any such application. If justified, the Tribunal will
grant leave for the submission of additional witness statements and expert reports
after the April 15, 2008 filing of the Memorial;

3. Procedural Order No. 1 contemplated that the Respondent would be at liberty
to renew certain requests after receipt of the Memorial (Order, Points I to 4). In
view of the issues addressed in the parties’ recent submissions, and the date
reserved for a hearing on May 26, 2008, the Tribunal now considers it
appropriate that the Respondent make such of those requests as it still sees fit and
wishes to advance and it is directed to submit a response to the Claimant's
Memorial by Friday, May 9, 2008. The response should address only those issues
in the Claimant's Memorial that are to be discussed at the hearing on May 26,
2008;

4. The Respondent's request that the Claimant deposit with the Tribunal share
certificates concerning its ownership in CEAS and Kepez is, for the time being,
set aside pending the submission of the Memorial, the Respondent's response
thereto and the parties’ submissions at the hearing;

5. The Arbitral Tribunal maintains Point No. 2 of its Procedural Order No. 2 of
March 14, 2008;

6. The Arbitral Tribunal takes note of the statement made by counsel for the
Respondent in its Rejoinder that “we have not received or used any intercepts or
other surveillance results from the Prosecutor’s Office in conjunction with this
arbitration.” Given the seriousness of the matters raised by the Claimant, the
extensive investigation by Respondent's counsel that it has provoked, and the
fundamental importance of such a representation to the proper administration of
the arbitration, the Tribunal accepts that statement. The Respondent and its
counsel are subject to a continuing duty to ensure that there shall be no use
whatsoever made of intercepted communications in this arbitration;

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

7. The Arbitral Tribunal takes note of the statement by the Deputy Chief Public
Prosecutor of Sisli in the Report of April 4, 2008 (Exhibit RA-10 to the Rejoinder)
that “[e]-mails that are not related to the investigated crime or any other crime,
e-mails that are duplicative or irrelevant to the investigation are destroyed.” The
Respondent is directed to obtain a supplementary statement from the Deputy
Chief Public Prosecutor of Sisli that all other documents and telephone
recordings in any way related to this arbitration have been or will be destroyed.
Such statement should be attached to the response to be filed on Friday, May 9,
2008;

8. The Arbitral Tribunal postpones any ruling on costs of the parties’ pending
applications until after the hearing scheduled for May 26, 2008.”

On April 15, 2008, the Claimant filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction and Liability. It
sought the following prayers for relief (Claim. 15 April 2008, para. 13):

“Order Turkey to pay compensation to Cementownia in an amount quantified in
the quantum phase, but not less than USD 4,000,000,000, together with interest at
arate to be determined later; and

Order Turkey to compensate Cementownia for its costs of arbitration in an
amount to be specified later together with interest thereon and, as between the
parties, alone bear the compensation to the Tribunal and the Secretariat of the
Centre.”

On May 9, 2008, the Respondent filed a renewal of its 18 December 2007 Applications.
A revised Redfern List was annexed to the request.

On May 21, 2008, the Secretariat of the Centre requested that each Party pay a further
advance of USD 100,000. The Republic of Turkey complied with this request.

On May 22, 2008, the Claimant restated and amended its requests for relief contained in
its letters of March 13 and April 1, 2008 and submitted a partial response to the
Respondent’s renewal of its 18 December 2007 Applications.

On May 26, 2008, a hearing took place with the Arbitral Tribunal and the Parties in Paris
(26 May 2008 Transcript). The Claimant was represented by Prof. Dr. Kaj Hobér, Mr.
Jakob Ragnwaldh and Dr. Nils Eliasson of Mannheimer Swartling Advokatbyra. The
Respondent was represented by Mr. Jan Paulsson and Mr. Brian King of Freshfields
Bruckhaus Deringer; Mr. Arzu Cosar, Ms. Utku Cosar and Mr. Alper Arslan of Cosar
Avukatlik Biirosu; and Mr. Selahattin Cimen, Mr. Mustafa Cetin, Ms. Sevim Argun of
the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources (Republic of Turkey).

The hearing concerned the Respondent’s requests for the production of documents and
for the posting of security for costs, as well as an update on the issues raised in the
Claimant’s letter of March 13, 2008 (see above para. 38).

In general, the Claimant agreed to comment on the Redfern List submitted by the
Respondent within a short period of time; both Parties agreed that they would try to reach

13

50.

Sl.

an agreement on the Renewal Request; and both Parties had a further opportunity to
present their positions on the subject related to the Respondent’s Request for Provisional
Measures for the Posting of Security for Costs.

In particular, with respect to the Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures related to
surveillance, the Respondent made a declaration according to which no information
pertaining to this arbitration had been communicated by Turkey’s prosecutor to the
Republic’s legal representatives. Furthermore, the government of Turkey gave the
assurance that the legal team of the Claimant would not be hindered from coming to
Turkey and that they would not be surveyed in Turkey (26 May 2008 Transcript, p. 126-
127).

On May 29, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 5, whereby it
decided:

“1. (a) Claimant is instructed to comment on the amended Redfern List submitted
by Respondent within ten days from the date of the hearing. The Arbitral Tribunal
will then decide promptly on the basis of each Party’s submission;

1. (b) The Parties are invited to agree on the production of original documents
and the modalities of their forensic examination within 21 days from the date of
the hearing. In case of disagreement, the Parties shall make submissions within
seven days and the Arbitral Tribunal will decide;

2. A decision on the Request for Security for Costs is postponed until completion
of the document production phase discussed in this Order;

3. (a) The Arbitral Tribunal confirms its previous decisions in Procedural Orders
Nos. 2 and 4;

3. (b) In view of the Claimant's renewed requests, the Arbitral Tribunal takes note
of Respondent’s counsel's further declaration as to the position of the Republic of
Turkey;

3. I The Arbitral Tribunal confirms the Claimant's right to submit a new request
in the event of new difficulties;

4. The Arbitral Tribunal will decide on the next steps of the procedure in a further
procedural order.”

On June_5, 2008, the Claimant made the following comments and objections on the
revised Redfern Schedule:

 

- the production of the original share certificates and the original sales agreements
would be subject to measures for the safe and secure delivery of such originals to
the depository to be agreed upon;

- the old lira share certificates were no longer in Cementownia’s possession;

- Cementownia was trying to locate resolution No. 44/2003 of Cementownia’s
board;

14

52.

53.

- Cementownia was investigating whether other minutes of its shareholders’
meeting of October 29, 2006 were available for production;

- the share certificates were kept in bank deposit boxes, therefore, no receipts or
inventories were issued by the banks at which the share certificates were kept;

- as regards the freight, insurance, custom records, custom clearance or air ticket
and passports of the accompanying persons, they did not exist or were not in
possession or control of Cementownia;

- no copies of the original bank transfers exist since the payment of the share
certificates would take place within two years following January 10, 2009;

- no approvals from the Turkish government that could evidence the purchase were
sought;

- Cementownia was in the process of retrieving copies of its tax declarations for the
years 2002-2007;

- Cementownia was not in the possession or control of documents evidencing
Kemal Uzan’s ownership or participation in CEAS and Kepez;

- Cementownia contested the production of its share register, other documents
identifying its shareholders from 2003, and documents concerning the sale of its

assets to Polska Energetyka.

On June 9, 2008 the Respondent reacted on the Claimant’s comments and objections.

 

On June 16, 2008, the Respondent informed the Arbitral Tribunal that the Parties were
actively discussing custodial arrangements for the deposit of original documents (so that
they could be forensically examined) in accordance with paragraph 1(b) of Procedural
Order No. 5 (cf. above para. 50).

 

 

On June 16, 2008 the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 6, whereby it
decided that:

"1. The Arbitral Tribunal refers to its Procedural Order No. 5, point 1(b),
concerning the production of originals of documents submitted by the Claimant in
copies. Accordingly, with respect to Respondent's requests Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 6(c),
the Parties are invited to agree on the production of original documents and the
modalities of their forensic examination within 21 days from the date of the
hearing held on May 26, 2008 (i.e. by June 16, 2008). In case of disagreement,
the Parties shall make submissions within seven days and the Arbitral Tribunal
will decide.

2. The Arbitral Tribunal notes, with respect to Respondent's request No. 2, the
Claimant's statement that neither originals nor copies of the original share

certificates in CEAS and Kepez are in Cementownia’s possession any longer and
therefore cannot be produced. The Tribunal accepts this statement.

3. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the Claimant agrees to the production of and
is in the process of locating documents concerning the Respondent's requests
Nos. 4, 8, 11, 14 and 15. The Tribunal orders that those documents that have so
far been located be produced to the Respondent without delay and that any
remaining responsive documents be produced by July 8, 2008.

4. With respect to Respondent’s requests Nos. 5(a) and (b), 6(a) and (b), 7, 9 and
10, the Claimant states that these documents do not exist. The Arbitral Tribunal
accepts this statement and wishes to remind the Parties of the Tribunal’s
Procedural Order No. 1 in which it held that:

“It is not contested that the documents that are required by the Respondent are
necessary to decide some of the basis for the claim, in particular the right of the
Claimant to be considered as an investor. Indeed, if the Claimant cannot prove
ownership and/or control of the Cukurova Elektrik A.S. (CEAS) and Kepez
Elektrik Tiirk A.A. (Kepez) shares at all relevant times, it would lack standing and
the Arbitral Tribunal in turn would lack jurisdiction.” The probative value of the
evidence adduced or the lack of evidence will thus be assessed by the Tribunal.

5. With respect to Respondent's request under No. 5I (passports of persons
transporting share certificates to Cementownia’s bank deposits in Poland in
2003), Claimant contests the request because the documents are not in the
possession or control of Cementownia. The Arbitral Tribunal accepts this
statement and wishes to repeat its observations under paragraph 4 of this Order.

6. With respect to Respondent's request under No. 11 (documents evidencing the
share ownership in CEAS and Kepez of Kemal Uzan in the period March 2003 to
July 2003) and No. 12 (resolutions of the CEAS and Kepez Board of Directors
authorizing Kemal Uzan to act as the companies’ representative), Claimant
contests the request because the documents are not in the possession or control of
Cementownia. The Tribunal notes that Mr. Kemal Uzan has submitted a witness
statement in which he describes the relationships between the group of companies
in which he is involved and states that he is a member of the Supervisory Board of
Cementownia. Therefore, although Cementownia may not have de iure control
over documents falling under the category of requests Nos. 11 and 12, it must be
deemed to have access to such documents. The Tribunal thus grants the
Respondent's requests and orders that any responsive documents be produced to
the Respondent by July 8, 2008.

7. With respect to Respondent's requests Nos. 16 and 17 (documents concerning
the application of Articles 1(6) and 17(1) of the Energy Charter Treaty), the
Claimant contests the requests because the documents are in its view not relevant
for the purposes of the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Without prejudice to the
Arbitral Tribunal’s decision as to the proper qualification of any legal issue in
this case, the Tribunal finds that it is appropriate in view of the efficiency of the
process to grant these requests. The Tribunal thus orders that any responsive
documents be produced to the Respondent by July 8, 2008.

16

54.

55.

56.

8. With respect to Respondent's request No. 18 (documents concerning the sale of
Cementownia’s assets to Polska Energetyka), the Claimant contests the request
because the documents are in its view not relevant for the purposes of jurisdiction
and because certain documents under this category are already in the possession
of the Respondent. The Arbitral Tribunal finds that the request is premature at
this stage of the proceeding. It further notes that Exhibits 9 and 10 to the
Respondent's Request for Production of Documents of December 18, 2008 are in
the possession of the Respondent. The Tribunal thus denies the request at this
stage, but grants liberty to the Respondent to renew its request after the filing of
the Counter-Memorial.”

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the documents mentioned under point 3 have not been
produced by the Claimant despite the fact that it agreed to the production and therefore
admitted that they exist.

On June 23, 2008, the Claimant’s Counsel informed the Arbitral Tribunal, without stating
any reasons therefore, that it had resigned from representing the Claimant with immediate
effect. Thereafter, the Chairman of the Management Board and Managing Director of
Cementownia, Mr. Biser Hristov Biserov, corresponded with the Respondent and the
Arbitral Tribunal.

 

On July 9, 2008, Mr. Biserov requested suspension of all deadlines and requirements for
at least 90 days. On July 21, 2008, the Respondent requested the Arbitral Tribunal to
deny the Claimant’s request concerning the suspension. In order to keep the Arbitral
Tribunal informed about the parallel proceedings, the Respondent forwarded to it on July
25, 2008 Procedural Order No. 5 issued in Europe Cement Investment and Trade S.A. v.
Republic of Turkey.

On July 30, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 7, whereby it
decided:

“I. The Claimant is instructed that it shall have up to 45 days as of the date of
this Order to appoint new legal counsel with notice of such appointment to be
given to the Tribunal and the Respondent immediately after such appointment is
made;

2. The Respondent is invited to make alternative arrangements for depository
services at a location outside of Turkey and Poland concerning the production of
share certificates by August 15, 2008, and to communicate the details of such
arrangements to the Tribunal and the Claimant by that date;

3. The Claimant shall produce the share certificates to the designated depository
no later than August 30, 2008;

4. The Claimant shall produce all other documents under Procedural Order No. 6
directly to the Respondent’s counsel no later than 15 days afier the appointment
of the Claimant's new counsel;

5. The Arbitral Tribunal reserves its decision concerning the further procedure.”

17

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

On August 15, 2008, the Respondent, referring to Procedural Order No. 7, informed the
Arbitral Tribunal that it had made arrangements for depository services with JPMorgan
Chase Bank in London, with whom it had negotiated a draft Custody Agreement.

On August 25, 2008, Mr. Biserov requested 60 additional days in order to retain new
legal counsel.

On August 28, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal, after having reviewed the draft Custody
Agreement and making minor amendments to it, approved the agreement and directed the
Parties to sign it.

On August 29, 2008, the Respondent sent four original copies of the Custody Agreement
to the Claimant for its signature.

On September 6, 2008, the Claimant informed the Arbitral Tribunal that it was about to
receive all documents from its former counsel and that it was in process of finding new
counsel. It therefore sought a further extension of time until October 30, 2009 to appoint
new legal counsel and “more time to comply with all aspects of the tribunal’s order
including the order for production of documents and the production of original share
certificates.” On September 12, 2008, the Respondent requested the Arbitral Tribunal to
reject the Claimant’s request for time extensions. On September 22, 2008, the Claimant
informed the Arbitral Tribunal about the progress of its search for new counsel.

On September 22, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 8,
whereby it decided:

“I. The Claimant is instructed to appoint new legal counsel as soon as possible,
but no later than October 15, 2008. The Claimant shall keep the Arbitral Tribunal
informed about the measures taken in order to appoint its new legal counsel;

2. The Claimant shall sign the Custody Agreement upon receipt of the present
Order;

3. The Claimant shall produce the share certificates in accordance with the
Custody Agreement no later than September 30, 2008;

4. The Claimant shall produce all other documents under Procedural Order No. 6
directly to the Respondent’s counsel no later than 21 days afier the appointment
of the Claimant's new counsel;

5. The Arbitral Tribunal reserves its decision concerning the further procedure.”

On September 25, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal reminded the Claimant that the obligations
to sign the Custody Agreement (cf. above para. 57) and to deposit of the original share
certificates were independent of the appointment of new counsel.

On October 8, 2008, Mr. Biserov informed the Arbitral Tribunal that the Claimant had
not signed the Custody Agreement and that it had not deposited any shares. It declined to
make any comments on this matter without receiving legal advice.

 

18

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

On October 15, 2008, the Claimant informed the Arbitral Tribunal that it was at its final
stage of choosing counsel and requested therefore a further extension of 30 days to meet
the time limits.

 

On October 20, 2008, the Respondent submitted its observations on the Claimant’s letter
of October 15 and requested that the Claimant sign the Custody Agreement, deliver the
share certificates and produce all requested documents under Procedural Order No. 6 (cf.
above para. 53).

 

On October 23, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 9, whereby
it decided:

 

“I. The Claimant is instructed to appoint new legal counsel as soon as possible,
but no later than November 14, 2008.

2. The Claimant shall sign the Custody Agreement immediately.

3. The Claimant shall produce the share certificates in accordance with the
Custody Agreement immediately.

4. The Claimant shall produce all other documents under Procedural Order No. 6
directly to the Respondent's Counsel as soon as possible but no later than 21 days
after the appointment of the Claimant's new counsel.

5. The Arbitral Tribunal reserves its decision concerning the further procedure.”

On November 4, 2008, the Respondent informed the Claimant that the custodian,
JPMorgan Chase Bank, had not yet received the signed Custody Agreement and the
original share certificates. On November 13, 2008, the Claimant informed the Arbitral
Tribunal of its progress in finding new counsel and asked for yet another time extension
of 45 days. On November 21, 2008, the Respondent objected to the Claimant’s request. It
also stated that it did not wish the arbitration to be suspended. On November 25, 2008.
the Claimant wrote that it would file a submission by December 2, 2008.

 

 

 

 

On December 4, 2008, Mr. Biserov informed the Tribunal that there had been a change in
the Claimant’s shareholders resulting in a subsequent change in both the Board of
Directors and Management Board of the company, and that he had had to become
involved in the case after the resignation of Mannheimer Swartling. He stated further that
upon receipt of the documents from the former legal representative, he had discovered
that there were no originals amongst the returned documents. He concluded that the
Claimant would not be able to comply with the Arbitral Tribunal’s orders and therefore
sought the discontinuation of the case without prejudice to the Claimant’s rights.

 

On December 16, 2008, the Respondent objected to the discontinuance under Article 50
of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules and requested that “a briefing schedule be
established to permit its jurisdictional objections to be adjudicated in a bifurcated
proceeding with an early hearing date” (Respondent’s Request of December 16, 2008, p.
4).

 

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

On December 18, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 10,
whereby it decided:

 

“1. The proceeding continues.

2. Either party is invited to pay the Claimant's outstanding share of the advance
payments in the amount of US$100,000 within 30 days of this Order.

3. Should the payment in point 2 remain outstanding after 30 days, the
proceedings will be suspended in accordance with ICSID Administrative and
Financial Regulation 14(3)(d).

4. The Arbitral Tribunal intends to revert to the parties regarding the procedural
calendar.”

In the letter accompanying the above-mentioned Procedural Order, the Arbitral Tribunal
requested that the Claimant make its comments and/or objections by December 23, 2008
at the latest. The Claimant did not respond.

On January 9, 2009, the Respondent sent a letter to the Arbitral Tribunal noting that the
Claimant had not respected the December 23, 2008 deadline. It also stated that it would
transfer USD 100,000 in substitution for the Claimant’s payment, as the latter was in
default. On January 16, 2009, the Secretariat received the Claimant’s outstanding
advance from the Respondent.

On January 15, 2009, the Respondent proposed a procedural schedule for proceedings on
jurisdiction. The Claimant did not respond to the Respondent’s proposal.

On January 22, 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 11, whereby
it decided:

“I. The Arbitral Tribunal will deal with the Respondent's objections to
jurisdiction as a preliminary question in accordance with Article 45(5) of the
Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules.

2. The proceeding on the merits is suspended in accordance with Article 45(4) of
the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules.

3. The procedural timetable concerning the proceeding on jurisdiction will be as
follows:

e February 9, 2009 Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction;

e March 23, 2009 Claimant's Reply on Jurisdiction;

e April 15, 2009 Deadline for submission of additional documentary
evidence; and

e May 5-7 Reserved days for a hearing on jurisdiction in Paris.”

On February 9, 2009, the Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction by which it
requested the Arbitral Tribunal to grant the following relief (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, para. 1):

“a) dismissal of Cementownia’s claim in its entirety;

20

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

b) a declaration that Cementownia’s claim is manifestly ill-founded, and has been
asserted using inauthentic documents;

c) an award of monetary compensation to the Republic, in an amount to be fixed
by the Tribunal; and

d) a full award of the Republic’s costs of arbitration.”

By letter of February 21, 2009, Mr. Biserov responded inter alia that “we are prepared to
represent to the Tribunal that we do not oppose dismissal of these proceedings on the
basis of lack of jurisdiction, if the sole basis for such ruling is that Claimant has not come
forward with the bearer shares at issue. Such a stipulated basis for dismissal would avoid
additional cost and burden on the parties and the Tribunal” (p. 2).

The Claimant also alleged that the President of the Arbitral Tribunal had not disclosed his
involvement with one of the Respondent’s counsel, Mr. Jan Paulsson, in another ICSID
case as arbitrators, and his participation in a seminar on arbitration held in Ankara. The
Claimant therefore asked to dismiss or discontinue the arbitration proceedings on this
ground as well.

On February 24, 2009, the President provided the Claimant with information regarding
the question of independence and impartiality: The Parties had been informed by letter on
May 11, 2007 from the ICSID Secretariat about the fact that the President had chaired an
arbitral tribunal in which Mr. Paulsson had served as co-arbitrator (see above para. 30).
As regards the conference in Ankara, the President stressed that he had been invited as
Chairman of the ICC Court of Arbitration on behalf of the Turkish Chamber of
Commerce, which was in charge of the invitations.

 

On March 3, 2009, the Respondent again opposed the Claimant’s proposal to dismiss the
case. It stated inter alia that: “The Republic’s concern regarding the CEAS and Kepez
shares is not just that Cementownia has failed to produce the original share certificates,
but rather that — even if it could now, or later, somehow present the originals —
Cementownia has not proven and cannot prove that it owned the shares at the relevant
time (...) The Republic could accept an agreed resolution of this case only if it resulted in
the issuance of an award granting the Republic each element of relief set out above
[reference to its Memorial on Jurisdiction of February 9, 2009, no. 232] (Respondent’s
letter of March 3, 2009, p. 2).

On March 16, 2009, Mr. Biserov confirmed that Cementownia did not oppose dismissal
of the present proceedings on the basis of lack of jurisdiction. He also stated that it did
not understand the reasons for the Arbitral Tribunal’s failure to disclose the President’s
collaboration with Mr. Paulsson in another case.

 

On March 17, 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal asked the Claimant to clarify as soon as
possible whether the letter of March 16, 2009 should be regarded as a proposal for the
disqualification of the President of the Tribunal. No reply was received from the
Claimant.

 

21

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

On March 25, 2009, the Claimant submitted a letter concerning the Respondent’s
Memorial on Jurisdiction. It concluded as follows (Claimant’s Reply on jurisdiction of
March 25, 2009, p. 3 and 4):

 

“We therefore seek that your honorable Tribunal dismisses this case based on the
fact of lack of jurisdiction due to our company’s inability to show the shares
legally acquired by our company.”

On April 8, 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal invited the Claimant to inform the Tribunal at the
latest by April 14, 2009 whether or not it intended to participate in the hearing scheduled
for May 6, 2009.

On April 27, 2009, Mr. Biserov informed the Tribunal that the Claimant would attend the
hearing and that it would be represented by Messrs. Guillaume Tessoniére and Frédéric
Sardain of Tessoniére Sardain and Chevé.

On April 28, 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal requested the Claimant to clarify the powers and
role of their accompanying lawyers. Furthermore, referring to Article 45(5) of the
Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules, the Arbitral Tribunal reminded the Parties that
they should not address questions relating to the merits at the hearing.

On the same day, the Claimant replied that the accompanying lawyers were duly
authorized to represent it at the hearing.

On May 5, 2009, the legal representatives of Cementownia declared, by letter, that they
were not “authorized” counsel in the present case and that they would not attend the
meeting scheduled for the next day.

On the same day, Mr. Biserov informed the Arbitral Tribunal that Messrs. Guillaume
Tessoniére and Frédéric Sardain had never been authorized to represent the Claimant; the
copy of a power of attorney of April 28, 2009 had been sent by mistake to the ICSID
Secretary-General. Since the Claimant was unable to attend the scheduled hearing, it
submitted the following arguments:

- If the Claimant is unable to produce original purchase agreements and bearer
shares, it is jointly agreed by the Parties and by the Tribunal that the Tribunal

lacks jurisdiction;

- The Respondent did not file a preliminary objection for a claim which is
manifestly without legal merit;

- The award rendered in the present case has to deal with issues related to
jurisdiction;

- If the jurisdiction condition is not satisfied, the Tribunal cannot decide whether
submissions are well-founded in fact and in law;

22

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

- The prayers of relief sought by the Respondent in its Memorial on jurisdiction
constitute questions on the merits;

- Each Party should bear its own costs because bearer shares are fragile documents,
Cementownia was only unable to produce the shares and has never tried to evade
its liability.

On May 6, 2009, a hearing took place in Paris concerning the Respondent’s jurisdictional
objections. Despite its earlier advising that it would participate in the hearing, no
representative of the Claimant attended. The Respondent was represented by the
following persons: Mr. Jan Paulsson, Ms. Lucy Reed, Mr. Brian King, Mr. Noah Rubins
and Mr. Jonathan Gass of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer; Mr. Arzu Cosar, Ms. Utku
Cosar, Mr. Alper Arslan and Ms. Ozge Bilgi of Cosar Avukatlik Biirosu; and Mr.
Selahattin Cimen, Mr. Budak Dilli, Mr. Mustafa Cetin and Ms. Sevim Argun of the
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources (Republic of Turkey). The Arbitral Tribunal
noted the Claimant’s absence but accepted its letter of May 5, 2009. The Arbitral
Tribunal heard the expert witness, Prof. Dr. Mehmet Bahtiyar and posed questions to
him. The Respondent made its legal submissions. At the end of the hearing, the Arbitral
Tribunal invited both Parties to file their statements of costs by June 8, 2009 (6 May 2009
Transcripts).

On May 27, 2009, Mr. Biserov submitted the Claimant’s statement of costs. According to
Mr. Biserov, Claimant’s total costs and fees amount to USD 1,288,449.95.

On June 4, 2009, Mr. Biserov informed the Arbitral Tribunal by letter that Cementownia
intended to make “a very important filing on Jurisdictional Matters to the honorable
Tribunal by 16 June 2009.”

 

On June 6, 2009, the Centre requested each Party to make an advance payment of USD
50,000.00.

 

 

On June 8, 2009, the Respondent submitted its statement of costs. According to
Respondent, it has incurred legal fees of USD 3,859,053.35 and disbursements of USD
1,045,768.71. In its filing, the Respondent also stressed that it had paid USD 100,000.00
to cover the Claimant’s shortfall in the advance payment (which subsequently became
USD 150,000).

On June 9, 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal reminded the Claimant that it was not for a party
to either decide in its discretion whether to file new submissions or to fix any time limits.
It further stated that a new filing would be accepted only if there were new facts that
could not be previously submitted and which were important and relevant to the
resolution of the jurisdictional objection. The Arbitral Tribunal then invited the Claimant
to submit its filing by Tuesday, June 16, 2009.

 

On June 16, 2009, the Claimant did not file any submission.

 

On June 18, 2009, Mr. Biserov informed the Arbitral Tribunal by letter that the Claimant
had gained access “to thousands of new documents, which include documents, that go to

 

23

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

the core subject of jurisdiction.” As the Claimant deemed it imperative to fully review
these new documents, Mr. Biserov requested a period of 35 days to make the
supplementary filing.

On June 23, 2009 the Respondent commented on the Claimant’s request to file a
supplementary submission. It requested the Arbitral Tribunal to deny the request, and to
proceed to render an Award.

 

On June 26, 2009 the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 12, whereby it
decided:

 

“I. The Claimant is directed to submit by July 6, 2009:

b)A detailed identification of specific classes of documents that
are mentioned in the Claimant's letter of June 18, 2009 and
that the Claimant requests to file before the Tribunal;

(ii) A demonstration how and why the documents in (i)
address the jurisdictional questions that are before the
Tribunal based on the Respondent's objections to
jurisdiction and relate only to the jurisdictional questions
that are before the Tribunal based on the Respondent's
objections to jurisdiction; and

(iii) An explanation in detail of the reasons why it was unable
to file the documents earlier in this proceeding.

2. If any of the classes of documents in I(i) are the originals of the Claimant’s
alleged shares in CEAS and Kepez, the Claimant must sign the Custody
Agreement with its filing on July 6, 2009. It shall then deposit the original share
certificates with the designated depository pursuant to Procedural Orders Nos. 7
and 8 by July 13, 2009 at the latest.

3. The Claimant is directed to pay to ICSID by July 6, 2009 US$50,000,
representing a part of its outstanding advance payments and by July 13, 2009 the
balance of US$100,000.

4. Unless the Arbitral Tribunal receives responses to all points raised in
paragraph 1 above, a copy of the executed Custody Agreement, and ICSID
receives the Claimant's payments under paragraph 3 by July 6, 2009 and July 13,
2009, respectively, the Tribunal will deny the Claimant’s request to submit any
further filing in this case and will proceed to render its decision.”

On July 6, 2009, the Claimant did not file any submission. In accordance with Procedural
Order No. 12 (see above para. 95), the Arbitral Tribunal notified the Claimant on July 7,
2009 that its request to file any further submissions was denied.

The proceedings were declared closed on September 1, 2009, in accordance with Article
44(1) of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules.

The Arbitral Tribunal has already noted the existence of two other parallel ICSID
arbitration proceedings before other arbitral tribunals in which the claimants claim to own

24

or to have owned CEAS and Kepez shares transferred to them in 2003 (see above para.
23 and 29).

Furthermore, CEAS and Kepez together with Kemal Uzan and Rumeli Elektrik have
brought an action against the Republic of Turkey before the European Court of Human
Rights (ECHR) for breach of the European Convention for Human Rights and seeking
damages therefor in relation to CEAS and Kepez (Application No. 18240/03, dated May
22, 2003) (Respondent’s letter of December 18, 2007).

These proceedings are legally independent of each other. However, the Arbitral Tribunal
reserves the right to consider declarations made in such other proceedings if they are
adduced as evidence in the present one. The Tribunal notes that the Award in the Europe
Cement claim was issued in August 2009 and forwarded to it by the Respondent after the
Tribunal had conducted its own deliberations. The Tribunal has reviewed that Award but
has arrived at its own conclusions based upon the evidence and submissions before it and
independently of the approach taken by that distinguished tribunal (although, it will be
seen that in some respects the approach taken by the Tribunal is consistent with that taken
in the other case).

25

B. LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS

I. Generally

1. The Proceedings and the Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal

99.

100.

101.

102.

The Claimant initiated the present arbitration proceeding on September 28, 2006 (cf.
above para. 24). The Request for Arbitration was registered by ICSID on November 16,
2006.

The Arbitral Tribunal was constituted on May 11, 2007 (cf. above para. 30). The Parties
did not raise any objections to the appointment of its members. During the proceeding,
the Tribunal has specifically replied to the Claimant on the question of the independence
of its President (see above para. 77).

The proceeding was conducted in accordance with the ICSID Arbitration (Additional
Facility) Rules. Following the request of the Respondent, the Arbitral Tribunal decided in
Procedural Order No. 11 (cf. above para. 74) that the proceeding would be bifurcated
between questions related to jurisdiction and those related to the merits. The Parties
agreed at the first session of the Tribunal to the application of the IBA Rules on the
Taking of Evidence in International Commercial Arbitration (see above para. 32).

As stated above, a number of procedural steps have been initiated in the present
proceeding, specifically:

- Requests for provisional measures;
- Requests for production of documents;
- Requests for several consecutive time extensions.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers in that regard that each Party, in particular, the Claimant,
has repeatedly been given the opportunity to be heard.

The issue of representation has undergone several changes. During the process the
Claimant has been advised by the following persons;

- the law firm Mannheimer Swartling Advokatbyra filed the Request for
Arbitration, all requests for provisional measures, all responses to the
Respondent’s requests for various orders, and the Claimant’s Memorial of April
15, 2008;

- the Chairman of the Management Board of Cementownia, Mr. Biserov, has been

in charge of all correspondence and requests for time extensions since
Mannheimer Swartling Advokatbyra’s resignation on June 23, 2008;

26

one week before the hearing, Messrs. Teissoniére and Mr. Sardain of the
Teissonniére Sardain Chevé law firm were announced by Cementownia as its new
legal representatives;

one day before the hearing, Mr. Biserov informed the Arbitral Tribunal that
Messrs. Teissoniére and Sardain were not authorized to represent the Claimant.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers the following:

At the hearing of May 6, 2009, the Respondent’s counsel asserted that Mr.
Biserov did not have the authority to represent the Claimant (5 May 2009
Transcript, p. 45). If that were the case, all requests made by Mr. Biserov on
Cementownia’s behalf would be invalid. Having regard to the record, the Tribunal
is of the view that all allegations of fact relevant to the question of the Claimant’s
ownership of the shares, save one, were made by the Claimant when it was
represented by competent counsel. The only relevant representation of fact made
by Mr. Biserov that bears upon the issues presented here is his claim that,
although the Claimant still does own the shares, it is unable to produce the
original share certificates. The Tribunal does not consider that the issue of Mr.
Biserov’s power to represent the Claimant in any way materially alters the
fundamental issues that it must resolve in the present application.

With respect to the Claimant’s request to appoint new counsel, the Tribunal has
been extremely patient; the Claimant’s Counsel resigned on June 23, 2008 and
throughout the ensuing period the Tribunal repeatedly extended deadlines at the
Claimant’s request. The hearing ultimately took place on May 6, 2009, almost a
year after Counsel resigned.

103. Finally, the Arbitral Tribunal notes the following:

Both Parties made the first advance payment. As regards the second advance
payment, this has been borne by the Respondent alone (on January 16, 2009) after
the Secretariat declared a default. The third advance payment requested by the
Secretariat on May 26, 2009 was made only by the Respondent, but no further
declaration of default was necessary.

As regards the prayers for relief, the Arbitral Tribunal takes into account the
Claimant’s position on the jurisdictional issue (see above para. 81).

The Claimant forwent its opportunity to attend the May 6, 2009 hearing, advising
the Arbitral Tribunal only the day before that, contrary to its earlier letter, it in
fact had not retained counsel. The meeting was dedicated to the hearing and
questioning of the Respondent’s legal expert, whose opinion was already
submitted in writing, and to the Respondent’s pleadings. No other witnesses were
heard.

104. The Arbitral Tribunal closed the proceedings on September 1, 2009. It can now rule on
the issues that have been submitted to it.

27

2. The Basis for the Arbitration Proceedings

105.

The Request for Arbitration is based on the following undisputed elements:

a) Both Poland and Turkey are signatories to the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”). In
accordance with Article 44 of the ECT, the ECT entered into force for the Republic of
Turkey on July 4, 2001 and for the Republic of Poland on July 23, 2001. The ECT is
therefore in force for both States, and was in force during the time of the principal
measures alleged to violate the ECT (www.encharter.org; Exh. C-58).

The Claimant submitted its claim under Part III of the ECT. According to the Claimant,
by terminating the 1998 Concession Agreements and its actions on June 13, 2003, the
Respondent has violated the following provisions:

- Article 10(1) ECT, which provides that investments of investors of other
Contracting Parties shall enjoy the most constant protection and security and no
Contracting Party shall in any way impair by unreasonable or discriminatory
measures their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal; and

- Article 13 ECT, which provides that investments may not be nationalized,
expropriated or subjected to a measure or measures having effect equivalent to
nationalization or expropriation except in certain specified conditions, one of
which is that the nationalization or expropriation be accompanied by the payment
of prompt, adequate and effective compensation.

b) The proceeding is conducted under the ICSID Additional Facility (see Article 27 ECT
and Annex ID of the ECT). The Administrative Council of the Centre adopted the
Additional Facility in order to authorize the Secretariat to administer certain
categories of proceedings between States and nationals of other States that fall outside
the scope of the ICSID Convention. In the case at hand, since Turkey has ratified the
1965 Washington Convention whereas Poland has not, the Additional Facility is
applicable.

3. Final Positions of the Parties and Structure of the Award

106.

Pursuant to their last submissions, the positions of the Parties are as follows:

a) The Respondent requests that the Arbitral Tribunal issue an award (Respondent’s
Memorial on Jurisdiction of February 9, 2009, para. 232):
“(1) Dismissing Cementownia’s claim in its entirety;

(2) Declaring that the claim is manifestly ill-founded, and has been asserted using
inauthentic documents;

(3) Awarding monetary compensation to the Republic in an amount to be fixed by
the Tribunal; and

28

107.

(4) Awarding to the Republic all of its costs and expenses associated with this
proceeding, plus interest.”

b) The Claimant requests as follows (Claimant’s Reply on jurisdiction of March 25,
2009, p. 3 and 4):

“We therefore seek that your honorable Tribunal dismisses this case based on the
fact of lack of jurisdiction due to our company’s inability to show the shares
legally acquired by our company.”

On the basis of the Parties’ submissions and arguments, the Arbitral Tribunal will analyze
the following questions:

- It will commence its analysis by examining the Respondent’s jurisdictional
objections arising from Cementownia’s role as investor (see below II);

- It will further examine the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections to the
Claimant’s standing (see below III);

- On that basis, it will then analyze the declaratory and financial consequences (see
below IV);

- Finally, it will address the issue of the allocation of costs (see below V).

II. Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections Arising from Cementownia’s Role as Investor

108.

109.

b) The Issue

The first jurisdictional question concerns the Claimant’s standing to sue. In that regard,
the Parties request the following:

The Respondent seeks the following prayer for relief (Resp. 9 February 2009, no. 1):

“(2) Declaring that the claim is manifestly ill-founded, and has been asserted
using inauthentic documents; ”

The Claimant’s response to the Respondent’s objection is as follows (Claimant’s Reply
on jurisdiction of March 25, 2009, p. 3 and 4):

“We therefore seek that your honorable Tribunal dismisses this case based on the
fact of lack of jurisdiction due to our company’s inability to show the shares
legally acquired by our company.”

In the case at hand, the situation is quite unusual since both Parties have requested the
Arbitral Tribunal to dismiss the claim based on the lack of the Claimant’s standing to sue,
although they differ sharply on the reasons therefore. In that regard, the Claimant
manifestly accepts the Respondent’s first prayer for relief. The point that divides the two
Parties is that the Claimant requests the Arbitral Tribunal to base its reasoning on a single

29

110.

motive, namely, the Claimant’s inability to produce the original share certificates (see
Claimant’s Reply on jurisdiction of March 25, 2009, p. 3 and 4). That is, the Claimant
maintains that it acquired a shareholding interest in the two Turkish companies at the
legally relevant time, but it claims that it is not in a position to prove this and therefore it
agrees to the claim’s dismissal, but on a without prejudice basis. In contrast, the
Respondent requests the Arbitral Tribunal to render an award which scrutinizes all
aspects of the issue of the Claimant’s standing to sue (6 May 2009 Transcripts, pp. 45-46)
and dismisses the claim with prejudice and with an award of damages and costs in its
favour.

The Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that either party may make submissions on what
matters should be the subject of a tribunal’s ruling, but this does not bind the tribunal.
The Arbitral Tribunal therefore agrees with the Respondent that it is not for the Claimant
(the respondent in this jurisdictional challenge) to delimit the Tribunal’s analysis to a
particular point (see the pleadings of Ms. Lucy Reed in 5 May 2009 Transcript, pp. 57-
59). In a reasoned request, the Respondent has requested the Tribunal to rule on several
prayers for relief. It has a legal interest in seeking a binding award which, if favourable to
it, disposes of the claim with res judicata effect in regard to the Claimant’s standing to
sue. If, in the face of all of the evidence adduced by the Respondent, the Arbitral Tribunal
were to confine itself to stating that a certain, even though decisive, class of documentary
evidence (namely, the original bearer share certificates) has not been produced, it would
be rendering an award on a without prejudice basis, giving the Claimant the opportunity
to submit a new request before another tribunal and start the whole process all over again.

The issue is an important one. As the tribunal found in Waste Management II:

“In international litigation, the withdrawal of a claim does not, unless otherwise
agreed, amount to a waiver of any underlying rights of the withdrawing party.
Neither does a claim which fails for want of jurisdiction prejudice underlying
rights: if the jurisdictional flaw can be corrected, there is in principle no
objection to the claimant State re-commencing its action.” (Waste Management,
Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Mexico’s
Preliminary Objection concerning the Previous Proceedings, Decision of the
Tribunal of June 26, 2002 at 36, available at www.worldbank.org/icsid).

For that reason and having regard to Article 52(1)(i) of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional
Facility) Rules and the fact that the Respondent has both adduced extensive evidence and
made submissions on different bases as to why the Tribunal is without jurisdiction,
although it could dismiss the claim on the fact that both Parties agree that the Claimant
did not produce the original bearer share certificates, the Tribunal considers that it is
bound to examine the issue of the Claimant’s standing to sue in the light of the objections
raised by the Respondent, at least insofar as it is necessary to do so in order to decide the
Respondent’s application.

In its last letter of May 5, 2009 (see above para. 85), the Claimant considered that the
Respondent, judging the claim manifestly without merits, should have immediately raised
objections. According to the Claimant, the Arbitral Tribunal should then have ruled on
that issue in an expedited procedure pursuant to Article 45(6) of the Arbitration

30

111.

(Additional Facility) Rules. According to the Respondent, the jurisdictional problem
requires the production of evidence proving that Cementownia actually owned the CEAS
and Kepez shares before June 12, 2003; that constitutes a necessary fact-finding for
tuling on the jurisdictional issue (6 May 2009 Transcript, p. 110).

Article 45(6) of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules reads as follows:

“Unless the parties have agreed to another expedited procedure for making
preliminary objections, a party may, no later than 30 days after the constitution of
the Tribunal, and in any event before the first session of the Tribunal, file an
objection that a claim is manifestly without legal merit. The party shall specify as
precisely as possible the basis for the objection. The Tribunal, after giving the
parties the opportunity to present their observations on the objection, shall, at its
first session or promptly thereafter, notify the parties of its decision on the
objection. The decision of the Tribunal shall be without the prejudice to the right
to a party to file an objection pursuant to paragraph (2) or to object, in the course
of the proceeding, that a claim lacks legal merit.”

This article corresponds to Article 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The principle on
preliminary objections was introduced in 2006 when the ICSID Rules were amended.
Under the new rule, a party may, no later than 30 days after the constitution of the
tribunal and before the first session of the tribunal, file an objection that a claim is
manifestly without legal merit. The tribunal, after giving the parties the opportunity to
present their observations on the objection, can, at its first session or promptly thereafter,
notify the parties of its decision on the objection. If the tribunal decides that all claims are
manifestly without legal merit, it will render an award to that effect.

In the case at hand, it must be said that the Claimant’s argument, based on Article 45(6)
of Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules, is surprising. In fact, the Claimant filed its
Request for Arbitration asserting that it had standing to sue and that it had the evidence to
prove it. The Claimant affirmed this for months and it would be odd if the Arbitral
Tribunal would rule on that issue after two years of proceedings in an expedited
procedure without any analysis. Regardless of the terms used in the Claimant’s request,
what it is really seeking is a finding from the Arbitral Tribunal that the Respondent
should have filed its preliminary objections no later than 30 days after the Tribunal’s
constitution. That argument is without merit, is inconsistent with the express terms of
Article 45 of the Rules (which permits a respondent to file objections to jurisdiction no
later than the filing of its Counter-Memorial), and is rejected.

For that reason, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that it is appropriate to examine the
objections raised by the Respondent.

The Arbitral Tribunal will therefore proceed as follows:
- It will start the analysis with the question of the burden of proof;

- It will continue with the question of the transfer of the shares.

31

2. The Burden of Proof

112.

113.

114.

115.

It is undisputed that an investor seeking access to international jurisdiction pursuant to an
investment treaty must prove that it was an investor at the relevant time, i.e., at the
moment when the events on which its claim is based occurred. In this regard, the Arbitral
Tribunal recalls its Procedural Order No. 1 of January 25, 2008 (see above para. 36)
issued after it had received submissions from the Parties on inter alia the question of
whether the Claimant had actually acquired any interest in the two Turkish companies at
the time that it claimed to have done so:

“< It is not contested that the documents that are required by the Respondent are
necessary to decide some of the basis for the claim, in particular the right of the
Claimant to be considered as an investor. Indeed, if the Claimant cannot prove
ownership and/or control of the Cukurova Elektrik A.S. (CEAS) and Kepez
Elektrik Tiirk A.A. (Kepez) shares at all relevant times, it would lack standing and
the Arbitral Tribunal in turn would lack jurisdiction.

- However, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that there is no special urgency to
have the Claimant respond to this request whilst in the final stages of the
preparation of its Memorial. Given the Parties’ exchanges on the issue of
ownership and the Claimant’s recognition that it will be incumbent upon it to
address this issue fully in its Memorial, the Tribunal does not see the need for the
order at this time. The request is therefore premature.”

The Claimant was thus put on notice by the Respondent and in turn by the Tribunal that it
bore the burden of proving that it owned or controlled the CEAS and Kepez shares at all
relevant times.

The Claimant’s former counsel in fact accepted the Respondent’s pleadings on this issue
(see Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, paras. 55-60 and 26 May 2008 Transcript, pp. 81-82).

The investor must evidence all the necessary conditions for the Arbitral Tribunal to
affirm its jurisdiction. The first condition in that regard is the Claimant’s ownership of
the share certificates at the time of the alleged expropriation. The Claimant must
therefore prove:

- that it had effectively and validly acquired the share certificates of CEAS and
Kepez; and

- that it acquired them before the alleged expropriation, i.e., before June 12, 2003,
and that it still was the owner of the shares on that date.

As mentioned above (see para. 109), the Claimant does not dispute this reasoning but
considers that the Arbitral Tribunal should limit its award to a simple statement that it
was unable to produce the original share certificates and that the claim should therefore
be dismissed, without analyzing the other questions with respect to the Claimant’s
ownership of the shares, which have been raised by the Respondent. It even seems that
the Claimant makes the inability to produce a condition to admit it. The Respondent

32

views the matter differently, requesting the Arbitral Tribunal to rule not only on the
Claimant’s inability to produce the original share certificates, but on all jurisdictional
issues raised by it.

The Arbitral Tribunal is of the view that:

a) It is obvious that one Party cannot direct the Arbitral Tribunal on the issues that it
should rule on. All jurisdictional issues have been referred to the Arbitral Tribunal
and it therefore falls to the Arbitral Tribunal to ascertain the matters on which it
should rule.

b

The Claimant’s request to dismiss the claim is akin to a withdrawal of the claim. If
the Arbitral Tribunal accepts a withdrawal of the claim by a decision taken without
prejudice, it would enable the Claimant to file a new claim on the same basis in the
hope of convincing a new tribunal on the merits. Pursuant to Article 50 of the
Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules, a claim may be withdrawn only with the
consent of the other party. That other party may for its own reasons find it necessary
to request the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on the dispute or, at least, on certain issues.
This is precisely the case at hand as far as the Respondent has a legal interest to
request that the Arbitral Tribunal rule on the jurisdictional issues at stake.

¢

2

In support of this argument, Article 52(1)(i) of the Arbitration (Additional Facility)
Rules states that the Arbitral Tribunal shall decide on every claim. That said, it does
not mean that the Arbitral Tribunal must expressly address in its Decision or Award
every single argument made with respect to each claim or objection raised, but it must
consider all such arguments when it decides the basis on which it disposes of each
claim or objection, as the case may be.

d

Even though the Claimant has the burden of proving that it is an investor, nothing
prevents the Respondent from submitting evidence that the Claimant is not an
investor.

For that reason, the Arbitral Tribunal will examine all questions related to the transfer of
the share certificates and its validity.

3. The Transfer of the Shares

116.

The Arbitral Tribunal turns to the second question, which is the material transfer of the
shares on May 30, 2003. By way of introduction to its detailed review of the evidence,
the Tribunal wishes to place the significance of the claimed share transfer in proper
context.

The Tribunal observes that prior to the date of the alleged sale and purchase of the shares,
the matters complained of involved the Turkish State and Turkish nationals, all operating
exclusively within the framework of Turkish law. Being a Turkish national holding
shares in CEAS and Kepez, under the Energy Charter Treaty, Mr. Kemal Uzan could not

33

117.

118.

119.

bring an international claim against his own State. This could only occur if a person
holding foreign nationality owned or controlled the investment.

The Claimant possessed foreign nationality and, in particular, the nationality of another
State party to the Energy Charter Treaty. This meant that if it actually acquired an interest
in the two companies, prima facie it would have the right to take what until that point of
time had been a purely local grievance arising under local law, subject to resolution in the
local courts, and in respect of matters occurring after the date of acquisition it could
submit a claim to an international arbitration applying international law. But if Mr.
Uzan’s shareholdings in the two electricity companies were not transferred to the foreign
Claimant, his rights vis-d-vis the Respondent would remain defined exclusively by
Turkish law and subject to the remedies afforded by the Turkish legal system (and the
European Convention on Human Rights). This is trite law, but fundamental to the
Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction.

The Claimant was frank about the reasoning underlying its claim. According to Mr.
Uzan, he transferred the shares because he feared that “the government would unilaterally
take at least the transmission rights of the companies” and he “wanted to protect our
interests.” (Kemal Uzan witness statement, para. 32). The way in which he claimed to
have protected his interests was to transfer his shares to a foreign company that his
family’s company, the Rumeli Group, in turn controlled.

This, if true, is unabashedly treaty shopping. As other tribunals have found, treaty
shopping per se is not in principle to be disapproved of, but in some instances it has been
found to be a mere artifice employed to manufacture an international dispute out of a
purely domestic dispute. Given the dispute’s history and the temporal aspects of the case
(a mere twelve days elapsed between the claimed acquisition of shares in companies
already on notice of potential termination of the concessions and the actual termination
measures themselves), had the Tribunal found that the share transfers actually did occur
on May 30, 2003, it would have held that this case fell within the category of an artifice.

Even if they did occur, the share transfers would not have been bona fide transactions,
but rather attempts (in the face of government measures dating back some years about to
culminate in the concessions’ termination) to fabricate international jurisdiction where
none should exist.

b) General Considerations

The Tribunal begins by noting certain facts and considerations that have influenced its
decision on the Respondent’s application, because some of those facts, when examined
individually, and certainly when taken together, show the utter implausibility of the
transaction claimed to have occurred on May 30, 2003.

As the procedural history of this case already reproduced in this Award has shown, from
the beginning the Respondent put the matter of the Claimant’s claimed ownership of the
shares at the material time squarely at issue. It sought, and the Tribunal granted,
procedural orders that required the Claimant to submit the originals of the documents said

34

120.

121.

to support the claim to a custody agent so that they could be forensically examined to
determine whether or not they were forgeries.

However, there is no trace of the original bearer share certificates. The Claimant has
alleged that they exist and has promised several times to comply with the Arbitral
Tribunal’s orders to produce them (for example, the Claimant’s letter of September 6,
2008 and Claimant’s comments on the Redfern List of June 5, 2008, prior to Mannheimer
Swartling’s resignation, and the Claimant’s letter of September 6, 2008). The Claimant
has explained its non-production by circumstantial hindrance: “Cementownia Nowa Huta
has all documents to prove its ownership in both CEAS and Kepez beyond the shadow of
doubt, however to undertake such a task on our own without the representation of legal
counsel would not only be a travesty of justice, it would also be a breach of my fiduciary
duties towards my shareholders” (Claimant’s letter of September 6, 2008, p. 3) and “The
request is not d. However, the production of the req d originals is subjected
to the implementation of measures for the safe and secure delivery of such originals to
the depository to be agreed upon by the Parties in accordance with Point 1b) of the
Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 5” (Claimant’s comments on the Redfern List of June
5, 2008, point 1). Even if the Claimant had produced the original share certificates
claimed to have been issued in 2005, they would not have constituted undisputed
evidence of acquisition on May 30, 2003, since no date of purchase was noted on the
share certificates (photo-copies of which were filed with the Memorial). The date of
issuance is however a characteristic of bearer shares.

After the resignation of the Claimant’s counsel, it then represented that it was not in a
position to submit the originals for inspection, while still insisting that it acquired the
shares at the legally relevant time. Notwithstanding the Tribunal’s repeated extensions of
time, the Claimant has never signed the Custody Agreement, contrary to the Tribunal’s
repeated instruction to do so, nor has it adjusted its position (taken since counsel
resigned) that it owned the shares but is unable to prove that fact.

The Claimant’s having taken a position that it cannot substantiate the ownership that it
insists it possesses, the question arises as to whether this precludes the Tribunal from
making its own judgment as to whether the claimed transactions occurred on May 30,
2003. After considering all of the record evidence with care, the Tribunal has concluded
that it is not so precluded. Obviously, the Tribunal’s task would be simplified by expert
forensic evidence. But the Respondent’s inability — through no fault of its own — to test
the original documents cannot preclude it from arguing that the weight of the existing
evidence is sufficient for the Tribunal to decide that the claim is a sham and the
transactions never occurred.

The Tribunal believes that this is procedurally fair and correct as a matter of law.
Extensions cannot be granted forever and it is entirely fair for a tribunal, after giving a
disputing party more than adequate extensions of time and notice, to decide that it should
consider the other party’s application to dismiss the claim in light of such evidence as has
been adduced. The Tribunal cannot allow evidentiary perfection to be the enemy of
common sense and judgment. There is ample evidence to conclude that the claimed

35

transactions never occurred on May 30, 2003. The Tribunal will explain why it has
arrived at that conclusion in the following overview of the evidence.

b) The Date of the Transaction

122.

123.

124.

The date of June 12, 2003 assumes importance in the Tribunal’s consideration of the
claimed transaction, because that is the date on which the measures complained of
culminated with the termination of the concessions. The claim is that Cementownia took
ownership of the shares just prior to the Respondent’s measures, which constitute an
unlawful expropriation of the recently acquired investments, and therefore it should be
compensated by the Respondent.

The timing of the claimed transaction is important because for any share transfers taking
place after June 12, 2003 the purchaser would be deemed to be aware of the reduction in
value of the shareholdings resulting from the acts of termination. To have a chance of
sustaining its very large claim for damages — USD 4,648,157,411, according to the
Claimant — Cementownia’s case depended upon its proving that it acquired the shares
before the Government acted.

As regards the date of the transaction of the shares, there are several inconsistencies:

- First, the Respondent adduced evidence filed on behalf of Mr. Uzan in a European
Court of Human Rights (ECHR) proceeding against the Respondent in which it
was asserted that he did not transfer the CEAS and Kepez shares to Cementownia
until after the end of June 2003, i.e., after the termination of the Concession
Agreements on June 12, 2003: “Le Gouvernement est donc a roc de prouver
Villégalité du transfert des actions de M. Uzan aux rocedure polonaises du
ciment. S’il s’agit du grief selon lequel la vente ou le transfert des actions devrait
étre communiqué a la Bourse d’échanges des titres d’Istanbul (IMKB : Istanbul
Menkul Kiymetler Borsasi/the Istanbul Stock Exchange (ISE)), il convient de
préciser que les titres de CEAS et Kepez étaient exclus de la Bourse a partir du
juin 2003, la vente effectuée par M. Uzan est survenue_plus tard“ (emphasis
added). (Exhibit attached to Respondent’s letter of June 18, 2008, Annex 6, para.
23). The Tribunal thus has before it inconsistent statements from the only witness
proffered by the Claimant — who did not appear before the Tribunal at the hearing
—as to the timing of the alleged disposition of the shares. In this proceeding Mr.
Uzan asserted that he transferred the shares on May 30, 2003 and in the ECHR
proceeding he asserted that he did so afier June 30, 2003. (Kemal Uzan and
others v. The Republic of Turkey (ECHR Case No. 18240/03), Supplemental
ECHR Application, 22 May 2004, Exh. R-24, para. 3). The two statements cannot
stand together.

- The Respondent adduced evidence of yet another statement which stands at odds
with Mr. Uzan’s testimony. On September 8, 2003, some three months after he
claims he transferred the CEAS shares to Cementownia, CEAS argued to the 10"
Chamber of the Council of State (Danistay) that the “company’s investments are
entirely based on domestic capital’ (emphasis added) and argued further, “In our

36

country while foreign investment is immune, doesn’t domestic investment have
any legal security?” (CEAS Statement of Claim. File No. 2003/3946 of the 10"
Chamber of the Council of State [Danistay], September 8, 2003, Exhibit R-122, p.
38). Thus, some three months after Mr. Uzan claims to have transferred CEAS
shares to Cementownia, CEAS was telling the Turkish courts that it was
“entirely” owned by Turkish nationals.

c) The Circumstances of the Transaction

125.

126.

127.

According to Mr. Uzan, the share transfer deal was struck during a telephone call that he
had with the chairman of Cementownia’s Management Board, Mr. Jerzy Ciepiela, on
May 30, 2003: “The transaction was carried out over the phone with the chairman of
Cementownia’s management board, Mr Ciepiela, representing Cementownia.” (Kemal
Uzan’s witness statement, para. 33). It was then documented in four one-page
“contracts” dated “as of the 30" of May 2003.” Of the four photocopied contracts
submitted as Exhibit C-60, only one was signed and it was signed by only one party (Mr.
Uzan). Quite apart from the requirements of Turkish law on the passing of legal title to
the shares, it is apparent to anyone with a passing knowledge of general
corporate/commercial practice that a share purchase agreement for shares in two
significant utilities (particularly two companies already in dispute with the Government
over alleged deficiencies in their performance of the concession agreements as well as the
compulsory transfer of their transmission rights — see Respondent’s Memorial on
Jurisdiction, paras. 32-37) could not be reduced to a single page.

Upon review, the Tribunal can only characterize the “contracts” as being extraordinarily
rudimentary and raising more questions than they answer. None of the four photocopied
documents submitted with the Memorial bore Mr. Ciepiela’s signature, which is odd
given that Mr. Uzan testified that “Mr. Ciepiela signed them in Krakow,” (Kemal Uzan
witness statement, para. 33) and only one of the four bore Mr. Uzan’s signature even
though he testified he signed them on May 30, 2003. No witness evidence was adduced
from Mr. Ciepiela to corroborate Mr. Uzan’s account generally and in particular to
explain why the photocopies adduced as evidence of the transaction did not bear his
signature. Nor did Mr. Uzan explain why only one of the four documents evidently bears
his signature. Nor was there any provision on the face of the documents for witnesses’
signatures.

As for the transfer of the shares from seller to purchaser, the Claimant has alleged the
following: “Immediately in connection with the transfer of the shares, the share
certificates were handed over to Cementownia. Trusted employees of the Rumeli Group
personally transported the shares to Cementownia’s bank deposits in Krakow and
Vienna.” (Kemal Uzan’s witness statement, para. 33). No explanation was offered as to
how the documents were executed by two persons situated in Krakow and in Istanbul
who, Mr. Uzan testified, agreed the deal over the telephone that day and then signed the
documents. Moreover, there was no documentary evidence in support of this claim, nor
did the Claimant submit any witness statement from any of the “trusted employees” said
to have transported the bearer shares. This account begged the question of when title to
the shares could have passed under Turkish law.

37

128.

129.

The Claimant allegedly deposited the bearer shares in Cementownia’s banks in Vienna
and Krakow (Kemal Uzan’s witness statement, para. 33). However, no documents
evidence the existence of a bank safe deposit contract or the rental of a safe deposit
facility. Nor was there any statement from a representative of either of the two
(unidentified) banks said to have received the bearer shares submitted in support of the
claimed transactions.

The curious features of the four documents and Mr. Ciepiela’s conspicuous absence from
the Claimant’s record evidence might, in and of themselves, raise sufficient doubt about
whether the transaction occurred. But the contemporaneous evidence gets far more
problematical for the Claimant.

b) Cementownia’s Financial Statements

It will be seen that Cementownia neither reported the claimed transaction to the Polish
and Turkish authorities at the time, nor did it seek the necessary Turkish regulatory
approvals to acquire the shares in CEAS and Kepez (see below para. 139 et seq.). But
more damning than any of the /acunae in its evidence of the documentation of the
claimed transaction and the absence of any evidence of even the most basic reporting of
the transaction to the relevant authorities, is the fact that Cementownia did not record the
claimed transaction in its own financial statements for the year in which it allegedly
occurred or in the ensuing year (2003 and 2004). Moreover, Mr. Ciepiela, the very
person whom Mr. Uzan testified signed the four “agreements” on Cementownia’s behalf,
signed and certified those audited financial statements as being true.

With respect to the relevant years, Cementownia’s financial statements reveal the
following:

a) The 2003 financial statements are signed inter alia by Mr. Ciepiela, who allegedly
signed the share purchase agreements. However, there is no mention in those
statements that a multimillion PLN transaction pursuant to which Cementownia
acquired interests in two much larger companies took place during that financial year;

b

As regards the 2004 financial statements, the situation is no better: Mr. Ciepiela once
again signed them and again there is no mention of any such transactions in these
financial statements;

c) The 2005 financial statements do mention that a transaction took place in 2003 but
without stating any exact date (which would necessarily have to be before June 12,
2003). It might be asked why the Tribunal prefers two out of three audited financial
statements, when all are certified as true and approved by the shareholders. The
answer lies in the fact that with the exception of the four one page “agreements”
already found not to prove the transaction and Mr. Uzan’s statement which is
contradicted by the two other statements, a// other contemporaneous evidence
supports the conclusion that it is the 2003/2004 statements which are accurate, and
the 2005 statement, completed just before the Respondent learned for the first time of
the existence of the supposed foreign shareholders, is false.

38

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

Following the aforementioned observations, the Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that
Cementownia’s 2003 and 2004 audited financial statements’ omission of any record of
the purported transactions at the time they were alleged to occur is evidence that they
never occurred. The Tribunal cannot believe that: (i) Mr. Ciepiela could have been a
party to the telephone conversation with Mr. Uzan which committed Cementownia to
acquire holdings in the two Turkish utilities; (ii) Mr. Ciepiela could have then reviewed
and certified the company’s financial statements as being true; and (iii) when doing so,
forgot that he had recently agreed, on Cementownia’s behalf, to buy a 12.23% stake in
CEAS and a 10.74% stake in Kepez — two companies that dwarfed Cementownia and in
respect of which Cementownia now claims to be entitled to damages of over USD 4
billion.

The significance of the 2003 (and 2004) audited financial statements’ silence in respect
of the share acquisitions is compounded when it is noted that once audited and then
certified by management as accurate, they were then put before Cementownia’s
shareholders for approval. This was done on April 14, 2004 (Cementownia’s 2004
Financial Statements, Exhibit C-71, Auditor’s Report, para. 12, p. 6). At that time, nearly
all of Cementownia’s shares were owned by Rumeli Cimento, A.S., a company belonging
to Mr. Kemal Uzan (Cementownia’s 2003 Financial Statements, Exhibit C-70, Report on
Operations, p. 21).

Thus, the Tribunal has before it a circular transaction that cannot be reconciled. That is,
the Claimant’s only witness, Mr. Uzan, attests to significant transactions which the
alleged counterparty’s audited financial statements did not mention at the time; that
alleged counterparty’s alleged representative certifies the accuracy of those financial
statements (which should have mentioned transactions of this magnitude); the company
that controls the counterparty then approves the financial statements at a general meeting;
and that corporate shareholder is controlled by the same Mr. Uzan who testifies that the
unmentioned transaction (now worth US$4 billion) did occur.

There is even more damaging contemporaneous evidence: Mr. Uzan testified that due to
the introduction of the new Turkish lira on January 1, 2005, and a change in Turkish law,
the old CEAS and Kepez share certificates had to be replaced with new certificates
denominated in the new lira (Kemal Uzan witness statement, paras. 35-36). The evidence
filed with the Memorial put January 10, 2005 as the date that Cementownia surrendered
its old bearer certificates to CEAS and Kepez in order to exchange them for new share
certificates. (Exhibit C-66, Record for delivery of the new shares in CEAS and Kepez,
January 10, 2005). The receipts tendered as evidence of this exchange bear Mr. Ciepiela’s
signature and that of two other Cementownia officers, yet only four days later, Mr.
Ciepiela and the same officers signed and certified as true Cementownia’s 2004 financial
statement which, for the second year running, omitted any mention of the company’s
acquisition of the claimed shareholding in CEAS and Kepez.

It was not until the company’s 2005 financial statement was completed and signed in
2006 that Cementownia ever stated that it had acquired the shares of a number of foreign
companies, including CEAS and Kepez. This financial statement, completed in 2006,
around the time that international claims began to be filed in relation to the Respondent’s

39

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

measures vis-d-vis CEAS and Kepez, deviated sharply from the two preceding years’
audited financial statements.

It defies credulity that the transaction now claimed to have be effected on May 30, 2003
actually took place as contended by the Claimant. To recapitulate, the Tribunal is being
asked: (i) to prefer Mr. Uzan’s account of the transfers given in this proceeding over Mr.
Uzan’s account given in the ECHR proceeding and CEAS’ representations in domestic
legal proceedings; (ii) to ignore the questions that arise from a careful review of the one
page share purchase agreements; and (iii) to ignore the fact that the Claimant itself never
mentioned the share acquisitions in its audited financial statements for two years running
and only mentioned them once the international claims began to be asserted.

It is therefore impossible for the Arbitral Tribunal to accept the Claimant’s allegation that
Cementownia purchased the bearer shares before June 12, 2003. The financial statements
produced by the Claimant rather show that Cementownia and Kemal Uzan attempted in
2005 to fabricate the transaction in order to protect the Uzan family’s economic interests
and to gain access to international jurisdiction.

Each one of these points is highly damaging and virtually of itself fatal to the Claimant’s
case. When the Tribunal then considers the other evidence adduced by the Respondent,
the claimed transaction becomes even more implausible.

b) Other Evidence

First, in contrast to the size of the USD 4.6 billion claim, Cementownia was a small
company that had minor assets in comparison to the two companies whose shares it is
claimed it was purchasing. A reasonable person looking at the claimed transactions
would be interested in the value of the assets being purchased and the purchaser’s
financial capacity to effect the transaction. Here, the Claimant was supposed to pay a
total of only USD 51,852.50 for shares in two enterprises now claimed to be worth over
USD 4.6 billion. The disproportionality between the value assigned to the shares then and
the value assigned to them now — some 77,000 times greater — need hardly be noted other
than to add it to the list of implausibilities. As for Cementownia’s financial capacity, this
issue was avoided by the Claimant’s asserting that the purchaser was not obliged to make
any payment at the time of the alleged transaction; the USD 51,852.50 was supposedly
due some five years hence. Moreover, according to the purchase agreement (Exh. C-60),
the deferred payment of the shares was “payable in installments or as a lump sum”, that is
the payment was without interest. The Cementownia 2005 financial statement also omits
any mention of interest for the deferred payment (Exh. C-72).

Second, the Claimant alleges that Kemal Uzan would have sold, in 2003, shares in 16
foreign companies for the total amount of PLN 315,505,975.00 out of which 12,875
Kepez shares and 61,200 CEAS shares respectively (Exh. C-72). Leaving aside the issues
of the seller’s security over the transferred shares (due to the alleged deferred payment)
and precisely when title would allegedly pass, there were, as the expert evidence adduced
by the Respondent showed, many regulatory compliance issues that would have to be
addressed were true share sale and purchase agreements to be negotiated and executed.

40

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

In every developed economy, particularly with respect to publicly traded companies
involved in a regulated sector, a sale and purchase of a significant block of shares will
ordinarily require the giving of notice and the granting of approvals from the interested
regulators. These are typically obtained prior to or at the time of the closing of the
transaction and, if they are not, it is standard practice to provide in the legal
documentation for adjustment to, or even rescission of, the transaction in the event that
approvals are not forthcoming.

CEAS and Kepez were both subject to extensive regulation under local law governing
inter alia electricity generation and transmission, capital markets, foreign investment law,
and general commercial law. Expert evidence was led by the Respondent on the
regulatory aspects of the purported transaction. The Respondent showed how, under
applicable Turkish law, a bona fide acquisition of a significant shareholding in CEAS and
Kepez would have required the parties to the transaction to give notices, seek approvals,
and obtain consents from different regulators (Claim. 15 April 2008, paras. 127-145;
expert opinion of Dr. Mehmet Bahtiyar).

The transactions at issue in the instant case, even on the most generous weighing of the
evidence in the Claimant’s favour, bore none of the hallmarks of compliance with the
manifold mandatory regulatory requirements of the applicable Turkish legislation. The
“contracts” are bereft of any reference to the different regulatory requirements that would
have governed such a transaction and had an impact on its structuring. No evidence of
any attempt by either of the parties to the claimed transaction was adduced to show that
any effort was made to register the transaction with the relevant Polish and Turkish
authorities or that the requisite approvals were applied for, let alone obtained, from the
relevant Turkish authorities.

In fact, when the Respondent requested production of documents relating to the
commercial and regulatory law aspects of the purported transaction, the Claimant stated
in its Observations on the Respondent’s Revised Redfern List (June 5, 2008 at pages 8-9,
comments on items 9 and 10), that it had not reported the purported acquisition of the
shares to any Polish or Turkish authority.

Under Turkish law, a foreign company like Cementownia would have to notify a variety
of different regulators of its intent to acquire a shareholding interest in the two
companies. For example, as a Polish company, it would have to seek the authorization of
the Undersecretariat of the Turkish Treasury, General Directorate of Foreign Investment.
It was common ground between the Parties that Cementownia never made any filing or
sought any approval in Turkey in relation to the purported change in the ownership of the
shares.

Third, not only did the Claimant take no step in Turkey to file any document or seek any
permission to effect the alleged share transfer, it likewise did nothing under Polish law to
report these sizable transactions to the relevant Polish authorities. Under Polish law,
Polish companies having a shareholding of at least 10% in the capital of a foreign
company (and of a value of at least € 10,000) must file with the National Bank of Poland
a detailed annual report on “capital held abroad” (Foreign Exchange law of 27 July 2002,

4l

146.

147.

148.

Exhibit R-95, art. 30.1; Council of Ministers Decree, December 10, 2002, Exhibit R-100,
§ 4.2). Yet the Claimant admitted that the “purchase of the shares in CEAS and Kepez
has not been reported to any Polish governmental or regulatory agency” (Claimant’s
Observations on the Respondent’s Revised Redfern List, June 5, 2008, comments on item
9).

Thus, the documents said to evidence the transfer of legal title to the shares are
completely unconnected to the manifold regulatory and commercial law issues that would
have governed any bona fide acquisition of the shares by a foreign investor.

The Tribunal considers that the weight of the evidence proves overwhelmingly that the
transactions never took place on May 30, 2003, and that the claim is a sham.

The Respondent spent a considerable amount of time and effort tracing Mr. Kemal
Uzan’s history as well as directing the Tribunal to foreign judicial decisions which have
made findings on his business and document production practices and veracity. It is not
necessary for the Tribunal to dwell on this evidence because of its conclusion already
reached. It does draw comfort from the evidence, however, particularly from the
conclusions arrived at by courts whose independence is unquestionable on the facts of
this case, that Mr. Uzan and his associates were guilty of fraud and obstruction of justice
in other legal proceedings. Thus, the sole witness adduced by the Claimant in support of
its contention that the transactions actually occurred has a track record on precisely the
same kind of issues as arise in the instant case.

4. Conclusion

149.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the Claimant has not produced any persuasive
evidence that could prove either its shareholding in CEAS and Kepez at the relevant time
or that it was an investor within the meaning of the ECT.

III. Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections to Claimant’s Standing

150.

b) The Issue

The Respondent raises several other issues and seeks the following declaratory relief
(Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, para. 232):

“Declaring that the claim is manifestly ill-founded (...)””

According to the Claimant, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot decide whether the claim is
manifestly ill-founded at the jurisdictional stage. A fortiori, it contends, the Tribunal has
no competence to grant a declaratory relief on these issues (Claimant’s Letter of May 5,
2009, para. 5.1).

In order to rule on the question whether the Claimant’s claim is ill-founded, the Arbitral
Tribunal will examine whether there has been any bad faith in and/or misconduct on the

part of the Claimant with respect to this proceeding.

42

2. The Parties’ Positions

a) The Respondent’s Position

151. According to the Respondent, Cementownia’s claim was brought and has been pursued in
bad faith. In support of that argument, the Respondent contends:

Cementownia knew when it commenced this arbitration that it did not own CEAS
and Kepez shares at the relevant time (if at all) (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, para. 223);

Turkish nationals have used Cementownia as an instrument of fraud and abuse of
process;

The company did not record the transaction in its corporate books until three years
after the transaction allegedly took place;

Cementownia has undergone “internal restructuring” after it initiated the current
arbitration, it sold its operating assets to PEH and PCH and is now insolvent, and
this was done to make it “award-proof”;

The shareholding and management of the company is uncertain, with accusations
of fraud between the Uzan factions currently pending before the Polish courts;

Kemal Uzan has used Cementownia to shield assets from Turkish legal process;
Cementownia is only one part of the Uzan’s family’s illicit effort to use foreign

corporate vehicles to assert baseless claims before a variety of international
tribunals (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, paras. 191, 202, 204).

In addition, the Respondent alleges that CEAS, Kepez and the Uzan family have had a
full opportunity to challenge all of the measures of which Cementownia now complains.
As the Republic of Turkey has adopted Annex ID to the ECT, it may choose to withhold
its consent to international arbitration of disputes that have already been submitted to
domestic litigation (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, para. 220).

b) The Claimant’s Position

152. According to the Claimant, the declaratory relief sought by the Respondent should be
rejected for the following reasons (Claimant’s letter of May 5, 2009, para. 5.1):

First, the Claimant does not challenge and indeed accepts the Tribunal’s lack of
jurisdiction. This official fact should be mentioned in the Award. The Claimant
asserts further that it is the true owner of the shares, that it has conducted itself
appropriately and that it has been prevented from making out its case by events
beyond its control. Cementownia argues further that it never refused to provide
original documents, as ordered by the Tribunal, but was not in a position to

43

comply with the orders. There is therefore no reason for the Tribunal to insert a
formal declaration in the Award;

- Second, the Republic of Turkey has not proven that Cementownia’s claim caused
an intangible injury to the Respondent;

- Third, such a declaratory relief would not be appropriate given the circumstances
of the case since CEAS’s and Kepez’s premises and facilities were allegedly
raided and seized by brute force by Turkish police and army;

- Fourth, the case at hand is not comparable to other cases in international law
where a declaratory relief is considered as “appropriate satisfaction”;

- Finally, the Republic of Turkey is not seeking legal relief against the Respondent
but rather political relief against natural persons who are third parties to the
dispute.

3. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

153.

154.

155.

Parties to an arbitration proceeding must conduct themselves in good faith. This duty, as
the Methanex tribunal found, is owed to both the other disputing party and to the Tribunal
(Methanex Corporation v. United States of America, NAFTA Chapter Eleven case under
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Final Award, Part II — Chapter I, para. 54 at p. 56).

In recent cases, some tribunals have found that a party that makes an investment, not for
the purpose of engaging in commercial activity, but for the sole purpose of gaining access
to international jurisdiction, does not engage in a bona fide transaction. Such a
transaction is deemed not to be a protected investment and a party’s creation of a legal
fiction so as to gain access to an international arbitration procedure to which it was not
entitled is an abuse which could be “détournement de rocedure” (Phoenix Action, Ltd.
V. Czech Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5), award of April 15, 2009, paras. 142-143,
available at www.worldbank.org/icsid). The arbitral tribunal in the Phoenix Action case
stressed that if jurisdiction were admitted, “any pre-existing national dispute could be
brought to an ICSID tribunal by a transfer of the national economic interests to a foreign
company in an attempt to seek protections under a BIT. Such transfer from the domestic
arena to the international scene would ipso facto constitute a ‘protected investment’ —
and the jurisdiction of BIT and ICSID tribunals would be virtually unlimited.” (idem,
para. 144).

The International Court of Justice noted in the Barcelona Traction case that “the process
of lifting the veil, being an exceptional one admitted by municipal law in respect of an
institution of its own making, is equally admissible to play a similar role in international
law,” noting further that “[t]he wealth of practice already accumulated on the subject in
municipal law indicates that the veil is lifted, for instance, to prevent the misuse of the
privileges of legal personality, as in certain cases of fraud or malfeasance, to protect third
persons such as a creditor or purchaser, or to protect the evasion of legal requirements or
of obligations” (Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Co., Ltd. (Belgium v. Spain), 1970

44

156.

157.

158.

1.C.J. 3 at para. 58). Cases which have upheld the right of foreign legal persons controlled
by nationals of the respondent State, such as the majority decision in the case of Tokios
Tokelés v. Ukraine, have been at pains to distinguish between the creation of foreign legal
personality for legitimate commercial planning purposes from the kind of conduct which
the ICJ noted can lead to the piercing of the veil in municipal legal systems (See Tokios
Tokelés v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), award of July 26, 2007, paras. 54-55,
available at www.worldbank.org/icsid).

Here the Claimant’s conduct is not even close to proper conduct. Had Cementownia
actually proven that on May 30, 2003 it legally acquired the shares of CEAS and Kepez,
there would still be the question of whether this was treaty shopping of the wrong kind, in
the words of Phoenix Action, “a transfer of the national economic interests to a foreign
company in an attempt to seek protections under a BIT.” The problem for the Claimant
is that the evidence shows that it did not even interpose itself between Mr. Kemal Uzan
and the Republic of Turkey. The transaction that would pose the issue of whether the
corporate veil should be pierced was fabricated.

The Claimant’s conduct in bringing the instant claim fails to meet the requisite standard
of good faith conduct. The claim is manifestly ill-founded.

With respect to the sanction in case of an abuse of rights, ICSID tribunals can award
costs against parties as a sanction against what they see as dilatory or otherwise improper
conduct in the proceedings (Benvenuti & Bonfant v. People’s Republic of Congo (ICSID
Case No. ARB/77/2), award of August 15, 1980, in 1 ICSID Reports 1993, p. 365; MINE
v. Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4), award of January 6, 1988) in 4 ICSID Reports
78; American Manufacturing Trading v. Zaire (ICSID Case No. ARB/93/1), award of
February 21, 1997, in 36 ILM 1531; and Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation v.
Republic of Liberia (LETCO) (ICSID Case No. ARB/83/2), award of March 31, 1986, in
2 ICSID Reports 370). In the LETCO case, the Government did not appear nor present
any case. In addition, the Government instituted proceedings in its own courts in respect
of the same dispute. That procedural misconduct justified the allocation of all costs on the
Republic of Liberia (see also CH. SCHREUER, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary,
Cambridge 2001, ad Art. 61, para. 24).

In the case at hand, the Claimant is manifestly responsible for several procedural
incidents:

- It has filed a Request for Arbitration under an important international treaty
framework and pursued it for two and a half years without being an investor. On
the basis of the contemporaneous documents, the Arbitral Tribunal has concluded
that that Cementownia and Kemal Uzan invented post factum the transaction and
transfer of the shares in order to gain access to international jurisdiction to which
neither the initial investor nor the putative successor was entitled;

- The arbitration proceeding and its schedule have been considerably delayed upon

several requests of the Claimant. During the time that it was represented by
Mannheimer Swartling, it sought two time extensions in order to file its Memorial

45

on Jurisdiction and Liability (Claimant’s request of December 30, 2008 and
Claimant’s letter of January 21, 2008). After Mannheimer Swartling’s resignation,
the Claimant requested no less than five time extensions going from 30 days to 12
months in order to produce evidence that it repeatedly claimed would prove its
investment in CEAS and Kepez (Claimant’s letters of July 9, 2008; September 6,
2008; October 15, 2008; November 13, 2008 and March 25, 2009);

Mannheimer Swartling’s withdrawal caused additional delays in the proceedings.
The Claimant requested several time extensions in order to find new legal
representation, advising the Tribunal a number of times that it was about to retain
counsel and never doing so until its eleventh hour appointment of Messrs.
Tessoniére and Sardain (who lasted less than ten days before the Tribunal was
advised that counsel was not in fact retained to represent the Claimant in this
proceeding). The Arbitral Tribunal has showed considerable patience from June
23, 2008, the date of the withdrawal, until May 6, 2009, the date of the hearing.
The Claimant’s conduct in this regard has moreover brought confusion to the
issue of Cementownia’s representation. With respect to Mr. Biserov’s power of
representation, the Arbitral Tribunal, notwithstanding the fact that it left this
question open (see above para. 102), stresses that the Claimant has not at all
attempted to clarify this procedural matter. This issue became even more
confusing when the Claimant first announced that Messrs. Tessoniére and
Sardain, duly authorized by power of attorney of April 27, 2009, would represent
it at the hearing, and when these two lawyers then informed the Arbitral Tribunal
the day before the hearing that they had never been authorized to represent the
Claimant. Finally, the Claimant did not even appear at the hearing on May 6,
2009, despite its having previously announced its participation.

The Claimant’s prayers for relief have changed: In its Memorial of April 15, 2008,
the Claimant requested the Arbitral Tribunal to order Turkey to pay compensation
to Cementownia in an amount not less than US$4,000,000,000. In its letter of
December 4, 2008, the Claimant requested the Arbitral Tribunal to discontinue
the case without prejudice to its rights. In its letters of February 21, March 16 and
March 25, 2009, the Claimant did not oppose dismissal of the proceedings on the
basis of lack of jurisdiction, if the sole basis for such ruling was that the Claimant
had not come forward with the bearer shares at issue. Finally, the day before the
hearing, the Claimant concluded that it was commonly agreed by the Parties that
the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the Claimant had not proven ownership of
CEAS and Kepez shares. In addition to this, the Claimant submitted further
conclusions with regard to the Respondent’s prayers for relief.

Meanwhile, Cementownia has sold virtually all of its operating assets and has
gone out of business. Indeed, by two contracts dated March 28 and April 5, 2007,
respectively, Cementownia sold its factories, its right to the land where the
factories were located, and the appurtenant equipment and materials, to Polski
Cement Holding SA and Polska Energetyka Holding (two other Uzan-controlled
companies) (Exh. R-9 and R-10). The Arbitral Tribunal therefore agrees with the
Respondent that Cementownia is now an empty shell the purpose of which was to

46

159.

pursue this arbitral proceeding without any exposure to an award of costs.
(Respondent’s Request for an Order for the Posting of Security for Costs of
December 18, 2008, para. 4.8). In the Tribunal’s view, when confronted with the
burden of submitting original documents for forensic analysis, the Claimant
sought to then delay the consideration of the Respondent’s objections and to try to
withdraw from the case on a without prejudice basis.

In light of all the above-stated considerations, the Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that
the Claimant has intentionally and in bad faith abused the arbitration; it purported to be
an investor when it knew that this was not the case. This constitutes indeed an abuse of
process. In addition, the Claimant is guilty of procedural misconduct: once the arbitration
proceeding was commenced, it has caused excessive delays and thereby increased the
costs of the arbitration.

As can be seen by the ICSID case-law (see above para. 158), the misconduct of an
arbitration proceeding leads generally to the allocation of all costs on the party in bad
faith. As the present case concerns an accumulation of liabilities — abuse of process and
procedural misconduct — there is good cause for the Arbitral Tribunal to go beyond the
general sanction and to declare that the Claimant has brought a fraudulent claim against
the Republic of Turkey.

IV. Declaratory and Financial Consequences

1. Declaratory Consequences

a) The Issue

160.

The Respondent seeks a formal declaration from the Tribunal that Cementownia’s claim
is manifestly ill-founded. The Claimant opposes this prayer for relief.

The Arbitral Tribunal will therefore examine whether the Respondent’s request is well
founded.

b) The Parties’ Positions

161.

162.

The Respondent seeks a declaration stating that Cementownia’s claim is manifestly ill-
founded in the award whereas the Claimant asserts that there is no reason for the Arbitral
Tribunal to grant such a declaration (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, para. 227 and Claimant’s Letter
of May 5, 2009, para. 5.1).

b) The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

As stated above (see para. 158), the Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that the Claimant
is responsible for several procedural incidents. It arises out of the file that companies
owned or controlled by the Uzan family have filed two other requests for arbitration
against Turkey within the ICSID framework (Europe Cement Investment Trade SA v.

47

163.

Republic of Turkey and Libananco Holdings Co. Ltd. V. Republic of Turkey). In addition,
Kemal Uzan has himself filed an appeal before the European Court of Human Rights
against the Republic of Turkey.

On the basis of the procedural incidents caused by the Claimant in the case at hand, the
Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that, in the present case, Mr. Kemal Uzan attempts to
gain access to international jurisdiction without having made an investment within the
meaning of Art. 1(6) of the ECT. By agreeing to dismiss the present claim on the basis of
lack of jurisdiction, but only without prejudice to its rights, the risk is considerable that
the Claimant will file other similar or identical requests before other international
jurisdictions or even before ICSID. The Arbitral Tribunal condemns such conduct, which
constitutes a manifest abuse of the international institutional arbitration system. A formal
declaration in the present Award would therefore constitute a fully justified remedy in
order to prevent the Claimant from filing this baseless claim before other international
jurisdictions or even before ICSID again.

Consequently, the Arbitral Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s request for a declaration in
the Award that the Claimant has filed a fraudulent claim before ICSID.

2. Financial Consequences

a) The Issue

164.

With respect to monetary consequences, the Respondent seeks the following prayer for
relief (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, para. 232):

“Awarding monetary compensation to the Republic in an amount to be fixed by
the Tribunal”

The Claimant requests that this prayer for relief should be rejected.

The Arbitral Tribunal will therefore examine whether the conditions for monetary
compensation are fulfilled.

b) The Parties’ Positions

i. The Respondent’s Position

165.

Tribunals applying international law may award to a State the remedy of satisfaction
where it has suffered an intangible injury, such as injury to its reputation or prestige. In
investment treaty cases, compensation has been awarded where the injury was inflicted
maliciously.

According to the Respondent, Cementownia’s conduct in this case has been egregious

and malicious. It has asserted and pursued a baseless claim and it has made spurious
allegations against Turkey with the intent of damaging its international stature and

48

reputation. Referring to two ICSID cases (Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of
Yemen, (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17), award of February 6, 2008, available at
www.worldbank.org/icsid - RLA-17; and Benvenuti et Bonfant srl v. The Government of
People’s Republic of Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/77/2), award of 8 August 1980 in 1
ICSID Reports 365; 21 ILM 740 — RLA-8), the Respondent states that “although both of
these cases involved awards of ‘moral’ or ‘equitable’ damages to the claimant party,
there is no principal reason why equivalent relief should not be available to the
respondent State in an appropriate case.” (Resp. 9 Feb. 2009, para. 226 with footnote).
The Respondent therefore requests an award of damages separate from and additional to
a costs award.

ii. The Claimant’s Position

166. According to the Claimant, the issue of moral damage is not clarified. The conditions for
moral damage are not fulfilled in the present case. In particular, the condition of
exceptional and specific circumstances is absent since it was the Respondent which
exerted the physical duress (Claimant’s Letter of May 5, 2009, para. 5.2).

3. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision

167. In the Benvenuti case (see above para. 165, p. 361), that arbitral tribunal dealt with the
question of intangible loss and stated the following:

“(...) The Tribunal has reason to doubt B&B’s simple statement that it lost its
credit with its suppliers or bankers or that it could not obtain the necessary
personnel. Taking into account, however, the measures of which B&B was the
object and the proceedings resulting therefrom, which have certainly disturbed
B&B's activities, the Tribunal considers it equitable to award it the sum of CFA
5,000,000 as damages for intangible loss.”

168. In the Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen (see above para. 165), that arbitral
tribunal first stated that investment treaties :

“(...) do not exclude, as such, that a party may, in exceptional circumstances, ask

for compensation for moral damages. It is generally accepted in most legal
systems that moral damages may also be recovered besides economic damages”
(para. 289).

169. As can be seen by these two awards, there is nothing in the ICSID Convention,
Arbitration Rules and Additional Facility which prevents an arbitral tribunal from
granting moral damages. It must however be stressed that in the Desert Line Projects
case, the arbitral tribunal decided, on the basis of the obligations contained in the
Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) between Yemen and Oman, in particular the obligation
of security, that exceptional circumstances, such as physical duress suffered by the
investor, justified the compensation.

49

170.

171.

In the present case, it is the Claimant — the purported investor -, and not the Respondent —
the Government — that is responsible for the abuse of process. In contrast to the Desert
Line Projects case (see above para. 165), where the investor based its request for
compensation for moral damages on the Yemen-Oman BIT, the Respondent requests, in
the case at hand, that the Arbitral Tribunal grant compensation for moral damages based
merely on a general principle, i.e., abuse of process. It is doubtful that such a general
principle may constitute a sufficient legal basis for granting compensation for moral
damages. In any event, such compensation goes clearly beyond the general sanction of
awarding the total costs on the responsible Party, a sanction that is based on Article 58(1)
of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules.

A symbolic compensation for moral damages may indeed aim at indicating a
condemnation for abuse of process. However, in the case at hand, the Arbitral Tribunal
deems it more appropriate to sanction the Claimant with respect to the allocation of costs
(see below para. 173 ef seq.). In any case, since the Arbitral Tribunal has already
accepted the Respondent’s request with respect to the fraudulent claim declaration, the
Respondent’s objective is already achieved.

Consequently, the Respondent’s request for moral damages is dismissed.

4. Conclusion

172. On the basis of the above-mentioned considerations, the Arbitral Tribunal declares
formally that the Claimant has filed a fraudulent claim against the Republic of Turkey.
The Respondent’s first remedy request is therefore accepted.
On the other hand, the Respondent’s second remedy request is dismissed.

V. Costs

1. The Issue

173.

174.

The Parties submitted their statements on costs simultaneously on June 8, 2009. The
Claimant informed the Arbitral Tribunal that its total costs incurred in connection with
this proceeding were USD 1,363,449.95 (legal advisor and notary fees of USD
873,198.70; disbursement of USD 415,251.25; advances on the Tribunal’s fees and costs
of USD 75,000.00). Respondent determined that its total costs in connection with this
arbitration were USD 5,179,822.06 (legal fees of USD 3,859,053.35; disbursements of
USD 1,045,768.71; advances on the Tribunal’s fees and costs of USD 275,000.00).

In its Memorial on jurisdiction and liability, the Claimant requested the following (Claim.
15 April 2008, para. 13):

“Order Turkey to compensate Cementownia for its costs of arbitration in an
amount to be specified later together with interest thereon and, as between the

50

parties, alone bear the compensation to the Tribunal and the Secretariat of the
Centre”

In its Memorial on jurisdiction, the Respondent requested the following (Resp. 9 Feb.
2009, para. 232):

“Awarding to the Republic all of its costs and expenses associated with this
proceeding, plus interest.”

2. The Parties’ Position

106. Both Parties have asked that their legal and arbitration costs be borne by the other Party.

3. The Arbitral Tribunal’s Decision
175. Article 58(1) of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules reads as follows:

“Unless the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal shall decide how and by whom
the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal, the expenses and charges of
the Secretariat and the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the
proceeding shall be borne. The Tribunal may, to that end, call on the Secretariat
and the parties to provide it with the information it needs in order to formulate
the division of the cost of the proceeding between the parties.”

This provision establishes the Arbitral Tribunal’s discretion in allocating arbitration costs
(the advances paid by the Parties to ICSID) and the fees for legal representation between
the Parties as it deems appropriate.

176. While many ICSID tribunals have ruled that each party should bear its own costs, some
have applied the principle that “costs follow the event”, making the losing party bear all
or part of the costs of the proceeding and attorney fees. (See, in particular, Plama
Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24), award of
August 27, 2008, para. 307 et seq.).

177. In the circumstances of this case, the Arbitral Tribunal intends to employ this principle
for the following reasons:

- The Claimant has filed a fraudulent claim;
- The Claimant has failed on all its requests for relief;

- The Claimant has delayed the present arbitration proceeding and therefore raised
its costs;

- The Claimant has never signed the Custody Agreement, notwithstanding repeated
direction to do so;

Sl

178.

- It not complied with the ICSID Secretariat’s instruction of May 21, 2008 and May
26, 2009 to pay the advance payment, thus forcing the Respondent to bear the
major part of the costs of the arbitration; and

- The Claimant used the pendency of the arbitration to dispossess itself of its Polish
assets in an attempt to make it “award-proof”.

Therefore, using its discretionary power, the Arbitral Tribunal concludes that the
Claimant is to bear all ICSID costs (the fees and expenses of the Members of the Tribunal
and of the ICSID Secretariat) which are estimated to USD 400,000.00. The Claimant is to
pay to the Respondent USD 325,000.00, which represents the Respondent’s contribution
to ICSID. The Tribunal further finds that the Respondent’s legal fees and expenses are
not unreasonable having regard to the course of these proceedings and that, therefore, the
Claimant is to bear such costs in the amount of USD 4,904,822.06.

52

C. AWARD

179. For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal unanimously decides:

4,

The claim brought by the Claimant is dismissed in its entirety for two reasons:
a) the failure of the Claimant to prove that it owned or controlled an investment in
accordance with Articles 1(6), 1(7) and 26(1) of the Energy Charter Treaty;

b) the finding by the Tribunal that the Claimant’s claim is fraudulent and was
brought in bad faith.

The Claimant shall pay to the Respondent USD 5,304,822.06, which represents the
Respondent’s legal fees and expenses and the Respondent’s contribution to the costs
of these proceedings.

In the event of non-payment of the amount owing under (2) above within 30 days of
notification of the Award, interest be at the 6 month successive EURIBOR rate plus
2% for each year, or portion thereof, beginning 30 days from the date of notification
of the Award. Interest shall be compounded semi-annually.

All other claims are dismissed.

race

Professor Pierre Tercier
President

paw: Sealer 1, 2007

~Hheme KD ffl

 

Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C. Mr Christopher Thomas, Q.C.
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: SEPT: 10 HOA Date: G Mybohe, of

53

